

1917-18-19.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Report of the Royal Commission
ON
Navy and Defence Administration
in regard to
(1) The purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works,
at Randwick, New South Wales, in
August, 1916;
(2) The purchase of the following vessels for
the purposes of the Navy Department,
viz., the Emerald, in June, 1916, and
the Phillip, late Togo, in August, 1916.
Melbourne, 2nd December, 1918.
Presented by Command; ordered to be printed, 7th August, 1919.
[Cost of Paper: —Preparation, not given; 830 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £126.]
Printed and Published for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA by ALBERT J. MULLETT,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
No. 161 . — F . 13033. —PRICE 2S. 9D.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and ot
the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India :
To our trusty and well-beloved
William George Mcßbath (Chairman).
James Chalmers.
Frank A. Veeco.
Greeting :
tha l We t’ h l tk T° Ur Letim Patent ’ iSSUed in our name hy our @ ow rnor- General of Our Commonwealth
Commonwealth 0 , % the Zyl CommTssiis“lc TT’ ° f ** ~«
Commissioners ■ , * Aot 1902 ’ 12 ’ and “« other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to be
to and report upon the following matters in connexion with the Departments of Defence and
(a) Business administration generally, including contracts and supplies.
(b) Accounting and paying systems,
(c) Industrial establishments,
(d) Relations with the Department of the Treasury and the Auditor-General.
G O «™ n AND our Oovernor-General in and over Our said
nwea e resu tof your inquiries into the matters intrusted to you by these Our Letters Patent:
com^r::™:T m haw —- —* -- - --* - -
mTNESS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Ronald Craueurd Munro Ferguson, a Member
(r-s.) °Lf S M . a Z Uj \ M T ?° norable PHVy omnCil ’ KnigU Gmnd °S the Most Extinguished
er of St. Michatj and St. George, Governor-General and Commander-in-Ohief of the
Commonwealth of Australia, this second day of July, in the year of Our Lord One thousand
nine hundred and seventeen, and in the eighth year of Our reign.
R. M. FERGUSON,
By His Excellency's Command, Governor-General.
W. M. HUGHES.
Prime Minister’s Department,
20th February, 1918.
RESIGNATION OP A ROYAL COMMISSIONER.
t b ™ pi “" a “ ““ pt
with the Departments of Defence and Navy. netB 0 mq ' llre into and report upon certain matters in connexion
W. M. HUGHES,
Prime Minister.
APPOINTMENT OP A ROYAL COMMISSIONER
m» i:rr a “;o;r 19 h “ : tpo, ” M “• “ .
n. D.p„ ta „ h o, „ d K „ r j Ch ■ J“’" .XT " P ”
W. M. HUGHES,
Prime Minister.


CONTENTS.
FAQI).
REPORT .. .. v
MINUTES OP EVIDENCE .. .. ... 1
SCHEDULE OP EXHIBITS - ..95


ROYAL COMMISSION ON NAVY AND DEFENCE
ADMINISTRATION.
To His Excellency the Right Honorable Sir Ronald Ceaufurd Muneo Ferguson,
a Member of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor-
General and Commander-in-Ghief of the Commonwealth of Australia.
May it please Youe Excellency :
In our Report on the administration of the Navy Department, dated 18th September,
1918, paragraph 5, we stated that “ Instances have been furnished to us where a Minister has
incurred expenditure either without reference or in opposition to the Naval Board, and
unsatisfactory and costly results to the Commonwealth. The instances to which we referred
are —
(1) The purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works at Randwick, New South Wales, in
August, 1916.
(2) The purchase of the following vessels for the purposes of the Navy Department,
viz., the Emerald, in June, 1916, and the Phillip, late Togo, in August, 1916.
2. We have now the honour to submit a Report of the result of our further investigations
into these matters based on information disclosed in the departmental files and on evidence given
on oath before the Commission.
3. The examination of witnesses before the Commission was conducted by Mr. H. E. Starke,
of Counsel, who was instructed by Mr. W. H. Sharwood, Assistant Crown Solicitor for the
Commonwealth.
4. The Hon. J. A. Jensen, M.P., the Minister of State for the Navy during the period in
question, was represented by Mr. L. B. Cussen, of Counsel, instructed by Mr. D. H. Herald,
Solicitor.
5. An opportunity was afforded other persons to be represented by Counsel if they so desired,
but advantage was not taken of this offer.
6. Your Excellency’s commission, inter alia, directs us to inquire into and report in
connexion with the Departments of Defence and the Navy upon
(a) Business administration generally, including contracts and supplies.
We recognise that we are expected to view matters from a business stand-point. We,
therefore, consider it to be our duty to report the facts which we have ascertained, and to comment
upon those facts only in so far as is necessary to express our opinion upon the business
methods and administration of the Department.
THE PURCHASE OF THE SHAW WIRELESS WORKS AT RANDWICK, NEW
SOUTH WALES.
7. On the Bth December, 1914, Father Archibald John Shaw, on behalf of the Shaw
Wireless Company, offered the land, plant, and works of the company at Randwick to the
Postmaster-General’s Department at a valuation, stating that the company had spent £78,000 on
the land, plant, and machinery. On 6th January, 1915, Father Shaw stated that he was authorized
by his company to place the works, buildings, plant, land, and the Australian rights of the Shaw-
wireless patents under offer to the Department for the sum of £55,000. The proposal was referred
by the Postmaster-General to a Committee of Experts composed of the Chief Electrical Engineer
off the Postmaster-General’s Department; the Manager of the,Small Arms Factory, Lithgow,
Department of Defence; and the Commonwealth Lighthouse Engineer, Department of trade
and Customs. As a result of the report submitted by that Committee the Postmaster-General s
Department on the 24th March, 1915, declined the offer.


S. On the 2nd March, 1915, Engineer-Lieutenant F. G. Cresswell, Fleet Wireless Telegraphy
O cer, reported for the consideration of the Naval Board on the desirability of establishing
workshops for the manufacture of wireless apparatus. Inter alia , he stated—
It is thought that the developments of wireless telegraphy within the Commonwealth, apart from the W/T
demands consequent upon the outbreak of war, justify the Government in establishing its own workshops for the
manufacture and repair of all wireless apparatus used by the Government. •
*******
• i tllere * ore submitted that additional accommodation, machinery, and staff should be provided at the
wireless telegraphy workshops, Naval Depot, Williamstown, and that the workshops should be utilized for the
manufacture and repair of all wireless telegraphy apparatus required for the different departments of the Commonwealth
service.
*******
„ r accommodation to meet requirements until the establishment of Flinders Naval Base is
estimated at i.I,SUU; the additional machinery required is estimated at £2,500,
The departmental file discloses that no action was taken as a result of that recommendation.
t, bhe Ist November, 1915, the control of the Radio Service was transferred from the
-Postmaster-General s to the Navy Department.
P n 12t *) Ma y> 1916, Father Shaw saw Mr. Cotes, one of the Directors of Shaw
Wireless Limited, and informed him that he thought he had a good chance of selling the works to
e Government, and asked for, and on the 15th May, 1916, obtained, an option of purchase of the
Company s interests for £25,000.
c^e father Shaw had also informed other persons that the works would
be sold to the Government. It is necessary at this stage to state that Father Shaw was the lessee
of the works from the Shaw Wireless Company, and that certain persons held securities over the
assets of the company to cover advances.
I 2; th e sa ™ e da 7 that he obtained the option (15th May, 1916), Father Shaw wrote to
the Minister for the Navy (the Hon. J. A. Jensen) offering the whole of the plant, &c., of the Shaw
Wireless Limited Company—including the Shaw Wireless patents—for the sum of £57,000. This
offer was drafted for Father Shaw by Senator J. J. Long, a representative of the State of Tasmania
in the Commonwealth Senate.
13. On the 29th May, 1916, the Minister directed the Naval Secretary to —
~, ® n ' Je;V L)- ,r , t 0 se s; ure , fro “ 1 V lO Home Affairs Department a suitable person to value the land and buildings
at the bhaw Wireless Works, Sydney, and to have same attended to as early as possible,
and also to obtain stock-sheets from Father Shaw, and have them inspected and checked by an
officer of the Navy Department. •
■d 30th May, 1916, the First Naval Member of the Naval Board
-Rear-Admiral Sir William Creswell, who, it should be stated, is not related to Engineer-
Lieutenant (now Commander) Cresswell—minuted the file of papers respecting the matter as
Recommend that the particulars be considered by the full Board.
The Naval Secretary (Honorary Fleet Paymaster G. L. Macandie) could not say definitely whether
the Mimster s attention had been drawn to this recommendation, and the Minister stated in evidence
that he had not seen it. The matter was not, in fact, brought before the full Naval Board.
. 15 ’ Members of the Naval Board at the time consisted of The Minister for the Navy
Chairman; Rear-Admiral Sir William R. Creswell, K.C.M.G., First Naval Member; Captain
Arthur Gordon Smith G.M.G., Second Naval Member; and Engineer-Rear-Admiral William
Clarkson, C.M.G., Third Naval Member.
16. On the 9th June, 1916, Father Shaw furnished an inventory of the equipment, tools
plant, workshops, land, houses, and stocks of the company, placing a value thereon, exclusive of
good-will and patent rights, of £63,461 12s. 4d., adding that the good-will and patent rights of the
Shaw wireless system stood m the books of the company at the figure of £ll,OOO, making in all a
total ot £74,461 12s. 4d. °
i /P 16 officer who at the time acted as Father Shaw’s manager stated in evidence that he
had made the valuation and had arrived at the figures mentioned by taking the land and buildings
at the valuations given to him by Father Shaw, and the stock at current market rates, and by
appreciating the machinery by 40 per cent, over the purchase price. This appreciation, he states,
was made on h ather Shaw s instructions, and after taking into consideration the fact that the works
were a going concern, which at that time it would be difficult to replace.
VI


18. On the 19th June, 1916—as a result of a conversation with Engineer-Eear-Admiral
Clarkson —the Minister wired to Father Shaw asking him whether he —
Had authority to dispose of the land, buildings, and plant on behalf of the company before the Department
incurred the expense of making a valuation.
On the same day Father Shaw obtained from the Company an extension of his option, and on the
following day forwarded a copy of the extension to the Minister. The correspondence was placed
on the official file, but no inquiry was made as to the amount of the option.
19. On the 21st June, 1916, Engineer-lieutenant Cresswell reported that he had visited
the works for the purpose of making a preliminary inspection of the workshops with a view to
purchase by the Government. He stated —
These workshops are too extensive to justify a recommendation that they should be taken over as wireless
telegraphy workshops alone ; but I am of the opinion that they should be taken over by the Government, and organized
as Government workshops for the manufacture and repair of the following :
[A number of different matters are then set out, showing that Commander Cresswell contemplated extensive
activities embracing the manufacture of motor cycles and machine guns.]
It would, therefore, be necessary that, if these workshops are taken over, the Government should issue orders
to the respective departments concerned to place such work in the Government wireless telegraphy and electrical
workshops as is possible, and that no work should be given out to private contractors unless the workshops are unable
to meet the different departments’ requirements.
This report was referred by the Minister to the Third Naval Member of the Naval Board for his
opinion. Engineer-Eear-Admiral Clarkson minuted the report disapproving of the proposal,
giving his reasons at length.
20. On the 29th June, 1916, the Acting Prime Minister wrote a memorandum to the
Minister for the Navy in the following terms :
Cabinet, at its meeting 28.6.16, approved of your recommendation that you should, obtain a valuation of the
plant and machinery at Father Shaw’s works at Eandwick, N.S.W., to be submitted to Cabinet to consider the question
of its purchase for wireless purposes.
21. A valuation of the machinery and plant at the works was obtained by the Minister
from Mr. H. E. Eoss, of the firm of Messrs. Eoss and Eowo, Architects and Engineers, Sydney.
Mr. Eoss was selected for this purpose in the following manner :—Father Shaw (to whom Mr.
Eoss was a stranger) asked him to visit the works, and on his arrival there Father Shaw inquired
whether he would be prepared to act as valuer as between Father Shaw and the Department.
Mr. Eoss said that he would. Father Shaw later mentioned Mr. Eoss s name to the Minister as a
suitable valuer. The Minister put himself into communication with the Minister for Lands of New
South Wales (the Hon. W. G. Ashford), inquiring as to the suitability and reliability of Mr. Eoss
to represent the Navy Department, and Mr. Ashford strongly recommended him.
22. The Minister on the 4th July, 1916, telegraphed to Mr. Eoss as follows :
Please inform whether you are prepared to undertake valuation some plant and machinery in Sydney for this
Department, and what would be your fee per diem.
and received a reply on the same day as follows :
Am prepared make valuation of plant and machinery in Sydney at fee of Twenty-five guineas per diem
The Minister on the same day replied by wire as follows ;
Your wire to-day. Beg to offer you Fifty guineas for valuation plant, machinery, and stock at Father Shaw’s
works, Eandwick, valuation land and buildings is not required, an officer from this Department will arrive Sydney
Thursday to co-operate with you, list of plant will be available.
Mr. Eoss, by telegraph, agreed to these terms. No other instructions as to the basis or the nature
of the valuation were given to Mr. Eoss. Eadio-Commander (formerly Engineer-Lieutenant)
Cresswell was on the sth July, 1916, directed to proceed to Sydney to co-operate with Mr. Eoss.
23. On the 12th July, 1916, Mr. Eoss supplied his valuation of the plant, tools, and stores
at £46,496. He pointed out that the stores had been accepted at the values shown by the stock-
sheets prepared by the Shaw Wireless Limited. In the meantime, the valuation by the Department
of Home Affairs had been received, setting out the value of the buildings at £10,560, and of the land
at £3,680—a total of £14,240.
24. When giving his evidence before the Commission, Mr. Eoss was questioned by Mr.
Starke as to the basic principle of his valuation. He stated
Mv instructions were such that I could only take the plant without any regard to its utility, and it was nothing
to me if I found a grand piano there or a machine for making ginger-beer, I valued that as a machine for the purpose
whether it suited the Navy or did not. I did not have instructions to value for Navy purposes, and so took everything
at its value as a going concern, assuming the utility of the machine was there, provided it was not obsolete, and was
suitable for the purpose:
VII


co„ceml-“^gX V c““. ™ “ " P “ t¥BgS ” ’ U " “>“» bM . “ d “ dy “ • P~£t-mati..g
And regardless as you said of its particular value in the business ?—Quite.
W S° SS al& + ° State j he I took eack particular machine substantially at its replacement value
less depreciation and after taking obsolescence into account. He was asked by Counsel-
in the oLdlsr?nTe fe ?“"v? PPOSe wit \° ut a T detailed examination you could not tell me what amounts were involved
narticuliwTn? V ® ry 1 could n °t tell you the amount of the obsolescence. It referred more
value to the Nawt)? lnstn ™ e £ ts ‘ that Y ere obsolete and of no value to anybody. It was not whether they were of
value to tne JNavy Department, but of value to anybody else. J
Or of value to the owner ?—Or anybody.
By Mr. Cussen. The market value ? —Not exactly the market value.
By Mr. Starke.—Have you had valuations to do in compulsory acquisition of property ? —A great many.
value oJanv?brA h ,l P 1r iple ft™’ " the u f t 0 tbe owner ? Tbat is tbe § uidin g Principle and not the market
value or anything else, the most beneficial use to which it could be put ?—Yes; that did not apply here.
Why not ? Because it was not compulsory.
No, but did you not adopt precisely the same principle ?—No.
The most beneficial value to the owner ? —Yes, in that sense I did.
Yes And tte m ° St beneficlal value to tbe owner meant to whatever purpose it could be put in anybody’s hands ?
* * * ■ * * * *
included! 16 apparently >’ ou did not mdude was the cost of the installation, putting it in ?—That was
good “i CpS. “ “ “ * g “ S “■ 1 * lWd ~ aißg “•» »*
As the result of insufficient instructions to Mr. Ross and the adoption of this method of valuation,
fi q l nnn 1 °• ° i e . P’ anb> sbock ’ stores, which the Manager states approximate in value
xIo,UUU, was included in the valuation.
P , 25 ' 1 °p the Commander Cresswell reported that he concurred with Mr.
Ross s valuation of £46,496, which, with the Home Affairs valuation of the land and buildings,
follow •-” 40 ’ a tota ° f £60,736 - Tke concluding two paragraphs of his report read as
it J he valaatlo “ as aforesaid is based on the works being taken over as a commercial concern, but I would point
valued raw U Saterids XPenSlVe F ' ttemS ’ dleS ’ and electrlcal apparatus is obsolete, and can only be taken at the market
wnl] ,, I have, therefore, to recommend that, if these works can be acquired for the sum of £40,000, which, in my opinion
eSLSfwSSop" “* Pre " nt pbt “” inS : ttey be ” “’ d " d <“ “» »<
26. The report was submitted to the Minister on the same day (14th July, 1916), and he
at once sent for Commander Cresswell and pointed out to him that the above-quoted
recommendation was inconsistent with the opinion expressed in the early portion of the report
in which concurrence was expressed in Mr. Ross’s valuation. As a result of the interview the report
was witnurawn and anew paragraph substituted on the same day (14th July, 1916) in place of the
follow^-— aph C ° ntaimng the recom mendation. The final paragraph of the report then read as
of Dip t + l «if for > e ’ a i )pea i’p^ at oo lie WOrks sbcmld not be taken over at ffie assessed valuation of £60,736. lam
Lfthk of coSt f haW 8 ?f 6 7 f £s7 ’°?° !S reasonable ’ but probably the Government could buy for a still lower figure ;
Put tnis, ot course, is a matter for negotiation. °
We desire to point out that the departmental file of papers does not disclose anything to indicate
ffiffLen^form 161 ' ° reSSWe 1 S report had ori g inall y been made in one form and then altered into a
+b t +b 7 ’<S n th w 9 T d 7 ( 14tk J uly, 1916) Cabinet approved of the Minister’s recommendation
that the Shaw Wireless Works be purchased for £55,000. A memorandum of the approval was
sen. by the Acting Prime Minister to the Minister for the Navy on the 15th July, 1916, as follows
°“ tbe ld-7 - 16 approved 7 > ,our recommendation that the Shaw Wireless Company’s land, buildings
of £55 000 b 6 pUrcbaS 7 *7 purp ° ses of the Navy Department’s wireless requirements for the sum
01 156,000, provided that you are satisfied that your Department’s requirements will keep such plant fully employed.
7; ' Pke Mimster stated in evidence that Admiral Clarkson’s adverse report and Commander
CressweL s favorable report were both before Cabinet when the decision to purchase was made.
It appears, however, that neither Cabinet as a whole nor any individual Minister was informed or
made aware that Commander Cresswell had altered his report in the manner above stated.
VIII


29. On the same day (14th July, 1916) the Minister asked Commander Cresswell the following
questions ;
(1) In your opinion could this plant be kept constantly going in naval requirements and in the manufacture
of other articles of machinery for other Commonwealth departments ?
(2) Are you of opinion, if the purchase of this plant takes place at Father Shaw’s .offer, that it would pay interest
on capital invested, taking into consideration the depreciation of plant ?
To both these questions Commander Cresswell replied on the same day (14th July, 1916) as
follows:
The answer to question (1) is yes, provided that steps are taken to insure the fullest measure of support being
given by the Government departments.
In reply to question No. 2, I am of the opinion that on a purchase price of £57,000 (as per Father Shaw’s offer),
these works should earn (after paying ordinary maintenance and running charges) the under-noted items : —•
Five per cent, interest on capital (£57,000) .. .. .. .. .. .. £2,850
Four per cent, depreciation on plant and equipment valued at £33,000 .. .. .. 1,320
£4,170
30. The examination of Commander Cresswell and Mr. F. W. Thomas (his Chief Clerk)
before the Commission showed that the opinion expressed by Commander Cresswell as to the
earning power of the works was founded on an entirely unreliable basis.
31. On the 15th July, 1916, the Minister telegraphed to Father Shaw as follows
Reference your offer dated 15th May the Government is prepared to offer you £55,000 for land, buildings, plant,
stock, and patent rights, Shaw Wireless Company, as per stock-sheets submitted by you.
32. On the same day (15th July, 1916) the Minister addressed the following questions to
Commander Cresswell:—
(1) Have you work in sight to keep the plant going if the Government purchase same ?
(2) Could this plajit turn out all the necessary machinery for wireless installation on ships recently purchased
by the Government and for all other ships on coast of Australia ? .
Commander Cresswell, in reply to (1), furnished a list of outstanding work, adding —
It will, therefore, be seen that considerable work is awaiting execution in our own workshops. This work, together
with that which it is anticipated will be forthcoming from other Government departments, will suffice to keep the
workshops fully employed for twelve months. I would again point out in this connexion that it will be necessary for
all Commonwealth departments to be instructed to place as much as possible of their requirements in the shape of
electrical manufactures and similar lines with the Commonwealth W/T electric workshops for execution.
An affirmative answer was given to question (2).
33. On the 18th July, 1916, Father Shaw accepted the offer, and a few days later he asked
that the purchase money, £55,000, be paid into his account at the London Bank of Australia Ltd.,
Melbourne. The Commonwealth Crown Solicitor was then instructed to prepare the necessary
documents to complete the matter.
34. On the 4th August, 1916, the Commonwealth Treasurer (the Hon. W. Gr. Higgs)
forwarded to the Minister for the Navy an extract from the Sun newspaper in which the purchase
was adversely criticised, and asked—
(l) Whether you are still of the opinion that the Shaw Wireless Company’s land, buildings, and machinery
which it is proposed to purchase for the sum of £55,000, are necessary for the purposes of the Commonwealth ?
(2) Whether it is true that all the ships on the Australian register are under contrao for ten years to obtain
wire'ess plant from the Amalgamated Wireless Company of Australia ?
(3) Whether you are thoroughly convinced that, if the Government expends £55,000 in the purchase of the Shaw
Wireless Company’s lands, buildings, and machinery, the Commonwealth will receive full value for its money ?
The communication was referred to Commander CresSwell for report, and on the 7th August,
1916, he reported as follows :
With reference to question (1). This is dealt with in my previous submissions. Such workshops and plant are
necessary for the purposes of the Commonwealth. I think sufficient justification exists for the establishment of proper
electrical workshops of the Government by the fact that the private contractors appear to take such a strong stand
against such a proposal. The electrical contractors, in my opinion, have in the past reaped considerable advantage
in the profits which have been made by them on Government work.
With reference to paragraph (2). This statement is incorrect. A number of ships on the Australian register
are under ten years’ agreement to the company ; but, on the other hand, between 30 and 40 ships not yet fitted will be
affected. When the Navigation Act does become law, and forces the ship-owners to install wireless telegraphy apparatus,
the ship-owners will look to the Government to provide reasonable facilities, in order that they may comply with such
Act.
With reference to paragraph (3). lam confident that the Government could not erect buildings and put down
e machinery and plant, &c., contained in the Shaw Works at the present time under £BO,OOO.
IX


Attached k ere to is copy of my number 16/4515, giving details of articles which can be manufactured at the Shaw
Wireless Works.
I would also point out in connexion with this matter that the use of the workshops for the purpose of the manu-
facture of wireless telegraphy apparatus forms only a small part of the workshop undertakings. The workshops will
be used not only for the manufacture of wireless telegraphy apparatus, but for the manufacture of machinery and
equipment required by other departments of the Government.
The Minister thereupon replied to the Commonwealth Treasurer on the same day (7th August,
1916) as follows :
Re Shaw Wireless Plant.
I am in receipt of your letter of the 4th instant, wherein you ask me the following questions :
(1) Whether you are still of the opinion that the Shaw Wireless Company’s land, buildings, and machinery,
which it is proposed to purchase for the sum of £55,000, are necessary for the purposes of the
Commonwealth 1
My answer to this is as follows ;
Yes. They can be fully occupied with the making of wireless requirements and the making
of necessary commodities required by the Defence Department; indeed some of the machinery is
being used for the making of Defence supplies now.
(2) Whether it is true that all the ships on the Australian register are under contract for ton years to obtain
wireless plant from the Amalgamated Wireless Company of Australia ?
This statement is incorrect. I have made inquiries, and find that a number of ships on the
Australian register are under an agreement to a company, but on the other hand a very large number
have not yet installed wireless. This large number of the Australian-owned ships have refused to
accept the conditions laid down by the persons who wished to provide wireless, and have therefore
done without same.
(3) Whether you are thoroughly convinced that, if the Government expends £55,000 in the purchase of the
Shaw Wireless Company’s lands, buildings, and machinery, the Commonwealth will receive full value
for the money ?
Regarding this question J would state that I have had a further report from the Engineer
for Radio Telegraphy, who states he is confident that the Government could not erect buildings,
and put down machinery and plant, &c., contained in the Shaw Wireless Works, at present under
£BO,OOO, and further that our officer’s valuation, which is on the conservative side, is about £61,000,
and we are purchasing same for £55,000.
I feel very confident that this Government has made a good deal.
35. On the 9th August, 1916, the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor reported on the title to
the land, and stated that it was the practice when lands were acquired by the Commonwealth for
such lands to be acquired by compulsory process under the Lands Acquisition Act instead of by
the method of conveyance. The benefit of this procedure was stated to be that the Commonwealth
acquired a perfect-title to the land, and no question as to any conflicting interests could arise.
He expressed the opinion that where the title was under general law, as in this case, it was advisable
to acquire the land by compulsory process, and asked for instructions. The letter was minuted
by the Minister as follows:
Obtain title by conveyance, and also signature of vendor for no further claim if thought necessary for compulsory
process. L J
A copy of this minute was on the 11th August, 1916, sent by the Naval Secretary to the Crown
Solicitor, adding—
It is therefore requested that the transaction may be completed at the earliest possible moment.
36. On the 19th August, 1916, the Crown Solicitor reported to the Naval Secretary that
settlement had taken place, and the purchase money, £55,000, paid into the London Bank of
Australia Ltd., Melbourne, on the previous day.
37. On the 19th August, 1916 (a Saturday), Father Shaw withdrew from the London Bank
of Australia Ltd., Melbourne, the following sums, being part of the £55,000 paid in on the previous’
day, viz., £25,000, £250, £5,300, £7,000) and £17,000. The Commission has ascertained in what
manner each of the foregoing amounts was disposed of, with the exception of the £5,300. With
that exception the money was applied in the ordinary course of business.
X


38. The sum of £5,300 was, however, withdrawn by Father Shaw nersouallv i .
of its disjosai appeL “ “v boo^Toi^t:
and aafsenato^Cg 6 Te 3 K bf* ftl House
Shaw handed him a nA rfll C T“ IssmI ' s that Father
Uendalnp. and of certain t “f
Father Shaw. Senator long further stated that he had at various times lent Father it’! n
s^nst*if^ ta a«ir f3 °°’
1916. 4 °' ® haW ‘°° k Seri °" sly iU on the Monday following, and died on the 26th August,
wb„uL|„rrh^
at race-meetings held at
K:fdil n d s’ 7hel*“*?*“ °f the wagenfor otgLkf
SssrJartw
Long in connexion with the puWse P Wuetes
of the Wau T ct e of th B 300 fewnon ILT.7 7 P ° SiW ' re f idenc | 3S to the
a farthru sum of£so from hff^l^nTcly
d JL iya d°7 7he
the wS MS* i£ZrS£Z' Mr C T | be Swth Ug 7e nr 18 ' 1
SESr “-P^^o B n^
the ISttf'AurastTdTf evi 4 den oe that Senator long then told him that Father Shaw on
for SenatorLonv SeMtor L »"g four separate packets of money, one of ,5”
tor senator Long, the others for persons named or indicated by Senator Long.
stated tttMnfcnTfl °T™ U ' B ° f ““ «ation, and
the Minister (Mr. Jensen) of toSupttn “* mf “ mOUB SUgBeSt,on be should accuse
l
;ss
Senator In™ 7 * wo . rks ’ m wklck statements the names of the Minister,
senator Long, and other persons were mentioned. 1
Qm^ss^ as used these statements as a basis for inquiry only, and has not
tbp t - Pr -° pe i to s egard - tkem as P roof of the matters stated. Formal evident was si-en to
the Commission by the persons to whom the alleged statements were made g
XI


From date of
Commonwealth
For year ended
control (August,
30,6.18.
1916) to 30.6.17.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Federal Government Departments ..
4,568 11 2
8,074 2 11
State Government Departments '
136 2 5
109 15 1
Administration late German New Guinea
579 5 1
1,216 16 2
Private Companies and Individuals ..
1,042 8 8
1,059 2 11
Royal Australian Navy—
Radio Service ..
6,928 5 2
12,043 19 0
H.M.A. Ships
1,581 IS 11
24 3 11
Transport and Cargo Vessels
2,990 13 2
2,489 5 5
Naval Establishments .. .. ..
380 18 2
5,354 8 7
Imperial Government, Colombo
1,087 16 3
18,208 2 9
31,459 10 3
49. Each of the persons concerned was called before the Commission and (with the exception
of Senator Long) emphatically denied on oath the receipt either directly or indirectly of any
money or other benefit from Father Shaw, and the Commission’s advisory accountant examined
each of their banking accounts and could find no entries in any account other than Senator Long’s
of any payments which could be traced to Father Shaw, or which could give rise to suspicion that
money had come from Father Shaw, and the Commission is satisfied that no such money was paid
into those accounts.
50. The fullest inquiry possible to the Commission has been made into the statements
referred to in paragraphs 44, 47, and 48, but the evidence does not disclose that the Minister or
any person other than Senator Long received any portion of the £5,300 withdrawn by Father
Shaw on the 19th August. 1916.
51. The Minister’s explanation of the reason for the purchase may be summarized as
follows
(a) It was the policy of the Government of which he was a member to take over
industrial works of this description.
( b) It was urgently necessary, to insure the safety of transports and other ships, to have
them fitted with wireless apparatus, and, in his opinion, the acquisition of works
of this character was necessary for that purpose.
(c) It had been reported to him that excessive prices were being demanded by private
contractors for wireless installations.
( d ) As a war measure alone the purchase was, in his opinion, justified.
(e) He relied'upon the reports of Commander Cresswell—-the Department’s wireless
expert—and the valuation of Mr. Ross, a man of undoubted integrity and
ability.
(/) As soon as the decision to purchase was made he deemed it his duty to push the
matter to as early a conclusion as possible.
( g ) He did not refer it to the full Naval Board, because he had already obtained the
opinion of the expert member (Engineer-Rear-Admiral Clarkson), and, in his
opinion, Admiral Clarkson’s objections were mainly on questions of policy, and
the policy of the Government had already been determined on such matters.
(h) While he obtained the advice of Commander Cresswell and Engineer-Rear-Admiral
Clarkson, he took upon himself the responsibility for recommending the
purchase, and, in his opinion, the purchase was justified.
52. The following particulars have been supplied to the Commission by the Navy Department
of the cost of work carried out at the works from the date the Commonwealth acquired them
until the 30th June, 1918


53. The Manager of the works has, since the close of the inquiry, informed the Commission
that the totals above shown include wireless telegraphy apparatus approximately as follows :
1916- £13,918
1917- .. £15,032
The balance of the work done was other than wireless telegraphy apparatus. The Manager also
stated that at the time of the acquisition of the works by the Commonwealth the value of the
machinery therein for the manufacture of wireless telegraphy apparatus was £4,500. The balance
of the machinery was for the manufacture of other classes of engineering plant.
54. For convenience we summarize the salient facts of the transaction as we have
ascertained them as follows ;
{a) Father Shaw was confident before the offer was made that the sale would be
effected.
(b) Senator Long drafted the offer.
(c) The Minister disregarded the advice of Engineer-Rear-Admiral Clarkson, the
Third Naval who was the engineering expert on the Naval Board,
and acted on the advice of an inexperienced subordinate officer.
{d) The Minister failed to ascertain why the Postal Department had previously declined
to consider the purchase of the works.
(e) The instructions given to the valuer were insufficient from a business point of view,
and the valuation was accepted without inquiry as to the method and basis of
valuation.
if) The valuation merely represented the cost of replacing the works cn that date,
with certain deductions for depreciation and obsolescence, but without
consideration of the utility of the plant to the Department or the nature of
the lay-out of the works.
{g) The only check on the valuation was the presence of Commander Cresswell, an officer
who had no training or experience in such matters.
(h) Commander Cresswell reported that a number of expensive patterns and dies and
electrical apparatus was obsolete, and should be taken only at the value of
raw material.
(i) The Manager estimated that obsolete and useless machinery and stock valued at
£13,000 were included in the valuation and paid for by the Department.
O’) After an interview with the Minister, Commander Cresswell withdrew his recom-
mendation to offer £40,000 and substituted an opinion that Father Shaw’s offer
of £57,000 was reasonable.
(ft) The alteration of Commander Crcsswell’s report was not disclosed to Cabinet
when the purchase was being considered.
(l) Commander Cresswell in successive reports—
(l) Estimated at £4,000 the cost of additional accommodation and
machinery at Williamstown for the manufacture and repair of all
wireless telegraphy apparatus required for the different departments
of the Commonwealth Service until the establishment of Flinders
Naval Base.
(2) Stated that an offer of £40,000 would be a fair offer for the Shaw
Wireless Works for use as general Government electrical workshops,
and then stated that Father Shaw’s offer of £57,000 was reasonable •
and ’
(3) Stated that the Government could not erect the buildings and put
down the machinery and plant under £BO,OOO. V
( m ) No inquiry was made as to the details of the option held by Father Shaw.


(n) The Cabinet’s approval of the purchase was upon condition that the Minister was
satisfied that the Navy Department’s requirements would keep the plant fully
employed.
(o) The Minister was aware from the official reports that the Navy Department’s
requirements would not keep the plant fully employed, but he states that the
Cabinet thoroughly understood that the department’s requirements would not
keep the plant fully employed, and that work from all other departments would
be necessary to keep it fully employed, but he took no steps to obtain any
correction of the Cabinet minute.
(p) The Minister’s reply to the Commonwealth Treasurer’s inquiry as to whether the
works were necessary for the purposes of the Commonwealth failed to disclose
the whole of the facts within the Minister’s knowledge.
(?) Senator Long received a gratuity from Father Shaw for influence which Father
Shaw believed he had used.
(r) Nearly £3,000 of the purchase money paid to Father Shaw has not been accounted
for.
55. Approaching the case from the point of view we have previously indicated, namely,
that of reporting upon business administration, we have formed the following opinions upon the
purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works, and deem it our duty to express those opinions for your
Excellency’s information :
(1) The establishment was acquired during a period of intense war activity, and for
that reason we refrain from undue criticism, but the works were undoubtedly
. too large for the requirements of the Navy Department, and were perhaps
unnecessary for the Commonwealth, having regard to the other large and well-
established Government engineering shops.
(2) The works are situated in an unsuitable district for industrial works.
(3) The works contained a quantity of obsolete and useless machinery and stock.
(4) The works are burdened with so high a capital charge that they are unable to
compete effectively with other workshops,
(5) The works were purchased at a price much in excess of the value for which they
might have been obtained had business methods been followed.
(6) The works have been conducted at a loss even under war conditions, and cannot
be expected to do nearly as well under peace conditions.
(7) The valuation of one man should not have been relied upon in such a large
transaction.
(8) The valuation, in our opinion, represented the highest possible value for a vendor,
and was an unsatisfactory basis for a purchaser.
. 56. The works have been capably and intelligently managed by Mr. A. E. Cornwell. We
have inspected the costing system, and find that it is suitable for the establishment and is well
carried out.
57, With regard to the future of the Randwick Workshops, in view of the unsuitability
of the site they occupy, and of the fact that they are not laid out in such a way that they can be
worked economically, we recommend that they be removed from the control of the Radio Officer,
Melbourne, and transferred to Garden Island, and placed under the general supervision of the
General Manager of the Naval Dockyards. By giving effect to the re-arrangement scheme outlined
in our Report dated 18th September, 1918, page 13, paragraph 35, it will no doubt be possible
to house the machinery and plant in the existing buildings at Garden Island, thus effecting a


large saving in new buildings, and also in the cost of freight and transport of supplies. The land
and buildings at Randwick, valued in 1916 at £14,240, could then be disposed of, as the site is more
adapted to residential purposes.
THE PURCHASE OP VESSELS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE NAVY
DEPARTMENT.
58. S.S. Emerald. —This boat was offered for sale to the Navy Department in 1916 by
Messrs. Cowper and Sons, Melbourne, for £6,000 or offer. After inspection by the Acting Director
of Naval Works (Mr. W. R. Swan) the vessel was pronounced unsuitable. Mr. Swan stated, under
date 29th March, 1916—
As far as can be ascertained from a casual inspection, the hull and machinery of the vessel are sound and in good
order.
He considered that conversion into a suitable tug-boat would involve expenditure of from £1,200
to £1,500. The Minister for the Navy (Mr. Jensen) minuted the file on the 3rd April, 1916, " No
further action to be taken.”
59. On the 25th May, 1916, the boat was offered on hire to the Navy Department by
Messrs. Croker and Croker, solicitors, of Melbourne. On the 8th June an inspection was made by
the Minister and the Acting Director of Naval Works. Mr. Swan, who referred to his previous
report of the 29th March, 1916, added that “ the vessel appears to be in good order and well found.”
He also reported that an expenditure of about £1,000 would be necessary before the vessel could be
properly passed by the Naval authorities, that if the owner placed a price on the vessel at least a
portion of this expenditure should be deducted therefrom, and that the price should be subject to
favorable report by the expert officers of the Construction Department.
60. On the same date, 8th June, 1916, the Minister directed that an offer of £4,500 be made
for the boat. On the next day, 9th June, the agreement for the purchase was signed. When the
First Naval Member (Admiral Creswell) heard of the purchase, he saw the Minister and protested
against it, and offered his resignation in protest.
61. On the 4th July, 1916, a survey of this vessel was made by three Naval officers with
the view to deciding whether the Emerald was suitable as (a) a tug-boat for the Henderson or
Flinders Naval Base, or (b) a patrol boat for Thursday Island. The report of these officers discloses
that an expenditure of between £5,000 and £6,000 would be necessary before the boat would be
suitable for either service, and that, in view of the low horse-power, it was doubtful whether the
vessel would be a success as a tug-boat. Subsequently it was decided that an expenditure of
such a large amount was out of the question.
62. It was recommended on the 16th October, 1916, by the Second Naval Member of the
Naval Board that, as the vessel seemed to be unsuitable for tug work and was too large for light
work, it should be sold.
63. On the 17th October, 1916, the Director of Naval Works reported that the trial of the
Emerald after the vessel was docked was unsatisfactory, and recommended that the vessel be
transferred to the Henderson Naval Base, Western Australia. This was approved by the Minister,
and in due course the Emerald was removed to Western Australia.
64. The cost of running this vessel amounts approximately to £250 per month, including
wages and ration allowance of the crew, consisting of a master and six ratings.
65. S.S. Phillip, formerly the Togo. —In April, 1916, this vessel was offered to the Navy
Department by Messrs. W. Cowper and Sons, of Melbourne, for the sum of £7,500. The offer
was declined, as the vessel was not considered to be suitable for the requirements of the department.
66. Three months later, the Acting Director of Naval Works (Mr. W. R. Swan) advised the
Naval Secretary that the Minister (Mr. Jensen) had instructed him to have the vessel inspected


and reported on by Mr. Duff, Naval Civil Engineer, and that all negotiations were tobe carried
out trough a firm of merchants, Messrs. Broomby and Dent, of Launceston, Tasmania. Mr. Duff
reported that the hull and machinery were in excellent condition, but that the boiler was not
sufficiently powerful for the vessel. No recommendation was made either with regard to the
suitability or price of the vessel.
, AT 67 - At the end of July 1916, in response to a request by the Minister, the Acting Director
of Naval Works reported that Mr. Duff considered the value of the vessel to be £7,500 and estimated
i Sma re P a^rs at £lOO- This information was received by the Minister on the
j tV U^ US t’ ’ Oll le same day an urgent telegram was received from Messrs. Broomby
LaUnCest ° n ’ Tasmania > repeating the offer of sale for £7,500, and asking for an early
68 The Minister on the same day, 11th August, 1916, instructed that an offer of £7,500 be
made, and this offer was accepted by letter dated 14th August, 1916.
69. The bill of sale shows that Mr. J. J. Broomby paid £7,000 to the Launceston Shipping
Company Ltd., the registered owners, for the vessel, and immediately transferred it to His Maiesty
the King for £7,500. J J
, + On the 12th August, 1916, the Acting Director of Naval Works reported to the Minister
that the vessel could be put into service in connexion with Naval works as soon as the necessary
alterations to convert her into a tug-boat were completed.
7 l’ on r!h lBtla october > 1916 > a recommendation was made by the Director of Naval
Works that £5OO be expended in adapting the vessel as a tug-boat for Flinders Naval Base, and
the work was apparently carried out.
, 4.x 72 ‘ tte 19tl1 Ma - V ’ 1917 > the Director of Naval Works called attention to the unsuitability
of the vessel for towing work, and suggested that the boat be transferred to another department,
in due course the boat was offered to the Quarantine Service and refused by the Director of
Quarantine as being unsuitable for the requirements of that department. After an adverse
report on the vessel by the Mechanical Engineer, it was recommended on the 23rd July 1917
that the boat should be sold or exchanged. ’ ’
7 3. The- Togo was subsequently tried, with unsatisfactory results, at various classes of
work. On the 10th April, 1918, the First Naval Member minuted as follows:
~ . i® desirable to change the name. That this craft should be so named is not a high compliment to a
distinguished officer in the service of an ally.
The designation of the Togo was thereupon altered to Phillip.
.„ 7 f Tenders were invited in July, 1918, for the purchase of the vessel. The tenders were
notified m the Commonwealth Gazette of 11th July, 1918, and also in 26 newspapers circulating in all
the States. On the 26th July, 1918, two offers were received, viz., for £l,OOO and £305 respectively.
As these amounts were considered unsatisfactory, the First Naval Member recommended to the
Acting Minister for the Navy on the 9th August, 1918, that neither tender be accepted.
75. From the date of acquisition by the Department, viz., in April, 1916, to the present
time, the vessel has been provided with a permanent crew consisting of one officer and six ratings,
whose pay and ration allowance amount to £3 18s. per day. Since October, 1917, the vessel has
been under the control of the District Naval Officer, Melbourne, and the total running cost per
month amounts approximately to £l6O.
76. The evidence shows that the Emerald and the Togo were unsuitable for the Department
at the time of the purchase, and that proper trials were not made until after the purchase had
been effected. The principle adopted appears to have been to purchase first and test afterwards.
Particularly in the case of the Emerald the most perfunctory examination only appears to have
been made before purchase.
77. With regard to the purchase of these vessels, the Minister (Mr. Jensen) frankly took
the responsibility, and stated that he considered it better policy to purchase vessels rather than to
incur continuous expenditure in hire.


As previously stated in this Report, we do not consider it to be within the terms of our
commission to do more than report the facts we have ascertained, together with our opinion as to
the business methods and administration of the Department as disclosed in the transactions under
review We accordingly do so, and; forward herewith a copy of all the evidence taken on oath
before the Commission, together with the departmental files and other documents put in as
exhibits. 1
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient Servants,
W. Gl. McBEATH, Chairman,
FRANK A. VERCO, Commissioners*
P. T. TAYLOR, J
W, A. NEWMAN, Secretary,
Melbourne, 2nd December, 1918.
F. 1303:3,—2


EVIDENCE
To accompany Report of Royal Commission
on Navy and Defence Administration, dated
2nd December, 1918.


INDEX TO EVIDENCE.
Page of
Evidence.
Beeby, Sub-Lieutenant Edward .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
Brentnall, Thomas, F.C.P.A. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38, 46
Burr, Amos .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Butchart, James Russell .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Clarkson, Engineer-Rear-Admiral Sir William, K.B.E , C.M.G. .. .. 37
Cooke, Thomas Henry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Cornwell, Albert Edward .. .. .. .. .. 6, 30, 47, 51, 68, 80
Cotes, Percy Robert .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5, 20
Cresswell, Radio-Commander Frank Gillespie .. . . 15, 20, 34, 84
Creswell, Rear-Admiral Sir William Rooko, K.C.M.G. .. .. 36, 88, 90
Denison, Hugh Robert .. .. .. .. • • • ■ . 28
Gardiner, Senator the Honorable Albert .. .. .. . . . . 52
Higgs, the Honorable William Guy, M.P. . . .. . . . . . . 42
Hoad, Evie Prudence .. . . .. .. . . . • • 65
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August, M.P- ~ .. .. 68, 70, 80, 81, 86, 89
Long, Senator the Honorable James Joseph . . . . . . 54, 61, 84
Lynch, Joseph Aloysius .. .. .. .. .. .. ..31,60
Macandie, Honorary Fleet Paymaster George Lionel . . ■ , . 34, 39, 40, 80, 84
Pearce, Senator the Honorable George Foster .. . . . . .. 81
Price, John Junius .. .. .. .. .. .. .. SO, 46
Ross, Herbert Ernest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Russell, Senator the Honorable Edward John .. .. .. .. 41
Strong, Percy William .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Thomas, Frederick William .. .. .. .. . . .. 2!, 83
Treacy, Paymaster-in-Chief Alfred Martin, 0.8. E. .. .. . . . . 85
Willis,'Albert Carlisle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4


SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS.
FIRST DAY- 12th NOVEMBER, 1918.
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works.
Page
Opening Address . . .. . . .. . . .. .. 1
Willis, Albert Carlisle .. .. .. ' .. . . . . .. 4
Cotes, Percy Robert .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 5
Cornwell, Albert Edward .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Cresswell, Radio-Commander Frank Gillespie .. .. .. - . . 15
SECOND DAY—I 3th NOVEMBER, 1918.
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works.
Application by Counsel, Mr. L. B. Cussen .. .. .. .. .. 19
Cotes, Percy Robert .. .. .. .. . . . . 20
Cresswell, Radio-Commander Frank Gillespie .. . . .. .. 20
Thomas, Frederick William .. .. .. . . .. .. 24
Ross, Herbert Ernest .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 26
Denison, Hugh Robert .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 28
Cooke, Thomas Henry .. .. . . . . . . .. .. 29
Cornwell, Albert Edward .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 30
Price, John Junius .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 30
Lynch, Jpseph Aloysius .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 31
Beeby, Sub-Lieutenant Edward .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
THIRD DAY—l4th NOVEMBER, 1918.
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works.
Cresswell, Radio-Commander Frank Gillespie .. . . .. .. 34
Strong, Percy William .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 34
Macandie, Honorary Fleet Paymaster George Lionel .. .. .. .. 34
Creswell, Rear-Admiral Sir William Rooke, K.G.M.G. .. .. .. 36
Clarkson, Engineer-Rear-Admiral Sir William, K.8.E., C.M.G. .. .. 37
Brentnall, Thomas, F.C.P.A. ' .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
Macandie, Honorary Fleet Paymaster George Lionel (recalled) .. .. 39, 40
Butchart, James Russell .... .. . . .. .. .. 41
Russell, Senator the Honorable Edward John .. . . .. .. 41
Higgs, The Honorable William Guy, M.P. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Brentnall, Thomas. F.C.P.A. (recalled) .. .. .. .. .. 46
Price, John Junius (recalled) .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
Cornwell, Albert Edward (recalled) .. .. .. .. .. 47
FOURTH DAY —15th NOVEMBER, 1918.
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works.
Cornwell, Albert Edward (recalled) .. .. .. . . .. 51
Gardiner, Senator the Honorable Albert .. . . . . .. .. 52
Burr, Amos .. ..... .. . . . . .. . . 53
Long, Senator the Honorable James Joseph . . . . .. .. 54
Lynch, Joseph Aloysius (recalled) .. . . . . . . .. , . 60
Long, Senator the Honorable James Joseph (recalled) .. .. . . 61
Hoad, Evie Prudence .. .. .. .. ' .. .. . . 65
Cornwell, Albert Edward (recalled) .. .. . . . . .. 68
Jenson, The Honorable Jens August, M.P. .. . . . . . . .. 68
FIFTH DAY—l6th NOVEMBER, 1918.
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August, M.P. .. ~ ~ .. , . 70


SIXTH DAY—lBth NOVEMBER. 1918,
Purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works .
1* AH K
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August, M.P. (recalled) .... g 0
Cornwell, Albert Edward (recalled) .. ~ ” " 80
Macandie, Honorary Fleet Paymaster George Lionel (recalled).. ’ ’ ’ ' 8o
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August (recalled) . , . . 81
Pearce, Senator the Honorable George Foster
Thomas, Frederick William .. .. '' 83
Macandie, Honorary Fleet Paymaster George Lionel (recalled) ’.' .'.' 84
Cresswell, Radio-Commander Frank Gillespie .. g^
Long, Senator the Honorable James Joseph (recalled) .. .. 84
Purchase of the s.s. “ Emerald."
Opening Address g^
Treacy, Paymaster-in-Chief Alfred Martin, 0.8. E. .. .. ' 85
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August, M.P. (recalled) .. .. .. gg
Creswell, Rear-Admiral Sir William Rooke, K.C.M.G. (recalled) .. " 88
Purchase of th'e s.s. “ Togo."
Opening Address ..... *
Jensen, The Honorable Jens August, M.P. (recalled) .. .. " g 9
Creswell, Rear-Admiral Sir William Rooke, K.C.M.G. .. " 90
Closing Addresses—
Mr. Starke
Mr. Cussen .. . 91
91
Remarks of Chairman . ■ '
94


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
{At the Court of Marine Inquiry.)
TUESDAY, 12tii NOVEMBEE, 1918, at 10.30 a.m.
Before the Commissioners :
W. G. Mcßeath, Esq. (Chairman.) •
F. A. Yerco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Taylor.
The Secretary (Mr. W. A. Newman) read the Letters
Patent appointing the Commission.
Mr. H. E. Starke. —I have been instructed by the Crown
Solicitor for the Federation to assist you in this inquiry.
Mr. L. B. Cussen. —I have been instructed by Mr. D. H.
Herald to appear for Mr. Jensen. Owing to the recent
occurrences and the announcement of to-day as a public
holiday, I am afraid that my client has assumed the Com-
mission will not sit. His presence here is essential to me
in appearing for him, and I feel in some difficulty. Neither
Mr. Jensen, nor his solicitor, both of whom I saw late
yesterday afternoon, and with whom I made arrangements
to see this morning, has been to see me. I can only assume
that they have assumed that the Commission would not
sit on a public holiday.
The Chairman. —I think they ought to have communi-
cated with the Secretary of the Commission at least, as an
act of courtesy. One of my fellow Commissioners has
come from Sydney and the other from South Australia,
and witnesses have arrived from Sydney as well. The
Government has asked us specially to expedite this matter,
and you will recognise we have a duty to perform in that
respect and I cannot see my way to adjourn the Com-
mission.
Mr. Cussen. —l think you will recognise the likelihood of
them assuming what I think they have assumed.
The Chairman. —Nobody else has assumed it.
Mr. Cussen. —I did not, perhaps out of abundance of
caution, but inquiries were made at the Law Courts this
morning by barristers’ clerks and it was then found none
of the courts were going to sit.
The Chairman. —I understand they did not adjourn; they
assembled first and decided to adjourn afterwards.
Mr. Cussen. —That is my position, and I certainly do
feel a difficulty in this case, because there has been some
evidence taken which I know nothing about, and Mr.
Jensen’s presence is essential to me because suggestions
are made against him and there are matters in which it is
suggested he is involved. Ido feel a real difficulty.
The Chairman. —I sympathize with you, but you recog-
nise, of course, your client is the one who ought to be here
above all others, and especially his solicitor. It is an
extraordinary thing that they are the only two that are
away this morning.
Mr. Cussen. —It is a public holiday, you must remember
that.
The Chairman. —Still I think they ought to have attended.
In my own business all our employees attended this morning
waiting for a decision.
Mr. Cussen. —The announcement was in the papers that
it was a public holiday, and I suppose Mr. Jensen, at any
rate, would assume that, that being so, no legal tribunals
would sit.
F. 13033. —1
Mr. Starke. —l do not know that there is any occasion to
adjourn the Commission. It will assist Mr. Cussen if
I state generally the character of the evidence that is
going to be called, and if I put in some documents that are
on the files and read them. Those documents I think he
has, or his solicitor has them, and no doubt he can com-
municate with the solicitor in the meantime and get in
touch with Mr. Jensen.
Mr. Cussen. —l have got no desire to delay the matter
at all, I assure you. lam here and quite ready to go in,
but I do feel this difficulty, and I think it is my duty to
my client to express it. What my friend says will probably
relieve the position somewhat ; if after he has finished
opening I feel that matters are stated by him which require
the presence of my client, I will mention the matter to the
Commission later.
[At this stage Mr. Jensen attended.)
Mr. Starke. —As I understand, Mr. Commissioners,this
inquiry is limited so far as these present proceedings are
. concerned to three matters. One, an inquiry as to the
facts surrounding the Shaw Wireless Works at Eandwick,
or the works that were known by that name ; secondly, as
to the purchase of a steam-ship called the Togo ; and
thirdly, as to another steam-ship called the Emerald. I shall
take the wireless first, and it is to be noted, I think, by
those appearing hero, that these are not, on the part of the
Crown, or any one else, accusations against any person.
I am not here to accuse any person of any corrupt act, or
of any improper act, but what I am here to do is to lay
before the Commission certain facts, both favorable and
unfavorable, and touching a large number of persons in
connexion with those transactions
There being no charges in that sense, I apprehend that
the Commission will not confine itself solely to statements
that would be received in a court of law. That would
be only right if there were accusations against any person
of improper or corrupt dealings, but in this case the facts
concerning the whole matter will be laid before the Com-
mission, and I do not suppose the Commission would on
hearsay evidence, for instance, in endeavouring to get the
facts, draw any unfavorable conclusion against any
person, but I think it is right to have all those facts before
the Commission in endeavouring to find out what was the
real truth of those transactions. I think it will be useful
for my friend, Mr. Cussen, to bear that in mind, that some-
times I will be leading evidence that he may think in a
court of justice would not affect his client. That will be
so, and when I do so, I will tell the Commission that that
would not be evidence in a court of law affecting Mr.
Jensen, and he will then understand it is not because
Mr. Jensen-is being attacked any more than Mr. Cussen
is being attacked, but it is to endeavour to get the whole
facts concerning' these transactions before the Com-
mission. Now the history of the matter seems to be this :
that Father Shaw had established a wireless works at
Eandwick, and he had formed a company which was called
“ The Shaw Wireless Limited,” and at that place they
manufactured various electrical machines, motors, and so
forth, which they could dispose of for the purposes of elec-
trical works or for wireless works. In addition, however,
he had certain patents, or perhaps it would be right to say
that the patents w r ere granted, but whether they were
valid or not could only be tested in courts of law ; but
they were gazetted on the register, and the company carried
on this business at Eandwick. Ido not think it can be
said that the business was a great financial success, at all
events the earlier part of it seemed to be mainly the laying


out of large sums of money and an inadequate return for
the moneys invested. But some time in 1914, about
December, it appears from the files that Father Shaw
offered these works to the Postmaster-General’s Department
of the Commonwealth. He offered the works and his
patents to the Postmaster-General s Department at a
valuation, and he said that he had spent about £78,000
on the land, plant, and machinery. That transaction
apparently did not go on, as the Postmaster-General’s
Department was not willing to acquire the wireless works.
However, at the same time the Naval Board seemed to be
requiring some works for carrying out the wireless instal-
lations of the Commonwealth, and they had recommended,
apparently, the establishment of workshops, which it
was thought would require about £4,000 to establish,
and that seems to have been at that time the sole require-
ment of the Navy Board in connexion with its wireless
establishments. Nothing was done as to that, and, appar-
ently, either that suggestion lapsed or else it was merged —
it is not easy to follow—into another offer. Some time
between 1914 and the 15th of May, 1916, apparently
neither the Postmaster-General's proposition had gone
on, nor the establishment of workshops had gone on,
but in May, 1916, Father Shaw wrote to the Minister for
the Navy. Apparently there is nothing on the file that can
suggest how this letter came to bo written at that moment
to the Minister for the Navy, or what brought it about,
or how Father Shaw suddenly bethought himself of the
Navy Department. There may be some explanation of
it, but I am not aware of it. However, he did write a
letter; as the Commission knows Father Shaw is dead,
but this is what he wrote — [reads letter of 15 th of May,
1916, from Father Shaw to the Minister for the Navy]. The
Minister for the Navy at that time was the Hon. Mr. Jensen,
and on the 25th of May Mr. Jensen telegraphed in reply
to Father Shaw —[ reads telegram]— and Father Shaw replied
on the same day — [reads telegram]. Then on the 29th of May
Mr. Jensen made a minute, in which he said to the secretary
of his Department, I think, “ Please endeavour to secure
from the Home Affairs a suitable person to value the land
and plant of the Shaw Wireless Works, and have the same
attended to as early as possible.” Then the Naval Secretary
wrote to the Home Affairs Department asking them to
submit a valuation of the land. That was done, appar-
ently. Mr. Jensen had a man appointed by the Home
Affairs to value the land, that valuation was made, and will
be put before the Commission. The next thing that was
necessary to do was to value the plant and stock at the
works, and there is some evidence that will be placed
before you that this valuer was named Ross. So far as I
know, Ross was a good reputable man, and, in fact, I do not
think there is any reason to suggest otherwise. There is
some evidence that his name w r as suggested by Father
Shaw; at all events Ross was appointed by Mr. Jensen
after consultation with a Minister in Now South Wales, who
recommended Ross as a reliable and competent valuer,
and he was appointed to value. He did not value the land.
Mr. Jensen directed Engineer-Commander Cresswell, the
Radio Director, to go over and assist in the valuation.
What they valued was the plant, not the stock or stores,
or anything of that sort apparently. They did not attempt
to do that, but they did make a valuation of the plant, and
so far as I understand the plant was valued on the basis
of what its value was at that time as a going concern with
the plant assembled in situ, and the whole thing fit to make
profits. That was the basis of the valuation, so far as I
understand Ross. That valuation will be placed before
you. The stores, so far as I understand, were never valued.
They were to be taken at a valuation, but from that date
to this I think they were never valued for the purposes
of ascertaining the purchase money. That being done,
the valuation was put before Mr. Jensen—that wasthe valua-
tion of the land by Home Affairs, and the valuation of the
plant by Ross and Commander Cresswell—and the valuation
01, the stores as assigned by Father Shaw was also before
Mr. Jensen. At this stage it is important to note two things.
First of all Engineer-Commander Cresswell was very much
in favour of a purchase. He thought it would be extremely
valuable. He wrote a report to the 'Minister suggesting an
offer of about £40,000. This is the portion of the report
ho wrote that I wish to refer to, “ I have therefore to
recommend if these works can bo acquired for the sum of
£40,000, which in my opinion would be a fair offer to make
owing to the conditions at present obtaining, that they be
so acquired for the purposes of Naval Electrical Works.”
That was on the 14th of July, 1916. Engineer-Commander
Cresswell,as I said, was in favour of purchasing theseworks,
but apparently of only making an offer of £40,000. Shaw
had offered them at £57,000. Engineer-Commander
Cresswell will be called, and it is a strange fact, which Mr.
Jensen will no doubt explain, that Mr. Jensen ordered
that report to be withdrawn, saying, in substance—l am
not repeating his words, because Commander Cresswell will
give his own oocount of the conversation—that Commander
Cresswell had nothing todo with the price,that was a matter
for the Minister. That part of the report was withdrawn,
and instead was substituted this paragraph, “ The valuation
as aforesaid is based on the works being taken over as a
commercial, going concern, but I point out that a number
of expensive patents and part of the electrical apparatus
is obsolete, and can only be taken on the market value of
raw materials. It would therefore appear that the works
should not be taken over at the assessed valuation of
£60,736. lam of opinion that Shaw’s offer of £57,000 is
reasonable, but probably the Government could buy for
a still lower figure, but that is, of course, a matter for
negotiation.” I think Commander Cresswell made, if I
may be allowed to say so, a grave mistake in allowing the
Minister or any one else to order him as to what report he
should make. That was a matter for himself, and for his
own honour to dictate, what report he should make. But
this portion of the report was substituted. One cannot
help sympathizing with Commander Cresswell, and he was
there in a position apparently absolutely dependent on the
Minister. That was done as a matter of fact. It is a fact,
and from the point of view of business you are competent
enough to form a very strong opinion on why such an
extraordinary thing as that was done.
The next curious fact- in connexion with the matter is
that the proposition was submitted to Rear-Admiral Clark-
son, who was the Engineering Member of the Naval Board,
and I presume a thoroughly competent man to express
opinions on matters such as these. He was strongly
opposed to this purchase and minuted the papers. In
fact, he wrote a memorandum on the subject opposing the
purchase, and said he did not think it was desirable in the
interests of the Commonwealth. He saw his junior’s
recommendation, and formed his opinions no doubt upon
that recommendation as well as other considerations to
which he refers. Mr. Jensen apparently overruled that,
and went on with his scheme. The curious fact is, although
a Naval Board had been constituted—which I presume
was the technical adviser to the Minister—the Naval Board
was, I think, ignored from beginning to end in the whole
transaction, although it involved an expenditure of £55,000,
except in so far as Rear-Admiral Clarkson had been asked
for his opinion on the subject. Despite those facts Mr.
Jensen resolved to buy, and he took it to the Cabinet and
he got an approval to purchase at £55,000, which is £2,000
less than Shaw had asked. The purchase was carried
through at £55,000 with great haste, and with considerable
pressure on the part of Mr. Jensen. He expedited it to the
Secretary of the Navy Department, and through the
Secretary of the Navy Department to the Crown Solicitor
of the Commonwealth.
Now, stopping there for a moment, it is a little important
to go back, because the facts show that Father Shaw’s
works had been, I will say mortgaged because it is an
easy term to understand, to Sir Rupert Clarke and perhaps
some one else who was interested with him, and they had
advanced a considerable sum of money on the property,
but at this time, I think, they were very anxious to get out,
2


as they saw it was a 1 oss. The facts behind seem to suggest
that had he gone to Sir Rupert Clarke and got an option
that if he could give them £25,000, which was much less
than they had advanced on it, they would be satisfied to
let him deal with the place. The importance of this fact
seems to be this: they were in a position where they could
have closed down at once ; they were in a position where
they must have sold if they were going to get their money.
There were only possibly one or two purchasers in Aus-
tralia for this place, the Commonwealth Government one,
and perhaps the Marconi Company or the Telefunken
Company might have been another ; but they would not
have looked at £25,000. They would have bought straight
from Sir Rupert Clarke at what he was prepared to sell.
Mr. Jensen never investigated that side, even if he knew of
it. I doubt whether he knew of it. It only shows the
haste and rush with which the thing was carried through.
The matter was carried through and £55,000 was paid.
Before I come to the date of payment, I should refer to
one other matter, and it is very important. There had been
come public criticism of this valuation that had probably
been spread about by the opponents of the Shaw Wireless
Works, and it had been published in the Sydney Sun news-
paper. On the 4th of August the Treasurer, Mr, Higgs,
wrote a letter to Mr. Jensen as follows —[reads letter].
On the 7th of August the Minister of the Navy replied to
the Treasurer as follows —[reads letter], I do not know
whether the Treasurer knew about Admiral Clarkson’s
opinion that this was an undesirable purchase for the
Government. I think he did not know, and Mr. Jensen
did not disclose it. He wrote that answer based entirely
upon Engineer-Commander Cresswell’s opinion ; and the
adverse report of Admiral Clarkson, I think, was either not
referred to or was suppressed. The second and third
statements in that letter were made on the authority of
Commander Cresswell’s report, and the Minister for the
Navy again omitted to state that Commander Cresswell had
suggested an offer of £40,000, and that the Minister had
ordered him to withdraw that matter altogether. So that
there was, I venture to say, a most material suppression of
fact so far as the Treasurer was concerned, who was the
responsible Minister of the Crown for finding the money.
I think it will be found that the Treasurer knew nothing
about Engineer-Commander Cresswell’s recommendation
that not more than £40,000 should be offered. That is one
of the most serious matters we have in this case, the fact
that these adverse opinions were suppressed apparently
from the Treasurer, and no doubt from the Cabinet, and
that the truth was not told.
Now, I was going on to say the date of the payment of the
money was the 18th of August, 1916, and a sum of £55,000
was paid with the authority of the Cabinet into the London
Bank, Melbourne, to Father Shaw’s account. At that time
the stock had not been valued at all. I do not think it
ever was valued. The plant had been valued, the land had
been valued, but the stock and stores had never been
valued. I do not think at that time even the title was
thoroughly complete. I have no doubt that the Crown
Solicitor was satisfied the title was good, but I do not think
the formal conveyance and documents were absolutely
completed in such a manner as lawyers would think entirely
necessary. However, that is a minor point, because the
Crown Solicitor was satisfied with the title, and that is all
he had to be satisfied on.
Now, of that £55,000 we can trace, I think, the whole of
that with the exception of £5,300 through Shaw’s account
and find the source to which it went: it mainly went to pay
Father Shaw’s debts, but £5,300 could not be traced. We
do find that Father Shaw drew a cheque which is for £5,300
on the bank which was marked “ cash,” and he cashed it
at the London Bank, and took notes. The purpose of it is
very difficult to follow, but following that payment the
next thing that we found was that a member of Parliament
named Senator Long had paid into his account on the 2nd
September £2,400. Now, evidence will be placed before
the Commission which, I suppose, directly touches Long and
indirectly touches Jensen, but which is not, in fact, 1
should say, is not evidence which lawyers would accept of
the truth of those matters against Long or Jensen. But
there are statements to this effect; that Father Shaw had
told his bankers, had told a young woman with whom he
was associated, had told Mr. Cornwell, who was an officer
in his employ, and who also became an employee of the
Government afterwards, that he was not making much out
of it because there were a lot of sharks about, and some of
the sharks he named as Long and Jensen. That, of course,
led to inquiries into Long’s account, and on the 4th of
September, 1916, within a very few days after the with-
drawal of this £5,300, there is the sum of £2,400 paid into
Long’s account in cash. Now Senator Long admits, as I
understand, that out of that sum £1,300 was paid to him by
Father Shaw. He said he was friendly, and that there was
no consideration for it, and that he had lent Father Shaw
some small sums of money —from £l5O to £l7O. He said
he had entertained Father Shaw at lunch when he came
over to Melbourne, and his son was at the wireless works.
And according to him Father Shaw paid him £1,300. What
for ? He declares it was not because he was the go-between,
and he did not assist in the matter. But, following this
thing out, I think we will be able to show that Long, at all
events, took a very great interest in pushing the thing
along as far as he could. He was at the workshops,
and, although you cannot prove conversations with the
Minister, all members of Parliament have ready access to
Ministers, and we must draw our own conclusions. What
was that £1,300 paid for that Long admitted? As to the
balance, he has a curious story to tell. The balance of the
money, he says, he won at the races. He says he went
out to the races at Flemington, and a week after that,
or within a couple of weeks, he also went out to the races at
Caulfield and he won large sums of money amounting to
the difference ; but he is quite unable to tell you what
horses he backed, what bookmakers he betted with, but he
says he won that sum, and it all went into his bank account.
The next curious thing connected with Long is that, after
the Commission had examined and had extracted those
facts from him, he apparently went over to Sydney and he
saw Mr. Cornwell, the manager at the works. Apparently
he knew Mr. Cornwell. Senator Long’s son was employed
at the wireless works. Cornwell was suspicious of the whole
business. He had always been suspicious of it. He had
heard remarks and statements, and he was very suspicious
indeed. He did not trust Senator Long, and he had
apparently other suspicions as well. Senator Long tele-
phoned to Mr. Cornwell, and he said he could not talk over
the telephone, and that he had better come out to Randwick,
which Long did. A long conversation then took place,
and it is a very damaging conversation to Long as Cornwell
relates it, and, although it is not evidence against Jensen, as
related by Cornwell it contains very damaging statements
to Jensen. I can state it shortly, because Cornwell will
give his recollection of it so far as he can remember. In
substance, it was to the effect that Father Shaw had taken
the £5,300 out of the bank, and he had put it into four
little packages, and went up to Parliament House. One
of those little packages Senator Long got, and another of
the little packages he said was for Mr. Jensen. Mr. Jensen’s
account has been searched, and Mr. Jensen made his
account perfectly free to the accountants, but there is no
trace in Mr. Jensen’s banking account of any such sum,
at least in no account that we have seen or have been told
of. That is not quite conclusive, of course, because Long
even stated in explanation of that that Jensen had never
yet taken the
would not be in any account. Long’s statement to Cornwell
was very definite that Jensen was in it. He mentioned
two other names, and I think I am accurate in saying
those names were Senator Russell and Senator Gardiner.
He said they also had packages. Their accounts have also
been searched and suggestions have been made as having
come from Father Shaw and other people that Commander
Cresswell also received a share. His account has been
3


freely opened to the accountants, and there is not any
trace whatever of any such sum at all. But the statement
by Cornwell, of course, is direct evidence against Long as
to the dishonest nature of this business. It is not evidence
in any way whatever, according to lawyers, against Jensen,
Commander Cresswell, or Senators Russell and Gardiner,
and in none of those cases, except in the case of Senator
Long, was any entry found of the money. However,
that conversation is very important. In addition to that,
Cornwell was so suspicious of Long, and apparently anxious
to put the light of day on to this matter, that he was not
content with only the conversation at which he and Long
were the sole hearers, but he had fixed up a little telephone,
and in the next room he had a man, Mr. Price, listening,
and Price took down in shorthand a copy of this conversa-
tion so far as he could hear it. He could not hear it all,
and some of the statements that Mr. Cornwell remembers
are not in that transcript. Mr. Price will be called, and will
give you entirely the notes that he made of the conversation.
That is a very damaging document so far as Long is con-
cerned, and I think it will be for the Commission afterwards,
and Mr. Cussen when he cross-examines him, to remember
that it also reflects on Jensen, as I say not as legal evidence,
but as a matter that forces an inquiry into the surroundings.
Mr. Cussen. —Have you got that document ? Can you
let me see it now ?
Mr. Starke. —Yes ; I am going to give this to you tran-
scribed exactly as the notes were taken. Where there was
a break in the hearing there is a break in the notes—
[docwnent handed to Mr. Cussen ].
I should tell you who Mr. Price was. Mr. Price had been,
I am not certain that he was not at the time, in the employ
of Mr. Barton, the accountant who had done certain
accountancy work for the Commission in connexion with
these Naval inquiries. Cornwell apparently rang Mr.
Barton up, and asked him whether he could give him a
shorthand man, as Senator Long was coming out, and he
wanted a man to take an important conversation. Mr.
Cornwell’s own shorthand writer was not reliable enough,
reliable in a sense of efficiency, and, so having spoken to
Mr. Barton, Mr. Barton allowed Mr. Price to go out, and he
did go out. I mention this because I think it is only proper
that Mr. Cussen should know. Mr. Price had been employed
to do some shorthand work by the Commission, that is,
the taking of statements, but I understand from the Com-
mission itself—the Commission can correct me if I am wrong
—that they had no knowledge at all of this duty on which
Mr. Barton had engaged Mr. Price, and there the matter
rests. But there the statement is, and it is very im-
portant, and there can hardly be a doubt, I think, of the
truthfulness of that report. Price had no interests to serve,
and nothing to do in connexion with it except to take it down
and as he says he did not hear it all, but where he did not
hear it all he left blanks. The other evidence that I will
also call before the Commission is of this character. It
is not strictly against either Long or Jensen or any one else,
but it is very important from a business aspect in endea-
vouring to assist you to try and search round and see if you
can get any assistance from any one to know what is the
meaning of Father Shaw’s statements to his bankers that
thete were sharks about, and that he was getting very
little out of it. The statement is very sinister. There
can only be one shark, or at least the sharks can only be
in one direction. It points, if it were true that Shaw made
a truthful statement, beyond all question to the men who
were negotiating and effecting this purchase. Every straw
points in the one direction, and one direction only. A
business man does not usually make statements to a banker
which are untrue. He may lie to nlbst people, but he does
not lie to his banker or his solicitor, but that puts you on
inquiry. That is all I say, that it forces the Commission
to demand explanations in every way in connexion with
this transaction, from Commander Cresswell, Mr. Jensen,
Senator Long, and any one else who is brought into the
matter. Another witness we will have to call is a woman
with whom Father Shaw was associated. She says as soon
as this transaction was carried through that Father Shaw
wrote her a letter, which is now destroyed, in which he said
that Long and Jensen, whose names she remembered were
mentioned in the letter, got something like £2,000 each out of
it. She says that was written in a letter from Shaw to her,
and I think she said she cannot remember what the other
names were. Those are the outlines of the facts that I
think it will be necessary to put before the Commission.
Senator Long’s position seems very difficult indeed. We
have his bank account from May, 1916, right on to Novem-
ber, 1916. He opened it with a Hobart cheque, which was
apparently a transfer from Hobart to Melbourne in the
Commonwealth Bank, and, roughly speaking, except for
that opening cheque, there has been very little paid into
the account but his Parliamentary salary, which was paid
in month after month, about £SO a month. He seems to
have had no other income whatever, and he was a man who
had a wife and five or six children dependent on him.
His regular income seems to have been about £6OO a year,
S 3 far as this account shows. Then he suddenly gets
£2,400 shortly after this purchase was completed. ' That
was paid into his account, and he explains it by saying he
got £1,300, and he went out to the races and won the
balance. He said he used to keep a certain amount in his
locker to “punt” with. He cannot explain what the
horses were on which he won the money or anything else.
How did he get it ? What is the meaning of it all ? As
I say, he, in a statement which he made to Cornwell,
directly connects Jensen up with this transaction. I do
not propose to go into the matter of the Emerald or the
Togo until we have finished with the wireless matter, and
I will now put in file number 1. I will put in the whole
file, which is indexed. Is there any necessity for me to read
it ?
Mr. Cussen. —-I do not think so.
Mr. Starke. —Then I shall not do so. The file includes the
whole of the minutes and so forth, Ido not propose to
read it to the Commission, as no doubt the Commission has
already read it. ,
EXHIBIT 1. —File in connexion with Shaw
Wireless purchase.
Albert Carlisle Willis, sworn and examined.
. By Mr. Starke. —What are you ? —Manager of the London
Bank of Australia, Haymarket Branch, George-street,
Sydney.
How long have you been manager there ? —Six years.
Since 1912 ? —Yes.
Did you know Father Archibald John Shaw ?—Yes, very
well.
Did he bank at your bank ? —Yes.
Did you know his account thoroughly I—Yes.
Would you tell me about 1916 how that account stood
with you ? —lt was overdrawn on that date.
Very much ? —Could you give me any particular time
in 1916.
By Mr. Starke. —Take from 15th Majv 1916, down to the
18th August, 1916 ?—Yes. The account was overdrawn.
By how much ? —Fluctuating amounts. I should say
from £3,000 up to £5,500.
Was that account in connexion with the wireless plant
he had ? —Yes ; in connexion with his wireless business.
Did you ever speak to him about getting thgrt account
reduced 1— No. We had security for that amount. It was
understood it was to be reduced.
You had ample security for it ? —Yes.
Did Shaw ever speak to you about selling the wireless
business ?—Yes, at various times prior to the date of the
sale —three or four months prior to the sale.
What did he say to you ?—He told me he was trying to
negotiate a sale with the Navy Department.
Did he show you any document in support of that state-
ment ? —Only an occasional telegram from Melbourne.
The telegrams were signed “ Long,” and nothing more.
4


Do you remember what those telegrams said ? —General,
for instance, “ Everything going satisfactory,” and so
forth.
Did he mention the subject of paying anybody in con-
nexion with the sale ?—Mention was made towards the
end, when the sale was about to be consummated.
What did Shaw say to you ? —He gave me to under-
stand he had to pay away a fairly large sum in Melbourne,
to no one in particular.
Instead of saying “ He gave you to understand,” would
you give me the conversation as nearly as you can remem-
ber, in the exact words ? —He let me know that a large
sum had to be paid away, that all this money would not
be coming backwards.
Paid away to whom I—He1 —He mentioned no particular
names.
Did he say for what purpose it was to be paid away ?
No. His words were, “ Some people had to have a cut
out of it.” That was the expression, I think.
Did you have any more conversation with him of that
nature ?—Only, I think, in reply to an inquiry I made
about what amount he would ultimately get out of it, and
he said he had to pay away a fairly large sum in Melbourne.
He had to pay away an amount to the Shaw Wireless
Limited for the works he had under option, and a very
large amount to be paid away which I took to be the
“ cut ” out of it.
After the sale was completed, how much money was sent
to your bank, or what sum came to the London Bank ?
To my branch ?
Yes ? —We received from Melbourne a net amount of
£17,000.
That is from the London Bank in Melbourne I—The1 —The
London Bank in Melbourne —I could not say.
Any way, £17,000 was remitted to your branch and
placed to Shaw’s credit ?—Yes.
Did Shaw tell you where that money came from ? —We
knew. We had advice from our Melbourne office that he
received that money.
That was for the purchase of the wireless ? —Yes.
In speaking of these large amounts of moneys that were
to be paid away, did he mention any amounts ? —To the
best of my recollection, about £5,000 I understood him to
say.
What did Shaw say that £5,000 was for ? —That was in
reply to the same question I referred to before about
£5,000 had to be paid away.
For what purpose ? —That is using his own expression,
that some one had to get a cut out of it.
By Mr. Cussen. —I do not want to ask the witness any
questions.
The witness withdrew.
Percy Robert Cotes, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a barrister and solicitor of the
Supreme Court of Victoria ?—Yes.
And you are at present employed in the office of Messrs.
Whiting and Aitken, solicitors, Melbourne ? —Yes.
How long have you been there ? —Since 1904.
I understand you are acquainted with the business known
as the Shaw Wireless Limited ? —Yes.
Were you ever a director, or anything of that sort ?
Yes, at the commencement of 1916.
How did you come to be appointed a director ?—Mr.
H. J. Whiting and Father Archibald John Shaw had been
directors. Mr. H. J. Whiting had gone to the war, or had
gone to England to enlist for the war at the end of 1914,
and there was no one to protect the interests of Sir Rupert
Clarke and Mr. Whiting, who had a controlling interest in
the company, and they were not too well satisfied with the
way things were going on during 1915, so at the end of 1915
an arrangement was made under which I was appointed a
director.
You were appointed a director to protect the interests of
Sir Rupert Clarke I —Yes.
What was Sir Rupert Clarke’s position in connexion with
the. business ? —He had a shareholding interest.
What was the shareholding interest ? —Substantially,
I think, he had about 10,800 shares out of 35,000 shares,
and Mr. Harry Whiting had about the same ; and, in
addition, Sir Rupert Clarke had guaranteed the account of
Shaw Wireless Limited with the London Bank, and in or
about August, 1915, he had paid to the London Bank the
amount owing to the bank, and obtained an assignment
from them of their security.
How much had he paid ? —He paid to the London Bank
just over £27,034.
In May, 1916, what was the state of the account between
Sir Rupert Clarke and this Shaw Wireless Limited ?—I am
not sure what the actual amount was. There was this
£27,034, plus, of course, interest, and in addition to that
there were some moneys that Sir Rupert Clarke had
advanced beforehand, and some moneys that had been
advanced during 1915 to pay for certain debts of Shaw.
You were acting for Sir Rupert Clarke ?—Yes.
Was the account in a satisfactory position so far as Sir
Rupert Clarke was concerned ?—No.
Were you being paid the interest at all ? —No.
I want you to tell me about some arrangement made with
Father Shaw to lease the works to him ?—At the end of
1915—0 n the 23rd December, 1915, to be accurate —Father
Shaw came up to Melbourne and saw Mr. Whiting and
myself (Mr. Whiting was dealing for Sir Rupert Clarke, Sir
Rupert Clarke being away at the war at that time), and we
discussed the position, and he told us that he had an
opportunity of making an. arrangement with a lot of engi-
neers to manufacture munitions. We were not prepared
to allow Shaw Wireless Limited to incur any more obliga-
tions, and we made an arrangement with him under which
he was to be able to have a lease of the works for the
purpose of manufacturing munitions, he working on a co-
operative basis, as we understood, with his men. We were
told that a good deal of money would have to be. laid out
in the first few months for the purpose of putting the works
into proper order for the manufacture of munitions and so
on, and so we agreed that the rent for the first six months
was to be £15,000, but that we would not press him for
payment at that time .so long as he was getting on all
right.
I suppose the lease is in writing if it is necessary to see it ?
—Yes ; but I have not got it. It was not exactly a lease,
but an agreement in writing.
Where is it ? —lt was handed over to Father Shaw.
Did you keep a draft, or a copy ? —Yes; but I cannot find
it.
Having made that arrangement, did any difficulties arise
in the manufacture ?—Yes, from what Shaw told me. He
told me the Government had commandeered some of his
machines, and he also told me that he had difficulty in
getting the steel which the Broken Hill Company had agreed
to supply him with, that it was not as perfect as it should
have been.
Was Shaw able to keep up his rent ?—When the first
quarter’s rent became due at the end of March, he told us
that, owing to the expenditure he had, he was not in a posi-
tion to pay the rent, and we agreed not to require him to
pay the rent at that time.
I want you to come to the time when Shaw mentioned
the matter of selling the works to the Government ?—That
was on Friday, 12th May.
Are you clear of that date? —Yes. It was on Friday,
12th May, 1916, when he came over and saw me (he also
saw Mr. Whiting), and told us that he thought he had a
good chance of selling to the Government, and that he
could get options, or had got options. I think it was he
had got options from other persons who held certain
portions of the land, &c., and he wanted us to give him an
option over the works. I might mention that one of the
things that I was dissatisfied about was, when I went over
to Sydney on other business at Easter, 1915, i found that
some of the most important works in connexion with the
5


business (for instance, the engine house), had been erected
on land which the company had not got the fee of, but had
only got an option, and that option had been allowed to
lapse, and they had some sort of a lease of these premises ;
but still the position from the Shaw Wireless point of view
and our people was not as desirable as it should have been
on that account, and I had suggested to my people that
they should make an effort to buy this land when I came
back from Sydney on that occasion.
He wanted an option to sell —what ? —What we had.
And how much did he want it for ? —We discussed the
amount, and finally we found the most he could give us was
£25,000.
Did you give him an option in writing ? —Yes.
Have you got that, or a copy I—l1 —I have' not got the
original. I handed it to him. I have a copy.
Would you bring up the copy ? —Yes. I can bring it up
to the Commission to-morrow. Of course I had a consent
in writing by Mr. Whiting as attorney.
Does it show on the face of it how long the option was
for ? —Yes, for one month. Shaw wanted it for a longer
time than that.
The option will speak for itself ? —Yes.
Give me the substance of it ?—An option to purchase the
assets of the Shaw Wireless.
He had the option to purchase for £25,000 ? —Yes, for one
month.
I presume, if you gave him an option for £25,000, you
would have given it to anybody ? —We would have given
the option to any one who was prepared to purchase, so
long as we thought we were getting as much money as we
could get for it.
You believed £25,000 was all you could get for it ? —Yes.
By Mr. Cussen. —You do not pretend to be an expert in
this business ?—No.
By Mr. Starke. —But you are a business man protecting
your client’s interests ? —Yes. I thought it was to our
advantage to take the £25,000 if we could get it, and Mr.
Whiting agreed with me.
Why did not you offer it direct to the Government 1 —
Because it would not have been a bit of use offering our
piece without the other part; it was not a complete thing.
You are speaking of the bit of land ?—Yes, on which the
engine house was built.
By the Chairman. —Peters’ land ?—Yes, Peters owned it.
Then there was another bit which the London Bank had
By Mr. Starke. —Was that in priority to you ?—Yes ; it
should have been included in the conveyance to us, but the
conveyance to Shaw somehow or other, before I came into
the matter, had not been executed.
That was security for some piece of land ?—Yes.
Do you know what the security was ?—I do not know.
After Shaw got an option, did he speak about how the
negotiations, if any, were proceeding ?—Yes. He told me
from time to time that the matter was progressing all
right, because I wanted to know whenever I saw him how
things were going.
Did you give him any extension ?—Yes. At the end of
the month we agreed to an extension, and actually put it
into writing on the 19th June.
Will you bring up a copy of that extension also ?—Yes.
I understand Shaw showed you a letter from the Naval
Secretary ? —Yes. I think the letter from the Naval
Secretary was dated 17th July.
He showed you some letter from the Naval Secretary,
and you drafted a reply ?—Yes.
You might look at this, and see if that is the reply you
drafted dated 18th July ? —Yes.
It is the letter in the file dated 18th July ? —Yes, on our
paper.
That is No. 23 on the file. You drafted that after he
showed you the letter from the Naval Secretary ? —Yes.
Then apparently there is another letter on the 21st July
on your paper —101 William-street, No. 25 on the file, with
stamp on it. I presume you drafted that, too. It is a
direction to pay money into the London Bank ? —Yes.
I drafted that letter.
He saw you then, apparently, and got you to draft that ?
Yes.
May I ask you how much money was paid into the hands
of Whiting and Aitken in respect of Sir Rupert Clarke’s
security ? —£25,000, and we got an additional £250 to cover
expenses for certain adjustments that had to be made
on account of our costs.
On what date did you get that ? —On 19th August. It
was on a Saturday, I think.
It was on a Saturday morning, and you think 19th
August, 1916 ?—Yes.
How was it paid to you ?—By cheque. I think it was
Archibald Shaw’s cheque on the London Bank.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —You only had security
for a part of the land ? —Yes.
Do I understand from you that the more valuable piece
of land was not included in your security ? —No, that is not
correct. I should say, as far as the land was concerned,
the more valuable part was included in our security un-
doubtedly, but the engine house, the engines, and so on,
were the vital part of the works.
And situate on land not included in your security ?—Yes.
That engine house, and the basement for the engines, had
cost several thousands of pounds.
Do you know, in addition to the £27,000 that Sir Rupert
Clarke put into this business, how much Father Shaw put
into it ?—I do not know what amounts Father Shaw put
into it. £27,000 was what we paid to the London Bank
to take over their securities.
Mr. Starke. —You will bring those documents up to-
morrow. (To the Commission) —Apart from that, I do not
want to keep Mr. Cotes any further to-day, and I propose
to let him go.
The Chairman. —The point is this: The Commission
thinks, in view of your opening statement, of course the
examination is made in Court, but there is no charge being
made against anybody, and there are a number of people
in the room here this morning whom the Commission
has not seen -before, and there is an officer on duty, and we
are very anxious indeed that all the proceedings in this
room shall be kept entirely secret amongst those that are
here, and we have to rely on the integrity of every person,
and we did not want anybody to leave the room until the
Commission had asked them to regard these proceedings
as secret, and not to. mention anything that has occurred
here this morning outside the room.
Witness. —Certainly I will comply with the request.
The witness withdrew.
Albert Edward Cornwell, sworn and examined.
Mr. Starke. —I understand you are the Manager of the
Randwick Wireless Works that belong to the Common-
wealth Government ? —Yes, that is so.
And you have been the Manager since the Common-
wealth took it over ? —Yes, that is quite correct.
Before the Commonwealth took it over what were you ?
I was Chief Mechanic for Father Shaw, and occupied the
position nominally of Works Manager.
And where were you employed ?—At the Wireless Works,
Randwick.
You might describe to the Commission shortly what those
wireless works were, and what you were doing ? —ln the
first place, I got into touch with Shaw, or Shaw got into
touch with me, at the latter end of May, 1915, and he put
a proposition to me and said he wanted to take part in the
contracts given out by'the New South Wales Government.
When was this ? —The latter part of 1915 ; probably the
end of November or the beginning of December. He asked
me later on at his works to give him an opinion as to, whether
Jje could efficiently manufacture shells in those works, and
6


I gave him my opinion, and said that I thought his plant
was not entirely suitable, and that personally I advised
him not to engage in the manufacture of shells, but he
persisted, and he eventually, offered me employment, and
guaranteed me a year’s salary in the event of the contract
ceasing. I commenced my duties just about a week before
the old year finished in 1915, and I finally severed my con-
nexion with the small arms factory in the first week in
January, 1916. In the first place, I told him he would have
to spend certain sums of money in order to augment his
plant to make it suitable for the manufacture of shells,
and he told me he had plenty of money to do that. I
commenced operations early in January, 1916, and I found
after I had been there a little while that he had very little
money with which to erect machinery for the manufacture
of the shells.
What work was he carrying on then ? —At that time a
very small quantity of electrical work, just a little mechanical
work consisting of parts of motor cycles that were being
made by a contractor for the Postmaster-General’s
Department.
Was it a large plant ? —Yes, a comparatively large
plant.
Was it modern ? —Quite modern.
Was the driving machinery modern too I —Yes, quite.
And in good repair I—Yes.1 —Yes.
Did he have a quantity of stock there—stores I—Yes,1 —Yes,
there was a quantity of stock there.
A large quantity ? —I was not at that time conversant
with the stock.
You noticed there was a large stock ? —Yes.
You might tell me, did you become confidential with
Father Shaw, and did he discuss his business with you ?
Yes. I became fairly confidential with him, and he told
me details of his business. I knew his financial commit-
ments and his financial standing.
Who was the accountant up there ? —Mr. Lynch.
He would know more about the details than you ?—-Yes.
Was Senator Long ever a visitor at those works ? —Yes.
Before this purchase I—Yes. He paid several visits to
the workshop in 1916.
His son, I understand, was employed there ? —Yes,
before I went there.
And is employed there now ? —Yes.
Did Father Shaw see Senator Long ?—lnvariably when
Senator Long visited the workshop he saw Father Shaw and
his son.
When did you first hear from Father Shaw the suggestion
to sell his works to the Government ? —As I stated, it took
me some time to get going with the manufacture of shells,
and I was going practically at full pressure, and things
were shaping pretty well. The remarks occurred in March,
1916, that the Government was intending to shut down
shell contracts, and I told Shaw then that I could not hope
to carry on that works as a going concern with just casual
engineering work.
That was because of the Broken Hill steel having some
little flaws in it ? —Yes ; some difficulty had arisen there.
You said you could not carry on the works if you had to
close down on munitions I —Yes, and rely just on casual
engineering jobs.
How did the suggestion come about selling the works ?
That would occur in March and April. Shaw asked me
casually in April and in May what I considered the works
were worth. I gave him my opinion, and I think- —I am
not too definite now —I asked him his reason for asking
that question. His reply was to the effect he thought he
could sell the works to the Government.
Did you give him your opinion ? —Yes.
Just give me the whole conversation % —I gave him my
opinion that, providing he had full control over all land,
buildings, plant, and stock, it was worth about £40,000 to
£44,000.
What date was that ? —That would be about some time
at the end of April or the beginning of May, 1916, I would
pot be definite as to the date.
When did yon next hear of the proposal to sell the works 1
—From time to time then onwards, culminating in Shaw
asking me-
First of all, did you ever take stock of the stores at that
time ? —Stock was taken at the wireless workshops, 31st
May, 1916.
Who took that ? —Myself, Mr. Lynch, Mr. Downey, at
the workshop.
Are those stock-sheets in existence ?—Yes.
Did you value the plant and stuff at that time ?—Yes.
Is that all the valuation ? —What do you mean ?
In the inventory—the valuation attached to the in-
ventory ?—Yes, it was given in detail.
For what purpose was that macte ?—ln order that Father
Shaw might submit full details with his offer to the
Government.
Did you value the machinery ? —I valued the machinery
and stock, and the appurtenances and overhead gear at the
factory, and things of that character.
In that valuation, on what bjisis of valuation did you
proceed. Was it an instructive valuation, something
that Shaw told you to value at, or something that you
did from your own ideas of value I—He asked me in the first
place my opinion as to the values, and then I gave it to him,
and he said that would not meet his purpose ; and then I
asked him what he considered the place was worth, or the
value he would have to obtain, and he turned me up
particulars—l think Mr. Lynch turned that up —of previous
valuations that the works- had been valued at for offer to
the Postmaster-General’s Department. In order to obtain
a value of £63,000 I had to appreciate the machinery over
and above the purchase price.
By how much I—By1 —By 40 per cent.
Take the stores ?■ —The stores were valued in this way.
I had an inventory taken in the store, which was checked by
Downey and myself, and those valuations were checked in a
number of cases by obtaining quotations from outside firms
of the ruling prices of those particular items.
- New material ? —Yes, many of the articles in the stores
were practically new material.
That was practically the market value of the stuff ?
Yes, it was.
Whether it was old or new stock ? —No. If old stock a
due allowance was made.
You allowed for depreciation I—Yes.1 —Yes.
Was that a fair valuation in your opinion ? —On a number
of articles, yes.
By Mr. Cussen. —Is this the £44,000 or the £63,000 1 —
£63,000.
By Mr. Starke. —How did you get at the land and build-
ings ? —I had to take the values given to me by Shaw.
Would you look through that document and see if you
can find the valuation you speak of. Has it been handed
to the Commission ? —I think so.
By the Chairman. —When you say you appreciated the
value of the plant by 40 per cent., are you talking about
the original value or the depreciative value ? —I am talking
about the purchase price of the machines, plus the price
of installing them, and putting 40 per cent, on to that
price.
And nothing allowed for depreciation ? —No.
By Commissioner Taylor. —A machine bought ten years
ago, you took at the same cost, plus 40 per cent., and no
allowance was made for depreciation ? —A machine which
cost at its purchase price before installation £l,OOO went in
at £1,400. ,
Although even installed ten years ago ? —Of course nothing
had been installed there that long.
Three or four years ago ?—Yes.
You did not allow for depreciation at all ? —No. The
balance were appreciated by 40 per cent.
By Mr. Starke. —Not only the. cost, but the cost of instal-
lation also ?—Yes.
By the Chairman. —Was there any machinery there that
was obsolete at all, or was it all new up-to-date machinery !
—Speaking of machinery, the machinery was quite good.


What about the plant ? —What do you mean by that ?
In your previous evidence you stated that some of the
plant was obsolete. What did you refer to —stores ?—•
Some of the articles that had been manufactured, and which
were included in the stores were obsolete. The wireless
plant was obsolete.
By. Commissioner Taylor.— There were some 900 pieces
of particular plant which you said were practically value-
less ? A quantity. A wireless plant had been made by
Shaw, which was quite in order and valuable at the time
made, but by effluxion of time was rendered obsolete.
By the Chairman— What did you value that at ?—That
was put in at the price it was sold originally to the Depart-
ment for.
Was that on the £63,000 basis ? —Yes. Take a case in
point. If a condenser was made and sold to the Government
in 1913 or 1914 at £6O, it was put down at £6O in 1916
regardless of whether it was valuable or not.
By Commissioner Taylor.— That was inclusive of stuff
you knew was obsolete and of no value ? —As a matter of
fact I cannot say I knew 4t was obsolete.
Which proved to be obsolete ?—Yes. It is regarded as
obsolete at the present time.
By Mr. Starke. —There is a letter dated 9th June, 1916,
from Shaw to the Minister, and there is a list attached to
that. Is that the inventory you mean, or a summary ?—■
That is a summary. As a matter of fact the original stock
list is on the file, extended and checked by the Naval
stores staff on the sth August, 1916. The original stock
supplied with the original valuation is extended on that
particular sheet.
That you say is in the Naval stores files I— Yes, it should
be.
I will read this summary to support that, and I will try
and get that document later. This is dated 9th June,
1916— [reads'].
You say that the stock sheet has been in the Navy De-
partment ? —Yes.
And what I put in just now is a summary of it ?
lam talking of the plant, apart from stock. Was there
any useless or obsolete ?—Some of it was found useless
yes.
Which of that plant was, as a matter of fact, useless or
obsolete ?—The wireless part of the stock that was in at
that time was since found to be obsolete, and the tools
in the store have since been found to be obsolete. No use
has been found for them since the resumption. The patterns
have not been used. About 85 per cent, of them have not
been used.
Is that list which I hand you, a list showing the plant
that is either not used or is useless or obsolete ?—Yes.
This seems to show, according to Cornwell, £10,052 13s. 4d
which is useless or obsolete, and £3,215, the proportion of
stock that will not be used for another eight years ?
That is so, judging by the present rate of consumption.
I presume you made that up since you have been in the
wireless plant ? —I made that up from the results obtained
from the workshops.
On that detailed stock list there is the £91,466. Is that
wrong ?—No.
I am told that there are certain items which have been
added up incorrectly. You might look and see if there are
any items in that list that were not in your list ?—The
item “ Power-house, £30,144 7s. lid.” has evidently been
written in wrongly—it should be £3,144. Apparently the
other items are coriect. ,
The item “ Power-house, £30,144 7s. lid.,” should be
£3,144 ?—Yes.
EXHIBIT 1a. — Letter dated 9th June, 1916,
with summary of inventory attached.
EXHIBIT 2. List of useless and obsolete
plant.
. jP*at srock valuation was taken for the purpose of putting
it forward as a basis for sale ?-—Yes. A detail of the stock
was taken and submitted with the original valuation.
From that time onward,, apparently, you were told by
Shaw what was going on ?—He told me he hoped to effect
a sale at that figure.
Did he make any statements to you at all as to what he
was doing or whom he was seeing ?—He told me that
Senator Long was working for him in the matter. He never
mentioned Jensen’s name to me in the matter at all.
Did he write you letters telling you of the facts ?—He
wrote to me from time to time from Melbourne, informing
me briefly. He was a very brief writer.
Look at these letters from Shaw to yourself and see if you
can tell me the order in which you received them, and also
these telegrams ?
By Mr. Cussen. —Do these letters contain anything
against Mr. Jensen I—l received these letters and remember
them.
By Mr. Starke. —Can you put them in order of receipt.
They are not dated, most of them ? —I think that is the
order in which I received those letters, as I hand them to
you, the bottom one being the earliest.
[Reads first letter commencing “ Got your wire.] —That is
the dispute with Balsillie ?—Fringing on that dispute, yes.
The next letter commences “ Ross phoned Melbourne,
&c.” Who was Ross ? —Ross was the valuer of the plant,
acting for the Department.
Did Shaw ever speak to you during these negotiations
with the Government about Ross ?—Yes.
What was the conversation ? —lf I remember rightly that
conversation took place about May or June, 1916." He told
me it would be necessary, or that the Government would
probably ask an independent man to value the place, who
would act independently of their valuation of the place,
and the question then arose as to whether I could state
to him the names of men, in my opinion, competent to value
the place. I mentioned Mr. Hipsley, Mr. Julius, and Mr.
Ross.
What did Shaw say about them ? —I think he must have
considered some of them.
Did. you make any comments on them to Shaw as to their
capacity ?—I said, to my mind, Mr. Ross was the best of
the lot.
It goes on to say, “ It will be early next week before
things go ahead,” &c.—[ reads on] —That apparently was
some time after May ?—Yes.
The next letter is dated 6th July—[re«ds].—Was there
any trouble about wages at that time ?—Yes ; we were
running on an overdraft at the bank, and I had to go to
Mr. Willis from time to time to draw my wages.
The next letter is headed “ Melbourne, Tuesday, dear
boy.” Is that the way he addressed you ?—Yes, he always
addressed me as “ dear boy.”
“ She is gone.” Th*it was ? —The works.
That is in Shaw’s own writing ?—Yes.
The next is dated “ Saturday.”— [reads.] —Who was
Braund ?—He was the solicitor acting for Marconi.
EXHIBITS Nos. 3,4, 5, and 6.—Letters from
Shaw to witness.
There are some telegrams between you. These are the
telegrams that were found in the works, are they not ?
Yes.
They are from May to July, 1916 ?—Yes.
[Reads telegrams.]— The next wire is 15th July. What
telegram is that “ Government prepared offer vou
£55,000.”
This is July ?—Yes ; that would be in July.
He says, “ Repeat telegram sent from Navy Office and
post me.” How did he get to know of that ? —Father Shaw
was in Melbourne at the time the telegram had been sent,
and apparently he went to the office and found it and asked
to have it repeated. I repeated it on the 7th.
Who is Dantoine ? —He was acting for the Shaw Wire-
less Company.
[Reads on from telegram, 19 th July.] —l suppose you do
not remember that letter ?—lt may have been a reply about
Benson Bros., who were pressing for a return of their
deposit.


Did you come to Melbourne I—l1 —I came to Melbourne about
next week after receiving it.
Were you appointed then ? —Mr. Jensen had told me
about the appointment.
What books were those that were referred to when he
says “ Keep all out of the inventory ” ?—They were the
technical books at that time in the laboratory.
Any account books ? —No.
The next telegram is 27th July— [reads. was
the accountant ?—Yes.
You got all those telegrams in May and July 1-—That is
so.
EXHIBIT No. 7.—Telegrams, May to July.
I now come to the telegrams of August— [reads jirst tele-
gram.]—Who was Baker ?—Baker was his partner in a mine
at Deepwater. He was practically financed by Shaw.
EXHIBIT No. 8. —August telegrams.
During this period of negotiation you say Shaw kept you
in touch with what was going on during his various trips to
Melbourne and back to Sydney ?—Yes.
Did he ever tell you after the offer of £55,0*00 was made
if he was paying any body ?—I knew his financial commit-,
ments. I knew he would have to get a certain sum in order
to meet his obligations, and he told me there was a certain
sum he would have to disburse, somewhere in the neigh-
bourhood of £5,000.
What for ? —ln connexion with the negotiations for the
sale of the works.
Was it to a creditor I—No.
To whom ?—Some people were working for him and had
undertaken negotiations preliminary to the sale of the works,
and he expected to disburse that amount.
Did he say to whom ? —No, he did not.
He just told you he would have to disburse the £5,000
to people ?—To people interested in the negotiations.
Did he at any time before his death tell you to whom he
had disbursed any money ?—No.
Did he tell you whether he had in fact disbursed any
money ? —No.
When did you see him last ? —I saw him last on 17th
July, 1916.
Did you know how he had disbursed the £55,000 at the
time of his death, from anything he told you ? —I knew his
commitments.
That is all you knew ? —Yes.
You have been in charge of these works ever since the
Government purchased them ?—That is so.
You are an electrical machinery man ? —I am a mechanical
engineer.
And you have a knowledge of the value of the plant and
the stock ? —Yes.
And you know that £55,000 was given for this concern ?
—Yes.
In your opinion, was that works, as handed over, worth
that amount ? —No. Acting on my own behalf I would
not have been prepared to give that amount for them.
What, in your opinion, was a fair sum ? —I made a snap
judgment when Shaw asked me i.n 1916 as to my valuation
of the works. That was about £40,000 to £44,000. A
more detailed investigation of the plant there would reduce
that to somewhere between £37,500 and £40,000 ; that
would be my value of the place.
Since the Government has taken it over, has it been
possible to fully employ the works ? —Not all of it, no.
To what extent has it been employed ? —When I say not
all of it, the works are very complete, they have complete
units occupying various trades, and the work that has been
before the workshops since resumption has been mainly
in the nature of electrical instrument work and electrical
work generally. For instance, I have not had enough
material to keep my foundry and pattern shop going, that
is wholly served.
Not even for Government Departments I—Not1 —Not even for
Government Departments, no.
Who keeps the books of this wireless concern ? —lt is
supervised by the Director of Radio Service.
You do not know whether it does or does not pay ?—■
I know whether I am carrying on operations at a loss.
Are you carrying on at a loss ? —ln the first year we
sustained a loss of about actual value £1,500, that is paying
interest and depreciation on the capital invested in the
place.
In the second year ? —I have not finally completed my
list.
Do you see any hope in the immediate future of using
these works to any extent. Are they necessary for the
Government ? —Yes, entirely so.
You believe they are entirely necessary ?—As a matter
of fact, they have done most valuable work since their
resumption.
You did not come to Melbourne when Father Shaw
died ? —No, unfortunately I was detained at Randwick.
I understand this is your report and balance-sheet of
the carrying on of the works from 18th August, 1916, to
30th June, 1917 ?—Yes.
Hours op Meeting.
After discussion, it was decided that the Commission
would meet at 10.30 a.m. daily, and rise at 4.15 p.m.
Adjourned till 2.15 p.m.
On resuming at 2.15 p.m.
By Mr. Starke. —While the negotiations were going on
did Senator Long visit the works at all ? —I remember
him being out there on three or four occasions in 1916.
You do not know the dates ? —I cannot trace the dates.
What was the last occasion on which you saw Senator
Long ? —l9th August, 1918.
Did you see him at the workshops ? —Yes, at that time.
How did he come to the workshops Had he had a
communication with you ? —He had been out on the previous
Thursday, and that was on the Monday.
The Thursday would be the 15th ? —Yes.
What brought him to the works on the 15th ? —I under-
stood that he was over in Sydney to execute a certain com-
mission with regard to racing matters, and on the Wednes-
day, about 6 o’clock, I received a telephone pall. On
answering, I found it was Senator Long speaking. I knew
his voice.
What did he say ? —He started to speak about some
telegrams in connexion with the purchase of the Shaw
Wireless Works.
What did he say ; try and give us his words as near as
you can; give us the substance of them ?—lf I remember
rightly, the first conversation I had was to the effect that
he said “ Have the Commission been out there lately ? ”
I said “ Yes.” He said “Is there much in those tele-
grams ? ” I replied “ What telegrams ? ” He said “ Pass-
ing about the resumption.” I said that was a matter
I preferred not to speak about over the telephone.
What did he say to that ? —He said he wanted to see his
son Leslie and would probably come out to-morrow.
About what time ?—He asked me whether I would be in,
and I told him that I would be in all day.
Will you tell me before he came out whether you had
taken any steps to check the conversation ?—I felt in any
conversation affecting the workshops, or the transfer of the
workshops, my position was rather an invidious one,
because only a week or a fortnight before I had been told
by a man that a statement was in circulation to the effect
that I had received £5OO from the sale.
What did you do ? —As a matter of fact, I asked Mr.
Allen, my secretary, to take a record of that interview
of the statements made by both sides, if it would be possible
for him to do that, because my office at the workshops is
adjacent to or part of another room. It is one room divided,
and the secretary’s office is divided only by a partition and
it is possible to hear a conversation right through in his office.
What did Mr. Allen say to that I—l1 —I asked him not to
rely on memory, but to take a shorthand note. He told
me his shorthand was not good enough, and he could
not be relied upon to take an accurate report or to
accurately report the whole of such a conversation.


What was arranged between you ?—I was very anxious
to get an account or a report of that conversation. It
was a matter not only of the statements that were being
circulated, but it was obviously a matter that could not be
intrusted to everybody. It was a matter for secrecy, and
the only man that I could think of who could advise me on
the point was the man who had been inquiring into the
transaction generally, that was Mr. Barton. I said to
him in conversation, about nine o’clock or nine-thirty on
that Thursday, that he might loan me Mr. Price, who I
knew to be a very accurate and very competent shorthand
writer, for the day.
Did you tell him what it was for at all ?—I told him that
I was expecting Senator Long at the workshop, and I wanted
a record of any conversation that occurred.
Did you tell him how you had arranged that Price should
hear it ? —As a matter of fact, you made a statement this
morning in which I disagree. You said that I had fixed
a telephone so as it was possible for Mr. Price to hear.
The telephone connexions make it possible for a convert
sation to be heard in Mr. Allen’s office which is going on
in my office.
I thought you fixed up some instrument. You did not,
it was there already ? —Yes, Mr. Price was in Mr. Allen’s
office, together with Mr. Allen.
Where were Senator Long and you ? —ln my office.
How far apart were they from you I —l suppose the room
might be 26 feet long, and it is divided by a partition into
two compartments. The room would be about 13 feet
square, that is either room. It was only a wooden partition.
Did Senator Long come out that day % Yes, he came out
in the afternoon.
At what time ? —To the best of my recollection, about
three o’-clock.
Will you tell me whether it was a long conversation ?
Yes, a comparatively long one.
About how long would it take ? —lt might take forty or
fifty minutes.
Will you give me as nearly as you can recollect now the
substance of the conversation and the order in which it
took placS %
The Chairman. —ls Mr. Price in the room ?
Mr. Starke. —No, but he might be directed to go out if
lie comes in. Of course, his account of the conversation
is in writing.
The Witness. —l think if I remember rightly the con-
versation opened by me saying to him “ You wanted to
see me about some telegrams in connexion with the re-
sumption of the workshops.” He said, “ Yes, have the
Commission been out here lately ? ” I said, “ They
have been out here several times, and lately.” The trend of
his remarks was how much exactly of the transaction the
Commission knew.
Will you try and give us as much detail as you can re-
member of the conversation ? —lt is a very difficult matter
to remember a conversation.
Give it to us as nearly as you can. - The trend of it was
that he wanted to know how much the Commission knew ?
Yes. I told him that the Commission, in my mind, had
evidence that was making it look black against Mr. Jensen.
He said, “ What evidence is that ? ” I said, “ Shaw is
very indiscreet.” He said, “In what way was he indiscreet.”
I said, “ In his private life, he had written letters touching
upon the sale of the works, and people had come forward
with those letters, and had given evidence as to their con-
tents.” I mentioned one fact to him that a. certain lady
had received a letter from Shaw, and that I had been given
to understand this, and that Shaw in that letter, which was
written immediately prior to his being taken ill —in fact it
was written on the Saturday upon which he received the
money for the transaction —had stated that Long was to
receive £2,000 and Jensen was to receive £2,000. Senator
Long made a remark then that if that were so it would
look very bad against Mr. Jensen.
Did you tell him the name of this woman I—No.1 —No. He
said, “ What else was there ? ” and I said so far as I knew
there was a point in connexion with a report that bad been
put forward by Radio-Commander CresSwell dealing with
the purchase of the workshops which, I understood, was
withdrawn by the Minister’s direction. He said, “ If that
is the case it makes things very bad against him.” Those
were his words. Then he told me he himself had been up
before the Commission, and he had admitted receiving
£1,300, that they had got that admission from him, that
they had been through his banking account, and that they
had got that admission from him. He went on to tell me
of another incident, and the conversation then veered on as
to whether the Prime Minister, Mr. Hughes, was home at
that time.
In England, do you mean Ho, here in the Common-
wealth. He said, “ No, I remember when in Melbourne
speaking to Father Shaw about the transaction, and he
was in a great hurry, or rather the parties were in a great
hurry, to consummate the transaction before Mr. Hughes
returned.” I told him, also, that I was under the impression
Mr. Jensen was in Sydney on the day that Father Shaw
received the money for the transaction, and Senator Long
assured me that was not so, that he remembered going to
Sydney on that Saturday night in company with Senator
Pearce and Mr. Hughes, the Prime Minister, because they
played bridge, and that he remembered also going to the
races on that afternoon with Baillieu, and I think the other
man’s name mentioned was Russell. He said he remembered
quite well seeing Mr. Jensen out at the races that after-
noon in Melbourne, and immediately after the races he
came across to Sydney, because he was a member of the
Repatriation Board, and there was a meeting called in
Sydney. He said further, he was certain Mr. Jensen was
not in Sydney at that time, that he was in Melbourne, and
that most of them came across to attend the opening of the
Commonwealth Bank on the Wednesday following. That
is, if I remember rightly, what he said.
Did he discuss what money he got and where he got it ?
Yes. I cannot definitely link the thing together in its
actual sequence, but I said “ another thing that was. causing
a great deal of comment was the fact that Father Shaw’s
banking account showed a difference of about £6,000
between what it should be and what it actually was.” I
remember this quite well, that Senator Long said that he
understood from the Commission that the amount that was
missing was £4,900. He went on again to speak about
the percentage or the portion he had received. He said he
had received £1,300, and he had admitted that, and he said
that two others were to receive £650 each, and the big man
was to get the lion’s share.
Did he say how he got his money I—He1 —He said that “ Shaw
on the Saturday morning was bubbling over with excite-
ment, and approached him, I think, on the Senate steps,
and gave him four packages.
Are you sure that he said four packages ? —I am
certain that he said form packages.
Did he say what was in the packages ?—He was certain
of his own amount, because that was the amount he was
supposed to receive, and he assumed the others had received
the correct amounts too. • He also said he put his package
in his locker at the Senate. I remember that portion quite
well.
Did he say what became of the other packages ?—No,
I did not ask him.
Did he say who the two others were ?—He mentioned
two names on the Thursday.
What were the names ? —Senator Russell and Senator
Gardiner. He called Senator Gardiner “ Jupp ” Gardiner.
And the big man ?—He mentioned no other names.
Whom did you understand was the big man when he men-
tioned the big man ? —I understood it was Mr. Jensen.
What did he say he was getting ? —He did not mention
any amount.
Did he say anything about the share he was to get, what
share he was to get ? —Not beyond what I have already*
said, that the big man was to get the lion’s share.
Did he tell you anything about Jensen being examined
by the Commission ?—Yes, I remember that he did tell m§


that Mr. Jensen had told him that he (Mr. Jensen) had been
examined by the Commission, that he had protested his
innocence, and that he intended to protest his innocence
regarding the whole transaction.
Did you say anything to him as to the course he should
pursue ?—I did. I said it appeared to me so far as he was
concerned, his position was simply that of a go-between,
and the responsibility for the transaction rested with the
Minister,
Did Long make any statement as to what Jensen had
done with his share ? —Yes.
Mr. Cussen. —l object, this ought not to be pushed too
far. What Mr, Long says in the conversation should not,
in fairness to Mr. Jensen, be taken as evidence against him.
I quite agree with my friend when he says that the Commis-
sion can inform its mind by other methods than those
applied in the Law Courts. Senator Long will be here, I take
it, himself.
Mr. Starke. —He will be here.
Mr. Cussen. —What is the use of getting from this witness
that Senator Long said something about Mr. Jensen ?
Mr. Starke. —This is most material against Senator
Long.
Mr. Cussen. —In so far as it is material against Senator
Long I quite agree.
Mr. Starke. —Senator Long said something about Mr.
Jensen.
■ Mr. Cussen .; —How Jensen got rid of his stuff.
Mr. Starke. —We want to have this and ask Senator Long
about it.
Mr. Cussen. —I suggest to the Commission that they
should take no notice of it. If Mr. Starke thinks it is a
fair thing to do he will do it, but I do not think he will do
anything deliberately unfair. I suggest the Commission
ought not to allow it to go too far. What Long says about
Jensen getting rid of his ought not to affect the minds of
the Commission.
The Chairman. —You must not assume that it will affect
the mind of the Commission.
Mr. Cussen .- —It is being put with the intention of affecting
the mind of the Commission. It is not being put for
amusement.
The Chairman. —The Commission are quite open-minded
upon the matter altogether. It is for us to sift the matter.
I think you can safely leave that.
Mr. Starke. —l have already said that it is not evidence
against Jensen in a Court of Law, but as I have also said,
it is most material , as Senator Long has made this statement,
that I should get it. It is material for us to ask Senator
Long about it.
Mr. Cussen. —I have stated my position, and I think the
Commission appreciate it.
By Mr. Starke. —We were talking about some statement
Senator Long made to you as to what Jensen had done
with his share. Do you remember anything of that sort ?
Senator Long told me that Mr. Jensen had told him he
had still that sum intact, that he had not lifted it Those
were his very words.
Did he say where it was at all ? —No.
Did you ask him ? —No.
Can you remember anything more ? —No, I think those
are the salient points of that conversation.
By the Chairman. —Do I understand you to say that
Senator Long said he received four packages ? —Yes.
Did he say what he did with the four packages ? —No,
he did not.
By Mr. Cussen. —Did you say that Long said he got four
packages ? —Yes,
By Mr. Starke. —That Father Shaw gave Long four
packages, and Long kept one for himself ?—Yes, he said
he put the package that was intended for himself in his
locker at the Senate.
By the Chairman. —He did not say what he did with the
other three? —No.
You did not ask him ? —No, I did not.
Having had that conversation, have you given us the
outlines rathe* than the details ?—Yes that is so.
What did Long do after that ? —He told me he had come
across to Sydney to effect a commission on two horses
that were running in Victoria on that Saturday.
He started talking racing ? —Yes, he mentioned the name
of those two horses.
Did he go to see his son ? —He left me to go and meet his
son.
Did he come back and see you ? —Yes.
When did he see you again, was any appointment made
between you and him again ?—He told me that those
two horses upon the chance of which he had come across
to Sydney to execute a commission, he was to know the
name of those two horses on the Saturday at a certain time,
and if I was interested he would ring me up.
Did you see him on the Saturday ? —No, I did not see
him on the Saturday.
Did he ring you up ?—He rang me up on the Saturday,
and told me he had received instructions not to execute the
commission. I told him I had been thinking over the
subject-matter of our conversation, and I would like to see
him again to put my opinion on the whole matter to h m
He replied to the effect that he was coming out to Leslie's
place on Sunday afternoon, and he would call out in time
to call at the works and have a conversation with me
immediately prior to going to tea with Leslie.
Did he come out ? —Yes.
On what day I—On the Monday.
Did yon have a conversation ?—Yes, a very brief one.
What was the substance of it ? —I touched on the subject-
matter of our previous conversation, and he said he intended
to do nothing else on the matter, he did not intend to go
before the Commission again, that what he said at this
examination by the Commission held, and he did not
intend to go back on that; that is the statement he had
made to the Commission. He also said that “On the
Thursday I told you those two names , 1 said “ Yes ” ; he
said, “ I mentioned Jupp Gardiner, did I not.” I said
“ You did.” He said, “ That was quite wrong, he had
nothing at all to do with-it.”
Did he leave and go and see his son ?—Yes, he left then,
and went to meet his son.
Do you remember the date of Father Shaw’s death ?
Yes.
About what date was that ?—lf I remember correctly he
died on 26th August, 1916.
Did you see Senator Long after his death ? —Yes, I saw
Senator Long after his death several times.
Was there a conversation about this sale ?—Yes ; if I
remember rightly I saw Senator Long in that year at the
workshops, either in September or October or November.
I cannot place the date very definitely.
Was this after Shaw’s death ?—Yes ; he died in August.
Would you tell me the substance of that conversation ?
In my position with regard to Shaw, when Father Shaw was
in Melbourne for quite a long time immediately prior to his
death, he had left me blank cheques in order to get the wages
from time to time. Well, immediately upon his death on
the Monday I took those blank cheques, of which I had three
remaining, down to Mr. Willis, and, in conversation with
Mr. Willis at that time, I gathered that a sum of £5,000 or
£6,000 was missing. I mentioned that to Senator Long on
the occasion of his next visit to the workshops.
Was it long after. What did Long say ? —I cannot
remember.
Did you have any further conversation‘at any time about
the sale of the works ? —No. Only the one I have just
detailed.
Anything about disclosures ?—No, not that I can re-
member to give you the substance of those conversations.
As to the effect of the disclosures ? —Yes ; but I do not
know that I can state what he said definitely.,
That he ought to be careful or anything of that sort ?
I could not say.
By Mr. Cussen. —You said you knew father SJiaiy
intimately ?—Yes, that is so,


For how long do you say you had known h'm ?—As I
have already stated, since December, 1915.
Not before December, 1915 ?—Yes before 1915. I sup-
pose I met Shaw just about October, 1915.
You have also said you were on confidential terms with
him ?—Yes.
And enjoyed his confidence ? —Yes.
He never at any time suggested to you that Mr. Jensen
was getting anything I—He1 —He never gave me in definite
words that Mr. Jensen was to receive a sum of money.
Did he ever mention to you in any words, never mind
whether they were indefinite or not, that Mr. Jensen was
to receive a sum of money I—No.
Your attitude to-day is one of antagonism to Mr. Jensen,
is it not I—Not at all.
Has it ever been I—No.1 —No.
When Senator Long saw you and you had this conversa-
tion, you were the first person to suggest that Jensen was
inculpated I—No.1 —No.
Now listen to the first thing that is stated—“ C. They
have gone into it very fully, as a matter of fact when they
had their with him they told himhe had paid a certain
amount of money to Jensen. Jensen looks pretty bad in
it, they have got him pretty well 1 think they have
Jensen, all right. Long: Do you 1 C. : Yes. Long:
They cannot trace money to him : how do you think they
have him, there are two others, are there not 1 ” Now is
that a correct report of the attitude you took up I—-No, it
is not.
So that you see there is not a suggestion from Long about
Mr. Jensen according to that report I—As1 —As you read it.
Listen to this. You say, “ There are two others, are
there not. Long; There is. C. ; Shaw was very
indiscreet.” Did you say that I—l1 —I remember that quite
well.
Listen to this. “ Long ; Yes. C. : In his private letters
he was indi icreet, I do not think you have any hope of
saving Jenson.” . Did you say. that I—l1 —I said that.
Is it not correct, then, you assumed from something you
had heard that Jensen was guilty in this conversation with
Senator Long, as you put it that “ Jensen was gone a
m l ion ” 1- —Yes, for this reason.
That was your frame of mind I—My frame of mind is
based upon reason.
It may or may not be. It is based on what you consider
to be a reason, but it may not be a reason. That was the
attitude you took right through the piece, that you assume
Mr. Jensen was guilty I—l1 —I made the assumption on what
Long told me.
Long, up to this point, had never mentioned Jensen’s
name to youl—According to that statement.
Had Long even mentioned Jensen’s name to you prior
to the interview you had with him on the 15th of August 1
—No.
And now you say that you assume Mr. Jensen guilty from
what Long said about him I—From1 —From what Long told me at
that interview.
You persist in that although the first remark at that
interview contains a statement by you before Long opened
his mouth at all. You say “ I think they have Jensen all
right.” Ido not say that you are doing anything wrong,
but I suggest to you that your frame of mind is one of
antagonism to Mr. Jensen I—You1 —You are quite wrong.
Then this report is also quite wrong I—l1 —I am not saying
that.
How much of it is that I have read I—l1 —I am not saying
what you have got down there is a detailed account of the
interview that occurred.
Did you say this, “ I think they have Jensen all right ” ?
—I said that I remember saying that quite well.
Did you say this, “ I do not think you have any hope of
saving Jensen ” I—l1 —I remember that quite well too.
Now when you said that, what did Long reply I—lf I
remember rightlv he said “ How do you think they have
him.”
Did he say “ I am surprised at that ” I—ldo not remember
that.
Did you say “ I think he is well in it, I am given to under-
stand the actual money has been traced ” ? —Yes, I remember
saying that.
What did he say to that. Did he say “ He assured me
he never had any money ” ? —No, he did not.
Long never made use of that expression ?—He did not
say “ He assured me he never had any money.” He said
“ He assured me he never lifted the sum he received.”
You say he did not say “ He assured me he never received
any money ” ?—I am quite certain he did not.
Did you say “ Well I was under the impression that he
did ” I—l do not remember that.
Did Long say this, “ The old man came up and gave it to
me. I put the money in my box. I went out to the races
with Baillieu ” ? —I remember that.
Then did he convey to you that he had put the whole of
the four packages in his box ?—No ; he did not convey that
to me, because he mentioned his own packet. He said he
put his own package in his box at the Senate.
I do not want to defame the dead, but I want to know
something about Father Shaw. Did he have a parish ?
No.
Did he practise his religion I—Not1 —Not to my knowledge.
Was he a Roman Catholic priest ? —He was.
Ordained so far as you know I—Yes,1 —Yes, so far as I know.
Was he married I—l1 —I do not think so so far as my con-
fidence was concerned.
Who is this girl that you referred to I—A1 —A girl of whom
I have heard.
What is her name ?—I will not tell you her name.
Why will you not tell me her name ; is there anything
secret about it I—There is nothing to conceal. I am quite
prepared to give that name in quite frankly.
What is her name I—Miss1 —Miss Hoad.
Who was she; what occupation did she follow ? —She
was a friend of Father Shaw.
Did she work in the office I—No1 —No ; not to my knowledge.
Did she do any work for Father Shaw I—Not to my
knowledge.
What was the relationship between her and Father Shaw 1
—I could not tell you, except that of a friend.
And you had heard that she had said that she had got
a letter from Father Shaw in which Mr. Jensen’s name
was mentioned ?—I had heard that, yes.
When was it you gave evidence before the Commission ?
I have given evidence on several occasions.
When first do you remember I—The1 —The first occasion I
should think was in 1917.
I want you to go to the wireless plant first of all. You
gave the valuation of between £40,000 and £44,000, which
you call a snap judgment I—That1 —That is so.
In giving that snap judgment did you take into account
the £IO,OOO of obsolete stuff—plant ?- I took the whole
thing into account.
In giving that valuation of between £40,000 and £44,000,
you took into account that there was a considerable quantity
of valueless stuff there I—l took into account everything
on the site of the workshop.
Mr. Ross was the valuer whom you suggested yourself 1—
Yes.
And a man of much more experience than you I—l would
hot say that in some things.
In matters generally in connexion with some things, a
great deal more experienced ? —ln some things more
experienced than I—yes.
In what things I—A case in point—in his estimating the
buildings.
And values of machinery I—No.1 —No.
Electrical machinery 1 —No ;
Were you present when he inspected I—l was.
He made a thorough inspection, I take it ?—lf I remember
rightly he spent Thursday afternoon, Friday morning, and a
portion of Saturday in going round the workshop.
Did he make an inspection sufficient to enable him to see
all the things there and value them I—To1 —To my mind, the


inspection that Mr. Ross made, according to my view, if
I were running the place, to give him the necessary time to
value it, it would take longer than what he took.
Do you suggest to me, or did you suggest to him he was
not taking enough time ?—lt was not my place to do so.
How long would you want to inspect a place like that
and value it ? —ln the first place, it would take me a week
to go through the store and value the stock.
They did not deal with the stock —only plant and
machinery ? —I could not value that place in ten days or a
fortnight.
You never reported to anybody that Mr. Ross had in
your opinion made an insufficient valuation ? —lf I had,
the person to whom I would have reported would be Father
Shaw. . (
But you never reported to anybody ? —Why should I ?
You did not do so ? —No.
What about Commander* Cresswell. How long did he
spend there ? —He spent portion, if not the whole of the time
that Mr. Ross was down at the workshop.
And of course you have more experience than him ?
Yes, on some things.
Values of electrical machinery ? —I would give a value
just as well as Commander Cresswell could.
You are not apparently as familiar with Commander
Cresswell as you were with Mr. Ross ? —No. I had only
seen Commander Cresswell twice before that time.
Again you said nothing about it to him ? —About what ?
About the insufficient inspection he made ? —No.
Did either of them tell you what value they were going
to put on it ? —No.
How long previously had you valued it at £63,000 ? —I
think that valuation was made in the week ending 31st
May, 1916.
About th;ee months before ? —Yes.
Mr. Starke. —His valuation included a lot more.
By Mr. Cussen. —Did you say that your valuation in-
cluded a lot more ? —Yes. my valuation included the whole
of the assets —plant, buildings, land, and the whole of the
assets represented on the site. Mr. Ross’s only included
plant and machinery, and not buildings and land.
There was another valuation of building and land ?
Yes.
So that the total of the two valuations for buildings and
land by the Government were the same property as you
valued at £63,000 ? —Yes.
Mr. Starke. —There are three things—land, plant, and
stock. Ross valued the plant, another valuer valued the
land, and the stock was never valued.
Mr. Cussen. —Yes, it was.
Is not that so, that your £63,000 valuation covered the
same things as those two valuations by Commander Cress-
well ? —Yes, that is quite correct.
In order to get your £63,000, what value did you take
for the land and buildings ? —The values at which they
had been submitted to the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment —the values at which they had been submitted, or
the value in excess.
Which was it, the value at which they had been sub-
mitted, or the value in excess ? —I could not be sure which.
I cannot be definite on that point.
For whose information were you making that valuation?
—For Father Shaw’s.
So he would have a clear statement of what was the fair
value of his assets ? —No, that is wrong, because in the
first place
For what purpose ? —I am giving you the purpose. He
told me the amount he would have to get in order to make
a profitable transaction, and I had to so arrange my values
as to carry the total amount of that value.
Then were you then giving a valuation to be used by
Father Shaw for the purpose of deceiving people ? —For
the purpose of submission to the Department.
For the purpose of deceiving people ? —I am not saying
that.
Do not you see it was. Were you giving a true value,
or a value that was false ? —I received instructions from
Father Shaw to do that, and that is what I did.
Were you giving a true value or a false value ? —To my
mind it was a false value.
And you say you knew it was going to be used by Father
Shaw for the Postal Department?—No; for the Navy
Department.
And he told you he wanted to get ? —He told me it would
have to approximate £63,000, the total value of his assets.
And you were to set to work up details of values which
would total £63,000 for submission to the Navy ? —Yes,
that is so.
And you did that ? —Yes.
You appreciated the machinery 40 per cent. ? —Yes.
What was the oldest of any of the machinery there ?
I understood the factory was started in 1912, and if sold in
the ordinary way
The oldest would be then about four years ?—Yes.
And some of them were comparatively new machines ?
Yes. Some were new machines in the sense they had been
little used.
And a whole lot of them were in perfect working order ?
Yes.
And good repair ? —Yes, and good tools.
What would be a fair amount for depreciation on
machinery such as that ? —The usual amount to write off
is about T| per cent, to 10 per cent, a year.
So then, in fact, they had depreciated in value between
30 per cent, and 40 per cent. ? —Under ordinary circum-
stances they would depreciate that amount.
Is it not a fact that, since the war, after war broke out,
those machines, or machines of that description, considerably
appreciated in value ?—Yes.
To what extent in the two years between 1914 and 1916 ?
—Some of them appreciated 10 per cent., some 50 per
cent., and some even 60 per cent., depending, of course,
on the type of the machine.
What are the machines in your place ?—They are
machines of different types.
The types of machines in your place increased 10 per
cent., some 50 per cent., and some 60 per cent. ? —Yes, that
is so.
I am only dealing with machines in your place ? —Yes.
Do you think it was a fair thing to appreciate the
machinery to any extent after valuing it ? —I should think
it was a fair thing to put them in at their purchase value.
And nothing else ? —No, because that would have been
the value which I should have attached to them.
Why. Some of them were not procurable ?—For this
reason: Some of them had been in use for four years, and
they had depreciated 71 per cent, to 10 per cent, in that
time.
Some of them had only been in a year ? —That is so.
And very little used, and had appreciated in value, too ?
They had appreciated in value, yes.
Do you then say it was not fair (you arc now cr'tic'.sing
your own valuation) to have put down anything for the
appreciation ? —l.am not saying it was unfair.
You have to say one or the other ? —I am saying the
value attached to the machinery was not a fair valuation.
You have given a valuation of £63,000 ? —Yes.
What about the valuation of £37,000 ?—That latter
valuation was after two years’ experience of the assets
in this workshop, and of the Use to which these machines
could be put, and I make that statement and that valuation
with that reservation.
Was it in your opinion proper or improper to put down
anything for appreciation of machinery ?—I am just
considering whether proper or improper is synonymovs
with correct or incorrect. I would say it was incorrect.
Then it was wrong, and in making that valuation it was
improper ? —So far as the total was concerned, yes.
Of course the propriety of doing it to deceive the Navy was
quite another matter. Supposing you had not put on


anything for appreciation, how much do you consider would
have been your valuation of the stuff without the experience
you have had now of two years ? —About £44,000.
- Are you influenced in saying £44,000 to any extent by
the knowledge you have acquired subsequently ? —No.
You think you can view the matter even now without
that knowledge ? —Yes.
I understand you to say that in point of fact it was an
extremely desirable thing for the Commonwealth to acquire
those works ? I have said that they have done extremely
valuable work since their acquisition.
Cg,n you say one way or the other whether this year you
have been carrying on at a loss or profit without making
up your stock or your books, or whatever is necessary ?
I should say that my present overhead charges, and paying
interest on the money invested in that establishment, and
the depreciation, &0., the workshop has been carried on at
a loss.
More or less than last year ? —I should think it would be
about the same.
It has made a wireless apparatus which has been used on
a number of ships ?—Every ship which has come within
its ambit has been fitted with sets made there.
And previous to those works being acquired by the
Government there were no works at which those ships
could be so fitted ? —The same plant was there in the
workshop
The wireless parts which the Admiralty fits these ships
with are secret things ?—Some of them are.
They are not the sort of things you could get outside
firms to manufacture ? —Some of them are standard pat-
terns.
But still they are things that you could not get outside
firms to manufacture ?—-Yes.
Do you think it was a wise purchase leaving out your idea
of the price ; do you think it a desirable thing for the
Commonwealth to have these works ?—I do.
Decidedly so ?—Yes.
£1,500 a year is not much for a Government undertaking
to lose. Have you been connected with any other Govern-
ment undertakings ?—Only the Small Arms Factory.
Have you ever seen Mr. Jensen at the works during the
course of those negotiations ?—No.
Have you ever had any conversation with him ? —Twice,
once at the workshop.
When ? —ln July, 1916.
And at the workshop ?—ln July, 1916, at his office.
What was the conversation about at the workshop ? —I
could not remember. His visit then was more in the nature
of a visit of inspection, and I take it I would be answering
any questions that Mr. Jensen asked.
Your visit to this office was at whose request ? —At the
Minister’s request.
Was that for the purpose of asking further questions ?
That was for the purpose of instructing me to take over the
management of the workshop for the Department.
And you were installed there as manager ?—Yes.
■ And you knew before the purchase went through that it
was intended you should be appointed ? —I knew nothing
of the kind.
Did not Father Shaw suggest that to you in a letter ?
Yes, but Father Shaw’s suggestions and results were often
divorced.
Were Father Shaw’s statements and the truth often
divorced ? —Sometimes.
I understand that Mr. Jensen sent you up to see Admiral
Clarkson about your appointment ?—Yes.
And I take it you said nothing to him ?—I said something
to Mr. Jensen.
About the value ? —I said something to Mr. Jensen.
What did you say ? —Mr. Jensen asked me my opinion
of the works, whether it was a good purchase, and 1 told
at that t;me that the full value had been paid for the
purchase. I told him further that I had to work verv
hard indeed to make the place a success on the capital
that had been invested in the workshops.
What else ? —I cannot remember much else.
Did you tell him about your false valuation, that you had
prepared the £63,000 valuation ? —I told him.
Did you tell him that you had sent in a faked valuation ?
—No.
You did not tell him that in your opinion a false valuation
had been paid for the works ? —No.
But you let him know you had your work cut out to make
it a success under the circumstances ? —Yes.
Of course it was desirable you should not let him think
he was putting you into an easy job ?—That is quite so.
Whether easy or difficult it is always desirable to let
the Minister think you are going intoavery hard job ? —Yes.
That is the policy you have pursued throughout your life ?
—No, it is not.
You recognised the desirability of pursuing that policy ?
I thought if Mr. Jensen knew the conditions under which
I had to work, that the plant had been capitalized in such
a way, &c., that the job was no sinecure.
Would you have said it to him whether you had thought
it a sinecure or not ?—I should not.
Did you see him first at the works or at his office ? —I saw
Mr. Jensen first at his office and then at the works, in the
same month.
And you had never seen him before he wired to you to
come to Melbourne ? —I saw him before that.
Mr. Jensen tells me he knew you had been managing
at Lithgow ? —Yes, that is quite right. I saw him in
November, 1914.
He was a Minister and came in contact with you there ?
Yes. He was Assistant Minister for Defence then.
Re-examined by Mr. Starke. —Since you have been at the
Randwick works, since the Government purchased, have
you been the subject of any complaints, or have there been
any complaints whatever made about your conduct ? —Not
to my knowledge.
Or any suggestion that you are inefficient or incom-
petent ? —Not to my knowledge.
By the Chairman. —ln the writing of this va'uation,
which in one case you put down at £40,000 to £44,000, and
in another case £63,000, did you take into consideration
at all the question of whether there was any goodwill attached
to those works. We are aware it was not a paying concern,
but did you take into consideration the fact that it was a
factory there established, that there was a large amount
of machinery and plant installed there which it was not
possible to get ? —I did take that into consideration.
And buying a going concern like that, although it may not
be payable in the hands of one man, yet the fact it was
there established and running ought to be given some con-
sideration in the way of value ?—I did take that into con-
sideration.
By Mr. Cussen. —lt does not appear in the figures ?—I
took that into consideration in compiling the £63,000, that
the workshops were a going concern, and in the compila-
tion of the £40,000 to £44,000 I put myself in the position
of a would-be purchaser of the workshop, and stated what I
would be prepared to pay for the workshop.
By the Chairman. —But, of course, at that time, it
would be practically impossible to get the machinery ?
Yes, a good deal of it.
Impossible to get it ?—Yes.
Therefore, it was worth more than the £44,000 ?—Yes.
If the Government wanted to establish these works success-
fully, they would have to take the fact into consideration
that they could not get the machinery, or could not get the
machinery installed as a going concern, and they would
naturally allow something for the value of that running
concern ? —Yes.
So that you would not say that £63,000 was altogether a
false valuation, but a valuation of the market price of the
day, what it would cost to establish those works I—Yes.1 —Yes.
So you say now, you took into consideration the fact
that it was a going concern, properly equipped, and well
able to do the work, quite apart from the wireless aspect
altogether ? —Yes.
The witness withdrew.


Frank Gillespie Cresswell, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What is your position in the Naval
Department ?—Radio Commander and Acting Director of
the Radio service.
Would you be good enough to give me your experience
both before you entered the service and since ?—I cannot
remember the full details of it, I started my career in 1896
with the firm of John Danks, machinery merchants, brass
fitters and engineers, Melbourne, and from there I went to
the A. U. Alcbck Electric Light Company. I was there for
nearly three years. From there I went to the Post Office
in the Electrical Engineer’s Department. I was there
for about twelve years. In 1897 I joined the Commonwealth
Naval Militia, at that time as an engineer sub-lieutenant for
electrical duties, and when the destroyers came out here
in 1910 I was asked if I 'would be willing to accept a
permanent position in the service, which I did. I was
appointed as an engineer sub-lieutenant for electrical
duties in 1911, and from there I went to sea in destroyers
and H.M. ships, I was appointed Fleet Wireless Telegraph
officer, in, I think, 1912.
I may take it from that, that you are not a graduate of
any University in engineering at all ? —No. I passed the
professional examination for the public service.
You have not had any service with the Imperial
Navy as a wireless officer other than on H.M. ships ? —No.
I had a lot to do with the Imperial officers when they came
out here.
But you have not had Imperial service ? —No. I worked
under a German instrument-maker for eight years, and
he was a skilful man in the manufacture of electrical equip-
ment.
I take it that your experience in Australia has been a
practical experience, and you yourself, are personally
interested in the subject, and have studied it at great
length ? —That is so.
In connexion with wireless, we have your report of 2nd
March, 1915, in which you suggested a workshop. Do you
remember that ? —Yes, I remember that report.
That was really the report you made suggesting an
electrical workshop ? —lt was suggesting an extension of
the wireless and electrical workshop. The workshops at
Williamstown Naval Depot were totally inadequate for
the requirements of the war.
That was suggested at a cost of about £4,000. —Yes, it
was thought a start could be made with that.
That was the first report you made on the subject ?
Yes.
Was anything ever done with that ?—No. As far as I
remember, that was hung up. I think I suggested in this
about turning over a certain portion of the drill room at
the Williamstown Naval Depot.
By the Chairman. —What year was that I —This was in
1915.
By Mr. Starke. —You cannot remember any action that
was taken on it ? —I know in conjunction with this report,
and other reports which I have made, the question came up
as to whether we should not acquire the old Telephone
Exchange in Wills-street and take that as a workshop,
and I went along and inspected that place.
At all events, the matter seemed to have slept, or, at
all events, no action was taken ? —No action -was taken.
The next step, apparently, in connexion with the work-
shop was this wireless plant at .Randwick ?—Yes.
We have a report from you to the Naval Secretary dated
21st June, 1916 I—l remember that.
Who gave you instructions ? —lf I remember correctly,
it was a Naval Board direction. I was to go to Randwick
to inspect. I am not certain whether it was the Naval
Board, or whether they came from anyone through the Naval
Board to me.
At any rate, it came through the Naval Board to you ?
Yes. ’
And you went to Randwick and inspected it and made that
report ?—Yes.
Is there anything you wish to add to that report now—
[reading]. Perhaps the thing it is desirable for you to
expatiate upon is the importance of acquiring these works
in the Commonwealth % —Yes,
You seemed to have a very strong opinion about it ?
I had at that time, because wireless telegraphy in this war
was playing a most important part, especially in connexion
with troopships and transports, and the safety of the ship
and life on board to a very large extent depended on wire-
less telegraphy. It enabled the ship to receive submarine
warnings, what tracks to avoid, what enemy ships to avoid,
and so on. I think there were 78 transports —of course,
we were not responsible for the whole of the fitting of the
transports, but, I think, in all thirty ships were fitted.
Besides the fitting of those ships, there was the upkeep of
them, and, of course, an inspection of these wireless instal-
lations had to be carried out, and it had to be tightened up
and made a very rigid one indeed, and every ship before she
left Australia since 1915, since I took over the organization,
has been compelled to carry a clearance certificate as to
the wireless apparatus being in perfect working order.
Besides troopships, &c., there was also the alterations in
the equipment to H.M. ships. Then there is the mainten-
ance of the radio stations, and in the radio service there are
21 stations in the Commonwealth and eight stations in the
Pacific.
By Mr. Cussen. —And everything has to be treated
confidentially ? —Everything in the Admiralty, even in
peace times, has to be treated confidentially.
By Mr. Starke. —I understand that the apparatus for
wireless—l am not talking about the wave lengths, but
the apparatus itself—has been patented, and there is not
much secrecy ? —Yes, but the idea is to avoid letting the
enemy know what you are using. If they know what you
are using they know how to interfere with you.
If they know your wave lengths ? —Yes, it is also a
question of the apparatus.
By Mr. Starke. —lt is not so much the apparatus itself but
the manner in which you operate the apparatus that is the
secret ?—lt is desirable to prevent the enemy from getting
the least detail as to what apparatus you are using.
Your 1915 workshop proposal was a war-time proposal ?
• —Yes, essentially.
Was there any need for more than that later on in- June,
1916 ?—No. If I remember correctly, I pointed out in my
report in connexion with these workshops, the inspection
and the valuation of the Shaw Workshops, that the work-
shops were too big to meet the requirements of the radio
service, but if they were taken over and organized
Mr. Cussen. —Your report speaks for itself on that
subject.
Mr. Starke. —From the point of view of the Wireless
Department or the Navy Department, you would have
preferred an expenditure of £4,000 or £5,000.
Mr. Cussen. —I do not think he says that.
Witness. —I was more concerned with the safety of ships
and the life on board at that time than I was as to whether
£4,000 or £5,000 was spent on this side or that side of the
works. If wireless had saved one ship the workshops
would have paid for themselves handsomely.
By Mr. Starke. —Your report was commented on by
Admiral Clarkson ? —Yes.
The next matter that concerned was, I presume, you got
instructions to go across with Mr. Ross ? —I went across to
meet Mr. Ross.
Your instructions were dated sth July, 1916— [reads] ?
Yes ; I remember that.
Did you know Mr. Ross before ?—No.
It then says, “ Attached is the list prepared by Father
Shaw showing the plant and stock. No valuation of the
land or buildings is desired ” ? —Yes ; I remember that.
Did you have a detailed list of the plant and stock 1—
Yes; I remember that was sent over to me. lam not
certain,- but I remember this in connexion with that, that
the values that Shaw had assessed had been cut out of. it,
and they were blank.


How long were yon there with Ross valuing ? —I was there
for three or four days. I really forget the actual length of
time I was with him, but I was with him right from the
very start to the finish.
What did you value, as a matter of fact ?—I went through
the workshops with him.
What part of the works did you value ?—The whole of
the plant and equipment.
Stock ? —No. The time at my disposal—and also, I
understood, at Mr. Ross’ disposal—was insufficient to take
stock.
Then all that you could do was to value the plant and
equipment ? —Yes.
How many hours did you and Mr. Ross spend doing
that ? —I do not remember ; but I-should say about three
days.
You had no time to take stock and make a valuation of
the stock and stores ? —No. Mr. Cornwell told me that
he had taken stock and that his stock sheets were accepted
subject to variation.
There is a report amongst the file dated 14th July, 1916,
in which vou reported the result of that visit of inspection ?
—Yes
Was that the original report that you wrote ? —Yes ; I
remember this,
I also hand you your office draft ? —Yes.
Will you give me the report you originally prepared ?
That is the document. That report was put in and it was
withdrawn.
The last two clauses are struck out; there is a cross
across them and the report that went in has a different
conclusion. You know that ? —Yes.
Will you explain to me why that was altered. Give me
the- exact circumstances under which it was altered ? —As
far as I remember that report went in and the Minister,
Mr. Jensen, sent for me. Ido not remember what he said
about the other part of it, except that he told me that the
question of negotiation was his business, it was a matter
for him and not for me ; and he requested me to withdraw
it. He said he wanted to know whether Shaw’s offer ef
£57,000 was a reasonable offer, and if I remember correctly,
I told him that I was prepared to do that, but I must qualify
it by stating that possibly they could be procured at a lower
figure ; and he thereupon requested me to amend my
report accordingly.
And therefore you put in the new paragraph as it finally
appeared in the report ?—That is so.
Unless you had those instructions I presume you would
have preferred to have stood by your first ?—I would like
to explain that when the Minister gives a direction, I am
really a subordinate officer of the Naval Board, of which
the Minister is president, and when a direction is given that
I am definitely told that I am exceeding my duties in
suggesting that negotiations should be opened up at a certain
figure, lam bound to follow his directions. lam thereupon
not in a position to suggest negotiations at all.
You said, “ I have therefore to recommend that if these
works can be acquired for the sum of £40,000, which in
my opinion would be a fair offer to make under all the
conditions at, present obtaining, may be so acquired for the
purpose of a Government Electrical Workshop ? —Yes.”
I presume that was your honest opinion ? —Yes.
And that was the value that you would have recommended
as the responsible technical officer ? —Yes ; that is so.
And not beyond it ? —No ; if I was negotiating myself
I would certainly have opened up at £40,000.
Do you remember about the 14th July, 1916, having
two questions submitted to you for report ? —Yes ; I
remember that.
How did they come to you ?—I do not remember. I
take it that it came officially.
What does it show on the face of it ?—lt has got a Navy
Offic e number here ; but if that came officially to my office
I would have a copy of it in the office file. I cannot say
whether it came over officially or unofficially ; but it was
replied to officially.
EXHIBIT No. 9. —Copy of Commander Cresswell’s
original report and copy of substituted document.
Your report is dated 14th July, 1916, and it says— [reads
report |. How did you work that out ?—ln the first place,
speaking of interest on capital at 5 per cent, for the Govern-
ment, it seemed to me to be a very safe figure to take as
interest on capital, as at that time the Government were
borrowing money for about 4J per cent.
“ That they would earn after paying ordinary mainten-
ance and running charges.” What possible basis did you
have for that. Youdidnotknowanythingabouttherunning
charges ?—I do not remember what the figures were. I
went into those figures.
All you knew was that the purchase price, £57,000, was
the capital charge ?—Yes.
You knew nothing whatever of the turnover when you
were proposing it. You did not apparently consider that.
You knew nothing whatever of the market you had ?
I remember Mr. Jensen told me that if the "works paid
interest on capital he would be satisfied.
This says, “ after paying ordinary maintenance and run-
ning charges ”?—I do not remember the figures now. It
is some considerable time since I went into this matter.
Will you have a look over that, because I do not see any
basis on which you got at that on the file. It is easy to say
5 per cent, is a reasonable rate for interest and depreciation,
but I cannot follow from anything in the file how you arrived
at that that would earn that amount, “ after paying
ordinary maintenance and running charges,” except as a
pot shot ?—Here was the Government paying interest at
4J per cent, on money, and the outside manufacturer has
to pay between 6 and 8 per cent, interest. If the outside
manufacturer could do it and make a substantial profit,
I thought the Government could also.
You did not know whether Shaw was making a profit
or not? —I understood he was.
That figure that was given to the Minister was not based
on any sound'business basis ? —lt was a pure guess.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Commander Cress well must
have had some actual data to go on ?—You must have
prepared some calculation that must have been put down
in writing in some way before you could arrive at such a
statement as that ? —Yes, I went into it.
You would not prepare that data without having it in
writing ? —I remember going into the figures. I went into
them, and ran them out more or less in an afternoon.
By Mr. Starke. —I will let that stand over for you to con-
sider. You will consider how you arrived at that calcu-
lation, that after paying ordinary maintenance and running
charges, you would be able to pay £4,170 per annum ?
It was understood at that time that the workshops would
have been made the fullest use of by other Government
departments.
That was all problematical, too ?—No, because it was
definitely stated in my recommendation that if the Govern-
ment would take them over we could not justify them
taking them over for purely wireless purposes alone, but
if the Government would take them over and utilize them,
not only fdr the manufacture of wireless equipment, but
for all electrical apparatus and machinery required in the
different Government departments, they were justified.
Yours was to be a Government workshops, not a private
workshops ? —A Government workships.
And, therefore, you ought to have had some estimate
made of what the output of Government apparatus
should be ? —I think I took some of the contracts from
the Commonwealth Gazette.
We will leave that stand for you to see if you can find
any trace of a calculation or data, for making that state-
ment. You understand what we want ?—Yes.
The next documents we had better look at are Document 19
and Document 21. This apparently is the Prime Minister’s
memorandum to the Minister of the Navy. “ Cabinet
approved of your recommendation that Shaw Wireless
should be purchased for the purpose of the Navy Department
wireless requirements for the sum of £55,000, provided that
you are satisfied that your Department’s requirements
will keep such plant fully employed.” That, of course, was
quite impossible that it should—“your Department,” if that
meant the Navy Department? —Of course at that time the


question came up in regard to the fitting of the first fifteen
Commonwealth ships that were purchased.' The manage-
ment of the Commonwealth line of steamers entered into
negotiation with Fiske Amalgamated Wireless in London
without consulting the Commonwealth Government at
all, even in regard to patent questions, and committed the
Government to a ten years’ agreement.
Could you have honestly certified in July, 1916, that the
Navy Department’s requirements would have kept that
Shaw Wireless plant fully employed. If you had been
asked to certify that could you have given such a certi-
ficate ?—No ; that was indicated in my previous report,
but, at the same time, in war time you have to provide for
the possibilities, not the probabilities. One did not know
what the developments of the war were going to be.
[Reads Document No. 21 and Document No. 22.]
That report will speak for itself. Will you go now to
document 30, dated 19th July, 1916— [reads]. C Do you
remember that ?—Yes, I remember that.
You had never taken stock. You had not time ?
I had not time.
Did any one take it before the monev was paid over ?
I understand se. I understand that the Minister issued
directions to the Director of Naval Stores to detail officers
to go into the stock and make a valuation.
You understood that ?—Yes, distinctly.
Do you know how the prices finally came out, and if any
check was made ?—No, except that I have learnt later that
the prices are rather enhanced.
In the stock sheets ?—Yes. As an example of the manner
in which-
Mr. Cussen. —lf this is a document we must have it.
I am told that the real result was that there was £I,OOO
more stock than was charged for, so I do not want the
witness’s recollection of it if you have got the document.
By Mr. Starke.—No. 53; on the 14th August, 1916, it
says, “ Have investigated the stock, everything in order,
e'xSess as shown in Cornwell’s telegram of Saturday.”
Do you remember that ?—Yes, I remember that. That
was after Mr. Cornwell’s stocktaking.
What were the circumstances under which that wire was
sent ?—I do not remember now, unless it was in reply to
another wire from the Navy Office.
Did you personally investigate the stock ?—No, I dis-
cussed it with Mr. Cornwell.
Who did 1- —Mr. Cornwell was the manager at this
time.
By the Chairman. —Manager for whom ? —For the work-
shops.
Was he Father Shaw’s manager ? —No, he Was appointed
by Mr. Jensen.
Mr. Cussen. —l was told that Mr. Treaoy will be able
to tell you all about this.
Mr. Starke. —Very well, We will call Mr. Treacy.
By the Chairman. —Who sent that telegram ?—I sent it.
By Mr. Starke. —You did not personally do the work ?
Mr. Cornwell had reported to me.
The Chairman. —What Was the date of that telegram you
read out ?
Mr. Starke. —14th August,
The Chairman. —When were the works taken over ?
Mr. Starke. —On the 18th.
The Chairman. —Will you read that telegram again ?
Mr. Starke. —“ Randwiok ; have investigated stocks,
everything in order, excess as shown in Cornwell’s telegram of
Saturday.”
By the Chairman. —Commander Cresswell said he did not
take stock ? —No. The Director of Naval Stores sent officers
over to go right through the stocks.
By Commissioner Taylor. —You said you investigated the
stock, and apparently you did not investigate the stock 1 —
I did not mean to indicate that I had personally done so.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Any one receiving that tele-
gram would understand that you had investigated the
stocks ?—I indicated that I had inquired.
Who was that telegram sent to ? —The Navy Office,
Melbourne.
P. 13033.—2
By the Chairman . —You must realize the importance
of this question because the Minister apparently took steps
to see that the Navy Office affairs were being properly
looked after in your hands, and he provided that these
stocks should be investigated; and that you should report
on tnem. You reported that you had investigated the
stocks, and if you had not investigated them then the
Minister must have been misled ? —I do not remember the
circumstances under which that wire was sent.
But we have had evidence that stock was not taken until
after the works were taken over by the Government. Did
not we understand you to say that you took Mr. Cornwell’s
figures ? —Yes. I went into the matter with Mr. Cornwell,
and he showed me there had been some excess of stock to
that shown in the stock list. It was impossible for me to
go right through the stocks and verify that.'
But why not say so to the Navy Office, that the time at
your disposal was not sufficient ?—Mr. Cornwell was to be
appointed manager.
The Chairman. —Yes, but Mr Cornwell could not be
buyer and seller.
By Commissioner Taylor. —You say, “ Have investigated
stocks, everything in order,” and signed your name to it ?
I wish I could remember the exact circumstances under
which that wire was sent.
By Mr. Starke. —We will call Mr. Tracy and see if he can
give any more explanation. Take documents 32 and 33.
It is an inquiry by Mr. Higgs, the Treasurer. Did you ever
see those questions 1-Yes, I think I did. Ido not know
that I saw this document. If I remember correctly, I
think it was cut out from the Sydney Sun and sent over to
me from Sydney. Ido not know if I saw it in the press.
I refer to the document of 14th August, 1916, No. 32.
Do you see that the Treasurer is very insistent to know three
facts ? —Yes.
Did you ever see those questions, 1,2, 3 ? —Yes, I think
so, but I am not certain.
Will you look at document 33 from Mr. Jensen to Mr.
Higgs, the Treasurer ? —Yes, I see that.
Were you consulted as to those answers ? —I should think
so.
I want you to look at them carefully because I am going
to ask you if they are true ? —Yes, I remember that. That
was sent to me by the Minister. My document to the
Minister is No. 4771.
Your report is attached to it ?—Yes.
Will you take your report ? I want you to look at the
answers given to the Treasurer, “ whether you are still of
the opinion that the Shaw Wireless Company’s land, build-
ings, and machinery which it is proposed to purchase for
the sum of £55,000 are necessary for the purposes of the
Commonwealth.” My answer is, “ Yes.” Did you approve
of that answer ? —Yes, I did at that time.
“ They can be fully occupied in the making of the wireless
requirements and the making of the necessary commodities
required by the Defence Department; indeed some of the
machinery is being used for making some of the Defence
appliances now.” Did you approve of that statement ?
Yes, for the Commonwealth generally.
Is the statement as made there accurate ?—I think it
should include the different Government departments.
It does not say that ? It says, “ the making of wireless
requirements and the making of the necessary commodities
required by the Defence Department.” Was that an
accurate statement that those two departments alone
were enough to keep it fully occupied ? —No, I do not think
so.
The second question is, “ Whether it is true that all the
ships on the Australian register are under contract for ten
years to obtain wireless plant from the Amalgamated Wireless
Co. of Australia.” And your answer is, “This statement is
incorrect. I have made inquiries and find that the number
of ships on the Australian register . . .—[reads on down
to “and have therefore done without same ”] —Do you
agree with that statement ?—Not entirely but it is practi-
cally accurate.


In what respect is it not quite accurate ? —I think the
.whole of these questions are answered in this report of mine.
I want you to consider the impression conveyed to the
Treasurer, Mr. Higgs ?—I am not responsible for the trans-
mission of that.
I am asking you was that statement in answer to Ques-
tion 2 in your opinion accurate or inaccurate ? If you said,
“ Not quite,” I want to know in what way was it inaccurate.
It is a technical matter,so you can tell us? —In so far as
wireless installation erected in ships of the mercantile
marine, some ships had entered into a ten years’ agreement;
on the other hand, I have been approached by, I think, Mr.
Hughes, of the Shipping Association, asking whether the
Government were prepared to fit merchant vessels.
Was that the truth. How many ships on the Australian
register were under a contract for ten years. To the best
of your knowledge were the large proportion of the big
shipping companies ? —Yes, a fair proportion.
You think that was an inaccurate answer to the Treasurer’s
request ?
'Mr. Cussen. —He has not said so, he has said the exact
opposite.
By Mr. Starke. —You see the importance of the question ?
—I do.
“ Whether it is'true that all the ships under the Australian
register are under contract for ten years to obtain wireless
plant from the Amalgamated Wireless —this statement is
not correct. I have made inquiries and find a number
of shippers are under agreement, but I understand that a
great number have not yet installed wireless.” That is the
fact ? —That is quite so.
What is ?-—The statement about a number of ships on
the Australian register being under contract with Amalga-
mated Wireless.
Were they more numerous than those not under contract ?
—No ; I should not say so.
What was the proportion so far as you recollect ?—Since
the outbreak of war the outfitting of ships has increased
immensely.
I am talking about August, 1916 ?—I cannot speak
accurately. I will have to look up those figures.
By the Chairman. —Have you got those figures I—l think
I can get them.
You can get the figures at that date ? —I think so. I can
give you every ship that is fitted in Australia.
By Mr. Starke. —-At August, 1916, the date the answer
is made to the Treasurer of the Commonwealth ?—Yes ; I
will supply an accurate statement.
Before he passed this purchase at £55,000; you will
supply an accurate statement ?—Yes.
The next question is, “ Whether you are thoroughly
convinced that if the Government expend £55,000 in the
purchase of the Shaw Wireless Company,’s land, buildings,
&c., the Commonwealth will receive Ml value for the
money.” You see that ?—Yes.
You remember your report recommending an offer of
£lO,OOO ?—Yes.
Now read this answer regarding this question —“ I would
state that I have had a further report from the Engineer for
Radio, who states he is confident that the Government
could not erect buildings and put down machinery and
plant contained in the Shaw Wireless at present under
£BO,OOO ; and further, that our officer’s valuation, which
is on the conservative side, is about £61,000, and we are
purchasing same for £55,000.” Do you consider that was,
in your opinion, an accurate answer to make to the Trea-
surer’s question in view of your report ?—lt is such an open
question. In time of war one does not know. The value
of machinery, equipment, and everything had gone up
enormously since the outbreak of war, and in August, 1916,
prices were very much enhanced, and it would be a most
difficult matter to state accurately. You could not do it.
I am asking-you, in view of your opinion on the 14th
July, 1916, that £40,000 was a fair sum to offer for the
Shaw Wireless Works —that yo'i told the Minister £40,000
was a fair sum to offer —was that answer to Question No. 3,
in your opinion, a fair and candid answer to that question ?
—1 do not know how to reply to you, because it is one thing
to take over a going concern and it is another thing to
establish it.
£40,000 was for a going concern?—Yes, with the old
equipment.
The same equipment. The £40,000 was for a going concern
in July, 1916, to carry on the Wireless Works of the Govern-
ment. You had recommended £40,000 to be offered ; that
it would be a fair offer to make under all conditions, in war
time. Well, in the next month, ,n fact hardly a month,
on the 7th of August, you were asked, Are you fully
satisfied we are getting full value ”
Mr. Cussen. —l think you are unfair. He did not say
£40.000 was a fair value.
By Mr. Starke.. —I will read it. It is “ a fair offer.” If
that Question 3 was submitted to you, as I understand it
was ?—Yes.
D.d you see that answer that Mr. Jensen made to the
Treasurer ? —That is made practically on mv report to him,
I take it.
I ask you, is that a fair and candid answer to make to the
Treasurer in view of your earlier report of July ? —I do not
think for a moment one is justified in saying that you will
purchase these works, say, for £40,000 ; 1 think it is a
reasonable thing to say that it would cost the Government
at least 30 or 40 per cent, in excess of that valuation to
establish their own works. If you take the - Home Affairs
Department buildings, the whole of that construction
You are not serious in suggesting that you should pay
what you could erect and establish works for ?—No.
Leave that out, because is not that nonsense. You do
not suggest that as a basis of value ? —lt is a matter of
opinion.
Is it not unnecessary to suggest what the Government
could in 1916 set to work to erect and establish a wireless
station for with no plant there, and with a world war
going on. To suggest that they could not erect it for
£BO,OOO is nonsense ? —I said under £BO,OOO.
That meant under the war conditions then existing, and
when there was no plant available throughout the world ?
I think it is a matter of opinion. It is a matter that has
to be carefully considered.
Is not that what you meant ?—Exactly : I meant that.
Is that, in your opinion, a candid answer to the Treasurer’s
question ?
The Chairman. —Do I understand the Treasurer asks
these questions of Mr. Jensen ?
By Mr. Starke. —Yes, and he has got Commander Cress-
well’s report, of which this purports to be a summary ?
You have to allow ; so much depends on negotiation. I had
nothing to do with the negotiation. One man may buy a
thing for £5 and another man may have to pay £lO.
Mr. Starke. —lt is no good telling me that.
Mr. Cussen. —I do not think you are fair to him, because
he says distinctly that £57,000 is a fair price.
Mr. Starke. —I cannot be guided by what you say is fair.
The Witness. —I think I said I would open up negotiation
at £40,000. I think I said £57,000 was a reasonable price.
By Mr. Starke. —Would you have gone to £BO,OOO ?—No.
What would you have gone to ? —I am not prepared to
say. I cannot answer the question offhand like that.
The Treasurer was asking, though ?—At that time I had
all these things at my fingers’ tips. This is some little
time ago.
You have no further explanation to offer of that ?—No.
You will inquire into that matter ? —Yes.
And these shipping matters ?—Yes.
And have them ready to-morrow morning ? —Yes ; I will.
The Chairman. —The Commission are not satisfied yet on
the question of this telegram, Mr. Starke. We will be glad
if you will take this matter up again.
Mr. Starke. —That is what I am asking him to inquire
into. lam going to call Mr. Tracy, whose Department made
the investigation.


The Chairman. —I understand from this telegram he says,
“ Have investigated stocks . . . everything in order,
excess as shown in Cornwell’s telegram.”
Mr. Starke. —That is what I have asked him. to inquire
into.
Mr. Cussen. —Mr. Jensen remembers this question. The
Navy staff clerks were instructed to take stock and valua-
tion, and I understand Commander Cresswell saw them just
at about the time they had completed their work, or saw
their officer, Mr. Treaoy, and on his reports and the reports
of the Navy staff clerks sent that telegram.
Mr. Starke. —He said Mr. Cornwell gave him those facts
and figures on which he sent that telegram.
Mr. Cussen. —I mentioned that fact so that he might
refreshJais memory.
The Chairman. —It is a fact that the Navy officer had not
had stock taken at this time ?
Mr. Cussen. —At the time that telegram was sent the
stock had been taken. It was just completed. Mr. Starke
said the opposite in opening the case, and said that stock
had never been taken.
Mr. Starke. —And I do not think it has, either.
The Chairman. —It was taken by Mr. Cornwell, but was
it verified ?
Mr. Cussen. —By the Navy staff clerks.
Mr. Starke. —We will call Mr. Tracy. {To witness). —You
will look into that yourself ?—I will.
EXHIBIT No. 10. —First Annual Report and
Balance-sheet.
The Commission adjourned till half-past Ten a.m. next day,
Wednesday, 13 th November, 1918.
(At the Court of Marine Inquiry.)
WEDNESDAY, 13th NOVEMBER, 1918,
AT 10.30 A.M.
Second Day’s Sittings.
Before the Commissioners:
W. G. McBbath, Esq. (Chairman).
F. A. Verco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Taylor.
Mr. Cussen. —There is a matter I would like to men-
tion to the Commission which occurs to me as some-
thing which might bring about a saving of time. I
understand that a number of witnesses have already
been examined before this Commission, some of whom
were examined yesterday, and some of whom will be
examined later on, and their evidence has been taken
and recorded. I realize I might be cross-examining
them or asking them questions as to which the Com-
mission is already in possession of the facts, and their
evidence having been taken, I would respectfully sug-
gest that I might be furnished with copies of that
evidence.
The Chairman. —The Commission will consider that
point.
Mr. Cussen. —I understand, sir, that a similar re-
quest has already been made by the gentleman instruct-
ing me, but apparently it was not acceded to, and I
know 1 of no reason, if I may be permitted to say so,
why I should not be permitted to see that evidence.
The Chairman. —The reason why Mr. Herald was
not allowed to see the evidence was because, in view of
the fact that the Commission intended to begin prac-
tically de novo, we did not regard the evidence of any
of the witnesses as absolutely trustworthy—I mean no
reflection on the witnesses at all.
Mr. Starke. —I do not think for a moment that Mr.
Cussen’s request can be considered. That evidence is
merely what we would call the proofs of brief.
Mr. Gussen. —That is evidence which has already
been given before the Commission, and I would like
to say this, as the matter has been opposed by Counsel
who is assisting the Commission, ■ that it is not a ques-
tion of mere proof for the Counsel assisting the Com-
mission at all. It is evidence that has already been
given, and while I have no doubt that you gentlemen
will try as hard as you possibly can to eliminate these
facts from your mind, it is humanly impossible to do it.
The facts have been stated, and there were matters
stated which are not stated in the evidence now being
given before this Commission.
Mr. Starke. —I shall take proper care of that.
Mr. Gussen. —That is all very well, but I am here
to look after the interests of Mr. J ensen. and you are
not here for that purpose. I submit I ought to be
allowed to get a copy of that evidence. It is a matter
for the Commission to decide, and it is not _a matter
for the Counsel who is assisting the Commission. I
respectfully submit I ought, in fairness, to have a copy.
The Chairman. —What I was about to say before
was, that the • reason why the Commission could not
see its way clear to give copies of the evidence which
had already been taken before them, to_ Mr. Herald,
was that the Commission wished to eliminate from
its mind absolutely the evidence which had already been
taken, because it had been taken without cross-examina-
tion on behalf of anybody mentioned in that evidence.
Therefore we could not regard that evidence in the light
of evidence which had been taken where the witnesses
were examined by Counsel for Mr. Jensen, or anybody
else. We therefore had to regard that evidence as not
being taken at all, and tried to wipe it out of our
minds altogether. That is the reason.
Mr. Gussen .—I think if I might say so, you will
realize the importance of it to Counsel appearing for -,
any party. He should know anything that has been
said about the matter, particularly if it is said before
the tribunal now dealing with the facts. In the
ordinary course ,of procedure in law courts, depo-
sitions which are taken are furnished to the prisoner,
so that he may see what the witnesses have already
said before a legal tribunal. In this particular case,
the reasoning is, I venture to submit, very much
stronger because wdiat the witnesses have said has been
before this very tribunal. I have not the slightest
doubt that you will strive to eliminate this from your
mind, but it is a very difficult thing to do. I am not
here in any way to obstruct the Commission or lengthen
the inquiry, and I desire to assist, if I can possibly do
it, to get at the true facts, having regard to the in-
terests of my client. But I certainly do submit in fair-
ness to me the Commission ought to rule that I am
entitled to .see a copy of that evidence. That is all I
can say.
The Chairman. —All I can say to you at the moment
is that the Commission will consider the point you
have raised and give you an answer this afternoon.
Mr. Gussen. —If the Commission can see its way to
give me an indication of their decision by 2 o’clock
this afternoon, then perhaps I might be able to get a
copy of this evidence, so that I may be able To peruse
it to-night.
Mr. Herald. —In reading the shorthand report I
noticed some remarks were made yesterday morning
about my absence. All I wish to say is that I came
in very early knowing this matter was on, and I tried
to get into communication with the office to find out
what was happening, and it was only by sending a
special messenger down I was able to find out, and I
came up here as quickly as possible. It was not out
of any disrespect to the Commission.
The Chairman. —I quite understand that.
2 2


Percy Bobert Cotes, recalled and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You produce the option given
to Father Shaw, and the extension of that option.
Have you got press copies of them?—Yes. I produce
press copies of both. The first item is the consent to
the giving of the option and then there is the giving of
the option.
EXHIBIT 11.—Press copies of option to
Father Shaw.
The witness withdrew.
Frank Gillespie Cresswell, recalled.
Examined by Mr. Starke. —The first matter which
I had asked you to consider was that document dated
the 14th of July, 1916, in which you said that the
works should earn, after paying ordinary maintenance
and running charges, the undernoted items:—Five per
cent, on the capital, and 4 per cent, depreciation. Have
you looked at that?—Yes, I refreshed my memory on
that point last night and also this morning, and the
determination of that expression of opinion was arrived
at in this way. I have a paper here which 1 propose
to submit to the Commission just giving the method on
which I determined that.
Are those figures made up since, or figures that ex-
isted at the time? Is this the calculation you made at
the time you wrote that minute ?—No; I understood you
were asking me not for those figures, but how I arrived
at them.
Yes, how you arrived at them in July, 1916 ?—These
figures are based on that. They are not accurate with
the figures in that recommendation, but they are pretty
near it, I think. I arrived at them in this way: I
took 5 per cent, interest on £55,000, which came to
£2,750, 4 per cent, depreciation on the value of
£30,000, which was the estimated value of the plant
and equipment, including overhead gear, and that
amounted to £1,200, thus giving a total of £3,950. I
think, if I remember, my statement was somewhere
near £4,000 odd.
I will give you your figures. They are 5 per cent,
interest on £57,000, which amounts to £2,850, 4 per
cent, depreciation, £1,320, giving a total of £4,170? —
Yes. As against that I took the annual reports of the
Postmaster-GeneraTs Department at that time, which
showed the plant and equipment at the Common-
wealth radio station, and also the stores at Ferrars-
street, to be, roughly, £70,000. I took the depreciation
on that equipment at 10 per cent., that is the electrical
equipment of the station, and that gave a figure of
£7,000. Then the estimated annual value of the work
required for the Fleet, H.M. ships, was estimated at,
roughly, £2,000. The estimated expenditure per
annum for the radio service was taken at £5,000, and
for other Departments, miscellaneous work at £2,000,
giving a total of £16,000. That is the way in which
I arrived at those figures.
I do not know that I understand that statement. Do
you mean the Commission to infer from that that you
consider the ordinary maintenance and running charges
would amount to £16,000 per annum, and that you
could make nearly £4,000 beyond that. You see what
I am speaking about. On the purchase of £57,000,
you say that these works should earn, after paying
running charges and maintenance, the undemoted
items. You have given a list of figures amounting to
£16,000. Am Ito take those to be the ordinary main-
tenance and running charges?—No, I have, after pay-
ing those charges, put the anticipated profit of run-
ning the workshops.
It looks as if I was right in that suggestion unless I
misunderstand the whole thing. That item seems to be
maintenance and running charges, £16,000? —Yes,
maintenance and operating cost of the workshops.
Does that mean what you have to expend per annum.
You would have to allow 10 per cent, on the capital
every year ? —The turnover for the first year was
£20,000, and I think it is estimated this year at
£30,000.
That does not answer my question at all?—I have
put 5 per cent, interest on £55,000, and that is interest
on capital. Then, there was the depreciation.
Yes, I understand that; but the things I do not
understand in this statement are the amounts making
up the £16,000, which, I understand, you are suggesting
is ordinary maintenance and running charges ?—That is
the estimated turnover of the workshops for that year.
By Ccrr-misisoner Taylor. —Does that mean that is
work which will come into the workshops to be done,
and On that you have a margin of profit of a certain
amount. Is that what you mean ? —Yes.
The £7,000 does not apply to that, it must be £9,000.
That is the estimated work that the workshops will do
during the year? —Yes.
By Mr. Starke. — That is the gross return, £5,000,
£2,000, and £2,000. If that is so you are in a hope-
less-tangle. You have got £7,000 depreciation to write
off. If you say that is the gross return, £9,000, then
you have got down three items, £7,000 depreciation,
5 per cent, on £55,000, which is interest, and 4 per
cent, depreciation of plant. Will you try and explain
this yourself to the Commission?—The productive la-
bour cost, I think, at that time was, roughly, £4,900 odd,
and there were about 60 men employed, taking out
£542 per month. That gave an annual cost of produc-
tive labour of £6,500. Then there is the 100 per cent,
on labour to cover overhead charges, including interest
on capital, depreciation, management and administra-
tion. So that figure was doubled, bringing it up to
another £6,500, and then the purchase of material and
stores was, roughly, estimated between £3,000 and
£4,000 per annum.
By Commissioner Taylor.- —That statement dues not
apply to what you are now saying at all?—No, I was
asked to explain how I arrived at the figures.
By Mr. Starke. — How did you arrive at the figure
that you can make £4,170 per annum beyond ordinary
maintenance and running charges. This £4,170 was
made up of 5 per cent, interest on capital, and 4 pei
cent, depreciation on plant after paying ordinary main
tenance and running charges. I cannot follow that
from your figures. The Commission will help you, Tam
sure, because lam not a business man ?■ —I will try
and explain it.
By Comm.isisoner Taylor.- —What application has the
10 per cent, depreciation to the other items?—You
asked me yesterday how I arrived at those figures; or
what basis I sat down to calculate the revenue for
the workshop.
I know that, but it is that third item of £2,000. That
is what you estimated the amount of the actual value
of the work would be?—That is so.
Then you have another item, estimated expenditure
for radio services. That is expenditure on radio ser-
vices on which you make a profit?—No, not a profit;
that is the actual value, the estimated value of the
works required for the radio services.
By the Chairman. —That is the annual value of wire-
less work for the Fleet. Is that the value of the work
done, £2,600? —Yes. It is well over that; the annual
expenditure on the Fleet.
Then at the time you made up this calculation, in
1916, you estimated then that the annual value of the
work which would be required from the workshops
would be £2,000? —Yes.
You were buying these wireless works, then, to do
£2,000 worth of work for the Fleet? —No, that is the
value of the work which would be turned out by the
workshops per annum.


You were to produce this £2,000 worth of work?—
Yes, for the Fleet- and then there was £5,000 worth of
work for the radio services, and £2,000 worth of work
for other departments.
By Commissioner Taylor.- —ls that work on which
you were going to earn a profit ?—I am not in the posi-
tion to say that. Of course, on the basis of working,
you will see that the labour charges were doubled.
By the Chairman. —You say here, “ Estimated an-
nual value of wireless works.” Do you mean £2,000
estimated annual worth of work for the radio services.
Do you mean the estimated annual value of work done
for the radio services? —That is what I mean. I
thought that was quite clear.
What we really want to get at is, how do you propose
to earn that £4,000 profit which you have provided for
the 5 per cent, interest and the 4 per cent, depreciation.
How do you propose to get that £4,000 profit. That is
the margin of profit over the depreciation?—Yes; but
the point I was asked last night was to show you how
I calculated the £4,000 odd.
By Mr. Starke. —Do you think this statement shows
it?—Yes.
By the Chairman. —I do not think it possible to
make anything of that document ? —I am very sorry.
By the Chairman. —l do not think it is possible to
thought I was not sufficiently well informed on finan-
cial matters to understand it. I should not think those
figures would have enabled you to give a certificate at
all. However, that is the only basis of the figures you
worked on in 1916 ?—Ho, the whole thing was taken
generally.
Can you give me any other explanation of that
minute?—No.
The Chairman, —You must try and clear this matter
up definitely, because it is a specific question which the
Minister had to answer to the Treasurer.
By Commissioner Taylor.—How did you arrive at
the £4,000. Did it provide for the depreciation and 5
per cent, interest ? —Might I take a copy of these figures
away and go into it?
By the Chairman. —You have not in your possession
in the office now the figures that you made up in 1916?
—No, I have not. It was after discussion with my
officers that I made up my report. I went into this
matter with my officers, and there were no notes made
at all.
The Chairman. —The point is this: Ido not see what
value the figures are now. The figures which should
have been available are the figures on which the recom-
mendation was made up in 1916. Those are the figures
which would have been of any real use to us at the pre-
sent moment, because there is a letter from the Trea-
surer to the Minister, and the Minister sent a minute
to the Radio Oomlmander, and if there is anything to
support the basis of his reply, which is the cardinal
point of the whole thing, it ought to he on record in
the office somewhere. "What is arrived at now is of no
value at all.
Mr. Starke. —Of course, the actual working has falsi-
fied that statement, because there was a loss of £1,500.
The Witness. —As a matter of fact, there was no loss
at all of £1,500. I think the works have been able to
show a profit and to write off 1\ per cent.
Could Mr Thomas throw any light on it? —I think
he could.
Mr. Starke. —T will call Mr. Thomas later.
The Chairman. —Then we will drop this examination
for the present, and call Mr. Thomas.
By Mr. Starke. —There was another matter you were
going to investigate; that is that telegram that you
sent? —I have not been able to trace that at all. The
only recollection that I have of that is that I think
the stocks, so far as I remember, were completed, and
that telegram was sent in reply to a wire from the
Navy Office.
I am told by Mr. Cornwell, whether it is accurate
or not I cannot say without further investigation, what
they did was to check the quantity of stock, but there
were no prices checked ? —Do you mean the values ?
Do you know whether that is accurate or not? —I
do not know whether that is accurate or not, but the
values should certainly have been checked.
You ought to have known when you sent that tele-
gram, “ Have investigated stocks; everything in order.”
You mean the stocks had been checked, and the prices
had been checked ?—That is what was reported to me
they .had done.
That is what you meant—the quantities and prices
had been checked and were all in order ? Yes, I meant
that.
I want to deal with another matter now, more for
the purpose of giving you an opportunity of: denying
it. You heard the statement about £5,300 being drawn
out from Father Shaw’s hank? —Yes.
And you also heard that Senator Long said that he
got £1,300 from Father Shaw? —Yes.
Did you receive from Father Shaw any money what-
ever? —None whatever.
Or did you receive from any person whatever any
sum of money in connexion with or as a gratuity for
services rendered in connexion with the sale of these
works? —Absolutely nothing.
Where do you keep your hanking account? —At the
Commonwealth Bank.
How long have you kept it there?—l should say about
twelve or eighteen months; and, previous to that, in the
State Savings Bank, in Elizaheth-street.
How long have you kept it there? — About two or
three years, I suppose.
Did you have any hanking account before that any-
where? —No; I have had small hanking accounts from
time to time, hut they have all been in the Savings
Bank. You can trace anything there.
Were they in your own name? —Yes.
Have you any relations in Australia? Yes.
Or dependants?—Yes.
Has your wife any hanking accounts?—Yes; she has
a current account in the Melbourne Savings Bank.
Have your children hanking accounts?—Yes; I think
they have got accounts, too.
Have they ever had accounts, any other accounts
except in the Savings Bank? —Not so far as I know;
they are just in the one hank.
Apart from your immediate family, have you any
relations at all?—Yes; my mother has an account in the
Savings Bank, and' my brother would also have an
account, and I will find out what his hank is.
All those accounts, I understand, have been checked
by the accountants? —I do not know.
You say there is not one penny of any sort whatever,
other than your salary, that is in those accounts ? —Ahso-
By the Chairman.— When you recommended the
Minister to purchase these works, what was the main
factor for that recommendation ?—The main factor was
on account of the war, to enable the wireless telegraphy
stations of the Commonwealth to he brought up to date
and kept in repair; also the fitting of ships, and the
manufacture of equipment for His Majesty’s ships.
That was practically the only reason?—Yes; of
course, I think if you remember, I stated in my re-
commendation that there was not enough work to keep
these workshops going—the Shaw Wireless Works —for
wireless work alone; hut if the Government took them
over, and organized them, not only for the manufacture
of wireless, but for the manufacture of electrical equip-
merit for the "NTavv, and also the electric equipment and
instrument work that would he required by other De-
partments, they could be kept going. .
Had you any difficulty at that time in getting what
you required ?—We could not get it; we had to make it
there.


Where did you make it ?—At the workshops at Rand-
wick.
The Shaw Wireless Works, at that time, were doing
work for your department?—Yes; they had been doing
some of it, but they had not been doing a great deal.
The Marconi Company fitted about six ships. I think,
at the time the works were taken over, the Marconi
had quite a small workshop.
Was that the only necessary factor in your mind?—
No; there was another factor, which certainly did not
settle the question of taking them over. But, if you
remember, a Royal Commission was appointed to in-
quire into the statements which Mr. Balsillie made in
respect to patents held by the late Father Shaw, and it
practically meant a claim and a counter-claim by each
other for filing their inventions, which would cover all
Mr. Balsillie’s specifications.
Who was Mr. Balsillie?—The engineer for Radio
Telegraphy at that time.
What was your other factor?—A Royal Commission
was appointed to inquire into that, but it was not pro-
ceeded with. The Commissioner who was to sit on
that matter became ill, and did not take part in it;
and then Mr. Balsillie strongly recommended that the
Commonwealth should sue for the revocation of the
Shaw patent. The Shaw patent and Balsillie patent
were practically identical; and then it was proposed and
talked of,, and suggested that this matter should be
taken to a court of law to sue for the revocation of
Shaw’s patent. I pointed out that it could be demon-
strated in a court of law that neither the Balsillie
patent nor the Shaw patent were in accordance with
the specifications, which would render the patent invalid.
But the Marconi agreement attached the Bal-
sillie specification to the Commonwealth, it was pos-
sible that the agreement might also be declared invalid.
Then, one of the reasons for acquiring the works was
to do away with this conflict of patents ?—Yes; and I
think, if I remember correctly, I recommended that
the deed of sale should include the whole of the patents,
and they were transferred, I think.
When you previously recommended the establishment
of a wireless plant at Williamstown, at a cost of £4,500,
was that in 1915 ?—Yes; it was just about then—it was
before this Shaw proposition.
It was some time after the war broke out?—Yes.
I urged the necessity for the establishment of these
works.
Could you have obtained the plant then to have estab-
lished these works at a cost of £4,500 ? —I think so, if
we had exercised the War Precautions Act, and com-
mandeered the machinery. That was to start with.
If I asked for £lO,OOO, possibly nothing could be done
or would be done; but it was to start with, and I could
not justify laying down a greater expenditure at that
time. If these works were established at the depot,
then we would have had access to the machinery and
equipment which was already there, to work in con-
junction in connexion with the manufacture of gear.
You felt, then, that £4,500 was about the limit to
which you could recommend the Government to go? ■
At that time my chief desire was to get hold of the
workshops.
Which you would have had to. establish?—Yes, I
could not carry on without them.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —So far as you were
concerned you regarded the purchase of these works as
almost essential to the affairs of the Navy at that time?
X considered that they should be taken over, which
would amount to a purchase.
The point is, did you regard them as essential?—
Yes, for the conduct of the war.
And the provision of machinery in consequence, and
the provision of apparatus for ships and Government
departments? The facilities there had been designed
and put down for that purpose, and they were suitable.
It was stated that Admiral Clarkson recommended
against the purchase of them, and you started to give an
explanation. You said he was a very busy man; what
was it you were going on to say?—l made that state-
ment, I know.
Do you know what operated with Admiral Clarkson
in recommending against it. Did you ever discuss it
with him?—No. I did discuss it with him at one time,
but he said it could not be done.
That is all you know about it?—Yes.
You said that you were sent to Sydney. Did your
instructions come from the Minister or did they come
from the Naval Board ?—I think it was a direction
from the Naval Secretary, signed on behalf of the
Naval Board. Ido not remember it.
Did you have any conversation with the Minister at
that time?—-Yes, I think so. I think the Minister sent
for me.
I see in the file, document 15, that there is an instruc-
tion from the Naval Board of the sth of July, 1916.
Mr. Jensen tells me that he told you to value the plant
at Eandwick, favoring neither Father Shaw nor the
department. Do you remember that?—Yes, I do.
And there was no limit to the time that you would
have at your disposal to make the valuation. No limit
is suggested in this document ?—lt was not suggested in
the document, but I was pretty busy at that time.
That insufficiency of time was due to your own work ?
—Yes; I could not neglect my other work.
Do you consider that you made an inspection sufficient
to enable you to give a fair valuation ?—I think, if you
■will read that document, that you will find I was de-
tailed not to make a valuation in conjunction with Mr.
Ross at all. I was detailed to proceed to watch Mr.
Ross’s valuation on behalf of the Naval Board.
You told me a moment ago that Mr. Jensen told you
to go and make a valuation favoring neither the Depart-
ment nor the proposed vendor, Father Shaw?—l might
not have been strictly accurate in saying valuation, but
I understood the direction to me was that I was to check
his value as he went through, which I did.
That amounts to the same thing?—Yes, I suppose it
does, in one sense; hut officially I was not the valuer of
the workshops.
By the Chairman. —You were to protect the interests
of the Department?—Yes, that is so.
You had his valuation submitted to you?—Yes.
By Mr. Cnssen. —You had his valuation and read it,
and dealt with it in your report?—Yes.
Taking document 41 in the file, . Mr. Ross’s
valuation concludes with the words, “ Total of valua-
tion, £46,496.” I want to draw your attention to
this, that your report, which is document number 16, in
paragraph 2, says this, “ Report and valuation of these
works handed you yesterday. I was associated with
Mr. Ross, and carried out a detailed inspection of the
machinery and'equipment, and concur with Mr. Ross’s
valuation, which is set down at £46,496. This does not
include the land, which was valued at £14,240, making a
total valuation of £60,736.” There is no doubt that you
did whole-heartedly concur in a valuation which set
down these works at £60,736 ?—That is so. Of course,
there was the consideration of the patent rights involved
in that also.
For the reasons which you stated in your report at
length you did concur in it?—Yes.
What do you mean by having said that £60,000 odd
was a fair amount, and at the end of your report that
£40,000 was a fair offer?—lf a workshop is worth, say,
£60,000, are you going to offer £60,000 straight out for
it? Would a business man do that?
That is what you meant that you would inform the
Minister—that, as a business man, although it was
worth £60,000, he should only offer £40,000 for it?—l
mean to say that the Government have to do business
the same as anybody else, and in dealing with business
men you have got to adopt business tactics.


Is that what you meant—that your reference to
£40,000 did not refer to what your opinion of what was
a fair value, but you meant to state your opinion of the
figure at which negotiations could begin?—Yes, that is
so; it was a fair figure to open up negotiations with.
And it meant no more than that? —No.
Your opinion of the value of the works was £60,000 ?
—No; my opinion was this: Mr. Ross’s valuation was
£40,000, but I was not in a position to express an opinion
on the value of the property.
You did not include that in your £40,000? —That
document reads, “ I concur with Mr. Ross’s valuation,
which is set down at £46,496,” and I added to that the
value assessed by the Department of Home Affairs.
If you were not in a position to express an opinion of
the value of the land, did you include the value of the
land in the £40,000, or was that only intended to refer
to the plant and machinery? Do you follow me?—Yes,
I follow you.
I would like you to tell us now if you included that?
—I suggested negotiations should be opened up on what
I considered to bo a walk-in and walk-out business
matter.
■Were you in a position to offer any opihion as to the
value of the land?—No, the value of the land was
already assessed by the Home Affairs Department.
You were incompetent to express any opinion on this
value?—Yes.
Did you mean to include the land in your suggestion
of £40,000 ?^Yes.
When that report went in in its original form the
Minister sent for you?—Yes.
And you say he directed you to amend it? —Yes.
Can you remember exactly what took place at that
time. Can you remember the conversation?—No, I
cannot remember it except that the Minister told me it
was his business and not mine.
Did he say this to you, “ What do you mean, your
report says £60,000 is a fair value and you recommend
£40,000 as a fair offer.” Do you remember him say-
ing that? —-No.
Did he say this to you, “ Either your valuation is too
high or your £40,000 is too low. You had better re-
consider it”? —No.
Will you contradict him if he swears that he did say
that?—Yes, I will.
You see now, of course, that that was the position
exactly as it stood in your report?—How was that?
That it was inconsistent. In the first part of it you
said £60,000 was a fair value, did you not? —I con-
curred with Mr. Ross’s valuation.
There is a conflict between you and the Minister. It
is suggested that he directed you to send in a report, in
fact, which did not express your true opinion. That is
the suggestion?—No, not at all. The suggestion was
that the Minister indicated to me that the matter of
negotiations, or suggested negotiations, was not my busi-
ness at all.
, What did you mean when you said yesterday, “ As a
subordinate officer I had to obey orders ” ?—I meant
that if I am told I am exceeding my duty in suggesting
matters, and I am told it is not my business to do so,
I must obey those orders.
What was your opinion of the true value of the works,
£60,000 or £40,000? —I believe Mr. Ross’s valuation.
You say in your report of July, 1916, that you concur
in Mr. Ross’s valuation of £46,496, and then you go on
as to the £14,000 for the land, and at the end you say,
“ I have to recommend if the works can be acquired
for £40,000, which, in my opinion, would be a fair
offer . . .” You realize there is that outstanding
inconsistency in your report?—No, I did not. Ido not
admit inconsistency at all.
You explain it by saying the £40,000 was a recom-
mendation to the Minister as to how to negotiate?—
Yes, that is so.
Did he say anything to you about that matter, the
fact that there was £60,000 in the first part of your
report and £40,000 in another part. Did he say anything
to you on that subject?—No, I cannot remember that.
I know he sent for me, and I cannot remember what
happened at all, and I am not going to make statements
that I am not certain of.'
Then you are not in a position to contradict the
Minister if he says that he drew your attention to what
he considered an inconsistency, whether it be so or not
is another matter? —No, I would remember if he made
those remarks, I think.
Are you prepared to contradict him, because he is
going to swear it, if he swears that he drew your atten-
tion to that inconsistency. You must say yes or no? —
I am prepared to contradict any inconsistency he might
suggest in that direction.
_ That is not the point. Are you prepared to contra-
dict the assertion that he drew your attention to what
he considered an inconsistency in the figures of your
report?—Yes, I am prepared to contradict that.
Although you say you do not remember anything
about it?—l said I could not remember the details of
the discussion.
Whose suggestion was it that it should be amended ?
—The suggestion of the Minister.
Did you regard it as an improper suggestion-—No;
he told me that all he wanted to know was whether I
considered Shaw’s offer of £57,000 was reasonable, and
I said, “ Yes,” it was reasonable for the purposes of
negotiating.
What do you mean by that?—That it was not un-
reasonable.
Then you said to the Minister that £57,000 might be
taken as an offer to begin negotiations with?—l think
you have got the document there, and you will see it
stated in the document.
I am speaking of the conversation, because the docu-
ment is on the file?—lf I remember correctly, the
Minister said to me, “ What I want to know from you
is. do you consider .Shaw’s offer of £57,000 a reasonable
offer?” and I think I said, “Yes, but I must qualify
that by stating it is a reasonable offer to open up nego-
tiations.”
_ You said, “ It is a reasonable offer to open up nego-
tiations with?” —Yes.
What do you mean by that? —I think I then sug-
gested it because I thought there should be no closure
made, there ought to be three or four offers or counter-
offers.
You said that to the Minister? —Yes, I remember
saying that.
You did not regard the Minister as suggesting any
impropriety to you?—No; I thought at the time the
Minister asked me about the £57,000, as to whether it
was reasonable, that it was reasonable for the purposes
of negotiations. You can open'dn a very big margin,
and the Minister may have been in a better position
even than what I was to know what the works could be
obtained for.
Mr. Jensen is going to say that he pointed out the
inconsistency to you. I understand you contradict
that ?—Yes.
Definitely ?—Y es.
Did he say to you, “ Either the valuation is too great
or the suggested offer of £40,000 is 100 low?”—No.
You will contradict that?—l will contradict that
.Did you say to him, " I see it in that light now. I
would like to reconsider it ” ?—No; I do not remember
that.
You took your report away from him T did you not I
• —Yes; I think so.
And the original sheet remained on the file. Did it
or did you retain your original sheet?—l do not know
whether the original was retained. I withdrew tb*


document, and that document was no longer an official
document. It should have been withdrawn from the
file, but apparently it was left on the file.
Where is the original sheet that was attached to
document 16 ?
Mr. Starke. —The only document that we found is
the one that was put in evidence.
By Mr. Cussen. —ln your'opinion, I take it, the ac-
quisition of these works has been definitely advanta-
geous to the Government?—lt has in so far as the pur-
poses of war are concerned, and it would be now if the
different departments of the Government co-operated
with the workshops. lam certain it would be an ex-
cellent thing then.
Do you remember having a conversation with Mr.
Jensen on one occasion in Usher’s Hotel, in Sydney,
about these wireless works?—No; I do not.
I will draw your attention to a conversation he is
going to depose to at Usher’s Metropolitan Hotel,
Sydney. Do you know the place?—Yes.
Do you stay there when you are in Sydney ?—No.
Do you remember staying there about February,
1917. Were you in Sydney then?—l go to Sydney so
frequently that I would not remember the month. In
all probability I was there.
Do you remember seeing Mr. Jensen at Usher’s Hotel
at about that time?—No; I do not.
Did you say to him that you had heard that there
was a noise being made over the purchase of the Shaw
Wireless Works?—No; I do not remember meeting him
there.
Sitting on the lounge, he tells me you introduced
him to your wife?—No; my wife was not over in
Sydney at the time at all.
. Was she ever with you at Usher’s Hotel, in Sydney ?
—Yes.
Did you ever introduce her to Mr. Jensen there ?
No ; I remember distinctly that I introduced her to Mr.
Jensen at Government House, Melbourne.
Do you deny that you said that you had heard that
• there was a noise being made over the purchase of the
Shaw Wireless Works ?—I do not remember the incident
at all.
You cannot deny or admit it?—No; I do not re-
. member it.
By the Chairman. —Do you remember when the Com-
mission questioned you on the point at the first inter-
view, you were asked how you could reconcile your
report in the concluding paragraph with the first
portion of the report in which you concurred with Mr.
Ross’s valuation of £60,000 for the land and buildings,-
and then you went on by stating that you thought an
offer ought to be made of £40,000. The Commission
pointed out to you was what was apparent then, it was
inconsistent to say in one portion of the report practic-
ally that the works were worth £60,000, and in another
part only £40,000 should be offered for them. Do you
remember your reply ?—I do not remember the reply;
but I meant that £40,000 as the basis for negotiations.
That was not the reply you gave the Commission on
that occasion?—That'is the only reason I had.
The statement you made then was that the Minister
said it was his own business and not yours.
Mr. Cussen. —ls that going to be suggested to the
witness ? That is the point I made this morning—that
that evidence was in the minds of the Commission,
The Chairman. —That is inconsistent with what he
said this morning, and in fairness to you, I wanted to
bring the point out.
The witness withdrew.
Frederick William Thomas, sworn and examined.
B V M r. Starke. —What are you ?—Chief Clerk in the
Radio Office.
Take what I will call the first report of Engineering
Commander Oresswell naming £40,000 as a basis fo-
offer. I understand that you and he worked in con-
junction in preparing that report ?—ln the draft of the
report. The morning that he was going to make his
recommendation he sent for me and asked me to be in
the room while he dictated the report. We had discussed
previously the taking over of the works, myself and
other officers, and we had gone exhaustively into most
points, financial and engineering, and we had formed
very clear ideas as to what we could do and what we
could not do.
You can tell us the clear ideas that you had formed ?
The first basis of our calculations was that the total
value of the plan in the radio station, plus what we
had in the stores, was so much. We had taken over
from the Postmaster-General’s people the radio stations
and stores a few months ago, and when we took them
over we took over plant valued roughly at about £66,000.
I am speaking of the inside equipment of the stations,
not the outside. In.the few months we had held them
we had made certain purchases, so when the day came
that the matter of the works had to be decided we had,
roughly, £70,000 worth of plant. The engineering offi-
cers stated that a fair depreciation of that-plant would
he 10 per cent, per annum. That gave us £7,000. In
addition to that we had the requirements of the H.M.A.
Ships, which were conservatively estimated at £2,000.
There was also a programme of new works which were
urgently required and which the Director had in view.
It was a comprehensive programme, but the first year’s
installation might be set down at £5,000. There was
also the hope that other Government departments would
co-operate, and their co-operation was put down at
about £3,000 or £4,000. That gave us this estimated
turnover of £16,000 per annum, that is on the credit
side of the profit and lose account. On the other side
we had this great fact that we knew the pay-roll
of the Shaw Wireless Works was about £5OO per month.
They were running about 60 to 65 men on what we
would call a 60 per cent, efficiency. We knew the
expenditure was £6,000 per annum on direct labour.
We .estimated in those times that material as compared
to turnover would be as 1 is to 3 or 4. We had our
administration charges—Mr. Cornwell’s salary, the
accountant’s salary, and the costs of the staff and so on,
gas, and fuel, and they came roughly to, say,
£3,000. We have got three items: administrative
charges, £3,000; labour, £6,000; raw materials, £3,000,
which is a total of £12,000. The difference between
£12,000 and the estimated valuation of £16,000 is
£4,000. and that was provided to pay 5 per cent, on
£55,000 and depreciation, which was estimated at 4
per cent.
I do not see how 10 per cent, on £70,000 is an item
which you can take in as turnover ?—That is easily
cleared up. In the Government the method is slightly
different possibly to what it is in business houses. In
the Government the method is to keep your plant at
100 per cent, efficiency. To do that you must replace
very largely. A private industrial employer does not
do that, but he would take a chance. That is not our
business, we give 100 per cent, efficiency, and our de-
preciation is rather more than in the outside world.
By Commissioner Taylor.—Do you mean by that that
this 10 per cent, depreciation is 10 per cent, of the
material which you set out at £70,000 ?—Yes, you have
got to replace 10 per cent, of your plant.
You are talking of replacements. You expect to get
that ?—Yes.
Ten per cent, of the work for ourselves?—Yes,
exactly ; that is the method that business men have got
to adopt when starting a business proposition. It is
perfectly simple. We had to estimate some turnover,
as without it you could not possibly make any recom-
mendation to the Government.
By Mr. Starke. —Are you really serious in these
statements you are making?—l am very serious.
Your technical officers had told you there was,
roughly, £70,000 worth of plant and stores?—They did
not tell me, it is on the file. The Postmaster-GeneraTs
Department publish their returns, and we knew exactly


from the published returns there -were £60,000 worth
or £70,000 worth that we had taken over from them
in September, 1915.
By Commissioner Taylor. —That had nothing to do
with the radio plant, that is the plant that you took
over from the Postmaster-General’s Department? —Yes,
it had.
Well, that is assuming that our office are going
to replace your plant in ten years. In the process of
doing that, you say you are going to make £7,000 a
year ?—Yes; on the basis of the figures supplied to me
by technical officers.
Supposing if in one year they only want £2,000
worth of work, all that estimate would be wrong ?
You do not do that in the Government. You must
replace it. If you have a plant worth £70,000, that
plant has to be maintained.
By Mr. Starlit. —lf that is what you have been doing,
to my mind, it is a very serious matter. Question 2by
the Treasurer is this; “ Are you of opinion that when
the purchase of this plant took place at Father Shaw’s
offer that it would pay interest on capital invested,
taking into consideration depreciation of plant ” ? Then
you collaborated wjtb the technical officers as accountant
in this answer to Question 2; “I am of opinion that
on a purchase price of £50,000, as per Father Shaw’s
offer, these works should earn, after paying ordinary
maintenance and running charges, the undernoted
items, 5 per cent, interest on capital and 4 per cent, de-
preciation on plant ” ?—Quite so.
To get that you dragged in £70,000 worth of stores
that you had in the Department that you had taken
over from the Postmaster-General's, Department, and
you reckoned you would replace.£7,ooo ? —Every year
you replace .it. I can put it quite simply, I think.
Wireless engineers estimate the life of a plant at ten
years’ depreciation. The depreciation on wireless is
very heavy, and therefore, if you have a plant and you
have £30,000 worth you must be prepared to write that
down every year, so that at the end of ten years if you
have not replaced it would be simply scrap.
You treated that as part of your turnover?—Yes;
because we had Commander Cresswell asking for works,
and because he would be wanting certain things.
Do you suggest that £7,000 was necessary or un-
necessary?—That is a matter for the technical officer.
Did you assume that it was necessary to write down
that plant £7,000 per annum ?—Yes, if they said so-.
They told you it was necessary to write down that
plant £7,000 per annum because it would depreciate
to that extent?—Yes, quite so.
And you say you would have to put in new
machinery to replace it?—Yes; that machinery would
be new.
You assumed he was going to build £7,000 worth of
plant every year to replace some of this plant?—Not
necessarily. Take an engine: An engine cylinder is
only one part of the engine, and if you replace that
when it is broken by putting in a new cylinder your
engine is as good as new.
In your estimate you say you have got to build
£7,000 worth of plant every year to arrive at that
£4,000? —No; there are other items. There is the
item of £5,000 per annum which is for brand new
work. Then there is repair work. You cannot keep
twenty-one stations going without spending money.
By the Chairman. —That is all assumption ? : —lt is
more than assumption. The balance-sheets I have seen
for the last two years, and in the first year the turn-
over was £lB,OOO.
By Mr. Starke. —Do you know there has been only
one balance-sheet?—There are two balance-sheets.
Mr. Cornwell says it has not been prepared yet for
this year?—There was a pro formd, balance-sheet for
the first twelve months.
It is not a pro formd balance-sheet, it is an actual
balance-sheet? —I know I have seem a balance-sheet.
I think you are rambling'on a great deal?—l think
I am trying to answer questions as directly as I can.
At this stage, I would like to point out for the infor-
mation of the Commission that, although at the time
this estimate was made, 5 per cent, was estimated as
interest on the capital. It is now 4J per cent. I believe
and 4 per cent, for depreciation, making a total of
9 per cent. At the present time the works are doing
better, because they are paying interest at the rate of
4J per cent, on capital and 7\ per cent, depreciation,
which is a total of 11| per cent., so that they are doing
2i : per cent, better in actual practice than what we
estimated they would do.
The only balance-sheet that we have seen is covered
by a report dated the 14th September, 1917. You say
there is a later one? —An earlier one I should say.
Look at Exhibit 10? —That is from 16th August to
30th June, 1917. That is one balance-sheet. You said
there are two. Where is the other one? —That evi-
dently included both. There was undoubtedly one for
the first six months—Mr. Cornwell’s pro forma balance-
sheet, which was attached to the annual report.
That is the only other document on the file? —Yes.
I want you to explain that reference in Commander
Cresswell’s recommendation of £40,000. Apparently
he discussed that with you?—When the matter of the
works arose it was seen quite 1 clearly that the jump
from a little works costing £5,000 to a works of the
character of the Shaw Wireless Works could only be
justified if there was work for such- a works. I, there-
fore, sat down and endeavoured to see what sources
there were open for the necessary work, and although
I cudgelled my brain as much as I could, and ran out
pro formd profit and loss accounts, I could not see that
we would be justified in assuming- responsibility for
works at a capital value higher than _ £40,000 or
£45,000. The cardinal thing which guided me was
although, as war expenditure, emergency_ expenditure
can be justified, from a peace point of view it might
be found the works could not be carried on
profitably. As to the actual value of the work, we
did not bother whether it was £60,000, or £70,000, or
£BO,OOO, but we did bother about what we could
secure them at, because on that depended whether we
could make a success or failure of it. When the
Director came to dictate the last paragraph, I pointed
out to him, as he was the responsible man, if he failed
he would have to take a share of the blame, but if he
could get it at what a tyro in business would know was a
figure at which we could make a success of it, then it
would be all right. There were only two possible
buyers I pointed out to him, and I also pointed out the
financial position of the works. We knew the bank
was advancing money to Father Shaw; we knew there
were mortgages over the works; and I had a very
shrewd idea Father Shaw had an option, and I made
a shrewd guess that the option was £28,000. I said
to the Director, “ You offer £40,000; pin yourself to
it,” and he put it in.
From your point of view, as accountant, you did not
think the works in Government hands could carry a
heavier capital charge from £40,000 to £45,000 ? —I was
not going over that, but the works have been doing
be-ter than we thought.
At that time? —Yes; at that time I do not think we
could have stated the case any higher.
If that were so your attitude was this; “I am of
opinion that on a purchase price of £s7,ooo”—you
have now jumped from £45,000 to £57,000 —“these
works should earn, after paying ordinary maintenance
and running charges, interest and depreciation amount-
ing to £4,700.” How can you justify a statement like
that? —Because we are dealing with war time. That
would be the result; we could earn interest on £70,000
during the war.
The question was this: “ Are you of the opinion,
when the purchase of this plant took place at
Father Shaw’s offer, that it would pay interest
on capital invested, taking into consideration


depreciation of plant.” In view of that very definite
conversation between you and the Director that
you could not carry on at a capital charge of
more than £40,000 or £45,000 with success, how can
you justify within a few days, because that first report
is the 14th of July, and I assume within a day or two
you go and report to the Minister that you can carry
on with a capital charge of £57,000 with success ?—I
would like to point out there are two positions. The
first one was this—we wanted work, and we had an
opportunity, as I say, that any tyro could see, of the
falling into our hands. There was only one pos-
sible competitor, and I am positive that competitor
would not give anything like what was a reasonable
offer.
Who was the competitor?—The Amalgamated Wire-
less Company, and they were practically out of the
market.
Which system of wireless did they carry on?—lt is
not so much a system as the method of earning divi-
dends. Their system is anything.
Was it running the Marconi ?—They wanted a works.
Were they running the Marconi or the Telefunken
system ? —Both.
That was the only competitor?—Yes.
Apparently you knew what was going on?—I would
have been a fool if I did not know that.
As a responsible officer you knew that Shaw could
not carry on any longer?—Yes, I knew that.
Tou_ apparently had some information that he had
an option?—Yes, that was my common sense. I made
an assumption, and the assumption was correct. As-
sumptions are not always correct, but it was this time.
It is only right to ask you, as I asked Commander
Cresswell, in any form, direct or indirect, have you re-
ceived anything from Father Shaw in connexion with
this transaction? —No.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —Did you tell the
Minister at any time of these ideas that you had ? —No;
I never met Mr. Jensen officially.
You never put on the file in any record that you had
good grounds for believing there was an option for
£28,000? —It was not necessary. lam not the respon-
sible officer.
You did nothing that conveyed it to the Minister?—
It was a business man’s assumption. The Minister
would say to me, “ Where are your proofs ?” and I had
no proofs.
You did not convey it to the Minister? —No; the
Minister does not know me. lam purely an ordinary
officer, and I was not invited to give the'benefit of my
experience. He does not know me, and I never spoke
to him. Ido not suppose I have ever seen him before
to-day.
The Chairman. —The Chief Justice has had a mes-
sage from the Premier asking that the Court should
close from 12 o’clock till 2 o’clock to-day, therefore we
will adjourn.
The sitting adjourned at 12 p.m. to 2 p.m.
On resuming at 2 p.m.,
The Chairman. —ln reply to your request, Mr.
Cussen, that the evidence taken before the Commission
should be handed over to you, the Commission have
decided that that cannot be done, as the intention of
the Commission is to confine its report exclusively to
the evidence given in this Court, and no other evidence
will be taken any notice of at all; but, if there is, within
the knowledge of the Commission, anything at all that
is_ not brought out, and which is favorable to your
client, the Commission will see that it is brought out.
Bfifr
Herbert Ernest Ross, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Btarhe. —What are you?—A consulting en-
gineer.
And you carry on the practice of your profession in
Sydney, New South Wales?—Yes. ■
What has been your experience in connexion with
electrical plant?—l have a very large industrial con-
nexion in the establishment of factories, and I am re-
tained by several large industries in that respect; and
my experience has been a special one in electrical
machinery on the industrial side. I have been called
upon to install, on numerous occasions, large installa-
tions of electrical machinery, on which my advice and
judgment is called into account.
And for how many years has that experience ex-
tended?—About twenty-five years.
At the request of the Federal authorities, you made
this report, dated 12th July, in respect of the Randwiek
plant?—Yes.
And the instructions that were given to you were—
[reading No. 13 on file] ?—Yes. Those were my in-
structions.
You know no more of your appointment that that you
had correspondence or telegrams addressed to you from
the Federal authorities?—That is so.
Commander Cresswell did arrive to assist you ?—Yes.
Will you tell me what time you spent on the valua-
tion, and exactly what you did?—l was three days
inspecting the machines and equipment of the factory,
■ and the stock. During those three days, each machine
■was examined in detail. A note was made—mentally,
or, in many cases, in writing—of the condition of the
machines, their utility and class, type, and their set-
tings; and, after doing so —I might say the schedule of
the equipment was handed to me by the Shaw Wireless
people at my request, as the Navy Department did
not furnish me with lists as arranged—l took the
schedule, together with my own notes, and went through
the workshop. The schedule provided by the Shaw
Wireless people was incomplete. There are a great
many items omitted from that; and, of course, I made
those items good in my own notes. Then, having
inspected the plant, its character and condition, I
devoted about five days; including a good deal of night
work, in pricing those items from the material I had
available. I inquired also from merchants in the
business as to values. I consulted the tenders and
prices accepted for equipment for Government purposes
of about that date, and as regards the items in stock,
consisting of a large collection of miscellaneous manu-
factured stock, nuts, small screws, bolts, and insula-
tions. _ I inspected those, and inquired the prices at
that time, in order to check the values of this stock.
As regards the stock, a sheet was given to me of the
stock, of the number of items in each section, which I
referred to in my statement to the Government; and
I took a note of what stock was mentioned as being in
the bin. That is to say, I selected here and there at
random entirely, without any suggestion, from different
bins, and examined the contents of those bins, and-in
a few cases I counted the contents, although I did not
intend to take stock in that sense—but I examined the
quality and condition of the stock; and then, taking
the sheet, which had prices opposite the various items,
I checked those items by inquiry in the mercantile
world in Sydney; and therefore, in a sense, I did make
a valuation of the stock, subject to the quantities being
correct.
You made your report, and your report gives £46,496.
That has no reference to the stock?—-Yes; it has, most
decidedly.
What does it cover?—The stock represents £12,000
of that item; and if you refer to my report, I say,
“In respect of the store stock ... a valuation has
been taken-as from the stock-sheets as on 31st May,
1916, and as forwarded to me by you. I have, how-
ever, checked throughout these lists the values, &c., and
find in every case the valuations stated are fairly
correct.” So I did not check the quantities, but checked
the values.


And then you made a valuation of the plant? —I
would like to say, at this stage, as regards that stock, 1
discussed it with Commander Cresswell —in fact, we
could not possibly count all this miscellaneous stock—
and Commander Cresswell told me that departmental
officers would check the quantities.
With your report, did you send in a detailed sche-
dule? —I sent in fifty-seven pages, altogether, of a
schedule.
Is it all there on the file? —It should be. In my
letter, I referred to the number of schedules, and what
the various items are in detail.
In valuing the plant, what was the basic principle
of the valuation which you followed out?—My instruc-
tions were such that I could only take the plant
without any regard to its utility, and it was nothing
to me if I found a grand piano there, or a machine for
making ginger beer, I valued that as a machine for
the purpose, whether it suited the ISTavy or did not.
I did not have instructions to value for Navy purposes,
and so took everything at its value as a going concern,
assuming the utility of the machine was there, pro-
vided it was not obsolete and suitable for the purpose.
The valuation, then, was based upon the things in
situ assembled and ready as a profit-making concern? —
Yes, as a going concern.
And regardless, as you said, of its particular value in
the business? —Quite.
Did you value it entirely as new machinery ?—hio;
that would not be valuing.
You allowed for depreciation? —Yes, and I allowed
for appreciation.
Appreciation caused by the war? —Yes. I took it
that there was somebody willing to sell and somebody
willing to buy certain plant at that time, and that both
parties were willing to do business.
Can you express it in percentages at all as to what
was the appreciation all round on pre-war prices?—lt
would be impossible to do it, but I had it in much
closer detail than that. I took every individual ma-
chine, and I referred to the English, American or
local prices where available, and I took the ruling con-
ditions.
May I ask you how you got the appreciated price. For
instance, a lot of material could not be obtained in
Australia at the time. What prices did you take for
that? —'Where it could not be obtained in Australia,
what I did was this: I took my English list of John
Birch, and taking the average of that class of machine,
I assumed that the same appreciation would apply to
these particular machines. That, I considered, was a
very sound position to take.
Did you apply that same principle to the stock value ?
—Yes. Most of the stock values I checked by quota-
tions. The same principle was applied.
And you went into the question of any depreciation
that you saw? —Yes.
That is with each particular machine? —Yes, it was
gone into in detail.
Did not that strike you as a very high valuation? —
Certainly not.
To take each particular machine and not look at
it as a whole? —Absolutely, no.
You were taking it substantially at its replacement
value, less deprecation?—Yes, most decidedly. That
was the market value of the plant. As a matter of fact,
those machines could have been sold since at a price
exceeding my valuation.
Who would have dismantled them. It means money
to dismantle? —Dismantlement is a very simple thing
compared with setting.
We understand the basic principles of your valua-
tion, but how did you go about the depreciation?—lf
a machine were tight in its bearings and not worn out
at all, and the accuracies are there, &c., I allowed prac-
tically no depreciation at all, because it is for the pur-
pose a new machine, and years make no difference. A
machine may he used three times in two years, and,
under the circumstances, I would take that as a new
machine. Obsolescence, of course, is taken into account.
Could that be so on the basis of your valuation? —I
claim it was taken into account.
You told me that, quite apart from the utility of the
machines at all to the works, whether ginger beer
machine or a pop-gun, you took it at its market value
less any depreciation. What application has the prin-
ciple of obsolescence to sueh a valuation as that? —In
a few cases, and in this particular instance, in a very
close association with Commander Cresswell, I wrote
down almost entirely certain things that were obsolete,
and from the nature of which could never be anything
else but obsolete, because they had an express purpose,
and that purpose was past, and if they were no good to
the Shaw Wireless they were no good to any one, such
as certain generators. Wherever that principle could
be applied it was applied.
I suppose, without a detailed examination, you could
not tell me what amounts were involved in the obso-
lescence?—Hot very much. I could not tell you the
amount of the obsolescence. It referred more especially
to wireless instruments, and certain instruments that
were obsolete and of no value to anybody. It was not
whether they were of value to the Navy Department,
but of value to anybody else.
Or of value to the owner?—Or anybody.
By Mr. Cussen. —The market value?—Not exactly
the market value.
By Mr. Starke. —Have you had valuations to do in
compulsory acquisitions of property?—A great many.
You know the principle there which is the value to
the owner —that is the guiding principle—and not the
market value or anything else—the most beneficial use
to which it could be put?—Yes. That did not apply
here.
Why not?—Because it was not compulsory.
No, but did not you adopt precisely the same prin-
ciple ?—-No.
The most beneficial value to the owner?—Yes, in
that sense I did. >-
And the most beneficial value to the owner meant to
whatever purpose it could be put in anvbodv’s hands?
—Yes.
The most beneficial use of the property. You were
valuing for buyers I—l1 —I was valuing as between parties,
I understood.
But it was not essentially a vendor’s valuation? —
I do not think so.
I am not speaking of the figures, but the principle
adopted was essentially a vendor’s valuation?—l do
not think so.
Why not? —Because I simply had to take the value
of the thing as between two parties, one who wished
to sell and one who wished to buy.
The only thing that apparently you did not include
was the cost of the installation, putting it in? —That
was included.
The cost of putting it in and establishing it in situ? —
Yes, as a going concern. I allowed nothing at all for
goodwill, because there was none, in my opinion.
Again, I suggest that principle of valuation which
would, I think, have been the right principle to adopt
of compulsory purchase, is essentially a vendor’s valua-
tion, without regard to what the parties could by ne-
gotiation in the market have got it? —I do not think so
at all.
Then you made this report, and, in your opinion, it
was a fair and just valuation?—Absolutely.
Subject to the checking of quantities?—Yes, which I
understood was to be done by somebody else.
Did Father Shaw see you in connexion with the valua-
tion before the Government had communicated with
y on ?—Yes. He asked me would I agree to act.


And that is all that passed between you?—Yes. I
saw Father Shaw —I had never seen him before in my
life—hut I saw him for about a minute and a half on
this occasion. He was sick that day.
At the works?—Yes.
He asked you to go and see him there? —Yes, and
asked me would I be willing to act as a valuator between
him and the Department, and I said I would.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —You have had plenty
' of time to make your valuation?—l took all the time I
wanted. I was wired expressly for the valuation to be
sent on as soon as possible, but I took all the time I
wanted.
By the Chairman. —You said that you valued ac-
cording to instructions. Who did you get instructions
from? —The ISTavy Department.
In the shape of a letter ?—Yes.
Can you produce the letter ?—I think it is a telegram.
By Mr. Starke. —lt is document Ho. 13 on the file,
telegram dated 12th July, 1916. Those were the in-
structions to you?—Yes.
By the Chairman.- —The instructions were in regard
to plant and machinery and stock, and nothing to do
with buildings?—Yes. I would like to point out that
at the beginning of the address by counsel a mistake was
made which might have some impression on the minds
of the Commission. The statement was that I did not
value the stock. As a matter of fact, I did. I took
their stock sheets at their valuation, and I found they
were correct. Therefore I did value the stock, because
if there were things not included in the stock they were
given credit for, and it is part of my valuation; but I
did not estimate the quantities. I checked the quanti-
ties in a few cases, but, as a matter of fact, that was left
to the other officers.
The witness withdrew.
Hugh Robert Denison, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you?—Managing director
of the Sun newspaper.
I want you to direct your attention to an article that
appeared in the Sun newspaper on the 31st July, 1916 ?
—Yes.
[Reading article ] —Were you connected with the
Amalgamated Wireless?—Yes, I was managing director
at the time.
You have a good knowledge of wireless plant?—l am
not a technical expert.
You have a business knowledge?—Yes, a good com-
mercial knowledge, and have, naturally, studied the
subject.
As a matter of fact, was that article suggested or
put forward by the Amalgamated Wireless Company?
—Ho, it was not. It was suggested by a paragraph
that appeared in the paper—a wire from Melbourne,
stating that the Government had purchased the Shaw
Wireless Works for the purpose of making wireless
plant for £57,000, which we thought absurd.
You say that is an excessive sum for the purpose
mentioned. Do you know any facts warranting that
statement?—Yes, I think I do. In 1915 Father Shaw
called on me and suggested to me an amalgamation of
our respective companies. I said, “What have you
got?” He said, “We have a very good plant and build-
ings, &c. Would you care to come and have a look at
the place?” I said, “All right; with your permission
I will bring Mr. Fiske, our technical superintendent,
and we will go out and have a look at it.” We went
out and examined the place, and I asked Father Shaw
what he valued the plant and machinery at for the
purpose of this amalgamation, and he said, “ Oh, there
is about £35,000 there.”
What year was this? —1915. So I said, “Is that the
price you are likely to ask if it comes to amalgama-
tion ?” He said, “ Oh, no; we want something for our
patents as well.” I said, “What do you value the
patents at ?” He said, “ I think they are worth about
£10,000.” I rather smiled at the time, and I told him,
after an examination, I would think the matter over,
and I conferred with Mr. Fiske and other officers, and
we decided it was absurd to buy a plant which was
valued at something like £35,000 when we could make
all that was required for the plant of the size mentioned
here; so I intimated that we could not consider the
matter, and the matter then dropped.
Did that £35,000 include the plant and buildings?—
Yes, the whole concern. That is what he said. I do
not know whether he referred to the stock; but, as a
matter of fact, he had a lot of stock that was no earthly
use for wireless purposes.
I want to deal with this Amalgamated Wireless Com-
pany. There is a statement here that the outside value
of the machinery and plant used by the Amalgamated
Wireless is not more than £2,000 in July, 1916. Was
that a statement of fact?—l think it is pretty close to
it. I fancy it was taken from the balance-sheet.
You know how the wireless has developed in con-
nexion with the ships round the coast of Australia. Do
you know the plants that are required?—Yes.
Is it a fact you could with such an installation have
manufactured that plant ?—All I can say is that we
have made the installations with the exception of the
dynamos for more than, I think, half the ships at pre-
sent trading in Australia, with that plant.
What sort of plant did you make ?—Hot the dynamos.
W© have to purchase those or import them. W© make
the whole of the rest of the plant.
The whole of the wireless plant?—Yes.
That is the receiving and transmitting?—Yes, the
aerials and everything except the dynamos.
Who makes dynamos in Australia?—There are two
or three people, but they are mostly imported.
There is nothing in the dynamos for wireless tele-
graphy that is peculiar or special ? —No. We buy the
or dinar}’ dynamos.
In one year, from June to August, the Navy turned
out about £22,000 worth of stuff. Do you think that
would be impossible on a capital outlay of £2,000 ?
Not on a capital outlay. It is the plant that is valued
at £2,000.
With the plant you have would it have been impos-
sible to have turned out such a large amount of work ?
—With the machinery?
Yes ?—I am not prepared to say, because I do not
know how much is wireless and how much is other
stuff.
Would you tell me, approximately, what was the
original cost of your factory, plant, and fittings?—We
leased the factory.
You did not buy land ?—No, nor buildings. We do
not think that is a good plan. Of course, I am not con-
nected with the wireless company now. At that time
I was managing director.
You mentioned the value of your plant?—The value
of our actual machinery was about £2,000.
That is the cost?—Yes.
You have had a good deal of commercial experience
in valuing businesses for the purpose of sale ?—I do not
claim to do that. I am not a buyer and seller of busi-
nesses. I have a commercial knowledge, which a man
is expected to have in connexion with my business.
You have heard Mr. Ross’s evidence on the principle
of valuation which he adopted ?—I cannot say that I
listened to it.
His view was this: in valuing this Shaw Wireless
Works the proper-thing was to take it as a going concern,
set up, assembled, and installed there without any regard
to profit or profit-earning capacity, but merely to give
the value, and the appreciated value of the articles at
that date coupled with the cost of assembling them and
installing them now, and lees any depreciation or any
actual obsolescence he observed, but as a whole not to
consider the question of obsolescence. In purchasing
a business is that a basis that you would consider


eound ? —You are asking a very difficult question now,
because, first of all, if I had been asked to do a thing
like that, it would have depended on the nature of the
instructions I had. That would be vital in the first-
place.
They Were open instructions 2 —lf I was told, to go
and value a business for a specific purpose, I would
value that business as a going concern.
That is a profit-earning capacity 2 —Yes.
I presume you have heard rumours that commissions,
and so forth, have been paid or received in connexion
with this purchase by the Government 2 —Only what I
have seen in the papers.
Do you know of any fact of your own knowledge?—
None whatever.
Or of any information conveyed to you from any-
body 2 —None whatever.
Directly or indirectly 2 —As far as the present inquiry
is concerned, I have heard nothing whatever. As far
as previous matters connected with Father Shaw and
the sale of the business, I have heard a good deal, but
I do not think that touches this Commission.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —-You were the
mancgmg director of the Amalgamated Wireless, and
also a large shareholder 2—l was, up to two years ago.
And, of course, it was known in the office of the Sun
that you were managing director and a large share-
holder 2—Yes, of course.
And the Sun paid rather a kindly attention to the
Amalgamated Wireless 2—No, it did not. I persistently
kept the Sun away from any other interests in which I
was involved.
Are we to understand you gave instructions that
when the Sun got a chance' of boosting the Amalgamated
Wireless it was not to do so?—My instructions
Did you give those instructions 2—No; and I may
tell you very candidly that the editorial department of
the Sun does not take instructions even from the man-
aging director, because the managing director has the
common sense not to instruct them.
But there is a little other influence which the manag-
ing director has? —The man who manages the paper,
yes.
And his friendliness is to be desired by even the edi-
torial department 2 —l suppose so.
And I suppose this purchase by the Government —■
I want you to regard this matter now as managing
director of the Amalgamated Wireless, and not as man-
aging director of the Sun 2—Yes.
This purchase by the Government meant that the
Amalgamated Wireless would not get any Government
work in the future 2 —We had not had any Govern-
ment work for a very long time previously, So I do
not think it hurt us.
The article said you were doing the work 2 —l do not
think so.
It says, “ At the present moment the plant required
on ships, with the exception of dynamos, are being
manufactured by the Amalgamated Wireless of Aus-
tralia?” —That has nothing to do with the company.
As a matter of fact, they carefully refrained from
giving us any business for some reason or other.
That was apparent that they had refrained from
giving you business—deliberately 2 —lt looked like it.
However, the purchase by the Government of these
works meant going into a trade that you were doing
in supplying plant required by ships?—No.
"Why not? —Tor the very simple reason that we had
contracts for the whole of the shipping of Australia,
and we had them tied up by means of contracts for a
period of years.
The whole of them? —Yes.
Do you say that? —The whole of the Australian ship-
ping was under contract to us. All I can tell you is,
the whole of the Australian shipping has been fitted
with wireless by the Amalgamated or Australasian
Wireless Company.
By Mr. Starke. —You mean the coastal ships 2—All
the coastal ships in Australia.
By Mr. Cussen. —What about the shipping coming
from the other countries?—The Marconi Company, and
other companies, have supplied those.
When war broke out I take it a number of ships
were fitted with wireless?—Yes; and the Government
compelled them to be fitted up, but apparently they
could not equip them themselves.
At that time, no. However, do you say that this
purchase by the Government of Father Shaw’s works
did not affect your business at all ?—Not in the
slightest.
Nor was it thought in the future it might affect it ?
That is a different thing.
It was a thing that the Amalgamated Wireless, and
you, as managing director, would rather not see come
about? —Yes; that is perfectly correct for two reasons.
I suppose one is money?—No. The principal thing
was that the Government unfortunately had taken the
most extreme step in the so-called Balsillie patents, and
were proposing to make stations wherever they could,
and we were fighting the Government in that matter
for years, and naturally we thought the Government
was behind them when they started to develop those
patents, which we understood were an infringement of
our patents.
What is the other reason?—The other was, we did
not want the Government to be a competitor—a com-
petitor with Government money behind it.
Cutting into your profits 2—-Yes; cutting into every-
thing.
Do you say that you knew nothing at all about that
article? —That is so. I did not see it until it appeared.
Did you make any inquiries about it? —No.
No request to any other papers on this matter?—
No. I think 1 wrote a letter to the Argus and Age on
that basis.
Did you write that as managing director of the Sun
—or what ?—As managing director of the Wireless Com-
pany, and signed as such.
Did you write that before or after this
think it was after—l am not sure.
You cannot give us any idea whether before or after?
—No. The article in the Sun was written the day after
the announcement of the purchase.
And when was your letter written?—Within a few
days, I think.
You were against it as managing director of the
Amalgamated Wireless?—Of course I was.
But as managing director of the Sun you simply
regarded it from a public point of view ?—^Undoubtedly.
Were any of the other newspaper managing directors
interested in the Amalgamated Wireless?—l do not
know.
At that time were any managing directors of news-
papers in Sydney interested in the Amalgamated Wire-
less? —I do not think so.
The witness mihdrew.
Thomas Henry Cooke, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you 2—A naval staff clerk.
And what are your duties? —I am senior clerk under
the director of Naval Stores.
What are your duties?—Clerical duties in connexion
with the supply of Naval Stores.
Dou you know anything of electrical machinery?—
No.
I understand you went across to check some stock-
sheets at the Shaw Wireless Works?—Yes.
Who went with you ?—I went by myself.
About what date was that? —Early in-August, 1916.
Was any one there while taking the stock.—Yes. I
had with me two clerical officers from the Naval Store
Yard, at Garden Island.
Who were they?—l could not remember their names
at the present time, hut I think it is disclosed in the
official papers.
29


Did you have any assistance from Mr. Cornwell, the
manager?—Yes; and the electrician who identified the
particular items while we checked them.
What instructions did you have first of all? —The
Director of Naval Stores directed me to proceed to
Eandwick and check the stock.
Did that include checking values or checking quan-
tities? —Checking quantities.
You went to Eandwick, and how long did you spend
there? —A week, as near as I can remember.
What inventory had you ?—I had an inventory which
was handed to me by the Director of Naval Stores.
Do you know where it is now?—lt is-in the official
file, as far as I know.
Is that the document? —Yes.
Are these the inventories ?-*-Yes, those are the ones I
prepared at the Navy Office.
One column is headed “description.” Where did
you get that? —That was taken from the inventory
either handed to me before I went from Melbourne, or
a description given to me of any articles not disclosed
on the inventory by the manager of the works.
And the denomination ?—That was likewise supplied.
“Quantities as per stock sheets 3/5/16.”? —That
was the stock sheets furnished in the first place by the
Director to me.
“As per stock taken 5/8/16.”? —Yes.
Extended as per store, &c., and total quantities?—
Yes.
“At 18/7/16.” Where did you get that ?—They
were furnished by the manager of the works and
checked with these values here.
I can take it at that time that you had no knowledge
to make an independent value of the stock ?—No.
_ And all you purported to do was to check the quanti-
ties and summarize the details in that inventory of
yours ?—Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 12 —Inventories of quantities.
The real thing you determined was the actual
quantity of stuff in the workshop ?—Yes.
And you made no valuation yourself ?—No. When I
returned to Melbourne the file was referred to Com-
mander Cresswell.
The witness withdrew.
Albert Edward Cornwell, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. Mr. Cooke says that these values at
18/7/16 he got from you ?—Yes, that is quite right.
As a matter of fact, it was the intention of the Depart-
ment to take over as from 18th July, 1916, in the first
place, and that date was afterwards altered to 18th
August, 1916.
Where did, you get those values ?—Simply extractions
from the original values at 31st May, 1916.
Those are from the original stock sheets that were
drawn up at Father (Shaw’s suggestion—Yes.
It is no independent valuation at -all?—No.
The witness withdrew.
John Junius Price, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you?—Merchant.
Where ?—I might explain that I offered my services
to the Defence Department in any capacity some two
years ago, and in some manner it was ascertained I was
an expert shorthand writer, and for the past two years
I have been engaged indirectly with the Defence De-
partment in that capacity.
I understand that amongst other duties you per-
lormed you took notes of evidence for the purpose of
this Commission?—Yes.
Where do you carry on your merchant’s business
now?—l sold that.
What are you now?—l am attached to the Defence
Department temporarily.
Do you remember going out to Eandwick, where you
overheard a conversation?—Yes.
What date was that?—lsth August of this year.
Who asked you to go?—Mr. Barton. He is an
accountant in 'Sydney, and constituted one member of
the Board under the War Precautions Act established
in January, 1917, of which I was the late secretary.
He, with Colonel Ling, constituted this Board. Our
investigations covered a period, I think, until about
July or August of that year, when the Royal Commis-
sion on IST aval and Defence Administration was ap-
pointed. It was ascertained that our work was more
or less overlapping, and I think I was handed over—l
was not consulted in the matter.
Did Mr. Barton suggest you should go to Eandwick?
Yes. On 15th August. Mr. Barton the previous
evening said, “ I have seen the Chairman of the Royal
Commission and you won’t be wanted to-morrow, and
there is something I want you to do.” The next morn-
ing he said, “ Something else has turned up. I want
you to go to Eandwick. The manager is expecting a
visit from Senator Long to-day, and he is rather
anxious to get a record of the conversation. Will you
go out ? ’ I said, “ Yes.” I took a taxi and got out
there and saw Mr. Cornwell, the manager. He said,
. expecting a call from Senator Long this morn-
.iiig, and I want you to take a record of the conversa-
tion. I said, “How am Ito do that?” He said,
Come here and I will explain. You are to take up
your position in this room, and if you apply this re-
ceiver to your ear (these telephones are interconnected
by some means, I did not understand how), you will,
I presumje, be able to hear the conversation.” I
said, “ I do not quite like the job, if you want a strictly
100 per cent, record of the conversation. In the first
place I will only have one hand to write with and the
other on the receiver. How am Ito turn over?” He
said, “ Do the best you can.”
Was there a partition in the room ?—Yes. I had
seen Mr. Cornwell’s room previously. I should sav the
two rooms are something about the same length as this
room—2o to 25 feet each—and they are divided by
means of folding doors. Prom my position I should
say 1 was about eight or nine yards away.
Did you see Senator Long there that day?—l saw
Senator Long on his return. In fact I returned in
the same tram.
You know Senator Long ?—Yes, I had already taken
his evidence.
And you know his voice? —Yes.
efficiency!* 18 instruineilt working?—As regards
, Y f'~ Ver J intermittently. I had to make breaks,
but I did as well as I could.
Were you able to take everything that was said?—
JNo.
You have got your shorthand notes there, and you
nave transcribed them exactly? Yes.
You can produce your shorthand notes if they are
wanted ?—Yes. J
Is that the transcript of your shorthand notes It
may be important for somebody to examine it I see
Senator Long is here, and I thought he ought to be here
while the evidence is given, and I think he ought to be
entitled, if he wishes, to not only examine Mr. Price
but any other witness if be likes. . He is as vitally in-
terested in this as Mr. Jensen.
The Chairman. If you wish to examine the witness,
senator Long, you may do so.
Witness. —This is my own typing.
By Mr. Starke— Give me the original, and I will
read it, so that Senator Long can hear it. I suppose
wherever “ C.” appears it means Mr. Cornwell was
speaking and wherever “ L.” appears it means Senator
Long ?—Yes.
30


Were you able to take it at the very opening of the
conversation 2 —No; I have a little note here which
would suggest I did not get the first remarks.
The dots represent something missed?—Yes.
Mr. Cussen. —Just follow what Mr. Starke reads,
with your original notes.
Mr. Starke. —I will put in the original notes, and if
Senator Long would like anybody to come up and
transcribe them later, they can be brought in.— [Reads.]
How long did this conversation take—what duration ?
—I suppose I was standing by the best part of an hour,
judging by the notes and the breaks.
That is the only conversation you have ever heard
between Senator Long and Mr. Cornwell?-—Yes.
Gross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —I suppose we may
take it that what you have got down here was said.
There was no question about that 2 —That is what I
heard—what is down there.
There is nothing down here except what you yourself
heard 2—Quite so.
The Chairman (to Senator Long). —lf you would
prefer it, you can leave your questions until to-morrow,
and in the meantime examine this transcript.
Senator Long. —I should be very glad to adopt that
suggestion. The whole thing has been sprung on me,
and I may be very glad to avail myself of the evidence
of Mr. Cornwell and that other evidence wmch is pre-
sented to the Commission.
Mr. Starke. —l think it is a reasonable request for
the Commission to grant.
The Chairman. —Yes; we are only too pleased to
afford you the facility of reading, the evidence, aud if
you wish to be represented by counsel, you may.
EXHIBIT No. 13.—Typewritten transcript of
Mr. Price’s shorthand notes.
EXHIBIT No. 14. —Original shorthand notes.
By Mr. Starke. —You will be here to-morrow, Mr.
Price 2—Yes.
The vntness withdrew.
Joseph Aloysius Lynch, sworn and examined
By Mr. Starke. —What are you 2—A clerk in the
Naval Wireless Department, Randwick f Sydney.
Before you were employed by the Navy Department
at Randwick, what was your position 2—Acting secre-
tary to the Shaw Engineering Company and private
secretary to Father Shaw.
How long had you been with Father Shaw ?—Six
years prior to taking over the works. First of all
I worked in his engineering shop for three years, and
then I went into his office.
Were you in his confidence then 2—ln certain
matters, yes.
Did you know anything of Father Shaw’s financial
position before the sale to the Government?—Yes.
What was it 2—He had an overdraft at the bank,
and he was just struggling along in the manufacture of
shells.
Here is the London Bank passbook of August, 1916.
You had access to his bank accounts, and this is his
passbook ?—Yes.
That shows a debit at that date of £3,000 odd
pounds 2—Yes.
What other debts had he besides the overdraft?—
Sir Rupert Clarke’s amount was £25,000, and he was
to get £25,000 out of the sale of the works; and he
owed another £4,000 to Lane and Peters, who had an
option over the stores at the works, and he carried on
other things independent of the Shaw Wireless Com-
pany.
Had he any other debts at that time that you knew?
—He had other debts in connexion with the Shaw
Engineering Company which were never fixed up.
When the balance-sheet was made out, the works
showed £2OO with six months trading, but those
accounts are still owing.
Prior to the sale of the business to the Government,
do you know whether the business prospects were im-
proving or diminishing ? —When the New South Wales'
Government decided to shut down the shell contract 1
could not see what he was going to do after that.
When was that 2—That was in about April or May,
1916, but we had until the end of June to finish the
contract he had in hand.
The position after April or May appeared to be hope-
less 2—yes; he was anxious to get into negotiations and
sell his works to some Government department after
1913.
Were you in close enough touch with his books to
know the amount he had sunk in this wireless business 2
—I. was only secretary to the business he was carrying
on as the Shaw Enginering Company, and not the Shaw
Wireless. He had an overdraft of £29,000 at the
London Bank in connexion with the Shaw Wireless.
Do you know Senator Long? —Yes.
Was he at the works with Father Shaw before the
sale?—Yes; on several ocasions. I think I can re-
member him when his son first came there in 1912.
Practically, every time he came to Sydney, I think he
came to tbe works.
Did he go to see his son? —He saw Father Shaw at
the same time as he saw his son. He saw his son every
time he was there.
Do you know how often he came' to Sydney?—l
could not say how often; but I know it was on many
occasions.
Can you tell me whether his visits to the works,
shortly prior to the sale to the Government, were more
frequent or less frequent?—More frequent about that
time. Father Shaw saw Senator Long more in Mel-
bourne then.
Did Father Shaw speak to you about selling the
works?—Yes.
When did he first mention it to you?—When I first
knew about it was some time in 1914, in connexion with
selling to the Postal Department, as far as I can re-
member.
Did that come off?—Nothing came of it.
What was the next suggestion you heard? —It was
to be purchased by the Navy Department. That was
early in 1914. I think when Father Shaw offered the
works to the Government; but I cannot say then
whether to the Navy or to the Defence Department.
Did Father Shaw mention Senator Long’s name in
connexion with that transaction in any way ?—Shaw
told me that Long was acting for him on behalf of the
Government, that Long was the man he was getting
into touch with on the Government side.
About when? —In 1914; and then again in 1916.
Both the Postal and Naval Departments. Both
times he mentioned Long’s name? —Yes.
Did Shaw tell you what he was trying to get?—-Yes.
I think the figure he told me was £63,000.
Did he tell you anything of the progress of the
transaction with the Government as it was going along?
—The last time I saw him in Sydney before he came
to Melbourne, on 2nd July, he told me he expected the
works to be sold within a week, and he would not come
back until they were purchased.
Did he say anything else? —He told me that I knew
how he was situated, and he was figuring what he would
get out of the purchase, the value of the works, &c.;
and he figured Whiting and Aitken were to get £25,000;
Lane and Peters, £7,000; Senator Long, £2,000; Mr.
Jensen, £2,000; and Commander Cresswell, £l,OOO. He
figured that out on paper.
Father Shaw told you that? —Yes.
That was shortly before he went to Melbourne to fix
it up 2 —Either that time, or the second last time he
came down. That was in June, I think.
Did he mention any sums beyond those?—l know the
amount he had to pay to Whiting and Aitken for the
hire of the works, Ac.


Did he say what Long, Jensen, and Cresswell were to
get money for?—He did not say, exactly; but it seemed
obvious to me.
What words did he use?—He did not use any words,
practically, against anybody at all. He just wrote
this down on paper as to how he would stand.
After the works were sold, did Father Shaw have any
conversation with you?—No; he never returned to
Sydney. He sent a wire to Mr. Cornwell to tell me
he was returning on Tuesday. I had a conversation
with Senator Long’s son
You remember Father Shaw’s death ?—Yes.
Where were you at the time?—ln Sydney.
And you heard of his death from whom?—From
Mr. Cornwell.
Did you go to Melbourne?—Yes, on Sunday night.
He died on Saturday night, on 27th August.
Where did you go?—To the Coffee Palace where he
was staying; and then down to the hospital, where he
died.
Where was his body ?—I came to bring his body back
to Sydney; but it had returned that morning.
_ Did you search the Coffee Palace?—No. I was
given there £26, a hag, and overcoat.
At the hospital, did you search?—l asked them did
they have any of his property, but they would not
deliver it toi me. The nurse said she did not know me,
and she rang up Whiting and Aitken, and she was told
not to deliver the bags to me. I went back to Sydney
that _ night without them.
Did you get a cheque-book on this Melbourne visit?
—Yes.
Where did you find that?—ln Father Shaw’s over-
coat pocket. I received the overcoat from the Coffee
Palace.
Is that the cheque-book, do you know?—Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 15.—Cheque-book.
Was this deposit-slip in it at the time?—l cannot
remember that.
The first cheque is dated 19th August, 1916. Is that
Father Shaw’s writing?—Yes; but the pencil marks
are not his.
You went back to Sydney?-—Yes.
To whom did you give the goods and documents?—
I them back to the Wireless Works, and put
them in his room; and his sister came for them on the
Monday. She did not take them away. They were
left there, and sent to Pigott and Stinson, his solicitors,
and they gave them to her.
Did you come to Melbourne again?—Yes; on the
Tuesday night, under instructions from the Mission
F athers.
Who were the Mission Fathers?—The Sacred Heart
Mission Fathers. I explained that there Were two
bags at the hospital, and they gave me instructions to
get them. 1 came to Melbourne, and stayed at first
at the Coffee Palace, and went to St. Patrick’s
Monastery, and asked the priest who attended Father
Shaw to come to the hospital with me. I received the
bags, and went back to Sydney on the Thursday night.
What sort of bags were they ?—One was a Gladstone
bag, and the other a little hand-bag—a small suit case.
Did you examine the contents?—No.
Were they heavy?—The Gladstone bag was fairly
heavy.
Who did you hand them to?—I took them over to the
Mission Fathers, and they gave me instructions to hand
them to their solicitor, J. J. Carroll.
What became of those bags ? —I arrived home on
Friday, and on Monday they Were taken to Pigott &
Stinson’s, the solicitors.
After. Father Shaw’s death did you help in any way
in connexion with his accounts ?—Yes.
And did you find out what had become of his money ?
■—Yes.
Did you investigate that matter of £5,300 in the
•heque block?—No.
Did you know of any debt of Father Shaw’s of that
amount, or any amount like that?—Not outside what
he paid away before.
You know what the other cheques were for?—Yes.
And you know they were business transactions ?—Yes.
And there is nothing you can attribute that £5,300
to ?—No.
No business transactions ?—I was speaking to Long’s
son after Father Shaw’s death, and he mentioned to me
that his father saw Father Shaw on the Saturday
morning, the morning the cheque was drawn. That is
all I know.
Did you ever see Mr. Jensen in connexion with this
matter ?—I had never spoken to him in my life.
Did you see Long at all after the sale ?—X saw him
the first time I came to Melbourne. I omitted to say
that. I saw him at Parliament House, and he took me
in there, and I asked him how Father Shaw died.
Give me every conversation you had with Long
since Father Shaw’s death ?—On 28th August, when I
arrived in Melbourne, I saw Long at Parliament House,
and he told me that he had lent Father Shaw money at
certain times, and had never had any receipts for it,
up to £3OO, and he was very sorry over his death.
Before Father Shaw died, on the Wednesday, we heard
the Tuesday night he had taken sick, and Senator Long
came to Melbourne, and that night or next morning
I wired to Senator Long to reply to me whether Father
Shaw was seriously ill or getting better, and I received
not reply to that telegram. Since then I was down in
Melbourne last November, and I was out at Long’s
home, and he was sick in bed, and he just came out
and said a few words'and went back to bed. I might
say his son stayed at my place in Sydney before he was
married.
By the Chairman. —Who was Mr. D’Antoine?—Sec-
retary appointed by Sir Rupert Clarke in place of Harry
Whiting to take over the interest of Sir Rupert Clarke
in the Shaw Wireless Limited.
Was he out at the works very much?—Yes, a great
deal.
Was he a friend of Father Shaw’s ?—Not before that.
Cross-examined hy Mr, Giessen. —How much do you
say Father Shaw’s overdraft was?—ln his private
account, I think, £9,000, and in t£e Wireless, £25’,000.
His own overdraft was £9,000 ?—Yes, about that.
Is it still owing?—No, it was paid up on £1*7,000
being transferred, leaving a balance of £6,000, which
is still in the Bank.
You say on one occasion Father Shaw mentioned
Mr. Jensen’s name to you ?—Yes.
And you wrote down?—l did not Write down. He
was writing down.
What was he doing?—He was making a calculation
of how he would stand on the sale of the works
Was it ever kept?—No. He threw it into the waste
paper 1 basket.
You remember that?—Yes.
Was it only on one occasion this happened that he
spoke about Mr. Jensen ?—That is all I can remember.
Have you been talking to Mr. Cornwell since this
Commission sat. How much you knew and how' much
he knew ?—No. The only time I spoke to Mr. Cornwell
on this matter was when he told me the Commission
wanted me, and to answer all questions I was asked.
Do you know a man named Carroll ?—Yes.
What is he ?—A business man in Melbourne.
Whereabouts ?—I do not know.
How did you know him ?—When Father Shaw died I
received a letter from a man named Carroll sending hia
sympathy with me. That is the first I heard of the
man.
Did you see him ?—I saw him when I came down to
Melbourne last year.
Where did you see him ?—I think he took me to have
a cup of tea. I saw him at the Collins House steps, and
I was speaking to him for half-an-hour.
Did you meet him by accident ?—No, by appoint-
ment. > J vr


How did you come to make the appointment ? —I did
not know who he was.
You saw him after he had written sympathizing with
you ?—Yes. I did not know who be was.
The position is; when Father Shaw died, a man you
never knew before named Carroll sent a letter to you
sympathizing with you ?—Yes, and asked me could I
send some little memento belonging to Father Shaw,
which I did.
Then you heard no more about him?—Yes, I did.
Did you become friendly with him ?—-No. My mother
and sister came down to Melbourne, and I asked them
they call on this Mr. Carroll, and they did so.
That is all I know of them.
When did you first see him ? —Last year, in Mel-
bourne.
That was the interview you spoke about?—l think
he came out to the works at the Wireless. I do not
know whether it was after I saw him, but I just said
“ Good-day ”to him there. It must have been after-
wards, because I did not know him until I met him
at Collins House.
You met him at Collins House by appointment?—
Yes, I rang him up.
Where is he now ? —I do not know.
Where did you get his ’phone number from ?—Out of
the telephone book.
What was his number then ? —lf you show me the
telephone book I will tell you.
What suburb ?—Ascot Yale, as far as I can remem-
ber. I did not go to his house, but met him in the
city.
For what purpose?—Just to know who he was. I
had never met the man before.
How many times have you seen him since?—Once,
at the Wireless Works, Randwick.
Never again?—No.
You will swear that?—Yes.
Have you had no talk with Carroll about the -Shaw
Wireless and the sale of it to the Government ?—Not
that I remember.
And how Mr. Jensen, the Minister, got £2,ooo?—No,
not that I remember. ’
That is the furthest you will go?—Yes, as far as I
know.
What do you mean ?—I mean I have never spoken
to Mr. Carroll on this matter.
H you did, would you know about it ?—I should
think so.
What do you mean by that; you know perfectly well
you did?—No, I did not.
What did you meet him for?—l met him just be-
cause he wrote me that letter and asked me to send a
memento, and I wanted to know who he was as a friend.
And then you told your mother and sister to call on
him?—Yes, I did. .
Did Carroll ever say anything to you about Mr.
Jensen getting £2,000 ?—No.
But you do not remember whether you did to'him?
—I did not. I said before I did not. '
You said you did not; as far as you knew you did
not. Now you positively say you did not?—l do not
remember.
You do not remember whether you did or did not.
Did you regard this statement of Father Shaw’s that
Mr. Jensen was to get £2,000, Mr. Long £2,000, and
Commander Cresswell £l,OO0 —did you know Com-
mander Cresswell then?—No. I did not know him at
the time.
Did you know who he was?—No.
Did you understand what the money was being given
to these people for?—l took it for granted for buying
the works.
You knew that Mr. Jensen was the Minister for the
Navy?—Yes.
F. 13033.—3
When did you first mention to anybody you were
aware that the Minister for the Navy had' been given
£2,000 for buying the works? —To the Commission
You never said a word about it to anybody else?—
I do not know whether Mr. Barton, in Sydney, is re-
cognised as being part of the Commission. I spoke to
him first about it.
When did you speak to him about it ? —August of this
year.
How did it come about that you then remembered
this, and told it to Mr. Barton. You knew it was a
very improper thing for the Minister to take £2,000 in
buying a thing.for his Government?—l did not think
it would be right.
Did not you know it was a very improper thing?—
In my opinion, it was.
And you always thought that?—l did.
Did you make any endeavour to find out who Com-
mander Cresswell was?—l did not know until he came
to the works, and I did not know whether he knew he
was going to receive this money.
The first time you mentioned the matter was when
you spoke to Mr. Barton in August of this year?—As
far as 1 can remember.
Or to anybody?—Yes.
You never talked it over with Mr. Cornwell ?—No.
You never talked it over with Carroll ? —No, it was
just by chance I ever knew the man.
_ On the Bth June you wrote to Mr. Jensen for a posi-
tion?—Yes, which Father Shaw promised me he had
fixed up.
And you got no satisfaction from Mr. Jensen?—Not
from the first letter.
Nor did you get any satisfaction from the second
letter?—Just that he knew nothing about it.
He says, “I have-to inform you that from memory
no such arrangements as you indicate were made ” ?
I would like to see that.
Did you receive that letter in reply to yours?—Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 16. —Application to Mr. Jen-
sen for position and reply.
Of course, you thought from that that Mr. Jensen
was not playing fair with you?—l did nothing of the
sort. I thought it was a matter which Father Shaw
had arranged. '
How is it that you did not at any time, from 1916
up to June, 1918, arrange about your position?—For
the simple reason, when I was first taken over by the
Navy Department I wrote an application for a per-
manent appointment, and they told me there were no
permanent appointments while the- war was on. I
applied to the secretary, and showed him the telegram
I had received from Father Shaw, and he advised me
to write to Mr. Jensen, as he .knew nothing about it.
That is before I put in my second application to the
Navy Department.
Did you read that article in the Sun about these
works being purchased?—l think I did at the time.
But still you said nothing about that the Minister
was getting £2,00(1 for doing it? —It had nothing to
do with me at the time. lam only answering questions
that I am asked.
The witness withdrew.
Edward Beeby, sworn and examined. .
By Mr. Starke. —What is your position?—l am at-
tached to the Navy Office just now. Formerly I was
managing clerk to Messrs. Piggott and Stinson, soli-
citors, in the Common Law Branch.
That firm acted in Father Shaw’s estate? —Yes. I
was in pretty well complete control of the matter out-
side the first preliminary conference. Mrs. Munday,
sister to Father Shaw, applied for letters of administra-
tion.
That cheque-book I put in evidence, I understand,
comes from the office of Piggott and Stinson.
You produce also his book and also his papers?—
Yes.


■ And that bank-book ? —Yes.
Uo you know of any other documents or books? —
I saw this bundle on bis table, and I think there were
a couple of trade books connected with the business.
Otherwise those were the only papers you received?
—Yes.
I presume you had to investigate Father Shaw’s
affairs after his dealth to some extent ? —Yes.
You endeavoured to see where that £55,01)0 went to?
Yes.
Was there any part of it you were unable to trace?—
Yes, one sum of £5,300, which we could not trace at
any time. It never came into the assets of the estate
at all. We wrote to the London Bank of Australia,
and we ascertained that the cheque had been drawn
by Father Shaw himself in cash, and, apart from that,
we could not trace it at all. We had no idea where it
went to.
And Mrs. Munday could not assist, either? —No.
EXHIBIT No. 17. —Documents produced by
witness.
The' witness withdrew.
A t ten minutes past Four p.m. the Commission ad-
journed till half-past Ten a.m. next day, Thursday,
LAth November, 1918.
(At the Court of Marine Inquiry.)
THURSDAY, 14th NOVEMBER, 1918,
AT 10.30 A.M.
Thibd Day’s Sittings.
Before the Commissioners:
W. G. MoBbath, Esq. (Chairman).
F. A. Vbrco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Tayloe.
Mr. Starke. —Senator Long communicated with me
this morning to say the House had been sitting all
night, and might he come at 2 o’clock. He also wanted
the original shorthand writer’s notes of that interview
in Sydney, but in reply to that I said I thought they
could not be allowed out of the possession of the Com-
mission, and he would have to send some one up here
to examine them.
Frank Gillespie Cresswell, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —1 understand you wish to make a
statement?—Yes. I wish to make a statement in re-
ference to a conversation I had with Mr. Jensen in his
office. A question was raised as to whether Mr. Jensen
used the word ‘ ‘ inconsistent ’ ’ in that conversation. In
trying to recall this conversation with Mr. Jensen, I
discussed it with' Mr. Thomas (my chief clerk) this
morning, and he told me that he remembers well what
I told him when I returned from Mr. Jensen, and in
justice to Mr. Jensen I think it is only right and pro-
per I should make this statement, that Mr. Jensen
said that my recommendation that £40,000 should be
offered was inconsistent with my concurrence in Mr.
Ross’s valuation, and that he was unable to place the
matter before the Government in that form. That is
the statement I wish to make.
I also wish to make an explanation in regard to the
word ‘ ‘ depreciation ’ ’ which is referred to in my esti-
mated output of the work. The word “ depreciation ”
there means also renewals and repairs.
By the Chairman. —I think the Commission under-
stands that. I understand now that in this interview
you had with Mr. Jensen, at his office, that the words
used by Mr. Jensen were that your report was in-
consistent owing to the fact that you had concurred
in Mr. Ross’s valuation?—Yes; that is so.
Is that all that transpired?—No. - I remember Mr.
Jensen distinctly telling me that all he wanted to know
from me was whether Shaw’s offer for £70,000 was
reasonable. Mr. Thomas remembers the conversation
well.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen.—When Mr. Jensen
drew your attention to the inconsistency, as you have
told us, he stated he was unable to lay the matter be-
fore the Government in that form?—Yes.
Did he not say then that either your valuation was
too high, or your recommendation too low?—No.
You see he points out the inconsistency
The Chairman. —I do not think you need pursue
that point, Mr. Cussen, we quite follow it.
Mr. Cussen. —I desire to put before the Commission
in connexion with Mr. Jensen’s evidence, Commander
Cresswell’s report on the first year of the wireless
business. This is the original report. (To witness).
—That is so; that is your annual report for the first
year of the wireless?—Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 18. —Commander Cresswell’s
report on the wireless business.
You see at page 15 you state the ships that have
been fitted up, and the work that has been done? —
Yes.
It shows that there were a considerable numoer of
ships fitted up with wireless apparatus?—Yes.
And other ships refitted?—Yes; on page 15.
And that a considerable number of shore works
were fitted with wireless?—Yes.
As a matter of fact, does the report show the work
done for other Departments outside the Navy Depart-
ment? —It is all shown in the balance-sheet.
The witness withdrew.
Percy William Strong, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you?—Manager at the
head office of the London Bank, Collins-street, Mel-
bourne.
Do you produce a copy from your ledger of Father
Shaw’s account there? —Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 19.—Copy, Father Shaw’s
account at London Bank.
That shows the £55,000 was paid in on the date
mentioned, and what has been drawn out against that
amount?—Yes.
Is the account closed now? —Yes.
Did you have any conversation with Father Shaw?
—Only on one occasion when he opened the account,
a temporary account. I think he was a customer of
our Haymarket Branch, Sydney.
What conversation did you have ?—He came into ,
the office in connexion with this £55,000 deposit, and
wished to draw certain cheques against it. .1 con-
gratulated him on the deal. He said he had to share
it with others beside himself, that, he did not get it
all.
Did he make any remark about that £5,300 cheque ?
—No.
That is all he said? —Yes.
That is all the conversation you ever had with him?
—Yes'.
At any time? —Yes.
Mr. Cussen. —I do not desire to ask any questions.
The witness withdrew.
George Lionel Macandie, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are the secretary of the Naval
Board ?—-Yes.
How long have you been in that position?—Since
May, 1914.
When did the matter of the purchase of the Shaw
Wireless first come under your attention?—May, 1916.


In what way did it come before you? —There was a
letter addressed by Father Shaw to the Minister. That
is the letter dated 18th May, 1916.
This letter offering the place at £57,000 ?—Yes.
Just state how it came under your attention ? —lt
was referred to me by the Minister to be dealt with
in the ordinary departmental way. I sent it on to the
First Naval Member, Admiral Creswell, controlling
wireless, and he simply noted the letter. I sent a copy
on to the engineer for Radio Telegraphy (Commander
Cresswell) on the 22nd. Then on the 29th May the
Minister instructed me to arrange for the valuation of
this property.
There is a telegram dated 25th May from the Minis-
ter to Shaw?—Yes.
Did you see that?—Yes; I saw that wire.
Did vou draft it and send it, or did you see it at the
time it was sent? —Yes. I think it is the Minister’s
own draft.
Was it before the Naval Board at all?—This wire?
Yes?—No.
Who was the direction from—was it the Minister’s
own act in directing it to be sent ?—Yes.
There is an answer to it on 25th May, “ Yes, my
letter includes land, buildings, and everything on the
place,’ &c. That is addressed to Mr. Jensen per-
sonally ?—Yes.
Was that (No. 46 on file) handed by him to you ?
It was noted by the Minister on the 25th, and it would
be handed to me.
Was that placed before the Naval Board in any way ?
—Not as a Naval Board, no.
negotiations then proceed under the control of
the Naval Board, or simply through the Minister
directly ? —Through the Minister directly.
I need not read all these letters to- you. As to the
valuation from the Home Affairs Department, was that
a personal direction from the Minister to you ?—Yes.
And you conveyed it to the Home Affairs Depart-
ment?—Yes.
It was all done directly by the Minister ?—Yes.
There is a report of Admiral Clarkson’s on the
matter, dated 27th June (No. 31 on file) ?—Yes.
You notice, apparently, a report from the director
of wireless had been obtained?—Yes.
And then it is referred to the Third Naval Member
for his information ?—Yes.
That was Admiral Clarkson ?—Yes.
And he makes a report?—Yes.
I presume that report would come back and through
you to the Minister?—l think so, yes.
But there is no doubt the Minister had that report?
—No doubt.
He saw that report, and it was brought under his
notice *—Certainly.
From that time onwards do you know whether the
Naval Board was in any way consulted by the Minis-
ter, or whether the progress of these negotiations were
brought before them?—The Naval Board were not con
suited. You will note on the Ist June, I made a note
oU this paper that I brought these papers under the
notice of the Naval Board.
What document is that? —It is a document of the
Navy, No 167482. I said, “ First, Second, and Third
Naval Members; these papers were marked to members
on 28th August, 1916, and were then at Minister’s
direction sent tci Mr. Hughes. They were not returned
to this Department until 10th March, 1917.”
How long were they with the Naval Board? —Their
minutes are dated 6th, Bth, and 11th June, 1917. The
papers were out of the office for quite a long time.
On the 28th August, 1916, you minuted the docu-
ment, “ For the information of Board members,” on
documents 16693, 16692, and 16695 ?—Yes.
That is, the documents in this bundle that is sewn
up?—Yes.
And as you say, the Third Naval Member (Admiral
Clarkson) initialled it on the 29th August, 1916, when
he had seen it?—Yes.
But the Second and First Naval Members had not
time to see them before the Prime Minister required
them I —That is so.
And they were sent to him and not returned until
10th March, 1917 ? —Yes.
Of course, the 28th August, 1916, was after the pur-
chase had been completed ?—Yes, I think so.
And that is all the Board ever knew at that time ?
—Yes.
I want you now to come to document No. 17 in that
file—‘‘Acting Engineer of Radio Telegraphy.” Would
that be sent through you, or was it probable it would
have been sent by you to the acting engineer?—Pro-
bably it- would have been sent by me to the acting en-
gineer.
By whose direction was it sent? —By the direction
of Mr Jensen, and it is in his own handwriting.
Did you have any conversation about it, or were you
simply directed to send it, and did send it?—l was
directed to send it, and I did send it.
Will you go to document No. 49, dated 24th July,
1916. That is a letter from you to the Crown Solicitor?
—Yes. _ '
[Reading] —Where did you get those instructions
from ?—1 did not sign that letter.
Who signed it? —It has been signed by my chief
clerk. Those are his initials. It was signed for me.
You do not know where you got those instructions? —
I might explain that that letter was simply passed on
and minuted by the Director of Wireless Telegraphy,
on the 19th.
That is document No. 30? —It does not bear any
number.
It was not the Minister’s act, but simply the Director
of Wireless Telegraphy made that statement, and it was
communicated by you to the Crown Solicitor? —Yes.
If you go to document No. 28, dated 11th August,
1916 —it is a letter from you to the Crown Solicitor —
you will notice that the second clause says, “ It is re-
quested that the transaction may be completed at the
earliest possible moment ” ? —Yes.
By whose direction was that instruction given to the
Crown Solicitor? —By the direction of the Minister.
Personally?—From him to me, personally.
Do you remember any conversation ?—No. I do not
remember any particular conversation.
It was a personal direction?—Yes.
You remember the Order in Council, dated 16th
August, 1916, document No. 34, an authority being
asked for in regard to the purchase?—Yes.
Who prepared that recommendation ?—r-That would be
prepared in the Navy Department.
Would it come under part of your duties to prepare
it? —Yes, the duties of my staff. The draft would be
drawn up by the Crown Solicitor’s Office, and we would
simply get it in the usual way, and copy it.
Was that ever brought before the Naval Board?—
No.
They were not consulted about that recommendation ?
—No.
Then I notice the document No. 38, dated 22nd
August, that the Crown Solicitor had managed to get
the business through between the 11th and the 28th,
and apparently you thanked him for the expeditious
way in which the business.had been carried through?
•—Yes.
I presume that was a courtesy of your own ?—I have
no recollection of any instruction from the Minister to
add that to the letter.
Do you know Senator Long?—Yes.
During this time, from Shaw’s letter offering at
£57,000, to 15th May, 1916, can you, from your own
personal memory, say whether- Senator Long was at the
Navy Department, or anywhere else, consulting Mr.
Jensen, the Minister? —No. I do not know of his
consulting the Minister at all in this matter. I have
one recollection of Senator Long coming to the Navy
3s


Office; but I cannot place the date. So far as I know,
he did not come to see the Minister on this matter.
Why I recollect it was this: that I was in the Minister’s
room, and Senator Long was waiting outside, and a
messenger came in to report that Senator Long was
there, and Mr. Jensen remarked that Senator Long was
in ill-health. That is what fixes it in my mind.
I presume you personally knew nothing of this
£5,300, drawn by Shaw out of the bank account, or
what became of it?—Nothing.
You know the witness Lynch ? —Yes.
He made an application to be put on the permanent
list ?—Yes.
It is suggested there is something sinister in that ap-
plication. What are the facts about it?—Something
sinister in the application?
So I understood. I do not know what Mr. Cussen
means. What is Lynch’s repute in the Department?—
Of good repute.
What has he applied for—is he a temporary man? —
Yes. I think he has applied for a permanent appoint-
ment.
And who has recommended him, if anybody?—l
could not say. Ido not remember his application.
Why has he not been put on the permanent list?—
Government policy.
There is nothing against him in the Department
whatever ?—No.
_ And he has done nothing wrong in making applica-
tion to go on the permanent staff?—No.
Cross-examined by Mr, Cussen. —The Minister in the
past has exercised a very wide control over Navy mat-
ters and over the Navy Board, has he not?—Yes.
And in connexion with many matters he has carried
them through himself without consulting the Navy
Board. I do not refer to Mr. Jensen in particular,
but that has been the practice of Ministers generally,
has it not?—Except matters of routine and pure Navy
matters, Ministers usually consult the Navy Board.
What I suggest is, excepting in pure Navy matters
and matters of Naval detail, have not Ministers in the
past acted independently of the Naval Board?—They
have.
In many cases, such as matters of policy—for in-
stance, whether it is a good thing to buy wireless works
—a Minister has exercised his own judgment about it?
—Yes.
On such matters as that?—Yes.
And there was nothing out of the ordinary in Mr.
Jensen and the Cabinet deciding the question of this
purchase without consulting the Naval Board?—ln my
opinion, no.
And this wire which was sent to Father Shaw asking
about his title and the details of his offer—there was
nothing out of the ordinary in that not being submitted
to the Naval Board?—l do not think so.
Mr. Jensen suggests that the Third Naval Board
Member, or that you told him that the Third Naval
Board Member, had suggested that such an inquiry
should be made?—No.
Did you suggest *to the Minister, either off your own
bat or through the Third Naval Member, that you were
doubtful whether Father Shaw owned the property?—
No. I had no discussion with the Third Naval Member.
Did you suggest it to the Minister yourself ?—No.
Do you know that after the transaction was com-
pleted, and the matter went to the Crown Solicitor’s
Office, that Father Shaw was repeatedly at the Navy
Office urging that he may get his money ?—He was
on three or four occasions.
And then the Crown Solicitor was directed to
exercise expedition I —Yes.
That was the Minister’s suggestion as you have told
us ? —Yes.
Is it an extraordinary thing for the Navy Office to
exercise expedition?—l should say not.
It is suggested, to me that Senator Long’s visit was
in connexion with an application by his son to be put
on to submarine building work. Was there an appli*
cation from his son to that effect?—There was an
application from his son to be sent abroad for instruc-
tion in submarine work.
Was that about the time of Senator Long’s visit?—
I could not be certain about that.
lie-examined by Mr. Starke. —Have you got a con-
venient document showing the functions and appoint-
ment of the Naval Board ?—Yes. I have it here now.
By Mr. Cussen. —What is the statutory rule about
it ? —This is the Statutory Rule, No. 32.
EXHIBIT No. 20.—Statutory Rule as to
appointment of Navy Board, &c.
The witness withdrew.
William Rooke Creswell, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What is your position in the Navy
Department ?—Rear-Admiral and First Naval Member.
In connexion with the purchase of this Shaw wireless
plant—in your opinion, was it within the functions of
the Naval Board that it should be consulted and, should
consider this purchase before it was made? Yes,
certainly.
Did the Minister ever consult the Board or ask for
its advice?—No; not to my knowledge.
Have you seen the papers at all?-—Yes, I saw the
papers. I would not be sure as to the date; but it
was after the matter was concluded.
I do not know if you have given personal considera-
tion to the propriety of the purchase since that date
at all ? —No. I cannot say that I have given much
attention to it. The matter was closed.
It has been suggested by the Secretary, Mr. Macandie,
that it was the custom of all Ministers, apparently, to
enter into contract and deal with large matters affecting
Naval administration without consulting the Naval
Board. Is that your opinion ?—I am not in agreement
with that statement.
And that matter, also, of not consulting the Naval
Board, has that been illustrated by this Shaw wireless
purchase, or are there other illustrations of it ?—I would
not be justified in saying there have been no cases
when the Navy Board has not been consulted, but, as
a matter of principle, the Naval Board has been con-
sulted.
In this case you neither had the confidence of the
Minister nor did he seek advice?—ln this particular
case, no.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —The Naval Board,
as I am instructed, came into existence as the result of .
some recommendations by an English admiral ?—Yes;
Admiral Henderson.
And he suggested the functions which should be
exercised by the Naval Board and the Minister. Is
not. that so? —He suggested the functions of the Naval
Board, yes._
And do you agree with this statement, “ The system
must admit of a complete parliamentary control and
responsibility, but, so far as possible, such control
should in practice be restricted to matters of policy
and finance,” &c. Do you agree with that?—Yes.
This purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works involved
a very important matter of Government policy, did it
not?—l do not know that there was any Government
policy in it. I did not look at it in that light. I
regarded it as a Naval matter affecting the Naval
service.
You knew the pur chase, of the works was practically
for the purpose of a Government workshop?—Yes.
A huge industrial concern in which the Government
were going to take part?—No; I did not understand
that.
Well, assume that it were so—it was the purchase of
a workshop to be used for supplying the requirements
in wireless apparatus rendered necessary by the war.


and supplying other Departments with electrical
machinery and other ■ apparatus. You know that that
is what it was for?—l know it was purchased for the
nature you describe.
In order to supply the Navy with wireless apparatus?
—I may say it may have been so- or it may not have
been so. It may have been a matter of policy or may
not have been a. matter of policy.
Whether or not the Government would enter into a
large industrial undertaking in order to* supply the re-
quirements of the Navy and its own Departments is
purely a matter of governmental policy. Will you
not admit that ?-—I have never regarded the matter
from the stand-point apart from the Naval Board.
You will not concede that one could reasonably re-
gard it from any other stand-point?—We were never
consulted.
lam putting it to you now. Will you concede it
could be regarded as purely a matter of governmental
policy to* purchase such works?—l can certainly regard
the Government- purchasing anything.
Including this?—Yes. I can understand the Govern-
ment purchasing anything.
Supposing the Navy Board had this matter put
before them. It would have considered, first of all, the
necessity of having works to supply their wireless ap-
paratus?—lf the Navy Board had the matter before
them they would have consulted any other Board.
As a Navy matter, they would have considered it
primarily in connexion with supplying Navy appara-
tus ?—-Yes.
Do you think it was any part of the function of the
Navy Board to consider the advisability of the Govern-
ment acquiring works for supplying Departments other
than the Navy?—‘Certainly.
You do? —Yes.
‘Purely?—l think if it came up before the Navy
Board.
Never mind that. lam putting to you this position,
whether you thought it was part of the function of the
Navy Board to consider the advisability of the Govern-
ment of acquiring works for supplying Departments
other than the Navy?—That has nothing to do with
me. Acquiring the works for the supply of other than
the Navy has nothing to do with me.
The Minister, of course, can veto anything done by
the Naval Board?—Yes.
That has been the system in practice since the con-
stitution of the Board?—Yes. I do not admit it has
been the practice of the Minister to veto. The Minis-
ter has had control always.
When I say the practice of veto, I am not referring
to the practice of exercising the right of veto? —Yes.
He has always had that right.
And has he on occasions vetoed the recommendations
of the Naval Board?—'They have been. In one special
instance
Never mind the instances. The Minister is presi-
dent of Naval Board, is he not?—Yes, he is presi-
dent.
Re-examined hy Mr. Starke. —There are two docu-
ments I ought to have called your attention to. This
file has the covering page torn off, but there is a note
of yours here of the 6th June, 1917: “On the 23rd
May, 1916, I recommended that these proposals should
be dealt with by the full Board. Subsequent proposals
did not include Board’s consideration ” ?—I cannot re-
call that.
Apparently, on the 23rd May, 1916, you had recom-
mended that the proposals should go to the full Board?
—-Yes, I will stand to what is there.
There is no doubt of that fact, that on the 23rd May,
1916, you had recommended that, and your recommen-
dation was not accepted?—Yes.
By Mr. Cussen. —Have you the document recom-
mending it?
Mr. Starke. —l should say that is probably on the
sheet torn off.
Mr. Cussen. —I won’t admit that probability at
all. I do not admit the minute of 6th June, 1917, as
evidence of something occurring in 1916.
By Mr. Starke. —You pledge your oath to that
minute of 23rd May, 1916, that you recommended the
proposals should be dealt with by the full Board? —
I will certainly stand by anything I have written.
Further cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —In regard
to the recommendation that the matter should be' dealt
with by the full Board. Was that in writing?—l re-
commended it. It was either in writing, or otherwise,
that is my statement.
Here is the document that is referred to. Did you
recommend, in writing, that it should be dealt with by
the full Naval Board? —I would not be sure whether
I did or did not. I could not swear at this moment,
but I think the particulars are all in the file.
Mr. Starke. —Here is the document; I have just
found it: “ Recommend the particulars be considered
by full Board.” It is in writing.
By Mr. Cussen.- —Dated 23rd May, 1916. Did that
ever go to the Minister? —After writing my minute, it
goes out of my hand, and goes through Die usual course.
Whether it goes to the Minister or not I could not say.
The usual course, if it is sent on to the Minister, is
for him to initial it, to show , that he has seen it. Is
that so ?—Yes, or minute it.
Either initial or minute it?—Yes.
Do you see anything there to indicate that the Min-
ister saw it or minuted it, or initialed it? —I see it is
part of the outside of the docket.
Yes, but do you see anything on it indicating that
the Minister minuted it or initialed it, or saw it. You
say the usual course is for him to minute it or initial
it?—lt has the initials of the other members.
Yes, but what about the Minister?—l do not see his
initials there.
The witness withdrew.
William Clarkson, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you?—Third Naval
Member of the Naval Board.
1 understand that your training has been -on the
engineering side of the Naval Branch?—Yes.
Do you remember on the 23rd June, 1916, the Min-
ister referring Commander Cresswell’s report to you
for your opinion? —Yes.
And you wrote a minute on it, and that is the
minute ?—Yes.
And your minute was distinctly unfavorable to the
purchase of the works? —Yes,
This was Mr. Creswell’s report, dated'23rd June,
1916, and your report on it—[reads].
Since that date (27th June,-1916), were you ever
consulted on the matter of purchase at all? —No, I
do not think I was. I finished with it.
And the Minister did not ask your advice, nor bring
it before the Board in any way?—The only occasion
1 can remember the Shaw Wireless being referred to
was once, when I called attention to the fact when we
were buying this from Bather Shaw, that inquiry
should be made to know whether Father Sh&w really
owned the thing or not. That is the only occasion I
can remember. ■
Have your duties taken you apart from wireless
necessities of the Government since the war broke out,
or have you been in touch with the Wireless Depart-
ment ?—I have not been in close touch with the Wire-
less Department. I have been fully occupied with
other work.
You know of no subsequent facts tliat nave come to
your knowledge that would induce you to alter that
opinion ?—No.


Mr. Cussen. — Or to differ from it? — l adhere to the
opinion.
By Mr. Starke. — But you have not been in close
touch with the matter ?—No.
May I ask, in your opinion, was this purchase of
the Shaw Wireless Works a function upon which the
Naval Board should have been consulted?—Certainly.
Then you agree with the Eirst Naval Member’s
opinion that the Board should have been consulted?—
Yes.
was not consulted ?—That is so.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —Do'you remember
when a letter came from Father Shaw making the
offer, having a conversation with Mr. Jensen?—l had a
conversation with Mr. Jensen; but I cannot remember
when it was.
Was it about the purchase of these works?—l had
no conversation with him before this was referred to me
for my report. lam perfectly certain about that.
Did he refer the letter from Father Shaw to you,
offering the whole of the works, as soon as he got it?
—I have no recollection of it.
There is a minute on it which shows you saw it? —
That is quite likely; but please remember you are
speaking of two years ago.
As a member of the Naval Board, you are at liberty
to refer any matters to it?—Yes.
When you say this is a matter that should have been
referred to the Naval Board, vvhy did not you do it.
You say it was the function of the Naval Board to be
consulted?—That was for the Minister.
Why did not you refer the matter to the Nava]
Board to be considered at its next meeting?—l do
not know why. I was asked to give my report to the
Minister, and I gave him my report.
But you have said very definitely that the matter
should have been referred to the Naval Board?—Before
the purchase, yes.
And you knew that negotiations were going on in
connexion with the purchase, did you not?—Yes.
You recommended that inquiry should be. made as
to Father Shaw’s, title before it was concluded?—Yes.
You had ample opportunity of referring it to the
Naval Board?—Yes.
Then why did not you do it ?—I could not say why
I did not.
Was-it because you thought it was a matter which
the Minister ought to assume responsibility of, and take
control?—l cannot say. Ido not know that I have
any thought on the matter.
You were asked for your opinion, and you have given
it fully in your report?—Yes.
Did the Minister ever attempt to get you to alter
your opinion ?—No.
You stuck to your opinion, and the Minister -did
not agree with you, and did not follow it. That is
what it comes to?—Yes.
You did not see anything wrong about that, did
you?—Not in the least.
Your opinion was largely influenced by what you
considered to be labour difficulties, was it not?—-It
was, to a certain extent. I have mentioned it here.
And the fact which, unfortunately, we know by ex-
perience, that Government Departments were costly
and inefficient?—Yes. The first thing I mentioned
here is the fact it has to be a general utility shop for
all Government Departments, and I thought it could
not be concentrated in one place. That was the large
matter, and the other was subsidiary.
They have been concentrated at one place?—Yes;
they have what effect?
A loss of £1,500 a year?—Yes.
Do you know of any other Government Departments
that you are actually concerned in that carries on at a
loss?—We do not reckon to make any profits in any
Gbvernment Department.
The witness withdrew.
Thomas Brentnall, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a public accountant, and
have practised your profession in the city of Mel-
bourne for many years ?—Yes.
And you have been assisting the Commission in con-
nexion with their inquiries?—Yes.
I understand you have had access to the various
banking accounts? —Yes.
Will you tell me what accounts you had access to?
—Mr. Jensen’s, Commander Cresswell’s
Where are Mr. Jensen’s accounts. Give me all the
Jensen accounts you have seen? —One account is in
the name of Mr. J. A. Jensen, at the National Bank,
in Launceston, Tasmania; one in the name of Mr.
Jensen, in the Bank of New South Wales, in Laun-
ceston.
What are the dates of these? —The one in the Bank
of New South Wales, Launceston, begins in 1912, and
goes on to the present time. Then there is a No. 2
account at the Bank of New South Wales, Launceston,
which begins also in 1912, and is still in existence;
and one in the name of Mr. Jensen, in the Common-
wealth Bank, in Melbourne, which began in 1914, and
is still open; and an account in the name of Mrs.
Jensen, which began in August, 1917, and is ■ still
open —it began earlier than that. There is one on the
National Bank which begins in 1916. Those are all
the Jensen accounts.
You know the Shaw account with the London Bank
in Melbourne? —Yes.
An amount of £55,000 was paid in, and various
amounts paid out? —Yes, I have got those from the
bank’s books.
We have been told there is an amount of £5,300
drawn out of that which cannot be accounted for? —
Yes. It was drawn in fifty-two £lOO notes, and £lOO
in £5 notes, on the 19th August, 1916.
You have made a critical examination of Mr.
Jensen’s accounts for the purpose of seeing whether you
could trace any part of that sum in any of his accounts,
or wife’s accounts? —I have.
And I understand there is no reason to'suggest that
any such payment was put to his account?—No large
amount, and the amounts that have been paid in could
not have any possible connexion with that transaction.
'So far as those accounts are concerned, you are satis-
fied, as a public accountant, there is nothing in his
books which calfs for suspicion at all? —That is so.
We come to the next account—that of Commander
Cresswell ?—Yes. I have seen the whole of his bank ac-
count, and practically that of the whole of the mem-
bers of his family, and there is nothing there to create
any suspicion whatever that he had anything to do with
this transaction. The only amount about which I had
any doubt was one that was quite satisfactorily ex-
plained, and that was, when he .was transferred from the
sea-going service to the home service he was entitled to
draw his deferred pay, and that accounted for a rather
large cheque that was paid into his account, t
By Mr. Starke- —I do not propose to put Mr. Jensen’s
books in evidence unless Mr. Cussen desires it.
'Have you examined Senator Long’s account?—Yes.
Will you tell me where and what dates? —This is a
copy, I understand, of his account with the National
Bank. There is one item there which has challenged
my attention.
EXHIBIT No. 21—Senator Long’s account.
Would you just give me the date of it, what sums
were paid in, and how?—On the 4th September, 1916,
an amount of £2,400 was paid in notes to the credit of
his account.
Do you know what the notes were ?—There is nothing
to indicate that. The bank could give me no informa-
tion "as to whether they were £lOO notes, or what the
denominations were.


You might give me, generally, the working of that
account. Shortly, it opened with an amount of £5OO ?
—Yes, and after that £325, on the next day (in May,
1916), and then the other amounts are comparatively
small, mostly, I should think, his salary cheques and
remuneration cheques from Parliament.
They seem to have been paid in every month nearly?
Yes.
Then, on the 4th September, the first large amount is
this £2,400; and on the sth September he withdrew
£l,OOO, or rather a cheque was drawn for £l,OOO, and
on the 7th a cheque was drawn for £l,OOO? —Yes, and
those cheques I traced as having been paid to A. S.
Balllieu, and the second to E. L. Baillieu for war
bonds.
They are brokers?—Yes. On the 15th August there
was a cheque drawn for £340, which was transferred to
Mr. Long’s savings bank account. Those are practi-
cally the only transactions.
There is nothing in any of the documents you have
seen to explain where that £2,400 came from? —Ho. It
was paid in in notes entirely.
The next one is Senator Gardiner’s account?—Yes. 1
wrote to - an accountant in Sydney, in regard to his
account, -and his reply was, “ There is nothing in his’
account of any interest to us.”
EXHIBIJ' No. 22.-—Senator Gardiner’s account.
With regard to Senator Russell’s account?—He keeps
an account at the Colonial Bank, Haymarket Branch,
and the pay-in slips and entries in his books are really
amounts of his Parliamentary salary.
You have satisfied yourself so far as that account is
concerned that there is nothing to create any suspicion
whatever?—Ho, they are all Parliamentary cheques.
I will take a general statement. Ho far as your in-
vestigations were concerned, are there any other ac-
counts you have investigated that enable you to suggest
any inquiries or any likely destination of that £5,300?
—Ho.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —Your examination
of Mr. Jensen’s accounts showed that in August, 1916,
he had an overdraft of £930? —I have no doubt if that
is in the passbook it is so.
Did not you observe that as you went through—you
have put a red ink figure there? —Yes, the figures are
correct.
In August, 1916, there was an overdraft of £920? —
Yes, that is so.
And his other accounts only carried a very small
credit, something like £l2o?—Yes.
That overdraft ran on until it has just recently been
paid off? —Yes. On the date on which I saw the par-
ticulars in August it was about £260, still in debit.
It has been gradually reduced by payment of Parlia-
mentary salary?—Yes, Mr. Jensen explained that to
me.
The witness withdrew.
George Lionel Maeandie, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —There is a minute of the First
Haval Member recommending that the particulars be
considered by the full Board. These files were all kept
tied together in the Department, were they not? —Yes.
The minute says, “ I recommend it be referred to the
full Board.” Is there in your mind any doubt that the
Minister, having those papers constantly before him,
would see that minute ?—I do not think the Minister
would see that.
The next document is a letter that would be under
cover of that file?—Yes, but those files were strapped
up later.
You do not think he would see it?—l would put it
this way; It ia quite possible he did not see it. There
is nothing to indicate he did see it.
The witness withdrew.
Mr Starke. —Except for the evidence from witnesses
that are coming from Sydney, parliamentary members
—Higgs, Jensen, Long, Russell, and Gardiner, and
another witness from the London Bank, that will he
the whole of the evidence that I have in connexion with _
the Shaw wireless. The parliamentary witnesses can-
not be here until 2 o’clock. Miss Hoad is leaving, I
understand, to-night, and will be here to-morrow. Mr.
Butchart will be there at 2 o'clock. I presume the next
thing I had better go on with will be the Togo and
Emerald matters. lam told it would save time if they
were not gone into
The Chairman. —I do not think time would be saved
by going into them now. They won’t take very long.
Mr. Cussen. —Is there any suggestion against Mr.
Jensen in connexion with the Togo and the Emerald?
Mr. Starke. —Only the usual suggestion that he did
the business, which was a very”bad business for the
Government, off his own hat, and he did not take any
notice of his technical advisers, and he knew nothing
of the subject of buying boats. There is no suggestion
of any corrupt dealing, only that Mr. Jensen absolutely
ignored his responsible technical advisers, and bought
boats which from a commercial investment were quite
useless for naval purposes.
The Chairman— That point in connexion with Mr.
Macandie’s evidence —do we understand that it is likely
or possible that the Minister did not see Admiral Cres-
well’s recommendation that the matter should be re-
ferred to the Haval Board? According to Mr. Macan-
die he says it is possible.
Mr. Starke. —I think, as a matter of fact, it is almost
impossible.
Mr. Cussen. —I think that is a very wrong statement
to make. You know nothing at all about it. It is the
evidence of the witness that must be considered, not
your statement. I sincerely trust the Board will not
be influenced by any such statement.
Mr. Starke. —I can say it in argument.
Mr. Cussen. —Yes, but not in contradiction of a man
on his oath.
The Chairman. —I think you misunderstand me. If
the Minister did not see the recommendation, it has
some bearing, of course.
Mr. Starke. —There is no evidence he saw it except
from the way this file was got up. Here is one little
bundle of papers amongst several. It is minuted on
the outside. Supposing there is a minute here, Re-
ferred to the Third Haval Member,” and that is signed,
and these files are constantly before the Minister deal-
ing with the matter. When you find a heading to a
thing like that, it is impossible that a man turning over
the file, I suggest, should not see it. I think it is very
difficult "to understand how the Minister did not see it.
Mr. Cussen. —Do you think that any tribunal, on the
face of Mr. Macandie’s evidence, would conclude that
Mr. Jensen saw that?
Mr. Starke. —My personal opinion about it is there
is no doubt about it, from the way this file was made up.
Mr. Cussen. —Mr. Maeandie says the file was made
up later on.
Mr. Starke. —That cannot be so. There are the tele-
grams; the bundle starts in a small way, and is gradu-
ally built up, and it is obvious that the bundle existed
from the 15th May, 1916, and, of course, the papers are
brought up to date from time to time, and so the thing
goes right on till August, 1916, and the papers are
gradually being added to, and the covering paper has
this recommendation.
Commissioner Taylor. —Who would put those papers
before the Minister ? ■
Mr. Starke. —Whenever the Minister had_ to deal with
the thing, the papers would be sent in to him.
Commissioner Taylor. —The Minister does not look
through the covering paper without being directed,


Mr. Starke. —lt is" possible, but not probable, he
would not see the covering paper when getting the
bundle twenty or thirty times.
Commissioner Taylor. — lf we could only find out
whether the Minister’s personal direction was drawn
to it, it would settle the matter.
Mr. Starke. — l think Mr. Macandie said it was not.
George Lionel Macandie, recalled.
By the Chairman. —Our experience of Naval Office
filing has been such that we would have considerable
doubt ourselves on the point, because their method of
filing is about the most antiquated thing I have ever
seen, and it is quite likely the covers get lost or mislaid.
The system is such that the Minister might possibly not
be able to keep track of everything that is there. Can
Mr. Macandie tell us, for instance, that when Admiral
Creswell wrote that minute stating the matter should
be considered by the Naval Board, did he bring it under
the Minister’s notice? —No. I have no recollection of
doing so.
Surely it is the secretary’s duty. If the First Naval
Member of the Board makes a minute to that effect
the Minister may at that particular moment be in'
some other part of Australia altogether. He may be
away, and would not see it for the moment, but surely
the Secretary’s duty would be to bring that under his
notice at the first opportunity?—Yes.
But you-do not recollect having done that?—No;
except the Minister had already got the opinion of the
engineer, and probably of the Board on this matter,
and disregarded it.
But Admiral Creswell’s recommendation was prior
to that? —No; subsequent.
He thought it ought to be considered by a full
Board?—Yes.
Do not you think you ought to have brought that
matter under the notice of Mr. Jensen, and had you
done so it would have been discussed by the Naval
Board?
Mr. Starke. —I do not think that is correct. I do
not think Admiral Clarkson’s minute was before that.
Admiral Clarkson’s minute was on the 27th June.
Mr. Cussen. —He discussed it when he received the
letter on the 15th?
Witness. —Yes; you are quite right, Mr. Starke, that
is an error. I see I was under a wrong impression
there. Mr. Jensen referred it to the Third Naval Mem-
ber later.
By the Chmrman. — So that the first decision of
the Board, which came from Admiral Creswell, a
member of the Board, was that it should he considered
by the whole Board, and that was never brought under
the Minister’s notice?—That is not quite correct. The
first minute of Admiral Creswell’s was simply that
he put his initials on the docket when I sent the pro-
position to him. He simply initialed the docket with-
out making any comment.
When was his comment made?—A week later; on
the 30th May.
That was before Admiral Clarkson’s?—Yes; on the
29th Mr. Jensen had instructed me to secure an officer
from_ the Home Affairs to deal with the land and
buildings.
According to your evidence he may not have been
aware of the fact that Sir William Creswell had re-
commended it should be considered by the whole
Board?—-Yes. There is nothing to indicate he was
aware of that, and I have no recollection of bringing
it under his notice.
_ Commissioner Taylor. —lf you had brought it under
his notice it might have brought about a different
result.
By the Chairman.— Was it the practice of the Board
at that time to sit regularly ?—No.
Not even when an important matter was to be dis-
cussed?—There was no fixed day.
No; but did not they meet as a Board? —Yes.
And yet tbey did not meet?—They did not meet on
fixed days and fixed hours.
We are not altogether unfamiliar with Government
methods, but one would have thought that under cir-
cumstances Such as that with such irregularities pre-
vailing, it would be more the duty of the secretary to
bring the minute of the First Naval Member before
the Minister? —The Minister, of course, can say
whether he saw the minute. I have no recollection
of bringing it under his notice, and there is no minute
anywhere to show that he did see it.
By Mr. Citssen. — And in the ordinary course he
would initial it had he seen it?—l would not say in
the ordinary course. There are many papers put be-
fore Ministers that they put no initials on.
By Mr. Starke.— -Am I not right in saying that that
bundle of papers must have been before Mr. Jensen
several times?—l am not clear on that. I think that
these papers were collected and made up later. Mr.
Jensen wrote many of those minutes himself.
That is why I suggest they were put in that bundle,
No. 164162, which was added to from day to-day?—l
do not think it was added to from day to day. The
matter was dealt with quickly, and was personally
handled by the Minister.
Commissioner Taylor. — lt may be that portion of
that file was being dealt with in one portion of the
Department, and another portion was dealt with in
another part.
By Mr. Starke.—Where did you get the documents
if not in file No. 161462, as they are all numbered.
You would have another file, but there is only one file
with that number?—This was a matter in which con-
tinuous action was being taken.
That is why I say you must have stuck them in the'
same file, but still you think there is sufficient doubt
to say the Minister may not have seen that? —Yes.
By Commissioner Taylor. —-It is just possible the
whole of the papers dealing with the matter are not
all in that file now?—Yes; they are all here now.
It is quite possible this paper may have been in a
different part of the building, and the file might have
been split up?—No; I do not think so. The papers
were pretty well kept together and handled by the
secretary.
By Mr. Starke. — l am afraid lam compelled to
ask you this. If the Minister did not see that minute
it was entirely owing to your default as Naval Secre-
tary?—Yes; if you like-to put it that way.
It was your duty to bring it before Mm, and if you
did not it "was an act of neglect on your part ?—I do
not admit any act of neglect on my part.
It is a very important minute?—Yes.
It was intended for the Minister?—There was
nothing to show that.
Who was it intended for ?—What is to indicate it was
intended for the Minister —it is a recommendation.
It might have been intended for me.
That puts it in another position. Then you neglected
to bring the matter before the full Board?—Yes; I
certainly did not bring it before the Board.
Any way you look at it, if the Minister or the full
Board did not see it it was entirely your neglect?—
The Minister is the President of the Board, and he was
handling this matter himself.
Is that sufficient for you to ignore the First Member’s
direction. I put it to you, that you either got a
direction that the Board need not see it, or else you
neglected your duties in not bringing it before the
Board ?—I got no direction.
Therefore you either did not do it owing to neglect
of dutv or because you put your opinion higher than
that of the First Naval Member—which was it ?—That
matter was being dealt with by the President of the
Naval Board.


And the First Naval Member having decided to bring
it before the Full Board, unless the Minister otherwise
directed, that was a direction to you ?—Yes.
If a direction to you, you did not carry it out? —No.
And if it was an intimation to the Minister, you
think it is passible you did not carry it out either ?
That is so.
By Commissioner Taylor. —When these papers were
called for by the Commission, were they all put together
like they are now ? —They were all assembled and the
file had been made up.
The witness withdrew.
James Russell Butchart, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you? —Inspector of the
London Bank, Melbourne.
Did you ever speak to Father Shaw ?—Many times.
For how long did you know him ?—I suppose three
or four years.
When did you first meet him? —I could not say that
from memory.
What year ?—I could not say that either.
Do you remember when he opened a bank account
with the London Bank in Collins-street. ?—No.
Did you ever have a talk to him about the sale of the
Shaw Wireless Works ?—Yes.
And about what he was doing with the money that
he was getting for the Shaw Wireless Works?—Yes.
When was that?—l should say it was a Friday or a
Saturday when the transaction eventuated, but I cannot
place the dates. I was not subpoenaed, so I came at a
moment’s notice, and did not look up any documents.
This is Mr, Strong’s record of the bank account.
That gives you the date? —Yes; August, 1916.
That was the date you had a conversation concerning
this purchase by the Government? —Yes.
And about what he was doing with the money?—
Yes.
Tell me exactly what the conversation was? —L had,
as far as I recollect, written instructions from, I take
it, the Shaw Wireless Company, as to the allocation of
this money. For example, I got the bank cheque from
the Commonwealth Bank for £55,000. I suppose that
would be probably a Navy Department cheque. Having
got that cheque, I made out a bank cheque for £25,000,
which, I think, went to Whiting and Aitken. At any
rate, I got my instructions as to whom it was to go to.
The balance of the money was to be credited to Shaw’s
account, as far as I remember. Apparently the whole
amount has been credited to Shaw’s account, and he
drew a cheque for £25,000, for which I gave a bank
cheque in favour of Whiting and Aitken. There is an
amount here of £5,300 payable to cheque No. 504.
Did he ever tell you what he was doing with that
money ?—What happened was this, assuming the £5,300
cheque is the one he got cashed in our bank
Yes, you can assume that?—He came to my room,
as far as I remember, with that money in his possession,
and he had told me he was leaving for Sydney, I think,
the next day, or possibly the day after, so I said,
' ‘ Surely you are not going to Sydney with all that
money in your possession. Let me give you our bank’s
cheque in exchange for the notes, as that will be much
safer.” He put his hands on my shoulder and said,
“ Mind your own business,” and smiled, and I think
that is where our conversation ended.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission at 12.30 p.m. adjourned till 2
o’clock p.m.
On resuming at 2.10 p.m. ,
Edward John Russell, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke —You are a member of the Senate?
—Yes.
And a member of the Goverment?—Yee.
I want to tell you the present position. Do not mis-
understand me that it is suggested in any way that the
statements are true or false, hut statements have been
made that Father Shaw in his life-time said that out
of the money that he got for the sale of the Shaw Wire-
less Works he had to pay you a certain sum of money.
Evidence has also been given that your banking account
shows that no such sum has ever appeared in that? —
I have two banking accounts —were they hoth investi-
gated ?
Did you give them both to Mr. Brentnall?—No.
What are they ?—I have an account in the Colonial
Bank, Haymarket Branch, and an account at the Com-
monwealth Bank, Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.
If Mr. Brentnall has not seen either of those banking
accounts are you prepared to facilitate his examination
of them?—l will be very glad to facilitate inquiry in
any shape or form.
Directly or indirectly, have you received from Father
Shaw at any time any sum of money?—Never one
penny in any shape or form at any time.
Or from Senator Long?—-Never at any time.
.Nor from Mr. Jensen?—Never at any time.
Qr from any other person as a commission or a
douceur, or whatever you like to call it, in connexion
with your influence in the carrying through of the pur-
chase of the Shaw Wireless Works? —Never at any
time, in any shape or form.
Senator Long. —Might I ask Senator Russell Just one
question ?
The Chairman. —Yes.
By Senator Long. —You were a member of the Go-
vernment at the time these works were purchased ?—I
was.
You and I have always been friendly, particularly
friendly?—l do not know about particularly friendly,
but we have always been on good terms.
Did I ever in any way, direct or indirect, attempt to
influence you in connexion with the Government inten-
tions to purchase these works?—Not to my knowledge.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Gussen. —-Were yotx at the
Cabinet meeting at which the Government approval was
given for this purchase?—Yes.
The matter was put before the Cabinet, debated by
them, and eventually approved?:—l do not know just
how far to go in regard to disclosing what occurred at
the Cabinet meeting. Ido not know that lam allowed
to say that without the consent of the Cabinet.
Anyway, it was put before the Cabinet and dealt with
in a general way?—Yes; in general terms, that is right.
I cannot go into details.
By Mr. Starke.- —If these were Cabinet secrets I would
not ask you questions on them, but I do not think they
are. Did you know that Admiral Clarkson had re-
ported against ‘ the purchase of the Shaw Wireless
Works?—l cannot say that I did. I have not a very
clear recollection of the incidents. I remember the
transaction in a general way, but I do not remember
any of the detailed reports.
The result of it was partly because he thought it was
impossible to concentrate wireless works, and partly
over labour difficulties. Admiral Clarkson, in a written
report, was unable to recommend the purchase of the
Shaw Wireless Works. At any time in 1916, so far as
your recollection goes, did you know that? —I do not
remember individually the report, but I remember
collectively the reports from several of the individual
officers—l understand the wireless experts. That is
the report I remember really.
Do you remember Admiral Clarkson’s report?—No.
Did you ever know at any time that the Director of
Wireless Telegraphy, Engineer-Commander Cress-
well, had suggested opening negotiations at £40,000,
and that the Minister had said that was inconsistent
with his recommendation, and that he had better with-
draw his report?—No. 1 do not remember any details
of the recommendation made.
Do you remember the fact that he had written a report
recommending offering £40,000? —I cannot remember
any of the reports in detail.


That was withdrawn. Did yon ever know that the
Engineer for Radio Telegraphy had withdrawn a
clause in his report ? —I do not remember it, but I am
not prepared to say it did not happen..
By Mr. Gussen. —I suggest to you that Mr. Jensen
reported at the Cabinet that Admiral Clarkson had re-
ported against this proposal because he feared labour
difficulties. Do you remember the question cropping
up and the views of some naval officer as to that?—l
do not remember individually the reports. Several re-
ports were there, but whose reports they were I could
not say.
Do you remember one report as to labour difficulties?
—I have a hazy recollection of it, but I would not swear
to it.
The witness withdrew.
William Guy Higgs, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a member of the Hous% of
Representatives?—Yes.
In 1916 you were Treasurer of the Commonwealth?
—Yes.
On the 4th of August, 1916, you wrote a minute ad-
dressed to the Minister for the ISTavy—[ reads minute ].
The Minister for the Navy answered you on the 7th of
August—[ reads reply]. Would you look at that re-
port by Admiral Clarkson— [hands to witness] ?—Yes,
I have read the memorandum signed by Engineer-Rear-
Admiral Clarkson.
Did you ever know of that report in 1916?—I never
saw it or knew anything of it until this moment.
It was never brought before you?—No..
You knew Admiral Clarkson was the Third Naval
Member and the Engineering Member of the Naval
Board ?- -T could not charge my memory with knowing
it. I know that he was associated with the Board.
If you had known he was the Third Naval Member
of the Naval Board, and if that information had been
given to you as Treasurer that he had reported adversely
on this purchase, would it have led to your further
consideration of the. matter?—l certainly would not
have advanced the money if I had seen that report.
I want to bring another matter to your notice, that
is the draft report of the Director of Wireless Tele-
graphy, which he presented to the Minister. You
might read the two clauses that are struck out there—
[hands to witness] ?—I have read those paragraphs
purporting to be a minute by Commander Cresswell,
addressed to the Naval Secretary, dated the 14th July,
1916. .
That report was drawn up by the Engineer for Radio
Telegraphy, and he had an interview with the Min-
ister, and he was told that that report was inconsistent
with the portion in which he concurred, with a valua-
tion of something like £60,000 odd —I do not think I
am stating it inaccurately—and he was directed to
withdraw that report; and he did withdraw it, and he
substituted this clause, which I think I had better
let you read— [hands to witness] ?—I have read that
clause 18.
You see the difference between the two. One shows
there negotiations at £40,000, and the other says, “ I
regard £57,000. as a reasonable offer, but I think it
might be reduced by negotiation”?—Yes; I see the
difference.
Was it brought to your attention that the Director of
Wireless Telegraphy had been asked to withdraw a
report?—l certainly never saw either of those para-
graphs or heard of them.
If you had known that the facts were that the Min-
ister had got that report, and, in substance, had said
that it was inconsistent with the valuation, and had
asked the engineer to withdraw it, woxild that have
been a material matter for your consideration? —I
would not have advanced the money.
You would have required further investigation?—l
would have had the matter brought before Cabinet
again before advancing the money.
I want to call your notice to some evidence given
by Mr. Ross. Mr. Ross was appointed to value the
machinery and stock on the premises— [reads evidence
on pages 106, 107, 108, and 109], You see that valua-
tion is based upon a principle that disregarded abso-
lutely the profits that this business was making. Do
you understand the principle he adopted?—l am won-
dering what is the object of your question.
To get at this, you did not know the principle of
valuation that was adopted?—Mr. Chairman, might I
say this, that I asked the Honorable the Treasurer
would he permit me to refresh my memory by looking
over the files in the Treasury concerning the Shaw
wireless plant, and he permitted me to do so. I asked
him if he would allow an officer of the Treasury tc
attend in charge of that file now to assist me, and at
the same time facilitate or expedite the work of the
Commission. The Treasurer gave me that consent. I
have seen the files, and refreshed my memory, and the
officer is now outside. I feel, therefore, if you would
permit me to take that file and tell you what I know
about this business it would expedite your work, if
you have no objection.
I have none at all, hut this will not appear on the
file. I am talking to you at present about matters that
do not appear on the file? —You have mentioned Ross,
and I cannot speak of him. I do not know Mr. Ross.
I am sure you do not? —He has been called upon to
make a valuation, and if I had anything to do with the
matter I should require to know who Mr. Ross was;
was he competent or qualified to make a valuation;
and if Mr. Ross told me that he proposed to consider
grand pianos and ginger-beer making machines and so
on, I would have come to the conclusion that perhaps
we ought to get a fresh expert.
Of course nobody knew the basic principle on which
he acted, but I am putting it to you, supposing that
you had known that Ross considered he was valuing
for both parties, or was there for both parties as a sort
of an arbitrator, and that he adopted a principle of
replacement without any regard to the profit-earning
capacity of the business, would you have regarded that
as a valuation which you could have accepted for the
purpose of paying the money?—lf I had known that
I would have declined to pay the money, and would
have brought the matter before Cabinet.
Where is the officer with the file from the Treasury
Department?—He is outside.
He was your officer; he was an officer in your office
when you were the Treasurer? —He was an officer in
the Treasury when I was there. He was selected by
the Secretary of the Treasury to take charge of these
documents.
[At this stage an officer from the Treasury at-
tended and handed a file of documents to witness.]
The Witness. —This matter of the Shaw Wireless
purchase, I believe, came before Cabinet on at least
two occasions. I find, on reference to the file, that by
a letter dated the 21st of July, 1916, from the Depart-
ment of the Navy, a request was made for warrant
authority for the sum of £55,000 on the Treasurer’s
advance might be issued in favour of the Director of
Naval Accounts to meet the expenditure in connexion
with the wireless works of the Shaw Wireless Company
Limited. I minuted that letter “Pend.” Speaking
from recollection, at the time there was some criticism
in the papers about the purchase of the Shaw Wireless
Works. I was not satisfied about the matter and the
criticism in the press had reference to the value, I
think, of the plant. However, not being satisfied, and
having seen the criticism in the Sydney Sun, under date
the 31st of July, 1916, I decided to send a copy of that
to the Minister for the Navy, with a letter dated the
2nd of August, 1916, which has already been read-. I


received from the Minister for the Navy a reply, which
has also been read. I was doubtful, and there was a
fear lest the Commonwealth should be involved in liti-
gation over patent rights if they purchased this Shaw
wireless plant and machinery. I therefore wrote to
the Acting Attorney-General, Mr. Mahon, who sub-
mitted it to the Crown Solicitor, and, I believe, you
have here the Crown Solicitor’s opinion, in which he
stated, speaking from memory, that the Commonwealth
would not be involved in litigation over the patents.
By the Chairman. —You mean that the Common-
wealth would not be involved in litigation if they did
not buy the works or if they did buy the works?—
My question was that if we purchased the Shaw wireless
plant would there be any litigation with the Marconi
or any other company over patent rights, and the
answer was “no.” I also wrote at the time to other
Ministers, as I was impressed by the criticisms in the
papers —[reads le r ter sent to Ministers]. My private
secretary at the time was Mr. Richardson, and he typed
that letter, and there is a minute, a similar letter to
the Hon. G. F. Pearce, the Hon. F. Tudor, the Hon.
H. Mahon, the Hon. W. Webster, and a separate
letter to the Hon. J. A. Jensen. I do not think I re-
ceived replies from any of the Ministers named, excepting
Senator Pearce, the Acting Prime Minister, and from
the Hon. King O’Malley. Senator Pearce minuted my
letter to the effect that in this matter we must rely
on the reports of the Naval experts which Mr. Jensen
had read to the Cabinet, and which certainly justified
the purchase. He also said as to the Sun criticism that
he understood that some of the proprietors of the Sun
newspaper had interests in the Amalgamated Wireless
Company. That minute was dated the 4th of August,
19.16. He also referred to the opinion re patent rights
and said it seemed satisfactory. The opinion he re-
ferred to was, of course, the Crown Solicitor’s opinion.
The Hon. King O’Malley, who, at the time, was Min-
ister for Home Affairs, wrote a letter dated the Bth of
August, 1916 [reads letter from file]. I may say when
I received the letter from Senator Pearce in reply to my
letter I felt that he was right that we had to rely upon
the Naval expert’s reports which Mr. Jensen had read
to the Cabinet. I myself felt that I had to accept the
Minister for the Navy’s letter to me in which he said
he felt fully confident that the Commonwealth was
making a good deal.
But you are confident you never knew that Admiral
Clarkson had sent an adverse report to the Minister
for the Navy?—No.
You never knew of the withdrawn report by Com-
mander Cresswell ?—No.
Is there anything else in connexion with the matter
that you want to call attention to?—No, I cannot
think of anything else.
There is only one other matter that I want to draw
your attention to. lam not talking of the plant and
machinery but the stock in hand, and the valuation of
that was based on an inventory drawn up by Mr. Corn-
well, who was at that time an employee of Father
Shaw’s, and this is what he said —[reads evidence given
by Mr. Cornwell]. Now, that valuation by Cornwell
was taken as the basis of the valuation right through.
Mr. Cussen. —Of whose valuation right through ?
Mr. Starke. —Right through the purchase.
Mr. Cussen. —That is not so. There is not a scrap
of evidence on that.
Mr. Starke. —Ross told you that.
Mr. Cussen. —He said he looked at the valuation
on the stock sheets supplied by Cornwell, and he checked
the quality and value in a number of instances and
was satisfied it was there. I ask for the Commissioner’s
ruling on that.
Mr. Starke. —I am speaking of the stores.
Mr. Cussen. —Your question was directed to that in
the first place.
Mr. Starke. —l read first the evidence and then I put
a question based on the stores.
Mr. Cussen. —Even as to the stores, it is not accurate.
I think I stated the accurate facts in connexion with the
stores and I ask the Commission to rule on it.
Mr. Starke. —I do not think the Commission will
stop my question.
The Chairman. —The Commission’s recollection of this
matter is that he is dealing only with the question of
stores. The impression left on our minds by Mr. Ross
was that he accepted the valuations given by Mr.
Cornwell, in as much as that he checked them up with
lists of well-known firms, and he found the valuations
given by Mr. Cornwell substantially corresponded with
the prices on those lists.
Mr. Cussen. —And were fair values, but he did nol
check the quantities.
The Chairman. —No.
Mr. Starke. —And he did not check the details.
Commissioner Taylor.— Here and there he checked
the items.
Mr. Starke. —And he assumed the list was correct?
Mr. Cussen. —As to quantity, he assumed it was
correct. I think the Chairman’s answer is perfectly
accurate, according to my recollection.
Mr. Starke. —l will read Ross’s evidence on page 106
and page 111 —[reads evidence ]. That is what the evi-
dence is. At all events, the stock sheets were prepared by
Cornwell, an officer of the Shaw Wireless Works, and
he put down the valuations for Shaw’s purposes. Then
Ross appeared to have examined the stock sheets
without checking the quantities, which were to be
checked later, and on them formed a general opinion
or a specific opinion as to the fairness of the valuation.
If you had known that was the method of stock valua-
tion would you have considered that was satisfactory ?
No.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —-You are sitting in
opposition now ?—Yes. Might I ask if Mr. Starke is
representing the Commission!
By the Chairman. —No, he is assisting the Commis-
sion. At the request of the Commission he has been
put at its disposal?—ls Mr. Cussen also representing
the Commission?
By Mr, Cussen. —I am representing Mr. Jensen. I
hope it will make no difference to you or to your
answers ?—None whatever, but I am a little puzzled,
the Royal Commission which has been appointed seems
to have taken on a judicial character.
You are sitting in opposition to Mr. Jensen now?—
Yes, I am sorry to say.
With quite different political ideas to his ?—You mean
his are different to mine.
Yes, and yours are different to his?—My own, I
imagine, have not changed very greatly since the time
we were sitting together.
His have?—He would be better able to answer that
than I am.
You have stated that if you had known that Mr. Ross
had adopted his own methods of valuations of Shaw’s
you would not have ad vanced the money ?—No, not
without further making an inquiry. I would have
required to know who Mr. Ross was, whether he was
fully qualified, and whether the Minister was satisfied.
You do not answer the point of the question. The
point of the question was not that Mr. Ross had done
it, but the point of the question was a certain method
of valuation was followed. Did you follow the method
of valuation Ross had adopted in connexion with the
stores?—Yes, but not every word that Mr. Starke read
out. I could not follow and consider it; he read out
such a lot.
Whv did you answer no or yes to a question that
you did not understand ?—I understood that much of
it, to get this from it that Mr. Ross had said in making
a valuation he was not concerned whether a grand
piano was there or a ginger-beer pump.
That is not the question that I am directing your
attention to. Will you please follow my question ?—■
Yes, I would be very glad if you will put the question,


Mr. Starke’s last question to you was directed to the
method of valuation adopted by Ross in connexion with
the stores at the Shaw wireless works. Did you under-
stand that was the question ?—Mr. Starke read out such
a lot that I could not follow him. I understood frOm
his question, and the way he put it, that this gentleman
had made a value of his own representing Father
Shaw, and that Mr. Ross had accepted that gentle-
man’s valuation for the purposes, I presume, of the
Department of the Navy, and my reply to Mr. Starke
was that if I had known that I would not have con-
sidered that would justify me handing that money out
without further reference to Cabinet.
Your negative answers come to this: That if you
had known that the Government’s valuer had accepted
without question the vendor’s value, the value put by
the vendor’s valuer, you would not have parted with
the money?—No, I would not.
Is that what your negative answers amount to?—
If the departmental officer had accepted without ques-
tion the valuation of the vendor’s valuer, I certainly
would not have thought that sufficient.
Is that all you meant when you answered “no” to
Mr._ Starke’s questions ?—Yes.
Did you follow the questions?—l followed them as
far as 1 could.
Let me put this to you; Suppose in connexion with
the stores. Government stores, as distinct from plant
and machinery, that the Government valuer checked
in every instance the quality of the stores, made in-
quiries as to their value from outsiders, and exercised
his own judgment on their value, examined their
quality, but not their quantity in every instance, and
had come to the conclusion that the vendor’s valuation
was a fair one, what position would have been taken up
by you ?—Well, I would say if the Government’s re-
presentative had checked the valuations, and had found
they were fair, and had examined, we will say, a fair
proportion of the stores, a reasonable proportion of
them, and found there was no discrepancy in his opinion
as to their value, I would have thought that that was
perfectly legitimate.
Even if the quantities alleged to exist by the ven-
dors were to be left over for checking before the money
was paid, you would see no objection to that ?—I would
not like to say that, it would depend on the amount
of stores involved, I should say.
But if they were going to be checked over by Go-
vernment clerks before the money was paid ?-—I should
have expected an officer of the Department to be put
in charge of the stores to see that they were kept in-
tact.
You admit there is nothing in that?—No.
Apparently, you did not mean your answers to Mr.
Starke in connexion with that last matter? —I did.
You see no inconsistency between your answers to mo
and your answers to Mr. Starke?—No, I do not see
any.
You were at the Cabinet meeting when it was decided
to purchase the Shaw wireless works ?—Yes.
Are you sure ?—To the best of my knowledge and be-
lief I was,
You say you were at the Cabinet meeting when th»
Cabinet decided to purchase this plant?-—To the best
of my knowledge and belief I was there. I was there
on two occasions.
Were you there on the critical occasion when the
Cabinet decided to purchase it ? —To the best of my
knowledge I was.
Were any reports of any officers put before that
Cabinet meeting ?—I do not remember. I cannot defi-
nitely remember.
What is your belief ?-—My belief is that the Minister
for the Navy told the Cabinet that his expert approved
of the purchase.
Then is it your belief that no reports were put before
the Cabinet as distinct from the statement of the
Minister?—l believe at the time the Minister had in
his portfolio on the table reports to support his state-
ment that the experts approved of this purchase.
But none were read to the Cabinet?—l cannot re-
member that.
Have you any belief on that subject ? —I cannot ror
member that, but I believe Senator Pearce when he
states in the minute which was written to me at the
time, that the Minister read the expert’s report to the
Cabinet.
Do you remember whose reports they were?—Mr.
Oresswell’s name seems to rest in my memory as some-
body who recommended it.
Was the valuation by Mr. Ross put before the Cabi-
net?—l do not remember Mr. Ross’s name at all.
You will not say it was not ?—No.
His report was not there?—l could not say.
How about Admiral Clarkson’s report?—l cannot
remember that Admiral Clarkson put a report before
us.
Will you swear he did not, or that Mr. Jensen did
not put his report before you ?—No.
Was it a part of the policy of that Government to
enter into industrial affairs?—Yes, more or less.
I want you to look at Commander Cresswell’s report,
document 16 on the file. Have you got the document?
—Yes.
Look at paragraph 2 of that document; do you see
what he says there, “ I have acted in conjunction with
Mr. Ross, whose valuation I handed you yesterday, and
I concur in his valuation of £46,496, which does not
include land and building which have been valued by
the Home Affairs Department at £14,240, making a
total valuation of £60,736 ” ?—Yes, I see that.
He concurs that the valuation of that amount is a
fair one?—Yes.
I want you to turn to the last paragraph of that
same report, in which it is stated, “ I recommend an
offer of £40,000, which I consider to be a fair offer.”?
—He says, “ I therefore recommend that if these works
can be acquired for the sum of £40,000, which, in my
opinion, will be a fair offer to make under all the
conditions at present obtaining, they be so acquired
for the purposes of Government electrical workshops.”
You see that, in the first part of his report, he con-
siders £60,000 odd is a fair price?—Yes. .
And, in the latter part, he recommends an offer of
£40,000, which he considers fair?—Yes.
Now, suppose you knew that when that came before
the Minister, he nointed out the inconsistency to Com-
mander. Oresswpll, which is perfectly obvious—you see
there is an inconsistency there?—Well, he Used the
words, “ If these works can be acquired for the sum
of £40,000, which, in my opinion, would be a fair offer
to make.” I would read those words there to mean the
whole business.
Is there no inconsistency between Stating in one
place £60,736 is a fair price, and stating later £40,000
is a fair offer? —There seems to be an inconsistency
there.
Suppose that obvious inconsistency were pointed out
to GressWell, and that he was, in fact, told that either
his valuation was too high, or his recommendation too
low, that he had better reconsider the matter; and that
thereupon he substituted paragraph 18, which Mr.
Starke read to you; and that, in those circumstances,
the matter came before the Cabinet, would you have
refused to have advanced the money then?-If Mr.
Oresswell had accepted the view that those works
meant only, as stated here, the machinery, equipment,
&c., which is set down at £46,000, if he meant that,
then I presume he was justified in making that altera-
tion which appears in clause 18.
That is not the point. The point is this: You
said definitely to Mr. Starke that, if you had known
there had been an alteration in the report, you Would
not have advanced the money?—Yes; I did.
Supposing you knew that the alteration in the report
occurred because of the obvious inconsistency that I
have pointed out to you between those two paragraphs,


and that Commander Cresswell, having considered it,
put in the new paragraph 18, would that have induced
you to refuse the money?—lf I had the explanation
you give, I would have advanced the money, other
things considered, if I were satisfied it ought to he
paid.
The Cabinet, at this time, had dealt with the matter,
and you were asked for your Treasury Warrant to
provide for the purchase ? —Yes, it had; but I held it
up. I would not advance the money.
You held it up because of some criticism in the
Sydney Sun? —Yes; and, I believe, some other papers
-at the time.
Not in'any other papers?—l believe there was other
criticism.
Did you send any other criticism but the ono in the
Sydney Sun, to Mr. Jensen?-—No.
Do you remember what Father Shaw’s original offer
was?—l believe it was more than £55,000.
On whose recommendation was it cut down?—l
should not be surprised if it was the recommendation
of the Minister for the Navy.
Did you know, when you wrote to Mr. Jensen and
those other Ministers of the Cabinet, referring to the
Sydney Sun criticism, that the managing director of
the Sydney Sun was also the managing director of the
Amalgamated Wireless Company?—No; I did not
know that.
Would you have taken as much notice of-the criti-
cism if you had known that?—No; not quite as much.
Would you have - taken any notice of it? —I might
not. I might add I was influenced very greatly by
the remark of Senator Pearce in his minute that he
understood the Sun people had interests in the Amal-
gamated Wireless Company.
Did you know the managing director of the Sydney
Sun and the managing director of the Amalgamated
Wireless Company, who were your competitors in busi-
ness, were one and the same person. If you had, would
you have taken the slightest notice of that criticism ?
I might have taken some notice of it; but I would not
attach the same importance to it.
Your experience in politics would not lead you to
believe a man could act in that dual capacity quite
fairly?—l have not your poor opinion of human
nature.
You said that you would not have advanced the
money if you had known of Admiral Clarkson’s report ?
—Not without further reference to the Cabinet.
But you did not remember that you did see Admiral
Clarkson’s report?—No.
If you had, or if it had been read to the Cabinet,
and still Cabinet approved of it—that is the purchase
—would you have advanced the money?—l cannot say,
at this time. I would like to see the report again.
Have a look at it again, and you will see it is con-
trary to Commander Cresswell’s recommendation. Did
you read Commander Cresswell’s report?—Yes.
You are brought here to judge on the matter?—l was
not aware of that.
Look at Commander Cresswell’s report again. Will
you go through it?—l have been through it.
Will you look at Admiral Clarkson’s report?—l have
read it.
You see, there is no criticism about valuation, and no
report about the value of the works there?—No; but
there is some reference to it there. He said, “ I regret
that the above considerations prevent me from recom-
mending the purchase of the Shaw Wireless Work-
shops.”
Not on the score of anything else but two considera-
tions —the difficulty of concentration and the possi-
bility of industrial disputes. Is not that what he goes
on? —I would glean from paragraph 2 when he wrote
that he thought, I should imagine, that the Shaw
Wireless Works were too large for the requirements of
the Commonwealth.
Have you read the whole report?—Yes.
Have you understood it ?—Yes, I think so.
Ido not mean to be impertinent?—lt is a little. I
was desirous to be as clear as I could, and I wanted to
take it paragraph by paragraph.
I did not mean to be rude to you when I said that.
Did you understand it? —Yes. The first paragraph
states “ Wireless services as originally required——”
We know what it states, and I want you to answer
my questions?—Mr. Chairman, you must pardon me,
but if this gentleman is cross-examining m© at th©
Royal Commission hi© must allow m© to answer in my
own way except under your directions to the contrary.
I do not want to be at cross-purposes with you?—l
understand you want me to go through the whole report
and say if that statement would have induced me to
favour the obtaining of a plant by the Government.
Paragraph 1 of this report would make me consider
that the Shaw Wireless plant, apparently being a big
concern costing £55,000, was too big a thing for the
Government. Paragraphs 4,5, and 6, to my mind,
would, induce a Treasurer to fight against or vote
against th© Shaw Wireless Works situated in Sydney.
Paragraph 7 in itself would not have weighed with me
to vote against the Shaw Wireless Works.
Because it means an increase in wages?—Because I
believe it is a good thing for the Government to under-
take certain work, and I do not know that Admiral
Clarkson’s opinion would have weighed with me in this
matter. As to clauses 8 and 9, as regards that, some-
times I consider it is a very good thing for the Govern-
ment to enter into competition itself with private firms,
especially when the people are imposed upon by high
prices. As to paragraph 10, Ido not think that para-
graph would have weighed with me against the pur-
chase of the Shaw Wireless Works, because I think we
ought to be able to get a manager. Paragraph 11
would weigh greatly with me, I think.
You have read that report and commented upon it.
Supposing you had before you the report of Radio
Commander Cresswell, a lengthy report, strongly re-
commending this purchase, pointing out the difficul-
ties in th© existing arrangements, pointing out the essen-
tial need pf such workshops by reason of the war, point-
ing out that in the past the Government departments
have been in fact fleeced by outside firms because it was
a Government whom they were supplying, and pointing
out how savings could be made amd ships in the Aus-
tralian waters fitted with wireless, for the Government
ships also, when the apparatus had to come previously
from Europe, and pointing out the ability to supply a
number of Government departments with apparatus
and machinery which they would require, suppose that
was all before you and that was the report of Com-
mander Cresswell, the man really and directly dealing
with this wireless business, and although that was after
Admiral Clarkson had reported adversely, are you still
prepared to say you would have refused to supply the
money? —-No, I would, I think, have been favorably
influenced if the statements were put by Mr. Cress-
well as you have put them. -
.Radio Commander Cresswell makes a report that I
have roughly outlined to you fairly accurately?—At
the same time, let me add that I would have been very
puzzled when two prominent officers disagreed in that
way.
Re-examined by Mr. Starhe. —There is no doubt, I
understand, that you feel clear in your mind that you
had no intimation that there was any officer of the
Commonwealth who had reported against the purchase
of this Shaw Wireless Works? —No, I have no recollec-
tion of any officer reporting adversely against it.
There is another small fact, that in March, 1915,
Engineer Commander Cresswell had himself reported
that what was necessary was a small workshop, of
which I think the value came to something like £4,000
or £3,000? —No; in March, 1915, I was not a member
of the Cabinet. .


In order to form a proper judgment you would have
to have all these reports before you? —Yes.
By Senator Long. —A suggestion has been made
during the course of this inquiry that I acted as an
agent or a go-between to the late Father Shaw, as be-
tween him and the Minister of the Navy, in connexion
with the sale of these works. If that were so, part of
my function would be not only to influence the Minister
for the Navy, but also to exercise whatever influence I
may possess on other members of the Cabinet. Will
you be good enough to say whether at any time, directly
or indirectly, I attempted to influence your judgment
or your decision as a member of the Cabinet in con-
nexion with the purchase of these works ? —I do not
remember that you ever spoke to me about the matter
at all.
EXHIBIT No. 23 —Treasury file re purchase
Shaw Wireless Works.
The witness withdrew.
T. Brentnall, recalled and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You were present in Court when
Mr. Ross gave his evidence as to the basic principle of
his valuation? —Yes, I was.
I understand you have had great experience of
valuing commercial concerns of all sorts?—Yes, I have
had a good deal of experience.
Is the principle of valuation which he adopted a
usual or unusual one to adopt in making valuations? —
I have never heard of it before.
As a valuer of business concerns, is it your experi-
ence that the usual valuations are made on profit earn-
ing of replacement value?—Profits, of course.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —Have you over-
valued a machinery business since the war?—No.
Have you ever valued a machinery business in your
life?—l am not a valuer, but I have had a great deal
tp do in dealing with these things.
Now, you know in this particular instance there was
no good-will, you heard Mr. Ross say he gave nothing
for good-will ?—I know that.
But there was a considerable and valuable quantity
of machinery?—Yes.
What principle would you apply in the Valuation
of a proposition such as that with no good-will? —To
begin with, the position of the valuer in this case was
such as I have never known in all my experience.
What principle would you apply in a proposition of
that description with no good-will at all ?•—That would
not weigh with me at all. That was simply because of
other considerations being set aside.
What is your principle of valuation that you would
apply if those were the facts? —I should value that at
what we think they were worth for profit-earning pur-
poses.
Would you think it would be a fair method of valuing
to look at the machine and say what in your opinion
it was worth to a person willing to buy from a person
willing to sell ?—That would be one of the considera-
tions, certainly.
Would that be a fair method to adopt?—Not alto-
gether.
In what circumstances would it be unfair ?—I think
you would have to take into consideration, as Mr. Ross
would have to take, uses the machine could be put to.
The Chairman. —Perhaps it may save time if I indi-
cate to you that the Commission takes this view of this
question : That apart altogether from the fact that it was
not a profit-making concern, yet it was at this par-
ticular juncture in 1916 a factory assembled there with
all the machinery which could not be got elsewhere;
although you could not say there was really attached
to it a very large value from a profit-making point of
view, yet there was a considerable value attached to
the fact it was all there and could not be got elsewhere.
If you are going to elaborate on that question, we need
not consider it.
Mr. Cussen. —That matter was raised again by Mr.
Starke calling this witness.
The Chairman. —We must take notice of the fact
there was an assembled factory there capable of doing
a great deal of work at that time, and it certainly had
some value.
Mr. Starke. —-Not Ross’s value?
The Chairman. —Of course, that is a matter of
opinion.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Starke puts in a list of steam-ships fitted with
wireless on the Australian coast.
EXHIBITS Nos. 24 and 25.—Lists of steam-
ships on Australian Register in which wireless
has been installed.
Witness Price, recalled.
Senator Long. —l would like to say that I made appli-
cation to the Commission this morning for the loan of
the shorthand notes taken by Mr. Price of this alleged
interview between myself and Mr. Cornwell. I have
now your reply, and .1 regret that I have not a copy of
this. I may say as this was a confidential document,
1 only wished to have them transcribed by one of the
Hansard staff, who, of course, could be fully trusted.
Mr. Starke. —If you wish that, I will arrange with
Mr. Sharwood to take them up to a member of the
Hansard staff, any one of whom you can get the Minis-
ter’s authority for him to do it. You can then get
that member of the staff to transcribe the notes, but
we cannot let those notes go- out of our possession.
Senator Long. —l would not have attempted to get
anybody outside to transcribe them.
By Senator Long. —Have you got your notes?—No;
they were handed in as an exhibit.
After that interview, did you show the notes of that
conversation to Mr. Cornwell ?—What do you mean by
the notes.
Did you show him your shorthand notes?—No, I did
not; because I left almost immediately after. In fact,
1 came back on the same tram as you. I missed my
way; not knowing the district I 'went down the wrong
street. Mr. Cornwell gave me vague directions how to
get to the tram, and after about fifteen or twenty
minutes you came along and stood within 2 yards of
me.
Did you read the notes to Mr. Cornwell ?—No.
Not that evening?—Not so far as I know.
At any Subsequent date?—l submitted the transcript
to him.
How soon after the conversation ?—1 should say it
would be about two days after that afternoon I handed
in the transcript.
Did you at any time make an alteration, or addition,
or amendment to your shorthand notes?—No.
They are to-day just as you say you took them on
that occasion ?—I would like to explain that I took the
notes' under difficulties. I think I see what your are
driving at, and that is this, that you will see that a
shorthand character is made a little clearer. That is a
shorthand writer’s privilege. I mean this; On reading
my notes during the interim, then if I found I had a
bad outline which might develop into some difficulty in
reading for transcript, I would make that a better out-
line at the time.
That is why I am anxious to have a look at your
shorthand notes. Did you know the nature of the con-
versation that was taking place between Mr. Cornwell
and I? —No, only generally. I understood you were
going to discuss a matter connected with the purchase
of the Shaw Wireless Works. I had no idea what you
were expected to say, but I gathered from Mr. Cornwell
he was rather anxious to protect himself, and he gave
me directions to take everything I could without any
modification at all.
Did you see me enter Mr. Cornwell’s room ?—Not
actually.


You knew 1 was there?—Yes; I knew you were there
for certain.
You did not see me go into the room? —No.
Did you see me come out of the room?—No.
You were certain I was there? —Yes.
There is no denying I was there. Could you clearly
discriminate between Mr. Cornwell’s voice and mine?
—Yes.
Is there nothing remarkable in the fact that in your
report here you have a full note of what Mr. Cornwell
said, and only a very restricted one, and even a garbled
one, of what it was alleged I said? —No; that is easily
explainable. Mr. Cornwell has a better speaking voice
than you, and moreover he would do it deliberately,
and I would presume that, owing to the fact that I
seem to have missed what, to my mind, would be a
vital answer, you probably lowered your voice for the
same reason deliberately.
Were your instructions to get a note of the earlier
conversation ?—What do you mean by the earlier con-
versation ?
The commencement of the conversation?—As far as
possible.
You would be most anxious to do that?—Yes.
If names were mentioned in that room would they
not be easily heard, rather than our lengthy conversa-
tion?—Not necessarily; it would all depend on how
the line was working.
Did you hear Mr. Cornwell give his evidence to the
Commission?—l was not present in this room when
he gave it.
Mr. Cornwell has stated to the Commission that I
said Mr. Jensen received a certain amount of money,
and that Senator Russell and Senator Gardiner also
received a certain amount. Now there is no note of
that in your transcription. Would it be possible for
a statement of that kind to be made, and for you not
to hear any part of it?—Certainly, at times I did
not hear a thing for three minutes.
You do not present this then as being a true, reli-
able record? —I think I have already stated I would
not guarantee to get 100 per cent, of the conversation.
I took the thing up under protest for that reason, and
as I explained to the Commission yesterday I was writ-
ing with a telephone in one hand, holding the instru-
ment, and turning my book over with the other. I
guarantee therefore no shorthand writer in the position
would have done better than I did.
Can the Commission take it that anything that
occurs here in consecutive form is something that you.
.heard clearly and distinctly?—Yes; I should say so,
always subject to human inability to hear.
Did you hear me say this, “ You can accept my as-
surance that he was not in it ” ? —lf that is there in
my transcript I did hear it, but that “he,” the pro-
noun, I will not guarantee to apply to anybody because
it all depended on the previous few words that were
said by Mr. Cornwell.
I suppose we could take it that remark would apply
to the report generally?—Not where I have a clear and
definite note. If you do not see a break in my notes,
and a. name is mentioned, the next pronoun would
refer to the name.
The witness withdrew.
A. E. Cornwell, recalled.
Senator Long. —I understand a witness remains .on
his oath until such time as his examination is com-
pleted. Therefore this witness is still on his oath.
Mr. Starke. —He is still on his oath; he is being
cross-examined under his oath.
By Senator Long. —l want to ask you just one or
two questions concerning the conversation that I had
with you on some date at Randwick, and also as to
one or two matters, statements that you made in reply
to Mr. Starke. Mr. Starke suggested that you were
very suspicious of me, is that so?—I think that is
hardly correct.
It is quite correct, that in consequence of some sus-
picion you had of me that you adopted the course of
submitting me, so to speak, to the third degree?—l was
suspicious of you coming out to the workshops and
asking me questions about the purchase of the work-
shops.
Had we ever discussed that question before? —If I
remember correctly on two occasions, yes.
Was it not always a subject of discussion between you
and I whenever I visited the works ?—No.
What was there about the questions that I had sub-
mitted to you that made you suspicious of me ?—ln the
first place, on the Wednesday night you asked me what
was in those telegrams that had been passing between
Shaw and Mr. Jensen. That was the first thing.
Was that over the telephone?—Yes, on the Wednes-
day night; that would be about 6 o’clock.
I am not going to argue tbe point whether I did or
did not. How long have you known me?—l suppose
about two years or two and a half years.
What have been our relations?—Friendly.
Intimate?—No, friendly; not intimate.
Do you know what my relations were with the late
Father Shaw. Have you ever discussed that with him?
—I knew he regarded you as'a friend, and you regarded
him as a friend.
He never expressed his connexion with me in
stronger terms than a friend ?—Never.
Do you know whether it is a fact that he used to
bring all his troubles to me?—l did not know that.
As a matter of fact, you do know this: that we were
close friends for many years before you ever saw the
works?—-Yes, I know you were friends.
How long has my son been at those works ?—Since
they have been under my charge, I suppose about three
years. Prior to that I understand he was there for
about two or three years —a matter of, altogether, about
five years, I should think..
As a matter of fact he has been there nearly seven
years?—l cannot be certain of the period before I came
there.
Do you know that I have always taken a great interest
in those works since you have been there ?—Yes, a very
keen interest in the first part of the time I was there.
Do you know that I brought quite a number of
Federal members to llandwick to view those works, to
show them what a fine institution we had there for the
training of young electrical engineers?—l do not know.
I do not ever remember you bringing out any Federal
members to the works while I have been there.
You know that in the stress of 1914 and 1915, when
the works were practically hung up, that I was in a
measure responsible for Father Shaw getting a shell
contract from the Government in order that those young
men might be kept employed ?—I do not know that, but
I do remember this; that in 1915, Mr. Carr, the member
for the district in which I was living at that time, made
in the House certain statements as to the lack of interest
on the part of the Government in allowing works of that
kind to remain idle. He made such statements that I
thought I would go to him and ask him if he knew
what he was talking about. I went to him and ques-
tioned him closely as to the plant, and formed the
opinion he was incorrect in making certain statements.
If I remember rightly, subsequent to this interview I
went to see him, and I told him he was making in-
correct statements when he made statements of the
character he had made.
Do you remember that I and Mr. Carr frequently
called attention to these works in our respective House® ?
■ —l remember Mr. Carr attacking the. Government for
a lack of interest in the Shaw Wireless Works, and 1
remember that that period lasted for three to six months,,
I think I am right in saying that would be about June,
1915, to December, 1915.
Now, it does not surprise you, from what you knev;
of my keen interest in those works, that my interest still
continued in them in 1916? —No, it is not surprising.


What was your object in assuring Mr. Starke, or
telling the Commission, that I had paid quite a number
of visits to those works in 1916 ? —I only wished to state
the fact. *
What was the difference in the facts of my visits.
Why did you confine those facts to I*9l6—why not 1915
also? —I was not there in 1915, and in 1916 your visits
were much more frequent in the first six months than in
the later six months.
I think you forgot to mention that in your evidence?
—You are mentioning it, and I am mentioning it now.
I want to go for just a moment to that interview that
you and I had in your office. You have told the Com-
mission that I stated to you that Mr. Jensen and certain
other members of the Federal Parliament had received
through me some money from the late Father Shaw ?
I did not say that. What I did say was that you told
me Shaw gave you four packages, and you put your own
in your box at the Senate.
You told the Commission that I told you that Father
Shaw gave me four packages on the steps of the Senate
of the Federal Parliament House? —Yes; on the steps
leading to the Senate.
I never told you then at any time that Father Shaw
gave me money to hand to Mr. Jensen?-—You never
told me that. You' never told me that Father Shaw
gave you money for Mr. Jensen; but what you did tell
me was this: that you knew what you were to receive,
and the others were to receive .£650 each, and the big
man was to get the lion’s share. In that connexion Mr.
Jensen’s name was not mentioned at all.
Did I not tell you what amount I got ?—You did not
tell me what amount you got. You said you admitted
to the Comimission receiving £1,300.
Did I not tell you £1,290?—H0; you told me £1,300,
if I remember correctly.
Then Mr. Jensen’s name in connexion with the pur-
chase of these works has never cropped up between you
and I ?—Y©s; but not in' these immediate circum-
stances.
Give the Commission the circumstances in which it
was mentioned. Will you give me your statement as
to when and where I ever associated Mr. Jensen with
anything, anybody, or how in connexion with the receipt
of moneys from Father Shaw or with the receipt of
money for the sale of these works ?—I have already told
you. You told me that Jensen carried the negotiations
through, and he was always acting on his own. I know
you told me, and when I told you Admiral Clarkson
had reported against taking over the workshops, you
said, “ Jensen must have told me a lie, because he told
me Clarkson supported it.” Further, when I told you
Commander Cresswell had put in a minute in which he
stated, in his opinion, the works were worth somewhere
about £40,000 or £45,000, and the Minister had called
him over to the Navy Office and asked him to withdraw
that,- you said if that was the case it would look black
against Mr. Jensen.
Do yon persist in saying that you did not tell the
Commission that I said I told you Mr. Jensen had
received money from Father Shaw?—l never had said
that.
When the late Father Shaw died did you go through
his letters and.correspondence ? —Yes.
Through all his correspondence?—Yes; everything.
Did you return certain letters of mine that were
among those letters ?—Yes, if I remember correctly.
What was your object in returning my corre-
spondence ? —Because I thought there might be matters
touched on in that correspondence' affecting the purchase
which might not be wise at that juncture to bring to
light.
Did any of those letters have any relation to the sale
or purchase of these works ?—I did not read them.
I ought to have known that you were a man like
that?—You know now.
What was the commencement of our conversation ai
this famous interview?—lf I remember rightly, you
walked through the workshops and I met you, and as
we were coming along we were discussing the position
of the work at the time. You entered my office and sat
down on a chair near the window, and I said, “You
wanted to see me about what was in those telegrams?”
That was practically the commencement of the con-
versation.
What telegrams?—-The telegrams that were passing
between the Department and Shaw referring to the sale
of the works. Those were the telegrams 1 understood
you had asked about.
Sow could I know about those telegrams?—l was
not concerned with how you knew. I was concerned
with what you wanted to know.
As a matter of fact, was not Father Shaw in Mel-
home for at least three months before the sale of the
works was effected?—lSTo; I hardly think so.
With the exception of perhaps a day or two ?—Tf I re-
member rightly, I think that is hardly correct. I could
definitely fix one of his visits by the stock. He brought
some things over from Melbourne. He was over for
about ten days, and he landed back in Sydney, I think,
on the Wednesday; and then he received a telegram from
Mr. Jensen asking him to state what title he had for
the land. And the position of the workshops was of
such a character at that time, that it was almost im-
possible to explain in a letter the exact position, so he
immediately came back to Melbourne on the Thursday,
sending that telegram indicating his title from Rand-
wick before he left. He visited Randwick from time
to time up to the date when he finally came across to
Melbourne, which would be about the 7th Or Bth of
July, probably about six weeks before his death.
But what I want to ask you is this: I could under-
stand you asking me about any telegrams referring to.
myself, but all this about telegrams passing between
Mr. Jensen and Father Shaw is, I want to say, all
a fabrication manufactured by you?—You are quite
wrong in saying that.
On that date, you say I rang you up on the tele-
phone. Was it early in the morning?—You rang me
up at 6 o’clock at night, between 5.45 and 6 o’clock.
How many times did your clerk or official try to get
me on the telephone the next da^? —About three times.
Is that all?—Yes; because, in the first place, you
made an appointment for the morning, if I remember
rightly, at 11 o'clock, and you did not keep it; and I
wanted to know whether you were coming out or not.
At the commencement of that interview, did you not
at Once burst into an indignant denouncement of Mr.
Jensen?—Hot at all.
Did you not assure me that you had information from '
the Commission that would damn him beyond the pos-
sibility of redemption?—Hot at all.
Did you suggest that I would be very foolish to carry
the baby any longer; that X ought to do what I could
before the Commission to implicate Mr. Jensen in this,
and save my own skin?—Ho; what I did say was thin,
that you admitted to me your part in the business, and
I said I suppose this life-long friendship for Mr. Jen-
sen makes you diffident about disclosing his share in
the business.
Did you say that X said Mr. Jensen had received cer-
tain compensation?—No; you did not say anything of
the kind. You asked me for the conversation. As a
matter of fact, if my memory is correct, you qualified
your life-long friendship with Mr. Jensen by saying,
" That is hardly correct. I have had a difference with
him with regard to Tasmania, and a further difference
with regard to Leslie. With regard to Leslie, he pro-
mised me to send him away to learn portion of sub-
marine making. He made these promises from time
to time, and he did not keep them.”
Did you say this to me in your office, “I am in a
position to know that if you put Jensen in this, that
the Commission will say that you were guilty of no
greater offence than that of indiscretion”?—Ho; that is
simply a fabrication.


You stated in your evidence-in-chief here that I
included Senator Russell and Senator Gardiner as
having received certain commission. Did you mention
those two names ? —Yes.
You said that I had mentioned them as having re-
ceived money?—Yes. You mentioned those names as
being two to receive sums of money—£6so each.
Is it not strange that that does not appear in your
shorthand notes? —No; it is not strange, because there
is a lot of our conversation missing from that tran-
script.
He has not missed much that you said? —I’or this
reason- —you were speaking in a low voice, and my voice
may be more penetrating, and I was speaking in my’
usual voice. With regard to tjiose two names, I want
to call your attention to this fact —that you came back
to my place on the Monday because you were going out
to Leslie’s place, and you said, “ With regard to that
conversation on Thursday I mentioned Jupp Gardiner’s
name, did I not?” I said “Yes, that is right.” You
said, “ Well, it was quite wrong; he did not receive
anything. He was not to get anything.” You made
that qualification yourself.
You are quite clear that I involved both Senator
Gardiner and Senator Russell in this what is termed
“ Graft,” and I never at any stage included Mr. Jen-
sen ? —As a matter of fact, if I am to assume that the
big man was Mr. Jensen, yes certainly; but so far as
mentioning his name as being a recipient, or a would-be
recipient, of a sum of money, no. But if Mr. Jensen
is synonymous with the big man, yes.
Did I go fully into the evidence that I gave before
this Commission with you; did I tell you how I had
disclosed to them my connexion with the sale or pur-
chase of these works and the humiliation that I ex-
perienced in having to relate my race-course business?
—You did not mention anything about humiliation.
You told me you told the Commission that you won
£4OO on “ Prince Bardolph.” I remember that name
quite well.
Are you sure it was not £7OO? —-You said £4OO.
I explained to you that the suggestion was a sus-
picion that I was the go-between Father Shaw and
the Minister, apd that there was no foundation for
any such statement, that the only negotiations I could
possibly carry out there would be carried out between
Father Shaw and the Minister ? —You said, as a matter
of fact, as I have already told you, that Mr. Jensen
carried through the negotiations himself, and that
Father Shaw was in indirect contact with him. I
have already stated that.
Just listen to this — [reading from transcript ] —“ I
told them what he gave me, I would not go back on
that. They asked me was it for services rendered and
I said no, it was a present. I told them what I had
lent him. I told them that Shaw gave me notes, and
said he did not know what he owed me. I told them
exactly what Father Shaw gave me. I told them I won
£4OO at Caulfield on 4th September. I told them there
was no reason why I should be secret about it. I put
£3OO in the Savings Bank, and invested the rest in the
War Loan.” Now what you say there is blank. What
suggestion did you make to me there? —I said why not
recapitulate the whole position, why not go back to the
Commission and put your position before them, that
is what I said. I advised you to see the Commission,
and you said in reply to that, if I remember correctly,
“ I cannot do that, another two years will do me.” You
told me then that you had been in a bad way, the
doctors had examined your heart, and the right side of
your heart was twice as big as it should be.
You did not say right at this juncture that I should
put myself right with the Commission by implicating
Jensen? —Undoubtedly I did not. That is a distinct
fabrication. What I did say was, “ I advise you to
recapitulate your position, state your position to the
Commission, and tell the truth.”
F. 13033.—4
I told you I had given my statement to the Com-
mission, and could not go back on it?—You said you
would not go back on it.
At this juncture you suggest that I said I could not
do it ? —I deny suggesting that you should implicate
Mr. Jensen.
Throughout that report your own desire is, to use a
vulgarism, to pot Mr. Jensen? —I had no such desire
at all.
The record teems with spiteful references to Mr.
Jensen? —I want to say right here that, so far as that
desire is concerned, I have not such desire as regards
Mr. Jensen. I have met him on three occasions only,
one was in 1915, and I did not see him again until
July, 1916, and I have not seen him since then.
Mr. Cussen. — You also stated you never suggested
Mr. Jensen was guilty, but this thing teems with it.
By Senator Long. —I just wanted to emphasize that
there is support for my statement against Mr. Corn-
well, that he did make that suggestion distinctly and
emphatically to me about implicating Mr. Jensen.
Here is a paragraph which is very much broken up;
you might be good enough to clear it up for the Com-
mission as you did to me. You say, “On Monday
night, before he was taken ill, they got two girls. If
they had evidence like that it absolutely .” Then
there is a break. Then it goes on, “ There were a lot
of photographs, and there were women stark naked.”
Do you say there that that break means “it abso-
lutely accounts for the disappearance of the money ” ?
Not at all.
Will you give the Commission the full explanation
you gave to me concerning that report to make the
application of that particular paragraph right in its
context, so far as the truth is concerned? —I was inti-
mating that the Commission had most minute know-
ledge of the transactions and movements of Father
Shaw. I said, “ They even knew this fact, that on the
night immediately prior to Father Shaw being taken
ill, that Father Shaw had two girls at his rooms-—he
and Garter.’* Carter, if I remember rightly, was re-
garded as a friend of Father Shaw here in Melbourne.
I said, “ If they had evidence like that it would prove
they had knowledge of the whole case.”
You deny absolutely that you said that conduct of
that kind would account for the disappearance of the
difference of what I told you I had told the Commis-
sion Father Shaw gave me, and what I had put in the
bank '?—l absolutely deny that.
What do you mean by saying, “ A lot of photo-
graphs?” You have not cleared that up yet?—l can
clear that up (prickly so far as that is concerned. I
told you Father Shaw was very indiscreet in leaving
letters about, even when he was in competition vith the
Marconi Company, when he was stopping at “ Archine,”
which was on the property. A subsequent search at
“Archine,” in the library, revealed the fact that there
were a lot of photographs there. There was a drawer
full of photographs, and some of these photographs
were of women in certain garb and lack of garb, and
one of them was Father Shaw, in fact, in the same con-
dition, emphasizing his indiscretion in leaving these
things about.
You deny absolutely that you made that remark as
to Father Shaw in his association with these women in
Melbourne ?—So far as the loss of money was con-
cerned, absolutely.
Where did you get the knowledge that you alleged
you possess regarding all the information that the Com-
mission had?—From Mr. Barton.
Was Mr. Barton authorized to give you information
of an official character ?—That I could not say. _
You remember, when you made that suggestion to
me which you deny, but which I assert you did mahfi,
that I told you another gentleman had made precisely
the same statement to me during that day?—No.


You do not remember that? —Wo, I do not remember
that.
1 will refresh your memory. Did I say to you,
“ You have been discussing over the matter evidently
with a member of the Commission”? —Yes, that is so.
I remember that quite well.
Tell us the conversation? —I said, “Is that so?”
You said, “Have you?” I said, “If I have it simply
appears that he has got the same common-sense opinion
of the thing that I have.” That was the reply to that.
Had you any instructions from the Commission tu
adopt the method of taking shorthand notes of the con-
versation between you and me ? —Absolutely none what-
ever.
By Mr. Gussen. —l desire, in view of the cross-exam-
ination, to refer to some matters. I will read the
transcript to you?—l would rather read it myself.
Why ?—You were of that opinion first of all.
X want to direct your attention to that part of the
conversation you have just answered Senator Long
about, that the blank here means that you advised him
to recapitulate his position?—Yes, I did.
You remember tfiat part?—Quite well.
What exactly did he say to that?—He said, “ I can-
not, I won’t go back on my word.”
Lou are now repeating what he said?—l am not
certain of the precise context, but I am certain of the
substance of it “I cannot do that. I will not go
back on my word.” He iold me he had already been
before the Commission and made certain statements,
and he was not going to alter them.
Anything else? —Not that I remember just there.
Did he say, “ I cannot do it, no matter what hap-
pens to me ” ? —Yea, I think I remember that.
What was the suggestion that you made to him that
induced him to say, “No matter what happens to
me ’ ’ ? —At that time the discussion centered on the
attitude the representatives in the Senate would take.
That follows immediately after this; you filled in the
blank yourself, “ I advised him to recapitulate his
position”?—You understand as well as I do.
You have supplied that blank yourself. You then
repeated his answer, ‘‘l cannot do it,” and so on.
Did he say when you advised him to recapitulate his
position, ‘‘ I cannot do it no matter what happens
to me”? —I remember “No matter what happens to
me,” quite well.
Did he say that in answer to your suggestion that
he should recapitulate his position ? —Yes.
It then proceeds without any break, “ Jensen has
always struck me as a man who would say you can
swim if you can Long : lam the man who has
to suffer he can deny it.” Did he say that?-—I re-
member him saying that.
Did you say, “ I have felt very worried over the
thing. I think, as a matter of fact —— it was my
duty to do the best for ”?—Yes.
Who was the person ?—The first time it was my duty
while I was with Shaw to do the best I possibly could
for Lather Shaw, and I went on to say, since the works
were taken over I endeavoured to do the best for the
Department.
Did Long say, ‘‘ As I told you, there was another
■.” Do you remember saying, “ Cresswell was
either a fool or a rogue”?—Yes, 1 remember saying
that. If I remember rightly, there the point arose on
the question of adverse reports as to the taking over of
the workshops. I had mentioned that to Senator Long.
The conversation begins, “ I told him .” You
see there is a blank?—Yes, but I told him of the re-
ports against the taking over of the workshops, and 1
mentioned this, that Commander Cresswell had altered
his recommendation on the figure at which the place
should he taken over, and he was either a fool or a
rogue.
You see there is a reference there to women’s photos \
—Yes.
Senator Long suggested to you that what happened
there was that the blank, “ If they have had evidence
like that it absolutely proves the disappearance of the
money.” You have filled it up, and said it proves
that the Commission knew all about the facts of it 1 —
That is quite right.
Was there any conversation at that time about the
disappearance of the money. At that period of the
conversation was there any suggestion by anybody or
anything accounting for the disappearance of the
money?—No, there was not.
Was the disappearance of the money mentioned? —
That was in that conversation, but not at the end of
'that period.
At any time within §ve minutes of that? —No.
You remember Long saying at that time, “ I have
got two years to run. I never did anything; I will not
admit it at all ” ?—I remember that.
At this conversation, at which the naked girls’ photoi
are mentioned, and the suggestion as mad© by you that
the Commission knew all about it?-—You are quite
wrong there, you are mixing the two things up.
I asked you a simple question. At that time, when
you are speaking about the photographs of naked girls,
did Long say that he did not care what happened to
him, “ I have only two years to run, I will not admit
that I did anything ” ?—No. that was not immediately
after that sentence.
Was it five minutes after that sentence?—No. I could
not definitely say. I would not think it was.
Was that mentioned. Did Long say, “ I do not care
what happens. I will have two years to run; I will not
admit that I did anything, I will not admit that.” Do
you remember him saying that ? —That he would not
admit that he had taken part in the negotiations ?
Did he say this, ‘ ‘ I have two years to run. I will not
admit that I did anything. I will not admit that at
all ” ?—He said that, but whether it was in sequence or
not I am not prepared to say.
Was it about the time you were talking about the
photos of the naked girls ?—lt was not.
Cannot you answer my questions?—l will answer
questions in the way in which it is right.
How long do you think elapsed between the reference
to the photos, and the suggestion that Long had only a
little while to last?—Several minutes, I should think —
sufficient to turn the conversation on to a new phase.
Did you say to him, “ Your knowledge is far greater
than mine, hut with my knowledge it seems to me that
they cannot carry a man with a character like that ” ?
Yes.
Whom did that refer to ?—That was referring to Mr.
Jensen.
Did Long say, “ You can accept my assurance he was
not interested”? —Yes.
Whom did that refer to?—To Commander Cresswell.
Do you see there there is a reference to the disappear-
ance of the money?—Yes.
Do you see there at that point a reference to the girls’
photos, and a blank and a reference to the disappearance
of the money?—Yes.
You have said, pursuing that matter, “ You can ac-
cept that assurance he was not interested ”; that refers
to Commander Cresswell? —Yes.
You swear that? —Yes, I absolutely swear that.
The next thing is there is another blank, and it goes
on, “ Whether he was here at the opening of the Com-
monwealth Bank I do not know.” Who does that refer
to?—Mr. Jensen.
I desire the Commission to read that part, because it
is obvious it there refers to Mr. Jensen?—l want to ex-
plain the statement. When in conversation with Sena-
tor Long on that day Mr. Oresswell’s name was men-
tioned. I put a question to him as to whether Mr.
Cresswell received any money, and he said he did not
receive any money, and was not interested in it at all.
By Senator Long. —ln the talk about the distribution
of that money, when Mr. Cresswell’s name came up did


you say to me that it was also known that several mem-
bers of the ISTavy would also get something out of the
sale of the works? —I said nothing of the kind.
The Commission adjourned at 4.45 p.m. to 10.30 a.m.
on Friday, 15 th November, 1918.
{At the Court of Marine Inquiry.)
FRIDAY, 15th NOVEMBER, 1918, at 10.30 a.m.
Fourth Day's Sitting.
Before the Commissioners:
W. G. McBeath, Esq. (Chairman).
F. A. Verco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Taylor.
Mr. Gussen. —I desire to bring under the notice of
the Commission the last page of the shorthand notes,
just prior to the adjournment last night, where, I
venture to submit, there is an obvious error. If you
will look at the last two questions on page 200, you will
see it is an obvious error. My question on- page 201
is put, “ The next thing is, there is another blank,” and
it goes on, “ whether he was here at the opening of the
Commonwealth Bank, I do not know.” If you will
refer to the transcript, you will see that there is no
blank.
The Chairman. —There is no blank in the transcript
of the notes.
Mr. Gussen. —I simply desire that the word “ no ”
should be substituted for the word “ another.”
Mr. Starke. —The Commission had better be clear
that Mr. Cornwell means that answer. If the short-
hand writer took you as saying “ another,” and you
really intended to say “ no,” you may have misled Mr.
Cornwell as well as the shorthand writer.
Mr. Gussen. —We will put Mr. Cornwell back again
in th© box.
The Chairman. —As it is, of course, it is contradic-
tory.
Mr. Starke. —I desire that there should be no doubt
about it, and I think Mr. Cornwell had better be
recalled.
The Chairman. —As it appears here, it may refer to
either Mr. Cresswell or Mr. Jensen.
A. E. Cornwell, recalled.
By Mr. Gussen. —You see, Mr. Cornwell, on the last
page of “Exhibit 13 ” the sentence starting, “L: You
can accept my assurance that he was not interested.
Whether he was here at the opening of the Common-
wealth Bank, I do not know”?—I see that sentence.
You see that there is no blank between the sentence
“ You can accept my assurance he was not interested ”
and the sentence “ Whether he was here at the opening
of the Commonwealth Bank ” ?—There is no blank there
in the transcript.
If that transcript is accurate, as Price says it is, do
you still persist that the “ he ” in the sentence “ You
can accept my assurance he was not interested” refers
to Mr. Cresswell?—Yes; I am certain on that point.
Do you also persist in the statement that “Whether
he was here at the opening of the Commonwealth Bank,
I do not know” refers to Mr. Jensen?—I am absolutely
certain of that.
Mr. Gussen. —I have got all I want on that subject.
The other matter I want to address the Commission on
is this: Mr. J ensen instructs me that when he gave
evidence before the Commission on another occasion,
a man named Carroll had already given evidence, and
certain questions were asked of him relating to Carroll’s
evidence. I did not understand, from the opening of
counsel assisting the Commissioners, that Carroll is
going to be called in these proceedings.
Mr. Starke. —No; I think he is utterly unreliable.
Mr. Gussen. —l accept that statement.
Mr. Starke. —l will give you the statement he made
to the Commission if you wish, and think it is of any
advantage to you.
Mr. Gussen. —l would like it.
Mr. Starke. —I am not calling him; but I think it
is only right you should see it. I will show you that,
because I think lam right in saying this. I examined
him before the Commission, and I think the Commis-
sion was satisfied that he was a thoroughly unreliable
witness.
Mr. Gussen. —There are two letters, I understand,
which Mr. Jensen handed to the Commission which he
received from Carroll, and also the shorthand notes of
an interview which Carroll and he had which was taken
by his secretary and another shorthand writer. That
evidence was handed to the Commission, I understand.
The Chairman. —Yes.
Mr. Gussen. —l have got a copy of the shorthand
notes of the interview, but I would like to see those
letters.
Mr. Starke. —l will get them for you.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Those questions that you
asked Senator Long at that interview, had you prepared
them before he came, or did they occur to you just at
the time ? —lt was quite spontaneous.
There were no notes made at the time?—No.
By Mr. Starke. —I understand Mr. Price gave you a
transcript of the notes he had made?—Yes; that is so.
That was the notes of the interview between Senator
Long and yourself ?—Yes.
How long after it took place?—l am not certain
whether it was on Saturday or on Monday morning.
What did you do then ?—I immediately sat down and
wrote up a detailed account from those notes while the
whole thing was fresh in my memory.
Is that the account of what you wrote out of what
the interview was —[hands document to. witness ] ?
Yes.
How long has that been known to Mr. Newman, the
secretary of the Commission?—Since last night.
Has any copy of it been put before the Commission?
—Yes; for a long time.
Has the secretary of the Commission had it?—l
think it was handed to Mr. Barton.
The Chairman. —The Commission has no knowledge
of it.
Mr. Starke. I said the secretary of the Commission.
LXHIBIT iVo. 26. —Notes of interview by
A. E. Cornwell.
Mr. Starke. There is no objection to Mr. Cussen
personally taking that document to examine it himself.
Mr. Cussen asked me certain things about Carroll, and I
propose, with the sanction of the Commission, to give
h m a statement made by Carroll on the 14th of May,
also a statement made by Carroll, I think, on the 16th
on which he was examined by me. Also a statement of
the transcript of Mr. Jensen’s interview with Carroll.
Mr. Cussen. —l have got that; I want Carroll’s evi-
dence if possible.
Mr. Starke. Here is his statement; is that what you
mean ?
Mr. Gussen. —Yes.
Mr. Starke. I think you will find all the cross-
examination I submitted him to established that we
could not rely upon him at all. The result is that I
have not felt it necessary to call him before the Com-
mission in any way. If Mr. Jensen wishes him to be
called, I will call him, if I can find him.
Mr. Gussen. —l do not want any liars called before
the Commission.
Mr. Starke. —l was only just wanting to bring out
he was utterly untruthful; you could not believe him
on his oath.
Mr. Cussen. —l only wanted to know where I stood.
The Chairman. —We absolutely wiped his evidence
out altogether. ,
4 2


Mr. Starke. —Mr. Jensen knows all about it.
Mr. Cussen. —He told me about it, but I wanted to
clear the air.
Mr. Starke. —The chairman told him he did not trust
Mr. Carroll. He has not been called, because I took
the responsibility of saying I could place no reliance
on him.
The Witness.— There is one other matter in regard
to that transcript, before I got that transcript from Mr.
Price I saw Mr. Barton and gave him a detailed account
so far as I could remember of the interview. Mr.
Barton may be able to corroborate it. I met him about
9.30 in the morning, and I was with him about li hours
that morning.
The witness withdrew.
Albert Gardiner, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a member of the Senate?
-Yes.
You are not a member of the Government? —No; hot
at present.
Were you a member of the Government in 1916?
Until the 27th August, 1916.
You were called merely to deal with the statement
that has been made that Bong said that Father Shaw
had handed four packages to him, one was for Long,
one was for Gardiner, containing £650, one was for
Russell, containing £650, and the other for the big man,
which he thought was Mr. Jensen. Is there any truth
whatever in any suggestion by any one that you re-
ceived directly or indirectly from Father Shaw, or
any one else, a sum of money as a commission, or as a
douceur, in connexion with a purchase by the Govern-
ment of the Shaw wireless works? —Absolutely none. I
would like to say that I positively swear that indirectly
or directly I have received from no one any moneys
whatever outside the ordinary course of business.
That is a little ambiguous. You do not mean in
connexion with the Shaw wireless?—l mean in con-
nexion with the Shaw wireless, absolutely no.
A present or anything else ?—No.
Where do you bank?—-During the time I was a mem-
ber of the Government I had a current account running
at the Commonwealth Bank, Melbourne. Previous to
that my bank account was in the Bank of New South
Wales, at Orange, when I lived at Orange, and then it
was transferred from Orange to Waverley.
I understand you have allowed Mr. Barton, the ac-
countant, access to that account ? —I do not understand
anything of the kind. They may have had access to
it, and they can now, if they wish.
By Senator Long. —Do you remember in 1914,.when
you were a member of the Government, that I intro-
duced a resolution in the Senate which has already
been before the Commission, dealing with the question
of the Government taking over the manufacture of its
wireless and telephone material itself. Do you remem-
ber that you were leading the Government during that
period of the Senate sitting?—Yes, I do.'
Do you remember the reference you made in speaking
on behalf of the Government, I mean in general terms ?
—I do not remember it.
Can you tell the Commission this, that before that
resolution was moved, or after it, or at any other time,
did I attempt in any way, or in any degree, to influence
you as a member of the Government to purchase the
Shaw wireless works in any shape or form? —No, not
in shape or form. I would like to make this state-
ment, when speaking of this, without speaking at any
length, an inquiry like this cannot be held without a
good many rumours, and I want to say that with regard
to the purchase of that plant at Randwiok that I was
quite eager for its purchase because at that time there
was a war raging, Australia was depleted of arms, and
I was aware that plant could materially assist in expedit-
ing the production of rifles and much other very useful
work, and I w’ant to say to get into the atmosphere of
that time you would have to understand that when a
plant was offered below valuation I would have been
of opinion it would have been cheap at a greater price
in view of the need of the Government.
By Mr. Starke. —Were you a member of the Govern-
ment that purchased it?—l think so.
Did you know that Admiral Clarkson had reported
against it ? —I could not speak definitely on any reports
against it, but a report favorable to it was in our
possession.
That was Engineer-Commander Cresswell’s report.
That is the one you are thinking of? —I am merely
thinking of the full reports and statements placed be-
fore us by the Minister.
Did you read them or accept the Minister’s assurance
as to what they were ? —I cannot discuss Cabinet
matters.
I am merely asking you did you read the document?
—I had the documents in my possession before.
Did you see the report of Admiral Clarkson against
the purchase I—l1 —I do not remember having seen the
report by Admiral Clarkson.
Did you know there had been a draft report by Mr.
Cresswell which had been altered or taken back on the
suggestion of the Minister? —No; I did not know that.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen .. —Was the whole file
of papers in connexion with this matter before Cabinet ?
—Yes. . ..
Do you remember anything being said or indicated at
the Cabinet meeting of some opposition because of the
fear of industrial troubles ?—That was one of our
difficulties —industrial troubles. We would have taken
over much more business but for that.
Do you remember that being discussed at the Cabinet
meeting ?—I cannot tell you what was discussed at the
Cabinet.
Do you remember the matter of industrial troubles,
or the possibility of them being before Cabinet? —Yea;
the question of industrial troubles in taking over any-
thing would always be considered by Cabinet, and would
play a part in whether we were going to take over a large
concern.
I think I ought to say this to you, that the suggestion
underlying the question relating to Admiral Clarkson’s
report was that Mr. Jensen suppressed that from
Cabinet. Now you see the necessity there is for me to
get as much from you as you know about this matter in
justice to Mr. Jensen ?—Without discussing Cabinet
business, I would say Mr. Jensen put the pros and cons
of the whole business before Cabinet in a thoroughly
business-like way, and no man was under any mis-
apprehension of either anything for or against it.
Without discussing details that occurred in Cabinet,
each Minister when he brings the proposal forward puts
a full statement and all reports on the table. They pass
round among the Ministers,, and they have an oppor-
tunity of seeing them. I will say Mr, Jensen put the
whole of the reports purposely before Parliament, but
I would not say I saw the whole of the reports.
You say the whole of the pros and cons were put
before Cabinet by Mr. Jensen? —Yes.
By Mr. Starke, —Just look at that report by Admiral
Clarkson. Did you ever see or hear the purport of that
report ?—My memory being refreshed by looking at that
report, I should say Mr. Jensen commented on that.
You cannot add anything further than that without
a breach of your confidential relations with the Cabinet ?
.—I feel in a very delicate position with regard to dis-
cussing Cabinet matters, because there is no end to it
if you start. But I would like to say this, that being
asked on any document at any time, I could not give
you any definite answer, but by reading that report,
that immediately stirs the springs of memory, and my
memory at once remembers statements of that kind,
and I am of the opinion that I have read that document
before.
There is nothing else you want to add? —No.
The witness withdrew.


Amos Burr, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you? —I am the chief of
the State Hansard staff.
I believe some shorthand notes were put into your
hands last night—by whose direction ? —-I believe it was
Mr. Knowles who gave them to me.
Mr. Knowles is Acting Solicitor-General ? —I do not
know.
At all events you could not transcribe the whole of
the notes, could you ?—I could in time.
Not at the time at your disposal ?—No.
You did transcribe part?—Yes, the last six pages.
Will you get the shorthand notes that you transcribed
from page 16—[“ Exhibit 14 ”] ?—Yes, I have them
now.
EXHIBIT No. 27.
Is this your transcript of those notes— [produced] ?
Yes.
I will read it, and then you can compare it with the
notes. You did not see any other transcription of the
notesi?—No.
If you look at page 5, this appears, “ I could not do
it ” ?—Yes; that is right.
Then it goes on, “ No matter'what happened to me.
In will do for me the way things are ”.?—lt
looks like. “In a couple of years will do for me.”
You took that word as “ I cannot,” Is it not “ I
could”?—No; it is “I cannot.”
Then it goes on, “ I was under the X-rays on Thurs-
day last”?—The “last” is not very distinctly
written; it would do equally well for “run.”
Then it goes on, “ C. Jensen has always struck me
as ”; then you could not read it, “As a man who
would say you can swim if you can ” ?—That is here;
I could not read it last night.
Then, “ L., lam the man who has to suffer. He can
deny it ” ?—Yes, that is right.
Then, “ C., I have felt very worried over the thing.
I think, as a matter of fact ” ?—That is what it is. I
can see that now. “It was my duty to do the best I
could for them.”
You agree with Price there?—lt is quite clear now—
there is no doubt about that.
Then, “L. As I tell you there was ” ?—lt
might be “ tell.” “ Either as I tell you.”
What I suggest is, “As I tell you there was no,
” ? —There is a stroke, it might be “at,” or a
tick to show he could not hear.
Then it goes on T “ C., I am not in a positon to judge.
Cresswell is either a fool or a rogue ’ ’ ? —That is right
there.
Then on the next page, "C., what about Jensen
now?” Then you have stopped there?—There is an
“L ” without any shorthand note to it. There is a
blank.
Then the next passage is, “ When Cresswell was
asked to withdraw the report he destroyed it.” Then.
“L. Of course if Cresswell.” Then there is a blank.
Then “C. Apparently he has forgotten all about it
himself. He got a reminder from one of his staff. You
can take it for granted they have got right to the
bottom. They had Cresswell back again. They asked
him if on a certain date did not you write a certain
letter ” ?—“ Did not he write a certain letter ?”
“ He said ‘ yes,’ and that he should withdraw it ” ?
I am not certain about it.
“They said why did you withdraw it”?—lt might
be that. ■
Then, “ Where is Jensen now ? I have been think-
ing.” You have got it, “I thinking ” ?—lt is
a new form to me, but it is a very good outline for “ I
have been.”
Take the next page ?—There is another line to go on
that page 17.
“ 0. Yea. have to take this point into consideration.”
That i» left out in your copy?—Yes,
Then, “ A man comes over to value the stock.” Can
you see the word “ find ” there?—lt might he “ find.”
“ He found that that stuff is at the market price.
As far as I was concerned, they have to eliminate from
that stock the stock which is obviously,” I suggest
“of no use to them ”?—That is right, I can see it
now.
" The market value is the minimum value stock
value at about £1,300 I cannot deny this fact,
I have said it that Shaw came to me on the Thursday,
and said* he wanted the stock valued to submit it in my
.” Can you read that ?—“ To submit in
my.” Then there is a full stop, and it goes on “He
wanted it by Sunday.” Those are the next words.
Then there is another blank ? —No, there is no blank,
it says, "To submit in my ,” then that stop.
Then it goes on, “He wanted it by Sunday. For God’s
sake.”— [No blanks.] —Then ‘‘Let me have it. The
Minister has asked for it.”
' Then, “L. Wasn’t this first Committee sent over
from Melbourne to value.” That is what I suggest to
you comes next?—That is what it is.
Then, ‘‘ C. No. The only valuation was Ross’s. He
said the stock would have to be taken as correct as
there was no time?”—Yes, but after ‘‘correct” there
is a full stop, and then it goes on, “ As there was no
time.”
Then, “In view of the fact that the Minister had
asked for a valuation as soon as possible, he took the
valuation as correct?”—Yes.
Then, "L. Jensen wired the New South Wales
Minister?”—l could not make out what that was last
night.
Is not the sentence, “Jensen wired the New South
Wales Minister for Lands to recommend a man”?—
Yes.
You have it, “ Jensen wired Minister Land
R. a man ” ?.—The R. is disconnected from the
N. I was unable to read the R.
It is very difficult, is it not, unless it is a very clear
outline, to read another man’s shorthand writing?—lt
is a difficult thing.
The Chairman. —Substantially the most of it is cor-
rect ?—There is no doubt when you decipher it.
Mr. Starke. —Would you like me to go on further,
Mr. Long?
Senator Long. —No, I was not so particular about it;
all I wanted was the opinion of an expert gentleman.
Mr. Starke. —You can ask him anything you want.
By Senator Long. —l just want to ask you this;
Have you gone thoroughly through those shorthand
notes ?—Only thoroughly through the last six pages.
Not. through the earlier pages at all ?—Yes, we
glanced at them, and then we took the last six pages
that we thought we could transcribe in the time. I
had another member of the staff with me, but I trans-
soribed it myself.
If the shorthand writer had taken a note of that
kind, and if an hour after, or a day after, he made any
additions to them, would that be apparent to an expert
like yourself?—Yes, I could tell that.
Did you notice any additions, any marks, or what
indicated additions in that report on the pages you
did go over?—On this very line that I am looking at
now, I can see as if there is the word “ saying ” put in
there.
Would you read the whole sentence?—“Jensen has
always struck me as a man saying you can swim.” I
could tell by the spaces the word “ saying ” had been
interpolated there. It is not in the current writing,
and it is not in the current spacing. I would say it
has been put in.
Is that the only addition ?
Senator L.ong. —l realize it is rather a difficult posi-
tion to put Mr. Burr in, and I suggest this—that he
should take his time to go through and inspect those
notes, and send a report to you as to whether there
have been any additions, substantially or otherwise, to


those notes after they have been originally taken ?—I
can answer that; there have been no substantial addi-
tions.
To those pages that you have transcribed?—No, the
man has gone over and put in vowels. I can see the
man has gone over his notes, put in vowels here and
there, and made them a little clearer.
By the Chairman. —That is not an unusual thing for
a shorthand writer to do?—No, I have done it myself.
If I was called upon to read a note, I would go over
it and make it clearer, anything I had any doubt about.
By Senator Long. —Did you have any instructions;
and, if so, from whom as to what pages of those short-
hand notes you should transcribe ?—No, it might have
been suggested. I said I had not time to transcribe
the whole of them, but I could transcribe a
part so that a comparison could be made between my
transcription and the writer’s transcription, and then
you could judge from that as to the correctness of the
other part. That was agreed to, and I said, “Well,
we will take the last six pages.”
May I get your opinion on just one other point in
connexion with shorthand reporting. If I was being
interviewed by Mr. Starke in this room, or-interrogated
by him, and you were in an adjoining room, and had
to depend upon a telephone to hear what passed be-
tween Mr. Starke and I, do you think you could give
anything like a reasonably correct report of what
transpired between Mr. Starke and I in that conversa-
tion. You would not undertake it. You say that it would
be bordering on the impossible, holding a telephone to
your ear to take those notes, which is the least diffi-
cult part of it, and hear a conversation that is taking
place at a distance, which has been admitted as some
20 feet, with a wall intervening ? —I should say no.
While the witnesses have been examined in this room
this morning, and I was sitting here, there were some
words I could not catch.
What would be your opinion of a shorthand note
taken like that?—lt would be like this, very frag-
mentary.
Would it be unreliable?—Unreliable as a. good re-
port, but with a good man it would be a record of what
he heard.
Mr. Starke. —I will now put Senator Long in the
box.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Starke. —Would you prefer to make your own
statement first or that I should ask you what questions
I think desirable?
Senator Long.—l should prefer you to ask me ques-
tions which you think desirable.
James Joseph Long, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a member of the Senate? —■
Yes; I am a member of the Senate.
Since what date have you been a member of the
Senate?—The 13th of April, 1910.
Would you tell me, did you know Father Shaw ?
Very, very intimately.
For how long ?—Very intimately for four years. I
bad known him for six years.
I understand that you sent your son to his works to
be trained in electrical engineering?—Yes.
Had you been frequently at the works?—Up to that
point, not very frequently.
How often were you out at the works ?—A number of
times. It is almost five years ago, and I could not say
from memory.
Did you know of Father Shaw’s offer to the Navy
Department of his wireless works at Randwick ?—Yes.
Did you write out or in any way draft or write out
the application form?—Yes.
Was it drafted or written out by you ?—I drew a
rough draft of what I thought he ought to send.
Might I explain that Father Shaw stated that the
supply of wireless material would become very im-
portant, as the Commonwealth Government were en-
gaged, in common with the rest of the Empire, in a war
with Germany, and he thought that they would like
a lot of this material. And it might, perhaps, happen
that the Commonwealth would consider the purchase
of his works. I said to him, “ Why not submit it to
the Government.” He said, “ Well, how do you go
about it.” ' I said, “ If you give me the rough par-
ticulars I will make out a rough draft of it and then
from that you can send on the proposition to the Go-
vernment.” I drew out that draft, and I have never
seen it since, and 1 do not know how it reached the
Government.
This was the offer that he made, is that what you
drafted —[ handed to.'witness] ?—I could not say that it
was, but I believe it represents it.
Do you remember the figure there, £57,000? —No.
What date was that draft, about what date did you
draft it?—Really, I could not give you any date.
I suppose it was shortly before the date of that
letter?—Yes, I should imagine so.
Was it posted or did you leave it at the Navy Office ?
—I never heard of or saw this document after the rough
draft I drew in the room at Federal Parliament House
which I gave to Father Shaw.
After that date did you see the Minister or any
officer of the Naval Department in reference to Father
Shaw’s offer or proposition to the Navy Department ?
—Possibly I saw the Minister.
With reference to the offer ? —I would not say that.
Will you say you did not?—l will say distinctly that
I did not see the Minister with the object that you
suggest, of furthering this proposition.
Did you speak to him about this proposition ?—I have
■no recollection whatever, but I should say I did not
mention the matter to the Minister.
Is that all you can say that you did not mention it to
him in any way ?—1 believe that I did not mention it.
Did you mention it to any officer of the Navy De-
partment, such as Mr. Cresswell? —Possibly.
What way ? —'When, Ido not know. Possibly I
have mentioned it to Mr. Cresswell, but I have no
recollection of doing that, but I will tell- you what I do
remember discussing with Mr. Cresswell, at what period
of the negotiations I am uncertain, that if the Govern-
ment did acquire those works at Randwick that I should
be very glad if be would see that the training of my
boy at those works was not interrupted.
Did you speak to him in any other direction in con-
nexion with the proposition. I understand you asked
him to see that your boy’s training was uninterrupted.
Did you speak to him as to the possibility of the pur-
chase ? —I think now that I did discuss with Mr. Cress-
welT the wireless proposition. If I remember rightly,
Lieutenant Cresswell introduced the subject himself.
Where ?—ln Melbourne.
At his office ?—I think so.
How were you there?—By the ordinary methods of
locomotion.
What took you to his office? —One hundred and one
things would take me to the Navy Office.
One was Shaw’s business ?—Not necessarily.
Probably?—l might explain.
You could then relate the hundred and one things
if you can remember. That was one of the hundred and
one things that took you to Mr. Oresswell’s office?—l
did not say the hundred and one things would take me
to Mr. Cresswell’s office; I said to the Navy Office.
I said, why did you see Mr. Cresswell? —Well, if a
member is waiting and prevented from seeing the Minis-
ter because of those ahead of him, it is no uncommon
thing to get into conversation with officials that may be
handy.
Mr. Oresswell’s office is not near the Navy Office, it is
down in Collins House. The Navy Department is in
Lonsdale-street. They are not in the same building, I
understand ?—But we are discussing a period in the
history of the Navy when they were. ,


You know where the Radio Office is in Collins House
now?—Yes, now.
Did you see Mr. Cresswell in Collins House, in Col-
lins-street?—l may have.
Did you?—-I have no recollection of it.
You said you saw Mr. Cresswell?—Hot at that office.'
The conversation I have just described to you took
place at the old Lonsdale-street office.
You had gone to see the Minister about something?—
More than likely.
About Shaw’s matter ?—I would not say that.
What had you gone to see the Minister about?—lt
would be quite impossible lor me to say.
Do jou deny you went to see him about Shaw’s mat-
ter?—Absolutely and positively.
What did you go to see him about?—Mr. Chairman,
I have already said that I could not for the -life of me
. say what was the business character or the nature of
the business on which I went to see the Minister; but
there is surely a record in the Department, and if a
member has business with the Minister dealing with any
Commonwealth matter the secretary, or some official,
would be sure to have some record of it.
The question is, what is your recollection?—l regret
that I am unable to give you any recollection.
You can recollect you went to see the Minister, and
you are certain it was not about the wireless works,
because you drafted the letter for Father Shaw?—Yes;
may I add this: that if it were necessary for me to see
the Minister in connexion with that it would have been
much more convenient for me to see him at Parliament
House than it would have been to go to his office.^
Did you see him at Parliament House?—l would see
him probably every day.
Did you ever speak to him about the Shaw Wireless
Works?—l do not think so. If Mr. Jensen said 1 did
I would not deny it.
_ What do you pledge your own belief on; did you see
him or did you not?—My belief is I never did. My
recollection is that at the time I was most careful not
to speak to the Minister or attempt to influence his
judgment in any way.
Why ?—For the first reason, I knew it would be quite
useless; that Mr. Jensen, like myself, would know no-
thing about the utility of a works of that character,
and that the whole matter would in the ordinary course
of events be sent to those best qualified to advise him,
and that the ultimate decision rests with them on that
and not with the Minister.
That is why you would not think it was worth while
speaking to him about it ?—Perhaps so.
Were you in touch with the negotiations from the time
of the application. Did Father Shaw tell you how
things were going?—l was never in touch with the
negotiations in connexion with the purchase or sale of
that wireless works beyond this; that is the composition
of the draft of letter which I drew up for Father Shaw.
Before that application was in, did you know it had
been offered to the Postmaster-General’s Department?—
I was in a measure responsible, not for the offer, but I
would like to explain. There was very slack time at
the works, and I had gone into the question of the pur-
chase of telephone material and instruments, which were
largely or wholly coming from Germany, through
Sweden, and I suggested to the Postmaster-General,
who, I think, was Mr. Spence at the time, it would be a
good scheme for the Commonwealth Government and a
justification of our policy for the Government to under-
take these things themselves, and if the Postmaster-
General would send officers across to Sydney to inspect
the works and report to the Postmaster-General upon
its utility it would be a good thing. The Postmaster-
General adopted my suggestion and sent officers across
to Hew South Wales, and although I never saw their
report I understand that the officers of the Postal De-
partment turned it down, I believe on the reason that
the works were established on land very much too ex-
pensive.
Did you draft that application to the Postmaster-
General?—Ho, I had nothing to do with it, so far as my
recollection goes.
Did you ever see it. I will read it to you—[ reads
letter from file]. Did you ever see that document? I
never saw it.
Did you ever hear the result of it?—Hothing beyond
what I have told you.
Did Father Shaw tell you what was the result?—lt is
more than likely he did. I haye no recollection of it.
What date was that ?
That letter is dated the Bth of December, 1914?—J n
1914 there was a change of Government. ITp to that
period the Commonwealth Government, particularly the
Postmaster-General’s Department, if not exclusively,
spent a great deal of money providing a great deal of
work at these works of the Shaw company. When the
change of Government came round the work given to
those works was absolutely cut off, and I understand that
the works never received sixpence from the Common-
wealth Government during that period. But, in addi-
tion to that, Shaw, on behalf of his company, was kept
waiting for an amount of a good many hundred pounds
from the Commonwealth Government for work done,
and if I remember rightly, in 1914, the condition of the
company was in such straits that he was induced to
again offer them to the Commonwealth Government.
Did you know that the Postmaster-General’s De-
partment investigated it ?—Yes.
Who told you that ?—Mr. Spence.
Did you know Father Shaw offered it to the Post-
master-General’s Department at £55,000 ?—No.
This is dated the 6th of January, 1915 \reads letter
from file]. Did you know of that offer?—No.
EXHIBIT No. 28.—Postmaster-General’s file.
You knew nothing of the offer ?—I do not think I
would be justified in saying I knew nothing about it,
because it is more than likely I would. You have the
report on the file.
It is on- the file. The report of the Committee of
Inquiry on the manufacture of wireless material, is
that what you mean ?—Yes.
There is also the report of the chief electrical en-
gineer ?—Yes.
Then, on the 24th of March, there is a letter to the
Shaw Wireless Works from the Postmaster-General’s
Department \reads letter] ?—Apparently the Postmaster-
General’s Department had turned it down at £55,000.
You have told us you did not know much of the
negotiations that the Navy Department had with Father
Shaw ?—Except what Shaw told me from time to time.
What did he tell you from time to time?—Nothing
much, he would simply say he had had nothing definite
yet.
When did you hear anything definite ?—I could not
give you any idea of that.
Do you remember Father Shaw coming to see you
at Parliament House on the 19th of August, 1916, or
any other date in August ?—Possibly he did, as that is
the date upon which I received money from him. Was
that a Saturday ?
On the 19th of August there was a cheque drawn
by Father Shaw for £5,300.- It was a Saturday?—
I saw him on a Saturday, somewhere about that time.
Where ?—At Parliament House.
Whereabouts at Parliament House? —In the Senate
Club Room.
Was any one present in the club-room?—Ho, that is
to say, after the messenger who showed him in.
Was Mr. Jensen in Melbourne on that date?—l could
not tell you; presumably he was.
Was Senator Gardiner in Melbourne on that date?—■
I have no idea.
Was Senator Russell?--! have no idea,


Did Father Shaw give you anything ?—Yes, he gave
me some money.
How was it done up?—Just in a roll of notes.
Was it done up in a packet?—jSTo, just the notes
rolled without any covering, no covering whatever.
What did he say to you ?—He said to me, “ Thank
God I have got the whole thing fixed up. Look, Jim
old man, I will never forget you for your kindness. I
do not know what I owe you, but I think this will
square us.” He handed me that money. I was sitting
on the big chair and he half embraced me and left the
club-room, arid I never saw him afterwards conscious.
What had you done for him?—l thought I had de-
tailed that rather fully. Do you wish me to do it
again ?
Yes, because this is another inquiry where every one
is hearing what every one who is interested has said?—
Well, Mr. Chairman, the question has been asked mo
what I have done for Father Shaw, that is to say,
why he should give me this money, the roll of notes.
There was no obligation upon him to do it, but possibly,
I would suggest this, it was done purely as an act of
gratitude in consideration of what I had done or en-
deavoured to do for him during a period of nearly
five years.
What had you done or endeavoured to do for him ?
This what I did. If Father Shaw had a commercial
or an industrial trouble, or even a financial trouble in
a small way, he came tome, and never on any occasion
when I was able to help much or assist him, did I fail to
to do that. Never while the trouble with the Govern-
ment was on with his contracts that he did not come to
me to see if I could help him out of it.
While in any trouble with the Government contracts
he came to you to help him ?—Yes.
And any trouble with industrial troubles he came to
you to help him ?—Yes, or with his contracts.
That is, Government contracts ?—Obviously. I would
.have no influence in any way other than that. By
industrial trouble I mean lack of employment.
That is getting him contracts, I presume ?—No, not
necessarily.
In suggesting contracts?—Yes.
By the Government?—Yes.
That is what you mean by industrial trouble,
when he had got no Government work to carry on, and
also in arranging contracts .for him ?—No, not
necessarily in arranging contracts.
Seeing the Department to see if they could not give
work to Shaw at his works ?—Yes.
That is what you had done and endeavoured to do ?
Yes.
That is what you meant when you said you had done
and endeavoured to do?—Yes.
Did you ever see Mr. Jensen for that purpose ?—No,
up to that time Mr. Jensen had not been- very long a
Minister.
What Ministers did you ask ?—Senator Pearce, Mr.
Spence, and the various Ministers in the various Depart-
ments.
Did you count the money that he gave you?—Yes, I
did.
When ?—Not in his presence, after he left.
It was all in notes ?—Yes.
Was it big notes ?—Yes, there was £1,200 in 100 note!
and the balance, £9O, £1,290 altogether.
When did you count that ?—After Father Shaw had
left the Senate club-room I counted it and put it in
my locker, except the amount I took out to the races
with me.
You put £1,290 in your locker. Did you put the
whole of the money in the locker?—With the exception
of what I took with me.
Had you any money in the locker at the time?—Yes.
How much? —I could not remember that.
Do you remember saying you had the whole of
Father Shaw’s money in the locker and took other
money to the races ?—I may have.
Which is accurate ?—My recollection is not very
clear.
And you had some £7O or £BO in your locker ?—Pos-
sibly I had; I invariably had cash in my locker.
Which is the accurate report?—Well,. I should say
that I have at this juncture no idea of the amount I
had in my locker, and the chances are I may have taken
some of that with me to the races.
You may?—Yes.
You did not see Father Shaw again that day?—No,
T never saw him again conscious. That was close on
12 o’clock.
He went away and you went off to the races ?—ln a
few minutes I went to the races. You were asking me
what I had done for Father Shaw which would justify
him in showing me that consideration as expressed by
the money. I was just about to add this, that, although
not a representative of New South Wales, I had always
taken a very keen interest in that works, after I knew
of its existence, and that interest was considerably re-
newed when my boy became an apprentice there, and
by that course the friendship between Father Shaw and
I ripened very much, and whenever he was at Rand-
wick, when I visited there, I was always his guest.
Another matter was his difficulties in connexion with
his wireless patents, and I was invariably his confidant
and his assistant in that trouble. The expenses for
those wireless patents which he was being called upon
to defend was a very expensive matter for Father Shaw,
and he had at different times drawn on -me for a con-
siderable amount. Like myself, Father Shaw was fond
of racing, and, like myself, of course, a bit reckless, and
without doing any injustice to his memory I just want
to say this, that he used to “ do ” a considerable amount
of money at races. He and I several times were at the
races together, and in the whole of the difficulties in
connexion with his dispute with- Balsillie, I was behind
the scenes. I helped him very materially, and although
my limited legal knowledge made me feel that his posi-
tion was absolutely unehallengable with regard to re-
cords in the Patents Office, I was in every way in the
position of one man helping another for a period of
four years. I was in the position of helping him, that
is to do for a man in whom I had the greatest respect,
to do for a man in whom I had the most complete con-
fidence what I could. I did for Father Shaw during
that period all that one man can do to help another.
Mr. Starke was good enough to say, in his opening
address to the Commission, that I had entertained
Father Shaw at lunch, and he disposed of what I had
done for Father Shaw with that reference. I want to
say that it was not a question of one lunch, of one
hundred, but Father Shaw was in Melbourne a great
deal in the last two years or eighteen months of his
life, and he spent more time with me, very much more
time with me, than he did with anybody else. I just
want to conclude by saying this, that Father Shaw was
under no obligation to me in the remotest possible
degree to reward me for anything I might have done in
the past in connexion with other matters or anything
that transpired in connexion with the success of the
sale of these works to the Commonwealth Government.
It was an absolute gratuity ?—Yes, it was an absolute
gratuity. Never at any time was there the slightest
suggestion that I, or anybody else, should profit by the
sale of these works to the Commonwealth Government.
You said you assisted him very greatly with the
patents?—Yes.
Of course, you are not a lawyer ?—'Not by any means.
You are not an engineer?—No, by no means.
There is only one other line of assistance, which was
that you are a politician ?—Not necessarily.
That was the only line of assistance which was of
any use?—Not necessarily.
You were going to use your political influence? —No.
Do you mean in a court of law?


What good was your influence in a court of law.
What use was your influence worth except as a poli-
tician?— j My influence was not worth very much per-
haps, except in assembling his papers and going
through them and noting them.
Be had a secretary, Lynch?'—l am speaking of the
time when he was in Melbourne.
Is it not a fact that when you speak of the great
assistance you were rendering to him it was entirely
political, going round the departments, seeing Minis-
ters, seeing officers of the departments, and seeing or
using every effort you could to advance his interests ?
Hot at all. I have done the same thing for dozens of
other people, and will do it again.
You mean going around to the Ministers and ad-
vancing their cases in every direction you could ?—I do
not say that. I advanced their claims in a legitimate
way.
Have any of them paid you gratuities for doing so?
■—Ho.
Only Father Shaw?—Yes, only Father Shaw.
(Did you ever advance Father Shaw any money?—
Yes.
How much ?—At different times do you mean ? If
so, I advanced him moneys to the amount, I should say,
now speaking from memory, approaching £3OO.
For how many years?—Perhaps three years.
What years were those, 1915 and 1916, or what year
before that? —I should say 1915 and 1916.
Your only remuneration at that time was your
Senate salary?—Yes, that is all.
£6OO per year?—Yes.
You had a wife? —Yes.
How many children dependent upon you?—Six.
Where on earth did you get £3OO in two years to loan
to Father Shaw?—lt would not be an impossible task.
He got it from time to time. I would loan him £2O or
£3O, and bn one occasion £52.
Did you ever say that the amount that you had loaned
him was £l7o?—Ho. Just excuse me a moment. In
that £270, I would include everything.
Hot £270, £l7O. I suggest to you, you formally told
the Commission you had advanced Father Shaw £170?
—Yes.
Why have you put it up to £3OO? —I said approach-
ing £3OO. Haturally, I kept records.
Where are they?—l kept records of those little
amounts; but, naturally, they were destroyed long ago,
because I never anticipated there would ever be an
inquiry like this.
On the 4th of September, 1916, there was paid into
your bank account at the Commonwealth Bank, I sup-
pose the largest sum of money in one amount that you
had ever had, £2,400 ?—That is so.
Where did you get that? —That was part of the money
I got from Father Shaw, and the balance of it I had
won at the races at Flemington on, I think, the 19th of
August, and the 2nd of September, at Caulfield.
How much did you win at Flemington on the 19th
of August ?—That lam not Very clear about. I think
I won about £3OO. If I can trust my memory rightly,
I should say I won £334 that day at Flemington.
Did you book your bets?—l do not think I booked
many bets on that occasion. Ido not think I used
to book very much.
You bet in cash?.—Yes; probably I may have booked
bets.
How much money did you take out? —£70 or £BO.
Did you get it from your locker? —Yes.
What amount did you take?—l am quite clear on
that day I did not hook any bets.
They were all cash bets?—-Yes. I will not bind my-
self absolutely to that, but I believe that every bet I
bad that day was a cash bet.
What horses did you hack? —I cannot say definitely,
but I can give you the name of one horse on which I
had a very good win, and that was Bridges. I think
I started off that day in the hurdle race with Hympie.
Those are two horses that day.
Who did you back Bridges with? —I could not say.
What bets did you take?—At this juncture, I could
not say.
Who did you hack Hympie with? —I have no idea.
Wbat bets did you take? —I could not tell you that;
it would be utterly impossible.
At what odds were the horses ?—I think I got 10 to 1
Bridges, and 7orBto 1 on the hurdle racer. I think
I also had a win on Artillery Bill that day.
Did you back them all with one bookmaker?—Ho;
if I had, there would be no difficulty in remembering
my bets, or who I had them with.
According to you, you came home with some £3OO in
your pocket?—l did not come home. I went straight
on to Sydney after the fourth or fifth race.
.How long did you stay in Sydney. You caught the
express, and you would have some £4OO in your pocket?
—Yes; I had over that.
How long did you stop there? —I could not give you
the date, but I think I was back here on the Thursday
following.
Did you keep the money all the time? —Yes.
Then you never banked it? —Ho.
Then you came back to Melbourne? —Yes.
What did you do with the money then?—The first
thing I did then was to ascertain where Father Shaw
was. The first thing I did was to see him and ascer-
tain his condition. lam clear that I did not go to
the House for lunch, or anywhere until I had seen
Father Shaw. After I had seen him, I went to the
House and put the balance of my money in my locker.
You put £4OO odd in the locker? —Yes.
How much had you in the locker besides ?—That I
could not tell you.
I suppose this locker that you have is a cupboard
to which you have a key?—Yes; all the members have
that.
You had then something like £1,290 and £3OO to £4OO
in your locker? —Yes.
You kept the money till when. What did you do
next with the money ?—I left it there. I was too
worried over Father Shaw to give any special attention
to monetary matters, or anything else.
What day did he die ?—I do not quite remember, but
I think it was the 26th of August. -
When did you go to the races next, the following
Saturday, the 19th, was it not?—He died on the 26th
of August, and the following Saturday was not the 19th.
The 19th was the first race day?—The next races
were at Caulfield.
. Was it on the 26th of August ?—Ho; that was the day
that Father Shaw died. Saturday, I think, was the
26th of August. ■
The 19th was a Saturday, and the 26th was a Satur-
day?—The latter date is the date he died.
The next Saturday was the 2nd of September, and
that was the date of the next race meeting?—Yes; that
was at Caulfield.
You went out to the races again?—Yes. -
Then, from the 19th of August, you had been so
worried and upset at Father Shaw’s death that you
could do no business? —That is so.
You could not even bank your £l,soo?—lt was not a
question of taking it to the bank. I had not decided
what I should do with it.
On the 2nd of September, you again arrive at the
race-course? —I presume that is the date.
I presume you had some money in your pocket?—
I had.
How much? —I could mot say that.


Where did you take the money from. Did you draw
it out of the bank?—No.
Where did you get it from?—From the usual reser-
voir, I suppose.
Did you take £lOO this time?—l could not tell you'.
You went punting; did you back any winners?—Yes,
I have already indicated that I had nearly the best
day in my life then, but I have had a better one since.
How much did you win?—l won £7OO or £BOO. I
cannot remember the amount I won at Caulfield that
day, but without any hesitation I say I won £BOO.
Cash betting?—Yes.
All cash betting, no booked bets ?—I would not say
I did not book bets.
Did you make any settling; did you go to the settling
clubs after Caulfield. If you had made cash bets you
would not go?—I cannot remember that.
You cannot remember whether you went to any of
the settling clubs. Do you remember any horses you
backed ?—Yes, I remember the principal one I backed
was “ Prince Bardolph.’ 7
Do you remember the odds?—Yes, the odds I got
were 25 to 1, but I believe he started at a little longer
odds than that.
How much did you put on him ?—Even that I could
not tell you just now.
What bookmaker did you bet with?—l cannot tell
you what bookmaker. If one has a bet with a book-
maker, it is settled the next minute or the next morn-
ing, and the incident disappears from your mind.
The £BOO incident had disappeared?—On Saturday,
the day on which “ Cuffs ” won the steeplechase at
Caulfiela, I won £1,200, and except for one bet of
£5OO that I won off one man, I could not tell you the
names of the other bookmakers, nor whom I won the
balance of the money with. The bets were won and
settled next day. I think I backed “ Coronatus ” also.
You cannot remember any of the bookmakers ? —I
could give you the names of 50 bookmakers with whom
I had a bet.
What has that got to do with it I —lt is only this—
that if you cared to call any of those bookmakers, and
asked them the questions you are asking me, you
would get the information.
You tell me a bookmaker you made a bet with, what
bet, and what horse?—l cannot tell you that. X could
tell you a dozen, or half-a-dozen with whom I probably
bet.
Will you swear to the name of one bookmaker you
bet with on the 2nd of September at Caulfield?—No,
Nor to a bet that you made?—No. Perhaps tip-
may be a little information for you; when I had backed
Prince Bardolph I'told a friend of mine, Mr. Kellow,
what I had done, he said, “Did you see Mr. Craw-
ford,” I said “ No, I have not.” Be said, “ Com 0
along quickly; come down to the bird cage and g°e
what he says.” He asked him what chance it had.
Mr. Crawford said, “Not a dog’s chance.” Kellow
turned round to me and said, “You can see you havj
no chance,” but the horse cantered in. It was a bit
luck for me, but if I had seen Mr. Crawford I would
not have had a penny on the horse.
At that time you had made your bet?—-Yes.
You do not remember the bookmaker?—No; but I
say this, that it is probable I bet with Bergmans,
James, Jansen, or Sam Allen. I say it is probable. T
bet with all those men and Hawkins, the men that
are along the fence. If you can only get a short price
a man that is opening a book is not going to d' -
you a long price about any horse. Then you go outside
if you cannot get a long price, and move about amongst
the bookmakers.
How much did you come home with in your pockets ?
—I suppose with between £BOO and £9OO.
Then it was all cash betting?—l think it would be
cash betting.
Of course, you walked up to Parliament House at
once?—No. I did not.
Where did you stroll round ?—I did not stroll round
at all.
Where did you get to?—As far as I recollect now, I
had dinner with some friends, Charlie Kellow among
them, at Hosie’s, and after dinner I went up to the
House.
Of course, by yourself ?—Yes, probably.
And locked up the money in the treasury?—Yes, as
usual.
On the 4th September, you paid £2,400 into yerr
account, and that is the history of that money?—Yes.
I notice the next day, or the day after that, yen
drew out £l,OOO, and on the 7th another £l,OOO. I
have your cheques here, which show the persons to
whom you paid them. They are stock brokers?—A. A.
S. Baillieu.
And E. L. & C. Baillieu. What did you buy with
the £l,OOO? —They invested the money for me in War
Bonds.
Why did you go to the two firms? —1 do not know.
They seem to be different men, or are they in the same
firm ?—They are different firms. I think I can explain
that. I intended to invest £l,OOO for my wife, and I
would take that to E. L. & C. Baillieu, who were stock
brokers and stock advisers. I was going to get them
to invest that £l,OOO in securities, but having con-
sidered the matter very very carefully, I did not feel
like running risks at the time, and I would not be run-
ning any risk if I put a large amount into War Bonds.
A. S. Baillieu is not a broker, his firm are house, land,
and estate agents.
• Those two sums are invested in War Bonds or War
Stock?—ln War Bonds.
On 2nd September you drew a cheque for £517
14s. fid. ?—Yes.
What was that cheque for?—l could not tell you just
now.
Whom did you pay it to?—I think it would be in
respect to the mortgage on my house.
EXHIBIT No. 29. —Two cheques.
You told me that you used to keep money in your
locker at Parliament House; where did you get that
money from ?—Do you mean apart from the money I
got from Father Shaw. If so, I would probably get
that from racing, or if you want me to admit other
vices, perhaps from a game of cards.
Let me look at your banking account for a moment.
You transferred on 18th May, 1916, from Hobart,
£5OO. That was a transfer from your account in Tas-
mania ? —The balance, I should say.
Then, apparently, on the 31st May another £lBl
from Hobart, too?—That was a sale of a bit of pro-
perty.
I come down to the 30th June, and you have a credit
balance of £314 on 30th June, 1916, and by August
your credit had dropped to £4l ?—Yes.
You have told us the only money you were getting
in was your salary of £5O per month. That appears
to have been paid in regularly every month?—Yes; it
is paid in by the Clerk of the Senate.
Your credit at August was only £4l 9s. 2d. How on
earth did you effect these savings that you say you had
in your locker?—A man that takes the risks that I do
is naturally up and down.
You mean punting and card-playing?—Yes,
Although you had all this family responsibility, vou
were racing, punting, and card-playing, and you had
made money by it?—l do not know about making
money by it.
You are serious, of course, in asking the Commission
to accept the statements which you are making that
you won £l,lOO from the 19th of August to the 2nd of
September?—l hope I am.
I want to call your attention to some statements. Yon
know Lynch, Father Shaw’s former employee ?—Joseph
Lynch, yes.
Have you known Lynch long ?—A good while, from
the earliest days I went to the wireless works. As a
matter of fact, I think my son used to board with his
mother for several years.


I presume we may take it he is a reliable enough
man ?—Y es; I would like to hear those statements. I
have heard other statements come from alleged reliable
men. Were those statements made before the Commis-
sion ?
Yes; they were made before the Commission. If
Lynch said that Father Shaw told him, “ That Long
was acting for him on behalf of the Government; that
Long was the man who was getting into touch with the
Government side,” in connexion with the transaction,
is that true?—lt is obviously wrong.
If Father Shaw told Lynch that, he was saying what
was inaccurate ?—Positively inaccurate.
You know nothing at all about it?—Did Mr. Lynch
make that statement himself ?
Ho; Shaw sard that?—Did Mr. Lynch suggest how
1 was acting ?
He said that Shaw told him that?—That is not an
accurate statement.
Shaw was a great friend of yours?—l should say, yes.
Hot likely to do you any harm or make untruthful
statements about you?—No; he was a man who would
speak thoughtlessly at times.
But not untruthfully ?—No; I do not think so.
If Lynch makes this statement, that Father Shaw was
figuring out what he- would get out of the purchase of
the works, and had figured out that Whiting and
Aitken were to get £25,000; Lane and Peters, £7,000;
Senator Long, £2,000; Mr. Jensen, £2,000; Com-
mander Cresswell, £l,OOO, and that Father Shaw figured
that out on paper, can you understand why Father
Shaw would make that statement?—No; I would say
that was an absolute fabrication by Lynch. When did
Father Shaw make that statement?
Lynch says that Father Shaw told him that he ex-
pected the works to be sold within the week. That he
saw Father Shaw in Sydney before he came to Mel-
bourne on the 2nd July, it was just before the 2nd
July. Can you explain to the Commission if Father
Shaw made such a statement why he made such a state-
ment ?—Did Lynch fell you what he expected to get
out of it ?
Why, was Lynch to get anything out of.it?—Lynch
was to get a trip to America, so he told me, and a good
present, and he expressed to me afterwards his great
disappointment he did not get it, nor did Cornwell get
it. He was to get the same.
Lynch had a talk about that sale with you ?—After
Father Shaw’s death.
And they approached you as a benefactor of all
oppressed citizens?—Yes.
How long was this after Father Shaw’s death ?—I
cannot tell you that; but I think Lynch told me he
knew Father Shaw was indebted to me, and he asked
me if I had got it. I told him I had, but beyond that
I did not go.
You did not get what was owed to you, but you did
get a gratuity ?—Of course, I considered that part of
that gratuity was owing to me for money loaned to
Father Shaw.
Then Lynch said what ?—I do not know exactly what
he said. I could not remember the conversation very
clearly.
What did be come to you for ?—lt was when I was
at the works.
He came to you and said what he expected to get
out of it?—He did not say that.
That is what I understand you are suggesting ?—I did
not suggest it. I said this, that Lynch, in common with
others, were expressing their regret at the early demise
of Father Shaw, and saying what a pity it was after
all his troubles were over that he should die. He said
to me, “ I know if he had lived I would have been all
right, because I would have had a good trip to America
and a good present,” a perfectly proper thing to say.
He said a trip and a present?—Well, a trip.
Was that after the Shaw works were sold ?—X was
saying this was months after.
Was he to get a trip and a present if the Shaw works
were sold? —Yes; he had got over his troubles, and he
was going for a holiday himself, and he would take
Lynch with him.
Lynch was a man whom Father Shaw was greatly
attached to ?—lie was a mere lad in his employ, and
I cannot imagine Father Shaw taking the step which
is indicated there of taking him into his confidence.
Do you know of a woman called Miss Hoad ?—I have
only heard of her.
Or that she was a friend of Father Shaw?—l only
heard of her through Mr. Cornwell.
Assume for the moment she will say something like
this. It has not been stated before the Commission,
Mr. Cussen. —Hot at any time?
Mr. Starke. —Hot at any time before the whole Com-
mission.
The Chairman. —lt was before the whole Commission.
By Mr. Starke. —l suggest to you that Miss Hoad
will say this, amongst other things that Father Shaw
said, “ I think I will sell the works,” and she said, “ Do
you think you can,” and Father Shaw said, “ I will get
Long and Jensen to work, and there will not he any
trouble.” “ This was in February, and I did not see
him again until just after Easter ” ?—lt had not been
offered to the Department in February, 1916.
Did that take place, any suggestion that he would
get hold of you and Jensen and that the thing would
then go through all right?—Ho.
If he made such a suggestion to Miss Hoad it was
an absolutely untrue suggestion?—l do not think he
ever made that suggestion.
There is another statement she made that just after
the works were sold in August, 1916, that he had
written to her saying that he had sold the works, and
that she got the letter on the Monday morning before
his death. She also said that he mentioned that he
would have to pay some one for their services in con-
nexion with the sale, and he said, “ There is a matter
of between £6,000 and £7,000 to be paid away almost
at once, £2,000 for Long, and Jensen £2',000.” She
said there were a couple of other names but she could
not remember what they were, but it was nothing like
the sum of £2,000? —They have got my amount very
uniform. i
It is very close to the amount in your bank. It is a
remarkable thing. Can you understand Father Shaw
making such a statement as this, assuming Miss Hoad
has said what is true? —I cannot; I do not believe he
would make such a statement.
If he did you cannot believe it. He had no personal
animosity against you. He was a close personal friend ?
—lf he had any animosity against me he was a queer
proposition. , | ■ i
And it was very queer that he should have given you
so much money?—Perhaps it was; you can take that
view of it. •
I will bring you to the banker’s statement. Do you
know Willis, of Sydney?—Ho.
Mr. Starke. —Miss Hoad will be here this afternoon,
and if the Commission thinks this examination should
be postponed till then I will do so.
The Chairman. — There is one other matter v the Com-
mission would like to mention, they would like Lynch
to be recalled and questioned as to Miss Hoad.
Mr. Cussen. —l should like to ask him some further
questions also.
By Mr. Starke. —You do not know Mr. Willis, of the
London Chartered Bank, Sydney?—l never heard of
him.
He said that Father Shaw told him that he was try-
ing to negotiate the sale of the works to the Govern-
ment, and produced telegrams which were signed,
“ Long.” Did you send any such telegrams ?—I have
no recollection:


Do you swear you did not?—l would like to see the
telegrams. I may have sent telegrams, but they would
not have any relation to the sale of these works.
Did you send any telegrams to Shaw signed “ Long,”
saying in substance, “ Everything going satisfactorily” ?
—No. I have no recollection of ever sending them.
Do you swear that you did not?—Yes; I swear to the
best of my recollection I never sent such telegrams to
Father Shaw.
Have you got any copies of your telegrams?—No.
Mr. Willis also says that Father Shaw also told him
that a large amount had to he paid away, and there
were some people that had to have a cut out of it. Do
you understand that statement?—No.
You got a cut out of it?—You may take that view of
it if you like.
That agrees with the banker that people were getting
a cut out of it, and you were one? —I deny absolutely
that I got a cut out of it.
You got a sum of money out of the money he got for
the sale of the wireless plant?—Not for the reason
you suggested in your examination.
I am suggesting this was done for the use of your
political influence ?—lt was nothing of the kind, and
no suggestion was made that political influence should
be used.
You cannot explain Father Shaw making a statement
like that, considering his friendly relationship with you?
—No.
Do you know Mr. Strong, of the London Bank, Mel-
bourne?—No.
He is manager of the head ofiice of the London Bank,
and he says that Father Shaw told him that he had to
share the £55,000 with others besides himself. Do you
understand what Father Shaw meant by that?—No;
I do not understand it at all.
Did he have to share it with you?—He was under
no obligation to share it with me.
'He did share it with you?—Yes; if you like to put
it that way.
Butcharl, another banker, says that he said to
Father Shaw, you are not going to Sydney with all
that money in your possession, that was £5,300. Do
yon know what Father Shaw was doing with that
£5,300? —No ; I never heard of the £5,300 until I came
before this Commission. I heard when we were in
Sydney, on the Tuesday or Wednesday, that he had
drawn a considerable amount of money from the bank.
It may have been Mr. Cornwell who told me. I know
somebody in Sydney told me. And after I saw that
Father Shaw was dead I immediately got into touch
with the manager of the hank and asked him if he
could remember that Father Shaw had drawn a cheque,
and I used the words £5,000. The manager said, “I
cannot tell you the amount, Senator Long, but Father
Shaw did draw a cheque for a very considerable
amount.” I I A;
You know Mr. Cornwell? —Yes.
You frequently asked him to look_ after your son, I
suppose?—l never made any suggestion to him.
Are you unfriendly with him?—No.
Have you any reason to distrust him, apart from this
case? —No.
You have never had any business or other dealing
with him?—No.
Nor any personal dispute?—No._
Nor any reason for personal animosity?—No.
Were you in Sydney about the 15th of August, 1915?
—Possibly.
Had you gone there for the purposes of going to the
races?—Not particularly for the purposes of going to
races.
Did you telephone to Cornwell? —Yes, probably I
did.
He says that you had said you were there to put some
money on a horse, to execute a commission?—Y«a o»>
two horses that were running here.
That is true, that you were there for some owner, to
put on a commission? —Yes, I .was there. Might I
explain that I was there for the purpose of putting
£2OO on two horses in Sydney at starting prices here ?
And you had gone over for that purpose?—Yes.
To execute a commission? —Yes, and some of it was
my own money.
Did you ring Cornwell up ?—Yes.
What did you say to him? —I told him what I was
over for, and that I would like to see him, and that I
could not mention the names of the “ Neddies ” —the
horses—oyer the telephone.
Why should you go and tell Cornwell the names of
the “ Neddies ”?—Because I had told him before that
I would tell him if I had a good thing. .
Did you tell him you wanted to see him about the
Commission.—No.
Did you ask him if the Commission had been out
there lately?—More than likely.
At this stage the Commission adjourned till 2 p.m,
On resuming at 2 p.m.,
Witness Lynch, recalled.
By the Chairman, —Do you know Miss Hoad? —No.
You do not know her?—No.
You swear you have never seen her?—To the best of
my knowledge, no.
You have never had any conversation with her?—
Never in my life.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —When did you last
see this man Carroll ?—I am not sure whether it was in
Melbourne or at the Wireless Works at Randwick.
When? —Probably some time last year. If in Mel-
bourne, it was in November, but I think he has been
over to Sydney since. I would not he certain whether
I saw him in Melbourne first or in Sydney.
You saw him last somewhere about November of last
year?—Yes.
Did you have any conversation with him then about
Mr. Jensen?—Not that I can call to mind.
Did you- have any conversation about the sale of the
Shaw Wireless? —Not to my knowledge; I cannot re-
member.
Will you swear you_ did not mention to hiA, or he
mention something to you, about the Shaw Wireless ?
I will not.swear that.
Did he tell you he had made an application to Mr.
Jensen for a job, and if he did not get it he was going
to make a charge against Mr. Jensen? —No, he did not
say that. He told me he had made an application to
Mr. Jensen for a position.
And did he say that he was going to take a course,
if he did not get a job, which would prevent him from
accepting any position from Mr. Jensen? —Not that I
remember.
Will you swear you did not?—No.
Will you swear the two of you did not discuss this
statement that Jensen got £2,000, Long £2,000, and
Cresswell £l,OOO ? Will you swear the two of you did
not discuss that? —I cannot see how that would come
up at all.
I want your oath on the subject. Will you swear
that?—l cannot take my oath that it was not spoken
about. . ,
Was it not spoken about ?—I cannot say.
Did you not discuss the question?—The question I
discussed with Mr. Carroll was
Never mind about the other questions—did you dis-
cuss that ?—To the best of my knowledge, no.
That is the furthest you will go?—That is the
furthest I know.
Have your parents, your mother, and sister stayed
at his place?—'Not that they have stopped there, but I
believe they visited his place while in Melbourne.
Frequently?—Not that I know of.


And what did the two of you do when you met
Carroll by appointment?—He took me to have a cup
of tea, and the conversation that ensued was about my
position at the works. He asked me how I was getting
on. I said that Father Shaw had promised me he
would fix up a permanent appointment, which he had
not done. He said, “ I will see if I can do anything
with Mr. Jensen for you,” and I thanked him very
much. He said, “If you write to Mr. Jensen, let me
know.”
He said he was going to see Mr. Jensen and see if he
could fix you up ?—To see if he could do anything for
me.
You swear that is what took place?—Yes.
EXHIBIT No. 30—Letter from Carroll to
Jensen, dated Bth November, 1917,
The witness withdrew•
Mr. Starke, —I will put in the whole of Carroll’s
statements.
EXHIBIT No. 31—Carroll’s statements (2).
Senator Long (examination continued).
By Mr. Starke. —iWe were about to deal with an in-
terview on the 15th August, 1918. You rang Cornwell
up on the telephone?—Yefi.
According to you, you told him of two horses he ought
to back?—Yes.
You also asked him if the Commission had been out
there?—More than likely I did.
Why?—Well, I was, perhaps, concerned whether they
had completed their investigations or not.
Did you ask him if there was much in those tele-
grams ?—No.
Are you sure ?=—l am quite positive I did not.
Did he say, “ What telegrams ” ?—There was no men-
tion of telegrams on the telephone.
Did you make an appointment to go and see him at
the works?' —I would not say I made an appointment.
He might have said, “Are you coming out? Will you
be out to-day ?” or I might have said “ J will be out
to-day or'to-morrow.”
He never said it was a matter he preferred not to
speak about over the telephone ? —I have no recollection
of any such conversation.
Will you swear it did not take place?—l swear posi-
tively it did not take place.
Anyway, you went out to Randwick? —I said that I
would not discuss the names of the horses over the tele-
phone.
You went out to Randwick, and you immediately
went to see Cornwell. How long Were you altogether?
—I have no idea.
Were you talking to him for an hour? —I may have
been for all I know.
What do you believe? —I really cannot place any es-
timate upon the time I spent with Cornwell and the
time I spent with my son; I should say a considerable
time.
After you saw Cornwell you saw your son? —Per-
haps.
Can you describe the room you were in with Corn-
well? —I cannot describe it very well. I should say,
roughly speaking, it is a room about 35 by 15 or 16.
Is it partitioned in any way?—Yes, I should say so.
You were in that room with Cornwell that day for
some considerable time?—On what day?
The 15th August, 1918 ?—Possibly. I am not clear
of the day; but, anyhow, I am not going to dispute I
was not there.
You had a long conversation with him? —Yes, on
some day.
That is when you went to Sydney to put a commis-
sion on horses that you had a long conversation with
him ?—Yes.
I do not want to interrupt you in any way whatever.
I want you to tell the Commission as nearly as you can
recollect the substance of that conversation with Corn-
well? —I shall endeavour to do that, but before I com-
mence will you allow me to make this observation: that
if you desire proof of the cause of my visit to Sydney
on that occasion I will refer you to a namesake of mine,
Mr. Long, of Messrs. Long and Smith, estate agents,
Prahran. I want that to be made perfectly clear.
You went to Sydney to work a commission on two
horses ?—Yes.
For Long, of Prahran? —Yes,
Cornwell had nothing to do with that business?—
Nothing whatever.
So, being in Sydney, you went up to see him and your
son ? —Yes. May I repeat once more, I have never been
to Sydney without going out there.
Be good enough to tell me exactly what the conversa-
tion was in your own words? —I think before we had
the conversation we had a look round the works, and
after that proceeded to Mr. Cornwell’s office. When we
sat down, I had hardly got on my seat before he com-
menced to tell me that Jensen was “ gone,” that he
knew from the Commission itself that they had traced
every penny of the money, that they had got in touch
with every transaction that had led up to the sale of
these works, and that he had not a hope of getting out
of it. “ N ow,” he said, “ I like you very much, and I
am very concerned about your position. I want to put
this to you. You have got a family, you have a posi-
tion you want to look after; there is a way for you to
get out of it by telling all you know of Jensen’s con-
nexion with this money, and how he came by it, and_ I
am in a position to tell you that the Commission will
deal with your connexion with it in the light that you
have been guilty of an indiscretion.” That is as near as
I can remember the words he said to me. The very
moment I sat down he commenced his conversation by
assuring me that he knew from first hand information
that Jensen was gone and “gone a million.” Ido not
know whether he used that expression, but to that
effect. I said to him, “I am sorry to hear that. lam
sorry to hear that there has been anything in the
nature of what you have described. Jensen assured me
that there was no such thing as a monetary transaction
between him and Father Shaw,” and then I started to
detail my connexion with it. I told him that, is my
opinion, his information was wrong and that there
could not be a possibility of associating Mr. Jensen in
an improper way with the sale of that wprks for the
reason that there had never been any improper conduct.
I pointed out to him that Father Shaw’s proposition
had been sent to the Minister, that the Minister, I be-
lieve, had followed the ordinary course that all Minis-
ters would follow in similar circumstances, and had
referred it to those best qualified to advise him, and I
went on in that strain, and in addition to that I said,
“ I am informed that, independent of his official ad-
visors, he obtained information, or rather got a report,
from one of the best consulting mechanical engineers in
all Australia—a man whose integrity is of the very
highest standard. Now,” I said, “in the face of that,
how can you tell me that Mr. Jensen is into this up to
his neck? What is the good of you talking about an
arrangement between Mr, Jensen and I for the sale of
this property? If Mr. Jensen wanted to be corrupt,
could not he be corrupt without any assistance from
me?” He again emphasized the fact, and went on to
tell me what he knew, and what the Commission had
told him —not the Commission, what had come to him
direct from the Commission —and so on. So far as I
remember, that is the gist of the conversation I had
with Mr. Cornwell.
By the Chairman— Did he say from the Commission,
or an officer of the Commission?—He said, “from the
Commission,” He did not say whether there was a
medium between himself and the Commission.
By Mr. Starke— That is all you remember?—Yes.
You have read Cornwell’s evidence? —Yes.


His account of the conversation is absolutely untrue?
—Part of it is an absolute and diabolical lie.
I want you to take Price’s shorthand notes, the trans-
lation, and turn to page 2?—Yes.
Mr. Cussen. —Page 1 strongly supports him.
By Mr. Starke. —You notice where it begins “ The
tool-screw machines were taken over, were they not?”
That is something Price heard as having been said by
you. Did you make that statement first of all. Did
you say, “ The way I am situated, I cannot go back on
him. I must take the responsibility”?—-No; certainly
not. I said I would take the responsibility, my own
share of the transaction.
Price heard you say those words “ The way I am
situated I cannot go back on him. I must take the
responsibility ” ?—That is not correct. That is abso-
lutely not correct. Will you permit me just a moment
to refer to the question immediately preceding the tool-
screw machine. Mr. Cornwell went on to say here
of the troubles that he had, and the extent to which, in
valuing this property, he had traversed his conscience
to get that valuation; and then said that, ■ after all his
trouble, and worry, and anxiety, he had got nothing
out of it, and he said, “ And the point is that I have
not got these values here to-day.” I said, “ But was
not there some new machinery added during the latter
portion of the time it was in the possession of Father
Shaw ?” He said, “ A little, which I think he was
responsible for introducing, in the way of shell-making.”
I am not dealing with that, that is all dealt with
above. If you go back a few more questions, it is all
stated there? —I want to point out, in connexion with
these tool-screw machines, that the Defence Depart-
ment had commandeered one of those machines, did
absolutely commandeer one of those machines; and
here the reporter says—and Mr. Cornwell will admit
that, because I and others made representations they
should not be taken; and furthermore the Society of
Amalgamated Engineers threatened trouble if those
two machines were removed. And I think a compro-
mise was effected by taking one..
That has nothing to do with what I was asking you?
—I mentioned that to show the two statements are dis-
connected.
Yes; just listen to me. Cornwell says, “I think it
is the end of Jensen—honestly, I think it is.” Did he
say that ? —Yes; about fifty times.
He said it there? —Yes.
Just after the screw machines were mentioned?—Yes.
Price has got you- down as saying, “ The way I am
situated I cannot go back on him. I must take the
responsibility.” Did you say that or not?—Absolutely
no.
Price must have heard you say it?—Surely you
would not say that is wonderful, after reading this
report.
“ I must take the responsibility.” Did you say that ?
—“ I must take my own responsibility,” certainly; and
I do.
Go over to page 3, about half-way down. “L. They
had them there when I was there. They asked me if
I had wired. I said ‘ No.’ Fortunately, I had no occa-
sion to wire him, because he was in Melbourne all the
time. He was there for weeks and weeks, as you say,
with a free leg. He used to get through a few pounds.
• • • . neither was I called upon to take any active
part in the transaction. He did it all.” Do you re-
member making that statement? —Yes; but not exactly
in those words.
State your own version of it?—l said there was not
the slightest necessity for any intervention on my part,
no necessity for me to use influence on the Minister,
because the Minister had dealt with the matter between
himself and Father Shaw in his own way.
You did say, “ He did it all ”?—Yes.
Did Cornwell say, “ Jensen did it ”; and did you say,
“Yes; lie did it all ”?—Yes; the Minister did it all.
That took place?—Yes.
Did Cornwell say, “ I have seen the ISTavy Office file,
and Clarkson stated his reasons for going against it.
. . . ,” and did you say, “ Then he told me a lie ” ?
—JSTo; there is no break there.
“ Then he told me a lie ” ?—I did not say that.
You never used that expression that he told you a
lie ?—No.
Did you say anything like that, or convey he had
made an inaccurate statement?—No.
What did you say in answer to that, “I have seen
the Navy Office file, and Clarkson stated his reasons
for going against it”?—l do not know what I would
say. I might have said “ Oh, is that so ?”
Price is wrong again. You say you never said any-
body told you a lie ?—No; certainly not from Mr. Clark-
son, because I had never seen him.
Did you say anybody had told you a lie ?—No.
I suggest that that suggests Jensen had told you a
lie?—l have no recollection of saying that at all.
Did Jensen tell you that Clarkson had supported the
proposition ? —I do not think so. I do not think he
ever mentioned it. This is *the only reference I have
ever heard of Clarkson’s report.
Then it goes on, and Cornwell says to you, “ Clark-
son s statement is against taking the place over. He had
about nine reasons,” to which you replied, “Oh.”
Did you say anybody told you a lie?—What is the
suggestion, that I am here telling deliberate lies?
The suggestion is you are not telling all you know ?
—I have told you all I know in connexion with the
questions you have submitted to me.
Have you told all you know about that £5,300 ?
Yes, I have told you all I know about it.
You never said at this interview that any one had
told you a lie ? You never made use of that expression ?
—No; I have no recollection of it.
Did you use it—yes or no ?—lf I did, I may, have said
it during the afternoon in reference to something.
Who told a lie?—l do not know. We might discover
that as we go along.
You say there “Oh.” You use that word “Oh.”
You have admitted that ?—I would not dispute it.
“ C. You say Jensen has not lifted that money yet?”
Did Cornwell say that?—l have no recollection of that.
This is either a gross or fraudulent statement of Price
and Cornwell, or else you are not telling us what you
know ?—Not necessarily that. There are some connect-
ing words that have been left out which might throw
altogether a different complexion on it.
There is nothing that could throw a different com-
plexion on this question. “You say Jensen has not
lifted that money yet.” Was that statement made by
Cornwell in any shape or form ?—Not in that shape or
form. He may have made some reference to money.
And the money that Cornwell was suggesting Jensen
had not lifted ?—May I say that a question of that kind
is altogether inconsistent with the statement I made to
Cornwell in the earlier part of our conversation that
Mr. Jensen was not in any way
It does not matter about that. Did you say that at
any time to Cornwell—that Jensen has not lifted that
money yet ?—I will say he never put such a question
to me.
“L. No.” Do you see that ?—Yes. I do not
recognise either the question or the answer in the
slightest degree.
It won’t do—such an answer as that ?—Very well.
You know perfectly well,- or else you have been
making inaccurate statements to Cornwell or the Com-
mission—one or the other. Which is it?—l am doing
neither. Ido not pretend to be able to swear to any-
thing contained in such a hotch-potch statement as this.
1 cannot be expected to.


You can be expected to say whether Cornwell said
those words. “You say Jensen has not lifted that
money yet,” to which you reply “ No”?—I may have
laid “No ” to something else. For the purpose of your
examination I will admit I said the word “ No.”
To that question?—No; I will not admit that.
Did Cornwell ask you this question, “ You say Jensen
has not lifted that money yet ’ ’ ?—I say Cornwell did
not ask me that question.
' And you never replied in the negative ?—Not to that
juestion.
“ C. It is still in trust ” ? —Do you renlemher such
a question as that being asked? —No.
“L. They cannot trace it.” Did you say that? —No,
I did not.
You never used the words, “ They cannot trace it ” ?
—No.
Despite the fact that Price said he heard you use
those words ? —Despite any fact.
“It has been worrying me, I 'can assure you ” Did
you say that? —Yes; the Commission had been worrying
me.
The whole case had been worrying you ?—Most
decidedly.
“ How long is it since they have been here ?” Did
you say that ?—Quite possible. I would not dispute
that.
Who were you referring to—the Commission ?
Probably.
Turn over to page 4, or rather at the foot of page 3
“C. Yes. Apparently there was some mine in Mel-
bourne. They have evidence. . . . They have
got that. They asked me whether I knew anything
about that. I told them that Father fc’haw broached
the subject that Jensen had shares. Got in early. I
said I did not know whether Jensen was to get anything.
I know the old man was interested. He said he hoped
to bring off a much bigger thing than he did with the
works. Those were his own words. They have got at
things. . . . . L. I think they have. They came
at me in a very re-assuring way.”. Did you say, “ They
came at me in a very re-assuring way ” ? —Possibly.
That that refers to the Commission? —Yes.
What are the words, “ I think they have ” ?—lf all
Cornwell told me was true, they had got at things.
Then he goes on —“ C. He is a Minister of the Crown
—they must try him ” “L. They look
upon me as the real culprit.”—Yes; but not quite in
that form. He said, “Heis a Minister of the Crown,
and they must try him.” I said, “ They cannot try
him. Why should they ? They look upon me as the
real culprit.’'
Those words took place in the context in which you
said it? —Yes.
Go a little further on,- on page 4. Did you say, “If
we can get this off he would make me a good present ” —■
did you say he said that ?—Yes; I see it here.
“C. As a matter of fact.” Take the previous clause
first —“ C. So far as the matter is concerned, the
plant is a very valuable one. It may be that the differ-
ence between the assets here and the money paid for the
workshop. . . . the amount which you received for
your part in the business, there is a further sum still
to be lifted. . . .” “L. He said ‘lf we can get
this off ’he would make me a good present.” Did you
say those words in the conversation ?—No.
In any sense or in any context? —Not in that sense.
Did you use these words in any sense during the
conversation —“ He said if we can get this off he would
make me a good present”?—! think it is more than
likely I did, but there is something to be added, that
he would make me a good present of some shares in a
coal mine in which he was interested at Newcastle.
What is that “ If we can get this off ” ? —lf the works
were disposed of to the Commonwealth Government.
Shaw would give ?—Me a good present in some shares.
When did he tell you that. At what stage of the
proceedings did he tell you that?—l think it would be
very very late in the negotiations.
How long before the offer was accepted ?—I think I
am justified in saying when this talk of making a
present of shares to me in the coal mine took place
(I did not know anything about it except it was New-
castle) , was hot until after the contract had really been
entered into between Shaw and the Commonwealth
Government.
What sense is there in that “ If we can get this off.”
It must have been before that ?—lf there were no hitch
in the proceedings, in the negotiations, if it went on
satisfactorily.
But the contract was signed ?—I do not assert that.
It was only a matter for lawyers then ? —I do not
assert the contract was signed.
The offer was accepted ?—I believe that was the case.
I. do not assert that.
You say that Shaw, when the offer was accepted, came
to you and said, “If we can get this off he (Shaw)
would make me a good present ” ?—I would say some-
thing like that.
And Shaw did tell you that ?—Something after that.
Can - you tell me the date he said that?—No.
Where was it ?—ln Melbourne.
What did he say he was going to give you a present
for?—He made no further statement than that, that-
he had a big interest in a coal mine up in Newcastle,
or at Lake Macquarie, in which he held a great number
of shares, and it was in that he was going to give me
some shares.
Did he give you any shares?—No.
Just money?—Yes, just money. I have no reason
to doubt but what he would have given me some
shares.
And you do not know what the present was for?—l
have endeavoured to- make that clear during the time
I have been under examination.
Turn to the next page. Did Cornwell ask you “ What
do you propose to do ” ?—Yes, more than once, only he
said more than that. He appealed to me “ What do
you propose to do?” He appealed to me for family
reasons that I should tell all I knew, all that he sug-
gested I knew, concerning Mr. Jensen’s improper con-
nexion with the disposal of these works, and I said to
him “ I have made my statement to the Commission,
and on that I must stand or fall. I have no other state-
ment to make, because what I told them was the
absolute truth.” If you look at what I say here, Corn-
well purports to have said “It is a matter of relying
on the mercy of the Commission .... time to time.”
All that took place, but not in the form presented
here.
All that is not accurate ?—I said I could not go back
on it.
The statement you made was, “ They asked me was
it for services rendered, and I said ‘No, it was a
present.’ ” Is that correct ? —Yes. I told them what
I had lent him from time to time. They asked me how
I accounted for the difference. I told them Shaw gave
me notes, and said he did not know what he owed me.
I told them exactly what Father Shaw gave me. . . .
In war loan.
All that statement was correctly heard?—No, I am
reading what is here. It is not correctly heard. The
statement that I told him I had won £4OO at Caulfield
is obvibusly wrong.
There is a blank after the reference to the war loan,
something Cornwell said. Can you fill up the blank?
—Yes, again Cornwell appealed to me to make myself
right with the Commission and the public and implicate
Jensen in the improper conduct in the purchase of this
plant.
By Mr. Starke. —This is what Price has heard—“ L.
I could not do it. No matter what happens to me.
Another couple of years will do for me the way things
are. I was under the X-rays on Thursday last.” Is
that true?—Not quite. I said I would not do it, I
would not agree to his infamous proposal.


He was making an infamous proposal to you for you
to accuse an innocent man of corruption ?—Yes.
Then it goes on—C. Jensen has always struck me
as a man who would say you can swim if you can.” ?
Might I finish the other paragraph. I said I would
not do it—no matter what happens to me. I was only
concerned with my position, the mere fact of a man
bring associated or had received money in consequence
of the transfer of a property from a Company to a
Government does not put one in a good light before
the public, consequently I felt my position much more
keenly in consequence in having to go before this
Commission through a long series of racing ©vents. That
is what troubled me more than anything, and then I said
I did hot care what happened to me, I could not do
that—l could not implicate Mr. Jensen in a matter of
which bo was perfectly innocent,
Your suggestion is that Cornwell was suggesting to
you an infamous proposal of accusing his Minister of
corruption?—! did not without any reservation.
Did you ever represent that to the Commission, or
report it to the Commission? —I have never had,time.
From the 15th August, although this infamous pro-
posal was made to you?—Ho.
And you never told it to Mr. Jensen, or to any mem-
ber of the Commission?—Ho. I have never tOJd it to
any member of the Commission. Ido not know that
I was called upon to do so. I may say this, I was in-
formed by the secretary that I would be again called
before the Commission.
Did you ever report this infamous proposal of Corn-
well’s?—Ho.
As an honest man can you explain why you did not ?
—For the reason I thought that CornwelTwas actuated
by kindly motives to myself.
When he made this most infamous proposal against
an important Minister of the State?—l did not look
at it iu that light.
Here was ah attempt being made to accuse Jensen
by one of his officers of perhaps the most serious thing
that could be laid to Charge against a Minister of the
Crown, and you kept your mouth shut, and you never
said a word of such a proposal as that to any officer
in tbe Department?—Ho; I did not.
You are a public man?—Yea,
And you have the interest of the public at heart?—
I hope so.
And the straightforward carrying out of Government
in this country?—l hope so, sincerely.
And although a man in the service had made suoh
an infamous proposal to you for no reason that you
could assign?—Ho logical reason he could assign.
Or that you could assign?—Ho.
Yet you said nothing?—Ho,
Xo anybody at any time? —That is so.
And you did not get up and leave the room even?—
Ho,
You listened to this infamous proposal sjx or seven
times, and discussed it quietly and calmly?—Yes; I
suppose he repeated it six or seven times.
And you made an appointment to see this same man
next day? —I do not know that.
Within a few days?—l do not know that.
I am not going to take you through Cornwell’s ac-
count because you say from first to last his proposition
was an infamous proposal which you strongly encoun-
tered all the time ?—Yes,
And yet you never said a word?—Ho; I did not. I
was quite prepared to accept my responsibility.
He made a gross attack on your honour and you
did nothing?—l did not.
You told me that you had no information whatever
as •to how Shaw got rid of that £5,300 except the
£1,290 he paid you?—l have no more idea than any
man in this room.
Ho suggestion you can make to the Commission?—
1 can make no suggestion of any kind.
By the Chairman. —What wag your reason for going
to the bank and asking the manager the amount of the
cheque that Father Shaw drew? —That was on the
Tuesday or Wednesday, 21st or 22nd October—it was
Mr. Cornwell that told me that he had drawn £5,000
out of the bank. I do not know whether he mentioned
the sum, or whether he said it waa a large sum, but
when I eame back I rang the bank manager up and
asked him if it was a fact that Father Shaw (I told
him who was speaking) that he had drawn a large
amount. He said, “ Yes,” but he could not tell me the
amount that had been drawn, but it was a very con-
siderable sum.
What was your reason for trying to find that out? —
Because it was a matter of surprise to me to know he
had drawn such a large sum of money out on the
Saturday,
Supposing he had, what had that got to do with
you?- --The mere suggestion that Father Shaw had wet
with foul play, and 3 thought if it were known that
he was in possession of a large sum of money there
might have been something in that. That was mj
concern.
It waa your personal interest in Father Shaw’s wel-
fare ?—Absolutely.
By Commissioner Taylor. —When Father Shaw
handed you that £J,29Q at Parliament House, had he
any other roll of notes?—Ho. He pulled it out of his
right-hand trouser pocket.
And he did not at that time tell you he had to give
any one else any money ?—Hover at that time, or any
■ other period of the negotiations, that he was called upon
to give money to anybody else.
By Mr. Starhe. —In Cornwell’s evidence, in speaking
of this same conversation he says— \_page 21 of short-
hand notes]. Did you say that?—l might have said
that.
“ He went on again to speak about the percentage.
. . . The lion share.”?—That is a pure fabrica-
tion.
Do you know if Mr. Jensen is known as the big man?
> —Why should I refer to Jensen in that frivolous
manner? He had mentioned his name hundreds of
times. ( ;
Did he mention four packages. Did you say that
Shaw had given you four packages did not say that.
I say that is a diabolical fabrication.
Did Father Shaw, in fact, give you four packages?—
I have told the president that Father Shaw gave me
the one package of money, the one package of money
Only, which he took out pf his right-hand trouser pocket
in the Senate club-room, between 11.30 and 12 o’clock
that morning, and no other money reached me.
Hpw were the packed mad® up?—-In #lOO notes. I
cannot give you the nineties; £5O; and two twenties, I
think.
You did not count it until he left ?—Not until he
left.
There was no cover on it t—No cover whatever.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen.—Ja it a fact that
you and Mr. Jensen had fallen out in Tasmania ?—Oh,
yes; but it was not a Ufe-long quarrel.
What was it over I felt it very keenly at the time.
Was it about the leadership of "the Labour party? —
Yes, .
Yon were not on any henna of intimacy, at any rate?
—I would not say that I was on terms of being an
enemy.
I do not suggest you were bad friends, but I sug-
gest you were not intimate friends ?—-Hot as intimate
as I was with a lot of Other members of the Cabinet-
By Mr. Starke. —Do yon wish to make any further
statement ?—Yes. I want to aay that throughout the
examination, Mr- Starke has suggested, very properly
no doubt, that in consequence of my receiving moneys
in respect of the sale of certain industrial undertakings
to the Commonwealth Government, and by using my


influence, I had done something improper. I want to
point this out in the first place, that all throughout
those proceedings my interest in those works was of
™ a m f asur ® centred in my son, and secondly,
ther Shaw, for whom I had the greatest respect and
reverence as a very clever man, and I think I ought
u P .^ hlS co p sldera tion first, that I was concerned
about this undertaking which found employment for
at least 250 young Australians, who would get a good
training in a very necessay industry in Australia. May
1 also say this, that to-day, to-morrow, or the next day
1, in common with other Federal representatives, may
tmd it necessary to make recommendations to the Go-
vernment in respect of some matters submitted to them
by their constituents—the sale or purchase of a ship,
the sale or purchase of estates, shipping space, and a
dozen other matters in which their constituents are
interested, and which you are in duty bound to help
them all you possibly can. 1 just want to put this
point to the Commission. Is a man to be branded as
an exploiter of the public revenue, as a man that lends
himself to a conspiracy to defraud the Government be-
cause he renders assistance to this one or to that one in
carrying out some proposition which might be to the
mutual advantage of that individual and the Govern-
ment. Now, I want to add just only this, that from
the beginning to the very end my position in respect
of tJio sale of the wireless works by the Shaw Company
to the Commonwealth Government—l want to repeat it
here as clearly as I can, and as definitely as I can, that
at no time on my word of honour as a man, and may
God never let me move from this box if it is not correct,
Jensen never received one penny for the sale of that
works through me nor any other man on earth. Is that
definite ?
, By.Cie Chairman. —What is troubling the Commis-
sion is this: Father Shaw drew a cheque for £5,300
from the bank, and we cannot trace where that money
has gone. Certain statements have been made 1 , some
of which the Commission can take notice of, and some
of which they cannot, but the plain fact remains that
amount is unaccounted for. The Commission’s respon-
sibility in this matter is, we do not want to say any-
thing in connexion with our report that will cause even
the slightest suspicion upon an innocent man, and we
looked to you to be able to clear this matter up in
some way because you are the man who has been in
the very closest touch, both from a personal point of
view and a business point of view over this transaction,
and it is inconceivable that Father Shaw did not give
the whole of his confidence to you in this matter. My
colleagues and I feel a very great difficulty on that
point?—l can only repeat what I have already stated.
Mr. Starke has very properly, no doubt, thrown a great
deal of suspicion upon my racing transactions.
The racing transactions do not affect it?—l should
be very glad-to produce evidence in support of the con-
tentions I - have placed before the Commission.
By Mr. Starke. You need not take me as saying
that betting on the race-course was a moral fault?
I do not take it that way at all.
By Commissioner Taylor. —You were an intimate
friend of Father Shaw. Have you no theory at all of
what could have become of that money. There is no
doubt he drew it and took it away in notes. Why
would he draw such a, large amount unless he meant
to dispose of it in some way. Have you any theory in
your fnind ? I do not think there was any man in
Father Shaw’s closer confidence than myself in the last
three years, and I give you my word that he conveyed
no intimation to,me in the remotest degree that lor
anybody outside myself was to receive anything at all,
and never till that moment, when he handed me that
money, was I under the impression that he was to give
me anything; °
But knowing Father Shaw so well, have you no
theory at all of what has become of that money ? I
have no theory. I was in his closest confidence
F. 13033.—5
He .would not lose it. He must have done something
with it ?—God only knows what has been done with it
I give you my word that if I had the least suspicion
at ail where that money went I should only be too glad
to give the Commission some idea so as to help them
An onicer s name has been mentioned in addition to
Senator Russell, in addition to Senator Gardiner and
myself, a trusted official of the Navy Department. Is
it likely that if there was anything like that goinu
about, that he would have told a young clerk like Lynch
of Long, and Jensen, and Commander Gresswell, that
they were to get a certain amount out of it. It is pre-
posterous. *
By the Ghairntwn. —Another difficulty in connexion
with tracing the money is this, on' your own evidence
you have made it quite clear to everybody that you
were a very intimate friend of his?—Ye®.
And it seems strange in a way that he did not confide
in you and yet he should, apparently, confide in Mr.
Lynch and another witness and tell them both exactly
the same thing that you received £2,000. -Why should
he have told the same lie to two different people ?—-
Those two statements do not agree. Commander Cress-
well is not mentioned in one statement and he was in
another.
I am not referring to the statement about Com-
mander Gresswell, but what about Miss Hoad ?—She
does not remember those two names. We are only try-
ing to get to the bottom of the matter so as to put the
blame on the right shoulders, and in order that innocent
men do not suffer in their reputation in any way at all.
The witness withdrew.
Evie Prudence Hoad, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —What are you ?—Manageress of the
Jenolan Caves.
How long have you been manageress there ?—About
sixteen months.
Did you know Father Shaw?—Yes.
How long had you known him?—l do not know
whether the end of March or the beginning of April,
Did you know anything of his wireless works ? I did
not understand very much about it except what he
told me about it. He often spoke to me about it. ’
Did he ever mention the matter of selling the works
to the Government?—Yes.
Could you tell me when he mentioned that matter
to you ?—The first time he ever spoke about it was in
December—the December before he died.
That would be December, 1915 ?—Yes. "
What did he say to you?—He was going to make
munitions. Tasked him whether he would make a suc-
cess with it, and he said, “ If I don’t, I shall sell the
works.”
Did he say anything more?—Yes. Nothing more
about selling.
Did he ever speak to you again about it? Yes. '
When next can you remember ?—I think it would be
some time l about the middle of February.
Where did he see you?—ln Sydney.
At his works, or where ?—At his works.
Did you go out to see him at his works ?—Yes.
Would you tell me what was said then?—He seemed
to be downhearted because the munitions were about
to close, and I asked him what he would do, and he
said he would sell the works.
Did you say anything ?—Yes.
What did you say ?—I asked him if he thought he
would be able to sell them. He said he thought he
would. He said he would get Senator Long and Mr.
Jensen to help in the sale of the works.
Can you remember anything else then ?—Either in
February, 1916—1 would not be sure whether he said
that then or when I came down towards the eud of
March to Sydney.
Did you go down to Sydney about March? Yes
about the end of March. ’
65


Did you see Father Shaw again ?—Yes.
Did he speak about the works again ?—Yes.
What was the conversation then as far as you can
remember? — said he was going to try and sell to
the Government, that he would have a little trouble,
he thought, but thought it would come off.
He said lots of tilings ?—He said he would get Long
and Jensen to work, and that he did not think he wouid
have any trouble in getting them to sell.
Did he ever fell you the works were sold ? —Yes.
When did he tell you that ?—Just a little while before
he died, he wrote and told me.
What date would that be about? —1 got a letter
on a Mondey from him trom Melbourne. He did not
put any address.
Where is that letter ?—I destroyed it a long time ago.
How did he address you ?—By my Christian name,
Evie; as a matter of fact, he had a nickname for me,
“ E .” He said in that letter the works were sold,
and he would soon be back in Sydney. He said he had
drawn a lot «f money out of the bank —I am not sure
of the amount, but 1 think he said between £6,000
and £7,000, and he said, “ Long will probably get about
£2,000 of it. Jensen about the„same,” and there were
some other names he mentioned that I cannot remember.
Have you thought over them since? —Yes. I could
not remember them now.
Was there anything else in the letter you can remem-
ber ? —I cannot think of anything else just now.
I will mention several names to you to see if they
recall anything to you. Was the name “ Cresswell ”
mentioned? —1 would not be sure whether it was men-
tioned in the letter, but he often spoke about Cresswell
to me. I really could not remember what he said about
him. I could not say if it was mentioned in the letter.
Was the name of “ Russell” mentioned? —No.
Gardiner ?—No; I could not remember that.
What were the exact relations between you and
Father Shaw?—He had asked me to marry him two
years before he died, and he was just waiting until he
got everything settled up.
Of oss-examined by Mr. Cussen. —How long had you
known him?—My father had known him since he was
a boy. I knew him since March or April 1913 or 1914.
And was it in 1914 he asked you to marry him?—Yos.
He was then a priest, as you understood?—Yes.
And still remained in the church? —Yes. He said
he would leave the church as soon as he could. As a
matter of fact, he asked me several times to marry him
secretly; but, of course, I would not do that.
And he still remained a priest of the church?—l
suppose so.
Your relations were of the utmost intimacy, were
they not?—What do you mean by that?
Sexual intercourse took place between you?—No.
Never ? —No.
Do you swear that?—Yes. I went to see him many
times at his house.
Do you swear that sexual intercourse never took place
between you and Father Shaw?—Yes; I do.
Used you to visit him at his house?—Yes; very often.
Alone?—Sometimes alone and sometimes with my
sister.
Did you go on trips with him? —Never; except the
time we came from my own home to Sydney. That
is all.
Did you promise to marry him?—Yes.
And you considered you were an engaged couple
after that promise had been made?—Yes.
His idea was, as soon as the works were sold? —To
go off to America. Either that, or he would go first,
and I and my sister should follow.
What did he say in the letter about this that you
have referred to ?—He did not say anything about
getting married in the letter. He said he would be
back shortly, “ and I will see you.”
What else?—Nothing else about that.
Were you to go to America at once?—Yes; I under-
stood so. I understood I would go at once with him;
or, if I did not, I would follow him and go later on.
Do you remember anything else in the letter beyond
what you have told uS? —No.
Was there no other topic at all other than the money
he drew from the bank? —I cannot remember.
Why do you remember that and nothing else. That
was a matter of the least interest to you?—He did not
write very much. It was rather a short letter.
That was a matter of the least interest to you, about
the money?—lt was of the greatest interest to me he
had sold the business.
It was of the least interest to you to know that cer-
tain people were going to receive portions of it?—l do
not know why he talked his business to me at all; but
the fact remains he did tell me of his business matters,
and I told him I did not understand anything about it.
And you repeatedly told him that?- —Yes.
That was a matter of the least interest to you how
the money was to be divided?—l do not think it was.
He said he hoped to be back soon, and I was not to
go to see him until I heard from him again; and he
asked how my sisters were.
Where were you living?—Frenchman’s-road, Rand-
wick.
Had you been living in Sydney before that?—Some-
times in Sydney, and sometimes at my own home.
When in Sydney, and certainly at Randwick, you
saw Father Shaw continuously?—No; not very often
when at Randwick at all, because I have only been
there a few months, and he was away in Melbourne
a lot.
How many names were mentioned altogether in the
letter as having got some of the money?—l could not
say.
Were there more than two?—Yes. I think there
were four; but I am not sure. He said, “ and others.”
He mentioned four names, and others? —I would
not swear he mentioned four.
Except Long and Jensen, you cannot swear of any
other names? —No; because those are the only two I
heard him speaking about continually. He did not
speak as much about Mr. Jensen as he did about Mr.
Long.
What did he call Mr. Jensen ?—He generally referred
to him as the Minister. He referred to him in his
letter just as Jensen.
And when he said he would get Long and somebody
else to sell the works for him, how did he refer to
Jensen. As Jensen, or the Minister?—Just “ Jensen.”
And he, usually referred to him as the Minister? —
Sometimes as the Minister, and sometimes as Jensen.
Did he refer to him as the Minister in the sale of
these works?—l do not remember when he said that.
When were you first asked what you knew about this
matter? —When Mr. Mcßeafh sent for me in Sydney.
I could not say exactly when that was; it was some
few months ago this year.
Had you told anybody of this letter from Father
Shaw?—Yes.
Who? —I mentioned it to a Mr. and Mrs. Cornwell,
the Monday after Father Shaw was taken ill.
That is the gentleman who saw you down at the train
to-day?—Yes.
When was that?—The Monday after Father Shaw’s
death.
Tell me exactly what yon told Mr. Cornwell?—l
could not tell you.
Tell me, as nearly as you can?—l was very upset at
the time. A friend of mine had sent me a notice in
the paper of his death, and I was expecting him every
day. I went on the Monday morning to ask Mr. Corn-
well —of course, I did not know anybody—l had my
two sisters there, and some intimate friends, who knew
that I was going to marry' Father Shaw. I went up
66


to see the Cornwells, and called at the works three
times, and then at the house, and Mrs. Cornwell said
would I come in and wait, as Mr. Cornwell had been
out during those calls. The third time I called, Mr.
Cornwell had just come in, and took me round to the
house. I told him I did not know about Father Shaw’s
death until a friend of mine had sent a clipping in the
newspaper sympathizing with me. I told him that
Father Shaw had said I was not to call until I heard
from him, otherwise I would have known about his
illness.
Did you tell him about Jensen? —No, I never men-
tioned it then.
When did you first mention to anybody that you got
a letter from F’ather Shaw in which he mentioned that
Jensen and Long would probably receive £2,ooo—that
is what you said? —Yes.
He said in the letter, “ Jensen will probably get about
the same ” ?—Yes.
Are you sure the word “probably” was used? —No,
I am not sure. I' would not swear the word “ pro-
bably ” was used; but, so far as I can remember, it
was.
The first person you mentioned that to was the Chair-
man of the Commission?—No. Mr. Cornwell wrote to
me some weeks before asking me did I know anything,
and did I have any letters, and I wrote back and said
I had no letters, that I had destroyed all the letters I
ever had. Then, a few weeks after that, I got word to
come to Sydney.
Have you got Cornwell’s letter to you?—No, I have
destroyed it.
Are you in the habit of destroying letters?—Yes, I
very seldom keep any.
In Cornwell’s letter to you did he say, “ Has Jensen
and Long got some money out of this ” ?—No.
What did he say about Jensen and Long in the letter?
—He just asked me did I have any letters, and did I
know anything to throw any light
On what ?—He did not exactly put it in those words.
What matter was it that you were to throw light on ?
—He said there has been a lot of- talk about it. Ido
no know if he put it in those words. He wondered if
I had any letters that threw any light on the matter.
On what matter ? —About the sale of the wireless
works.
In what way. Did not he suggest that Mr. Jensen
and Senator Long had got some money out of it? —No.
What did he say about. Jensen and Long?—l do not
know that he said anything about it.
What was the matter that was mentioned about in
Cornwell’s letter that you were to give some informa-
tion about? —About the sale of the wireless works.
In what way? —I do not remember exactly in what
way. I did not take very much interest in it. I did
uot want to stir up the past at all.
Was there anything else said about Mr. Jensen or
Mr. Long in Cornwell’s letter? —I would not be sure.
He may have mentioned it.
He may have mentioned that Mr. Jensen and Senator
Long had got some money ?—I do not think he did. I
do upt think he mentioned anything about money, as
far as I remember.
Who did you stay with when you came to Sydney ?
With my sister.
What did you write back?—l just wrote back, as
nearly as I can remember, that letter I last had from
Father Shaw, and if that would be of any use to him.
Who did you state that to; did you state that when
you gave evidence before the Commission, or did you
see Mr. Cornwell before you gave evidence —Yes, he
took me into Mr. Mcßeath. • I met him at the corner
of Pitt and Moore streets.
Did you have any conversation with him about this
Shaw wireless?—JNo, not really any conversation, but
he said it was about the Shaw wireless, “ And I just
want you to tell what you know, and'tell the truth,”
just to tell what I knew about it, and not to be worried.
Did he say anything about Mr. Jensen?—No, he did
not mention his name.
Or anything about money?—No.
Why did not you keep this letter?—He (Shaw) asked
mo to destroy his letters.
When did you destroy it?—lt may have been a few
weeks afterwards that I destroyed it.
Nobody else suggested that you should destroy it?—
No.
Did any man suggest that you should destroy it?—
No.
Where were you living when you destroyed it?—ln
Frenchman’s-road/ Randwick.
What did you hear him say about Commander Cress
well, that he was to help to sell the works ? —I cannot
remember.
Why do you recollect Jensen and Long’s names? —
he mentioned them several times, and I was
getting impatient. I was waiting two years for him to
get his affairs settled up.
Why do you remember about them?—Because he
spoke about them so continuously, both of them, before
the works were sold.
And both of them were going to help to sell the
works ?—That is what he told me.
Did not he say that he was going to get Mr. Long
to see the Minister to see if the Government would not
buy it. Is not that the way he mentioned his name? —I
do not think so.
Have you had any conversation with any one except
Mr. Mcßeath about this evidence? —No, 1 will swear
that.
EXHIBIT No. 32. —Letter from Cornwell to
Barton.
lie-examined hy Mr. Starke. —Did Father Shaw give
you any money whatever ?—Yes, on my birthday.
When last did he give you any money? —He sent
me some money for my birthday. He sent the money
a fortnight before he died. My birthday was not until
after he sent the money.
Is that the only money you ever had from him ?
Yes.
Do you know what he did with the £5,300 that he
withdrew from the bank ?—No.
Did you get any of it or any of your family ? —No.
Or did you have any arrangement for sending money
to America ? —No. I understood when he came back
he was going to put some money on deposit in the bank
for me when he went away, if he went without me.
Had you any moneys deposited in America for
Father Shaw or yourself?—No.
How did you propose to live in America ?—He ex-
pected to make good at engineering over there.
Y ou cannot’ make any suggestion whatever as to what
became of any of the money?—No.
You were met at the Sydney express to-day?—Ye;,
by Mr. Cornwell and Mr. Brentnall.
I understand you had no conversation with Mr.
Cornwell on the subject of this Commission ? —No.
When was it arranged that Father Shaw should leave
money in Australia for you ?—Just before he w*>nt to
Melbourne on his last visit. That was in case he went
to America before I did.’
By Senator Long. —Do you know Mr. Lynch?—l do
not know him. I have seen him once or twice. I do
not know whether I would remember him again.
You have never had a conversation with him ? —No.
Has he ever seen you at Father Shaw’s house at
Randwick ?—Not that I know of.
You have never discussed this matter with Mr.
Lynch ? —No.
When did you receive that letter from Father Shaw "
—On Monday morning.
5 2
67


On the Monday,he took ill?—Yes.
When did Father Shaw first mention to you the
probability of the Commonwealth Government jmr-
chasing his wireless plant?—The first time he spoke
about it was in December, the year before he died,
December, 1915.
Did he tell you he had a very good chance of selling
it? — It was a long time before he said he thought he
would sell it. Ido not know whether he meant then.
He tried to sell it once before.
Was it in December he told you that?—He
told me in December he was going to start munitions
and he hoped to make good, but he had been going to
make good so often that I said I did not think he would
ever make good, and he said he would sell the works.
Did he ever mention Long’s name in regard to start-
ing munitions ?—I cannot remember that.
Did he ever mention that Long had been helping him
with the Defence Department to get a share of that
work ?—He often spoke about Mr. Long.
The next time he mentioned the sale of the works
I think you said was in February, 1916 ?—Yes, the
February before he died. He said he would get Long
and Jensen to work for him.
Later on he said something else —was it in March ?
I would not be sure whether it was the end of March
or early in April.
Did he express great anxiety to get rid of the works ?
—Yes;.
It was a subject that was uppermost in his conver-
sation with you always?—Yes.
Do you know the actual date upon which he com-
menced negotiations with the Navy Department?—No.
Although he had mentioned it to you in February
and March, probably earlier, he did not, as a matter of
fact, communicate his proposition to the Defence De-
partment until May, 1916. That is several months
after. When he mentioned the names of Long and
Jensen, did he always put Long first?—l could not
remember that.
Invariably he mentioned Long’s name first?—Yes
The witness withdrew.
Witness Cornwell, recalled.
By Mr. Cussen. —ln this report it is said on the
Monday night before Father Shaw was taken ill there
were two girls in the room. What does that refer to.
Was it a fact the two girls were in his room?—Yes.
During the night?—l could not say that.
There is a suggestion that merely two girls were in
his bedroom, or was it that he was misconducting him-
self with the girls?—The girls were in his room that
evening.
What did you infer from it?—l thought there was
misconduct there, yes.
Do you know who the girls are ? —No-
Does anybody else know ?—I do not know.
The Chairman. —l might say that the Commission
were very anxious, as indeed they are now, to trace
this matter, and when we heard that Father Shaw
was taken ill, and Senator Long made some suggestion
about foul play, the secretary of the Commission com-
municated with the police, and we had Father Shaw’s
movements traced from the time he took ill on the
Monday, rather from the time he got the money on
the Saturday. We got the report that he had had those
women in his room, and also another man, Carter, was
named.
Mr. Cussen. —Has Carter been traced?
The Chairman. —Yes, and examined.
Mr. Cussen. —Have the girls been found ?
The Chairman. —Yes, the police have reported to the
Commission.
Are they reputable women or disreputable ?
The Chairman. —Disreputable.
Mr. Cussen. —And is this Carter a reputable man or
disreputable ?
The Chairman. —Here is Carter’s statement. We
found that Carter was a man very hard up, and had
pawned his watch very soon after Father Shaw died.
We have the fullest statement.
Mr. Cussen. —That is substantially all the informs
tion I want.
The Chairman. —lf you would like to see the police
file it is available.
The witness withdrew.
Jens August Jensen, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Cussen. —You are at present Minister of
Customs in the Commonwealth Government? —Yes; in
the present Administration.
lYhere do you reside?—My home is in Tasmania. I
am at present residing at St. Kilda-road, Melbourne.
You were Minister for the Navy in the Hughes
Government in 1916? —Yes..
I understand you were appointed Minister some time
in November, 1915 ? —On 12th July, 1915, I was ap-
pointed Minister of the Navy, and I remained Minister
for the Navy until 7th September, 1917.
You carried through the purchase of these Shaw
wireless works? —Yes. It was during my time that it
was carried through.
Are all the papers in reference to it upon the file? —
I have not seen the file, but all I can say is, every paper
and document that came before me was ordered by
me, or my private secretary, to be put on the file.
You called for certain reports which are there? —
I think they are there. By what I have heard since, I
think they are there.
Amongst those reports is on© from Commander Cress-
well?—Yes.
In his first report you remember he stated that he
recommended an offer of £40,000 as a fair offer? —
Yes. _ ■
In the early part of it he had concurred in Mr.
.Ross’s valuation of £40,600, which with machinery,
plant, and stock made a total of £60,000 ? —Yes,
£60,700, I think.
At any rate, Commander CreeswelTs figures showed
that for stock -and plant alone £46,000 was a fair offer,
and on the top of that was to come the Home Affairs
valuation of the building and land?—Yes.
Did you consider that those two figures were incon-
sistent? —When I received the report from Commander
Cresswell—l might state-that when I instructed Com-
mander Cresswell to proceed to Sydney I gave him final
instructions to value in conjunction with Mr. Ross at
bedrock, neither favouring Father Shaw nor the De-
partment, but to value as if he was the purchaser him-
self. Those were the instructions from me, and also
from the secretary of the Department, which he had
in writing, for him to value or assess any valuation on
machinery, plant and stock, and indeed I went fur-
ther in my verbal instruction, that I held him entirely
responsible as an officer of the Department for the
stock, machinery and plant, and their true valuation.
When you got this valuation of his, what happened?
—As the Minister, being in the position I was I read
his report with some interest, and I was struck with
the great differentiation of his valuation and the offer
which the Government should make, because I con-
sidered that when he received his instructions to value
at bed-rock prices, which he should have done if he
did not, that .whatever he valued at was a fair thing
for recommendation, and I said, “ Commander Cress-
well, I cannot understand your valuation and your
recommendation. What have you to say about it. In
one instance you value the machinery and stock at
£46,000, and you ask me as Minister of the Navy
(there is another £14,000 to be added to that for land
and buildings) to make an offer of £40,000. It appears
to me the whole thing is inconsistent. You are placing
me in a very false position, and if I were to take this
68


document to Cabinet they would want to know what
sort of an officer you were, or valuer, to make such a
recommendation.” I said, “Well, now it is for you to
think this over and see what you are going to do.”
He said, “ Well, Mr. Minister, I can see what you mean
and I would like to amend it.”
Did you say to him he would have to reconsider the
matter ?—I said, “ If your valuations are correct your
recommendation is absurdly low, that the land and
buildings have to- be added to it. Either your valua-
tions are too high or your recommendations too low.”
Those are the very words I used. He said, “ Well, Mr.
Minister, I see what you mean, and if you do not mind
I would like to reconsider the whole position.” Might
I be permitted to state now that I was astounded to
hear him say I ordered him to take that report back
and amend it.
I think in effect Commander Cresswell conceded
that ?—He practically withdrew* that.
Mr. StarTce. —He said that you did say it was incon-
sistent, but he did not concede anything else.
By Mr. Cussen. —Did you order him to take it away
and amend it?—No. I did not. He did that on his
own voluntary suggestion.
Did you say to him, “ All I want to know is whether
Shaw’s offer of £57,000 is a reasonable offer ” ?—No;
I do not know that I said that to him, and I do not
think I did. It was not a matter of Father Shaw, and
his offer to me at that moment, but a matter of valua-
tion.
Negotiations and offer were matters for the Cabinet?
—Yes,
And of course you could not make any offer without
Cabinet sanction?—No.
And before you put it before the Cabinet you must
have information to put before them? —Yes.
, When you got Father Shaw’s original offer, did you
have any conversation with Admiral Clarkson about
it? —Yes. I think my memory serves me well when I
state that on receipt of a written application from
Father Shaw—and by the way I want to say if I am
permitted that the first time since the whole of this
offer from Father Shaw has cropped up, the first time
I have ever heard that Senator Long should make a
draft letter for Father Shaw to send in, is to-day. That
is very material to me, because I understood from
Father Shaw that there was no other person in any way
connected with the sale of this property but'myself, and
I took it that the writing which was received hy me as
Minister was the writing of Father Shaw (perhaps it
is), and I had no knowledge and no information what-
soever that any, other person had drafted that sug-
gested letter from Father Shaw to the Minister.
There is nothing to indicate that you did ?—But I
think the Commissioners should know that.
Mr. Starke. —The letter itself is in typewriting, and
signed by Father Shaw.
By Mr. Cussen. —You discussed this with Admiral
Clarkson ?—I think I referred Father Shaw’s letter
direct to Admiral Clarkson.
And did you and he have a conversation about it ?
He sent a minute to- me regarding it. That minute,
in my opinion, was a direct refusal from Admiral
Clarkson to me to purchase.
To sanction ?—Yes; and his contention, which I pre-
viously told the Commission when I was before them in
June, was because of the industrial trouble in regard
to labour, and the difficulty the Government had ex-
perienced in industrial concerns, that they had not
proved a success, and he could not recommend it for
one thing because of that, and I think the other was
that there was far more machinery than we required,
and he could not see his way to support the application.
Did you bring that before Cabinet ? —I did so.
That was before ever you got into negotiation and
got valuations. Did you get authority to enter on
valuations, or did you mention it to Cabinet?—Yes,
And you got your valuations as you have told us ?—
Yes.
And you put the whole matter before the Cabinet*
—Yes.
And we learned that Cabinet approved of it?—Yes.
Did you ever have brought under your notice the
fact that Admiral Creswell had recommended the
reference of this matter to the Naval Board?—No.
When you brought the matter before the Cabinet
did you disclose every report which you had received,
including- Admiral Clarkson’s, to the Cabinet?—Yes.
I asked the Secretary of the Department for the whole
file, and put it before the Cabinet.
Was there one single fact concealed by you from the
Cabinet in connexion with this matter?—No.
I do not suppose you told the Cabinet about your
conversation with Commander Creeswell and the
£40,000? —No, I did not; but I told the Cabinet of
the reasons of Admiral Clarkson. In fact, I read
portion of it to them, or, I suppose, the whole of it,
but I gave them the gist of it, that he was opposed to
it because there had been labour troubles in Common-
wealth Government concerns.
And, as Senator Gardiner says, you put the price
and everything before Cabinet ?-—Yes.
In this purchase were you actuated by any other
motive than faithful service to the Commonwealth Go-
vernment?—No.
And did you act as you believed in the best interests
of the Commonwealth ?—I did.
Directly or indirectly, did you receive from an$
person any sum of money or any gift or consideration
of any kind in connexion with this purchase?—No,
none; not from any living soul have I received one
penny or any gift.
Or any promise?—No.
Or anything in the nature of a benefit to yourself
in connexion with this purchase?—No, nothing.
By the Chairman. —When you recalled Commander
Oresswell, and pointed out the inconsistency, did you
say to him or infer it was not any business of his what
the Commonwealth paid for the works? —No; I did not
go that far. I did go as far as this, to say that I had
not asked him for a recommendation, but I did not
object to his making one.
You did not say it was not his business what the
Government paid?—No; I do not think I would say
that.
At twenty minutes past four the Commission adjourned
till ten o'clock a.m. next day, Saturday, 16th Novem-
ber, 1918.
{At the Law Courts, Melbourne.)
SATURDAY, 16th NOVEMBER, 1918, at 10 a.m.
Fifth Day’s Sitting.
Before the Commissioners:
W. G. McBeath, Esq. (Chairman).
F. A. Veeco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Tayloe.
Mr. Starke. —Commander Cresswell has asked me to
say that he is preparing a written statement that he would
like to hand to the Commission on Monday morning.
Mr. Cussen. —In respect to what ?
Mr. Starke. —Giving the history of the whole trans-
action as far as he himself is concerned.
The Chairman.- —I cannot say we shall receive it at the
present time. It is rather an unusual request.
Mr. Starke.— I do not think there is any harm in it
going in. He would be prepared to give it as evidence.
The Chairman.— Well, if he is prepared to give it as
evidence, and there is no objection on the other side, it may
go in. However, it can be left over till Monday morning.
69


Jens August Jensen, cross examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You arrived at the sum of £55,000 as
the purchase money for the Shaw Wireless works ? —Yea.
That was entirely your own figure ? —Yes.
How did you arrive at that sum ? —I cannot say that I
can give any definite reasons why I arrived at it, but I
thought I would make a recommendation to Cabinet, and
that I would offer £55,000 or recommend to Cabinet the
purchase at £55,000.
You cannot give any definite reasons for fixing on £55,000?
■ —No, other than I hesitated whether I should give £55,000.
I looked at the valuation of my departmental officers,
which I hold them entirely responsible for, and, as a go-
between, I cut it down £2,000.
Just in an arbitrary way, to strike off £2,000 ?—Yes. I
had no real or definite reasons for so doing, but I
recommended to Cabinet that we should offer £55,000 and
see if he would accept it, and he did accept it.
I notice he says in his letter he offered it to the Postal
Department before ?—Yes.
And I presume you inquired into that ?—I read the report
of Mr. Hesketh, and I think of the two gentlemen who
inquired into it, but if the Commissioners would examine
that report thoroughly they will notice these gentlemen
never went into any valuation, or anything else, but simply
turned down the offer of Father Shaw’s proposal.
I will refer to that; but you had read the Postmaster-
General’s file in connexion with this matter ? —Yes ; it
was sent to me.
You knew then that Shaw had offered it at £55,000 to
the Postal Department ?—I think he stated that in his
application when offering it to my Department, and that
he had added machinery to it.
Document No. 2 of the 15th May says, “ Some time ago
I submitted .... establish those works.” So there is
nothing there, but you had read in the Post Office file he
was prepared to sell the Shaw Wireless Works at that date
for £55,000 ?—I think that was brought under my infor-
mation as a Minister of the Government to which the offer
was made. I was a member of the Government where
that same offer had been made to.
And therefore you knew of the surrounding circum-
stances ?—Yes.
It is undoubted that the only justification for this pur-
chase at £55,000 was because it ceuld be used for all Govern-
mental requirements—post office, naval, defence, and so
forth ?—There was nothing to stop it being used.
Was not that the only basis on which Mr. Cresswell could
justify such an outlay ? —That was one of his contentions,
it could be used.
Was that the basis on which you purchased ? —Not
exactly.
You knew for the Wireless Department you only wanted
an outlay of £4,000 or £5,000 ?—I did not know that at
all.
Did not your officers report that to you. You must have
seen their reports ?—I was not the Minister, Ido not think,
when that was offered.
You must have seen the letter—Cresswell’s report of
March, 1915—in which he said that what they wanted was
practically a tool shop which would not cost very much,
£4,000 or £5,000 ?—I was not the Minister for the Navy
at that time.
You never heard even of that, that Cresswell had reported
that all the Wireless Department wanted was some work-
shop at an outlay of £4,000 of £5,000 ?—I do not deny I
ever heard of it, but I never took that into consideration. .
If you look at Cresswell’s report I think you will see in
paragraph 3 he says—this is his report of 21st June, 1916,
on which you did act ? —-Yes.
[Reads] —That is the basis of Cresswell’s recommendation ?
—And a very sensible one, too.
Did you act upon that, that you were acquiring works
then for a department of the Government Service ?—I
certainly bore that in mind, and considered that if these
were bigger works than was absolutely necessary for the
wireless itself, that the whole of this machinery could be
utilized for the Government departments.
If you thought that, when did you read the report of the
Board of the Postal Department on that subject at all,
because they point out that a lot of this plant was perfectly
useless for the Postal Department ? —I wont’t deny that,
but it may be useful for other departments.
Some of it was not useful for any ?—I want to point out
this; if some of that plant was useless, I am not respon-
sible for its valuation. If it was useless plant it should
never have been valued at all. That should have been taken
into consideration in the valuation.
You saw this report of Hesketh’s ? —I have read it very
thoroughly since, but not much before.
The Board consisted of Hesketh (Chief Electrical En-
gineer), Wright (Manager of the Smalls Arms Factory),
and Wallaoh (Engineer for Lighthouses), and you had read
their report ? —Yes.
It sets out the various items at the works, and comments
on their utility and otherwise— [reads]. —Do you notice
that ?—That may be so, but I relied on my departmental
engineer, who was in charge of the Radio Wireless, in my
instructions, to take everything like that into consideration
in his valuation. If those things were not suitable, he
should have said so.
[Reading further from report.] —“ Patterns, drawings, &c.,
about £3,000 altogether”?—Yes. I say that my depart-
mental officer should have taken all that into consideration.
There is one item there referred to as for £3,000. I bought
that for £9OO myself.
Mr. Cussen. —What is the date of the report you are
reading ?
Mr. Starke. —10th February, 1915.
Witness. —That very fact of my buying for wireless plant
for £9OO, after sending my departmental officers over to
King Island to view it, and I had in mind those isolated
persons in that island, who should have some little con-
sideration from the Government, and I sent my officers
over there to make a valuation under Commander Cresswell,
and a valuation was made, and I paid not one penny more
than £9OO.
By Mr. Starke. — [Reading further from report.] —There
were several very considerable amounts that were
unjustifiable from their point of view ?—That was a
matter for my departmental officer to consider and go
into.
Mr. Cussen. —lf you read the whole of that report, Mr.
Starke, it puts a different complexion on it.
Mr. Starke. —l have read what they say.
Witness. —l think they also say in that report that the.
machinery is most modern and up to date.
By Mr. Starke. —Yes, I grant you that. You knew at the
time that a Board of Government experts (not of one
department only) had examined the matter, and had
declined the proposal ? —They had looked into it, but never
valued it.
They declined it ?—Yes, but hever valued it.
But they looked into his proposal that the Government
should purchase ?—How many business transactions take
place where one person turns down a proposition and
another person takes it up and makes a success of it ?
One department of .the Government having carefully
examined the proposition thought it was undesirable,
and you immediately step in ? —No. Let me explain.
What might not suit the Postal Department in their tele-
phone work might be suitable to the Navy Department
for wireless.
Did you buy this for wireless only, or for all Government
departments ? —The principal thing was for wireless, and if
the whole of the works could not be kept going for wireless
purposes, then it was the duty of the Government to see that
other departments were attached to it, in order to keep it
going.
Did you know that your professional officer, Mr. Cresswell,
was utterly opposed to taking over those large works if it


was mainly for wireless purposes, and he thought a much
lower expenditure would suffice ? —But you must remember,
in my subsequent communications with Commander
Cresswell, I put these other proposals to him, whether those
works could be utilized by Government departments, and
he advised me they could be and ought to be.
But here was the Postal Department saying, as far as they
were concerned ?—I did not bother about
You did not bother about the experts of the Postal
Department?—Not to this extent. What I was chiefly
concerned in was, we were at war, and as Minister for the
Navy, which I was made on 12th July, 1915. to September,
1917, of the same year 1915, the whole of this work w r as
taken away from the Postal Department and handed over
to the Navy Department; and the first thing I did as
Minister for the Navy was to get everything put on a
proper basis with regard to having everything controlled
in a proper way by the Navy Department, and not the
Naval Board; and a system of organization was entered
into whereby everything was conducted on a proper basis;
and once that system was inaugurated in the Navy Depart-
ment, to have control over this wireless system, it was my
duty to see then that whatever was required by the Radio
Engineer, if it was in my power, should be given to him
in order to make the Radio service a success, and be con-
trolled by the Government in a proper manner.
Take the Postal Department’s view. It is in the postal
file, and you saw this file ?—Yes, but to be quite candid,
I do not know that I looked into that report of that Com-
mittee that examined on behalf of the Postal Department
very much.
You did not bother about it ?—My dear sir, I know what
happened in Cabinet. I know the report that went to
Cabinet, and I know how it was discussed there, and if
you read that report from beginning to end, as I have done
several times since this trouble came on, I am quite-satisfied
I have done the right thing. Those gentlemen who inquired
or looked into the machinery at the Rand wick Works speak
in high terms of the machinery itself —the very highest
terms.
Mr. Cussen. —Mr. Starke is not quite fair over the report.
He should read it all.
Mr. Starke. —That is not of very much importance in
what I am trying to get at.
Mr. Cussen. —l object to this. My friend has read part
of the report only.
Mr. Starke —l will read it all.
Mr. Cussen.- —Well, draw the Commission’s attention
to the passage that Mr. Jensen has referred to in the report.
It reads thus : “If the policy of the Government is to manu-
facture all possible articles, then the manufacturing plant
in these works would form an excellent nucleus and could
be kept fully occupied.”
By Mr. Starke.- —I want you now to consider another
document on the file of the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment. There is apparently a letter here dated 30th June
from Mr. Webster. He was the Postmaster-General, and
Senator Pearce was the acting Prime Minister at that time ?
—Yes.
He said—[reads] ?—That is the first I have ever heard of
that.
Although it was on the Postmaster-General’s file ? —I have
never seen the Postmaster-General’s file yet. That is the
first I have ever heard of that. How would I see that file ?
You knew that the Postmaster-General’s Department
had been approached and had declined the proposition to
purchase at £55,000 ?—That is quite so.
You knew that ?—Yes.
And you had seen the report made by the expert officers
to the Postmaster-General ?—I admit I had heard of it in
Cabinet.
Why not call for it and investigate it further, when con-
sidering this proposal ?• —Because of my recollection of
Cabinet that the principal reasons for turning that down-—■
I do not know whether I should go into Cabinet matters.
I think not. I won’t ask you that ?—But the principal
reason was from a residential point of view.
The point I am stressing is this, that apparently the
Postmaster-General’s Department had an offer of £55,000?
—Yes.
The only difference was they said they would put in some
munition plant to cost £4,500 more ?—Yes.
You had heard of all those negotiations, and you knew
the report was existing. Somehow you had heard of it.
It is immaterial how you heard of it, but when you we,re
considering the proposition yourself a few months later,
you never got the reports and never considered them.
The Postal Department had said it was of no use to them ?
Yes, but there again the requirements of the Postal Depart-
ment are quite a different thing to the requirements of the
Navy, and what might not suit them might suit my Depart-
ment.
And then I put it to you again, your own departmental
officers had said (Mr. Cresswell particularly) that as a mere
proposal for the Navy Department it was an absolutely
unjustifiable proposal ? —No,
I will read you his report ?—That was never put to me.
I will read his report to you ?—Yes, but you must read
the whole thing. You must take into consideration the
whole of the report and not one sentence.
Certainly, but if you will take paragraph 3 where he says,
“ These workshops are too expensive to justify a recommenda-
tion that they should be taken over as wireless telegraphic
workshops alone ? ” —Yes, but read on, “ But I am of opinion
they should be taken over by the Government.”
And organized for all possible Government purposes ?
Yes, of course.
Do you say you were not concerned a bit about other
Government purposes —it was wireless only ?—I do not say
that at all, but I say what might have suited the Postal
Department as a Postal Department entirely on its own,
had no weight with me up to a certain point, that those works
were quite suitable for my Department, and especially in
view of the fact where Commander Cresswell says, “But
I am of opinion they should be taken over by the Govern-
ment.” He practically tells me to take them over.
He told you the only thing he wanted was a workshop for
wireless purposes, costing about £4,000 or £5,000 ? —No
He never told me that at all.
’ His reports are in, and he says, “ These workshops are too
big for our Department?”-—Not too big at all. That is
my opinion now even.
“ But they would be very valuable for the Government
if every Department got its stuff from it ? ”■—And Why
shohld not every Department do it.
Then I say to you, why did not you go and collaborate
with the Postal Department who turned it down ? —1 want
to emphatically state here that as a member of the Govern-
ment that purchased these works, we, as a' Government,
were returned by the people of Australia to go in for nation-
alization of industry, and that was the cardinal point of the
Government in taking over these works, and as a man who
subscribed to that platform that was uppermost in my mind.
No matter at what price ?—I do not admit that. I was
guided by my departmental officers, and no man will get
me off the track from that, and I resent
Well, I will turn to what your departmental officers said
in a moment. I was drawing your attention to the fact
that a very important Government Department had got
reports not only from its own officers, but of officers in the
electrical branch, from the lighthouse engineef and from the
Small Arms Factory, who all report that the Government
would not be justified in acquiring this property for Govern
ment purposes, and it was declined by another Government
Department. Then you rush in and buy it. I want to ask
you why did not you collaborate with the Postal Department
and your officers also collaborate with the Postal Depart-
ment when you were going into such a proposal ?-—Why did
not my officers confer with the officers of other Department s
and bring it under my notice?
Your officers you say were grossly negligent ?- —I do not
say any such thing.
71


You either throw it on the shoulders of your officers or
take the responsibility yourself ?—My dear sir,.let me state
this : I referred this to the only member of the Naval
Board that I could refer it to, viz., Admiral Clarkson. When
once I decided to look into the matter I referred it to him,
as the member of the Board who had charge of all matters
in connexion with machinery, and who was the engineer
member sitting on tha v Board. He looked into the matter
arid he reported—l admit straight out his report was not
favorable, I admit that. I mentioned that to the Com-
mission when I was before the Commission before, and I
have never attempted to say anything else, but I do say this,
if Admiral Clarkson, as a member of the Board, to whom I
referred the matter, was not satisfied, he never condemned
the machinery, nor the valuation of the machinery.
He never had an opportunity to do so ? —He had plenty
of opportunity when once I referred the matter to him.
You went behind his report ?—That member of the Board
had full power to refer the whole thing to the Board, which
he never did. I have been blamed for not referring it to
the Board. If there is any blame attachable to anybodv
it is attachable to him for not referring it to the Board.
I will refer to that a little later ? —I am not going to stand
by and listen to this sort of thing. I say that if Admiral
Clarkson had referred that to the Board in his minute, there
would, have been nothing for the Secretary to do but to
bring it up before that Board at its next Board meeting,
and no opposition from me.
You would not have acted on the Board’s opinion, any-
way ?—I do not know. Admiral Clarkson is not the Board,
but a member of the Board, and if he was not satisfied he
could have referred the matter to the full Board.
I will go back to that. You justify the purchase of this
wireless plant because it was useful not only for the Wireless
Department but for other Government Departments of the
Commonwealth ?—Yes.
Did you investigate from other Departments whether
there were promises made which would interfere with the
governmental control of all the activities that should go to
this workship ?—No, I did not. I will tell you what I did
do. I never circularized every Department. In fact I
do not know that I circularized any, but I did mention the
matter to Senator Pearce. I told him the whole thing,
and I said, “ In all probability these workshops will not be
fully occupied for wireless purposes, and there are many
things which Government Departments require, and they
could get the whole of their requirements from these work-
shops, and he said, “ I quite agree with you.”
By Mr. Cussen. The Ministers of other Departments
were in Cabinet ? —Of course. I never bought this
machinery. Is it for one moment asserted that I bought
the machinery. The Cabinet bought it. Every member
of the Cabinet is equally responsible in view of the fact that
I took the file there.
This plant had been offered for £35,000, and you paid
£55,000 ? > J r
Mr. Cussen. There is no justification for such a state-
ment.
By Mr. Starke. We know it was offered to Denise, for
£35,000. Do you call that no evidence ?
Witness. Is not there a qualification in regard to
that offer. I sat here and heard Mr. Denison say there
were no stocks taken into consideration. I heard him say
that stocks, &0., were not considered in that offer.
Mr. Cussen—l hope the Commission will not take notice
of anything but what is in evidence.
Witness. It is not fair to say such things.
The Chmrman- You can rely on the Commission, Mr.
Jensen. You need not worry about that.
Witness.— l hope Mr. Starke is not here to endeavour to
entrap me, because it is
By Mr. Starke. —No ; but I will endeavour to probe this
thing as far as I can in the public interests. Here is a letter
on the Postmaster-General’s file that I want to call your
attention to. It is from the Metal Manufacturers Limited,
and addressed to Senator Pearce. It is dated 25th July’
1916. It says, “ Our attention lias been called to a published
statement to the effect that the Postmaster-General’s De-
partment intends to establish, works for the manufacture of
cables, wires, &c.” That was an activity that these works
could have dealt with ? —What date was that ?
25th July, 1916 ?—I do not know, sir—the 25th July,
I think, is too late. lam afraid the thing was purchased
then.
That is what lam suggesting to you ? —lf the Postmaster-
General writes to Senator Pearce as Acting Prime Minister
on a question like this, how can I help it.
Mr. Gussen. —lt is not from the Postmaster-General.
By Mr. Starke. —No; it is a letter from the Metal
Manufacturers Ltd. to Senator Pearce pointing out there
was an arrangement made with the Government and this
purchase should not affect that arrangement. I am sug-
gesting to you that without any proper inquiry you rushed
into a purchase which may have seriously affected this
agreement. The letter goes on, “We have also noticed
that, according to the Press, the Government is about to
purchase the Shaw Wireless Works at Sydney, and is about
to take over the large staff at present employed there ”
[reads further ] ? —ls that for the manufacture of copper
wire ?
Evidently ? —There is no intention to manufacture copper
wire at these works.
You knew nothing about this arrangement ?—No.
Listen to what the Acting Secretary says, “ My announce-
ment was subject to any arrangement made by Mr. Hughes,
the Prime Minister. No • decision was come to pending
Mr. Hughes’ return to Australia, when his plans would be
revealed.” That was a very important matter to be con-
sidered before you entered into this huge purchase ?—-Is
that my thought ?
You never inquired ? —How could I inquire if I knew
nothing about it 1
You never inquired from any other Department as to
what arrangements could be made for getting material from
this Shaw Wireless Works until after you purchased it
My answer to you is this, seeing that the Ministers of the
several Departments were present, it was their duty to
point that out, and not mine.
One other matter I ought to tell you is, that Mr Macandie
the Naval Secretary, in October, 1916, says, “ I have to
inform you that the Department of the Navy has acquired
the Wireless Telegraphy and Electrical Workshops of Shaw
Wireless Limited, Randwiok, Sydney. It is the wish of the
Minister of the Navy that opportunity shall be taken by
all Commonwealth Departments of the facilities now pro-
vided for the manufacture and repair of all electrical and
other machinery, &c., of the classes shown in the attached
schedule.” And then there is a schedule attached showing
all the sorts of things you can supply ? —That is all right.
That is a proper method of business.
And it was sent, I understand, to each Government De-
partment ? —Yes, as far as I know ; it was my instructions.
It was only at that date, as I take it, that you suggest—
you did not have apparently any Governmental considera-
tion of policy in doing it ? —Would you have me suggest it
before they were purchased or not ?
Were these works for all Government Departments, and
not the Navy Department only ?—That was fully considered
at the proper place.
The next matter that I come to ask you about is the
subject of your recommendations. You knew Admiral
Clarkson had reported against it ?—He had not reported
totally against it in this way ; he said that from his point of
view the going concerns which were being run in the interests
of the Government, were in his opinion not a success-
straight out. That may not be the words, but that is his
meaning—because of labour difficulties.
He said more than that ? —Yes ; of course lam speaking
from memory. You must remember that I have not seen
one paper in connexion with this file since their completion
at the Navy Department,
72


You do not mean to tell me you did not see Admiral
Clarkson’s adverse report ? —I did see it two years ago, at
the time, but I cannot tell you every word ; but the gist of
his report was the workshops as proposed were too large.
On the 27th he apparently signed his report, and on the
29th you got the thing approved of in Cabinet, to value the
works ? —The 29th of what ?
On the 27th June, Admiral Clarkson having read his
subordinate officer’s report regretted ? —I referred
it to Admiral Clarlson on the 23rd June.
. On the 27th he regretted that he was prevented from
recommending the purchase. That was the Engineer Mem-
ber of the Naval Board ? —Yes.
Despite that report you went straight to Cabinet and
recommended a valuation ? —Quite so. Is Admiral Clark-
son to dictate to me, as a Minister of the Government,
what the Government policy should be ?
That is your position—that all you had was the report
of Mr. Cresswell and Admiral Clarkson. You knew the Post
Office had rejected the proposal, and you put it up to the
Cabinet to have it valued ? —I put it up to the Cabinet to
have it valued, and also told the Cabinet of Admiral Clark-'
son’s report.
So you have told me ?—Yes. It is a matter then entirely
for the Government to say whether it will have a valuation
made. This report is really a condemnation of the Govern-
ment’s policy, and nothing else.
You regarded it as a condemnation of the Government’s
policy ?—Yes.
Why not call the Naval Board together ? —Simply be-
cause in the first instance I was not impressed by the
member I referred it to, and in a mintue that was previously
issued by my predecessor, (Senator Pearce), whilst Minister
for the Navy, he says that any matter which might be
referred to an individual member of the Board can be dealt
with entirely by that member, or if he thinks fit can be
submitted by him to the Board for the full Board’s con-
sideration.
Do you know that the First Naval Board Member had
recommended that it be submitted to the full Board ?
I never knew that until it was brought under notice whilst
this Commission has been sitting. Now I want to say
I want to ask another question first ?—I want to say this.
In regard to that minute, which has been read here by
Admiral Creswell, I am quite sure and I am certain the
Secretary of the Department will get into this box and
swear that he had power to bring the matter before the
Board himself without referring it to me at all, and put it
on the agenda paper for consideration, and I am quite
certain, although I have never conversed with him and
never spoken to him on this business, from the day I left
Office, I am quite certain he will get in the box and say it
was no instruction of mine to keep it away from the Board.
You never even saw it ?—No.
The First Naval Member said this matter should be
considered by the full Board ? —I never saw it.
We may take it that your Naval Secretary was guilty of
gross dereliction of duty ?—I will not say that, because I
have complained to the Naval Secretary dozens of times
that he was overworked and offered him an extra man in
his own Department. He has slept on the premises, he has
been that busy, and not for one moment will I say he was
ever neglectful of his duty.
It was his duty to bring the matter before you or the
Board ?—So it may have been, and it may have been
overlooked ?
The Board was not greatly relied upon by you ? —That
is a very pertinent question. Do you ask me for my opinion
of the Board ? I will tell you that the Board is not a
harmonious Board.
It was not relied upon by you ? —I would not go so far as
to say that.
Did not one of the members offer to put his resignation
in your hands because you ignored the Board ? —No,
Because you bought a ship that he said was wrong ?—.
No, he did not offer to resign because I ignored the Board,
but offered to put his resignation in my hands because I
ignored him.
And he was the First Naval Member ? —That is quite
true, and I told him to go and sleep on it.
He told you not to buy the ship ? —He did not say that.
That was his opinion ? —His complaint was that he was
not consulted before it was bought, and it was bought
before he knew anything about it.
And he offered to resign ?—He did.
I may take it that you did not very much rely on his
opinion ? —I won’t say that. Ido say this :I am sorry to
say I have sat at this Board before I was Minister for the
Navy as Assistant Minister under Senator Pearce, and I
admit I was surprised by the occurrences at the Board
between two members —surprised. They were antagonistic
to one another.
I may take it that that being so you resolved to exercise
the whole functions of the Board ? —No, that could not be
so.
May I ask you when j r ou knew that Admiral Clarkson’s
report was against the purchase of the Shaw Wire!ess Works,
and when you knew the Post Office Department had been
against buying the works, why did not you call the full
Board together ? —I referred it to the member of the
Board who had charge of that portion of the administration
of it. If he, under the powers that were conferred on him
as a member of that Board, refrained from submitting
it to the full Board, it is entirely his business. 1 went
as far as I could go. I submitted it to the member
of the Board dealing with the matter, and if he failed to
bring it before the Board it is his responsibility. He gave
me his decision and I took it to the proper place, to the
Cabinet.
By the Chairman. —As a matter of fact, did not Admiral
Clarkson recommend it should be submitted to the full
Board too ?—Not that I know of. I neve > heard of such
a thing. If so, it ought to be on the file.
There is his initial here ought to be on the file if
that is so.
Mr. Starke. —Mr. Macandie says that that is merely
to show that he has seen the document.
Witness. —lf Admiral Clarkson had desired this matter
to be referred to the Board, I woidd not have offered the
slightest opposition.
By the Chairman. —Can you tell me what was the actual
reason for that minute which gave to members of the Board
power to bring matters directly under the notice of the
Minister instead of referring it to the full Board ?—I
cannot tell you exactly. Senator Pearce is responsible for
that minute. I think there had been a lot of friction on
the Board between two members, Admiral Clarkson and
Admiral Creswell, and I may tell you that the whole of the
time I was a member of the Board they never spoke to one
another; for two years they never spoke to one another
privately.
Was not the reason because the Ministers could not get
the Board as a Board to accept responsibility ?—I cannot
tell you that. I was only an assistant then, and I did not
know as much as Senator Pearce about the Board, but I
do say this, when I took my seat for the first time on that
Board and heard the wrangling going on between those
two members, they seemed to be in direct opposition to
one another on all questions.
By Mr. Starke. —Was that your reason for passing by
the Board ? —No.
That is no reason at all ?—No, but I have been asked
certain things and lam telling you. I would refrain from
telling you these things, if I were not asked.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Why did not you deal with
those two gentlemen. It must have been a very bad
thing for the Department. Why was not some step taken
to put the matter on a proper footing ?—I was there for
nearly a year with no powers at all. I was only there as
financial member sitting on the Board. I brought it under
73


the attention of the Minister of Defence on two or three
occasions, and told him of the bad feeling on that Board ;
and there is another thing I could state if I am forced into
the position—l do not want to state it, but I may state
it before the Commission has finished with regard to one
member of that Board.
By Mr. Starke. —Why not state what the facts are ?—lt
might come up when the Emerald is being dealt with.
By the Chairman. —l want you to state fully these things.
This is your opportunity now of stating anything which
happened during your administration of this Department ?
—Seeing that Sir William Creswell has gone as far as to
tell the Commission that he threatened to resign
No, I do not think he said that I—Well,1 —Well, Mr. Starke
evidently knows of it. He has put it to me.
By Mr. Starke. —I believe that Sir William Creswell will
say that ? —And if he says that he offered me his resignation
because I bought the Emerald he tells the truth. He did.
And I said, “ Well, Sir William, I am very sorry, it is only
a trivial thing anyhow. We want tugs, and you have no
tugs at all, and you are hiring, and paying huge hire, and
this is a little thing that will suit the purpose, and not much
money.”
We will go into that later. That has a funny little history
of its own ?—Well, perhaps I should not go into the
Emerald matter at this juncture. I do not want to. What
I did there I take full responsibility for.
By the Chairman. —That is all we want to know I—l
do not want to go into conversations between Sir William
Creswell and myself on certain occasions. I would rather
not do it, but if I am forced into the position in order to
make my position clear
By the Chairman. —You want to make your position
clear. Do not make any mistake on that point ?—I will
tell you about it when we come to the Emerald matter.
By Mr. Starke. —Although Admiral Clarkson had recom-
mended you not to purchase the Shaw Wireless Works,
you did not bring the matter before the full Board, and you
persisted on your own personal responsibility of going on
with the matter and you brought it to Cabinet ? —Persisted,
I do not know about that. I won’t admit that. There is
no persistence on my part.
You got his recommendation ? —There is a document
before the Department, and it has to be dealt with, and I
dealt with it.
On the 27th you got an adverse report, and on the 29th
you are in Cabinet with a recommendation to value, despite
Clarkson’s report ? —Yes.
Without consulting the full Board, and despite your
technical officer’s recommendation, you took the matter
to Cabinet ?—Yes.
That was on the 28th, and on the 29th the Acting Prime
M nister apparently said that the Cabinet had approved
of the valuation ?—Of obtaining a valuation.
I suppose you take entire responsibility as to the form
of valuation, and the method of valuation I—Yes.1 —Yes.
Entirely ? —Well, I will.
Do you know that an option existed between the Shaw
Wireless Company and Father Shaw I —No.
You never investigated that matter ?—No.
You did not know it and never investigated it ?—No.
I suppose you knew enough of the thing to know it
was the Shaw Wireless Company ? —All I knew was by a
letter which is on the file, because of the inquiry I made at
the suggestion of Admiral Clarkson, and that is where
Admiral Clarkson comes into it again. After he made his
report to me he said, “ Mr. Minister, I am very doubtful
whether Father Shaw has the selling of these works.”
I do not know whether it was after his report, or in talking
the matter over with him. However, he said to me,
“ Mr. Minister, I am doubtful whether Father Shaw has the
right to sell these works.” I immediately said to myself,
“ I shall not incur one penny expense until I am satisfied
on that point,” and I had telegrams sent to him through the
Secretary of the Department—it was an instruction by me,
and I do not say my name was not used, but it went through
the Secretary of the Department to inquire what was his
title, and whether he had the right to dispose of the land,
buildings, machinery, &c. Then he sent a letter on to the
Department, I think from some firm. I think it was from
some firm of solicitors, giving him the necessary power to
sell. That is all I know about that.
At all events, I presume you knew that Father Shaw and
his wireless company were not doing very well ? —Well,
I do not go as far as to say that.
There is a little memo, again on the Postmaster-General’s
file, which I suppose you might have seen ?—No, I have not
seen the Postmaster-General’s file. I have never seen, it
in my life.
Things get talked about in politics and elsewhere ?■—
Well, I have not seen it. ,
There is a little memo. here. You know Mr. W. 0.
Archibald, who was Minister of Home Affairs in 1915 ?
Yes.
He was a member of the Government at the time when the
Shaw Wireless Works was bought ?—No, unfortunately he
was put out.
At all events, in June, 1915, he wrote this to the Post-
/master-General. “ Whilst in Sydney recently, I was
interviewed by Mr. Black, Chief Secretary for the State, in
regard to what is known as Father Shaw’s Wireless Station
at Frenchman’s-road, between Waverley and Bondi.
Mr. Black explained that he lived out in this locality, and
it appeared to him rather a sad thing that all this
very valuable machinery should be practically lying
idle, when he understood the Defence Department was
badly in need of buttons, badges, and a variety of other
things, for the manufacture of which he was informed this
machinery was well adapted. He understood the Common-
wealth were paying a considerable rent for the premises,
and accordingly he had decided, in quite a private and
friendly way, to take the first opportunity of bringing the
matter to the notice of a Federal Minister.” So the thing
apparently was getting in extremes and could not carry on.
Did not you know that ? —No.
Then you had a valuation made ?—Yes.
Did you lay down any principle on which that valuation
should be made beyond the letter of 4th July, which said,
“We beg to offer you 50 guineas for a valuation of the
plant, machinery, and stock at Father Shaw’s work,” &c. ?
—I think there were some former communications from
that gentleman {Mr. Ross), wherein he asked more. I think
there were prior communications from Mr. Ross. They
ought to be on the file.
That is comparatively unimportant?—No, not at all,
because I cut him down in his price.
There is one letter in which he agrees to make a valuation
at 50 guineas. Ido not see anything where he offered to
do it at a higher fee ? —I think if you confer with the
Secretary you will find there was some offer by his firm
prior to that.
Mr. Macandie thinks it is on the file, but it is not important
for what lam about to ask you. The basis of valuation
was all important ?—Yes.
Mr. Ross has told us he understood he was to value for
both parties. Can you understand that ? —No, I cannot
admit that. I heard him give evidence.
The first letter is 4th July, 1916, and this is on the file
and initialed by you. It is to Ross to know whether he
will value some plant and machinery in Sydney for your
Department, and what would be his fee per diem ?
For this Department you see.
And Ross replied that he would make a valuation of the
plant, machinery, and stock at 25 guineas per diem ?
Yes.
Then followed your wire offering him 50 guineas for the
valuation of plant, machinery, and stock ?—You will notice
in that first letter the valuation is for this Department.
I want to say that I have had no communication with Mr.
Ross in my life. I never saw him in my life until I saw him
here in the witness box, and I never know of him except
from what I was told by a responsible Minister of the
Crown in the State Governpient of New South Wales,
74


He says at page 109 of the shorthand transcript—[reads.]
This is what Mr. Ross says—[ reads evidence on page 109] ?
—My reply to that is this, the only instructions Mr. Ross
got from me are on th 6 file which I ask you to look at. Mr.
Ross had never had any instructions from me to value as
between seller and proposed purchaser.
If you had known that you would have corrected it ?
lam inclined to think I would. I think I would have made
it clear that he was there practically and only on behalf of
my Department.
When you heard of the extraordinary system that he
adopted ? —No, I do not think it is extraordinary.
To take whatever he found there, no matter what its
utility for the business was and value it at its replacement
value there then, although he knew there were very high
prices owing to the war. Can you justify that. Did you
know he was doing it. Did you believe he would do that ?
He gave consideration, so he said here, to what he considered
obsolete articles and he reduced their value because of such
obsolescence. I think if you look into his evidence he has
taken that into consideration.
Mr. Cussen. —He unquestionably said that.
Mr. Starhe. —He did in some portions of the machinery,
not as a whole. Some cases that Mr. Cresswell pointed out
as obsolete machines.
Mr.' Cussen. —I contradict that.
By Mr. Starhe. —I wifi read you his evidence on page 108
where it appears, “We understand the basic principles of
your valuation, but how did you go about the deprecia-
tion. If a machine were tight in its bearings and not
worn out at all and the accuracies are there, &c., I allowed
practically no depreciation because it is for the purpose
a new machine and years make no difference. A machine
may be used three times in two years and under the cir-
cumstances I would take that as a new machine. Obsoles-
cence of course is taken into account.” He was then asked,
“ Could that be so on the basis of your valuation ? ”•—I
claim it was taken into account.
You told me that quite apart from the utility of the
machines at all to the works, whether ginger beer machines
or a pop gun, you took it at its market value less any
depreciation.?—ln a few cases, and in this particular instance
in very close association with Commander Cresswell, I wrote
down almost entirely certain things that were obsolete
and from the nature of which could never be anything else
but obsolete, because they had an express purpose and that
purpose was past, and if they were no good to the Shaw
Wireless they were no good to any one, such as generators.
Wherever that principle could be applied it was applied.
That shows that what he dealt with was the obsolescence
of certain particular machines, not obsolescence in the
broader sense of allowing for the plant as a whole and seeing
whether obsolescence was to be treated as a deduction from
the valuation. You did not know on what principle Ross
had based his valuation ?—Well, that is a question that will
entail many meanings.
What did you think Ross had done ?—Well, by his explan-
ation that I heard him make here and in consequence of his
report
At the time you got his valuation what did you think he
had done ?—I thought he made a proper valuation and a
genuine valuation, and if he did not, I took precautions
outside of Ross altogether by instructing the head of the
Radio Telegraphy Department of Australia, who was a man
who has or is supposed to have a knowledge of the value
of radio machinery and other machinery plants and who has
had a large experience, to go over to Sydney and take the
responsibility for me and for the Department. My con-
tention is this that if Mr. Ross did not do things properly
Commander Cresswell should have checked him and he should
have reported it to me.
I suggest to you that instead of leaving it to a junior
officer ?—Commander Cresswell is not a junior officer.
Yes, he is a junior officer. If you had taken the opinion
of the Third Naval Member you would have got nearer the
truth ?—Commander Cresswell was the person in charge of
Radio Telegraphy and Wireless Telegraphy in Australia .
The Naval Board is not in charge of it. What did Sir
William Creswell know of wireless telegraphy ?
Might I suggest a great deal more than you who was
responsible for wading into this purchase. Was it within
your contemplation that Ross should go and value the whole
of the machinery as it stood in situ at its rejfiacement value
on the date of its valuation. Did you contemplate such a
valuation as that ? —What do you mean by replacement
value.
The cost that it would take to go and buy the machines
and instal them in the building there, less any depreciation
that was charged ; did you think that sort of valuation was
going to be made. Mr. Ross was told to value that machinery
at its present market value. There is no other conclusion ?
—No, no other construction can be put on my letter through
the departmental secretary to him.
What do you mean by market value ? —As it existed at
that date.
Do you mean as the thing was there assembled and in situ ?
—Yes.
Then it was to be taken as a going concern ? —Yes.
You have bought going concerns before I suppose in your
business experience ?—Yet, I have.
As a business man have you purchased as a going concern
any business on any other basis than what it would earn
in your hands ?—I will ask for the protection of the Chair-
man of this Commission. You may not know what I knew
at that time. As a member of the Government I knew the
position the Government was in and I also knew of weekly
information that was sent out by the Imperial Authorities
and War Office relating to many matters and one of the
matters that was continuously brought under my notice,
because of this inside information, was certain machinery.
The Imperial War Office at that time was at its wits’ end
and the Munition Department in England was at its wits’ end
to get machinery which was necessary for the carrying on
of the war. lam forced to say this to protect myself.
There were certain big orders that were sent from the Aus-
tralian Government to certain firms in America to supply
machinery that was required here and especially for war
service, and we were requested to forego that machinery in
order that they might have it in England. The Govern-
ment did so.. I want to say furthermore because of my
knowledge that this machinery was absolutely unobtainable
in England, America, or anywhere else at this time, if we
could get that machinery at invoice value, at what Father
Shaw had paid for it, I knew it was worth 50 per cent, more
because of its being unobtainable.
You had to pay a lot more. If you had to put the value
on that date and pay that, you had to pay a lot more ?—I
am going to say something more to justify my action. As
Minister for the Navy complaints after complaints were
coming to me from Cockatoo Island that machinery which
was wanted there for the purposes of building ships, the
Brisbane was being built at this time, could not be got.
Mr. King Salter has had me over in Cockatoo Island on
many occasions explaining to me how his work was being
hung up and how he could not go on with his work as he
desired. He has come to Melbourne and I have called down
the Director of Naval Stores and pointed out to him the
seriousness of the position, because some of this machinery
that had been ordered for six or twelve months could not
be got. I knew we were going in for workshops for wireless
telegraphy work and I knew that this machinery would not
be obtainable in all probability for years if this war lasted
and I could see nothing ahead of me. The Radio Engineer
said to me, “ Mr. Jensen, if we want to make a success of
the wireless telegraphy in Australia we must have some
control in every way, not only in the sending of messages,
but of patents machinery, secret rights, and anything else.”
What was I to do. I was forced to tell you this.
That is all very fine ?—Here now I am being arraigned for
what ?
For making a bad bargain. I am suggesting that this
was a bad bargain. That is the proposition lam putting
to you. I may be quite wrong ? —Well if it is only as 'to a


bad bargain I am arraigned for and nothing else I do not
mind. There is no man living but what has made mistakes,
buf unfortunately I have had to sit here for three or four
days and hear what I have had to hear, I wish I had never
seen the thing.
lam dealing with this as a bad bargain; the other matter
is a matter that can be dealt with on another footing. What
I am dealing with is that this was commercially a bad
bargain. I think that is a fair thing 2 —l think it is.
What you said just now to the Commission may possibly
justify you in acquiring this machinery, but it does not
justify paying an extravagant price for it 2—No ; but I
do not agree an extravagant price was paid for it.
You had all the powers of course under the War Preacu-
tions Act at that time of taking any machinery you wanted
and any works you wanted for Naval and Military purposes 2
—Let me answer that. My answer to that is this, that if
we had compulsorily taken over those works we would have
had to pay on a valuation made by our own departmental
officers, and there has never been any property to my know-
ledge that has been acquired for Government purposes that
we ever paid on our own officers’ valuation. We have
always had to pay more; that is my answer to that.
That is not an answer; you are talking of compulsory
acquisition 2 —You said to take over these things.
As you have taken over woollen mills and forced them to
work. You have had to take them over for working ; you
have not purchased them 2—No.
Can you justify as a business man the taking over of the
Shaw Wireless Works on the basis that you should adopt
the replacement cost of those machines assembled and
in situ at the time 2—l never took that into consideration.
I would have to give consideration to a thing like that.
Would you have bought things on such a basis as that 2—•
I cannot answer that, I have not given it consideration, and
it is no use answering a thing until you have given it
thought.
The next matter I want to come to is Mr. Cresswell’s
report, which you thought was inconsistent 2—l thought it
was inconsistent in a way.
I am going to suggest to you there was nothing very in-
consistent about it. Let me put this to you. Cresswell had
concurred in a valuation of about £60,000 for the land,
buildings, and the stock 2—He concurred in the valuation
of machinery stock and he offered no opposition to the
Home Affairs’ valuation of the land and buildings. He
took that as correct.
It was out of his Department and he was not a valuer of
land. However, he had suggested that the value of these
things was about £60,000 2—Yes.
I suppose you will admit there was a very important fact
to consider, and that was whether Shaw was. pressed to get
rid of that—whether it was necessary for him to get rid of
it 2—l did not know anything about that, except what I
have heard since of Father Shaw’s position, especially
since this case has being going on.
Some of your officers knew of it ?—They never pointed
it out to me.
Cresswell did inform you in substance, and his recommen-
dation was based upon it when he says, “ We have got a
valuation of £60,000 and I think £47,000 of it is all right;
and £14,000 the Home Affairs have valued, which is all
right; Shaw’s offer is £57,000. I think you can get it
for less than that, and I would start out at about £40,000,
and I think you will have a good show of cutting him
down ” 2 —Of course, if that is the construction you put on
it, that may have been in his mind.
I suppose that was a business proposition, to bargain 2
He might have put it in that way.
Do you not think it is very rough upon this subordinate
officer in the Department to have to carry the whole burden
when he says, “ I think you should have begun at £40,000 ” 2
—He meant that as a negotiation only. •He did not say,
although he may have contended we should start negotia-
tions at £40,000, we should not give £57,000 for it. Why
should I not give £57,000 for it, or the £60,000.
If he had said this, “ I think we can get it lower, and I
recommend starting at £40,000 and bargaining,” you might
have got it through, that is a curious point ? —I do not think
so.
Cresswell had put to you the proposition to make an offer
of £40,000. He put this proposition, “ I think that is a
good basis to work on, leaving out all other consideration, I
suggest to start at £40,000.” Why did you tell Cresswell it
was not his business then to make such a suggestion 2
I did not say such a thing. I have discovered, however,
through his giving evidence, especially in relation to these
subsequent questions which were asked of him, that his
memory is not quite accurate. I do not think it is done
intentionally.
I do not think any one could suggest that 2 —No ; because
I have always found him a gentleman in every way. But
I do say this, I spoke to him as calmly and quietly as I am
now. I remember it as if it were yesterday. I said,
“ Commander Cresswell, I have your report before me and I
have considered it and I am struck with the great incon-
sistency of your valuation, which I sent you to do as the
responsible officer of' this Department, and what you
suggest to me I should offer for this machinery.” I went
on, “ Now, sir, I want to point out that if you have gone
and done your duty and valued that machinery and stock
at bed-rock prices, how can you come to me and suggest
I should offer £20,000 under your own valuation. Is that
a fair thing.”
What did you mean by bed-rock prices 2—l told him to
value it at bed-rock prices, at the lowest price possible at
that time.
At the price he could get it at 2—No, the valuation of the
machinery and stock.
I cannot understand you. When you said he was to
value at bed-rock prices, that is not the market price, it is
not the replacement value or anything like that; bed-rock
price is the lowest price to which you can force b man down 2
—I told him to find the lowest value possible.
He is telling you that—£4o,ooo 2—That is not his valua-
tion at all.
That is his bed-rock price 2 —No ; he has said that he
suggested that as a price to commence negotiations. You
should not suggest things like that.
The Chairman. —The Commission thinks the £40,000 was
the figure you might commence negotiations with, but he
did not say at what price you might finish 2 —That is so.
I told Commander Cresswell to value that machinery as
if he himself was the would-be purchaser, and he intended
to purchase it if he could get it. What more could I do
as Minister, and seeing I gave him those verbal instruc-
tions, which he has admitted, and I furthermore told him
that I placed the whole of the responsibility on him going
to Sydney with regard to the valuation of this machinery
and stock.
Wait till I read you all the instructions the unfortunate
Radio Engineer had —[reads instructions from file] 2 —Those
were his instructions. I made him responsible.
Why did you not make Admiral Clarkson responsible 2
Commander Cresswell came to me in my office about 4.30
in the afternoon, and he said, “ Mr. Minister, under direction
I am going to Sydney.” I said, “ Look here, I want you
to take full charge up there ; go into everything and show
no favoritism to the Department or to Father Shaw ; value
the whole thing right down to bed-rock as if you were
valuing it for yourself.”
By Commissioner Taylor. —Did you think it was a very
unbusinesslike proposal of Commander Cresswell to start
at £40,p00. Did you not think it would have been a wise
thing to have done 2—lt might have been ; but I want the
Commission to consider this —that I could not conceive
at the time why I should be asked to give £20,000 under
our own valuation. That was not for me ; that was a
matter for the Government to consider, and we considered
it as a Government. Now, I want to say this, I had as
Minister cut down 10 per cent, myself in our own valuation


for a start. Our valuation was £60,700, and I cut it down
to £55,000, and that was £2,000 under Father Shaw’s
offer.
By Mr. Starke. —You were not going to start at over
Father Shaw’s offer ? —No.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Did you know Father Shaw
was very anxious to sell the works I—l did not know
he was in such circumstances as have been stated here.
Supposing you had adopted Commander Cresswell’s
suggestion, and he had refused that, that would have only
taken a day or two. You could then have gone up to
£45,000 I —l do not take the responsibility of that. The
Government must take the responsibility of what was
offered to Father Shaw. It was not decided in my
Department ; it was considered by the highest authority
in Australia, and they knew what had been reported. I
elaborated everything to the Cabinet.
By Mr. Starke. —You must recommend it? —Not
necessarily ; but I did recommend it.
You must take the responsibility of that I—But the
Cabinet could have said, “We will act in compliance with
the suggestion.”
We can take this as gospel, I presume, that no Cabinet
will act without the recommendation of the Minister of
the Department in buying works?—No.
They may refuse his recommendation, but they will not
act without his recommendation ? —They may refuse it or
tell him to take it back and reconsider it.
They will not act without it ?—No ; I say I recommended
it.
By the Chairman. —Did the Cabinet know Commander
Cresswell suggested to offer £40,000 ? —I read whatever
was on the file.
By Mr. Starke. —Listen to what Commander Cresswell
says about this, because it seems to me he was rather
brusquely dealt with ? —I have never spoken an unkind
word to Commander Cresswell in my life, and I have
never forced him to do anything against his own
wish in his life, nor any other officer in that Department.
In addition to that, if I had attempted to browbeat Com-
mander Cresswell, he had his course —he should have sent
a letter to the Secretary and had it brought under the notice
of the Naval Board. I could not dismiss him ; I think he
has permanent rights in that Department as a civil servant,
and if I did anything that was wrong, he had his course
and could have reported it to the Naval Board.
When you sent for Commander Cresswell had you seen
the draft report ?—Yes, of course I had seen it.
You sent for him? —Yes,
Commander Cresswell said that you told him the question
of negotiations was not his business. There can be no
doubt of that. Did you tell him that ?-—I do not know
that I said that to him, but I am quite certain I told him
that I had no objection whatever to him making a recom-
mendation, although he was not requested to do so by me.
Did you say it was a matter for you and not for him ?—I
will not say that.
That is what Commander Cresswell says ? —That does not
matter ; I know what I said. I have a very clear memory
of my transactions in the Navy Department. I maintain I
have got a good memory, and I said to Commander Cress-
well, “ Your valuation and your recommendation are incon-
sistent. In accordance with your instructions you have
not been asked to make a recommendation that I have
no objection to you making it.” He said, “It is incon-
sistent. Why did I accept his other recommendation ? ”
Why did you say a thing was inconsistent when it was
not ?—lt was inconsistent.
What is the inconsistency ? —-He says, “ I therefore
recommend that if these works can be acquired for a sum
of £40,000, which in iny opinion would be a fair offer to
make under all the conditions at present obtaining, they
should be so acquired.” I say that if a man says*£4o,ooo
is a fair offer to make when he admits it is worth £60,000
odd, is that a fair request for a Government to make to
one of its citizens.
What is a bedrock price ?—That is not.
What is your point as to the bedrock price ?—His bedrock
price was £46,000 for the stock.
His bedrock price was £40,000 ?—No.
By Commissioner Taylor. —The Government have made
a much more ridiculous offer than that. I have seen it
frequently. If Commander Cresswell’s offer had been made
to start with, it is very likely it would have been a good
offer to start with ?—Perhaps so.
By Mr. Starke. —Commander Cresswell said that you
wanted to know whether Shaw’s offer of £57,000 was a
reasonable offer ?—I never said any such thing. He says
that.
Commander Cresswell says, “ If I remember correctly,
I told him I was prepared to do that, but I must qualify
it ” ?—That is not so.
He goes on, “ By stating that perhaps they could be
procured at a lower figure ” ?—I am quite clear in my
mind that I never mentioned the valuation of Father Shaw
in the business.
His subsequent report corroborates that ?—I know what
Commander Cresswell says, but I never gave him any
directions at all to amend his report because in my
Ministerial capacity I would not attempt to do such a thing.
You see how his report corroborates him?—l cannot help
his report. The very fact that I did not take exception to
it shows that I was not concerned very much about his
work outside the valuation. I am nearly exhausted on
this. I cannot give you any more information than I
have given you on it. I have told you I never gave him
any more directions at all. At his own request he said,
“ I can see what you consider to be an inconsistency.
I would like to give the matter further consideration.” I
said, “It rests entirely with yourself. In looking through
this report I can see it would be a very strange report to
send to Cabinet; they would say to me, if that is the true
valuation why should we not give it ? ” I said that to
him, “If I take this to Cabinet as it is, I am quite
prepared to do it, but I have not asked you for a recom-
mendation. I do not mind getting one from you. I
have no objection, but you consider your valuation over
again and your recommendation.”
That is a very strange answer. Commander Cresswell,
in your opinion, as you have stated it to me, whether you
are right or wrong, was the most competent person in
the Commonwealth for the purposes of valuing this plant ?
He was the most competent in my Department.
You say he was the most competent person in your
Department for- the purposes of valuing the plant. Of
course, you told Cabinet who the competent officer was
that you were relying upon ?—All the members of the
Cabinet know Commander Cresswell.
Would it not have created a tremendous discission in
Cabinet if you had put up a proposition of £55,000, and this
responsible officer, Mr. Cresswell, had said, “ Do not offer
£55,000, begin at £40,000 ” ?—No, I do not think
it would, because the Cabinet could look at the valuation
made out by its own departmental officer, through the
Home Affairs Department.
If that is so, why did you not let the report go in as it
was written and let Cabinet form its own opinion ?—I
have told you I sent for Commander Cresswell and drew
his attention to what I thought was an inconsistency, I
gave him no directions whatever. Whatever has been done
he has done himself. I knew my business too much as a
Minister to browbeat an officer into what to say. I have
never done such a thing in my life.
You have heard Commander Cresswell’s statement at this
inquiry ? —Yes.
I will read you some of his evidence —[ reads evidence \.
Is it not a fact that in substance your suggestion brought
about a withdrawal of his recommendation that you should
begin at £40,000 ?—No, he need not have withdrawn it.
I never forced him to do it, and he does not say I did.
He did it after seeing you ?—I admit that, and I have
told the Commission so.


The other matter that I want to ask you about is this,
apparently you got the sanction of Cabinet to buy the
works on the 14th of July, 1916 ? —I cbuld not say that
unless I saw the Prime Minister’s file.
Cabinet on the 14th of July approved of your recommen-
dation that the Shaw Wireless Works be purchased for
£55,000, provided you were satisfied that your Depart-
ment’s requirements will keep such plant fully employed ?
Yes.
That was, of course, a very important proviso, provided
you were satisfied that your Department’s requirements
would keep such a plant fully employed ?—Yes.
It is quite obvious your Department would not keep that
plant fully employed. The Navy Department only could
not keep that plant fully employed ?—Of course, that is a
matter of opinion. I do not know what has been done
since then, only what I have heard since I have been attend-
ing this Commission, but I know at the time that it was
considered if this was taken over other Departments would
have to join in with it.
You notice the Cabinet’s proviso, and 1 think it is a
most important thing that a Cabinet decision should be
carried out ? —That means this, so long as I was satisfied
that those works could be kept going by Governmental
concerns.
Although it says, “provided your Department’s require-
ments will keep such plant going ” ?-jI had already put it to
the Cabinet.
You read a meaning into the document that is not
apparent on its face ? —No, I knew what was in the minds
of the Cabinet. We knew what had been discussed.
You say, although the document does not, that you
could consider outside Department’s requirements. You
understood Cabinet meant that?—What is more, I com-
municated with Commander Cresswell regarding other
Departments, and I knew the meaning of it was for other
Departments.
However-you say that you knew that Cabinet meant more
than the minute expressed ?—I knew what was in the
minds of. Cabinet, and I
Now we come to Mr. Higgs. Can you understand how
it is Mr. Higgs has- no recollection of Admiral Clarkson’s
adverse report ?—He did not deny that it had been brought
up there. You know there are many times when a man is
attending Cabinet when he leaves the room for half-an-
hour. Mr. Higgs’s own Department was only next door to
the Cabinet, and he was in the Cabinet, so it is quite possible
that he may have been out. He said his mind was not very
clear on the point. He says it may have been read.
At all events you say that Admiral Clarkson’s report
was either presented at the Cabinet meeting, or its substance
was conveyed to Cabinet by you ? —Yes, I am quite sure
of that.
You remember the Treasurer’s questions to you and your
answers, I will read them to you — [reads from file] ? —The
second answer is the answer of my responsible officer.
Did you regard it as accurate ?—I did ; has he'not sup-
plied a list of the ships he has fitted up in the first twelve
months the works were taken over ?
You knew perfectly well a large number of sUips were
under contract with Mr. Denison’s company ?■ —There may
have been some.
Half the coastal ships ?—I doubt it.
Denison says so ?—I do not mind what he said; I rely
on my own departmental officers’ report.
You remember the third question ? —Yes.
Let me put this to you about this £BO,OOO mentioned
in your answer. There was not the slightest idea of erecting
such a plant at that time ?—No, but I will guarantee that
that machinery, if it were to be imported from anywhere
in the world now, you would not get it, and could not get
it. I say that in all seriousness.
Take the next thing, “ Our officers’ valuation, which is
on the conservative side, is £61,000” ? —Yes, that is the
bedrock side.
Why did you not mention the £40.000 ? —That was only
Cresswell’s suggestion to me.
You got Cabinet’s approval on the 14th of July, and you
paid the money on the 19th of August ? —I believe it was
paid on the 19th of August, but I took no part in the
payment.
What was the tremendous haste that you were in. You
were pushing the Naval Secretary on and the Law Depart-
ment. What was the haste ? —I was not pushing the
Naval Secretary on.
The Naval Secretary says you ordered him to write to'
the Law Department to expedite the matter ? —Certainly.
Once a Government has entered into a contract to purchase
a thing, any man is entitled to come up and see me, and to
ask if the matter may be expedited. Is there anything
wrong in that ?
I want to know what was the urgency for it ? —To get the
matter completed. From my knowledge I knew the works
were being hung up, and we had to put watchmen in.
Watchmen were sent there under my directions to watch
everything. There was a day watchman and a night
watchman. I did not want the thing to be held up for
months. I wanted to expedite it, and surely I was justi-
fied. Our departments are always being blamed for lagging
behind and not doing their business.
The titles were rushed through ? —No, I took no part
in the rushing of anything through.
The day after you received Admiral Clarkson’s report,
the adverse report, without further inquiries you recom-
mended the purchase ? —lf I took that report to Cabinet
I did my duty.
Did you know that Senator Long had got any money
from Shaw ?—No.
Did you know that Senator Long and Father Shaw were
friends ? —Yes, I had seen them together dozens and dozens
of times at Parliament House, and never on one occasion,
excepting the time I told the Commission about when I
was before them previously, did I ever talk to Father
Shaw and Senator Long at the one time. Let me just
describe this. I was made Minister for the Navy on the
12th of July, 1915. I had had handed over to my Depart-
ment on the 17th of November the whole of the Radio
Services of Australia from the Postmaster-General’s
Department. I think in October I visited Sydney on some
departmental matters in connexion with Cockatoo Island.
I think it was the big labour trouble, demarcation trouble,
and whilst I was in the Minister’s room there I received
two or three calls on the telephone that Father • Shaw
would like me to go out and view his works. This was in
October. I am certain it was about four or five weeks.
after we took over the Radio Services. I said I would be
free at a certain time, and at that time there was a motorcar
waiting for me, with Senator Long and another man named
Mulroney in it. I went out and looked at these works.
That was in October, 1915, and this offer was not made
until May, 1916. I had a look over these works, and the
principal reason that I was sent for was this : At that
time there was a big dispute in the Commonwealth Depart-
ments in regard to the patent rights, on which there was
litigation going on between Father Shaw and the Balsillie
rights and the Commonwealth Government. That was
explained to me by Father Shaw, and he took some time
to do it, and then he bitterly complained to me of the
treatment he had received from Balsillie, with regard to
not getting orders for certain machinery that he could
supply at a less price than what Balsillie was buying it for.
He particularly asked me if I would assist him by getting
orders if I could. I never said yes. I went to see the works.
I looked all over this machinery, and I was amazed to find
such a fine plant, especially in one building, and a lot of
machines, with the workmen standing on alongside, who
seemed to me as if they could turn out anything that was
required*in electrical matters, and small machinery and
anything like that. Nothing further was discussed but
these two things, the patent rights, and he wanted me to
get him orders for machinery. I then came back to
Melbourne.


He was hard up then for work ? —Do not many firms ask
for orders for machinery when they are hard up ?
He was hard up ? —He may have been.
You believed he was hard up ? —I did not believe he was,
because he never put his financial position to me. He
asked for orders and I never gave him one. I never signed
an order to Father Shaw.
It shows how useless the works were to you if you never
gave him an order. You say it was so urgent for the
Commonwealth to get these works ? —That was in October.
That was the only time I saw Father Shaw and Senator
Long together in my life, or I spoke to them together in my
life. I came back to Melbourne and I did discuss the wire-
less position both with Commander Cresswell and the Secre-
tary to the Department. Certain documents went between
the Attorney-General’s Department and my Department,
and it was decided on the recommendation or suggestion
of Commander Cresswell that these patent rights which were
in dispute were of no value to the Commonwealth, with
what rights they had and what powers they had. Those
rights and powers were quite sufficient. I think that can
be turned up. Immediately after I came back from Sydney
on that occasion those matters were dealt with by me and
litigation was stopped.
I think you are right about that. I do not know that it
was stopped, I doubt if it ever started. There was going
to be a Royal Commission and the Commissioner became
ill and it was never proceeded with ? —There was a dispute
and no more notice was taken of it because I acted on the
suggestion of Commander Cresswell. Now from that date
that I .saw Father Shaw and Senator Long, I never spoke
to Father Shaw nor Senator Long about anything in con-
nexion with those works, that Father Shaw had submitted
his offer to the Department. For the first ten or twelve
days after that offer came in I do not think that I dealt with
it at all. I never even submitted it to the Third Naval
Member. But subsequently Father Shaw wrote in asking
what was being done. I do not think up to that time I had
referred it to the Third Naval Member, but I would like
that looked up.
You say that Senator Long had no discussions with you
of any sort whatever in relation to the purchase of the Shaw
Wireless Works ? —No, I want to say this, that if he had
come to me I would not have listened to him, because I
knew on what close and intimate terms he and Father
Shaw were.
You say no such action was taken on his part at all ?
Not with me. I cannot say what inside information
Senator Long was getting from anybody, I am not responsible
for it. From me he had no information at all.
When did you first know that he had got £1,290 or any
sum of money from Father Shaw ?—I was before the Com-
mission on the 19th of June and I did not know then. The
Commission told me, by way of putting a question to me,
that Father Shaw had drawn out a cheque for £5,000 and it
had been stated that a certain amount had been given to a
certain man, he had got £2,000. Tfie Commission never
mentioned the name. I was supposed to have got £2,000
and Lieutenant Cresswell £l,OOO. I did not know that
Senator Long was the man who was implicated by having
traced £2,000 to him. That is what the Commission said.
They said they had traced £2,000 and I did not know Senator
Long was the man until I was informed, I suppose I am at
liberty to say this, by my Counsel. That is the first I knew
of that.
That is after the Commission had informed you they would
hold an inquiry. It was when you were present they told
you that. You can offer no explanation of what became
of the difference between £1,290 and £5,300 which Shaw
drew out of his bank on the 19th of August ?—I know
nothing about it, I cannot offer any explanation.
Or suggest any lines of inquiry ? —No, I cannot, I know
nothing of it.
Can you offer any explanation of Father Shaw’s statements
to various persons that you were getting a commission or
a cut out of the deal ? —No, I assure the Commission that
on the few occasions that Father Shaw came to see me in
my office —I have seen him on the door step of the Navy
Office on many occasions, at least three or four times when
he never came to see me, trying to get into the Secretary’s
room to try and get information of how the thing was pro-
ceeding, especially after the Government had made an offer,
and I give you my oath that never any such suggestion was
made between he and I of anything I was to get from him
in any shape or form.
You can offer no explanation in any shape or form ?—No.
Why he made those statements, if he made them ? —No.
Of any description whatever ? —No, Father Shaw may
have said so, but I am for what he says.
I am merely asking you if you can offer any explana-
tion ? —No, I want to be very emphatic on this, if there is
any living man in Melbourne or a member of Parliament
in Melbourne, or in Australia, that can come forward and
say that they have seen me walk down the street with
Father Shaw, that I dined with him, or met him in any way,
you can say I am a guilty man.
I would not go that far if I were you ? —What I mean is
this : I never met that man anywhere other than in my
office and on that one occasion at his own office with Senator
Long. I have seen him dining at Parliament House on
many occasions with Senator Long and I have never even
gone and spoken to him. I can offer no explanation
against these very serious allegations that have been made
against me.
None have been made against you ?—Yes they have.
No allegations have been made here ? —Well, then,
suggestions.
I think it is necessary for you to see that the inquiry is
necessary to show what became of that £5,300 and especially
for you to hear what Father Shaw had said especially after
you know Senator Long got £1,290. That is a serious
matter ? —l' admit that is a very serious matter.
You admit there are no charges made here, and I
explained that at the outset ?—Yes.
By the Chairman. —You heard Senator Long’s statement
yesterday in which he said that Mr. Cornwell suggested
that he should implicate you in this matter in order that
Long himself might get off lightly ?—Yes, I heard that.
Are you on friendly terms with Senator Long I —l speak
to him. I had a most serious row with him a few’ years ago
in Tasmania and we never spoke for some three or four
years. We speak now, but we are not friendly. Ido not
go about with him.
I think that was the evidence you gave before ?—-Yes,
I do not go about-with him, I do not drink with him, I do
not mix with him. 'lf he speaks to me I answer him.
There is no friendly acquaintance between us.
Did he tell you of this alleged suggestion by Cornwell ?
—No.
He never mentioned it to you ? —No, that is all news to
me since this Commission.
I should think that if it were as Senator Long represents
he would have told you about it ? —I know nothing about
it.
By Mr. Cussen. —Do you want to say anything further
to the Commission ? —No.
Mr. Starke. —I understand the Commission has expressed
a desire that I should call Senator Pearce ?
The Chairman. —Yes.
Mr. Cussen. —Mr. Jensen wants to get away on Monday
afternoon.
Mr. Starke. —Then I think we had better meet at 10 a.m.
{The sittings adjourned at 12.20 f.m. till Monday, the 18th
November, 1918, at 10 a.m.)


(At the Court of Marine Inquiry.)
MONDAY, 18th NOVEMBER, 1918, at 10 a.m.
Sixth Day's Sittings.
Before the Commissioners:
W. G. Mcßeath, Esq. (Chairman).
F. A. Ybeco, Esq.
Hon. P. T. Taylor.
Jens August Jensen, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —lt shows -on the file that you tele-
graphed to Mr. Ashford, Minister for Lands, Sydney,
“ Gan you give me any information in regard to Mr. H.
E. Ross, consulting engineer, Pitt-street, Sydney,” &c.
Where did you get hold of the name of Ross first?—l
got it from Father Shaw.
Under what circumstances? —Under the circum-
stances that I told him I was going to appoint a
valuator, an outside valuator, as well as one from our
own Department, and I said, “ I have been making in-
quiries about an outside valuator.” He stated that
there was a very' reliable firm in Sydney, and he men-
toned the name of Ross, and, of course, I just made a
note of it, and then I met Mr. Ashford, a Minister of
the State Government of New South Wales, in Mel-
bourne, and I think he had his private secretary with
him at the time.
Mr. O’Keefe ?—I do not know who the gentleman was
by name, but he was with the Minister. I said to Mr.
Ashford, “ Can you tell me of any firms in Sydney
that do any valuing for your State Government?” and
he could not for the moment. Then I asked him about
the firm of Ross, and he could not at that moment say
about him, but his secretary did mention that he knew
the firm, and that they were very, very, reliable. That
was in Melbourne when that conversation took place.
Prior to the name of Ross being mentioned to me by
Father Shaw, I had already asked Mr. Catts, M.P.,
who was a member of the House of Representatives,
and who knew a good deal about engineering firms in
Sydney—and I might tell you 1 knew of none—l asked
him if he could recommend a most reliable firm to do
any valuing, and he said at the moment he could not,
but he would look into the matter and let me know.
Well, I never heard from him for some time
You heard on the Ist July?—lt was some consider-
able time, anyhow. I also asked Mr. West, who repre-
sents another big portion of the city of Sydney or its
immediate suburbs, if he could recommend any engineer-
ing firm that could do valuing, and he said for the
moment he could not, and I asked him if he would make
inquiries and let mte know, and I never heard any more
from Mr. West at all. If there is any doubt about my
statement, I would like these gentlemen called.
There is a telegram from Mr. Catts on the file recom-
mending a valuer named Marchant ?—Yes, I think that
is right.
And also a telegram from Mr. Ashford recommending
Ross to you?—Yes.
What I was more concerned with was the first sug-
gestion coming from Father Shaw?—-That is quite true.
I absolutely admit that.. In order that I might be quite
sure of the facts relating to Mr. Ross, after having a
conversation with Mr. Ashford in Melbourne, I then
sent him a telegram, and on that telegram I took it he
would make inquiries into the suitability of Mr. Ross
and his hona fides, and into everything else. He did
so, and I think, if you will look into the dates of those
telegrams, you will find that the recommendation, or at
least the telegram, that I had already communicated
with Mr. Ashford, and I think had practically made an
offer to Mr. Ross before I received a reply from Mr.
Catts. I think you will find that is the position. I
would like that just looked into. I think I had gone
that far with Mr. Ross that I could not entertain the
other gentlemen’s names; but I want to state this, and
you will see I am quite frank about this; I asked
Father Shaw if he was in any way indebted to this man,
as they were an engineering firm, and he told me no. 1
said, “ Are you under any obligation to this firm ?” and
he said, “ No.” I said, “ Are they personal friends of
yours ?” and he said, “ No.” ' But he said, from what
he could hear in Sydney, I would get a just and fair
valuation for my Department. I said, “ Look here, he
is not to act in any way for you. Whatever is done will
be done for this Department only. I want to be assured
from you that you are under no obligation to him in any
shape or form,” and he assured me of that. I said,
“ You owe him no money?” and he said, “ No.” I said,
“Are you very friendly with him?” and he said, “No,
I hardly know him.”
The Chairman. —l think that is quite borne out in
the evidence.
By Mr. Starke. —Catta<’ telegram was on the 3rd, and
your offer of fifty guineas had been earlier ?—That
bears out my evidence. I had already been in com-
munication with Ross before I got the reply from
Catts.
By the Chairman. —Of course, of the two men there
is no doubt about Mr. Ross? —I have nothing to hide
in the matter.
The witness withdrew.
Witness Cornwell, recalled."
By Mr. Starke. —You have heard Senator Long’s evi-
dence?—Not all of it.
He made this statement: that you suggested at the
Randwick works to him that if he accused Jensen of
corrupt practices, or implicated Jensen in receiving
money in connexion with Shaw’s works that Long would
get out lightly?—That is absolutely false.
No such suggestion of any sort was made by you?—
No. The conversation
You have given the conversation; but definitely you
say that statement is false? —Yes. I would like to say
this: that up to that time I had no definite knowledge
of any transactions at all —no definite evidence. After
that interview I had definite evidence, and suggested to
Long that he should not withhold certain things from
the Commission, and should recapitulate his position.
The witness withdrew.
Witness Macandie, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —Since your last appearance in the
box I understand you have searched some records of
meetings of the Naval Board, and you have a copy of
the minutes of the meeting of the Board of 29th July,
1916?—Yes.
Is this an extract from the book ?—Yes.
Is there any other reference in the minutes to these
Shaw negotiations?—No, none at all.
EXHIBIT No. 33. —Naval Board Minute.
This is the Naval Board minute, dated 29th July,
1916, “ Consideration was given to minute of Commo-
dore Gordon Smith and other members as to the respon-
sibility of Board members. The Minister stated he did
not want to interfere wtih the sphere of the members
of the Board . . . but at the same time, the Minis-
ter stated he was responsible to Parliament and re-
served the right to adopt, even if the Board did not
agree with it,” &c. Do you remember that minute?—
Yes.
What did happen there was a matter of fact. Ap-
parently somebody was objecting to the purchase?—lt
arose on a minute of the Second Naval Member (Com-
modore Gordon Smith), on Board responsibility. He


did not specifically refer to the Shaw Wireless Works
in his minute, although that was one of the matters he
had in mind. He 'wished to know what his position was
where matters were done without full Board authority.
That was after the purchase was made on the 29th?
—Well, the Government were committed to the pur-
chase then.
The Cabinet, on the 14th, approved of £55,000? —
Yes.
Who protested or objected at that time?—l could
produce the actual minutes of Commodore Gordon
Smith, and thfe First Naval Member wrote a minute at
the same time, but no specific reference was made. In
their minute you will not find any reference directly to
the Shaw purchase.
But the Minister himself brought in the Shaw pur-
chase?—At the Board table the Shaw matter was men-
tioned.
What happened at the Board table when the Shaw
purchase was mentioned. Who brought it up, and how
was it discussed? —It was brought up by the Second
Naval Member. All members- were present. The two
matters referred to are set forth here. The Shaw works
and the matter of appointing officers to this coaling bat-
talion. He objected to it.
Who objected to it. Did the Naval Board object to
the purchase of the Shaw works having been made
without their approval? —I would not say they ob-
jected. It was simply a question of Board responsibility.
You will get that minute?—Yes.
The witness ivithdrew. .
Jens August Jensen, recalled.
By Mr. Cussen. —Will you tell the Commission what
took place at that meeting?—Mr. Chairman, I distinctly
remember Captain Gordon Smith, the Second Naval
Meniber, asking for an interview with me, and I
consented to it, and he said, “ Mr. Minister, I
desire to see you about the appointment, or at
least the gazetting, of two private individuals in
Australia who have had no naval experience
in any way whatsoever, and because of your
creating those two persons with Naval distinction.” One
of them was Captain Whaley, and the other was, I
think, Commander Slattery. Both these persons were
just private civilians, and had no naval experience, I
admit; but it was at the suggestion, and I think on the
recommendation to me —I do not know whether any
minute or any private conversation, but certainly one
or the other —from Mr. Treacy, Director of Naval
Stores. In the creating of this coaling battalion it
was pointed out to me that if Mr. Whaley was to hold
a responsible position like that he thought some distinc-
tion should be given to him, seeing that this coaling bat-
talion would he under Navy discipline, and it appears
that I fell in with the view of the Director of Naval
Stores, who was the paymaster of the Australian Fleet,
and I assented to the giving of this distinction, viz.,
captain, for the duration of the war to Mr. Whaley and
also to Mr. Slattery to give him “ Commander ” of this
coaling battalion, and it was on that, and on that only,
that Captain Gordon Smith took exception.
That brought up the question of Naval Board respon-
sibility ? —Y es.
And during the discussion on that you explained, in
connexion with the Shaw wireless, what you had done?
—I might have done that.
That appears on a minute referred to. You took the
stand that you were responsible for it, and took the mat-
ter to Cabinet as it -was part of your policy?—Captain
Gordon Smith did certainly object to me.
He objected about giving Naval rank to men who had
no Naval experience?—Yes.
But did he or anybody else at the Board meeting
object to the Shaw wireless ?—No, not one member. That
is the reason why the matter cropped up, because I had
F. 13033.—6
done something which Captain Gordon Smith thought
I should not have done, by giving those two individuals
rank as mergers of the Coaling Battalion.
The witness withdrew.
Senator G. F. Pearce, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke. —You are a member of the Senate of
the Parliament of the Commonwealth?—Yes.
And you hold office as a Minister of the Crown ?
Yes, Minister for Defence.
About May or June, 1916, what office did you hold ?
—I was then Minister for Defence.
And you were also acting as the Prime Minister ?
Yes, Acting Prime Minister in the absence of Mr.
Hughes.
There are two matters I want to draw your attention
to. I will not ask you to go into Cabinet matters in any
way, but do you remember the Shaw Wireless purchase 1
—I remember the Shaw Wireless purchase coming before
the Cabinet.
Can 'you tell me at this date whether you ever knew
or heard of Admiral Clarkson’s adverse report—that is
his exact minute on it—[ producing ] ? —I could not swear
that that particular report was read. My recollection
of the matter was this, that at the first Cabinet meeting,
when Mr. Jensen (who was then Minister of the Navy)
first brought the matter forward, he read several reports
to the Cabinet, and my recollection of those reports is
that some of them were favorable, and some were un-
favorable, and that the matter was not finalized at
that meeting of the Cabinet, but that the Cabinet asked
that Mr. Jensen should obtain further information.
I believe that what the Cabinet asked for was further
information in the direction of the valuation of the
works to be acquired. On the matter again coming
before the Cabinet, Mr. Jensen presented further re-
ports as to the value of the works. I understood those
reports were reports of the Commonwealth officers.
On the second occasion when those reports were sub-
mitted, the Cabinet agreed to Mr. Jensen’s recom-
mendation for the purchase of the Shaw Wireless works.
I could not swear definitely, but I will say
On the file I will show you the only thing that was
added to that. These, I think, are the two important
things that were added— \Mr. Starke pointing out docu-
ments']. Is that the further information that you think
was submitted ?—I could not say. My recollection is
that the further information was the question of valua-
tion. I could not swear as to whether this minute of
Mr. Jensen’s and the Director of Wireless
By Mr. Cussen. —There were no further valuations
obtained at all 2—That is my recollection.
By Mr. Starke. —I want you to go to the Cabinet
Minute. This is a public document, and therefore I
feel at liberty -to ask you about this. You see that
Cabinet on the Mth of July approved of the recom-
mendation that the Shaw Wireless Company’s land,
buildings, plant and patterns should be purchased for
the purpose of the Navy Department wireless require-
ments, for the sum of £55*000 “ provided you are
satisfied that your Department’s requirements will keep
such plant fully employed.” That is your Minute 2
Yes.
I do not think there is any doubt about the fact
that, beyond all question, the wireless requirements of
the Navy Department would not keep the plant fully
employed 2—l am not competent to express an opinion
on that.
Mr. Jensen has said that despite the language of the
Cabinet Minute it was thoroughly understood that this
plant was to be purchased and used for Government
purposes generally, that it was not really a condition
of the Cabinet that it was the wireless works that were
to keep it employed, but Government work generally 2
My recollection of the Cabinet view was, that at any
rate primarily for the purpose of manufacture for the
wireless for the Navy


That is a very important condition of Cabinet which
was put on the purchase, and no one Minister should
disregard that, whatever he thought it mShnt ? —Except
that the Government Departments should place their
orders within the' Commonwealth Service, if at all
possible.
Mr. Cresswell, the Engineer for Radio Telegraphy,
had made a report to the Minister in which he had
stated that the land and buildings, which had been
valued by the Home Affairs Deipartment, and his own
valuation of stock and plant, had come to a combined
valuation of about £60,000. That was the letter he
sent to the Minister. Did you know that before that
letter there was another letter in which he suggested
opening negotiations at £40,000 ? —No, I cannot say
that I did. I have no recollection of it.
Although the Minister thought that that former letter
ought to be withdrawn because it was inconsistent with
the valuation. Did you know anything about that ?
No.
Cross-examined- hy Mr. Gussen. —You remember when
the Shaw Wireless came before Cabinet, Commander
CresswelTs report being read ?—As I say, my recollection
is that there were reports by Naval Officers. I believe
there was a report by Cresswell amongst them.
It is report No. 16. I will read you a portion of his
report, or perhaps I can summarize it. In effect he
says this in. the report —“ These works are too big for
wireless purposes only, but they should be acquired so
that the wants of other Government Departments for
machinery and apparatus can be supplied.” You may
take it that that is substantially what his report says.
That was brought before Cabinet?—Yes.
And that being so, was it not thoroughly understood
in Cabinet that this plant would be utilized for manu-
facture of machinery for Departments other than the
Navy, and other than wireless apparatus? —I would not
like to swear that that was understood.
You cannot say one way or the other? —I cannot
say it was understood. I would like to say that my
recollection, and I would put it in my own words, is
that the proposal was' it should be primarily for the
purpose of the wireless department of the Navy De-
partment, and I have no doubt, and I would not deny
at all, it was suggested it might he used for other
purposes.
By the Chairman. —Will you look at this minute-
paper in which instructions were issued hy which any
member of the Board could bring matters direct to the
Minister during your administration. Will you give
the Commission the reason for that instruction? —I
have a distinct recollection of having penned this
minute, or having given instructions for it to be typed,
and having signed it, and I would like briefly to ex-
plain, that when I first became Minister for Defence,
we had a military and naval branch combined, and we
had a military Board, but we had no corresponding
Board on the naval side. We had then a naval director.
In the early stages of my administration I was able
to- attend practically all the meetings of the Military
Board as the Department was rather a small show in
those days, hut when we commenced an alteration of
the Defence scheme, the work increased so much that
I found it impossible to attend the meetings of the
Military Board. My experience of the Military Board
of Administration was this, that when I was attending
the meetings I saw a decided disposition on the part
of the members of the Board to ascertain what the
wishes of the Minister were before giving expression to
their views, and I felt that.any Minister in that posi-
tion was liable to fall into error, because he would be-
lieve that he was acting on the advice of members of
the Board, whereas he was practically acting on his own
advice, and those members of the Board who had ascer-
tained what his view was, simply coincided with the
Minister’s view in order to get the goodwill of the
Minister. I found there were certain members of the
Military Board that appeared always to share the view
I happened to hold myself, whereas members of the
Board for whom I have the greatest respect would very
frequently be at variance with my view, and I came
to the conclusion that if I were to get the real advan-
tage of the qualifications of the members of the Board,
it would be better if I were not there, and I decided on
that policy not to attend the meetings of the Board.
And then a fresh difficulty cropped up, that no matter
how small a question was, I was never able to get the
view of the individual member of the Board. Each
naval member of the Board was < charged with
the administration of a certain branch of the Depart-
ment, but no matter how small the matter was, if it
were only a matter of the kind of buttons to be put on
particular uniforms, I found it was the view of the
Military Board and not of the individual member, &c.
I found, too, that when questions came up, if they
were likely to bring members of the Board under cross-
examination, individual members would never take the
responsibility of putting up any proposition, but it was
always by the Military Board, and it was impossible
for the Minister under those circumstances to know
which members of the Board were worthy of his con-
fidence, and which were unworthy, because he never got
an individual view from any member of the Board, but
the view of the general Board. I endeavoured to ob-
tain information for the Commission as to the date
upon which I altered that procedure, and I find it was
on the 27th March, 1911, and the alterations which I
then made are practically in consonance with the altera-
tion I subsequently made in the Naval Board. On
the adoption of the Henderson scheme, the Naval Board
came into operation, and I then found I had a fresh
set of difficulties to deal with. The Naval Board was
originally planned very much on the same lines as
the Military Board hhd been. The Minister was sup-
posed to be the President of the Board and to attend
the meeting. Therefore, I found also that not only
was I not getting the individual views of members of
the Naval Board, but there was a distinct tendency on
the part of the Naval Board to keep the Minister out
of all knowledge of what was going on, and to prac-
tically make this a close preserve into which even the
Minister should never be allowed to step. I had this
position, that we had a number of members of the
Naval Board who had held somewhat subordinate posi-
tions in Australia, and some of whom had had no ex-
perience of recent years of sea-going life. We had one
member who had come from a sea-going fleet, and when
a proposition came before me I had no knowledge as
to which member of the Board had recommended it,
and no way of knowing, perhaps, the view of the mem-
ber who had experience of a modern sea-going fleet. He
may have been at the meeting but he was never allowed
under the rules in existence to express his view, beyond
that I simply got on all questions the view of the Naval
Board, and I decided to bring into operation some sys-
tem by which individual responsibility was placed on
the member for the branch which he was administering.
That the only way I could see of doing that was to com-
pel the member first of all to - bring his recommendation
to the Minister, and he then had the responsibility of
the recommendation, good or bad, and it was this mem-
ber who was to decide whether it should go to the col-
lective Board or to the Minister, and to take it to
the collective Board if he thought necessary. , I wish
to draw attention to the fact that in this, so far as
setting aside the Naval Board, ■ it really was to put the
Naval Board on a much better footing than it was
ever before, and before this there were no regular meet-
ings, and this minute provided there should be regular
meetings every Monday. Before this there were no pro-
per minutes kept of the Board’s deliberation, and it was
provided that proper minutes were to be kept. Then
again, if you traced back many of the old files, before
the initiation of this procedure, you will find it is
impossible to place the responsibility for soiqe act in a


particular branch of the particular member of the Naval
Board administering that- branch, but under this, even
although it be a decision of the Board, the member
who was responsible, and who had brought it forward,
who brought forward first of all his recommendation,
would have to bear that responsibility. And again, when
a matter was considered by the Board, it was difficult to
know if any member had recorded his dissent, and when
a proposal came to the Minister he only had the ad-
vantage of a mere plain recommendation of the Board,
but the recommendation of the Naval member whose
branch it most vitally concerned was not known, and
all that was known was the view of the whole Board,
and if any member dissented, no record was kept of
that fact, but the majority ruled. Under this new sys-
tem it seems to me- it had this advantage, that it made
members of the Board responsible who had originated
the matters concerning the branches which they ad-
ministered, and in the second place it brought back
direct to the Minister the view of that member, and
enabled him to decide whether it was a matter for the
collective responsibility of the Board, and did not en-
able a weak member of the Board to shelter himself in
his weakness behind the collective responsibility of the
Board. He first of all had to expose' his weakness to
the- Minister, and in my judgment it was sound, and
worked well in the Military Board. I must say it was
received with bitter opposition by members of the
Military Board, and it was said by them to be taking
away their powers and putting it in the hands of the
Minister. I found it also received opposition from the
Naval Board, and I am rather inclined to think it was
not received by them with any friendliness at all, and
subsequent proceedings led me to the view it was
honoured more frequently in the breach than in the
observance. May I be permitted to say, it seemed to
me in reading the report of the 'Commission that the
Commission took the view that under this minute a
Minister could take the responsibility that he could
not have taken had this minute not been there. Might
I submit to the Commission for their consideration
that in the case that is quoted where a Minister ordered
certain things without reference to the Naval Board, that
the Minister could have done that if this minute had
never been penned. I could give cases in point if I had
the opportunity of going through this file —and I have
no doubt the Commission has seen them —where mem-
bers of the Board have recommended things to various
Ministers, and where Ministers in the exercise of their
responsibilities have refused to s adopt thdir recom-
mendation, and have adopted others, or they have taken
a certain course which has resulted in a saving of
thousands of pounds to the Commonwealth. I know
'of a case in regard to the Flinders Naval Base where
a recommendation was made to me by a Naval member
of the Board —I am not sure whether it was referred to
the whole Board, but where it was a distinct disagree-
ment from the Henderson scheme, and if adopted it
would have resulted in the installation of a most costly
workshop, although the Henderson scheme only con-
templated small repair shops. That is an example
where the existence of this minute has lead to impor-
tant savings, and might I submit, has brought a sense
of responsibility on the members of the Board which
makes them careful in penning minutes, when they
know that for all time the responsibility is laid on their
shoulders, and not on the shoulders of the collective
Board.
By Commissioner Taylor. —lf that minute had not
been penned, would not the responsibility have rested
with the individual concerned just as much as it had
been. If a definite recommendation were made by the
three members of the Naval Board, unanimously made,
would not the responsibility rest on the individual con-
cerned just as much ? —The • collective responsibility
would, but that member might have been against the
proposal.
If that were so, he would record it, would he not ?
No.
Of course, I think he ought to record it ?—Before
this was in operation the Minister received only “ Re-
commended by the Naval Board,” and no more.
That was the majority of the Board, and one indi-
vidual might have been against it, and there was no
record ?—That is so. Recommendations of the Naval
Board or the Military Board, as.the case may be, I
could leave this if you wish
By Mr. it ever contemplated by you
under that order that the Minister should act in a largf
purchase without the advice of or consultation with the
Naval Board ?—I cannot say that that was contem-
plated.
Say, for instance, the Shaw Wireless Works, all that
was done was that the Second Naval Member was con-
sulted. He reported adversely, and the Minister then
purchased it on a subordinate officer’s recommendation ?
—I have always considered that a Minister is inde-
pendent of his Board in respect of matters of policy.
For instance, I might give an instance where I acted
without any advice from the Naval Board whatever,
when I recommended to the Government we should
build three torpedo destroyers—it was really the in-
ception of the Australian Fleet. I never consulted the
Naval Board for their views on that question. That
was a question of policy, but after the Cabinet had
approved of it I went to the Naval Board to consider
what was the best type of destroyer.
Take the Shaw Wireless Works. Would, that be a
question of policy, or a question of expert advice first ?
—I say it is a question of policy, because the practice of
the Government had been, up to that time, to get its
wireless plant from wireless firms. There was a Labour
Government in existence at that time, and its policy
was that of owning its own workshops, and I should say
the Minister was quite justified in bringing before
Cabinet a bold proposal that they should acquire their
own workshops, subject, of course, to that in my
judgment he should have obtained the best advice he
could certainly, as to whether the workshops he
was obtaining were ones of fair value for the money,
but I should say it was not an infraction of responsi-
bility for a member to propose' to the Cabinet that
wireless workshops should be obtained, but no particular
ones.
This was the Shaw Wireless Works?
Mr. Cussen. —They were the only ones on the market?
Mr. Starke. —No.
Witness. —They were the only manufacturers.
Mr. Starke. —There was Denison’s Company.
The witness withdrew.
Frederick William Thomas, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —You wish to make some observations
to the Commission ?—ln regard to the acquisition of the
Shaw Wireless Works in 1916, it was rather contem-
plated to make wireless as absolutely a monopoly as
was land telegraphy, and it was thought it might be
desirable to acquire the interests of the .Amalgamated
Wireless. I went into the affairs of that company
at some considerable length. When Mr. Denison gave
his evidence the other day he indicated that their
workshop, which represented a capital of some £3,000
practically —and I find from my report that in a state-
ment they show for their workshop plant, machinery,
and office furniture put down at £3,043. ' That would
practically make it about right, the value put down
by Mr. Denison, but in the revenue statement they
show that they averaged during the financial year
from 30th June, 1315, to 30th June, 1916, an output
value of £4,000.
Have you your statement there ?—Yea.
6 2


It is all in that statement? —Yes, practically all there.
The first ten and a half months of the Shaw Wireless,
the output was, roughly, £33,000. As the figures were
diametrically opposed I take the opportunity of putting
this statement in.
EXHIBIT No. 34.—Statement of witness.
The witness withdrew.
George Lionel Macandie, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —Have you get Captain Gordon
Smith’s memorandum referr.ed to in the minute?—Yes.
It says “ Desirable special knowledge possessed by indi-
viduals composing the Board should be utilized.”
That referred to the Shaw matter?—Yes. Apparently
the Third Naval Member initialed it. The First Naval
Member annotated it, “ Read with interest and concur-
rence in the remarks of Second Member,” &c.
Mr. Cussen. —That does not refer to Shaw Wireless.
By Mr. Starke. —Then there is a meeting of the
Board, the minutes of which appear on page 79. It is
just as we have got it here. That is the only minute
relating to the wireless?—Yes.
Mr. Starke. —l will put in the whole file.
EXHIBITS Nos. 35 and 36. —Minutes of
Naval Board.
The witness withdrew.
Frank Gillespie Cresswell, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —l understand you wish to make a
statement? —Yes. I wish to point out to the Commis-
sion that on the occasion of the interview with Admiral
Clarkson in connexion with the taking over of the Com-
monwealth wireless organization, Admiral Clarkson ex-
plained to me that the Board were more or less de-
pendent upon me to do my best to organize it and run
it. Admiral Clarkson was a very busy man at that
time. He had the organization of over 80 transports,
which entailed the responsibility of transporting 300,000
troops and thousands of tons of cargo to the seat oi
war. I know' this, there was a very big strain on him, and
I do not think that Admiral Clarkson with the respon-
sibility he had could afford to give the time and con-
sideration which the proposition of taking over these
works would merit in time of peace.
_ By the Chairman.. —You felt that?—Yes; and he en-
tirely relied on me. I just wished to point out Ad-
miral Clarkson’s position. In regard to policy, as to
whether it was desirable to establish wireless work-
shops, I know that there was no division or differences
of opinion betwen the First and Third Naval Members
on that point. It was considered at that time, and
appreciated at that time, that workshops were essen-
tial.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Starke. —Senator Long has written this letter
to the Commission.
EXHIBIT No. 37.—Letter from Senator
Long to the Commission.
Mr. Starke.—-A.s to the suggestion contained in that
letter, I submit it is quite useless for any purpose of
this Commission, and I do not propose to adopt it. The
name of D’Antoine has been mentioned during the
course of the case. He has been seen, but so far as I
can judge there is nothing material that he knows in
connexion with these matters,. and I believe at present
he is not m Australia. I might be wrong, but I am
at all events satisfied there is no statement he could
make that would be of use to the Commission.
The Chairman. —His evidence previously was purely
nugatory. He gave no information at all. (To Mr.
Cussen). —You have heard that letter read from Senator
Long. Do you wish to make any remarks about it.
Mr. Cussen. —No. I agree with my friend.
Senator Long, recalled.
By the Chairman. —ln the evidence you gave on
Friday you made a statement in which you absolutely
absolved Mr. Jensen from any connexion of having re-
ceived any money at all from Father Shaw?—That is
so.
If you are in a position to make a statement of that
kind, where did you get your information from, and
how do you know he has not received anything ? —From
me.
Only from you ?—Most decidedly.
You have no other knowledge ?—I have no other
knowledge. I have avowed dozens of times at
least that neither Mr. Jensen nor any other Minister,
nor any other member of Parliament, Or any other
person has ever through me, or with my knowledge
received any money from the sale of the Shaw wireless
works.
That is all I want to know ?—Might I, while I am
here, just qualify that, and whatever I have said pre-
viously. I wish to say that there is a gentleman whose
name has not been mentioned hitherto, and who cannot
by any stretch of imagination be connected in any im-
proper way with the sale of these works, and that is
the gentleman who was the cashier of the bank where
the late Father Shaw cashed that cheque I think I
mentioned this to you, that Father Shaw that morning
had drawn something out of the bank to pay a few
debts, and he said that the cashier at the bank had
been so kind that he insisted on him taking £2OO. The
cashier said he refused to do it, but Father Shaw in-
sisted on him taking the money. I felt I ought to make
that qualification. Beyond that, that was the full limit
of my knowledge as to the difference between the money
I got and the money he is alleged to have drawn from
the bank.
By the Chairman. —You say he is the cashier at the
London Bank ?—Wherever he cashed the cheque.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Do you remember his'
name ?—No. He told me it was with much reluctance
that this gentleman accepted it, and, of course, I hesi-
tated in mentioning his name.
By Commissioner Verco. —Do I understand you to
say that in the course of the proceedings you had made
another £1,200 in racing lately?—Pretty well. I
thought, perhaps, IVIr. Starke might want to investigate
that. I think if he looks at my bank balance he will
see it is in a much more satisfactory condition than
when he last investigated it.
The witness ivithdrew.
Mr. Starke. —l am going on to the Emerald matter
now. I think it is only necessary in this matter to re-
call Admiral Creswell and the Paymaster (Mr. Treacy),
Apparently, this matter began somewhere about March,
1916, when a proposition seems to have been made for
the Navy to buy this boat at £6,000. At first the
Minister (Mr. Jensen) on the 3rd April directed that
no action bo take as to the purchase. That was on the
3rd April,- and on the 13th April a formal letter was
sent declining the offer with thanks. That was to
Coombs and Son. No sooner was that letter practically
despatched when the matter was again opened by
Messrs. Croker and Croker. They offered the boat once
more. They suggested a charter, and then, no sooner
had this representation been made, the various officers
were sent to inspect her. Mr. Jensen, on the Bth
June, although he declined the purchase in April, on
the Bth June directed an offer to be made of £4,500
with everything on board, and that was accepted. That
offer was made by the Director of Naval Contracts, Mr.
Treacy, to Croker and Croker. So far as one can see,
that transaction was entered into without any consul-
tation with the Naval Board, and so far as one can
gather, without any sanction of Cabinet, simply the
Minister spent £4,500 or agreed to spend
it on the 9th May, 1916. The subsequent
history of the boat shows she was not very satis


factory from, any point of view. They were con-
tinually trying to find out some use for her, or what
they would have to do to make her efficient, and Cap-
tain Thring, on the 18th July, 1916, said that, a motor
craft was wanted at Thursday Island, but the Emerald
was not suitable for that work. So they go on to the
end of the chapter, and, finally, I think the Emerald
was sent over to Western Australia I think that is
the position of the Emerald at the present time, x
merely put the file before the Board.
EXHIBIT No. 38.—Navy File re Emerald.
The position seems to be, as far as one can gather,
that without any consultation with the technical ad-
visors on the Naval Board, and without consulting
their opinion—indeed, I think it will be found in oppo-
sition to Admiral Creswell —the Minister simply walked
in and bought a boat for £4,500, and there is no Cabi-
net sanction or anything else.
Alfred Martin Treacy, sworn and examined.
By Mr. Starke.-— What is your position at the pre-
sent time? —My position is Director of Naval Stores
(victualling).
You know the Emerald?— Yes; I knew her.
Did you over inspect her ?—I did. _
At whose suggestion ? —At the Minister’s personal in-
struction. ' „ T . . ,
On what date was that?—7th March, 1916. I think
it was the day we inspected her, 7th March.
I see there is a report signed W. R. Swan, Acting
Director of Naval Works, in which he says; “In ac-
cordance with the Honorable the Minister s instruc-
tions, an inspection of this craft was made with the
Director of Naval Stores,” &e—lt was on a Monday
on which I received the instructions.
You did see her ?—Yes. _
I -do not quite understand how it is considered you
are specially expert enough to inspect tugs. You had
no experience? —No; not in the inspection of tugs. It
is only a superficial experience _ that I have gathered
from being so'long associated with the service.
And Mr. Swan, the Acting Director of Naval Works;
would it be within his knowledge?—l do not think, it
T had been buying the vessel myself, I should have done
that. I should have put the construction branch on
to it. But Mr. Swan is a civil engineer, and
Director of Naval Works, and I asked him that ques-
tion whether he knew much about it. He said he had
a fair amount of experience in marine craft engines;
&c., in India.
He know enough about it not to recommend it<—
Yes.
And it is recommended that no further action be
taken in regard to purchase?—Yes. ‘
And then the Minister apparently annotated that
“No further action ”?—That is so.
The next matter I see with which your name is con-
nected is on the Bth June, 1916, you write a letter to
Croker and Choker. “ I have to inform you that the
Naval Board is prepared to make an offer ot £4,500
for the purchase of the steamer Emerald, &c.’ At
whose direction was that letter written? —The personal
direction of the Minister, in writing.
“To the Director of Naval Stores.” I suppose that
would be you? —Yes.
“ Make offer £4,500 for this vessel with everything
now on Board” ?—On that direction I wrote that letter.
You say, “To inform you that the Naval Board is
prepared to offer, &c.” ? —All letters are sent out in the
name of the Naval Board.
You did not re-inspect her? —Not after the first
That is the personal direction of the Minister?
Yes.
Without any further discussion ?—That is so.
Mr. Cussen.—Tt was offered originally at £6,000, and
he offered £4,500?
Bij Mr. Starke. —You had nothing more to do with
her? —No. I have not seen her since.
Do you know where she is now?—lSTo.
Cross-examined ly Mr. Cussen.— Supposing the ves-
sel had been altered satisfactorily, what would have been
the value of her? —I do not think the vessel could have
been altered satisfactorily. -
Who is this gentleman, “W. E. Swan.” He re-
ported, apparently, in conjunction with you? Yes.
And he reported that the vessel could be made suit-
able for £1,000?—I do not think_ he reported in con-
junction with me that it was suitable. What is the
date of that report?
Eighth of June? —It was in March that lam speak-
ing of.
Do you profess to have a greater knowledge than Mr.
Swan on these matters?- -'No.
Assuming it could have been and it were altered for
£l,OOO, what do you think would be the value of the
vessel—that is, assuming you are wrong and it could
be altered?—ls not that rather assuming an assump-
tion ?
Assume you are wrong, and it could have been
altered?—lt depends on what I have to assume exactly
■ —assuming she was a tug instead of a ferry steamer.
Assuming that what Mr. Swan said could be done
was done, and that the vessel was altered so as to make
her suitable for the purpose?—l should like to see that
letter of Mr. Swan’s, because it is one I am not in
accord with.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Was she a single-engine
ferry steamer? —Yes. -
What was her age?—She was built in about 1900.
Where was she plying?—ln Sydney. We asked the
master and the engineer—l think the engineer on board
made the passage down at easy stages.
What run was she on in Sydney?—That I could not
\y Mr. Cussen. —You see that report of Bth June,
No. '6 on file. After going into the matter in detail
Mr. Swan sets out what was necessary in order to
convert her, and recommends making an offer of
£4,500, with everything now on board?—Yes. _
Assuming it was made suitable in the fashion that
Mr. Swan suggested, can you give the any
idea of its value?—Do you want to get at what is in
my mind, or was in my mind at the time in that
direction. , . .
Yes ? —Of course, I did not read this. This was
rather hurriedly done on that day, and I carried out
those instructions really without going through this
file. The direction of the Minister was enough for me.
Do you think you could give me an answer to the
question I put to you. That is to assume an alteration
as Mr. Swan suggests; can you give the Commission
any information as to what its value would be?—lt is
rather difficult to answer the question. That would in-
dicate that I thought that she would be suitable at
some time, with these alterations, for a tug, and i
could not think that. , . ,
You were present when he made the offer? —i thinK
Mr. Crcker was in the Minister’s room. _
Were you not present when the Minister made the
offer to Mr. Croker ?—I think it was. quite likely I was.
I was very often in Mr. Jensen’s room,'and the Min-
ister sent for me and handed this to me. Mr Croker
was in the room at the time, and on that day, I think
it was, the offer was made. .
By Commissioner Taylor. —What class of engines has
she? —That I could not tell you. I did not bother
about that. I am not an expert in these things
By the Chairman.—ls there a report on the state ot
the engines? —The last paragraph of this report of Mr.
Swan’s, of the. Bth Junes is the only thing. ,
By Commissioner Taylor. —You did not inspect her
engines?—No. . .
By Mr. Starke.— It is quite plain you were not the
proper person to ask to inspect her ?- No.


By Commissioner Verco. —Was there a report from
the Construction Branch ?—I have not seen one.
The witness mthdrew.'
Mr. Starke. —The Third Naval Member recommended
that a survey he made. On the 29th June, the Naval
Secretary writes to tfie Commanding Officer of the
Cerberus, asking for a naval survey of the Emerald.
On the 4th July, 1916, there is a report from Engineer-
Lieutenant Commander Owen and Chief Carpenter
Walker. They submit a report—j reads'].
Commissioner Taylor. —Those are reports after the
vessel was purchased ? •
Mr. Starke. —Yes. This is 4th July, 1916.
Commissioner Taylor. —ls there no report as to the
condition of the vessel prior to the purchase, as to the
engines ?
Mr. Gussen. —She was examined by Swan on the Bth
June.
Mr. Starke. —The only examination of her was by
Mr. Treacy and Mr. Swan.
Commissioner Taylor. —ls there no report at all on
the condition of the engines ?
Mr. Starke. —No. There is only that report of Mr.
Swan on the Bth June.
Commissioner Taylor. —But the report does not refer
to the condition of the engines ?
Mr. Starke. —No. Mr. Swan’s report of the Bth June,
says —[ reads ].
Commissioner Taylor. —Following that there was no
expert officer who reported on the condition of the
boilers or the engines ?
Mr. Starke. —No.
Mr. Gussen. —Did you read the second paragraph of
that letter.
Mr. Starke. —This minute says make offer of £4,500,
with everything complete, now on board.
Mr. Gussen. —Mr. Swan says in the second paragraph
of the report, “ The vessel seems to be in good order
and well found.” Did you read that?
Mr. Starke. —No.
Mr. Gussen. —Why not ?
Mr. Starke. —Because I do not think it is of any im-
portance. That is not an inspection, to say the thing
appears to be.
Commissioner Taylor. —We may take il there was no
report pribr to being purchased.
Mr. Starke. —No. The only other report is in March.
Mr. Cussen. —Yes. I would ask my friend to look
at that report of 29th March.
Mr. Starke. —I am going to the report after the boat
was purchased.
Mr. Cussen. —Are you here to assist the 'Commission ?
I think you ought to put all the documents in.
Mr. Starke. —I am doing it my own way.
Mr. Cussen. —Well, I have no objection to raise. Mr.
Commissioner Taylor Tias raised the question as to
whether there were any reports on this vessel before
the purchase was completed. I have not the familiarity
with the file that my friend has, but there is a report of
the 29th March, which is referred to in the report of
Bth June, and that deals with the condition of the
vessel so far as their examination could reveal it.
Mr. Starke. —We have dealt with that.
Mr. Gussen.— You did not read it.
The Chairman. —The examination of the tug was just
as she was.
Mr. Cussen. —Yes, just as she was.
Commissioner Taylor. —You cannot examine a vessel
afloat.
Mr. Cussen.- —No. But you asked me if there was a
report about it, and I say there is one on the 29th
March.
Mr. Starke. —This is Captain Thring’s minute on the
18th July, 1916— [reads]. On the Ist September, 1916,
the Acting Director of Naval Works (Bevil Sharpe)
writes — [reads']. Then Fraser the Chief Engineer says
t-his— [reads], —Then Heddle, the master, put? in a report
— [reads]. The Commanding Officer of the Cerberus,
whom the Naval Secretary asks to examine the Emerald,
Togo, and Albert, as to the condition of the hulls,
boilers, a"hd engines. Then there is a report on the 4th
October— [reads]. The First Naval Member minutes
that. That is a report put in by the Chief Carpenter
Walker, Lieutenant-Commander Owen, and Lieutenant-
Commander Innis. The First Naval Member minutes
that. Mr. Jensen notes it “approved.” Then the Sec-
retary writes to the Director of Naval Works —
[reads], —Captain Thring minutes that —[read s].
Jens August Jensen, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —What did you buy the Emerald for?
—I bought her principally for the Western Port Naval
Base.
What to do ? —To do light towing there. I might
explain that continuously the Secretary of the Depart-
ment had brought it under my notice that the Naval
Works Department were very short of tugs, Tight tugs
especially. I think we had one or two tugs under hire,
and the hire that we were paying was very very ex-
cessive. I might say that certain dredging was to take
place at the Western Port Base. Up to this time
there had been no dredging done there at all, and we
had no light tug of any sort at the Western Naval
Base. I had already entered into certain contracts
with certain firms for suction dredges, and it would be
necessary when those suction dredges were in operation
that we should have several light barges there with a
view to those suction dredges * emptying into those
barges, and it was necessary we should have some light
steamer—l do not necessarily call the steamer a tug,
I call it a steamer —and I felt that something ought to
be done. I might say that the Department had com-
municated with Cockatoo Island. I am sure if this is
looked up it will be as I state—we had communicated
with Cockatoo Island asking the manager. there if he
could build for the Department two light tugs, and in
what time, because they were urgently required, and
the reply from the manager (Mr. King Salter) was
there was no hope whatever of Cockatoo Island building
any tugs for the Navy Department, or any tug at all
at that juncture, because they were short of practically
everything that was necessary for building them. They
were short of plate, short of boiler plate, and every-
thing. This was in 1916, two years after war broke
out. I had to look around, and I have had to do many
things on my own initiative in this Department, and,
whatever I have done I am prepared to stand by or
take the blame for. This is one of the things I did, and
I am not going to stand here and say my judgment was
of the very very best. I am not going to take that
stand at all, but I do take this stand, that I did the
very best under the circumstances. What happened
was this—this vessel was brought under my notice, and
on the recommendation of one of my departmental
officers —I do not know which one it was—it is on the
file—l did not purchase in the first instance. I forget
what she was offered for even.
By Mr. Starke. —£6,ooo? —Well, £6,000. I turned
it down.
By Mr. Starke. —£6,ooo, or offer?—l turned it down
in the first instance. Then the Secretary of the De-
partment brought under my notice the fact that we
wore paying excessive hire for tug boats round at Fre-
mantle. I asked if we had no tug boats for Western-
port, and I was told we never had one in our possession,
and you must remember that Westernport is smooth
water. I turned it down first on the recommendation
of an officer. -Then, subsequently, this vessel was
offered to my Department for rental. I do not believe
in that at all. I do not believe in a huge Common-
wealth renting from anybody. The Commonwealth is
in a position to purchase if it really requires a vessel
at all. That is the stand I took. I looked into the
matter again, and Mr. Croker, of Croker and Croker,
solicitors, called on me two or three times, and wanted


me badly to rent this vessel, and I would not. I would
not lodk at it for rental purposes, so I said, “ I will
tell you what I will do. I have already turned down
this vessel, but I will send some of my naval officers
down to look at it.” I did so, and I think Mr. Swan
went. Mr. Treacy says he went, and I also had a look
at her.
Yes, his report is here? —1 am just giving a state-
ment. I went and had a look at it. There was some
function on down at Williamstown Depot, at which
His Excellency was present, and I was asked to attend,
and on the same day that I went down to Williamstown
I made it my business to go- over the Emerald. I had
a look at her, and, of course, I do not for a moment
maintain that my view or impression of her is of much
value—l would not like to say that at all. But still
I looked at it, and I found that it was a vessel that-
seemed to me to be very sound in the hull, and the
machinery seemed to me to be in fair order, and there
was a lot of rope-, wire, and all sorts of things on
board her. It appeared to me that she might in the
meantime be able to do our -work in smooth water, and
I naturally thought, “ Well, if this vessel will do at
all at the Flinders Naval Base until the time comes
when we can have them built for ourselves, she might
do in the meantime.” I told Mr. Croker that I would
first of' all have to get a report, and the Director of
Naval Works is the man immediately concerned in all
matters of naval work, and because of that I referred
the matter to the Director of Naval Works, which was
Mr. Swan. He was the Acting Director, I think, at
that time. That is as far as I went. An examination was
made, and that examination was fairly favorable. Ido
not say it was absolutely favorable, but fairly favor-
able. And what did he say, “If this vessel can be
purchased at a price, taking into- consideration any
alterations that will be necessary in order to convert her
into a tug,” &c. And that was in my mind, that it was
to be. used only in smooth water, and that brings infi
to this point —if responsible departmental officers, and
even a. member of the Naval Board, will go as far as to
say that that vessel with a little alteration would be
suitable in rough waters, which is the condition at
Fremantle—there is a heavy swell at all times there,
which never ceases —and if she were at all suitable for
Fremantle, in my opinion she was absolutely suitable
for smooth waters at Westernport Base, where it is
almost as calm as the Yarra. That is my opinion, I
am going to take the full responsibility for the pur-
chase of this boat, and I want to say, as far as Admiral
Creswell is concerned, I never consulted him.
Nor the Naval Board ? —No.
Nor the Cabinet? —Nt>.
Nor any responsible officer whom you ought to have
consulted?—l consulted the Director of Naval Works.
We are told he was not the proper person?—l am
telling you the facts. I admitted what you want me
to admit, when you put a question to me on Saturday
I was told by the Director of Naval Works that he was
taking into consideration that with an expenditure of
£I,OOO, 'or, perhaps, £1,200, she might be made suit-
able, and could be adapted to this work.- What did I
do. After further consideration again, and after being
interviewed on several occasions by Mr. Croker, I
telephoned to Mr. Treacy to come to ray room whilst
Mr. Croker was present, and he put this vessel under
offer to me. I never saw the principals at all.. I only
saw the agent acting for them. I said, “Look here, Mr.
Croker’ ’ —this isi after L had got those reports from the
Director of Naval Works —“ what is the lowest amount
you are prepared to accept for this vessel?” Well, he
did not seem to want to budge one penny. I said, “ I
will tell you what I will do. I will give you ten minutes
to think over it”—and I think Mr. Treacy will re-
member my very words—“ I will give you so much for
her straight out on my own initiative.” I admit here
and now that I never consulted Admiral Creswell, or
the Board, or the Cabinet, or anybody else, I did it
with Mr. Treacy present in my room.
By Mr. Starke. —I suppose Croker rushed the boat?
■ —No, he did not. That boat came from Queensland in
the open sea in the condition she was in, and arrived
safely in Melbourne, which shows she was sea going
when she could come from Queensland to Melbourne.
I made an offer of £4,500, .and it had been offered for
£6,000, or offer. I got him down £1,500, and yet, I
say, I was told by my departmental officer that if I
took the amount it would cost for alterations into con-
sideration she might be taken over.
Mr. Starke. —He says, “ I am of opinion before the
vessel can be properly passed,’' &c.
By Mr. Cvssen. —Look at the report of 29th March ?
—Well. I cut him down £1,500, and gave him ten
minutes to think over it. Mr. Treaty was in mj room,
and after that offer Mr. Treaty went back to his room,
and afterwards I telephoned to him that the vessel
had been bought and fixed up as took place in front
of him. I said, “ You take the matter in hand, and
get the thing properly dealt with.’ 1 ’ That is the whole
business, and I will take full responsibility.
By Mr. Starke. —You did not consult the Naval
Board ?—No.
Why not? —Simply because it was such a small,
trivial matter, I took it upon myself, knowing we had no
tugs.
You wanted this boat as a tug? —As a light tug.
To tug hopper barges ? —Yes, in smooth water at
Westernport.
Do you know her tug hook was so situated it made
it pretty useless as a tug? —No.
You never got any advice on that? —No. All the
advice I have got is on the file.
Why did not you take it to Cabinet ? —lt was such
a small matter, and Ministers have power to deal with
any small matters like that. There are hundreds of
thousands of things bought by the several Ministers
without going to Cabinet. If a Minister is responsible
he must take some responsibility, and the man who will
not take responsibility at times is not worth his salt.
You will accept that position ? —Yes, unreservedly.
Did Admiral Creswell protest to you about this pur-
chase? —After I had completed it, yes.
What did he say ?—He said, “Mr. Minister, you
have purchased this boat without consulting me.” I
said, “ Yes, Sir William.” He said,_“ I feel this very
much, and if you want my resignation you can have
it,” “ No,” I said, “I do not want it. I am sorry
if I have hurt your feelings in any way, and as far
as the purchase of boats is concerned, you shall always
be consulted.” I was in no way offended by what Sir
William said to me, but he did say it to me.
Is that the whole explanation you want to make?-
Yes. I have nothing further to say. If I have erred in
judgment —that is all it is.
By Commissioner Taylor. —There is apparently an
inconsistency in what ‘you say about the matter of
policy. You said you believed in the Government
owning its own vessels, instead of hiring them. I
notice that in Sydney the policy of hiring has been
adopted nearly all through the war. There are some
vessels which could have been bought for £450 or £5OO,
and that much has been paid in hire for them ?—Just
so.
You were Minister then? —What time was this?
In 1916? —Yes: I was still Minister.
Take the Lady Helena. Why did not you deal with
the recommendation in regard to- her ?—I do l not re-
member the name of that vessel.
There were recommendations made from Garden
Island to purchase this and another boat, and thev
have cost as much again for hire I—Quite so. Ido not
know that ever they were brought under my notice.
There are two or three letters from Captain Glossop ?
—To whom.
To the Naval Board? —To my knowledge I have
never seen them, and my memory is fairly good. To
conclude, I would point out that this Emerald is a twin
screw vessel, 300 1.H.P., 11 knots, length 124 feet.


breadth 25 feet, depth 8 feet, gross tonnage 189. That
is a fairly large .vessel, and if her hull had been ad-
mitted to be good, and her engines and boilers to be
good, well, what is wrong with a vessel like that for
£4,500. It would cost half that money for the en-
gines.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Do not you think it
would have been wiser if you had got a report about
it from a capable man, as to the condition of her en-
gines?—Yes, quit© so.
In purchasing a vessel, it is necessary she should be
examined in dock?—You see, I had a report in front
of me from the Director of Naval Works. It was his
duty to do that. He could have sent that on to the
First Naval Member.
Mr, Swan ? —Yes.
He did not make any recommendation as to your
purchasing?—Not exactly, but he went as far as to'say
this • ■
By Mr. Starke. —He recommended against it?—No,
I cannot agree with you there.
I will read it to you. On the 29th March, Paymaster
Treacy and Mr. Swan reported against it ?—I have
said before that this matter was gone into subsequently.
I got other reports in the meantime.
You only got Mr. Swan’s report. Who is Mr. Swan?
—Mr. Swan is in a most responsible ■ position in the
Naval Department—he is Director of Naval Works at
the Australian base, where things are being dealt with.
By Commissioner Taylor. —He does not say “I have
found the ship and her hull in a certain condition” ?
No. However, you have heard what I have had to
say. I did it for the best; we had no tugs. I was
told by Cockatoo Island they could not build any tugs.
I was offered this boat, and as it was for use in smooth
waters, taking everything into consideration, I did what
I deemed to be the best.
Mr. Cussen. —-There is no doubt about the facts, and
I do not think I need bother you with any questions.
The witness withdrew.
Sir William Creswell, recalled.
By Mr. Starke.— You remember the purchase of the
Emerald ?—Yes.
In your opinion was that a purchase that should
have been made for naval purposes at all ?—No.
Was she unsuitable for the Flinders Base for tup-
purposes?—ln my opinion, she was an unsuitable vessel
to purchase as a tug.
That is owing to the condition of her hooks?—There
was a report in regard to it. I cannot recall any par-
ticular details about her. She came up for considera •
tion, and she was rejected.
I understood after the purchase you spoke to Mr
Jensen about it, and protested ' about it?—Yes. I
would like to practically indorse or corroborate all that
Mr. Jensen has just said. I was much surprised and
annoved when this-steamer was purchased, and I came
to Mr. Jensen, and I practically told him what he has
told you now, that that was tantamount—well, I asked
him if he had any further need for my services.
She was not suitable, apparently, for the Flinders
Naval Base, and she was sent finally to Western Aus-
tralia ?—Yes.
In connexion with the Naval Base there?—Yes.
The water there is rather rough ? —lt is outside the
inland waters at all events?—Yes.
And even there is she a satisfactory boat? —She is
not used for a tug. She is used for carrying coal and
water to the dredges.
By the Chairman. —Do the Commission understand
that the Em,erald has been doing useful Government
work?—Yes, she is doing good work.
Although not suitable for the purpose of a tug boat,
yet she has done or is doing other work?—Yes.
Would they require a boat of some kind to*do the
work she is doing?—Yes. We were in want of a boat
for that special purpose, to take coal and water round
to the dredges, instead of the dredges having to come
into coal, &c.
By C ommisisoner Taylor. —She is quite suitable for
that?—Yes. I would prefer a specific report on that
point as to her service since by the Director of Naval
Works. I have not been in very close touch with the
matter since.
Is that officer in your Department, the Director of
Naval Works?—He is now in the Works and Railway
Department.
So far as the Board knows about this vessel ?—She is
doing good work.
By Mr. Starke. —ln examining the hull and the en-
gines of the Emerald originally, who was the proper
officer that the Board should have referred such an
examination to. Practically it was referred to Mr.
Swan and Mr. Treacy. Mr. Treacy says he was quite
unsuitable for such work I— Yes.
What about Mr. Swan ?—He may have referred
matters of that kind to the members of the Naval
Board. Any purchases of that kind
Who was the technical officer?—l should consider the
Third Naval Member the technical officer.
Cross-examined by Mr. Cussen. —What do you think
is the value of that vessel as she now is?—l could not
give you an idea. I could only tell you she has been
doing work for us and contributing to the service.
The witness withdrew.
]\lr. Starke. —That is all about the Emerald. Now
as to the Toga. There is a long file here in connexion
with this boat.
EXHIBIT No. 39.—Navy File re Togo.
In April the Togo was offered for £7,500, and she
was declined at that price. She was declined on the
28th June. Apparently there was a minute that Cap-
tain Thring wrote to the Naval Secretary, in reply to
an inquiry from the Naval Secretary as to whether the
Togo was suitable for their purpose. Captain Thring,
in July, 1916, said she was not suitable. There is a
minute in 1916 of Mr. Swan. Then Broomby and Dent
sent a telegram to the Minister, “ Can still offer Togo,
£7,500.” This, apparently, was a Tasmanian firm.
After the thing had been declined they take it up again,
and give the Minister a rouse up by saying she is still
open at £7,500. No* sooner had this Tasmanian rouse
up taken place, than -the Minigter offers £7,500. That
is quite enough for him. The offer was promptly gent
in and accepted. Having purchased her the trouble
began, and I pass over a lot of the file because it re-
lates practically to- the fixing up of the legal documents
that are necessary, and the taking of the inventory.
Mr. Cussen. —Swan says it was worth £7,500.
Mr. Starke. —The next thing we come to of import-
ance is, as soon as the unfortunate Cooper & Son knew
that the vessel was purchased, naturally they wanted a
little commission, but Broomby and Dent got the lot.
The trouble then began immediately. On the 19th May,
1917, the Director of Engineering Works reports as to
the unsuitability of the vessel for the work of towing
dumb hopper barges, &c. He suggested the Quaran-
tine Department might find use for it. In May, 1917,
the Naval Secretary writes to the Controller-General
of Customs suggesting that the vessel be taken over for
quarantine, and he asks the Navy Board what this
vessel was suitable for, whether suitable for boarding
purposes. The Naval Board then said, she was entirely
unsuitable. As soon as that happened the quarantine
authorities turned down the vessel, and that was the
end of her so far as quarantine was concerned. The
next thing was a minute from the Director of Naval
Works, forwarding extracts from the mechanical engi-
neer. and the First Naval Member requests that the
vessel be withdrawn from service.


Mr. Starke. —It was said that the Togo was utterly
unsuitable. The First Naval Member reported she
was utterly unsuitable for open-sea towing, and, ap-
parently, she was no use for the Flinders Base-. I
think we can pass down then to February, 1918, when
the First Naval Member directed that the Togo should
be sold if anything like her purchase price was offered.
Then in May, 1918, it was approved by the Minister of
State for the Navy that the vessel should be sold; and
then proceedings went on, and, apparently, an offer was
made for her for £305, and another for £l,OOO, but
those offers were refused as being too low. Then Com-
mander Tickell recommended that the vessel be with-
drawn from sale because it was then employed on useful
duty. The First Naval Member directed she should
npt be sold unless a suitable price was offered, and that
was approved of by the Minister, and then the final
minute on the file is this, that the Togo was completely
meeting the requirements of the district naval officer,
and she should be retained instead of being sold at a
considerable sacrifice. That was indorsed by Rear-
Admiral Clarkson.
Jens August Jensen, recalled
By Mr. Starke. —What did you buy the Togo for?—
I bought the Togo for a tug if necessary, or a small
tender boat, for either purposes.
Where at? —She was in Launceston.
Who were Broomby and Dent?—A firm of merchants
there.
Were they friends of yours ?—Not particularly.
They were in your constituency?—Yes.
How long have you known them ?—I have known
them it must be twenty years. I might say I have
been dealing with them for fifteen or twenty years.
You notice that Cowper and Son offered her for
£7,500, and she was declined ?—ln what year was
that ?
The 28th of June, 1916?—I do not know that I ever
saw the offer. I do not remember, but I may have.
What is the date of the offer?
The 11th April, 1916 ? —When was Broomby and
Dent’s offer ?
The 11th of August, 1916. They said, “Can still offer
Togo , £7,500.” There was only a little time between
them. This is dated Collins-street, Melbourne: —‘ ‘We
have pleasure in bringing under your notice an exceed
ingly fine little steamer of 13-14 knots, which we shall
be glad if you will keep before you for future reference,
price £7,500. Delivery, Launceston. We are enclosing
one of our forms with particulars of this steamer; if.
however, there are any other data you require we shall
be very pleased to obtain the same for you. Meanwbi’e
we beg to assure you that we are prepared to place
our best services at your disposal in any business yon
may put before us.” That is signed by Cowper and
Son. That was sent to Mr. Swan, Director of Naval
Works, Melbourne?—That is quite a different thing.
Then Mr. Swan sends it on to the Naval Secretary? —
Are my initials there at all in connexion with Cowper’s
offer. I do not remember ever seeing it.
At all events. Captain Thring was asked if the vessel
would be. suitable for his purposes, and he said it was
not suitable, that her low free-board and bows, &c.,
indicate a river craft; she was probably unfit to go to
sea in bad weather. You must have seen it on the 11th
of August, 1916. Will yon look at that document,
number 9 ?—I remember, I think, that it was practi-
cally the Togo had been offered to me by Broomby and
Dent. I do remember something of another person
who wrote something about wanting permission, you
see, Mr. Chairman, it is very hard for me to remember
everything like that.
.Take the file and look at document number 9 ?—That
document is signed by Mr. Swan, and initialed as hav-
ing been seen by me. Ido not know whether that refers
to Broomby and Dent’s offer or not; I could not say.
By Mr. Gussen. —That refers to Broomby and Dent’s
offer?—l could not say; you see my difficulty.
By Mr. Starke.— Turn to document 10, there is au
urgent telegram from Broomby and Dent to you, “Can
still offer logo , £7,500, kindly let us know your deci-
sion as soon as convenient.”' It looks as if they were
carrying on the offer ?—That' is Broomby and Dent.
You must have known of that?—Of course, I knew
of Broomby and Dent. I would like to say this just
to show the Commission the position. I was passing
through Launceston on one occasion, and the Warden
of the Marine Board sent for me, and said he wanted
to see me very urgently about a vessel he wanted to
offer to the Naval Department. I am giving this as
an illustration. I went and saw him, and he offered
me the Ton Rabble. That was a new boat that had
come out quite recently from England. I think it was
a sort of barge, at least a hopper barge vessel steaming
9' or 10 knots. It was a splendid vessel, and the Marine
Board of Launceston bought her for the carrying out
of certain works they intended to carry out there; but
they found that they had got her two years really
before they required her services. That boat was
offered to me, and what did Ido ?—I bought that boat
practically in Launceston, subject to the concurrence
of the Minister for Defence. I was then Assistant
Minister, but I want to point out that the Warden of
the Marine Board personally sent for me, and I per-
sonally interviewed, him. Now I suppose in this in-
stance Broomby and Dent brought this thing under my
notice in a similar way. Passing through Launceston
it is in the papers when I arrive, and it is in the papers
when I depart, and these people necessarily waited on
me, and they offered me this vessel. I said all right.
I knew the tug, and I told them when I came to Mel-
bourne I would give it consideration. I saw the tug
bui’t with my own eyes. She had a most substantial
hull, she was copper fastened, and she had reciprocal
engines in her that cost £3,000 alone to my knowledge.
She was built by a firm in Launceston, the Salisbury
Company, and that vessel cost- £ll,OOO to my know-
ledge. I have travelled in her hundreds of times up
and down the Tamar River to my home, and I re-
garded her as the smartest boat in the southern water®.
She was an 11-knot boat.
By the Ghairman. —How old was she ?—Twelve years.
She cost about £ll,OOO, and she had been offered to
the Department prior to the war for £8,500, through
Mr. Findlay. Will the Department look that up for
me. If that vessel was worth £8,500 prior to the war,
I say she was easily worth £7,500 after the war had
been raging two years. I should think that that boat
was offered to me by Broomby and Dent verbally then;
that is what I want to convey to the Commission.
By Mr. Starke. —Did you rely upon your own know-
ledge?—A great deal on my own knowledge. I knew
that boat, I had travelled on her, and she was the
smartest little thing in Australia. I bought her for
either a tug or a tender boat.
A light tug for where?—Either at Fremantle or
at Flinders. There was work for two boats once that
steam suction dredge got to work.
However, you did not consult with the Naval Board ?
I consulted, I think, Admiral Creswell. What I want
to say is this—really I consulted with the First Naval
Member before I bought her in this way. ' Speaking
from memory, the First Naval Member was ill, I think
he was at his home, and I telephoned to the next in
charge, the chief officer upder him, and I told him
that I wanted the Togo matter considered, that Mr.
Swan had through Mr. Duff said that this vessel could be
purchased, and was worth £7,500. I want to say
that Mr Duff, who was supposed to be one of the best
engineers in the Naval Department, went over.to Laun-
ceston, and put in a week on the examination of that
boat, and my instructions to Mr. Swan were to thh
effect—that a thorough overhaul was to be made. 1
was not keen, and I was not in any way bound to make
a purchase in any shape or form, and I did not compel


anybody to make a purchase. What happened'was this
—Mr. Duff, a responsible officer of the Navy Works De-
partment, put in a week overhauling that boat in every
shape and form, and his report was that the hull and
machinery was in excellent condition.
By Commissioner Taylor. —Did he put her in dry
dock ?—I could not say. There is a dry dock there.
There is a slip there ?—There is a dry dock, a floating
dock also. He put in a week, nobody could say he was
rushed, and in his report he said he took a week and
he made a thorough examination, and after his exami-
nation he put her under steam.
By the Chairman.—l do not think you need waste
time on it. I think the Commission is quite satisfied that
the value of £7,500 for the boat was all right. The ques-
tion is whether the Department wanted her, and what
use they could put her to? —I wanted her because of
my knowledge that w© could not get a tug built any-
where in Australia. That is on record. We could not
get a tug built at Cockatoo Island nor in the State
yards or anywhere else.
By Mr. Starke. —You are business enough man to
know that if a person first introduces the business to
a Department he should be recognised ?—What do you
mean. I never interfered with the-commission.
Do not be certain about that. Listen to this. On
the 13th of July there is a minute from Mr. Swan to
the Naval Secretary as follows: —“Further, with re-
ference to my minute of the 28th ultimo, the Hon.
the Minister for the Navy, Mr. Jensen, instructed me
by telephone this afternoon to have the Togo inspected
and reported on; and in accordance therewith N.O.E.
Mr. Duff will proceed to Launceston by the Eoongana on
Monday afternoon the 17th. The Minister further in-
structed that all negotiations in connexion therewith
were to be carried out through Messrs. Broomby and
Dent, merchants, of George-street, Launceston, who
brought this vsssel to his notice. I would, however,
direct attention to the fact that Messrs. Cowper and
Son previously submitted this vessel to the Naval
Works Department on the 11th of April last, and were
informed that she was not suitable for our require-
ments, but that the particulars had been forwarded to
the Naval Board for consideration, and in order to
prevent any misunderstanding as to' which firm is to
be dealt with in negotiations, it would be advisable to
send an official letter to Messrs. Cowper and Son
informing them that this vessel had been brought under
your notice‘by another firm.’-’ Why did you deal with
your constituent? —I knew nothing about any former
negotiations up to the time from Cowper and Son.
The first person who mentioned it to me war Broomby,
in passing through Launceston, and it was because of
his bringing it to my notice I had the matter dealt
with. That is my answer.
Can you tell me this—this boat went apparently all
over the place on naval works, and she was not used,
and then she was offered for sale?—Yes.
This precious boat, of which you are so proud, only
induced two offers, one for £350 and another for
£l,OOO ?—I am a poor man, but I will give -£6,000 for
her to-day. although she has been knocked about, I
could easily get that for her. Fancy an offer of £l,OOO,
and another of £350, for a boat that has got engines
in her worth £3,000.
You hired her for a tug?—l will not say that I did
not, but 1 had two things in view, a patrol boat or a
tender boat, or a tug in on© or two places. I wanted
those.
Where did you want a tender boat?—ls there not
such a thing as a tender boat at the Flinders Naval
Base, where the hopper barges and dredges are lying
3 or 4 miles away from the shore.
. To carry coal and stores?—She was suitable for that
Where did you want a patrol boat?—Up in the
Northern Territory.
Captain Thring said she was not suitable ?—lf you
will read the file, you will find there were a dozen or
so boats offered, and they were considered unsuitable.
I did mention this to Sir William Creswell subsequent
to the purchase, and I mentioned it to Captain Thrin-
that I considered that the Togo should be sent up to
ply in those narrow waters between Thursday Island and
German New Guinea. In that narrow passage of waters
she was specially fit. She was strongly built, she was
properly built, she was properly seasoned, copper fas-
tened, and I was of opinion at that time she might be
used then up there.
Look at what Captain Thring says, “ Her low free-
board and bows indicate a river craft.” She was built
in Launceston?—Yes, that is so.
Captain Thring also says, “ Probably unfit to go to
sea in bad weather.” I think you had better leave
her alone as a sea boat?—l do not know. You must
remember up in these channels there is practically still
water. It is only now and again that you have rough
seas.
How could you get her up? —How did she go to Fre-
mantle.
Did she go?—Yes.
When did she go?—She has been to Fremantle.
I do not think so? —I do think so.
Where is she now ?—By the reports she has been to
Fremantle.
I think you are mistaken ?—I think she has beer
there, I will not say for certain. She came across Basa
Straits, and she has been over here on other occasions.
That is some of the roughest water in the world. That
is what I hear from sea-going men.
This is what she is doing now in August, 1918 —
[reads document 95 on file']. You never purchased
her for any such things as that?—l purchased her, and
I had three things in view—a patrol boat, a tender boat,
and a light tug. I think you will do me justice, an L
I think you will permit me to say this.
I think I am doing you justice, but I want to finish?
—I want to know that. It is due to -me and to th<t
Commission to know this. When this boat was pur-
chased everything was placed in the hands of Sir Wil-
liam Creswell. He took everything in hand, and I
never interfered.
What do you mean by saying that he took her in
hand ? —With regard to bringing her here, and every-
thing else, and before I purchased her I told him at
home. *
Do you mean to say you concurred in this purchase?
—I do. I rang up his Department. I rang him up,
but he was not present in his room, and I asked his
Chief Clerk, or whoever was in charge, to get into
communication with him wherever he was, and, in my
view, he had no opposition to the question of this boat.
May we take it that if he had had you would not
have bought it?—l do not think I would, and I will
tell you why. I would not have done so, because on a
previous occasion with the Emerald, I saw how cut up
he was that I had interfered on that occasion, and I
almost assured him I would not do anything without
his knowledge again.
The witness withdrew.
Mr. Starke. —l would like to call Admiral Creswell.
That is the end of the evidence I propose to bring.
Sir William Creswell, recalled.
By Mr. Starke. —Did you approve of the purchase of
this boat now called the Phillip ? —I had not the ob-
jection to the Togo that I had to the Emerald. I can-
not say that I was absolutely consulted over it; but in
the course of conversation I was informed that an engi-
neer had gone over and had reported on her. I had
a knowledge of what the steamer was. The matter was
inconclusive when I was taken ill. I was ill for about
three weeks, and when I came back the first thing I
was told by Mr. Jensen, I think, was that he had pur-
chased the Togo. I then immediately issued directions
for bringing her here, and putting her into use for V-?
purposes for which she was purchased.


She was quite unsuitable for the purpose for which
she was purchased ?—She was disappointing for the
work down there in the shallow channels; but I wish to
repeat that I had not the same positive objection to
the Togo that I had to the purchase of the Emerald.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Cussen. —You thought before
you actually tried her that she would do the work ? —She
looked a promising ship.
Mr. Starke. —That is all the evidence I propose to
call.
The Chairman. —How do you propose to proceed this
afternoon 1
Mr. Starke. —l think Mr. Cussen wishes to> address
the Commission. I only propose to call the attention
of the Commission to one or two matters that they
might wish to consider. I do not propose to address
them.
Mr. Cussen.—l. do not propose to address the Com-
mission at any length.
Lunch adjournment.
On resuming at 2 p.m.
Mr. Starke. —l do not propose to detain the Com-
mission at any great length, but there are one or two
matters which I think I ought to suggest to the Com-
mission. It seems to me in connexion with the Shaw
Wireless Works, there are two matters to be considered.
First, the aspect of the transaction from, a business
point of view, that is, not only the business methods
of the Department, but the value placed on these works,
and the circumstances under which that value was
paid, whether that appeals to you as a business trans-
action in any way whatever. The other aspect of the
refers to the honour of the men en-
gaged in it, and, taking Mr. Jensen first, it is for the
Commission to consider that transaction, and it may be
that the Commission will not think it is right to pass
any opinion upon the honour of any person concerned in
it, but merely to report the, facts as they exist to the
Governor-General, and allow the Governor-General and
the parliamentary authorities responsible to decide
what action, if any, should be taken upon the facts.
That is one aspect of the report that might be con-
sidered. Another aspect is whether the Commission
would go on to consider whether it should report Mr.
Jensen’s conduct as being perfectly honorable and free
from all impropriety, from a business aspect. As to
that, I promised the Commission to say, as from a
legal point of view, what would be the evidence against
Mr. Jensen. None of the evidence given by Mr. Willis,
Mr. Strong, Mr. Butchart, Mr. Lynch, Mr. Cornwell,
or by Miss Hoad, contains any evidence upon which
any Court of law would make any conclusion adverse
to Mr. Jensen. So far as that is concerned, it would
not be admissible against him. I promised the Com-
mission I would point out such statements which I
I thought would not be considered by lawyers as evi-
dence against him. Other matters though, that would
be open for consideration, would be the transaction it-
self, the manner in which it was carried out, the man-
ner in which it was entered into, and the price paid, if
you thought it was an absurdly high price, the method
by which it was arrived at, and the fact that Mr.
Jensen thought it was necessary to expedite it in every
possible way. Whether that points, or does not point,
to an honest transaction, or a dishonest transaction, can
be considered. And then there is another fact, of
course, which is the alteration of Cresswell’s report. I
think Mr. Cresswell’s account was, on its face of it,
more reliable than anything Mr. Jensen has given, be-
cause his written report bears out the version that he
gave. The only correction he ever made was when
he told Mr. Jensen he saw that his statement of £40,000
was inconsistent. There does not appear to he any in-
consistency. So far as Senator Long is concerned, the
facts certainly bear a very sinister aspect. The con-
versations between Cornwell and himself are evidence
in every Court of law, whatever view you take of Corn-
well’s truthfulness and the accuracy of Price; whatever
the facts' are there is evidence in any Court of law
whatever concerning Long’s conduct. The evidence of
Miss Hoad, of Willis, of Strong, and of Butchart, would
not be received in the Court of law as evidence even
as against Senator Long, but his own statement of the
facts, and the conversation that undoubtedly did take
place with Cornwell are matters that can be considered
by the Commission as to what its report shall be. It
may not show that he is guilty, but there is not the
slightest doubt he got £1,290 on his own admission,
and I think it is very probable he got £2,400. What
did he get it for? He says for gratitude. It must
have been for influence that Shaw thought he had ren-
dered in the purchase of these works, or that he said
he had rendered. He may have lied to Shaw, but
there is not the slightest doubt whatever that he was
paid for political influence that Shaw thought, or was
told, he had rendered. If it is not a fact that he did,
it is a fact that Senator Long is a member of Parlia-
ment. I need say no more about that. As to Radio-
Commander Cresswell, there is not, so far as I can
see, any evidence apart from the withdrawal of his
report, and the extraordinary valuation to which he
was a party, Ross’s valuation, that would suggest any
dishonest action on his part, and wherever his name is
mentioned in conversation, that he was to get £l,OOO,
none of that would be evidence against him. The same
way with Senators Gardiner and Russell. There is no
evidence that they were parties to it. There are no
surrounding facts that point to them as it does to a
slight extent with Cresswell. The only points against
Cresswell are that he wanted to withdraw his report,
and did not, but I think that is absolutely explicable.
He knows perfectly well that he could not disobey his
Minister. Very few officers would dare to do it, and the
only other fact is that valuation for which Ross is more
responsible than Commander Cresswell is. Indeed, I
think it is very wrong to suggest Cresswell as the proper
person to value these works. He knew nothing of the
business; he is a technical officer. He may know the
prices of certain machines, but to value works as a
going concern was quite beyond his capacity and ex-
perience. Those are the only points in connexion with
the Shaw wireless. The only other matters really only
raise aspects of business for your consideration. As to
the Emerald, I should think it would be right for you
to consider whether the business methods employed on
a business transaction were at one with your views as
business men as to what should be done. In the case of
the Emerald, it is quite obvious Jensen ignored every-
body, and the reports he gob are farcical as a basis for
a purchase. The Emerald itself, I venture to think,
was an absolute failure for the purposes for which it
was absolutely wanted. As to the Togo, there was only
one curious transaction, and it is curious that when an
offer had been originally made at £7,500 nobody
thought proper to do anything. As soon as one of Mr.
Jensen’s constituents got busy, the thing was appa-
rently purchased for £7,500, the very price which has
been asked without any repairs, and it was accepted.
The facts to-day show, and the history of it shows,
that the vessel ultimately was practically useless for
any purpose for which she was wanted, and that on the
open market it could only command offers of £l,OOO
or £350. Now it has been put to uses that it was never
required for, and that it would never have been pur-
chased for. It is on these aspects of the transaction
that Mr. Jenseh’s business ability and business acumen
were a great deal at fault. I think those are the only
matters that I desire to call the attention of the Com-
mission to.
Mr. Cussen. —Mr. Commissioners, I desire first of all
lo deal with the case against Senator Long in connexion
with the Shaw wireless works. As to evidence, as it is
put here before this tribunal, it appears to me to
divide itself into two classes. There is, first of all,
what might be called the intrinsic evidence in the
transaction, by that 1 mean to refer to Mr. Jensen’s
conduct in the office in connexion with the valuation,


or in connexion with Commander Cresswell’s report,
and in connexion with this other piece of evidence
which my friend, Mr. Starke, has just drawn to the
attention of the Commission, the expedition or the
hurrying of the transaction through. The other aspect
of the case consists of what my friend has quite fairly
said is not evidence that would he taken into account
in tribunal determining facts, as containing any
probative force against anybody. It is not a question
of it being merely that lawyers would not accept it,
or that it is only hearsay evidence, it is a matter of
non-probative force at all, and the experience of the
Courts, gathered over a number of years by men of
great wisdom, has shown the utterly untrustworthy and
unreliable character of such evidence upon which to
determine any facta, and for that reason because its
probative force is useless, it is rejected in the Law
Courts. I have no hesitation in saying this-—that any
tribunal which would determine adversely to anybody,
however slight the charge made against him, on such
evidence as that, would be inviting an injustice, would
be doing something which they might for the rest of
their days for ever regret, because all the criticism
which may be urged in connexion with the frailties of
human evidence, even as against a searching testimony
on the witness stand, apply with added force to testi-
mony which comes to you second-hand, where conver-
sation may be misrepresented, where statements may
be misunderstood, and where memory of what took
place, and the exact form in which it took place is an
essential factor. Now, dealing with the first part of
the case, which I think might be called for the purposes
of description, such evidence as may be intrinsic in
the transactions, I propose to deal as shortly as I can
with the matters which my friend opened, and which
he persists in in his concluding remarks as matters
upon which this Commission could make a suggestion, or
a finding, or a statement of facts in any way adverse
to Mr. Jensen. I invite the Commission quite frankly
to make its finding of fact. It is no use saying that
one witness has said this, and another witness has said
that. You are here, as I understand, selected from the
people of this country as men who-, from your business
transactions and knowledge of matters generally, are
men fit and proper to determine these things,
and I invite you to do your duty and determine
them as you consider the facts exist. Any
other conclusion would be, I venture to submit,
both unsatisfactory to the gentleman whom
I represent, and unsatisfactory to the persons to whose
assistance you have been called in. So far as this evi-
dence, alleged to lie in the transaction itself, is urged
as containing matter in any way implicating Mr. Jen-
sen, I propose to deal with it as containing any impli-
cation, first, as to his honour; and, secondly, any im-
plication upon his business ability. So far as his
honour is concerned, you have got to look at the whole
of the surrounding facts, and you find, as he himself
put it, that he is a responsible Minister of the Crown,
administering a Department essential to the welfare of
this country at that time, part of whose equipment in-
cluded radio-telegraphy. A war is raging, shipping
facilities between here and other countries are depleted,
machinery cannot be imported, or when even they have
got it on order the British Government, as I under-
stand, has asked that that machinery which has been
ordered for Australia should be allowed to go to the
British Government to help it in the prosecution of
the war. The provision of some works in connexion
with radio-telegraphy, and the wireless equipment, and
the wireless departments of the Australian Navy art-
essential. There is no question about that. Every wit-
ness who has come here has said that the provision of
some works at that time- was vital to the interests of
the nation. _ Mr. Jensen is faced with this position
either provide them, or do not provide them; provide
them by constructing your own works, or here is a
works going in full swing, with the equipment that
will enable you to do what you want to do, and much
more. It is the policy of the Government—whether
this Commission agrees with it or disagrees with it may
be a matter which, perhaps, is not within the scope
of this inquiry, but it is the policy of his Government-
and he, as a member of that Government, must be
loyal to that policy, to, so- far as they can, with their
own workshops supply their own wants. Senator
Pearce, Senator Gardiner, and the other witnesses who
have come here, all testified to that. What did he do ?
Is there a single thing in connexion with that trans-
action that anybody that knew the state of affairs,
and those being the circumstances in which he was
placed, that can reflect upon him. There is this posi-
tion then. He calls for a report from his officer. First
of all, he ascertains that Father Shaw is in a position
to sell, whether his title is all right, which seems to be
a very sensible thing to do. Then he calls for a report
from his technical officer, Radio-Commander Cresswell.
It is idle for Mr. Starke to say that Commander Cress-
well was simply a junior officer, lie was nothing of
the sort, he was the man directly in touch with wire-
less, directing that Department, looking after it at the
time when it was taken over from the Postmaster-
General some months earlier, or some time in the year
preceding. I think it was some time about September,
1916. Commander Cresswell’s report is put in, and Mr.
Ross s valuation. Commander Cresswell urges the neces-
sity of acquiring these works, and he points out quite
frankly as a near wireless telegraphy works they are
too'extensive, but he says, “ I recommend that you take
these works over and make them a Government work-
shop. ’ Mr. Starke says, “ Look at the idiotic valua-
tion he acted upon.” What is idiotic about it, .except
that he said it. He has some- theory that it was wrong
for Mr. Ross to approach this matter except in some
way as a commercial proposition. It was not a com-
mercial proposition, it was not a profit-making concern.
It was not a thing which the Government was going to
take over to make profit, and the question, the only
question for the Minister was what was a fair thing
for it, and I venture to think that criticism that might
be urged about Mr. Ross is at once answered when you
come to consider his evidence. He did show himself
to be a competent man. He knew very well what he
was about, and he valued these works, I venture to
think, perfectly fairly. I do not know that it should
be the policy of a Government, because one of its citi-
zens is in financial straits, to put the screw on him
and say, ‘ You have got to sell, you have got a thing
which is worth £lO,OOO, I will pay you half its value.”
That is what it comes down to. It strikes me as a matter
where a man might very sensibly, and might very fairly,
sa y? Ido not care about that, I think it is worth this
money, and lam going to take it at that.” If he con-
sidered it, and deliberately came to this conclusion, I
would still contend for this, "lam not going to take
into account those extraneous circumstances which make
you an easy prey for me.” That is what it comes to.
However that may be, and however the force of that
argument in its proper circumstances, it has no force in
this case, because Mr. Jensen did nothing more than
obtain a valuation from a person who had been recom-
mended to him, and whose qualifications he had taken
steps to discover, and who was recommended to him by
people in the highest authority. Mr. Jensen did not
hesitate to tell you that Father Shaw mentioned Mr.
Ross’s name to him. He said certainly he did. The
only people who knew that were Mr. Jensen and Father
Shaw, and Father Shaw is dead. Mr. Jensen said he
made inquiries from Mr. Ashby, and his secretary,
and they recommended Mr. Ross. Everybody rays’
Cornwell and everybody else, that he was the best man
for the position. Then what happens? Commander
Cresswell’s_ report comes in, and Mr. Starke says you
get the sinister circumstances. People view things
from a different stand-point. They have different
opinions, and I venture to submit there is an obvious
inconsistency there. Commander Cresswell says, “I
agree with Ross’s valuation of £60,000, roughly,” and


at the end of his report he says, “ I recommend that
£40,000 would be a fair offer to make.” I venture to
think there is an inconsistency. I submit to the Com-
mission there is an inconsistency which nobody, parti-
cularly a Minister taking this big proposition to Cabi-
net, could pass over. I will not urge that you should
say that Mr. CresswelTs account of this conversation is
untrue, and that Mr. Jensen’s account is true, that
one is unreliable and the other is reliable. I do not
think it matters which account you take of the con-
versation, I think they are both of them pretty near
the truth. Mr. Cresswell may have been struck with
something that Mr. Jensen was not. I think I am en-
titled to say the same thing would apply to Mr. Jen-
sen’s account. The broad substance of it is that there
is this inconsistency, or, at any rate, what Mr. Jensen
seems to think was an inconsistency, and he called his
officer and said to him, “ Here is an inconsistency,
what do you mean ? How can I take this thing before
Cabinet in that form. In the one breath you say
it is worth £60,000, and in the next breath you say
only offer £40,000, which, in your opinion, would be
a fair price to offer,” Well now, if Mr. Jensen did
say, “ The question of negotiations has got nothing to
do with you,” I think he was probably right. That
being the explanation of the alteration in Commander
CresswelTs report, how can this Commission say, in
fairness to Mr. Jensen, having heard his explanation
of it, and seeing, as I venture to submit, there is this
inconsistency in his report, and the necessity of having
the matter taken before Cabinet in some concrete form,
that he was wrong. Commander Cresswell alters his
report. He says, ‘ ‘ I think the valuation is a fair one,
but he considers that it can be procured for less,” and
that was a matter for negotiation. So much for that.
All the other evidence indicates that Mr. Jensen froin
that time onwards was cautious, and carried out this
transaction in the ordinary way in which commercial
transactions are Carried out. Commander Clarkson
had reported against it; what of that? There was no
suppression of that. Mr. Starke opined that was, sup-
pressed. That is not true. That is the answer to that.
It was not suppressed. The pros and cons of it were
put before the Cabinet, as Senator Gardiner says, in
a very business-like fashion. There was no suppression
of the adverse opinion about it. There was nothing
suspicious, unless you are going to view the whole of this
transaction with suspicious eyes. If you are going to
start out with this idea, “ Jensen was in this, he was
going to get £5,000 out of it,” you can lend a colour to
everything. But I am perfectly satisfied the Commis-
sion is not going to do that. It is very easy to be wise
after the event. It is very easy sitting here years after-
wards, when all these things have happened, and the
whole facts are now in your possession, for Mr. Starke
to say he should have done this or that. That is all
very well. As I •say, it is very easy to be wise after-
wards. Mr. Jensen goes to Cabinet with it, and he
even takes the precaution of getting Cabinet’s sanction
before he enters into negotiations. What is wrong with
that? Even before he spends £52 10s. he consults
Cabinet. He gets his valuation from a competent man,
and having got that, he returns to Cabinet with it,
and I submit, without hesitation, that piece of evidence
shows that he put it before Cabinet. It is said that he
should have put Commander CresswelTs recommenda-
tion before Cabinet. I join issue on that. I do not
think that was necessary. Here is a responsible Min-
ister, and Cabinet would want to know what sort of
deal they were getting; it is part of their policy; is it
worth the money ? It must be remembered that while
it would not have taken a long time to start negotia-
tions at a lower figure, the Government wanted these
things at once, and I should think it is undesirable for
a Minister to go to Cabinet saying, “ I offered £40,000,
he will not take that, what will I offer him now?”
Cabinet might say, “ Offer £45,000,” then the Minis-
ter would have to go back to Cabinet and say, “ He
will not take £45,000. He says he will not take less
than £50,000.” Then the Cabinet says, “ Offer him
£50,000,” and the £50,000 is offered, but he will not
take less than £55,000, so the Minister has to go hack
to Cabinet again. The way this business was carried
out was that Mr. Jensen took this to Cabinet, and said,
‘‘l think it is worth £55,000. We want the works,
my technical officer says we can keep the works em-
ployed.” He tells Cabinet that it is worth £55,000,
and he gets Cabinet’s approval. It may be that in
other circumstances it might have been all right to
have three or four offers, until eventually at a price
of bargaining and haggling, they could have been ob-
tained for a lower figure than £55,000. They might
possibly have got it for less in the circumstances that
existed in connexion with Father Shaw. I submit
neither as a Minister of the Crown nor as the adminis-
trator of a large public Department, from any point of
view, did he fail in the duty he owed- to his Govern-
ment of his country. Of course, as I say, the Com-
mission knows that the British Government itself was
having great difficulty in getting hold of this class of
machinery, and there was this as a going concern. It
is then said by my learned friend that even in those
answers to the questions by the Treasurer, Mr. Higgs,
in connexion with the money that Mr. Jensen sup-
pressed the truth. That is not so. What does he say ?
Mr. Higgs writes and asks two or three very pertinent
questions. What did Mr. Jensen do? He did not act
on his own, he sent the letter to Commander Cresswell,
and it is Cresswell’s actual reply that is sent to Mr.
Higgs. What is wrong with that ? I have no doubt
that the Commission will simply look at the trans-
action from the point of view of Jensen at that time,
and in those circumstances I venture to submit that
his is not open to any criticism of any sort.
He suppressed nothing before the Cabinet. He sup-
pressed nothing from Mr. Higgs. He suppressed no-
thing from anybody. The criticism that took place at
the time in the Sydney Sun is criticism from people who
were interested, and I venture to submit that nobody
in this room, hearing that criticism, and knowing
that, would have taken the slightest notice of it. So
much, as I understand, for the intrinsic evidence. It
is said that the price paid was excessive. I say it was
not on the report of competent people, and there is
not a scrap of evidence here to the contrary, except
the evidence of Cornwell, and Cornwell’s evidence, on
his own showing, is unreliable. Cornwell himself put
his name to a valuation of £63,000, a valuation which
he says was arrived at by appreciating the machinery
by 40 per cent. As between the two witnesses, Corn-
well and Ross, which evidence is the Commission going
to accept ? I have no hesitation in saying that the
evidence of Ross, supported as it is by Radio-Com-
mander Cresswell, ought to be accepted by the Com-
mission. Cornwell did either one of two things. He
either made a wrong valuation with the intention of
deceiving the Postmaster-General's Department, or he
made an honest one. I prefer to give him credit for
making an honest one.
The Chairman. —You mean the the Navy Depart-
ment?
Mr. Cussen. —No. It was the Naval Department.
He made a valuation of £63,000, and I thought it was
to be submitted to the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment, but evidently it was to the Navy Department.
That valuation was either true or untrue. I venture
to think, notwithstanding the position Cornwell took
up at this Inquiry, the possibility is that it was some-
where near the truth. As the Chairman pointed out,
there is the stuff there; there is the thing ready to walk
in and to walk out. It is ready for use, and although
there is no goodwill in the ordinary sense of the term,
that very fact itself is a fact which enhances the value
of the stuff there and ready to work. Now it is said
there was expedition. I can only say in reply to that,
that I sincerely trust that we will not give a finding
from any Commission complaining of expedition in con


nexion with Government matters. Mr. Jensen says
that he suggested it because Father Shaw was worry-
ing him, and because there were watchmen out there, and
he suggested to the Crown Solicitor that the matter
should be expedited and disposed of so that he could
get his watchmen out and get his workmen in to get
on with their work, and so that Father Shaw should
get his money. I do not know whether there is any-
thing unbusinesslike in that. I thought it was good
business to pay a man, as you had got what you bought
from him. I submit to the Commission, so far as that
transaction is concerned, and so far as the evidence is
concerned, there is not one scrap of evidence' which
would have any effect, or should have any effect against
Mr. Jensen in his business capacity. So far as the
other evidence is concerned, I will repeat what I said
before about it, and I desire to say this—if this matter
is going to be- looked at suspiciously, I am perfectly
sure this Commission will not apply their suspicion to
only one person. If Father Shaw came here himself,
and on his oath asked you to say that my client had
received £2,000, or any sum of money, I would have
no hesitation in asking you to put just as much reliance
on his oath, where it involved my client, as he him-
self put on it. He is dead, unfortunately. Ido not
want to defame the dead, but I am not going to allow
the living to suffer at the expense of any dead man. I
should have no hesitation in asking this Commission to
utterly disregard his oath, where it involved the honour
of a man whose past was not open to criticism such as
Father Shaw’s was. I have said, perhaps, enough
about that, and Ido not want to say any more. What
he did, and what he said we do not know; from him
we cannot know; but we do know this, that he was a
man who was prepared to enter into- any secret trans-
action, even secret marriage at the expense of his vows
which he took of celibacy and chastity. What such a
man did with his money is only to be guessed at. It
is said that he said Mr. Jensen was to get £l,OOO.
What is there to suggest the slightest weight should
be paid to that. Even if the slightest effect were given
to it, even as the effect on your own minds of saying,
“ Well, it is suspicious,’-’ I beg to submit would be
distinctly unfair. As I say, he is not here. You do
not know what he said. You do know this with Long,
and Long’s connexion with this thing, if I may say so'
in my opinion,, does not bear a very good odour. What
might very easily have happened, and it is by no means
the first time that it has been done, is this: Long may
have very easily said to Father Shaw, “ Well now, look,
of course I will have to grease a few palms over this.”
I do not think there is any doubt that Long got his
money either for saying, at any rate, he was facilitat-
ing the transaction, something of that sort—however,
I am not concerned with advancing theories, if theories
are going to be indulged in, I think, there is a very
strong theory that Mr. Long said he would have to
grease two people’s hands—and it strikes me as being
extremely significant to see the two people he picked
out. He picked out the Minister, the man directly
dealing with it, and then he picked out the technical
officer dealing with it. He would say, I think, “ I
have to grease those two fellow’s palms,” and Father
Shaw may very easily have believed it, and goodness
knows what happened to the money, if Long did get
the £5,000. It is said that it was taken up to Par-
liament House, but there is no more evidence against
Mr. Jensen’s connexion with this transaction than there
is against Radio-Commander Cresswell, and it would
be outrageous, in my opinion, I submit, that Radio-
Commander Cresswell should on evidence such as this
have the slightest stain cast upon his character, just
as it would be an outrage for Senator Gardiner’ oi
Senator Russell, and, as 1 venture to submit, an out-
rage if Mr. Jensen has any suspicion on his honour or
character by reason of that evidence. That evidence
applies only, of course, to that part of the transaction
which is headed as reflecting upon Mr. Jensen’s
honour. What took place at the interview between
Senator Long and Cornwell, I do not think the Com-
mission have got the truth of yet. They have got a
scrappy version of it from Mr. Price. I think what
he put down he certainly heard. They have got an
account of it given by Mr. Cornwell, and at this late
.stage they have got a revised version of it given by
Cornwell, Cornwell’s suggestion is that at that inter-
view, Long said to him what practically gave the show
away. He said, “Jensen is in it, but he has not lifted
his money yet.” I have had compiled for the Com-
mission that revised version, which contains in black
what Price heard, and in red ink the additions which
were made by Cornwell in the revised version. You
see Long said to Cornwell, “ He assured me he never
had any money
The Chairman. —l do not think you need pursue
that; we do not attach any importance to it.
Mr. Cussen. —That is all I desire to say about the
whole of that evidence. I feel sure that it will not be
accepted by the Commission as involving Mr. Jensen’s
honour in the slightest degree. The other two matters
are the Togo and the Emerald, and on them I can be
very short indeed. So far as the Emerald is concerned,
there is a report upon it of the 29th of March, and
another one of the Bth of June. Certainly they were
reports that the engineer had simply had a look at it.
This engineer, I think Mr. Raff, said that she seemed
to be well found, and Mr. Jensen exercised his judg-
ment on this matter when he considered it. He con-
sidered it to be a right and proper thing, and he did
it; If he made an error of judgment, it is not the first
time a man who is called upon to exercise his judgment
has made an error. So far as the business transaction
is concerned, there is not a scrap of evidence that the
Department paid a penny too much in paying £4,500
when £6,000 was asked for it. The Department has
now got a boat which is worth the money. There is not
one scrap of evidence one way or the other before the
Commission saying that it is not now being used and
being found of utility. It is being used now for Go-
vernment works and is doing good work. So far as the
Togo is concerned, nothing can be said about that except
it was apparently not used for the purposes. it was
acquired, but Admiral Creswell was consulted by Mr
Jensen before the purchase of this boat. The only other
matter I desire to deal with is the matter which has
been raised as to the inference, in whatever way it is
to be drawn, when it is urged against Mr. Jensen
that he did not consult thei Naval Board in connexion
with the purchase of the Shaw wireless works. I think
it is clear on matters of policy the Minister exercises
his own judgment, and this was a matter of policy.
When he consulted Admiral Clarkson, and Admiral
Clarkson reported against it for the reasons that he
gave, it was then within the competence' of Admiral
Clarkson or Mr. Macandie, as secretary of the Board,
to refer the matter to the Naval Board. The evidence
is that the suggestion that it should be brought before
the Naval Board is embodied in a minute by Sir Wil-
liam Creswell, that it was not brought before the Naval
Board. Under , those circumstances, I submit no ad-
verse inference should be drawn against Mr. Jensen
in connexion with the matter. In the whole of the
evidence I submit there is nothing which reasonable
men viewing _ the _ matter, as I have no doubt you,
gentlemen, will view the matter in a reasonable light,
will find which casts any suspicion whatever on the
honour of Mr. Jensen in this transaction. That is all
I desire to say.
The Chairman. —The Commission has listened very
carefully to the representations made by you, .and also
to. Mr. Starke. You would not expect the. Commission
to make any announcement to-day, but we will give
the matter now our very earnest and serious considera-
tion, giving every weight possible to the views you have
put before us on behalf of your client, and we will each
arrive at our decision as quickly as possible, and for-
ward it to the Government in a. few days.
The sitting then concluded.
94


SCHEDULE OF EXHIBITS SUBMITTED WITH REPORT DATED 2nd DECEMBER, 1918.
Consecutive
Page
Exhibit.
Evidence.
1
Navy Office File, N. 16/4162, relating to the purchase of the Shaw Wireless Works at Randwick,
New South Wales .. .. .. ..
4
1-0
(Portion of No. 1.) Letter from Father A. J. Shaw, dated 9th June, 1916, enclosing inventory
of works and valuation
8
2
3 1
Statement regarding obsolete stores and machinery at Shaw Wireless Work . ..
t
8
4
5
-
Letters from Father Shaw to Mr. A. E. Cornwell, Manager of the Shaw Wireless Works.
8
6 J
7
Telegrams despatched by Mr. J. A. Jensen, M.P., and Father Shaw, May-July, 1916..
9
8
Telegrams despatched by Father Shaw, August, 1916
9
9
Copies of Report, 16/4284, dated 14th July, 1916, from Commander Cresswell to Naval
Secretary —
(a) of original report recommending that works be acquired for £40,000;
16
(i b ) of substituted report expressing opinion that Father A. J. Shaw's offer of £b/,UUO is
reasonable
10
First Annual Report and Balance-Sheet, Shaw Wireless Works, for period ended 30th June, 1917
19
11
Copies of letters to Father Shaw from Directors of Shaw Wireless Works respecting option
of purchase of Company’s interests for £25,000, and extension of option ..
20
12
File of papers, D.S. 16/1194, containing stock and inventory sheets, Shaw Wireless Works, as
at 5th August," 1916 .. .. .. .. ..
30
13
Transcript of shorthand notes taken by Mr. J. J. Price, on 15th August, 1918, of conversation
between Senator Long and the Manager of the Works
31
14 •
Original shorthand notes of conversation between Senator Long and the Manager of the Works
on 15th August, 1918 (see No. 13)
31
15
Father Shaw’s cheque book, London Bank, Melbourne ..
32
16
Copy of letter from Mr. J. A.. Jensen, M.P., to Mr. J. A. Lynch respecting the latter’s
application for permanent employment
33
17
Father Shaw’s pass books and cheque book, London Bank of Australia, Sydney, and City Bank,
Sydney
34
18
Installation of wireless on vessels, First Annual Report, R.A.N. Radio Service
34
19
Copy of Father Shaw’s banking account with London Bank of Australia, Melbourne ..
34
20
Commonwealth Statutory Rules No. 32, of 1911 —Duties of Naval Board ..
36
21
Copy of Senator Long’s banking account with Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Melbourne..
38
22
Letters from Commission’s advisory accountants respecting inspection of Senator Gardiner’s
banking account .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
39
23
Commonwealth Treasury Department’s File, 18/37092, respecting purchase of Shaw Wireless
Works
46
24
Navy Department’s File, 16/6767, respecting compulsory installation of wireless on ships
46
25
Navy Department’s File, N. 18/2036, respecting compulsory installation of wireless on ships ..
46
26
Transcription of notes by Mr. J. J. Price of conversation between Senator Long and the Manager
of the works on 15th August, 1918, with additions as supplied by the Manager (Mr. Cornwell)
(see also Exhibits 13, 14 and 27) .. .. .. .. .. ..
51
27
Transcription of shorthand notes by Mr. J. J. Price, as made by Mr. Amos Burr, Shorthand Expert
(see also Exhibits 13, 14 and 26)
53
28
Postmaster-General’s Department’s file, G.4985/18, respecting proposal to purchase Shaw
Wireless Works .. .. .. .. .. .. _
55
29
Two bank cheques, Senator Long, (for £1,000 each)
58
30
Letter from Mr. A. E. Carroll to Mr. J. A. Jensen, M.P., on 8th November, 1917
61
31
Evidence given before Commission bv Mr. A. E. Carroll on 14th May, 1918, and 16th May, 1918
61
32
Letter, dated 26th July, 1918, from Mr. A. E. Cornwell, Manager, Wireless Works, to Mr. A. E.
Barton, Commission’s advisory accountant, re Mi's Hoad’s evidence
67
33
Record of meeting of Naval Board, held at Navy Office, Melbourne, on 29 h July, 1916 see
also 35) .. .... .. .. .. ..
80
34
Comparison of figures respecting Amalgama cd Wireless prepared by Mr. F. W. Thomas, Chief
Clerk, Radio Branch
84
35
Navy Office File, 16/135, responsibility of Naval Board Members (see also No. 33
84
36
Navy Office File 15/2603 —Rules for conduct of business by Members of Naval Board Senator
Pearce’s minute dated 7th April, 1915
84
37
Letter from Senator Long to Chairman of Commission, dated 16th November, 1918, suggesting
that Senator Pearce, Mr. Spence, Mr. Higgs and Mr. Tudor be called
84
38
Navy Office File. N. 16/5218, re pecting the purchase of the s.s. Emerald ..
85
39
Navy Office File, 18/5763, respecting purchase of s.s. Togo
88
ROYAL COMMISSION ON NAVY AND DEFENCE ADMINISTRATION.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by. Albert J. Mullett,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
