

1926-27-28.
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
MOVING PICTURE INDUSTRY
IN AUSTRALIA.
Presented by Command, 26 th April, 1928 ; ordered to be printed, 3rd May, 1928.
[Cost of Paper : —Preparation, not given; 1,050 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £50.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. GREEN,
Government Printer, Canberra.
No. 227. —F.418 -PRICE 1S. 3D.


CONTENTS
Terms of Reference .. .. .. .. .. _ A j U v E ’
List of Witnesses ~ .. .. .. .. .. . .. v
Part I.—lntroduction to Report .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 1
Part ll.—lmportation of Cinematograph Films .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Part lll.—Film Censorship— .. .. .. .. ~ _ .. i
Appeal Board .. .. .. .. .. .. .. _ _ .. 8
Part IV.—Distribution of Films .. .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. 9
Part V.—Exhibitors and the Exhibition of Films .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 10
Part Vl.—Film Production in Australia .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 11
Part ' Vll.—The Quota System .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Part VIII.—The Cinema and the Community— .. .. ~ .. .. .. ..17
The Film and Native Races .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Children .. .. .... .. ~ .. ~ .. 18
Educational Films .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 20
Part IX.—Financial Aspects .. .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. 20
Part X.—Taxation .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 22
Part Xl.—British Films .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Part Xll.—Customs Duty .. .. ~ . . .. ~ .. .. 24
Part XIII.—“ Know Your Own Country ” Series .. ~ .. ~ .. 25
Part XlV.—Commonwealth and State Legislation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Part XV.—Conclusion .. .. .. .. .. . ~ .. .. 26
Summary of Recommendations .. .. . . , .. .. .. 28


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain ana Ireland and of the British
Dominions beyond the Seas King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India :
To our trusty and well-beloved
Walter Moffitt Marks, Esquire, M.P. ;
Senator Walter Leslie Duncan ;
Senator John Grant ;
Senator the Honorable Herbert Hays ;
Francis Michael Fordb, Esquire, M.P.;
The Honorable Henry Gregory, M.P. ; and
Lewis Windermere Nott, Esquire, M.P.
Greeting :
KNOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of Australia,
acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal
Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to be Commissioners to inquire into and report on the
moving picture industry in Australia, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to inquire particularly into :
(a) The importation, production, distribution, and exhibition of moving picture films ;
(b) The incidence and effect of the Customs Tariff upon the importation of such films and the sufficiency or otherwise of existing
duties of Customs ;
(c) The sufficiency or otherwise of the existing income tax law of the Commonwealth in relation to persons firms and companies
engaged in the industry ; and
{d) In connexion with any or all of the foregoing matters, the income, profits, expenditure and losses of such persons, firms and
companies derived from, or incurred in connexion with, the industry, and the amount of capital invested in the industry.
AND WE appoint you, the said Walter Moffitt Marks to be the Chairman of the said Commissioners :
AND WE direct that, for the purpose of taking evidence, four Commissioners shall be sufficient to constitute a quorum, and may
proceed with the inquiry under these Our Letters Patent:
AND WE require you, with as little delay as possible, to report to Our Governor-General of Our said Commonwealth the result of your
inquiries into the matters entrusted to you by these Our Letters Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent and the Seal of Our said Commonwealth to be
hereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellor, John Lawrence, Baron Stonehaven, Knight Grand
Cross of Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Companion of Our Distinguished Service
Order, Our Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in and over Our Commonwealth of Australia, this twenty-
eighth day of May, in the year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twenty-seven, and in the eighteenth year
(1.5.) of Our Reign.
STONEHAVEN,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
S. M. BRUCE,
Prime Minister.
Entered on Record by me, in Register of Patents, No. 56, page 10, this thirtieth day of May, One thousand nine hundred and twenty-
seven.
P. E. DEANE.


LIST OF WITNESSES.
Adams, Miss Jean, Representative for Fox Film Corporation Ltd., Launceston, Tasmania
Agnew, Robert, Assistant Teacher, Junior Technical School, Maroubra Junction, New South Wales
Andrewartha, Edwin Percy, Secretary, Police Department, and Member of State Censor Board, Hobart
Andrews, Mrs. Bertha Arnold, Honorary Secretary, Mothers’ Union Council, Perth
Andrews, Phillip Llewellyn, ex-Film Exchange Manager, Hobart
Anthoness, Thomas Richard Tallis, Manager, Cremorne and Majestic Theatres, Kalgoorlie, Western Australia ..
Appleby, Phillip Norman, Vice-President, Motion Picture Exhibitors’ Association of Western Australia, Perth
Bailey, Mrs. Nora Annie, Vice-President, Women’s Vigilance Society, Melbourne
Baker, Walter Edward, President, Actors’ Federation, Sydney
Balcombe, Gordon Tyrrwhit, a Managing Director of Union Theatres Ltd., and Australasian Films Ltd., Sydney
Barkley, William Henry, Collector of Customs, Sydney
Barr, William John Cook, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Melbourne..
Barrett, Charles, Secretary, League of Child Helpers, Melbourne
Barrett, Franklyn, Motion Picture Producer, Randwick, New South Wales
Barrett, Sir James William, Vice-President, Health Society of Australia, Melbourne
Bath, John Morley, Proprietor, Rigby’s Ltd., Adelaide
Beckett, James Thornton, Journalist, Sydney
Bellion, William Washington, Motion Picture Exhibitor, New Oxford Theatre, Leederville, Western Australia..
Besly, Kenneth Allen, Importer of Phonograph Records, Sydney
Beveridge, Elton, Counsel, Baker, and Beveridge, Majestic Pictures, Burnie, Tasmania
Biggins, Harry Vernon, Headmaster, State High School, Devonport, Tasmania
Bignell, Miss Annie Muriel, General Secretary, Young Women’s Christian Association, Adelaide
Bird, Reverend Harold Wallace, The Rectory, Subiaco, Western Australia
Black, Hon. George, M.L.C., ex-Film Censor, Sydney
Blandford, Frank Victor, Manager, Regent Picture Theatre, Thornbury, Victoria
Bluett, Albert Robert, Secretary, Local Government Association of New South Wales, Sydney
Bowman, Mrs. Elizabeth Haigh, President, National Council of Women of South Australia, Adelaide
Boyce, William Frederick Charles, Managing Director, National Pictures Ltd., Adelaide
Boyle, William Lester, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Central Theatre, Adelaide
Boynes, Albert George, Manager, Tropical Pictures, Cairns, Queensland
Brandt, Dr. John Lincoln, Representing the Council of Churches of Victoria, Melbourne
Brennan, Dr. Edwin Thomas, Medical Practitioner, Sydney
Brennan, Martin Charles, Editor, Film Weekly, Sydney
Brigden, Professor James Bristock, Professor of Economics, University of Tasmania, Hobart
Brodziak, Henry Jacob, Exploitation Representative, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Limited, Sydney
Bruce, John Alwyn Seves, Cameraman, Commonwealth Film Laboratories, Redfern, New South Wales
Buchanan, George Thomas, ex-Motion Picture Exhibitor, Wahroonga, New South Wales
Bulley, Albert Henry, Inspector, State Children’s Department, Perth
Burnell, Mrs. Eliza, Justice of the Peace, Burnie, Tasmania
Campbell, Leo, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Capitol Pictures, Latrobe, Tasmania
Carmichael, Alfred Robert, Queensland, Manager, Famous Lasky Film Service Ltd., Brisbane
Carroll, Daniel Joseph, Managing Director, Prince Edward Theatre, Sydney, &c.
Cartwright, Bertram Tasman Felix, ex-Motion Picture Exhibitor, Devonport, Tasmania
Casper, Henry, Justices’ Association of Western Australia, Perth
Chapman, Henry William, Sharnoliffe, Sandgate, Brisbane
Chapman, William Lang, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Strand Pictures, Townsville, Queensland
Chauvel, Charles Edward, Motion Picture Producer, Australian Film Productions Ltd., Brisbane
Clapham, Stanley, Theatre Manager, Gladstone Theatres Ltd., Gladstone, Queensland
Clemenger, William Ralph, Part Proprietor and Manager, Town Hall Pictures, Kalgoorlie, Western Australia
Clifford, Daniel, Managing Director, D. Clifford’s Theatres Ltd., Adelaide
Cocks, Miss Fanny Kate Boadicea, Principal of Women Police, Adelaide..
Coman, Joseph, Sub-Inspector of Police, Brisbane
Coombe, Sir Thomas Melrose, Theatre Proprietor, Perth
Coutts, Compton, Moving Picture Actor, Sydney
Cowan, Lady Winnifred, President, British Council of Patriotic Leagues, London
Cowan, Mrs. Edith Dircksey, National Council of Women, Perth, and Member of Children’s Court Bench, Perth
Cox, Miss Emily Constance, Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Hobart
Crawford, Robert Henry, Secretary for Education and Chairman of State Film Censor Board, Hobart
Crick, Stanley Sadler, Managing Director, Fox Film Corporation (A/sia) Ltd., Sydney ..
Dalziel, Allen Henry, Secretary, Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League, Adelaide
Darling, Roy, Motion Picture Importer and Distributor, Sydney
Dawson, Theodore Wesley, Assistant Master, Scots College, Sydney
Dean, George Best, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Hobart
Deans, Reverend Absalom, Representative of Council of Churches of Victoria, Melbourne
Deering, Harold, Chief Secretary’s Department, Sydney
Dexter, Robert James, Editor-in-Chief, Everyones, Sydney
Down, Robert Henry, Officer-in-Charge, Children’s Courts, Melbourne
Doyle, Ralph Raymond,Managing Director, United Artists (A/sia) Ltd., Sydney
Doyle, Stuart Frank, a Managing Director of Union Theatres Ltd., and Australasian Films Ltd., Sydney
Duncan, Alfred, Manager, Educational Service, Australasian Films Ltd., Sydney
Dunlop, Thomas Alberto, Mayor of Rockhampton, Rockhampton, Queensland


Bales, Joseph Herbert, Member of the Children’s Court Bench, Perth
Edwards, Mrs. Hilda Violet, Mothers’ Union Council, Perth
Edwards, Sydney William, Secretary, Australasian Performing Right Association, Sydney
English, Patrick, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Malanda, Queensland
Parnell, Thomas William, Police Magistrate, Rockhampton, Queensland
Farrell, George Pritchard, M.L.A., Legislative Assembly, Brisbane
Feldt, John Arthur, Proprietor, Sun Pictures, Townsville
Fenwick, Osbom James, Federated Picture Showmen of Australia (Queensland Branch), Brisbane
Ferguson, George Andrew, Director, State Children Department, Brisbane
Ferguson, Thomas Edmund, Secretary, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Ltd., Sydney
Finlay, Herbert Cecil, Producer, 12 Thompson Street, Darllnghurst, Sydney
Flynn, Justin Vaughan, Melbourne Representative of Everyones, Melbourne
Fordyce, Miss Elizabeth, Head Mistress, Dulwich Hill Domestic Science School, Dulwich Hill
Freeman, Norman Bernard, Managing Director, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Limited, Sydney
Fulton, Claude Victor, General Manager, National Pictures Limited, Adelaide
Gambier, Sargent John, Secretary, First National Pictures (A/sia.) Ltd., Sydney
Garran, Sir Robert Randolph, Solicitor-General for the Commowealth, Canberra
Garrick, Thomas Arthur, Rockhampton Manager for Birch, Carroll, and Coyle, Rockhampton, Queensland ..
Gavin, John F., Motion Picture Actor, Sydney
Gibson, William Alfred, General Manager, Australasian Films Ltd., and a Managing Director of Union Theatres
Ltd., Melbourne
Good, Frederick Daniel, Justices’ Association, Perth
Goode, Mrs. Agnes Knight, Justice of the Peace and Member of the State Censor Board, Adelaide..
Griffith, George Frederick, Managing Director, Hoyt’s Theatres Limited, Melbourne
Griffiths, Charles Llewellyn, Journalist, Bundaberg, Queensland
Guthrie, Senator James Francis, The Senate, Canberra
Gyles, Harry John Wilmot, Director, New Ascot Theatre, Ascot Vale, Victoria
Halley, Dr. Ida Gertrude Margaret, Principal Medical Officer, Education Department, Adelaide
Hancock, George Richard, Proprietor, Bon Accord and Mascot Picture Theatres, Sandgate, Queensland
Hansen, Martin Peter, Acting Director of Education, Education Department, Melbourne..
Hardy, Charles Thomas, Managing Director, Selznick Pictures (Aust.) Ltd., Sydney
Hargraves, Cecil, Film Cutter, Sydney
Harvie, Harold Joseph, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Healesville, Victoria
Hawkins, Horace John, ex-Secretary, Film Renters’ Association, Brisbane
Hawkins, Stanley William, Managing Director, DeForest Phonofilms (Aust.) Ltd., Sydney
Hayle, Gerald Macßorie, Motion Picture Producer, Melbourne
Healey, Charles William, Scenario Writer, Nagambie, Victoria
Hellmrich, Alexander Brooks, Motion Picture Exploiteer, Melbourne
Herschell, Charles Richard, Managing Director, Hersohell’s Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
Hewitt, Thomas Sinton, Manager, Memorial Theatre, St. Kilda, Victoria
Heyward, Claude William, Proprietor, Exclusive Features, Melbourne
Hicks, John W., jun., Managing Director, Famous Lasky Film Service Ltd., Sydney
Hobler, William Learmonth, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Rockhampton, Queensland
Holdaway, Frank Richard, Secretary, Universal Film Manufacturing Co. (A/sia.) Ltd., Sydney
Hootton, Miss Henrietta, Hon. Secretary, Parents and Citizens’ Association, Perth
Howe, William Joseph, President, Federated Picture Showmen’s Association of Australia, Sydney
Huckerby, Albert Edward, General Secretary, Australian Theatrical and Amusement Employees’ Association,
Melbourne
Hurley, James Francis, Motion Picture Producer, Sydney
Ireland, Charles David, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Alderley Theatre, Brisbane
Jackson, George, Bowen-terrace, Brisbane
Jackson, Lawrence Stanley, Secretary, Federal Taxation Department, Melbourne
Johnson, Oscar St. John, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Waterside Workers’ Hall Pictures, Townsville, Queens-
land
Johnston, Ernest William, Musical Director, Melbourne
Jones, Mrs. Doris Amies Beresford, President, Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Melbourne
Jones, Mrs. Edith, President, Victorian Women’s Citizen Movement, Melbourne
Jones, John Corbett, Managing Director, First National Pictures (A/sia.) Ltd., Sydney
Joyner, Mrs. Ethel Rose Paterson, President, Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia, Perth
Juchau, Percy James, Motion Picture Producer, Sydney
Jull, Dr. Roberta Henrietta, Medical Officer for Schools, Education Department, Perth
Keast, Leslie John, General Manager, Cinema Art Films Ltd., Sydney
Kellow, Henry Arthur, Headmaster, Boys’ Grammar School, Rockhampton, Queensland
Kerr, James Stevingstone, M.L.A., Australian Film Productions Ltd., Brisbane
Kirwan, Herbert Dominick, Motion Picture Producer, Brisbane ..
Kothe, Henry Ernest, Commonwealth Film Censorship Staff, Sydney
Kruger, Albert Herman, Western Australian Representative for Australasian Films Ltd., Perth
Lashmar, Ernest, Manager, Chappell and Co., Ltd., Sydney
Laver, Miss Constance Harriet, Queen’s Walk, Melbourne
Leake, Charles Edward, New Guinea Trade Agency, Sydney
Longford, Raymond Hollis, Motion Picture Producer, Roseville, Sydney
Longford, Victor Hollis, Scenario Writer, Roseville, Sydney
Lovely, Miss Louise, Motion Picture Actress and Producer, Melbourne
Lowther, Frederick Leslie, Author, Sydney
Lyall, William, Machinery Sales Manager, Australasian Films Ltd., Melbourne
Macdonald, Alexander, Motion Picture Producer, Edinburgh ..
VI


Macdonald, Mrs. Amelia, Vice-President, Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia, Perth
MacLaren, Charles James Torrance, Southern Cross Film Productions Ltd., St. Hilda, Victoria
Malins, GeoSrey, c/o Overseas Dept., Board of Trade, London
Mallalieu, Mrs. Edith Agnes, Secretary, National Council of Women, Brisbane ..
Marsden, Miss Grace, Honorary Secretary, Good Film League, Sydney
Marshall, Vaughan Campbell, Motion Picture Producer, Melbourne
Mason, Ferguson Brough, Manager, Princess Theatre, Launceston, Tasmania
Mason, Mrs. Mary Clement, Britannia Film Distributors, Sydney
Mayer, Mrs. Minnie Grace, Minna’s Theatrical Enterprises, Townsville, Queensland
McCaul, Terence Michael, Head Teacher, State School, Gladstone, Queensland
McCrae, Herbert, Western Australian Manager for the Universal Film Manufacturing Co. Ltd., Perth
McDonagh, Miss Isabel Lysia, Motion Picture Producer, Drummoyne, New South Wales
McGeorge, John, Motion Picture Producer, Paddington, New South Wales .. ...
Mclntyre, Hercules Christian, Managing Director, Universal Film Manufacturing Co. Ltd., Sydney
McLachlan, Alban, Inspector, Education Department, Sydney
McLeish, Robert, President, Victorian Motion Picture Exhibitors’ Association, Melbourne
McQueen, Dr. Ewen Neil, President, Good Film League, Sydney, and Principal, Presbyterian Ladies’ College,
Croydon .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. i.
Mellefont, William Peel, Managing Director, Gladstone Theatres Ltd., Gladstone, Queensland
Mellows, Mrs. Elizabeth, Women Justices’Association of Western Australia, Perth
Moeller, George William, Film Salesman, Sydney
Moorehead, Arthur, Journalist, Melbourne
Moorehouse, Thomas Edward, Australian Association of British Manufacturers, Melbourne
Morris, Mrs. Emma Sarah, Member of State Censor Board, Adelaide
Murphy, Frederick Edwin, Motion Picture Producer, Perth .. .. ..
Murray, John, President, Brisbane Sub-Branch Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League, Brisbane
Muscio, Mrs. Florence Mildred, Good Film League, Sydney
Naylor, Rufus Theodore, Managing Director, Empire Theatres Ltd., Sydney
Nelson, Charles Andrew, Secretary, Mutual Film Exchange Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
Nelson, Frank Lionel, Managing Director, Victory Theatre, St. Hilda, Victoria ..
Nelson, Mrs. Ruby Mary 8., Lessee, Lyric Palace Pictures, Boulder, Western Australia
Newman, Tasman Alban, Theatre Proprietor, Scottsdale, Tasmania
Nicholls, Dr. Brooke, Melbourne .. .. .. ■. • • • •
Nicholson, Rev. Reginald Chapman, Organizing Secretary, Methodist Foreign Missions, Adelaide
Nye, Geofirey, ex-Film Distributor, Sydney
O’Brien, Charles David, Police Magistrate, Bundaberg, Queensland
O’Brien, William, Vice-President, Brisbane Sub-Branch Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League,
Brisbane
O’Reilly, Walter Creswell, Commonwealth Film Censor, Sydney
Osborne, Miss Wendy Macdonald, Motion Picture Actress, Edinburgh
Pashley, Mrs. Jane, Empire Pictures, Rockhampton, Queensland
Patterson, Joseph, Inspector, State Children Department, Rockhampton, Queensland
Pearmine, Alfred Arthur Athol, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Northam, Western Australia
Peverill, Harry Andrew, Manager, Majestic Theatre, Launceston, Tasmania
Phillips, Frederick, Managing Director, Phillips Film Productions Ltd., Sydney
Phillips, Herman Frank, Managing Director, Capitol Theatre, Melbourne
Pierson, Percy Roach, Secretary, Navy League, Melbourne
Player, Dr. Charles Richard, Special Magistrate, Children’s Court, Melbourne
Pottinger, Eldred, Motion Picture Exhibitor, Melbourne
Pratt, Mrs. Ruby Elizabeth, Girls’ Friendly Society, Perth
Rattray, Douglas Garland, Proprietor, Paramount Picture Palace, Bundaberg, Queensland
Reed, Miss Elsie Sleeman, Secretary, Young Women’s Christian Association, Brisbane
Rees, Albert, Brisbane Sub-Branch, Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League, Brisbane
Rees, Mrs. Elizabeth Lawrie, Honorary Secretary, Women’s Christian Temperance Union, Melbourne
Rich, Miss Ruby, President, Federated Women’s Societies of New South Wales, Sydney
Ridley, Walter George, Peoples Pictures Ltd., Mackay, Queensland
Roach, Leonard Nairn, Secretary, British Dominions Films Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
Robinson, Edgar Norman, Publicity Officer, Development and Migration Commission, Melbourne ..
Roos, Leonard Hally, Cameraman, Sydney .. .. .. .. • • • •
Rowlands, Mrs. Vera Leigh, Women’s Non-Political League, Hobart
Rust, Albert Collingbourne, Patron, Parkerville Children’s Home, Parkervilie, Western Australia
Ryalls, John Thomas, ex-Motion Picture Exhibitor, Gladstone, Queensland
Sampson, Richard Stanley, Roads Boards Association, Perth
Sanders, Robert Michael, Journalist, Melbourne
Scott, Robert, Manager, Olympia Theatre, Bundaberg, Queensland
Segerberg, Albert Oscar, Motion Picture Producer, Mosman, New South Wales ..
Shannon, Cecil John, Manager, His Majesty’s Theatre, Hobart
Sharp, Cyril John Crutchfield, Managing Director, Commonwealth Film Laboratories, Redfern, New South Wales
Shell, Harold Edgar, Journalist, Melbourne
Simons, John Joseph, Director, Young Australia League, Perth
Sixsmith, James Ainsworth, Secr“*» r y, Famous Lasky Film Service Ltd., Sydney
Smith, Frederick Thomas, Cowper-streot, Bulimba, Brisbane
Smith, Frederick William, Paramount Theatre, Townsville, Queensland
Smith, Mrs. Ivy Blanche Olive, President, Tasmanian Women’s Graduates Association, Hobart
Smith, Thomas George, Optician, Perth


Solomons, Nathan, Chairman of Directors, Greater Wondergraph Co. Ltd., Adelaide
Steiner, Cecil William, Manager, Palace Theatre, Cairns, Queensland
Stops, Frank Norwood, Police Magistrate, Devonport, Tasmania
Strack, Frederick William, Director, Phillips Film Productions Ltd., Melbourne ..
Stuart, Frederick Edwin, Manager, “ The Photoplayer,” Sydney
Taylor, George Frederick E. A., Manager, Theatre Royal Pictures, Mackay, Queensland
Terry, Michael, Melbourne
Thomas, Lewis, Secretary, Children’s Welfare Department, Melbourne ..
Thomas, Richard Gawyn Lloyd, Journalist, Sydney
Tildesly, Beatrice Maude, Good Film League, Sydney
Trehearn, Frederick William, Moving Picture Operator, Melbourne
Trevelyan, Cecil George Patrick, General Secretary, Musicians’ Union, Melbourne
Turnbull, Ernest J., Production Manager, Herschell’s Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
Turner, Frederick William, ex-Motion Picture Exhibitor, Sydney
Wallace, Professor Robert Strachan, Chief Commonwealth Film Censor, Melbourne
Ward, Frederick, Journalist, Sydney
Wardrop, Gabriel, Head Teacher, State School, Leederville, Western Australia
Waterman, Hugh Mclntyre, Ozone Theatres, Adelaide
Waterworth, Mrs. Edith Alice, Member of State Censor Board, Hobart
Watson, George John, Manager, Greater Imperial Films, Sydney
Watson, Miss Phebe Naomi, Senior Lecturer, Teachers’ College, Adelaide
Watts, Jack, Western Australian Manager for Hoyt’s Theatres Ltd., Perth
Webb, Dunstan Michael, Motion Picture Actor, Sydney
West, Rev. Albert Edward, Congregational Church, Longueville, Sydney
Wheatley, Arnold Augustus, Vice-President, Motion Picture Exhibitors’ Association of Western Australia, Perth
White, Percy Charles, Director, Marchant’s Ltd., Sydney
Whitford, Archer Phillip, Part Proprietor, “ Everyones,” Sydney
Wild, Elton, Secretary, Fox Film Corporation (A/sia) Ltd., Sydney
Wilkinson, Harold Launcelot, Brighton, Victoria
Williamson, William Henry, Parents and Citizens’ Association, Maroubra Junction, New South Wales
Willmont, Charles, Star Court Pictures, Mackay, Queensland
Wilson, George Brandon, Commonwealth Film Censorship Staff, Sydney
Wilson, Sir Reginald Victor, President, Motion Picture Distributors of Australia, Sydney
Winterflood, William John, General Manager, Bifch, Carroll, and Coyle, Brisbane
Wood, John Henderson, Rockhampton, Queensland
Wootton, Horace Edgar, Chairman of Directors, British Dominions Films Pty. Ltd., Melbourne


—
Place.
No. of Sittings.
Federal Capital Territory
Canberra
30
New South Wales
Sydney
55
Victoria
Melbourne ..
26
Queensland..
Brisbane
6
Bundaberg
2
Cairns
1
Gladstone ..
1
Mackay
2
Rockhampton
2
Townsville ..
2
South Australia
Adelaide
5
Western Australia
Perth
6
Kalgoorlie ..
1
Northam
1
Tasmania ..
Hobart
3
Burnie
1
Devonport ..
1
Launceston..
2
147
Two hundred and fifty-three witnesses were examined and a list of witnesses appears on page V.
REPORT.
PART I.—INTRODUCTION.
To His Excellency the Right Honorable John Lawrence, Baron Stonehaven, a
Member of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of
the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Companion of
the Distinguished Service Order, Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in and
over the Commonwealth of Australia.
May it plea.se Your Excellency :
We, the Commissioners appointed by Eoyal Letters Patent to inquire into and report on
the Moving-picture Industry in Australia, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
to inquire particularly into :
(a) the importation, production, distribution, and exhibition of moving-picture films ;
(■ b) the incidence and effect of the Customs Tariff upon the importation of such films
and the sufficiency or otherwise of existing duties of Customs ;
(c) the sufficiency or otherwise of the existing income tax law of the Commonwealth in
relation to persons, firms, and companies engaged in the industry ; and
(d) in connexion with any or all of the foregoing matters, the income, profits,
expenditure and losses of such persons, firms, and companies derived from,
or incurred in connexion with, the industry, and the amount of capital invested
in the industry,
have the honour to report as follows ;
2. The matter referred to us for inquiry and report has involved a long and exhaustive
examination of all phases of the moving-picture industry. Our first meeting was held on the
2nd June, 1927, and the last witness was examined on the 16th February, 1928.
3. Evidence was taken in all of the Capital cities of Australia, and in certain States where
local problems of distribution and exhibition warranted it, some country centres were visited.
Evidence was taken in camera where, in the opinion of your Commissioners, the publication of the
evidence would affect, prejudicially or otherwise, the business relations of the witness.
4. Your Commissioners also held important conferences with the Eight Honorable L. C.
M. S. Amery, M.P., Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs, the Honorable J. G. Latham, C.M.G.,
K.C., M.P., Attorney-General for the Commonwealth, and the Honorable H. E. Pratten, M.P.,
Minister for Trade and Customs.
5. The number of sittings, and the places visited for the purpose of taking evidence are given
hereunder:—


6. Your Commissioners realized that there were persons not connected with the moving
picture industry who were keen observers of the effect of films upon the community, and it was
therefore deemed expedient that an opportunity should be given to any one who so desired to
appear as a witness. As a result, valuable evidence was received from medical practitioners,
police magistrates, justices of the peace, officials of children’s courts, psychologists, journalists,
educationalists, representatives of women’s organizations, officials of the Returned Sailors and
Soldiers’ Imperial League of Australia, &c.
7. We visited many picture theatres, inspected studios and laboratories, and arranged
for screenings of several fihns in order to prosecute our inquiry.
8. In addition to observing the moving-picture industry in Australia, consideration has
been given to proposed and enacted legislation of other countries of the world with a view to
determining the probable effect of such legislation on the industry in Australia.
9. The motion-picture industry in Australia comprises four divisions, viz.;—importation,
distribution, exhibition, and production of cinematograph films, and these divisions have been
dealt with separately in this Report.
10. The cinema occupies a lasting place in the life of the people, and is becoming increasingly
important in its activities in the social, cultural, and moral development of the community. Its
potentialities in indirectly influencing the ideals of its patrons are recognized as almost illimitable.
PART II—IMPORTATION OF CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS.
11. The principal companies engaged in the importation into Australia of cinematograph
films for exhibition purposes are :
Australasian Films Limited.
British Dominions Films Proprietary Limited.
Cinema Art Films Limited.
Famous Lasky Film Service Limited.
First National Pictures (Australasia) Limited.
Fox Film Corporation (Australasia) Limited.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Limited.
Mutual Film Exchange Proprietary Limited.
United Artists (Australasia) Limited.
Universal Film Manufacturing Company (Australasia) Limited.
Some of these companies have contracted to receive the output of certain film-producing companies,
chiefly in the United States of America, and others have established agencies abroad for the
purpose of purchasing films suitable for exhibition to Australian audiences.
12. Films are also sometimes imported singly or in small groups by persons desirous of
profitably releasing the pictures throughout the Commonwealth.
13. The cinematograph films imported by the principal companies enumerated above are
acquired by one of two methods. Either the films are purchased outright, that is, a certain sum
is paid to the seller for the Australian rights, or they are secured on the basis of a percentage
of the gross earnings in Australia. This percentage varies from 50 per cent, to 65 per cent,
according to agreement. Usually five to seven copies of a film are contracted for, and the copies
are then shipped to Australia, together with certain advertising matter which is paid for at a
cost per sheet of printing or set of photographs. After arrival in bond, films and advertising
matter are submitted to the Censor.


Country of Origin.
Films.
Feet (one copy).
Feet (all copies).
1926
.
United States of America
1,555
5,115,133
22,841,912
United Kingdom
146
257,786
664,004
Canada
15
17,080
21,000
Denmark
3
18,309
54,927
France
5
37,236
97,692
Germany
12
73,720
150,450
Italy .. .. ..
1
8,920
62,454
New Zealand
11
9,010
11,710
Australia (returned)
1
1,859
1,859
Unknown
14
33,879
115,700
1,763
5,572,932
24,021,708
1926.
United States of America
1,618
5,085,720
22,004,658
United Kingdom
198
351,456
1,149,143
Belgium
1
5,800
5,800
Canada
49
46,280
66,498
China
3
8,609
8,609
Denmark
2 ■
15,589
23,991
France
4
17,241
44,077
Germany
7
41,214
63,154
India
1
8,000
8,000
Italy
13
77,688
132,714
Japan
3
4,445
4,445
Java
1
3,500
3,500
New Guinea .. ‘ .
1
1,000
1,000
New Zealand
53
40,007
191,977
Pacific Islands
1
4,000
4,000
South Africa..
1
6,353
19,059
Sweden
1
5,298
5,298
Europe
1
5,532
27,660
Unknown
2
5,543
15,729
' 1,960
5,733,275
23,779,212
1927.
United States of America
1,681
5,119,241
24,187,591
United Kingdom
271
492,869
1,904,190
Other Countries
199
585,228
1,366,466
2,151
6,197,338
27,458,247
Country of Origin.
Films.
Feet (one copy).
Feet (all copies).
1925
United States of America
674
4,084,808
18,453,808
United Kingdom
25
165,315
303,289
Other Countries
22
155,652
464,811
721
4,405,775
19,221,908
1926.
United States of America
649
3,823,195
15,586,452
United Kingdom
24
164,245
475,679
Other Countries
24
166,945
324,169
697
4,154,385
16,386,300
1927.
United States of America
621
3,719,590
17,430,869
United Kingdom
39
277,165
832,776
Other Countries
55
446,862
890,267
715
4,443,617
19,153,912
14. The following table shows the importations of cinematograph films into Australia
for the years 1925, 1926, and 1927, and the countries of origin
The above table includes all classes of films, viz., dramatic, industrial, scenic, tropical, educational,
and scientific.
15. Feature or dramatic films are the main part of the imports and these have, during the
years 1925, 1926 and 1927, been imported to the following extent; —


16. Approximately 90 per cent, of the films imported into Australia are produced in the
United States of America, where the moving-picture industry has developed to such an extent
that it has become, according to the United States Department of Commerce, the eighth largest
industry in that country.
- 17. Sydney is the centre of the film import trade. Ninety-eight per cent, of the films
imported enter Australia through that capital, and most of the head offices of the importing
companies are located at that centre.
PART III.—FILM CENSORSHIP.
18. The censorship of cinematograph films imported into Australia is conducted in
pursuance of regulations made under the Customs Act. Provision is contained in the regulations
for the registration of imported films, and for the Censor to approve of the film conditionally or
unconditionally or to reject it. Registration will not be granted in the case of a film which,
in the opinion of the censor —
{a) is blasphemous, indecent or obscene ;
(b) is likely to be injurious to morality, or to encourage or incite to crime ;
(c) is likely to be offensive to the people of any friendly nation ;
(. d ) is likely to be offensive to the people of the British Empire ;or
(e) depicts any matter the exhibition of which is undesirable in the public interest.
19. The importer of a film rnay appeal to the Chief Censor against the decision of a Censor,
and there is a further right of appeal to the Minister for Trade and Customs.
20. In the case of a film which has been rejected, the importer may apply to the Chief
Censor for permission to reconstruct the film and submit it to a Censor for review. A plan
setting out in detail the proposed reconstruction must accompany the application, and, if the
plan is considered satisfactory, reconstruction is carried out by the importer, who enters into a
bond to effect the reconstruction in accordance with the approved plan. The film, with all
plimina.tp.rl matter, is again submitted to the Censor, who issues a certificate of registration if of
the opinion that the film as reconstructed is suitable for public exhibition.
21. The fees payable by importers in connexion with inspection of films are :
Standard film . . ..• .. .. .. 10s. per reel
Review fee ..' .. .. .. .. 20s. ~
. Importers enter into a bond of £5OO to observe the Censorship Regulations.
22. Specimens of advertising matter intended for use in connexion with the exhibition
of a film must, before importation, be deposited with the Censor, and the Censor may approve
of the importation of the advertsing matter subject to the importer giving security that such
advertising matter will not be used in any form other than the form in which it was passed for
importation.
23. Under the Censorship Regulations the permission of the Censor must be obtained before
a film is exported from Australia, and such approval may be conditional or unconditional.
Permission to export will be refused by the Censor in the case of a film which in his opinion—
(a) is blasphemous, indecent or obscene ;
( h) is likely to be injurious to morality, or to encourage or incite to crime ;
(c) is likely to be offensive to the people of any friendly nation ;
\d) is likely to be offensive to the people of the British Empire ; or
(e) depicts any matter the exhibition of which is undesirable in the public interest,
or is likely to prove detrimental or prejudicial to the Commonwealth of
Australia.
24. The censorship was originally conducted by a Board, which appointed deputies who
carried out an initial inspection of the films submitted, and set aside those which were considered
should be viewed by the full Board. A printed synopsis of the story of each film was submitted
to the Board, but it was found that gauging the suitability of a film on the synopsis alone was
unsatisfactory. The Board as it then functioned proved unwieldy, and in 1922 Professor R. S.
Wallace, of the Melbourne University, was appointed to the part-time office of Chief Censor for
the Commonwealth. At the time of his appointment, there were censors in Sydney who were
being paid on a basis of a fee for each reel of film inspected, but on his recommendation a position
of full-time Censor was created at Sydney, and the censorship has since been conducted by the
Chief Censor at Melbourne and the Censor stationed at Sydney.


To—
Films.
Feet (one copy).
Feet (all copies).
New Zealand
157
130,647
144,375
United Kingdom
89
98,319
203,984
United States of America
50
64,795
64,795
Canada
31
21,887
21,887
New Guinea
105
75,753
104,783
Straits Settlements ..
57
55,906
63,069
Dutch East Indies
65
45,234
45,234
Pacific Islands
46
43,138
43,138
Japan
2
1,267
1,827
Noumea
7
700
700
South Africa
1
1,022
1,022
Vancouver ..
1
5,500
5,500
Germany
1
1,000
1,000
Italy
1
1,000
1,000
Total
613
546,168
702,314
25. Most of the censorship is performed at Sydney, which is the receiving port for the bulk
of films imported from abroad. The Censor inspects the feature or dramatic films submitted,
and other films, such as comedies, gazettes, and scenics, are viewed by members of his staff.
When pressure of work prevails, the subordinate members of the staff also censor feature films.
26. The number of films dealt with by the Censor during the years 1925, 1926 and 1927,
and the manner in which they were treated were :
1925. 1926. 1927.
Passed unconditionally .. .. 1,324 .. 1,590 ~ 1,725
Passed after eliminations had been
made .. .. .. 371 .. 283 .. 336
Rejected in first instance .. 68 .. 87 .. 90
Total .. .. 1,763 .. 1,960 .. 2,151
27. The films which are of main concern as regards censorship are the feature or dramatic
films, and for the years 1925, 1926 and 1927, they were dealt with by the Censorship in the following
manner:—
1925. 1926. 1927.
Passed unconditionally .. .. 322 .. 359 .. 319
Passed after eliminations .. 331 .. 251 .. 308
Rejected in first instance .. 68 .. 87 .. 88
Total .. .. .. 721 .. 697 .. 715
28. Taking the number of films rejected in the first instance in order to ascertain to what
extent appeals have been made to the Minister against the Censor’s decision, it is found that the
appeals for the years under review were :
1925. 1926. 1927.
Number of appeals . . .. 8 .. 12 .. 8
Censor’s decision upheld . . 7 .. 8 .. 4
Reconstruction allowed .. .. 1 . . 4 . . 4
29. Films which were inspected by the censorship for export permits numbered 613 for
the year 1927, and were exported to the following countries :
30. In addition to inspecting the films imported, the Censors examine the advertising
matter relating to them in order to see that such matter does not contravene the censorship
requirements. Advertising matter consists of posters, press-books, photographs, and sketches,
and is mostly prepared in the United States of America.
31. While the Censor has control over imported advertising matter, he is not empowered
to deal with matter which is reprinted in Australia. Realizing the weakness of this system,
efforts have been made to secure the assistance of film importers and others in ensuring that
advertising matter which would not be permitted in imported material would not be reprinted
in Australia. Co-operation has, generally, been willingly given, but in a few instances matter


which had been previously excised by the Censor has been reprinted from press books or overseas
trade magazines. Further, advertising matter transmitted from abroad by post is not all subject
to inspection by the Censor. Uniformity and consistency would be more efficiently maintained
were the Censor given authority to control all advertising matter used in connexion with the
exhibition of moving pictures, and your Commissioners are of the opinion that the Censor should
be invested with this power.
32. The Commonwealth Censor is also devoid of authority in the case of pictures produced
in Australia and exhibited in the various States. Films produced in Australia are submitted to
the Censor only when permission to export is desired. It follows, therefore, that in those States
where internal censorship is non-existent, films which would be rejected by the Commonwealth
Censor may be freely screened. This condition is one which your Commissioners consider should
be early remedied by granting the Commonwealth Censor power to control by censorship all films
exhibited in Australia.
33. State Censorship Boards exist in New South Wales, South Australia and Tasmania.
34. The censorship for the State of New South Wales is performed by a board of five
Government officials, including an inspector of police and an officer of the Chief Secretary’s
Department.
35. South Australia has a Board composed of six men and two women, including
the Commissioner of Police, the Chairman of the Central Board of Health, and the Inspector of
Public Entertainments.
36. Tasmania’s Censorship Board is constituted under the Picture Film Censor Board Act,
and consists of representatives of the Department of Health, the Education Department, and the
Police Department. There are two women on the Board.
37. Provision has been made by the Government of the State of Victoria for the censoring
of films for exhibition within that State, but an agreement has been made between the
Commonwealth and the State whereby the censorship for the State may be performed by the
Commonwealth Censorship authority.
38. The State Censor Board in South Australia has, during the past ten years, inspected
27 films, and of that number seven have been prohibited from public screening. Some of this
number have been prevented on the ground of bad cinematography and others for moral reasons.
39. In Tasmania, the State Censor Board meets every Friday to review the films proposed
to be exhibited within that State. It considers the synopsis of the film which is submitted, and
if thought necessary, orders the film to be screened before release.
. 40. Having in view the comparatively few occasions on which the State Censorship Boards
are called into action, it is apparent that the States accept the censorship of the Commonwealth
and regard it in the main as satisfactory and meeting their requirements.
41. Your Commissioners consider that with the elimination of certain weaknesses which
now exist in the censorship system the necessity for the continuance of State Censorship Boards
will pass away. The Commonwealth Censorship does not at present possess the requisite authority
to censor pictures made in Australia and exhibited within the Commonwealth, nor can it deal with
advertising matter printed in Australia. The State Censorship Boards are endued with the
authority necessary to act in the cases cited, and instances have occurred where State Boards
have prohibited, for just reasons, the exhibition within their respective States of Australian-made
pictures which were not subject to Commonwealth censorship. In regard to obscene posters
and other objectionable printed matter relating to films, here again the States have fulfilled a duty
by ordering the withdrawal of the printed matter —a duty which probably would not have become
necessary had the objectionable matter been required by law to be submitted to the Commonwealth
censorship. The existence of two or more censorship authorities with perhaps widely divergent
views and unequal standards creates confusion in the minds of importers, producers and exhibitors
as to what lequirements must be complied with in order to satisfy the plural censorship. Should
the States desire to retain a certain amount of control over motion pictures, provision could be
made for the Commonwealth Appeal Board to review a film on exhibition upon an application
for such review being received from a Minister of a State Government. The people of a State
could then make representations to the State Government in the case of a film on exhibition
considered to be objectionable or undesirable, and the State Government could, if deemed
warranted, make application through one of its Ministers to the Appeal Board for a review of the
film. Such a provision, would, it is considered, afford an adequate measure of protection to a
State.


42. Your Commissioners realize the heavy responsibility that a Censor carries. He is
able, by his judgment, to assist materially in the moulding of the character of a nation, to direct
to a degree the occupational proclivities of the people, and to further the cultural development
of the State. The popularity of the cinema with children and the influence of the film upon
the development of the child-mind add an additional burden to the Censor’s public responsibility.
Accepting this standard of the qualities required of a Censor, we are of the opinion that every
reasonable precaution should be taken to obviate the passing of films which would have harmful
effect upon the picture theatre audiences. The present Sydney Censor, Mr. W. Cresswell O’Reilly
inspects on an average fourteen films each week, and, in addition, supervises the censoring of short
films, such as comedies and gazettes, and advertising matter. The performance by one Censor
of an inspection of some fourteen feature films weekly imposes upon him a task which should be
lightened. It is conceivable that the sense of judgment of a Censor must, after a concentrated
and exhausting period of film inspection, become less keen, and at such a time questionable or
undesirable features in a picture may pass unnoticed. This is one of the reasons which your
Commissioners advance for the release of a few films containing scenes or incidents which might
well have been excised.
43. The number of films of a doubtful nature passed by the Censor, though few in
comparison with the total number registered, yet in themselves are not an inconsiderable quantity,
and in their influence upon the community generally may have a distinctly demoralizing effect.
Their right to be screened appears to be based by the Censor upon the ground that although
such films may contain certain doubtful scenes or features, yet they are at the same time of a
high dramatic and artistic nature.
With this particular phase of the censorship, your Commissioners are not in accord, for
whilst no doubt the suggested grading or marking of films will to a certain extent meet the case,
yet it is considered that films of this description, which undoubtedly pander to a lower moral
sense, are better out of the Commonwealth than within it, particularly if they have to be so
materially censored and cut as to make the story obviously disjointed.
44. Little exception can be taken to the phrasing of sub-titles, but occasionally words are
used which bear a distinctly different interpretation in Australia from that usually taken in the
United States of America, and here would be considered vulgar and offensive. In such cases,
the Censor should not hesitate to excise such objectional words in sub-titles.
45. Considering the large number of films screened yearly in Australia, the instances to
which objections of weak censorship could be made are comparatively few, and it is generally
conceded by the people engaged in the industry and the public that the Commonwealth censorship
has been reasonably and creditably performed. The recommendations regarding the censorship
which are made in this Report will, it is considered, be conducive to greater efficiency and will
reduce to a negligible degree the possibility of such “ leakages ” occurring.
46. The accommodation and equipment of the Sydney censorship office was inspected
by your Commissioners, who are of the opinion that the accommodation is inadequate for the
work performed and moreover does not, for constructional reasons, allow the officers to carry
out their labours under conditions of absolute safety. Most films are highly inflammable, and every
precaution should be taken to avoid the possibility of an outbreak of fire. The inspection of posters
and other advertising matter is now done under unsuitable conditions, and better facilities for
displaying the posters, &c., during inspection could be provided. Also the number of projection-
rooms should be increased to permit of films being inspected concurrently.
47. The standard set up by the Australian censorship is considered a fair one having regard
to the relative dramatic and moral ideals of our community, and much good has been done and
can be done by circulating in film producing countries the requisites of our censorship standard.
The observance by producers of the information published can do much to lessen the labours of
the Censors and to assist their distributors in Australia.
48. A strong advocacy has been made by film importers for the right to censor their films
before submitting them to the Censor. Importers claim that generally they have no choice of
selection in the films exported to them from America. It is not surprising therefore that these
films frequently contain features objectionable to Australian standards. These importers
consider that by exercising pre-censorship they can adapt the films to Australian conditions
and save a considerable amount of the Censor’s time. Pre-censorship was in existence at the
time Professor Wallace was appointed Chief Censor, but it was found that not much use was
made by importers of the right of pre-censorship to improve their films. Further, the private
screening was on many occasions made a trade show. The Censor did not see the original picture
but only the film after eliminations had been made. It frequently happened that criticism
for destruction of the continuity of a film was directed at the Censor, although the elimination
had been done by the importer under his privilege of pre-censorship. Pre-censorship is open
to abuse and trouble, and it is not thought advisable to restore the privilege.


APPEAL BOARD.
49. Under the existing Regulations, importers have a right of appeal to the Minister
for Trade and Customs against the decision of a Censor. Changes in this portfolio occur and admit
of the possibility of the appointment of a Minister with views entirely different from his
predecessor. The attainment of a definite standard of censorship and the continuance of that
standard are desirable, but are difficult under such happenings. Moreover, a Cabinet Minister
has not the same opportunities for gauging the entertainment wants of the public as many private
citizens have. The opinions of a number of people on a film under consideration for rejection
are deemed necessary, and therefore a recommendation is made for the appointment of an Appeal
Board.
Recommendations.
50. Your Commissioners recommend, therefore :
(1) That a Board of Film Censors be established, consisting of three persons, one of
whom shall be a woman.
(2) That each Member of the Censorship Board view films independently, and that
when in doubt, the particular film be referred to the full Board for inspection.
(3) That the remuneration to be paid to Members of the Censorship Board be such as
will adequately cover the heavy responsibility which they will be called upon
to bear.
(4) That the Members of the Censorship Board accept full responsibility for the
censorship of all films.
(5) That the Censorship Board be invested with power to deal with the importation,
production, exhibition, and exportation of all motion-picture films, and also
all illustrated and advertising matter made without and within Australia which
is to be used in connexion with motion-picture films.
(6) That more commodious accommodation be provided for the censorship office in
Sydney, including at least three projection rooms and a room suitably fitted
for the viewing of posters and advertising matter.
(7) That a Censorship Board of Appeal be created, consisting of five Members, one
of whom shall be a woman ; three to form a quorum.
(8) That, as it is desirable that changing and progressive opinion be adequately
represented on the Appeal Board, the Chairman shall be appointed for five
years, and the other Members for a period not exceeding three years.
(9) That the motion-picture industry shall not have representation on the Appeal
Board.
(10) That the Appeal Board be constituted :
(a) To decide appeals made by importers, distributors, or producers against
rejections or cuts made by the censorship ;
(b) To deal with requests for reviews from State Ministers ;
(c) To grant relief from quota requirements ;
( d ) To make recommendations for awards of merit in connexion with Australian
film productions and scenarios ;
(c) To carry out such other duties as may be prescribed.
(11) That the country of origin shall be marked and exhibited on all films.
(12) That, whilst your Commissioners recognize that the local distributing companies
representing the American producers have repeatedly made representations
to America regarding the unsuitable nature of some of the films exported to
Australia from that country, the practice, as revealed by the Censor’s reports,
nevertheless continues. Your Commissioners recommend, therefore, that
it be enforced that any distributing firm which, during the course of one year,
has 25 per cent, of its importations banned, shall be warned for the first offence,
and for any subsequent offence may have its registration cancelled for such
period as may be determined. Your Commissioners realize that the action
which they propose is an indirect method of securing the object desired, viz.,
the prevention of the exportation to Australia of films of an objectionable
or undesirable nature, but something drastic must be done to put an end to
such practices. The producing exporters in the country of origin must be
brought to realize that Australia will not permit the moral tone of its
community to be in any way undermined by these low type films. Presumably
they are sent here because it is profitable for the exporting companies to do so.
To effectively end the practice, it must be made unprofitable. Your
Commissioners cannot conceive of any more effective way than the method
suggested. If these companies will not conform to our Australian standards,
then they must be prevented from forcing upon the Australian public films which
from any aspect are undesirable.


PART IV—DISTRIBUTION OF FILMS.
51. The distribution or the sale of films to exhibitors is mainly done by the importing
companies, although some producers and independent importers effect their own sales.
52. Films are marketed in Australia from the head office or the branch offices of the
distributors or by travelling salesmen representing the distributing firms.
53. The distributing houses hire their films to exhibitors for a certain number of days or
screenings, and contracts for products are made for long periods, short periods or for single pictures.
54. Special features or pictures given exploitation by the distributors are generally hired
to the exhibitor on a percentage basis, the distributor and the exhibitor each receiving a percentage
of the gross takings of the theatre during the run of the picture.
55. Contracts are usually made for a period of twelve months, but one exhibiting company
controlling a large circuit of theatres in the capital cities and the suburban areas has recently
made a three years’ contract with a distributing company. The contract system assures the
distributor of an output for his films, and the possession of several contracts for long periods
enables him to effect savings in distribution expenses.
56. Most of the distributing firms are connected with American producing companies,
and under agreement with those companies transmit to the United States of America weekly
a percentage ranging from 50 to 65 per cent, of the gross earnings for film hire in Australia.
57. Many of the distributing companies representing American interests have distributed
in Australia British-made pictures, and have announced their willingness to handle British and
Australian pictures of a standard which will guarantee reasonable returns.
58. The distributors furnish to the exhibitors printed matter for advertising, posters, and
photographs. The principal publication is a press book or campaign book, which contains
informative details of the film itself, the story, the artists, and gives hints for the conduct of a
successful advertising campaign. Much of the printing and artistic work required is now done
in Australia, and distributors and exhibitors agree that the work compares favorably with the
matter imported.
59. It is abundantly clear to your Commissioners from the evidence adduced that there
is no American combine in existence in Australia exercising a stranglehold over the motion-
picture industry. The connexion of the Australian distributing companies with the companies
in the United States of America is dealt with in another part of this Report. The film
distributors have formed themselves into an organization termed “ The Motion Picture
Distributors of Australia.” This is clearly a trade protective association, and in no way controls
or directs the selling operations of the respective companies. Outside the organization, the
members display the keenest rivalry in theif attempts to place their products.
60. The prices obtained by distributors for their films are not fixed, but vary according
to the ability of the exhibitor to pay and to the distributor’s value of the films to the exhibitor
concerned.
61. Consideration has been given to the establishment of a National Film Exchange, under
Government control, for the distribution of British and Australian pictures, but in the opinion of
your Commissioners it is not deemed warranted.
Recommendations.
62. Your Commissioners recommend :
(1) That all film distributors in Australia shall be registered. A “ distributor ” shall
include any person, firm, or company offering to hire, lease, or sell a motion
picture for exhibition purposes.
(2) That contracts made for distribution of cinematograph films in Australia shall
be limited to a period of twelve months, and that any contracts for a longer
period entered into within three months prior to the publication of this Report
shall not be legal.
(3) That penalties be prescribed for breaches of the recommendation above regarding
contracts.
F. 418.—2


PART V.— EXHIBITORS AND THE EXHIBITION OF FILMS.
63. It is estimated that there are 1,250 pictures theatres in Australia, Many of the
theatres, principally those in the capital cities and the suburban districts, are in the control of
companies, while others are owned or leased by individuals. The approximate amount of
£35,000,000 invested in the picture theatres of the Commonwealth is entirely Australian, and not
one theatre is owned or controlled by foreign interests,
64. The annual attendances at picture shows in Australia are estimated to be 110,000,000.
65. There are several classes of picture theatres. Such theatres as the Prince Edward
in Sydney and the Capitol in Melbourne, which show special films for indefinite periods are termed
M long-run ” theatres. Other theatres change their programmes once, twice, or three times a week.
66. The exhibitors obtain their films from the distributors or individual renters and may
or may not be operating under a contract system. The exhibitor receives the film in his turn from
another exhibitor or direct from the film exchange, and after use returns it to the distributor
or passes it on to another exhibitor, according to arrangement.
67. Exhibitors are charged rental for films on a percentage of the theatre takings, or on an
agreed price for each film, or a price for a term for the whole product of a producing organization.
68. Contracts between the exhibitor and the distributor are usually for a term of twelve
months. Where a contract is made between the exhibitor and distributor for the former to
hire the whole output of a certain producing company for a fixed term, the system is known in
Australia as “ block booking.” Where a contract is. entered into whereby the exhibitor agrees
to take the product of. a certain organization and he is not aware of the pictures he will receive,
owing to the pictures not having been made or the production plans of the producing unit not
having been finalized, such booking is called “ blind booking.”
69. Block booking assures the exhibitor of a continuity in the supply of his film, and he
relies on the standing of the producing unit and the quality of its previous product for the standard
of the film which he will receive under his contract.
70. Blind booking does not allow the exhibitor to estimate the box-office value of the
pictures he will receive, as he is unable to determine the merit of the films. In some cases, he
knows that he will receive a certain number of films with particular artists or stars in them, but
he is unable to assess the value of the pictures to him until they have been made. The exhibitor
who allies himself with blind booking does so on the surmise that the producing company will
maintain its recognized standard of production during the tenure of his contract.
71. Many exhibitors have stated their willingness to continue block and blind booking
if given the right to reject a certain percentage of the films received under the contract. They
find at times that some films are inappropriate for the locality in which the theatre is situated,
or so faulty in production as to mar the exhibitor’s future business if shown.’ The insertion in
the contracts of a clause allowing the exhibitor to reject a percentage of the films without financial
prejudice is recommended, provided that an Australian picture up to the approved standard
shall be screened in place of the film rejected.
72. Some exhibitors contract to the extent of 100 per cent, of their programmes, but most
of them contract for less than 100 per cent., leaving room for any special pictures, or “ floaters ”
as they are called, that may come on to the market.
An exhibitor who has not fully contracted for film supplies has therefore room for the
screening of any British or Australian picture of merit that is not included in his contracts.
73. It is apparent that, in the case of an exhibitor who has fully booked his programmes
for a period with foreign pictures, he has no room to screen any British or Australian pictures
of merit that may be released during the currency of his contract unless he is prepared to place
a contract picture aside and screen the British or Australian picture in its place. He will, of
course, have to pay for the contract picture if screened or not, and all exhibitors are not prepared
to make such a sacrifice. Booking to the extent of 100 per cent., therefore, narrows the market
for British and Australian productions not included in contracts, and it is considered that some
opportunity should be given to an exhibitor to reject a percentage of pictures supplied under his
contract in order to afford him a chance of screening Australian-made films in place of those
rejected.
74. A large majority of the many exhibitors throughout the Commonwealth who appeared
before your Commissioners, were emphatically of the opinion that it would be most difficult
to conduct their businesses as exhibitors and maintain a continuity of programmes, if the contract


system was abolished. In the absence of such a system, they feared the constant search and the
bargaining for the necessary supply of suitable films. Regarding the term of contract, their
opinions varied between three, six, and twelve months, but, generally, the most favored term
was twelve months.
75. The prices paid by exhibitors to film renters for hire of films is a matter of bargaining,
but a variety of conditions bears on the prices obtained. One company in Australia has interests
in 89 theatres, while another is concerned in 42. As the majority of the city and suburban picture
theatres are controlled by the two companies referred to, it is clear that they are in an
advantageous position in regard to price negotiation, recognizing that a city release is important
to the successful distribution of a picture. Competition among exhibitors in the same town
for a particular film or films will, of course, result in a good price being obtained. On the other
hand, in districts where one exhibitor is operating, the lack of competition places him in a
favorable position.
76. In most of the Australian States, picture theatres are licensed under regulation, and
it is not recommended that any action should be taken by the Commonwealth in the direction
of licensing picture theatres.
77. New theatres are under construction in several capital cities, and it is proposed to
furnish and equip these buildings on a lavish scale. The public derives the benefit of such
improvements, and no doubt is appreciative of the efforts made for its comfort.
78. Throughout the Commonwealth exhibitors expressed strong views regarding the
demands made upon them by the Australasian Performing Bight Association Limited, inasmuch
as they state that they are unable, without process of law, to ascertain whether such demands
are legally justifiable. It would appear that this resentment was mainly engendered by the
fact that exhibitors had hitherto been able to perform any music without fee, other than the
purchase of the necessary copies of music. The Association maintains that it has the right to
ask for a royalty for any music for which it holds the copyright which is played at any
performance. Any demands now made for the performing rights, however reasonable they may
appear to the Association, are naturally exorbitant to the exhibitors. The charges operating
at the present time were arrived at by arrangement between the parties concerned at a joint
conference presided over by the Secretary, Prime Minister’s Department. This Association
is a registered company limited by guarantee in New South Wales, and is affiliated with similar
associations in other countries. Its charge for performing fees for copyright music is on the
basis of Id. per 100 seats per performance. As certain aspects of the claims of the Association
are at present being considered by the Courts, your Commissioners therefore consider the matter
as sub judice and do not feel justified in making any recommendations in regard to it.
Recommendations.
79. Your Commissioners recommend —
(1) That all motion picture exhibitors in Australia who exhibit films for profit shall
be registered.
(2) That no exhibitor holding a block booked contract shall be compelled to exhibit
a cinematograph film that affords grounds for racial or religious objection,
provided that the Appeal Board sustains such objection.
(3) That all contracts between distributors and exhibitors or producers for the hiring
or leasing of films shall contain a rejection clause empowering the exhibitor
to reject 5 per cent, of the total films covered by such contracts ; provided
that rejections under this clause shall be only for the purpose of screening
Australian productions and that Australian pictures so screened shall not be
regarded as quota films.
(4) That no motion picture shall be exhibited in Australia unless it shall have been
previously approved by the Commonwealth Censorship Board.
PART VI.—FILM PRODUCTION IN AUSTRALIA.
80. It is generally admitted that Australia with its excellent and varied climatic
conditions, its extended range of scenic beauty, and its geographical situation, is specially suited
for the production of out-of-door motion pictures.
81. Australians have shown their adaptability in the moving picture world, and to-day
there are many of them engaged in the industry in the United States of America who are capably
filling posts as directors, actors, actresses, scenario writers, cameramen, &c. The unlimited scope
afforded by the well-established industry in America has been responsible for their remaining


in that country, and it cannot be expected that many of them would be prepared to sacrifice
highly remunerative positions and return to Australia in order to assist in the establishment
of the industry here unless every encouragement and assistance were given to make production
in Australia a profitable and lasting employment.
82. Many attempts have been made in the past to produce moving pictures in Australia,
and the results have, with a few exceptions, been far from satisfactory, few pictures achieving
success. The first moving picture was produced in Australia about twenty years ago, and since
that time the quality of production has improved and the output has increased. In earlier
pictures, production expenditure was incurred to the extent of a few hundred pounds, but
recently pictures have been made costing between £30,000 and £50,000. It yet remains to be
seen whether the outlay of considerable sums of money in an effort to produce pictures of the
standard of other successful producing countries will be justified by the earnings from the local
and the overseas market.
83. Former production activities have been concentrated on a local market, but it is now
recognized that pictures produced in Australia must be of a standard that will ensure their
acceptance abroad. The average return for an ordinary programme feature film in Australia
is from £2,000 to £4,000, and a producer who desires to make pictures solely for the Australian
market must necessarily limit his expenditure to less than the average return in order to make
his venture a profitable one.
84. At the present time Australasian Films Limited is giving effect to its policy of spending
huge sums on production with a view to making pictures equal or superior to the world’s best
feature films. They have made two pictures, “ For the Term of His Natural Life,” and “ The
Adorable Outcast,” and it is their hope that with the success of these pictures they will firmly
establish themselves as producers of merit. Phillips Film Productions Limited has released
its first picture, “ The Romance of Runnibede,” and anticipates that a profitable overseas market
will be obtained for this film and future productions.
85. The requirements for the successful establishment of production are considered to
be: —
{a) Capital.
(b) Suitable stories.
(c) Equipment and personnel.
(i d ) Sufficient avenues of distribution.
86. Sufficient capital is required by a producer to enable him to ensure a continuity in the
supply of his product. A producer cannot always hope to secure screenings of his picture
immediately it is completed, and it is desirable that he should have sufficient capital to commence
a second production so as to avoid wasteful expenditure in dispersing his organization and re-
assembling it later.
87. The success of a picture depends largely on its story, and the statement was repeatedly
made in evidence that, in Australia, there is a dearth of suitable stories. The acquisition by a
producer of the copyright of a suitable story is a costly proceeding, and this accounts for the
sale by certain British authors of their stories to American producing companies. In America,
the story is considered to represent 10 per cent, of the negative cost. Realizing the importance
of the story to the picture, your Commissioners consider that some encouragement should be
given to induce Australian writers to contribute stories suitable for film adaptation.
88. Equipment required for film production consists of cameras, mechanical apparatus,
electrical appliances, properties, scenery, costumes, &c. The film industry requires assistance
from many trades, and employs, in addition to the artists and the people actually engaged on the
picture, dress designers, tailors, modellers, electricians, scenic artists, carpenters, property men,
musicians, film cutters, developing and printing experts, &c. The equipping of a modern studio
is an expensive undertaking.
89. It has been considered advisable by certain companies which have recently produced
films in Australia to bring from the United States of America film directors and actors and
actresses. The use of such directors and stars enhances the possibility of the film securing a
release in the country from which the artists came. The importation of such people gives
Australians employed on the same picture an opportunity of observing first-hand the methods
of the directors and the artistry of the stars. There is not considered to be in Australia a
sufficient number of cameramen and technicians to supply the requirements of a large moving
picture industry, but there are some expert cameramen and technicians available, and others
could be trained here as circumstances demanded.


90. Producers are of the opinion that an essential to the success of a film is a release of
the picture in a capital city. Such a release, in addition to representing 15 to 20 per cent, of the
«fl.mings of the film, grants it a measure of publicity which could not be otherwise gained.
Statements have been made that Australian productions have failed to secure adequate screenings,
but these statements are clearly disproved by the evidence. As an instance, Union Theatres
Limited, which controls or has interests in most of the city theatres in Australia, has, over a
period of years, screened 90 per cent, of the pictures produced in Australia, although recognizing
that the merit of some of them did not warrant their appearance. Country exhibitors generally
have shown that they have screened Australian pictures in preference to the products of other
countries, though the rental of the Australian picture has been considerably more than a foreign
picture of a higher standard. The’desire of exhibitors to help Australian producers has been
amply demonstrated, and they have expressed their willingness to continue their assistance,
provided the films reach a reasonable standard of quality.
91. The production of a successful picture is becoming a matter of expense recoverable
by larger sales, and it is considered necessary that, in order to establish the industry in Australia
on a firm footing and to ensure adequate financial returns, an international market must be
secured. Few Australian films up to the present have been box-office successes overseas, but
“ The Sentimental Bloke,” which was produced by Mr. Raymond Longford, was a big attraction
in England, although in America it failed because of its particularly Australian flavour.
Evidence has been given that in the United States of America the theatres there find it difficult
to obtain sufficient pictures of the proper standard, and, consequently, distributors in that
country are eager to obtain films of good quality from other countries. Overtures have been made
by American distributing corporations to Australian producers for the screening rights in America
of recently-made Australian pictures, and there is every reason to believe that such pictures if
shown in that country will be successful. Your Commissioners are of the opinion, therefore,
that any attempt made by Australian producers to secure an American market for their films
should be encouraged. In Great Britain, Australian-made films will nearly all come within
the class of films to be shown under the quota system, and it is not expected that any difficulty
will be encountered in disposing of pictures of merit there.
92. In connexion with the fostering of the moving picture industry in Australia,
consideration must be given to the type of film on which attention should be concentrated. The
entertainment demand of the public is met by satisfying popular taste, which is for the dramatic
film. Historical events could, of course, be interwoven in dramatic picturizations, and places
of scenic beauty could be used for locations. The topical news film depicting happenings in
Australia is already being screened in other countries and creating continuous and increasing
interest in our country, but the demand for films of this type is limited, and an extension of
production of such films would be an unappreciable factor in the growth of the moving picture
industry in Australia. It would seem, therefore, that the dramatic or feature film would be the
most successful, but it is imperative that the picture must attain a standard of merit at least
as high as the average standard of foreign productions, and it should be produced with a view
to overseas screenings. Otherwise satisfactory financial returns from the film cannot be expected.
93. Your Commissioners are of the opinion that some assistance should be given in order
to stimulate the production of motion pictures in Australia and to maintain a standard of merit,
and witnesses have been exhaustively examined in an endeavour to ascertain the best means
by which such assistance could be given.
94. In other parts of the British Empire, a system whereby a certain percentage of British-
made films must be screened annually has been introduced as a means to increase production.
The establishment of this quota system ensures the absorption of a given number of locally-
produced films, and, for this reason, may be considered the most advantageous method of
stimulating film production.
95. The establishment of a national motion picture studio for the use of producers was
suggested as a means of encouraging production. The equipping of an up-to-date studio is a
very costly item, and small producers would be materially assisted if they had at their disposal
for a nominal rental a studio equipped and maintained by the Government. Wherever located,
a national studio would not suit the needs of all producers. Canberra was suggested as an ideal
situation, but the placing of a national studio in such a centre would give the producers of the
eastern States a decided advantage over those of, say, Western Australia. Further, the question
of transport of artists, &c., would entail heavy expenditure by the distant producer, and difficulty
would be experienced in obtaining suitable extras or “ supers.” A substantial offer was made by
one witness, who submitted a scheme for the establishment of two national studios, one in Sydney
and the other in Melbourne, and agreed to contribute £lOO,OOO conditional on the Commonwealth


Government supplying a similar amount. The details of the scheme set out the method of
conducting the studios and the reimbursement of expenses. Careful consideration has been
given to the various proposals for national studios, but as national studios established at one
centre, or, perhaps two centres, would not give the same degree of assistance to all producers,
and, as it is not deemed advisable at this stage to establish national studios in all States, the
adoption of the scheme cannot be recommended.
96. The enforcement of a tax on each reel of film imported and screened, the payment
of a bounty or subsidy, the importation of negative films instead of positive films as at present,
and the establishment of Chairs of Cinematography and allied subjects at Universities in
Australia and a Commonwealth grant to assist in the foundation of such Chairs, were other means
suggested for the development of .the industry; but, upon inquiry, it was found that no substantial
assistance would be given to the industry by any of the methods mentioned.
97. The attainment of a standard of production is paramount, and your Commissioners
are of the opinion that that standard can be best achieved and the industry most helpfully
assisted by awards of merit and the introduction of a quota system, and recommendations are
made accordingly.
98. A large measure of assistance has been given to motion picture producers in Great
Britain and elsewhere by Governments, and it is likely that, as motion picture production
develops in Australia, application will be made to the Commonwealth Government for the use,
in connexion with motion pictures, of defence and other governmental material. Your
Commissioners would suggest that any request for such assistance, if reasonable and practicable,
should be favorably considered.
Recommendations.
99. Your Commissioners recommend—
(l) That, subject to recommendations by the Appeal Board—
(а) Awards of Merit shall be made each year for the best films produced in
Australia which will build up national sentiment, will be of high moral
standard, contain humor, but not containing propaganda which might
be prejudicial to international relations or likely to promote ill-feeling
with other countries.
(б) The Awards shall be, in order of merit—first, £5,000 ; second, £2,500 ;
third, £1,500.
(c) An Award of Merit of £5OO be given for the best film scenario each year,
written in Australia by a resident Australian citizen, provided that
such scenario is up to a standard approved by the Appeal Board.
(d) An Award of Merit of £5OO be given each year under similar conditions
for the best film scenario containing Australian sentiment.
(2) That the Awards recommended above be made during the currency of the quota
system, viz., three years, and be open to extension, if necessary.
(3) That the Appeal Board may withhold a recommendation for an Award of Merit
for any year should productions or scenarios submitted not attain the requisite
merit deemed necessary by the Appeal Board to enable it to make such
recommendation.
PART VII.—THE QUOTA SYSTEM.
100. The best method of ensuring the exhibition of Australian-produced films is by the
introduction of a quota system whereby all exhibitors must screen a certain number or a
percentage of such films in each year, but your Commissioners realize the difficulties and dangers
of the application of such a system. The position must be viewed from many angles, such as the
merit of past and present Australian productions, the reception given to same by the public,
the possible merit of future productions and the quantity thereof, whilst having in mind, by way
of comparison, the stupendous nature of American film production and the great sums of money
entailed, and, further, the important viewpoint of what effect the establishment of a purely
Australian quota might have upon the existence and prosperity of the 1,250 picture theatres
of the Commonwealth, which represent an investment of approximately £25,000,000 by the
Australian public and give employment to 20,000 people. Such figures make the exhibiting
end of the industry of paramount importance as compared with the production of pictures in
this country.


101. The adoption of any method of stimulating production which would have the effect
of injuring for any length of time the vast number of showmen throughout Australia, causing
them financial loss, and even, in many cases, perhaps driving them out of business altogether,
is unthinkable. In this connexion, it must not be forgotten that some 95 per cent, of the films
shown in Australian theatres to-day are produced in foreign countries, and, with the exception
of 2or 3 per cent., these are of American origin. These pictures are of a very high standard
of production generally, and the Australian public taste will continue to demand this high
standard. To force therefore upon the exhibitors the screening of pictures merely because they
are Australian made, and without regard to the quality of such films, would, by militating against
attendances, undoubtedly involve showmen in financial loss, and to fix the proportion of the quota
at a point where the production is not high ehough to reach it would be to render the whole
scheme farcical. Many theatres have already shown the whole of the Australian-made films
which are available to-day for screening, while many others have shown most of them. It would
be manifestly unwise to place showmen in the position of having again to screen films which,
because of previous screenings in that particular district, have largely lost their show value.
For this reason, and because of the extremely limited nature ’of the supply of Australian films,
both actual and prospective, for some considerable time, your Commissioners are of the opinion
that the adoption of a quota for purely Australian productions cannot be recommended.
102. The evidence of those controlling the two largest picture theatre circuits in the
Commonwealth, and amongst which are included the main first-release theatres, was emphatically
against the quota, and that, if it were established, they would no doubt produce their own quota
pictures for their own circuit of theatres. Should this latter position arise, it would defeat the
very object aimed at by other producer witnesses in advocating an Australian quota, in that
it would largely centralize Australian production in the hands of two companies who control
the main theatres, with little or no encouragement to the smaller producer. The result would be
that other producers would find it almost impossible to secure the city releases so essential to
the successful exploitation of any film.
103. Mr. Raymond Longford, an Australian who has directed the production of the largest
number of Australian productions, gave lengthy evidence before your Commissioners expounding
various methods of encouragement for production of films in the Commonwealth, and finally
was of opinion that the most effective method would be the establishment in the Commonwealth
of an Empire quota, and that he was confident that Australian production could successfully
compete for inclusion within this quota with the best British productions, without the imposition
of a separate Australian film quota.
104. After carefully weighing the voluminous evidence on this point, and viewing the matter
from every possible angle, your Commissioners are of the opinion/that an Empire
quota would best meet the case. Australian exhibitors would thereby have a much wider choice
of pictures to fulfil quota requirements than would be the case if they had to comply with a
separate Australian quota within an Empire quota. One of your Commissioners, Senator J.
Grant, whilst agreeing with an Empire quota, is, however, of the opinion that included in such
quota there must be, for the adequate protection and encouragement of the moving-picture
industry in Australia, an expanding or flexible Australian quota.
106. It is not desired by the establishment of an Empire quota system to guarantee the
release of every picture which may be produced within the Empire. A standard of quality will
need to be set, so that the quota system will not be a medium for the release of films of mediocre
quality. One benefit of the quota system will then be that pictures up to the standard will
have every opportunity of securing a release. The provision for the screening of a particular
number of Empire pictures should give an effective distribution to Australian pictures of the
required standard.
106. The extent to which the quota should be applied, is a matter which has been carefully
considered. Picture theatres in Australia vary considerably in the number of films screened
weekly. First, there are the “ long-run ” theatres of the city, where it is the practice to exhibit
the same pictures for an extended period. Then there are city theatres with a weekly change
of programme, the suburban and some country theatres with a bi-weekly change, country
theatres with thrice-weekly changes, and the distant country centres with one-night-a-week
shows. The number of pictures required per year and the footage of film vary with the class
of theatre. Two feature films are generally included in every programme, and on the average
14,000 feet of film are screened at every performance. As the number of programme changes
each week varies, so the number of feature films varies. Where two features are required weekly
in a city theatre, four would be necessary for a suburban or country theatre with a bi-weekly


change of programme. It is considered that an equitable quota can only be applied on a
percentage of the number of feature films screened during the year, and your Commissioners
recommend the adoption of a quota on this basis.
To enable the Commonwealth to enforce the provisions of the quota, it will be necessary
for the Commonwealth to obtain specific powers from the States, as recommended in paragraph
209 of this Report.
107. The quota system should be enforced for a period of three j'ears, and should then be
reviewed. At the end of that time, definite information should be available as to the stability
of the moving picture industry in the British Empire, and as to the justification for further
assistance by the continuance of a quota system in Australia.
108. The quota period is recommended to commence on the Ist January, 1929. From
information supplied, it is considered that there will be sufficient British and Australian films
of a suitable standard available to satisfy quota requirements for the ensuing twelve months.
109. The object of the quota system is to develop and increase motion picture production,
and to provide releases, and it is therefore considered that dramatic or feature films should be
the only class included in the quota.
110. When there are not sufficient quota pictures of merit available for exhibitors, some
adjustment is necessary, and it is proposed to overcome a difficulty of this nature by authorizing
the Appeal Board to grant relief to the exhibitors concerned until such time as suitable films are
available.
111. The enforcement of a screening of a certain number of Empire films during a year
will increase the demand for such films, and it will be necessary to prevent exploitation of the
exhibitors by the charging of exorbitant rentals for the quota films.
112. Several exhibitors have screened every British and Australian picture of merit and
sometimes, for sentimental and patriotic reasons, have shown Australian pictures of a poor
standard. The general experience has been that the prices charged for British and Australian
pictures were considerably higher than for American films of a better standard. Many
exhibitors have screened during a year considerably more Empire films than the number proposed
to be enforced by the quota.
Many exhibitors have openly expressed their desire to assist the Australian industry, and
it is unlikely that they will in future, be materially affected to any appreciable extent by the
enforcement of a small quota of Empire pictures.
113. It would, of course, be unjust to enforce exhibitors to screen quota pictures of inferior
quality, and it is recommended that the Appeal Board shall decide whether films are, for quota
purposes, up to the required standard.
114. The stabilization of the moving picture industry in Australia should be effected by
the encouragement given by the imposition of a quota system, and the indications are that
financial assistance to producing companies in Australia will be forthcoming immediately upon the
introduction of a quota.
Recommendations.
115. Your Commissioners recommend—
(l) That, subject to reciprocal arrangements being entered into by the Commonwealth
Government with other parts of the Empire, an Empire quota be introduced.
(2) (a) That, in every picture theatre in Australia, other than “ long-run ”
theatres, there shall be screened during the first year of the quota
period, feature films of Empire origin to the extent of -5 per cent, of
the total number of feature films exhibited in such theatre during
the year, with a minimum of ten such feature films.
( h ) That the quota of feature films of Empire origin for the second year shall
be 10 per cent., and 15 per cent, for the third year.
(3) That in the case of “ long-run ” theatres, there shall be screened each year during
the quota period a number of feature films of Empire origin at least equal to
5 per cent, of the average number of feature films usually screened in such
theatre each year, with a minimum of one.
(4) That quota films be’ feature films only, and shall not include news gazettes, scenic
pictures, advertisements, educational films, industrial films, or scientific films.
(5) That the quota be in force for three years, subject to review before the expiration
of that period. If warranted, the term should be extended.
(6) That, subject to the fulfilment of the condition of Recommendation No. 1 above,
the first quota year shall commence on the Ist January, 1929.


(7) That every film which it is desired to be included in the quota shall first be
submitted to the Appeal Board for determination as to whether the film is
of the required standard of merit.
(8) That films which have been recognized as quota films in any part of the British
Empire with which a reciprocal arrangement has been made may, subject to
approval by the Appeal Board, be registered in Australia as quota films
upon production of satisfactory evidence that they have been so recognized.
(9) That a film shall be deemed to be a film of Empire origin if, but not unless, it
complies with all the following requirements :
(а) It must have been made by a person who was at the time the film was
made a British subject, or by two or more persons each of whom was
a British subject, or by a company constituted under the laws of any
part of the British Empire, the majority of the directors of which
are British subjects;
(б) The studio scenes must have been photographed in a studio in the British
Empire;
(c) The author of the scenario must have been a British subject at the time
the film was made ;
(d) Not less than 75 per cent, of the salaries, wages and payments
specifically paid for labour and services in the making of the film
(exclusive of payments in respect of copyright and of the salary or
payments to one foreign actor or actress or director, but inclusive
of the payments to the author of the scenario) has been paid to natural-
born or naturalised British subjects, provided that the Appeal
Board may relax this requirement in any case where it is
satisfied that the maker had taken all reasonable steps to secure
compliance with the requirement, and that his failure to comply
therewith was occasioned by exceptional circumstances beyond his
control. The requirement contained herein shall not apply to films
completed before the 31st December, 1928.
GO) That upon the application of an exhibitor, a remission certificate from compliance
with the quota provisions be issued by the Appeal Board in the following cases
if satisfied after inquiry that the issue of such a certificate is warranted :
(а) Where the price asked of an exhibitor for a quota film is not fair and
reasonable, and other quota films are not available at a reasonable
price ;
(б) Where there is an insufficiency of quota films of the required standard ;
(c) Where a competitor in the same locality has already screened or is
screening the available quota films ;
(d) Wfiere it has not been commercially practicable for the exhibitor to
comply with the quota requirements.
PART VIII.—THE CINEMA AND THE COMMUNITY.
116. The cinema theatre is primarily a place of entertainment, but can be profitably used
for educational purposes and subtly or openly availed of for propaganda. The film can be made
the medium for picturisation of every expression of mood, sense, and desire.
117. The cinematograph picture is generally regarded by adults as merely a presentation
of a form of entertainment, and most of them look upon the cinema as a pleasant relaxation, the
result to them of their visits being more beneficial than harmful. The theatres are usually subject
to the regulations of the Health Department of the State and are properly controlled.
118. Sir James Barrett, a vice-president of the Health Association of Australia, stated that
he had never seen the slightest indication that films prejudicially affect the eyesight, and that
as far as he had observed no organic disease of the eyes is produced by the films
119. In New South Wales, there exists an association of representative citizens called
The Good Film League. This League’s objects are :
(a) To encourage the presentation under good conditions of moving pictures ;
(b) To secure adequate censorship of all advertisements ;
(c) To extend the use, under healthy conditions, oi moving pictures as a factor in
education in the schools of New South Wales.
The League in carrying out its objects has performed useful public service, and is generally able
to obtain and present the public view-point in regard to motion pictures. The formation of similar
public bodies in other States would be helpful to the industry and to the public generally.


120. The evidence tendered does not support the oft-repeated statement regarding the
presence of anti-British propaganda in films screened in Australia and produced in the United
States of America. As 90 per cent, of the films shown in Australia are from the United States and
are produced primarily for screening in that country and oidy secondly for world distribution,
it would be but natural that they should be pro-American, but this fact cannot be termed anti-
British, saving certain films which distort historical events and make them appear anti-British.
THE FILM AND NATIVE RACES.
121. With native races the same equanimity is not preserved, vivid and lasting impressions
are retained by the natives, and frequently their imagination is riotously aroused. The film
exerts a powerful influence over the natives and could by design instil into their minds dangerous
and sinister motives. The possibility of such a happening it is considered should not be allowed
to remain.
Recommendation.
122. Your Commissioners recommend
That no moving picture film shall be screened before audiences of aboriginals or natives
of the Mandated Territories unless such film has been passed by the Censorship
Board as suitable for such exhibition.
CHILDREN.
123. There is considerable controversy upon the effect of the cinema upon the child, and
your Commissioners have examined educationalists, psychologists, medical practitioners, police
officers, and parents with a view to ascertaining the effect and the extent of the power of the film
upon juveniles.
124. The picture theatre seems to have become part of the fife of the child, and therefore
every possible precaution should be taken to ensure that the child will derive nothing but good
entertainment from the picture screen.
125. Many children are susceptible to whatever influence visual entertainment might
exert, but children with such proclivities would be better safeguarded by parental control.
12d. Some exhibitors realize the importance, both as an entertainment and as an education,
of the moving picture to children, and, in a number of cinemas, matinees are given at which pictures
are shown particularly suitable for children. Unfortunately, owing very often to the expense
and difficulty of obtaining films especially suitable for children’s matinees, it frequently happens
that the pictures shown to the children in the afternoons are the same films as are shown at the
ordinary evening screening. Many of these films, dealing as they do with sex problems and with
excesses of one kind or another, can by accustoming the child mind to such matters exercise
to a greater or lesser degree a certain demoralizing influence. A great deal of evidence in support
of these views was placed before your Commissioners and a widespread feeling of uneasiness was
manifested as to the possible cumulative effect of such exhibitions upon future generations.
The showmen are keenly appreciative of the box-office value of children patrons and are
only too eager to introduce features likely to increase the attendances at matinees.
127. The frequent attendance of children at night picture performances is found by school
teachers to militate against their educational progress, for it is noticed on the days following
nightly picture-show attendances that the children are listless, inattentive, and unable to
concentrate. The continuance of such a state of affairs is not desired, but a difficulty exists in
finding a remedy without unduly enforcing haT-dsldp.
128. It has been stated that the misspellings and the slang used in sub-titles of pictures are
being absorbed by children, and while it is apparent that frequently any alteration of the wording
of a title by the removal of slang would distort the character represented, it is thought that the
Censorship should not allow misspellings, Americanised spellings, or words offensive to Australians,
although inoffensive in the country producing the film, to remain in sub-titles.
129. To prohibit the attendance of children from night shows would be too strict, for
as has been repeatedly stated in evidence the picture shows are more pleasant than their home
surroundings in many cases. In Western Australia, Friday night is observed as a special children’s
night and pictures suitable for exhibition to children are shown. The children do not attend
school on the following day and therefore their education is not affected. This appears to be one
solution of. the problem.


130. The relationship between the film and juvenile crime has been exhaustively inquired
into. Having in mind the enormous annual attendances of children at picture shows and the
number of films which they view, the offences of children which could be directly traced to the
cinema as the cause are negligible. In Queensland, it was stated that 10 per cent, of the juvenile
crime in that State was due, indirectly or directly, to the influence of the cinema. The witness
admitted, however, that it was difficult to determine to what extent the cinema was responsible,
and to decide what bearing heredity, environment, and parental control had on the matter. In
Victoria, the opinion of Dr. Chas. Player, who has been associated with the Children’s Court for
seventeen years, was that after a careful study he had come to the conclusion that the evil effects
of the film upon children had been very much exaggerated and that the number of cases in
which crime may be attributable directly to the film is negligible. In South Australia and Western
Australia, a very small percentage of juvenile crime could be traced directly to the cinema. In
New South Wales and Tasmania no evidence was tendered to show that the film was responsible
for any increase in juvenile crime.
131. Visual memory is the strongest, and little children are at the most impressionable
age for the storing up of mind pictures. Dr. Gertrude Halley, Principal Medical Officer of the
South Australian Education Department, said that children who attend cinemas frequently
are noticed to be pale and sleepy, to lack power of concentration, and sometimes are nervous
and highly strung. The witness said that seats placed close to the screen caused a strain in the
ocular muscles, and that children with defective eyesight were liable to have their defects increased.
The strain was also caused by faulty projection or by a badly scratched film. The witness
considered that an improvement could be effected in conditions by conducting children’s
performances from 7 p.m. to 8 p.m., thus leaving them to enjoy Saturday afternoons out of doors.
The construction of more open-air picture shows, the witness thought, would be beneficial.
132. Your Commissioners are of the opinion that the audience, and specially the young,
should not be seated too close to the screen or at the outer angle of same.
133. Witnesses are agreed that there should be some regulation of the films screened
before children. It is recognized that the enforcement of a law prohibiting children from attending
shows at night would be unjust. likewise, a regulation prohibiting the admission of children to
shows at night unless accompanied by an adult would prove a hardship.
134. The absolute prohibition of the admission of children under the age of, say, ten years
would re-act on some parents who look on a cinematograph entertainment as a pleasant relaxation
and who cannot, for domestic reasons, leave their children at home or in charge of others.
Further, it is realized that children attending picture theatres with their parents are under more
control than those unattended.
135. Another method of restriction considered was that of preventing the attendance of
children between the ages of 10 and 14 unless accompanied by an adult. A serious objection
to this proposal is that it would lead to the solicitation by children of adults to escort them into
the theatre.
136. The point up to which the interest of a child is maintained at a picture show depends
upon the class of entertainment and the temperament of the viewer. The mind of a child who
is viewing a programme of ordinary length cannot absorb all of the incidents and happenings
shown on the screen during the two and a half hours taken up by the average programme. The
shortening of the programme at children’s performances and matinees would relieve certain
subsequent effects, such as listlessness and lack of concentration, which are now noticeable.
137. The evidence tendered to the Commission proves that any harm which the cinema
might cause to children can be reduced to a negligible minimum by stricter parental control,
It is thought that every assistance should be given to enable parents to judge whether the pictures
being screened at the theatre which the children visit are suitable for them to see, and, with
this object, proposals for the marking of films to indicate those suitable for children have been
recommended. With pictures graded as recommended, adults will also be guided in their choice
films, but at the same time it is considered that there should be no relaxation of the present
standard of censorship in regard to pictures for adults.
Recommendations.
138. Your Commissioners recommend :
(1) That all motion picture films shall be graded by the Censorship Board, and marked
“ Suitable for Universal Exhibition ” when considered by the Board to be so.
Films shall not be marked in any other way except with the approval of the
Censorship Board. “ Universal ” shall mean that the films are suitable for
exhibition to children as well as to adults.


(2) That the marking of films “ For Adults Only ” shall be restricted to educational,
scientific, and medical films, such marking to be made by the Censorship
Board. No exhibitor shall advertise a film as “ For Adults Only ” unless such
film has been so marked by the Censorship Board.
(3) No film other than those marked “ Suitable for Universal Exhibition ” shall be
shown at matinees ; provided that the Appeal Board may grant a remission
certificate in the case of long-run theatres in respect of matinees, where the
picture on exhibition is not marked for universal exhibition.
EDUCATIONAL FILMS.
139. The value of educational films is freely admitted, though unfortunately such pictures
are not appreciated by the majority of audiences and consequently are not attractions which
show good box-office receipts.
140. Picture show audiences attend the theatres to be amused or entertained, and when
any considerable proportion of educational pictures is screened a resentment is sometimes
felt at what many of them think is an unwarranted attempt to improve their knowledge. To
placate the feelings of such sections of audiences a judicious and seemly handling of educational
films is required. An indiscriminate showing of long films of this type may disrupt the feelings
of the patrons, and the exhibitor experiencing this result will thereafter entirely eliminate such
pictures from his programmes. Therefore educational and scientific pictures should be made
up of short films and should leave the audience with a desire to see more.
141. The cinema as an educational factor can be made good use of. In certain States
in Australia the cinema has been placed in schools and pictures are shown as part of the routine
school programme. No attempt has been made to supplant oral teaching with the film but the
usefulness of the cinematograph as an adjunct to present educational methods has been
established. The cinematograph is being specially adapted to give assistance in the teaching
of certain educational subjects. Demonstrations by slow motion pictures are more vivid than
by any other method.
142. In certain schools in New South Wales the cinema is regularly used for instructional
purposes, and the success achieved there should lead to an extension of the system.
143. In the United States of America, extensive use is made of educational films for
instructive and recreative purposes, and the educational side of the film industry is on a highly
organized basis. Numerous films on scientific and general educational subjects are available,
and lists of the films are widely distributed. Films are hired out at small fees, and are
systematically delivered and collected.
144. At least one distributing firm in Australia, viz. : —Australasian Films Ltd., has a
special section of its business dealing with educational films and has given valuable assistance
to schools, institutions, and theatres willing to screen and desirous of showing educational subjects.
Herschell’s Pty. Ltd., of Melbourne, is also a firm which has made educational films and given
exhibitions of such films in schools and other places.
145. Many educational films, such as studies of fauna, have been made in Australia and these
pictures when exhibited abroad have been enthusiastically received.
146. Realizing the potentialities of the cinema as an adjunct to the educational system,
your Commissioners consider that attempts to extend its present use are worthy of encouragement.
Recommendation.
147. Your Commissioners recommend :
That the States recognizing the advantage to be gained by the use of the cinematograph
as an adjunct to educational methods should be assisted in every possible way
by the Commonwealth.
PART IX.—FINANCIAL ASPECTS.
148. Examinations were made of the financial relations between the American and
Australian distributing companies and of several exhibitors, and, although the evidence concerning
finance was generally given in camera, your Commissioners desire to make the following
observations. These comments do not make public any information which your Commissioners
consider should for business reasons remain confidential.
149. Taking first of all the distributing companies, most of them operate on an agreement
with an American Corporation, having its head-quarters in America. By these agreements the
Australian companies acquire the exclusive right to handle in Australia the films of the American
Company. The agreements provide that a certain percentage of the earnings are to go to the


credit of the American Company, the balance to be retained in Australia. This percentage
varies, 50 per cent, to 65 per cent, being transmitted to America. Against America’s share, in
some cases the duty paid in Australia and the censorship charges are debited. The 35 per cent,
to 50 per cent, retained in Australia bears the cost of distribution, and if there is any surplus
after meeting these costs, such surplus represents profit to the Australian Company and it is upon
this profit that income tax is paid.
150. In considering the profit of the Australian Company, the question arises whether
this earning of profit out of the percentage retained is the main object of the Company in Australia
or whether, when a certain turnover is reached and the American concern receives its agreed
allotment, the enterprise may be considered to have achieved its purpose. This leads to the
question of the proportion of the earnings retained in relation to the costs of carrying on the
exchange. It is difficult to make a definite statement on this subject as some of the Companies
are building up their organizations, and expenditure is abnormal; again, extraordinary expenditure,
such as the provision of new premises, has been incurred in recent years. The different class of
picture handled by the various film exchanges also has its influence.
151. Though good business was done in certain instances, no profit was shown until the
turnover figure reached a substantial amount, and, even where a profit appeared, it was not a very
large one.
162. The opinion is formed, however, that there is very little margin for profit between
distribution expenses and the percentage of rentals, even when the business shows every indication
of being in a flourishing condition.
163. The companies are conducted on very efficient lines. Certain salaries are high,
but are not disproportionate to the amount of the turnover, and are, no doubt, commensurate
with the ability of the recipients.
154. Most of the registered capital of the companies is held in America, and in the majority
of instances the share capital of the Australian Company has little or no bearing upon its operations.
The working capital is provided by .America, and the organization of the Australian Companies
is such that no capital need be provided in Australia at all. The working capital is generally
the supply of film.
155. The directors have been appointed apparently with the object of complying with the
requirements of Australian company law, and, generally speaking, they are employees of the
company or lawyers receiving no fees in respect of their directorship.
156. The officers and directors have no pecuniary interest in the profits, that is, their
salaries are fixed and commissions where paid are based on turnover. Their interest therefore lies
rather in maintaining a large turnover than in securing a surplus over expenses on the percentage
of rentals retained.
157. The venture is that of the American Company. The risk of starting the enterprise
is all theirs, and losses incurred or any deficiencies in the forwarding of the stated allotments
are on their account. Even though the financial books show that the Australian Company may
owe its American supplier of films large sums, no security is held and the meeting of the debt is
altogether dependent upon the receipts in Australia over and above the expenditure.
158. Full details of all expenditure and receipts are forwarded regularly to America. This
system is that of head office and branch rather than that of the seller and the purchaser of a
marketable product.
159. Your Commissioners are of the opinion that most of these Companies are virtually
distributing branches of American concerns.
160. The Australian exchanges under review assume that the cost price to them of the
films is that proportion of the rentals which is due to America under their agreements. The
earning capacity of different films in relation to the cost of production varies, and it is evident
that the remittance of a regular proportion of earnings must result in overpayments and
underpayments for the individual pictures.
161. It would seem that if the Australian business has no influence upon the original cost
of production, it would be a paying proposition to send the films to Australia as long as a surplus
over the positive cost was shown —even though, say, only 25 per cent, of rentals was returned.
That is, it does not necessarily follow that America should receive 50 per cent, to 65 per cent, of
rentals in order to justify the continuance of the Company in Australia. A picture produced in
America, after being exhibited there for twelve months, might return the full cost of production,
plus a margin of profit. If it be then decided to send that picture to Australia, the sending would


oe justified if a surplus of receipts over cost of printing the extra positives were obtained. It
seems quite reasonable, however, that the films exported to Australia should bear their share
of the original cost of production as well as other expenses directly chargeable. Then the
difference between the cost of production as far as Australia is concerned and the credit to America
constitutes profit or loss. The purchase by the American Company of pictures from other
producing companies in order to maintain its supplies to Australia must also be considered before
arriving at conclusions on this aspect.
162. Where films are purchased outright by an Australian Company no difficulty is
experienced in arriving at their cost value as landed in Australia. The relation of film purchases
to rentals can be examined and the profit or loss ascertained.
163. Your Commissioners are of the opinion that profits are included in the credits to
the American Companies, and consequently in the remittances to America, and that these profits
are earned in Australia.
164. The remittances from Australia to America for film hire for the years ended June,
1926, and June, 1927, were £771,000 and £740,000 respectively.
165. The control of picture theatres in Australia is solely Australian and no foreign capital
is employed. It is estimated that the sum of £25,000,000 is invested in the industry in Australia,
and that over 20,000 people are connected with the industry.
166. Film hirings represent about 20 per cent, of the gross receipts from picture theatres,
and, for the year ended 30th June, 1927, are calculated to have amounted to £1,100,000.
167. The gross receipts from Australian picture theatres are estimated to be £5,500,000
yearly.
168. It is considered worthy of notice that of the gross receipts from picture theatres
only approximately 14 per cent, is sent abroad, the remainder being absorbed in Australia in
wages, rents, advertising, printing, lighting, music, taxes, profits and dividends.
PART X—TAXATION.
169. Income tax is payable by persons engaged in the motion picture industry and by
companies.
’7O. As mentioned in another part of this Report, some of the Australian distributing
companies representing American companies are conducting their businesses with a nett loss
result. Under their agreements their remittances to America do not form part of the finances
of the Australian company, and therefore are not subject to taxation. Your Commissioners
have elsewhere expressed the opinion that profits are included in these remittances on which
taxation seems justly due. Further, there is the somewhat anomalous position of sound financial
and organized corporations in America supporting, year after year, branches with recurring losses.
171. In New South Wales, by the Income Tax ( Management) Amendment Act 1925, and the
Income Tax ( Amendment) Act 1925, it was provided that any person in that State who pays or
agrees to pay or credits to any person whose principal place of business is outside the State any
money as consideration for the purchase or lease for exhibition in the State of any motion-picture
film not manufactured in the Commonwealth, shall be deemed to be the representative of the
foreign taxpayer, and the amount shall be deemed to be taxable income of the foreign taxpayer.
The rate of tax imposed on such income is five shillings in the pound, or such less sum as may be
fixed by the Governor of the State. In August, 1927, an application was made to the High Court
by the Universal Film Manufacturing Co. (Australasia) Ltd., for an injunction to restrain the State
of New South Wales and the Commissioner of Taxation from proceeding on an assessment on the
ground that it was ultra vires the Legislature of New South Wales. Reserved judgment was given
in November, 1927, but no conclusive order was made, the parties being at liberty to amend the
pleadings as they might be advised and to further apply, but the injunction still stood. As it is
understood that a further application will be made to the High Court, no opinion is expressed by
your Commissioners upon the validity or equity of this film tax.
172. Commonwealth Entertainments Tax is payable on admissions to picture theatres on
tickets costing 2s. 6s. and over, and the amount of such tax paid annually by picture theatre
patrons is approximately £38,000.
Recommendation.
173. Your Commissioners recommend :
That the matter of the taxation of gross earnings remitted to America by Australian
branch companies be reconsidered after impending judicial proceedings are
disposed of.


1927.
Number of films awaiting
trade shows.
Films In production.
Number of films for which
definite production plans have
been made.
May
8
ii
29
August
19
14
30
September
22
12
36
October
24
11
40
November
19
13
44
December
19
9
46
PART XI.—BRITISH FILMS.
174. The exhibition of British films in Australia has not met with universal success in
recent years. Exhibitors have stated in evidence that there is a distinct apathy on the part of
audiences towards British productions. It must be admitted that many British films which have
been shown by exhibitors desirous of assisting the industry within the Empire have been of a low
standard of merit and have lacked entertainment value. Picture-goers viewing films of such a
character are careful to see that when British pictures are included in programmes they will
withdraw their patronage during the exhibition of the films. This lack of support with
diminishing box-office returns still exists in Australia, and will need to be overcome before successful
returns from British pictures can be hoped for. Recently-screened pictures of British origin have
shown a decided improvement in quality and technique, and a maintenance of this improvement
will completely overcome any antagonism on the part of audiences to British productions.
175. Statements have been made on many occasions in Great Britain and in the
Commonwealth that British films have been boycotted on arrival in Australia. These statements
have, however, been decisively rebutted by the evidence taken in regard to specific Cases, and your
Commissioners are convinced that such statements are without justification.
176. The practice of British. producers in selling their films to individuals, or “carpet-
bag men ” as they are known, instead of establishing their own distributing agencies in Australia,
would appear to be the main cause for such statements, and if British producers hope to benefit by
the large revenues derived from such films, they would be well advised to discontinue this practice.
177. It has been found that certain persons have purchased one, two, or three
films in London, and have brought them to Australia for the purpose of arranging profitable
screenings. They are unacquainted with the trade conditions here in this country, and usually
the rental prices asked are totally disproportionate to the general box-office returns or rentals
charged for other films.
178. One large film-importing firm has a buying agency in London, and purchases many
British films and, in addition, British films have often been and are being released in Australia
by representatives of American distributors.
179. British-made pictures have secured adequate screenings in Australia in the past
few years. One exhibiting circuit, with interests in 40 picture theatres, during that period has
shown films of British origin to the extent of per cent, of its programmes, but this percentage,
it should be pointed out, includes other than feature films.
180. With properly organized distributing facilities in Australia, British producers should
not experience any difficulty in obtaining releases for pictures of merit, as there is a genuine
desire on the part of distributors, exhibitors, and the public to assist such British productions.
181. The latest figures as to the number of British films completed, or being made, in the
United Kingdom, together with the corresponding earlier figures, for some previous months of the
year 1927, have been supplied by the Board of Trade, and are quoted hereunder ;
Last November, nineteen British films had been shown to the trade, but not generally released
for exhibition. In December, the number of such films was 25. Reciprocal arrangements have
been, made by film companies for the release of British-made films in Europe.
182. The percentage of British-made films rejected by the Commonwealth Censorship
during certain periods was higher than those imported from any other country. The rejections
have been mostly on the grounds of highly objectionable themes and incidents. This position is
most unsatisfactory, and it is thought that the matter should be brought under notice.


—
British Preferential
Tariff.
Intermediate Tariff.
General Tariff.
(o) (1) Sensitized Films, and Films n.e.i. -
(2) Exposed or developed Films representing dramatic or
Australian subjects; —
(a) Suitable for use only with Home Kinemato-
Free
Free
Free
graphs - - - per lineal foot
Free
|d.
|d.
(6) Other - - per lineal foot
Provided that any such films printed from a negative
which was not the produce or manufacture of the
United Kingdom shall not be entitled to entry at the
rate of the British Preferential Tariff under this sub-
item.
Free
Id.
l|d.
Recommendations.
183. Your Commissioners recommend :
(1) That British producers be advised to establish an agency or agencies in Australia
for the distribution of their films.
(2) That, in view of the large number of British productions rejected by the
Australian censorship as unfit for exhibition, representations be made for the
strengthening of the British censorship to meet the requirements of the
Australian market.
PART XII.—CUSTOMS DUTY.
184. Customs duties, as shown hereunder are at present imposed on cinematograph films
185. The amount of duty collected on dramatic films imported was £134,310 for the year
1926-27.
186. Some importing companies themselves pay the amount of duty, and others have the
payments made reimbursed by the parent company abroad.
187. The substitution of an ad valorem rate for the present footage charge has been
considered. The Department of Trade and Customs considers, however, that the imposition of
such a duty would be impracticable, because of the difficulty of arriving at and verifying any basis
of value. It is difficult to foresee what success a film will have in Australia and impossible to
estimate what the returns will be. Instances have occurred where pictures listed by the
distributors as ordinary programme pictures have derived such unexpected earnings as to warrant
their elevation from the programme picture class to the special picture class.
188. A proportion of the Customs duty collected could be devoted to the encouragement
and development of the moving picture industry in Australia, and, in whatever direction it may be
decided to foster the growth of the industry, some of the money received by way of customs duty
should, it is considered, be diverted to that channel.
189. The revenue derived by an increase in Customs Duty on films could be used for the
following purposes ;
(а) To encourage and stimulate Australian production.
(б) To provide for —
(i) The cost of the Censorship Board and the Appeal Board, and accommodation
and equipment therefor.
(ii) Awards of merit.
(iii) Assistance with educational work, if desired.
In addition, the increased duty would provide a greater measure of preference to British
Empire films.
190. As Australia admits British films free, it would be an advantage for a reciprocal
arrangement to be made for Australian negatives or positives to be admitted free of duty into
the United Kingdom, where at present a duty is payable on Australian produced films.
191. Witnesses connected with the printing industry have expressed the opinion that they
are adequately protected by the present Customs Duty and no further assistance is necessary w
enable them to compete with American poster and printing work. Much of the advertising
matter required for publicity purposes in connexion with films is now being done in Australia,
and the quality of the work inspected by your Commissioners compared more than favorably
with imported material. Distributors, too, are well satisfied with the standard of the printing
and poster work executed in Australia.


Recommendations.
192. Your Commissioners recommend —
(1) That the Customs Duty of l|d. per lineal foot, General Tariff, on films representing
dramatic or Australian subjects (as defined in the Tariff schedule) be increased
to 2d. per lineal foot.
(2) That the Tariff preference which is now extended to British films imported into
Australia be continued.
(3) That a reciprocal tariff preference for Australian films entering Great Britain be
negotiated for.
(4) That a reciprocal tariff preference for Australian films entering other parts of the
British Empire be sought.
PART XIII.—“KNOW YOUR OWN COUNTRY” SERIES.
193. In 1921, it was decided to utilize the Commonwealth’s photographic branch for the
purpose of making a number of pictures of Australia which might be screened in Great Britain
by the Migration Department as a means of illustrating to intending migrants the features,
industries, and potentialities of Australia.
194. When, later, it was decided that these pictures of typical Australian scenery, industries,
and cities should be exhibited within Australia, the Department endeavoured to arrange for
screenings, but was unsuccessful. As the result of a conference of several distributing firms, an
undertaking to secure screening of the pictures in from 400 to 600 theatres in Australia at a cost
of £lO 10s. each theatre per year was received from the Famous Lasky Film Service Limited.
This offer was accepted, and the pictures were released with the title of “ Know Your Own Country
Series. The Famous Lasky Film Service Limited undertook to distribute the films without cost,
and a series of 52 pictures of 500 feet each were distributed at the rate of one per week. In the
first two years the Famous Lasky Company secured contracts for 300 theatres, but in the opinion
of the company the pictures are now losing the interest of the public.
The Famous Lasky Company pointed out that the pictures were fast losing interest, and
in order to continue the distribution arrangements, the terms were modified to £lO 10s. a year
for principal theatres and £5 ss. for the smaller houses, and the release of one picture a fortnight
of 1,000 feet instead of one of 500 feet each week.
195. The returns to the Migration Department for the first two years were approximately
£3,000, and just covered the cost of printing copies from the negatives, but there is an untold and
incalculable propaganda value contained in the series, and they have aroused and developed
an interest by Australians in their own country and its progress.
196. Your Commissioners found in the course of their investigations that, throughout the
Commonwealth, there is now a keen and growing appreciation by the exhibitors and the public of
the value and interest of these pictures.
197. The legislation recently passed by the Victorian Parliament requiring the exhibition
in each programme of 1,000 feet of Australian-produced pictures has secured an additional increase
in the demand for the “ Know Your Own Country ” Series in Victoria.
198. The overseas distribution of this series comprises six copies to Great Britain, one to
New Zealand, and one to the Near East. They are also distributed in parts of the United States
of America. Negotiations have been entered into with the shipping companies, and arrangements
are being made to supply copies free to all ships equipped with projecting machines. By this
means, it is expected that tourist trade will be stimulated and a deeper interest in Australia
aroused.
199. The sub-titles of the films are open to improvement. It is considered that they could
be made more informative and more descriptive.
200. The part played by the Famous Lasky Film Service Ltd., in gratuitously distributing
these films is worthy of mention. The success achieved in the popularity of the series is to a
great extent due to the activities of that company. They made valuable suggestions for the
production of the pictures, and their desire to assist the Government and to educate Australians
to know Australia is to be commended. They also secured release in America, of vhe series
through their Company there.
Recommendations.
201. Your Commissioners recommend :
(1) That efforts be made for a more general and continuous distribution of the series.
(2) That encouragement be given to private producers to make and submit to the
Department for purchase films suitable for the series.
(3) That more informative and interesting sub-titles be used in order to considerably
enhance the educational and entertainment value of the films.
F. 418. —8


PART XIV.—COMMONWEALTH AND STATE LEGISLATION.
202. There are at present, in addition to Commonwealth legislation, State laws relating
to film censorship and exhibition of pictures. The absence of uniformity in administration
which exists in certain directions, creates confusion, and the development or institution of uniform
laws throughout Australia would be a help to people connected with the industry, both in Australia
and abroad.
203. The moving-picture industry in Australia has reached such a stage of importance that
it is considered that the enactment of special laws instead of regulating it under the Customs Act
as at present would be beneficial. In other countries, control of the industry is maintained and
regulated by special Acts.
204. The question of uniform laws throughout the Commonwealth for the motion-picture
industry is deemed to be of such importance as to require special and early attention by a
conference of Commonwealth and State Ministers.
205. The existence of State Censor Boards and the possibility of their exercising their power
in regard to a film already passed by the Commonwealth Censor has kept exhibitors and
distributors in those States in which Boards exist in a state of uncertainty, and exhibitors and
distributors alike complain of the continuance of this undesirable position.
206. The Censor Boards of the State have rendered signal service in the direction of
censoring films and advertising matter which are not subject to inspection by the Commonwealth
Censor, and with this power vested in the Commonwealth Censorship, and with a stricter censorship,
the necessity for the continuance of State Censor Boards should disappear. The few cases m
which the States take action would lead to the conclusion that, generally, they accept the
Commonwealth’s Censorship.
207. The State of Victoria has by legislation authorized the making of an agreement
between the Commonwealth and State Governments to empower the Commonwealth Censor
to act as Censor for the State of Victoria. This agreement has been made and the arrangement
is working satisfactorily.
Recommendations.
208. Your Commissioners recommend—
(l) That laws dealing with the motion-picture industry be made uniform throughout
the Commonwealth.
(2) That, for the realization of this object, the Commonwealth Government request
the States to meet them in conference for the purpose of arriving at an
agreement whereby the States would enact legislation under Section 51 (xxxvii)
of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act and would give the
Commonwealth power to control the motion-picture industry as indicated in
this Report.
(3) That this legislation should be embodied in a Bill for an Act and not in a mere
amendment of the Customs Act or of regulations under that Act.
PART XV.—CONCLUSION.
209. In making the various recommendations contained in this Report, your Commissioners
are aware that there are several phases of the industry in which the Commonwealth’s powers are
limited by the Constitution, and that to embody these recommendations in a legislative enactment
it will be necessary for the Commonwealth Government to approach the various States with a
request that under placitum (xxxvii) of Section 51 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution
Act the States should, by legislation, refer the matter to and confer the necessary powers on the
Commonwealth. From their investigations, your Commissioners believe that there would be
little difficulty in inducing the States to pass legislation giving the Commonwealth the sole
power to control (a) the censorship of all films exhibited for profit and also of all films produced
in Australia —providing provision was made for a State Minister to demand a review by the Appeal
Board of any film the exhibition of which was deemed objectionable ; ( b ) all advertisements,
posters, and printed matter relating to the exhibition for profit of motion pictures ; (c) the
registration of all distributors of films and of exhibitors showing for profit; ( d) the limiting of
contracts for the renting or hiring of films ; and also the necessary power to compel the
exhibition of the quota of Empire films recommended by your Commissioners in this Report.


Your Commissioners therefore recommend that the State Governments be approached
with a view to the enactment of legislation which will enable the Commonwealth to effectively
control the motion-picture industry in Australia as indicated in this Report.
210. Your Commissioners have endeavoured to make such recommendations as would
stimulate and. improve the motion-picture industry in Australia, prove a benefit to the nation,
and give a greater degree of satisfaction to the public who find the motion picture such a reflection
of ideals and a source of entertainment.
211. Your Commissioners would like to express their appreciation of the valuable services
rendered by Mr. A. A. Tregear, who has acted as Secretary to the Commission, and to acknowledge
the helpful assistance given by the Parliamentary Reporting Staff, Mr. T. C. Pittaway, who acted
as Assistant Secretary for a short period, and by Messrs. L. G. I. French and E. McCarthey, of
the Auditor General’s Staff.
We have the honour to be,
Vnur Excellency’s most obedient Servants,
WALTER M. MARKS
Chairman.
WALTER DUNCAN,
J. GRANT,
HERBERT HAYS,
F. M. FORDE,
H. GREGORY,
LEWIS W. NOTT.
A. A. TREGEAR, Secretary.
Canberra, 17th March, 1928.


SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
FILM CENSORSHIP.
(1) That a Board of Film Censors be established, consisting of three persons, one of whom
shall be a woman.
(2) That each Member of the Censorship Board view films independently, and that, when
in doubt, the particular film be referred to the full Board for inspection.
(3) That the remuneration to be paid to Members of the Censorship Board be such as will
adequately cover the heavy responsibility which they will be called upon to bear.
(4) That the Members of the Censorship Board accept full responsibility for the censorship
of all films.
(5) That the Censorship Board be invested with power to deal with the importation,
production, exhibition, and exportation of all motion-picture films, and also all illustrated and
advertising matter made without and within Australia which is to be used in connexion with motion-
picture films.
(6) That more commodious accommodation be provided for the Censorship Office in Sydney,
including at least three projection rooms and a room suitably fitted for the viewing of posters and
advertising matter.
(7) That a Censorship Board of Appeal be created, consisting of five Members, one of
whom shall be a woman ; three to form a quorum.
(8) That, as it is desirable that changing and progressive opinion be adequately represented
on the Appeal Board, the Chairman shall be appointed for five years, and the other Members for a
period not exceeding three years.
(9) That the motion-picture industry shall not have representation on the Appeal Board.
(10) That the Appeal Board be constituted :
(a) To decide appeals made by importers, distributors, or producers against rejections
or cuts made by the censorship ;
(b) To deal with requests for reviews from State Ministers ;
(c) To grant relief from quota requirements ;
(d) To make recommendations for awards of merit in connexion with Australian
film productions and scenarios ;
(e) To carry out such other duties as may be prescribed.
(11) That the country of origin shall be marked and exhibited on all films.
(12) That any distributing firm which, during the course of one year, has 25 per cent, of
its importations banned shall be warned for the first offence, and for any subsequent offence
may have its registration cancelled for such period as may be determined.
DISTRIBUTION OF FILMS.
(13) That all film distributors in Australia shall be registered. A “distributor” shall
include any person, firm, or company, offering to hire, lease, or sell a motion picture for exhibition
purposes.
(14) That contracts made for distribution of cinematograph films in Australia shall be
limited to a period of twelve months, and that any contracts for a longer period entered into within
three months prior to the publication of this Reort sphall not be legal.
(15) That penalties be prescribed for breaches of the recommendation above regarding
contracts.
EXHIBITORS AND THE EXHIBITION OF FILMS.
(16) That all motion-picture exhibitors in Australia who exhibit films for profit shall be
registered.
(17) That no exhibitor holding a block booked contract shall be compelled to exhibit a
cinematograph film that affords grounds for racial or religious objection, provided that the Appeal
Board sustains such objection.
(18) That all contracts between distributors and exhibitors or producers for the hiring
or leasing of films shall contain a rejection clause empowering the exhibitor to reject five per
cent, of the total films covered by such contracts; provided that rejections under this clause
shall be only for the purpose of screening Australian productions and that Australian pictures
so screened shall not be regarded as quota films.
(19) That no motion picture shall be exhibited in Australia unless it shall have been
previously approved by the Commonwealth Censorship Board.


FILM PRODUCTION IN AUSTRALIA.
(20) That, subject to recommendations by the Appeal Board—
(a) Awards of Merit shall be made each year for the best films produced in Australia
which will build up national sentiment, will be of high moral standard, contain
humour, but not containing propaganda which might be prejudicial to
international relations or likely to promote ill-feeling with other countries.
(b) The Awards shall be, in order of merit, First, £5,000 ; second, £2,500 ; third,
£1,500.
( c ) An Award of Merit of £5OO be given for the best film scenario each year, written
in Australia by a resident Australian citizen, provided that such scenario is
up to a standard approved by the Appeal Board.
(d) An Award of Merit of £5OO be given each year under similar conditions for the
best film scenario containing Australian sentiment.
(21) That the awards recommended above be made during the currency of the quota
system, viz., three years, and be open to extension, if necessary.
(22) That the Appeal Board may withhold a recommendation for an award of merit for
any year should productions or scenarios submitted not attain the requisite merit deemed
necessary by the Appeal Board to enable it to make such recommendation.
. THE QUOTA SYSTEM.
(23) That, subject to reciprocal arrangements being entered into by the Commonwealth
Government with other parts of the Empire, an Empire quota be introduced.
(24) ( a ) That, in every picture theatre in Australia, other than “ long-run ” theatres, there
shall be screened during the first year of the quota period, feature films of Empire origin to the
extent of five per cent, of the total number of feature films exhibited in such theatre during
the year, with a minimum of ten such feature films.
( b ) That the quota of feature films of Empire origin for the second year shall be ten per
cent., and fifteen per cent, for the third year.
(25) That, in the case of “ long-run ” theatres, there shall be screened each year during
the quota period a number of feature films of Empire origin at least equal to five per cent, of
the average number of feature films usually screened in such theatre each year, with a minimum of
one.
(26) That quota films be feature films only, and shall not include news gazettes, scenic
pictures, advertisements, educational films, industrial films, or scientific films.
(27) That the quota be in force for three years, subject to review before the expiration of
that period. If warranted, the term should be extended.
(28) That, subject to the fulfilment 1 of the condition of Recommendation No. 23 above,
the first quota year shall commence on the Ist January, 1929.
(29) That every film which it is desired to be included in'the quota shall first be submitted
to the Appeal Board for determination as to whether the film is of the required standard of merit.
(30) That films which have been recognized as quota films in any part of the British
Empire with which a reciprocal arrangement has been made may, subject to approval by the
Appeal Board, be registered in Australia as quota films upon production of satisfactory evidence
that they have been so recognized.
(31) That a film shall be deemed to be a film of Empire origin if, but not unless, it complies
with all the following requirements—
(a) It must have been made by a person who was at the time the film was made a
British subject, or by two or more persons each of whom was a British subject,
or by a company constituted under the laws of any part of the British Empire,
the majority of the directors of which are British subjects ;
(b) The studio scenes must have been photographed in a studio in the British Empire ,
(c) The author of the scenario must have been a British subject at the time the film
was made ;
(d) Not less than 75 per cent, of the salaries, wages and payments
specifically paid for labour and services in the making of the film (exclusive
of payments in respect of copyright and of the salary or payments to one
foreign actor or actress or director, but inclusive of the payments to che author
of the scenario) has been paid to natural-born or naturalized British


subjects, provided that the Appeal Board may relax this requirement
in any case where it is satisfied that the maker had taken all reasonable steps
to secure compliance with the requirement, and that his failure to comply
therewith was occasioned by exceptional circumstances beyond his control.
The requirement contained herein shall not apply to films completed before
the 31st December, 1928.
(32) That, upon the application of an exhibitor, a remission certificate from compliance
with the quota provisions be issued by the Appeal Board in the following cases if satisfied after
inquiry that the issue of such a certificate is warranted—
(a) Where the price asked of an exhibitor for a quota film is not fair and reasonable,
and other quota films are not available at a reasonable price ;
(, b ) Where there is an insufficiency of quota films of the required standard ;
(c) Where a competitor in the same locality has already screened or is screening the
available quota films;
(d) Where it has not been commercially practicable for the exhibitor to comply with
the quota requirements.
THE FILM AND NATIVE RACES.
(33) That no moving picture film shall be screened before audiences of aborigines or natives
of the Mandated Territories unless such film has been passed by tfie Censorship Board as suitable
for such exhibition.
CHILDREN.
(34) That all motion picture films shall be graded by the Censorship Board, and marked
“ Suitable for Universal Exhibition ” when considered by the Board to be so. Films shall not
be marked in any other way except with the approval of the Censorship Board. “ Universal ”
shall mean that the films are suitable for exhibition to children as well as to adults.
(35) That the marking of films “ For Adults Only ” shall be restricted to educational,
scientific, and medical films, such marking to be made by the Censorship Board. No exhibitor
shall advertise a film as “ For Adults Only ” unless such film has been so marked by the
Censorship Board.
(36) No film other than those marked “ Suitable for Universal Exhibition ” shall be shown
at matinees, provided that the Appeal Board may grant a remission certificate in the case of
long-run theatres in respect of matinees, where the picture on exhibition is not marked for
universal exhibition.
EDUCATIONAL FILMS.
(37) That the States recognizing the advantage to be gained by the use of the cinematograph
as an adjunct to educational methods should be assisted in every possible way by the
Commonwealth.
TAXATION.
(38) That the matter of the taxation of gross earnings remitted to America by Australian
branch companies be reconsidered after impending judicial proceedings are disposed of.
BRITISH FILMS.
(39) That British producers be advised to establish an agency or agencies in Australia
for the distribution of their films.
(40) That, in view of the large number of British productions rejected by the Australian
censorship as unfit for exhibition, representations be made for the strengthening of the British
censorship to meet the requirements of the Australian market.
CUSTOMS DUTY.
(41) That the Customs duty of l|d. per lineal foot. General Tariff, on films representing
dramatic or Australian subjects (as defined in the Tariff schedule), be increased to 2d. per lineal
foot.
(42) That the tariff preference which is now extended to British films imported into
Australia be continued.


(43) That a reciprocal tariff preference for Australian films entering Great Britain be
negotiated for.
(44) That a reciprocal tariff preference for Australian films entering other parts of the
British Empire be sought.
“ KNOW YOUR OWN COUNTRY ” SERIES.
(45) That efforts be made for a more general and continuous distribution of the series.
(46) That encouragement be given to private producers to make and submit to the
Department for purchase films suitable for the series.
(47) That more informative and interesting sub-titles be used in order to considerably
enhance the educational and entertainment value of the films.
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE LEGISLATION.
(48) That laws dealing with the motion-picture industry be made uniform throughout the
Commonwealth.
(49) That, for the realization of this object, the Commonwealth Government request
the States to meet them in conference for the purpose of arriving at an agreement whereby the
States would enact legislation under Section 51 (xxxvii) of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act and would give the Commonwealth power to control the motion-picture industry
as indicated in this Report.
(50) That this legislation should be embodied in a Bill for an Act and not in a
mere amendment of the Customs Act or of regulations under that Act.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Gkbbn,
Government Printer, Canberra.


