

REPORT
OF THE
SPECIAL COMMITTEE
OF THE
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
ON THE
BEST MEANS OF PROMOTING AGRICULTURE & SETTLING
THE WASTE LANDS OF THE COLONY.
MELBOURNE.
txOODHUGH & TREMBATH, PRINTERS, 48 FLINDERS LANE, EAST.
’1855.




REPORT.
Pi wss'/pgoes
ss .77
Yoijb, Committee disclaim all political feeling in this momentous
question; they have endeavoured in all their suggestions to provide
for the general welfare of the -Colony irrespective of all class
interests, and in laying before the Chamber the result of their
labours, your Committee wish it to be understood that in making
the following remarks on the Land question they are not wedded
to any particular system : if a more practicable and equally compre-
hensive mode can be suggested, they are prepared to support it.
Your Committee having duly considered the subject and availed
themselves of all the documentary and other evidence they could
procure, as well as information furnished by several members of the
Chamber practically acquainted with what has been done in other
countries, have agreed on the following report, which they now
with confidence submit to this special meeting of the Chamber for
its approval and adoption :
1. Ypur Committee cannot but express their decided conviction,
that the present Crown Land Regulations of the Colony are radi-
cally defective, and have tended to produce and aggravate much of
the depression under which the Colonists are now suffering.
2. Your Committee consider, that it is only by a complete change
in these regulations; and their thorough revision and remodelling;
that the Colony can gradually be restored to a state of permanent
prosperity.
3. Your Committee declare, without fear of contradiction, that
the sale of land in Victoria has failedto provide food for its population.
Out of 62,000,000 of acres, the estimated area of the Colony, about
1,400,000 acres have been sold up to the present time, the remain-
der is held almost entirely by about 800 individuals, under annual
licenses of occupation for pastoral purposes. Had proper care been
taken when selling the above lands to secure their improve-
ment and cultivation by the purchasers, it would have provided
food for all the present population of the Colony; but, as there is np
such condition involved in the terms upon which the land has been
alienated from the Crown, it is the opinion of your Committee,


(although in the absence of all reliable statistics, they have no
positive evidence) that not one-tenth part of the land sold, is actu-
ally under cultivation with crops suited for the food of man.
4. Your Committee consider that the aspect of the land question
has been entirely altered by the sudden and large increase in the
population of the Colony, an increase unparalleled in any country,
except California. On the 3lst December, 1851, about four or five
months after Gold was first produced in quantity, the whole Colony
contained about 88,000 souls ; and on the 31st December, 1854, it
may safely be estimated at 320,000; shewing an increase in three
years of 232,000 souls. It is most desirable that a sufficiency of
land should be sold, and not only sold, but cultivated, to provide
food and employment for this additional population, and render us
in this respect independent of the neighbouring colonies and of
foreign countries.
5. Your Committee report that the effect of this increase in
the population, combined with the large production of gold, and the
want of any provision to ensure the cultivation of the land, has been
to diminish the resources of the Colonists and impoverish the Colony
generally, by causing a yearly importation of bread-stuffs and
vegetable productions to the value of two millions, all of which we
have to pay to the neighbouring colonies, to Chile, the United
States, and the Mother Country.
6. Your Committee, while deploring a state of things so preju-
dicial to the welfare of the Colony, express their conviction that
the evil will be aggravated year by year, as population increases,
if an effort be not at once made to change our land system, and
suit it to the wants and desires of the colonists.
7. Your Committee beg to draw the attention of the Chamber
to the great rise in price of all agricultural products; premising,
that they quote the Melbourne wholesale prices, which are much
enhanced by the cost of carriage to the mining districts in the
interior, where a very large proportion of our population is now
settled, all of which might be supplied much more cheaply by the
cultivation of land in the immediate vicinity. They quote from
the “Victoria Almanack,” for 1855 :
Wheat per bushel Oct 1850,
Maize „ „
4s. 3d. Oct. 1854 15s.
2s. 6d. ~ 10s.
3s. Od. ~ 10s.
3s. 3d. ~ 9s. 6d.
lid. „ 3s. lOd.
£4lss. „ £2O
£lolos. „ £35
Gs. „ £2 ss.
Barley „ ,
Oats „ ,
Bran ~ ~
Hay per ton ,
Flour, first ~
Potatoes per cwt.
8. Your Committee are of opinion that the system in operation
{it the present time, for the disposal of Crown lands, is the worst


that could be adopted in a country such as Victoria. In a new
country, land should be obtainable, by actual settlers, at a low rate;
The experience of Canada and the United States, countries
settled and improved by Englishmen and I their descendants, proves
that the greater the inducements offered to emigrants, in enabling
them to settle on small sections of land, and in the terms of pay-
ment, the more the country advances in prosperity and wealth.
California, one of the states of the Union, presents so strong an
analogy to the circumstances of Victoria, —in the small number of
inhabitants prior to the discovery of gold ; in the rapid increase of
population, and enhancement of the price of labour and of food;
that we cannot do better, while considering this great question,
than to keep it constantly before us. But all analogy ceases when
we come to the land question; owing to freedom from artificial
restrictions and impediments, California, within six years, has
become an exporting country. We have good soil, abundance of
it, a fine climate, and an energetic population ; let us remove the
barriers which prevent us from free access to our lands, and in a few
years we shall do as California has done.
9. It is the opinion of your Committee that the policy of
Government, in the sale of crown lands, has injured the Colony*
and impoverished its inhabit ants. Had our crown lands been sur-
veyed and offered for selection, at a low fixed price, to actual
settlers, the land would have been cultivated, and an immense
amount of capital retained in the Colony;—all of which has been
either swallowed up in the purchase of land at a high price, or
paid 'to other countries to provide us with food. The following
shows the quantity of land sold and the price paid for it at different
dates:—
Ist July to3lst Dec., 1853, — sold, 145,600 aers, for £838,557, or nearly £6 pr. acr-
-Ist Jan. to 30th June, 1854, „ 213,270 „ £810,789, „ £4 „
This money has been employed partly in making roads and bridges,
and partly in bringing out immigrants; but your Committee think
that the extraction of £1,000,000 from the pockets of the Colo-
nists in twelve months has impoverished them, and absorbed great
part of the capital that would, with land at a cheap rate, have been
available for its cultivation and improvement. Your Committee
would here allude to the numbers of people resident in the towns
of the Colony, who are forced into unsuitable and unprofitable em-
ployments for their labour and capital, in consequence of being
unable to purchase land at a low rate, and thereby entailing loss on
themselves and their connections; also to the numbers who have
come out to Victoria, and returned to the old country, or re-emi-
grated to the neighbouring colonies, in consequence of the want of
suitable employment.
10. Your Committee have to report that the present system has


had tlie effect of causing Government, and the land speculators, to
combine against the interest of the great body of the colonists.
By the llth Section of V. and YI. Victoria, the Land Sales Act,
the Governor is empowered to raise the upset price of one tenth
part of any country land offered for sale; but at a late Govern-
ment land sale, the proportions were almost reversed, about one
tenth was put up at £l per acre, and nine tenths above that rate.
Besides this, in general, all lots at £\ per acre are too large for the
small farmer, but are eagerly purchased by speculators and capital-
ists ; and whenever a working man, the most valuable kind of
settler, attempts to purchase a lot of eighty to a hundred acres, at a
Government sale, he is exposed to the competition of parties who
never intend to occupy or cultivate the land.
11. To remedy this state of things, your Committee, after due
consideration, have to submit to the Chamber the following outline
of a plan, similar, in many respects, to that which has attracted
such an extensive emigration to Canada and the United States, —
altered, in a slight degree, to suit the circumstances and wants of
the Colony of Victoria. It has been your Committee’s wish and
endeavour to provide a remedy for the present state of things, to
avoid any partiality to a particular class, and to place our land
system on a firm and permanent basis.
12. 111 recommending their plan to the Chamber, the Committee
have refrained from alluding to vested interests, or to any claims
which may exist upon the Crown Lands of the Colony, for two
reasons; first, it does not come withiil the scope of their duty, and
second, they consider the interest of the great mass of the people
to be paramount, and that any impediment in the way can be
equitably arranged.
13. Your Committee recommend to the Chamber the following
system, as one which has been tried and found successful in Canada
and the United States, which has furnished a home to thousands of
Our countrymen, and which has tended year by year to increase the
prosperity of these countries.
Plan fob the Disposal and Settlement of Ceown Lands.
1. The Colony of Victoria, so far as practicable, to be surveyed
and subdivided into township-sections, of about six miles square,
Or a superficial area of 36 square miles.
2. That roads be laid out at proper intervals in every township,
3. That every township be laid out in sections of 1 square mile,
or 640 acres, subdivided pnto 8 or 16 sub-sections, or lots, of 80 or
40 acres respectively.
4. That Government reserve from sale all lands which may be
Hccessary for public purposes, such as military stations, &c.


5. That Government Land offices be established in different parts
of the Colony, where all information shall be furnished to the
intending settler in relation to all lands offered for sale in the
neighbouring townships ; its location, description of soil, adaptation
to agricultural or grazing purposes, its facilities for irrigation, &c.
Also that detailed plans of the surveys be kept in these offices,
shewing the reserved lots, those sold, and those open for selection.
0. That any subject of Great Britain, or any foreigner who
may declare his intention of being naturalized, be entitled to select
and enter upon any quantity of such unsold land, say from 40 to
(>4O acres, at the fixed price of five shillings per acre, on the follow-
ing conditions: —
1. That he forthwith commence the improvement of the land,
by fencing, erecting a habitation, and cultivating, and your Com-
mittee would recommend that any foreigner becoming a purchaser
should be thereby entitled to his letters of naturalization and enjoy
all the rights and privileges of a British subject.
2. That within one year he pay one-half of the purchase money
of 2s. od. per acre.
3. That within two years he pay the balance of 2s. 6d. per
acre. . . „
4. That Government shall thereupon give him a clear title in fee
to said land, subject to his own use and disposal for ever, the maxi-
mum charge for each title deed not to exceed one pound.
5. That from the day of entering on the land the settler shall
be entitled to all minerals on or under the surface.
6. In case such purchaser fail in any of the before-mentioned
Conditions, he shall lose any improvements he may have made, and
his land shall be open to "selection and purchase the same as if
it never had been occupied.
7. All real estate in every township shall be subject to taxation
for the following purposes; such taxation to be imposed by the
inhabitants of each township respectively :
The cost of Government of such townships, including police
'courts, jails, &c.; also for making and keeping in repair all township
roads; also for the support of public schools and for the mainte-
nance of the poor, and for any other improvement that the inhabitants
Of such township may deem necessary for its advancement or
protection.
8. That every township be empowered to borrow money for public
works or improvements, duly providing for the interest and repays
ment of principal of its loans, by taxation on all the property of the
township.


14. Your Committee feel that the Chamber will look to it for
the reasons which have induced it to recommend the foregoing to
its adoption. Your Committee think that the stimulus of cheap
land, which is now annually draining Europe to the amount of nearly
400,000 persons, who all settle in the United States and Canada,
has been the main source of the prosperity of those countries. We
are at a much greater distance from the Mother Country and from
Europe; but, your Committee is satisfied that, were it once known
that in Victoria, under the British flag, a home was offered to all
the world, combining the advantages of moderate price, easy terms
of payment, and local self-government, an amount of immigration
of which at present we have no conception, would be induced
thereby.
15. Your Committee venture to express their conviction that,
were the Crown lands of this Colony thrown open on the above
terms, the general government would be at once freed from a posh
tion at present embarassing, viz., providing magistrates, police,
forage, &c., for all parts of the country. By giving the Colonists
local self-government, your Committee believe that the people
would be more contented and happy, and would provide adequately
for their own wants.
IC. Your Committee would likewise remark on the impolicy and
injustice of the emigration system at present in force: it is most
expensive and provides us with the worst class of immigrants;
sending money home for such a purpose has tended to raise the
passage money of the immigrant, who comes here at his own cost,
at least 50 per cent. Further, government immigrants on their
arrival are furnished with board and lodging and employment ;
while the industrious and valuable class of free immigrants are
taxed and left entirely to their own resources.
17. Your Committee do not hesitate to condemn this vicious
system, and to recommend its abandonment; they are satisfied that
we shall get sufficient immigrants of a superior class, by opening
up our lands at a low price, and that we are only draining the
Colony of its resources by remitting over half a million annually
to bring out an inferior class of settlers.
18. Your Committee are decided that the present system of
auction sale of Crown Lands is most impolitic and is rapidly
diminishing the capital of the Colony. The farmer requires capital
quite as much as the merchant. In a new country he incurs heavy
expense in preparing his land for crop, and has to wait for that crop
before any return can be received for his outlay; and if lie has to
pay out all his capital as at present, to buy a piece of land, he has
none left for improvements.
19. Your Committee would briefly allude to the importance of
opening up the country by a general system of railways; they
would merely express their conviction, that nothing would tend


more in conjunction with the sale of land at a low price, to deve-
lope the resources of this fine Colony, and to render it great and
and permanently prosperous.
20. Your Committee find that the present land system is pro-
ducing the same effect as the English corn laws; capital and labor
are fast leaving the Colony, and finding their way to countries
which will yield a better return; the price of food is kept at an
artificial rate, while the wages of labour are falling day by day.
Throw open the lands, railways and labourers will at once be
required, profitable employment will be found for capital, and
the price of labour will not fall materially, even should the expense
of living be much reduced.
21. Your Committee would point out the great benefit of district
land offices in affording reliable information to the settler in the
immediate neighbourhood of the land he wishes to purchase, and
secui’ing him thereby from being deceived by land jobbers or spe-
culators.
22. It is clearly for the interest of Government that the Colony
should be settled as speedily as possible, and by people who will not
only purchase, but occupy and improve the lands. Our general
revenue is raised by a tax on the consumption of spirits, wines,
beer, tobacco, sugar, tea, and coffee; and surely everything that
adds to the number of producers will increase the number of con-
sumers also, and the more will Government get in the shape of
taxation.
23. Your Committee cannot think that the occupiers of pastoral
lands will be prejudiced by any measure that will increase the
number of consumers of beef, mutton, and wool; they know how
much their interests were improved by the rush of population fol-
lowing the discovery of the Gold Fields, and thereby can estimate
the value of a continued increase of Colonists.
24. Your Committee consider it imperative on the Government
to do all in its power to avert a famine. With a large population,
dependant almost entirely on foreign countries for bread-stuffs, we
are liable at any moment to feel the effects of a bad crop in the
neighbouring Colonies. We possses a soil capable of producing
everything required by man, and it behoves the Government to
place no stumbling-block in the way of opening the land. Were
we to be thrown on our own resources, owing to short imports of
food, or a bad crop in the other Australian Colonies, your Com-
mittee believe that the whole country would be thrown into
anarchy and confusion.
25. In concluding their report, your Committee have to mention
that their wish has been to recommend the introduction of a
system of land sales based upon the broad principles of social and
political economy. They feel satisfied it will recommend itself to
the Chamber and to the community at large. It has been their


wish and endeavour to avoid everything of a political nature, and to
free the question front any allusion to existing interests, whether of
occupiers or purchasers of land under the present regulations.
Your Committee are convinced that, once the great question of
really and truly settling the crown lands is brought fairly before the
public, the settlement of vested interests will be a matter easily
arranged.
26. Your Committee would sum up their report in a few words :
Ist. It condemns the sale of land by auction and consequent
competition.
2nd. It points out the evil effects of a high price for land,
3rd. It shows that at present no provision is made for cultivation
or improvement,
4th. It shows that capital is fast leaving the Colony, and that
the Colonists are impoverished by their means being spent on land
and in the importation pf food.
sth. It recommends an entire charge of system :
Land at a low price, and easy terms of payment, with the
view of attacting and retaining capital in the Colony.
Provision for cultivation and improvement of the land.
Local government and taxation for roads, &c.
District Land Offices , to afford information to purchasers.
By abandoning Government immigration, it destroys the com-
petition which has increased the free immigrant’s passage-money
at least fifty per cent.
ROBERT KENT, Chairman.
Robert Bowden,
J. G. Foxton,
W. P. Muir,
A. Woolley,
S. P. Lord,
G. F. Train,
Members of
the Special
Committeg.
Thomas Dickson,
Y. Hellicar,
Chamber of Commerce,
Melbourne, 2nd March, 1855.
Goodbngh & Trcmbath, Printers, <B, Flinders-labe, East, and 174, Elizabeth-stroet.
