

1954-55.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH COMMITTEE ON RATES OF
DEPRECIATION.
Presented by Command, Ith June, 1955; ordered to be printed, 9th June, 1955.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation, not given; 880 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £loo.]
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by A. J. Arthur at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra.
(Printed In Australia.)
No. 83 [Group 8].—F.3061/55.—Prior Is. 6d.


COMMONWEALTH COMMITTEE ON RATES OF DEPRECIATION.
A. S. Hulme, M.P., F.C.A. (Aust.) (Chairman).
F. E. Hitchins, C.B.E.
S. B. Holder, 0.8. E., F.C.A. (Aust.).
B. R. Orr, F.I.C.S.
A. M. Simpson, B.Sc., A.U.A.
R. R. Gray, Secretary.


CONTENTS.
Subject. Paragraphs.
Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1-7
General Considerations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3-6
Representations Outside Terms of Reference.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
The Present Depreciation Provisions . . . , .. .. . . . . .. .. 8-15
Term of Reference No. I—Present1 —Present Rates of Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. .. 16-21
Term of Reference No. 2 . . . . . . . . .. .. .. ■. .. 22- 40
Proposed Increase in Diminishing Value Rates .. .. .. .. .. .. 22-29
Option to Change Method of Depreciation . . . . .. .. .. . . .. 30
Additional Methods of Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Balancing Adjustments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32- 40
Term of Reference No. 3—Obsolescence Factor .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41- 55
Term of Reference No. 4 —Overall Rates of Depreciation . . .. .. .. .. .. 56- 62
Term of Reference No. 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 63-155
Buildings — .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68-134
Previous History .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 69- 71
Present Considerations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 72- 80
Possible Bases for Allowance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 81- 97
Basis Recommended .. .. .. .. .. .. ■. ■. .. 98- 99
Outline of Proposed Plan .. .. .. .. .. • • • ■ .. 100
Application .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • •. .. 101-103
Basis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 104—115
Purchase at less than Depreciated Value .. .. .. .. .. .. 116-117
Notional Depreciation .. .. . • • • • • .. 118-120
Alterations and Additions .. .. .. .. • • • • ' • • .. 121-122
Rates of Depreciation .. .. . • • • • • • • • • •. 123-128
Balancing Adjustments .. .. . • • • ■ • • • • • .. 129-134
Wasting Assets — .. .. .. . • • • • • • • .. 135-155
Patent Rights and Similar Intangible Assets .. .. .. .. .. .. 136-148
Quarries, Claypits, &o. .. .. . • • • ■ ■ • ■ ■ • .. 149-151
Buildings and Roads used in the Timber Industry . . .. . . . . .. 152-155
Summary of Conclusions and Recommendations .. .. • ■ .. .. .. 156
Schedule of Average Building Costs .. .. . • • • • • • ■ ■ • .. Appendix
F.3061/55. —2




COMMONWEALTH COMMITTEE ON RATES OF
DEPRECIATION.
To the Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur Padden, K.C.M.G., M.P., Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia.
The Committee appointed by you to examine certain aspects of the depreciation allowances for
Commonwealth income tax purposes has completed its inquiries and presents its report.
INTRODUCTION.
1. Following the announcement in your Budget Speech delivered on 18th August, 1954, that a special
committee would be set up to inquire into the income tax depreciation allowances, we were appointed on
21st September, 1954, with the following terms of reference:—
“ To inquire into and report upon—
(1) whether the effective lives of units of property as estimated by the Commissioner of
Taxation as required by section 55 (1.) of the Income Tax and Social Services
Contribution Assessment Act 1936-1953 are fair and reasonable;
(2) whether the bases of depreciation provided by the said Act ensure that the cost of each
unit of property is deducted in a reasonable manner over the effective life of that unit;
(3) whether it is practicable and desirable, in determining annual rates of depreciation, to
take into account possible obsolescence of a unit of property before the effective useful
life of that unit is completed;
(4) whether it would he desirable to provide, by way of an amendment of the law, for an
option whereby the taxpayer might claim depreciation at a standard rate per annum on
all units of property in respect of which depreciation is allowable to him, and, if so,
what rate should be specified as the maximum standard rate of depreciation; and
(5) whether it would be desirable to extend deductions for depreciation to any classes of
assets not subject to such allowances under the present law.”
2. After an initial meeting in Canberra on 11th October, 1954, we issued through the Press a
statement of our terms of reference and a general invitation to interested persons and organizations to
make written submissions to us. We also sent a special letter to 46 associations which we thought would
have a particular interest in our inquiries. In response to our invitations, we received more than 100
submissions from all States of the Commonwealth and representing a wide range of Australian commercial
and industrial activity. In addition to written submissions, we invited personal appearances and held
meetings in Sydney,. Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth and Canberra.
General Considerations.
3. From the submissions made to us, it is apparent that the industrial structure of Australia has
altered considerably over recent years, particularly since World War 11. The secondary industries have
expanded and have advanced into new spheres. There have been major advances also in the field of
technological development and many industries have reached a high degree of mechanization. Moreover,
many industries have come into increasing competition with their counterparts overseas, both on the home
as well as the export markets. Because labour costs in Australia are relatively high as compared with many
of the competing countries, this factor in particular has brought about a constant and pressing need for
greater output and economy of processes.
4. Inevitably, these changes have led to a need for faster turnover of plant. Not only is this
necessary to keep abreast of technological changes, but there is also a growing awareness of the loss of
efficiency which comes from the retention of plant to and beyond the point where heavy maintenance is
needed to keep it in production.
5. The greatly increased costs in recent years and the need to keep plant constantly up to date, have
given rise to difficulties of finance throughout all sections of industry.
6. These changes in industrial and economic conditions emphasize the need for a review of the
depreciation allowances.


Representations Outside Our Terms of Reference.
7. Tiie following questions were raised with us, but as they were outside our terms of reference we
have not discussed them in our report: —
(а) An allowance by way of depreciation to provide for the estimated cost of replacement of
an asset, as against the present basis of depreciation calculated on the original cost of the
asset.
(б) Special initial depreciation.
(c) Investment allowance on new plant, similar to that allowed in the United Kingdom.
(d) Matters relating to section 57aa of the Act —
(i) Continuance of the present 20 per cent, depreciation allowance for primary
producers.
(ii) Granting of an option to take the ordinary rates of depreciation in lieu of the
special 20 per cent. rate.
(iii) Increase of the limit of £2,000 allowable in relation to accommodation for employees.
(e) Extension to other industries of an allowance similar to that provided for primary producers
in section 57aa of the Act.
(/) Special allowances for depreciable assets in remote areas.
( g) Depletion allowance for quarries, claypits, &e.
Proposals for allowances under (a), (&) and (c) were put to us as partial remedies for what is commonly
termed “ capital erosion ”, which it was submitted is a major concern of industry at the present time.
THE PRESENT DEPRECIATION PROVISIONS.
8. The provisions governing the present depreciation allowances are contained in sections 54 to 62 of
the Income Tax and Social Services Contribution Assessment Act. Substantially, these provisions have
remained unchanged for many years.
9. The classes of assets in respect of which depreciation is allowable are defined in section 54.
Broadly, these comprise—
(a) machinery and equipment;
(5) certain fixtures and fittings provided as amenities for employees; and
(c) in the case of primary producers—fences, dams and other structural improvements.
10. The rate of depreciation allowable on each asset is determined by the Commissioner of Taxation
on the basis of the estimated effective life of the asset, assuming it is maintained in reasonably good order
and condition, and an annual percentage allowance is fixed accordingly (section 55 (1.)). Thus, the annual
rate of depreciation on an asset with an estimated life of five years is 20 per cent.
11. A list of the standard rates of depreciation determined by the Commissioner in respect of
various types of assets is contained in Income Tax Order No. 1217, which is published for general
information. These rates, which are based on plant of average type used under normal working conditions,
may be varied by the Commissioner on the production of evidence of any special circumstances or conditions
causing depreciation at a rate either higher or lower than the standard rate.
12. Special concessional rates are fixed by the Act for-
(a) certain fixtures and fittings provided as amenities for employees (33-J per cent.) —section
55 (2.) ;
(b) certain plant and improvements of primary producers (20 per cent.) —sections 57aa and
57ab;and
(c) plant used for scientific research (33| per cent.) —section 73a (5.).
13. Under section 56, depreciation may be calculated either by the “ diminishing value method ”, or,
at the option of the taxpayer, by the “ prime cost method ”. The percentage rate in either case is the
same. Under the diminishing value method, the depreciation for each year is calculated on the depreciated
value of the asset at the beginning of that year, that is, on the original cost less depreciation already
allowed. Thus, a lower deduction is allowable in each successive year and the cost of the asset is not entirely
written off until it is disposed of. Under the prime cost method, on the other hand, the depreciation for
each year is calculated on the original cost of the asset, the effect being that the full cost is written off by
equal instalments over its estimated life.
14. Whichever method is adopted, that method must be applied to all of the taxpayer’s depreciable
assets. Moreover, section 57 provides that, having adopted either of the two methods, that method must not
be altered by the taxpayer, except by leave of the Commissioner, or in exercise of the option to adopt the
prime cost method in lieu of diminishing value.
15. As a complement to the annual allowances, section 59 provides a system of balancing adjustments.
Thus, where a depreciable asset is disposed of, lost or destroyed, the amount by which the consideration


receivable falls short of the written-down value for depreciation purposes becomes an allowable deduction in
the year concerned. On the other hand, where the consideration exceeds the written-down value, the excess,
to the extent of the depreciation allowed, is included in the assessable income of that year.
TERM OF REFERENCE No. 1.
Whether the effective lives of units of property as estimated by the Commissioner of Taxation as required
by section 55 (1.) of the Income Tax and Social Services Contribution Assessment Act 1936-1953 are
fair and reasonable.
16. Prom the submissions made to us, we are satisfied that the estimates made by the Commissioner
of the effective lives of assets in terms of section 55 (1.) of the Act are fair and reasonable. The
opinions expressed to us were that the Commissioner’s estimates have been soundly based and that he has
dealt fairly with claims made to him for departures from the standard rates in special circumstances.
17. We are of the opinion that the present system under which the Commissioner, subject to review
by a Board of Review, is the determining authority for fixing the rates of depreciation, should be continued.
It was suggested to us that a technical body of referees, with expert knowledge of the industry concerned,
might be set up to determine cases where a difference of opinion arises between the Commissioner and
the taxpayer as to the effective life of an asset. Such a system is provided for in the United Kingdom,
although it was admitted that there was little recourse to it. In Australia, a taxpayer has the right to
take any such dispute to a Board of Review and it is significant that the references to these Boards are
almost entirely free from any disputes of this kind. In view of this fact, and the assurances we have had
that taxpayers generally are satisfied with the present arrangements, we see no justification for setting up a
special body of referees.
18. We did have put to us a number of requests for increases in the present rates of depreciation
on particular items of plant. These requests, however, were based either on new factors of construction
or usage which have come about since the existing rates were determined, or on abnormal conditions under
which the plant is - used in individual businesses.
19. In all except one of the cases concerned, it appeared that no approach had been made to the
Commissioner for adjustment of the existing rates. This is surprising, since such a course has always
been available and clearly the Commissioner cannot be aware of any inadequacy in the standard rates
in particular cases unless the facts are brought to his notice by the persons concerned. In the one case
which did reach the Commissioner —that of a transport vehicle —an increase from 20 per cent, to 25 per
cent, was granted, although this fell short of the 33J per cent, sought by the taxpayer.
20. Although some of the claims appear to us to have merit, we feel that it would require a more
detailed examination than we could make in the time and with the facilities available, to determine whether
the increased rates requested are, in fact, justified. In this regard, many of the claims amounted to no
more than expressions of opinion based on general experience. When we asked for more specific data, the
information furnished proved to be, in most cases, too incomplete to enable a firm conclusion to be reached
and in some instances failed to materialize at all.
21. In the circumstances, we feel that we can do no more than to pass on to you particulars of the
claims' and the supporting data which have been submitted to us, with the suggestion that they be referred
to the Commissioner for further inquiry and determination by him. This we are doing by way of a
separate memorandum. We are also including in the memorandum a number of claims made to us for
overall rates of depreciation in particular industries.
TERM OF REFERENCE No. 2.
Whether the bases of depreciation provided by the said Act ensure that the cost of each unit of property
is deducted in a reasonable manner over the effective life of that unit.
Proposed Increase in Diminishing Value Rates.
22. As already noted, the present law provides alternative bases of calculating the annual
depreciation allowances, namely, the diminishing value method and the prime cost method. These methods
are also those most commonly used in overseas countries.
23. Although the prime cost method has the advantage that the cost of the asset is completely
written off over the period of its effective life, it appears that the diminishing value method is the one
most frequently used. This is because it is simpler and requires less detailed plant records than the prime
cost method. Nevertheless, a considerable number of taxpayers do use the prime cost method, and it should
be continued as an alternative to the diminishing value method.
24. The diminishing value method, as it operates at present, is subject to the criticism that it
permits only about two-thirds of the cost of the asset to be written off over its effective life. Whilst it is
reasonable to expect that an asset which is disposed of at the end of its effective life would have some
salvage value, this would be unlikely to amount to one-third of its cost. Indeed, it seems illogical that,
F.3061/55. —3


PLANT WITH ESTIMATED EFFECTIVE LIFE OP 10 YEARS.
Year.
Prime Cost Method.
Diminishing Value Method.
10 Per cent.
10 Per cent.
15 Per cent.
£
£
£
1st
90
90
85
2nd
80
81
72
3rd
70
73
61
4th
60
65
52
5th
50
59
44
6th
40
53
38
7th
30
48
32
PLANT WITH ESTIMATED EFFECTIVE LIFE OF 20 YEARS.
Year.
Prime Cost Method.
Diminishing Value Method.
5 Per cent.
5 Per cent.
7i Per cent.
£
£
£
1st
95
95
93
2nd
90
90
86
3rd
85
86
79
4th
80
81
73
5th
75
77
68
6th .. ....
70
73
63
7th
65
70
58
8th
60
66
54
9th
55
63
50
10th
50
60
46
11th
45
57
42
12th
40
' 54
39
13th
35
51
36
14th
30
49
34
after a careful estimate of the effective life of an asset has been made, the calculation of depreciation then
applied should give such a result, particularly in view of the complete write-off offered by the alternative
prime cost method.
25. We received numerous submissions seeking increased rates of depreciation where the diminishing
value method is used. These submssions drew attention to the inequity to which we have just referred
and quoted the practices adopted overseas in this regard. In the United Kingdom, the diminishing value
rates are generally about double those for prime cost. In Canada, where the prime cost method was
changed to diminishing value in 1949, the present rates are double those formerly provided. In the United
States of America, the diminishing value rates were originally one and a half times those for prime cost,
but have recently been increased to double the prime cost rates.
26. To some extent, we have found this problem inseparable from that of obsolescence, which is
dealt with more particularly under Term of Reference No. 3. The aspect of obsolscence we feel is' relevant
here concerns the point of time when plant may be expected to be replaced and our observations in this
regard assume that a normal re-sale value would be realized at that point. The evidence we received,
however, indicated that, where plant bcomes obsolete, this is not always so and that in some instances
there is practically no salvage value. This further aspect will be considered later in our report.
27. Before the advent of obsolescence as a substantial factor in depreciation considerations, plant
was generally used for its full effective life. Now, however, the obsolescence factor frequently calls for
replacement of plant by improved units at an earlier stage. It is desirable, therefore, that both the prime
cost and diminishing value methods should provide as nearly as possible the same residual value at that
stage. We discussed this matter at some length with those who appeared before us and we reached the
conclusion that, as a general rule, it would be recognized as good practice to effect replacement at the
expiration of approximately two-thirds' of the estimated life. This view was supported by evidence
that in the later years of its life a machine requires excessive repairs and that a partly worn machine is
usually incapable of giving the degree of precision required.
28. From the point of view of bringing the diminishing value rates into accord with the prime cost
rates on this basis, it seems to us that the desired result would be achieved if the diminishing value rates
were increased by 50 per cent, and we recommend accordingly. The effect of such an increase will be
seen from the following tables' of written-down values at the end of successive years of an asset costing
£lOO


29. In our opinion, the increased diminishing value rates should be available in regard to existing
plant as well as future purchases.
Option to Change Method op Depreciation.
•‘lO. If the proposed increase in the diminishing value rates is adopted, we suggest that an option
should be given to taxpayers at present using the prime cost method to change to the diminishing value
method if they so desire. This option should be available in regard either to the whole of the taxpayer’s
plant or only to future purchases, in which case the existing plant will be allowed to work out on the
prime cost method. Conversely, taxpayers at present using the diminishing value method should be
permitted an option to change to the prime cost method either in respect of the whole of their plant or
only future purchases. Such an option is given at present, but is available only in regard to the whole
of the plant. Our proposal will meet the representations we received from taxpayers who stated that they
desired to change over to the prime cost method, but were prevented from doing so because of lack of
records of early plant.
Additional Methods of Depreciation.
31. It was suggested to us on several occasions that additional methods of calculating depreciation
should be permitted. These suggestions followed the principle laid down in the United States of America
that a taxpayer should be entitled to adopt any accepted basis for writing off depreciation. Such methods
would include “ sum-of-the-years-digits ”, mileage basis for transport, hours worked and units of production.
It seems to us, however, that the special factors on which these methods are based can be taken into account
under the prime cost or diminishing value methods and their inclusion in the income tax law would only add
unnecessary complications.
Balancing Adjustments.
32. Consideration of this term of reference would not be complete without dealing with the
provisions relating to balancing adjustments. These are contained in section 59 of the Act and are designed
to bring back as assessable income amounts previously allowed as depreciation which are recovered on the
disposal of the asset, or to allow as an additional deduction any deficiency of depreciation evidenced on
disposal or loss.
33. The provisions are a logical and effective method of ensuring that the actual depreciation incurred
by the taxpayer over the period during which the asset was held by him is allowed as a deduction and we
agree with the principles on which they are based.
34. Because of the inflationary conditions over recent years, however, the incidence of the balancing
adjustments has assumed a significance which we feel was not envisaged when the provisions were first
enacted. Whereas it might normally be expected that small “ tidying up ” adjustments would be necessary,
the tendency in many cases nowadays is for a substantial surplus over the depreciated value to be realized
on the disposal of an asset. This is due not so much to the allowance of excessive depreciation, but to the
change in money values.
35. Since the surplus on disposal is often absorbed in the higher price of the replacement asset, the
effect of the liability for tax on the amount recovered is to reduce the funds available for replacement at a
time when they are needed for that purpose. We were told that this has led to real hardship in some cases
and has militated against the replacement of assets, to the detriment of production.
36. Another facet of this question is the present tendency amongst taxpayers to insure their plant
against loss or destruction on the basis of replacement value, which is often as high as three times the
original cost. In the event of loss or destruction and the recovery of insurance, this leads to the writing
back as assessable income of most if not all of the depreciation previously allowed, thus partially defeating
the attempt to provide funds for complete replacement.
37. In the light of these developments brought about by the changed economic conditions, we feel
that the provisions should be reviewed.
38. In this connexion, our attention was repeatedly drawn to the war-time provisions of section
59 (2a.) to (2c.) of the Act, which modified the balancing adjustment in relation to insurance and other
recoveries on assets lost or destroyed during the war. Broadly, these provisions permitted the taxpayer,
instead of being assessed on the recoupment of depreciation in the year of loss, to set off the recoupment
against the cost of the replacement or against the value of any other assets subject to depreciation.


39. We suggest that the principle o± these provisions should be incorporated as a permanent feature
of the law, suitably widened to cover the proceeds of sales of plant, as well as insurance and other recoveries
on their loss or destruction.
40. Whilst this course would afford a reasonable degree of equity in the case of taxpayers engaged in
a continuing business, it would give no relief to the taxpayer who disposes of his assets for the purpose of
terminating his business and we think this taxpayer should also receive some consideration. This might be
effected by applying a principle similar to that provided for abnormal income of authors and inventors—
Division 16a of the Act. Thus, a proportion of the amount of the recoupment would be deducted from the
total taxable income to ascertain the rate of tax, which rate would then be applied to the normal income plus
the full amount of the recoupment.
TERM OF REFERENCE No. 3.
Whether it is practicable and desirable, in determining annual rates of depreciation, to take into account
possible obsolescence of a unit of property before the effective useful life of that unit is completed.
41. We received many representations that an allowance for obsolescence should be taken into
account in fixing the annual rates of depreciation.
42. The present rates are determined on the basis of wear and tear, the term “effective life” in
section 55 (1.) of the Act being interpreted by its ordinary meaning of “fit for service”. Any further
depreciation arising through obsolescsence is covered by the system of balancing adjustments provided by
section 59, which permits any loss on disposal to be taken up at that stage.
43. We have already referred to the changes which industry has undergone in Australia in recent
years. The effect of these changes is that it is no longer sufficient to have equipment which will work; now
it must work efficiently, economically and with the highest possible output. This not only requires that the
equipment should be kept constantly up to date, but also that it should not be subject to frequent
breakdowns and consequent loss of production.
44. Under the old conditions, when obsolescence was not such a significant factor and the rates of
tax were low, the provision in the balancing adjustment for premature retirement of equipment apparently
operated satisfactorily. But obsolescence is now so commonly and so consistently encountered, that we are
satisfied it should be recognized as a substantial element in determining the annual rates of depreciation.
45. As against this proposition, it was admitted to us that a great deal of plant is still in operation
beyond the effective life estimated by the Commissioner, but it was stressed that this plant was being
maintained only at the expense of uneconomical repairs. It was claimed that if greater depreciation
allowances were provided, much of this plant would be replaced by more modern equipment, thus not only
increasing productivity, but also saving heavy expenditure for repairs.
46. Whilst we agree that obsolescence should be taken into account in fixing the annual rates, the
method of making such an allowance, and the degree of the allowance, have given us some difficulty.
47. The evidence we received failed to establish any definable cycle of obsolescence in any industry.
It is largely an unpredictable contingency. Moreover, the incidence of obsolescence varies from time to time
and is not present in all industries at the same time. For example, in some of the primary industries there
is a movement towards greater mechanization and because this is in the experimental stage there are frequent
improvements in the machines being introduced. The same degree of obsolescence may not exist when the
period of experimentation passes. Again, obsolescence may come about because of a sudden increase of
public demand for a particular product, rendering the existing plant obsolete because of the need for
increased output.
48. The United States of America apparently authorizes an allowance for obsolescence in determining
the annual rates of depreciation. In the United Kingdom, obsolescence is not taken into account in fixing
the rates, but a system of investment allowances on new plant and initial depreciation on second-hand plant
has been adopted. Other countries, such as Sweden amd Western Germany, allow very high optional rates
of depreciation not related to the actual life of the plant. These measures have the effect of encouraging the
replacement of obsolete plant by a more rapid write-off.
49. By its nature, it is impossible to lay down any hard and fast formula for taking the obsolescence
factor into account. The only method which appears to us to be practicable is to introduce a degree of
flexibility into the annual rates of depreciation.
50. It was suggested to us that this might be achieved by authorizing the Commissioner to allow an
accelerated rate of depreciation upon application by the taxpayer when obsolescence became apparent. This
would involve actions by both the taxpayer and the Commissioner which we feel to be unnecessary. W©
favour leaving the matter, within prescribed limits, in the hands of the taxpayer, who should be, with his
knowledge of his own industry, the best judge of the situation.


A.
Basic Rates—Prime Cost.
B.
Proposed Rates —Diminishing
Value.
0.
Proposed Limits—Prime
Cost.
D.
Proposed Limits—‘Diminishing
Value.
0/
/o
2
■%
3
%
2-2*
0/
/o
2-4
2*
3f
2*-3
2*-4*
3
4*
3-4
3-6
4
6
4-5
4-7*
5
7*
5-6
5-9
6
9
6-8
6-12
H
11*
7*-9
7*-13
8
12
8-10
8-15
10
15
10-12
10-18
12*
18|
12*-15
12*-22*
15
22*
15-17*
15-22*
20
30
20
20-30
25
37*
25
25-37*
33*
50
33*
33*-50
51. We set out hereunder a table showing the limits we suggest, in relation to the basic rates as at
present fixed and the proposed increased rates for diminishing value: —
ISTotbs.—
Column A shows the basic rates for depreciation by the prime cost method determined by the
Commissioner at present.
Column B shows the increased rates for depreciation by the diminishing value method in accordance
with our recommendation in paragraph 28.
Column C shows the proposed limits within which the taxpayer may select a rate of depreciation
under the prime cost method.
Column D shows the proposed limits within which the taxpayer may select a rate of depreciation
under the diminishing value method.
52. The above table is intended to apply only to plant. Buildings which are the subject of depreciation
at present, namely, those which are integral with plant and those which are used for the purposes of
primary production, are excluded and are dealt with under Term of Reference No. 5. At this point,
however, we should indicate that it is not any part of our recommendation to exclude such buildings from
the depreciation provisions.
53. It will be noted that Columns C and D of the table contain lower as well as upper limits, except
in the last three categories of Column C. We feel that a lower limit should be provided so that taxpayers
will claim a reasonable allowance in relation to the life of the plant. The lower limits have been fixed at
the existing rates so that taxpayers who so desire may continue to use their present rates.
54. In connexion with plant with an estimated life of five years or less, we have made no provision
for any additional rates to provide for obsolescence, since we feel that the balancing adjustments sufficiently
provide for any possible obsolescence in these cases.
55. It is our opinion that once a rate has been selected by the taxpayer, that rate should be continued
during the life of the plant unless altered with the permission of the Commissioner.
TERM OF REFERENCE No. 4.
Whether it would he desirable to provide, by way of an amendment of the law, for an option whereby the
taxpayer might claim depreciation at a standard rate per annum on all units of property in respect of
which depreciation is allowable to him, and, if so, what rate should be specified as the maximum standard
rate of depreciation.
56. We interpreted this term of reference to mean that a single rate of depreciation would be
specified in the law as a maximum and that the taxpayer, regardless of the composition of his plant and the
type of industry in which he is engaged, would have the option, in lieu of taking the individual schedule
rates, to select any rate up to the specified maximum as an overall rate for application to his plant as a
whole.
57. The reaction to such a proposal was somewhat divided. Some commended the idea as a means of
simplifying depreciation claims, from the point of view both of taxpayers and of the taxation administration.
It was pointed out that such a method would be particularly suitable for taxpayers with numerous items of
plant having varying individual rates of depreciation. Others opposed the idea on the ground that, because
of its arbitrary nature, it would be contrary to sound accounting principles. Since it would be necessary
to strike an average rate, one of its effects would be to over-depreciate long life assets, whilst
under-depreciating those with shorter lives, thus giving rise to disproportionate balancing adjustments on
disposal.


58. This difference of opinion is exemplified in the present practices of taxpayers in relation to the
overall rates already provided for some industries. In the gas industry, for instance, individual rates
ranging from 2 per cent, to 20 per cent, are provided in respect of 66 different items of plant, Avith the
option of taking an overall rate of 4 per cent. Notwithstanding the simplification of their claims offered
by the overall rate, the evidence before us indicated that most gas companies prefer to take the individual
rates. On the other hand, it was represented to us on behalf of several industries Avhieh have no overall
rate at present, including hotels and road contracto. s, that such an option would be welcomed in those
industries.
59. The rates of depreciation at present listed in Income Tax Order No. 1217 range from as low as
1 per cent, to as high as 50 per cent, and it would he impracticable to fix a common rate within this range
to suit all industries. For example, the evidence put to us by the gas industry indicated that an overall
rate of 6 per cent, would be appropriate, whereas the representatives of road contractors asked for a rate of
20 per cent. If there were to be any measure of control over the standard rates adopted (and this would
appear to be inherent in the proposal in vieAV of the mention of a maximum limit), it would thus seem
necessary to specify a rate sufficiently high to accommodate the most extreme eases and leave it to the
Commissioner to determine individual rates within this range to suit particular industries.
60. This leads us to observe that it is already the practice of the Commissioner to fix overall rates for
particular taxpayers or particular industries where this is requested. If the suggested provision were
inserted in the law, it appears to us that the only feature which would be added to the present practice
Avould be to confer on taxpayers a definite right to take an overall rate, which, however, would still have
to be fixed by the Commissioner. An alternatiA r e to this course might be to specify in the law separate rates
for particular industries, but we foresee that this Avould involve practical difficulties. Moreover, the
comparative rigidity which such a method could be expected to bring about would tend to defeat the
flexibility which the provision would be designed to afford.
61. We recommend that no change be made in the law, but that the present practice, under which
overall rates are fixed by the Commissioner, should be continued.
62. Representations which have been made to us for overall rates in particular instances have been
included in the separate memorandum referred to in paragraph 21 of this report.
TERM OF REFERENCE No. 5.
Whether it would he desirable to extend deductions for depreciation to any classes of assets not subject to
such allowances under the present law.
63. Just as it does not seek to levy tax on capital gains, the income tax law does not, as a general rule,
permit deductions for capital expenditure. On the other hand, due allowance is given for the various
day-to-day outgoings of a revenue nature which are expended in the earning of income.
64. In between these two distinct classes of expenditure there is a third class, which, though
commonly termed “ capital ” expenditure, is, in reality, long-term revenue expenditure. The most obvious
example of this class is the cost of working plant, the value of which gradually disappears as the plant is
worn out in the process of producing goods over a number of years. Although the asset which is created by
this class of expenditure has a lasting value beyond the year in which the expenditure is incurred, it
nevertheless has a definite life, which is determined either by exhaustion through usage or depletion, or
through effluxion of time.
65. To a large extent, the income tax law recognizes that an allowance should be made of such
expenditure over a period of years. The depreciation allowances for plant and equipment are an example
and the deductions for developmental and certain other expenditure incurred in the mining industry
represent a recent extension of the same principle. lloAvwer, a number of items of this class of expenditure
still remain outside the scope of the permitted deductions and we received many requests that the law should
be widened to allow deductions to be taken for them.
66. As a principle, we agree that all expenditure which is used up in the earning of income should be
deductible in arriving at the profit on which tax is to be levied. In its broadest sense, however, such a
principle could go far beyond the bounds of depreciation allowances. To remain within our terms of
reference, Ave have confined our considerations to assets Avhieh, in the ordinary conception of depreciation,
are subject to a gradual diminution in value over a measurable period.
67. The additional classes of assets which we think ought to be brought within the depreciation
allowances fall into two main groups, namely, buildings and wasting assets, and we propose to deal with
each of these groups separately.
Buildings.
68. In none of the matters which came before us did Ave encounter more widespread representations,
nor more unanimity of opinion, than that an allowance should be given for depreciation of buildings.


Previous History.
69. With minor exceptions, namely, structures forming an integral part of plant and structural
improvements on land used for primary production, the Commonwealth income tax law has never allowed
depreciation on buildings. Since 1946, a special provision has permitted the cost of buildings used for
scientific research to be written off over a period of three years, but this is more in the nature of a concession
than an allowance for depreciation. Before the adven + of uniform income tax in 1942, Queensland was the
only State which granted an allowance for depreciation of buildings.
70. The reasons which appear to have been held against such an allowance in the past are to be found
in the following extract from the Report of the Royal Commission on Taxation 1932-34:
“We received many requests that depreciation should be allowed in all cases. There are
many buildings, however, which with repairs and maintenance, all of which are of course allowed
as deductions, will last for hundreds of years. There is the further consideration that many
substantial buildings in good localities have not depreciated in value —on the contrary the property
as a whole has appreciated owing to an increase in values of the sites on which the buildings
stand . . . We recommend that depreciation on buildings be restricted to buildings forming an
integral part of plant . .
71. Whilst the reasons given by the Royal Commission for rejecting the allowance in 1934 may to
some extent be still valid, we are of the opinion that conditions in Australia have so changed in the
meantime that further considerations have arisen which justify a review of the question.
Present Considerations.
72. There can be no doubt that, like any other material thing, a building does physically deteriorate
over a period of years, although repairs do enable it to be kept usable. In Australia there are many
buildings which are 100 years old and are still being used, whilst in overseas countries there are many
which are much older.
73. Manufacturing industries have become an important part of Australia’s economy and factories
and other industrial structures represent a substantial proportion of buildings. There has also come
about a closer commercial relationship with overseas countries, bringing with it increasing problems of
competition and the need for constant change and improvement to keep abreast of modern -world
developments. The result has been that obsolescence has become as important a factor for buildings as
for plant.
74. Obsolescence affects buildings in various ways. In the manufacturing industry, the development
of ne-w types of plant and equipment, changes in demand for particular products, relocation of industrial
areas, provision of improved amenities for employees and the constant need for increased efficiency all
tend to limit the useful lives of factory buildings. Commercial buildings are hardly less affected. For
example, the hotel industry is faced at the present time with the need to undertake large-scale rebuilding
to meet the public demand for improved amenities and more modern standards of accommodation. Theatres
and broadcasting centres provide further instances of the need for periodical change and reconstruction
to keep abreast of new developments. In retail stores, warehouses' and office buildings, there is evidence
in many of our cities and towns to-day of an increasing tendency towards rebuilding and reconstruction
for reasons of changed commercial methods and the more efficient use of space.
75. As in the case of plant, the extent to which obsolescence affects the useful life of a building is
a varying and largely immeasurable factor. It does become evident, however, when the elements of
wear and tear and obsolescence are brought together, that the amount of real depreciation assumes
significant proportions.
76. The argument that the loss in depreciation of a building may be offset by appreciation in the
value of the site on which it stands can have validity only if the value by which the site has appreciated is
realized by sale. It can have no validity where a taxpayer erects a new building on the same site.
77. From a practical stand-point, we consider that a building used for business purposes' should be
looked at in the same way as plant which is employed in the business, and as an entity separate from the
land on which it stands. Just as an item of plant becomes worn out through use, so must there come a
time with every building when its usefulness will have expired through decay or obsolescence, whereas the
land will endure, indefinitely. We see a clear distincion between funds invested in the land, which is a
permanent asset, and those invested in the building, which will reduce in value over the course of time.
To the extent that this loss of value occurs with the use of the building in the earning of income, it follows
that the loss should be allowed as a deduction from that income in determining the true profit on which
tax is to be levied.
78. Our view is reinforced by the precedent so often put to us of the allowances given by overseas
countries. To-day, Australia and South Africa alone amongst the English-speaking nations do not allow
depreciation on buildings. In the United States of America, Canada and New Zealand, an allowance is
given on all classes of buildings used in the production of income. In the United Kingdom, an allowance
was introduced in 1947 for industrial buildings and it is understood that an extension of the allowance
to commercial buildings is at present in contemplation.


79. Indeed, the fact that such allowances are given in the countries mentioned has a direct bearing
on whether an allowance should be given in Australia. Australian industries in competition with similar
industries in those countries are at a disadvantage at present in this respect. In other more general
ways, it appears that the absence of such an allowance is reacting to the detriment of industry. We
were told, for example, that efforts to raise capital overseas for rebuilding in the hotel industry had been
unsuccessful largely because of this factor.
80. Having regard to all of these considerations, we have found the conclusion inescapable that
the time has arrived when a depreciation allowance should be given for buildings.
Possible Bases for Allowance.
81. Whilst we found ourselves in agreement with the submissions made to us in justification of the
claim that there should be an allowance for depreciation of buildings, Ave found very real difficulties when
we came to consider the basis on which the alloAvance should be given.
82. The first question was AAdiether all classes of buildings used in the production of income should
qualify for the alloAvance. On the principle already stated that all expenditure incurred in the
production of income should be an allowable deduction, we believe that all buildings used for this purpose
should be included.
83. The next question was Avhether the allowance should be limited to buildings constructed after
the date of commencement of the allowance, or whether it should apply also to existing buildings. In our
view, it would be quite inequitable, for example, to exclude a building which had been completed a few
days before the commencement of the allowance, Avhile giving a full allowance for a building completed a
feAv days afterwards. In a reducing degree, the same consideration must apply to any building which,
though constructed many years earlier, has not exhausted its useful life at the commencing date. We have
concluded, therefore, that the alloAvance should apply to existing as well as future buildings. This' view
is firmly supported by the opinion of those who made submissions to us. At the same time, it was
generally agreed that, in commencing the allowance in the case of existing buildings, an adjustment
should be made to take account of the depreciation which had already occurred over past years.
84. Having arrived at the eonchision that all buildings used in the production of income should
be included and that the alloAvance should apply to existing as well as future buildings, it became necessary
to determine the basis of valuation on which the depreciation allowance should be calculated. In this
regard, there appeared to be three possible bases. These were—■
(A) Current replacement value;
(B) Cost to the present owner; and
(C) Original cost of construction,
each of which is discussed in the folloAving paragraphs.
(a) current replacement value.
85. The advocates of the current replacement value basis sought to justify their proposal on the
ground that it would place all taxpayers on an equal footing. It would require that each building
existing at the date of commencement of the allowance be valued by an approved valuer on the basis of
estimated current building costs. This figure would then be reduced by the notional depreciation which
had occurred since the date of construction and the residue would be allowed as depreciation over the
remainder of the life of the building.
86. The main objection avc see against this basis is that, because of the changes in money values over
the years', it would result in the allowance of deductions for much more than the actual expenditure in
many cases. For example, statistics show that building costs at present are about three times as great as
they were in 1943. A building which cost £50,000 to erect in 1943 Avould thus be valued on 1955 costs at
approximately £150,000. Assuming the rate of depreciation to be TJ per cent, per annum, the amount
which Avould qualify for deduction under the proposal would be £123,000 (i.e., £150,000 less notional
depreciation*—twelve years at £2,250 per annum = £27,000), as against the actual expenditure of £50,000.
87. It is plain that such a basis, giving a deduction for amounts not actually expended, would be at
variance with existing taxation principles'. Moreover, it Avould give rise to an anomaly as between
buildings of recent construction and those built many years ago when costs Avere much loAver.
88. There is also the question of practical application. Such a basis would involve an opinion as
to the current replacement value of each individual building, thus leading to contest between the
administration and the taxpayer in many instances. It is also very doubtful whether the number of
skilled valuers available would be equal to the task of valuing the many thousands of buildings which would
be involved.
89. If the same basis Avere used for future buidings, the same problems would continue to arise.
Because of the constant changes in costs, there Avould presumably have to be a fresh valuation for each
building each year, or at frequent intervals, and the great amount of administrative work Avhich Would
result appears to us to make the proposal impracticable.


90. Inherent in this proposal is the fundamental question whether depreciation allowances should
be based on original cost, or on some other basis which will reflect changes in money values. If the basis
of replacement value were adopted for buildings, it would seem difficult to deny the same treatment for
plant and other assets.
(b) cost to the present owner.
91. The second basis, that of cost to the present owner, was the one which found the strongest support
amongst those who made submissions to us. The chief virtue claimed for this basis was that it would give
a deduction calculated on the amount actually expended by the taxpayer and would thus be in line with
existing taxation principles. It was claimed, too, that the present owner would in most cases have a record
of the amount he had paid for the building and there would be no difficulty, therefore, in establishing the
figure on which the allowance was to be given.
92. Examination reveals many objections to this proposal. It seems to us that an anomaly would be
created as between one taxpayer who had owned a building since its erection and another taxpayer who had
purchased a building at a price in excess of the cost of construction. In the former instances, the annual
deduction would be based on the cost of construction, whilst in the latter it would be based on a higher
figure, even though the two buildings might be almost identical in age and other respects. A further
anomaly would be the increased deduction allowable where buildings were transferred at written-up current
values between parties not at arm’s length, as has frequently occurred in company re-organizations over
recent years.
93. If the same basis were also applied to future buildings (as some of those who appeared before us
thought it should), the question must surely arise whether the profit which is realized on the sale of the
building should be subject to tax. If a deduction were allowed for the full purchase price, we think it
would be logical to tax such profit. As, however, the income tax law does not seek to tax capital gains, we
feel that it would be equally inappropriate, on the other hand, to allow the corresponding outgoing as a
deduction to the purchaser. Moreover, if the allowance were given on the full purchase price without
taxing the profit in the hands of the vendor, there would undoubtedly be many sales of buildings between
related parties merely to obtain a higher depreciation allowance.
94. The claim that the purchase price would be easy to establish would be true to a degree only, since
the problem would remain in nearly every case of separating the price paid for the building as distinct
from the land. There would also be the problem of determining the notional depreciation for past years
where a building had passed through several hands during that period.
(c) COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
95. The third basis, that of cost of construction, envisages that, nothwithstanding changes of
ownership, the depreciation to be allowed in respect of any building shall be no more than the actual
expenditure incurred in its construction. In the generally accepted sense, a building is erected for a specific
purpose at a certain cost and on the assumption that it will have a limited effective life. It therefore
appears reasonable that such cost is the amount which should be regarded as an outgoing spread over its life
by annual instalments, or by a balancing adjustment on demolition or on sale at less than the depreciated
value.
96. This basis has a precedent in the United Kingdom allowance for industrial buildings and we see
many advantages in its adoption. In the first place, it would be consistent with depreciation allowances for
plant, which are based primarily on original cost. It would also relate the allowance to an established
figure, thus avoiding openings for dispute which are inherent in the other bases we have already discussed.
Moreover, it is the only practicable method we can see which would enable both existing and future buildings
to be treated on a common basis.
97. From an administrative point of view, also, this would appear to be the most satisfactory basis.
In the first determination, it would be necessary only to establish the cost of construction in order to
calculate the annual allowance. This allowance would then continue during the life of the building, unless
a sale took place at a price less than the depreciated value, in which event a balancing adjustment would
be allowed to the vendor and the annual allowance to the purchaser would be reduced accordingly.
Basis Recommended.
98. In our opinion, any method adopted would be open to some criticism. We are therefore concerned
to recommend a basis as satisfactory as possible from the point of view of both the taxpayer and the revenue.
99. Of the three methods which appear to be available, namely, current replacement value, cost to the
present owner and original cost of construction, we consider that the original cost of construction is the
most practicable and involves the least number of inequities. We recommend, therefore, that the allowance
be granted on that basis.


Outline of Proposed Plan.
100. First in outline, and with the main features amplified later the plan we propose for adoption is
as set out hereunder. For convenience, we will refer to buildings in existence at the commencement of the
allowance as “ existing buildings ” and those constructed after that date as “ future buildings ”..
(a) The allowance will apply to all buildings and structures (other than those for which
depreciation or other allowances are already given under the law) owned and used by
the taxpayer in the production of assessable income.
(&) It will be based on the original cost of construction, or, where this is not known, on the
deemed cost of construction calculated by reference to a prescribed schedule of building
costs.
(c) Where a building is purchased, either before or after the commencement of the allowance,
for less than the depreciated value, the allowance to the purchaser will be based on such
lower value.
( d ) Existing buildings will be treated as though depreciation at the prescribed rate had been
deducted each year from the date of construction and the allowance will be limited to the
balance of the cost of construction thus remaining at the commencement of the allowance.
( e ) Alterations or additions to the original building will be treated for the purpose of the
allowance as separate buildings.
(/) The annual rates of depreciation allowable will be 1J per cent, for brick, stone or concrete
construction and 2| per cent, for timber, fibre or iron construction, calculated on the
prime cost method.
( g ) Balancing adjustments will be confined to the amount by which the consideration receivable
on sale, loss or demolition falls short of the depreciated value. This amount will be
allowed as additional depreciation in the year in which it arises. There will be no
recapture provision in respect of depreciation recouped on disposal.
Application.
101. The allowance will apply not only to buildings owned and used by the taxpayer for the purposes
of his own business, but also to buildings let for rent, including fiats and dwellings. It will not apply,
however, to a building used by the owner as his residence.
102. There will be some buildings which are occupied by the owner and only partly used in the
production of income, such as a combined shop and dwelling, or the residence of a doctor which includes his
surgery. A provision similar to section 61 of the Act in relation to plant would be required to allow a
proportionate deduction to be determined in such eases.
103. Some classes of buildings qualify for allowances already provided under the law and these
should be excluded from the new allowance. They include buildings used for scientific research,
improvements not subject to tenant rights erected by the lessee on leasehold property and housing and
amenities for employees in the mining industry. Structures forming an integral part of plant and structural
improvements on land used for primary production, for which depreciation is already given under the law,
should also be excluded, but it is suggested that structures of this type erected in future might be brought
within the general allowance for buildings.
Basis.
104. The cost of construction for the purposes of the allowance will include all expenditure incurred in
the erection of the building and structural improvements, including architect’s fees, excavations and
levelling of the site and demolition of the previous structure, if any. It will also include installations which
form an integral part of the building, such as plumbing and electrical wiring. It will not include, however,
such items as lifts, escalators, fixtures and fittings, which are already depreciable as plant.
105. In claiming the allowance, the onus will rest upon the taxpayer to satisfy the Commissioner
as to the original cost of construction of the building. Whilst this should not result in any real difficulties
in the case of future buildings, we recognize that it might not always be possible to establish the
construction cost of existing buildings. Particularly will this be so in the case of buildings which were
erected many years ago and which have changed hands in the meantime.
106. It would be unfair to deny the allowance in such cases, especially as the inability to produce
records of the original construction costs would not be due to any fault of the taxpayer in most instances.
On the other hand, it is important that any arbitrary basis which might be adopted to meet this situation
should ensure an equitable result, not only from the point of view of the taxpayer, but also from that of the
revenue.
107. We have given a great deal of thought to this problem and have come to the conclusion that it
can reasonably be met by means of a schedule of average building costs of various types of construction
extending over the years which are relevant. The schedule which we propose for this purpose is set out as
an appendix attached to this report.


108. In our first approach to the schedule, we had the idea that, for completeness, it ought to cover
the whole period from the commencement of the allowance back to the earliest year which will be relevant.
We found, however, that, in recent years, many variations of finish and new types of construction have
developed, which led us into a very extensive range of differing costs. On the other hand, we found that,
before the war, these elements tended to be much more standardized, thus enabling the range of costs to be
reduced to more manageable proportions. As we felt that, in any event, the actual construction costs of the
great majority of buildings erected during the war and post-war years would be capable of ascertainment,
we adopted 1939 as the base year for the schedule.
109. Having determined the range of costs for 1939, our next step, was to relate these back to each of
the preceding years. For this purpose, we used an index maintained by the Rural Bank of New South
Wales showing the relative levels of building costs since 1926 and an index for the earlier years conforming
as. nearly as practicable to the basis followed by the Rural Bank.
110. Although based on cottage construction, the Rural Bank index is, we understand, widely
recognized and is frequently used in relation to all types of building construction. This is evidenced by
its acceptance by the High Court in the case of Grace Bros. Pty. Ltd. v. The Commonwealth (72 C.L.R.
269) as a satisfactory index of the general trend in building costs in determining the probable cost in
1945 of a large city office building as compared with the actual cost in 1929. It has the special merit
that the costs on which it is compiled are not based strictly on award rates of wages or list prices of
materials, but are weighted to take account of prevailing economic conditions, such as periods of over-supply
or under-supply of labour and materials.
111. The manner in which it is intended that the schedule should be applied is' that the taxpayer
will be required to identify the classification into which his building falls and to measure the plan area of
each floor. The deemed cost of construction will then be calculated by multiplying the rate per square
foot shown in the schedule for the year of construction by the total number of square feet in the plan
area.
112. After having made tests of the schedule against known construction costs of various types of
buildings, we have confidence in recommending its adoption for the purpose for which it is designed. At
the same time, it must be emphasized that the schedule has its limitations and is intended for application
only where it proves impossible to produce satisfactory evidence of the actual construction costs.
113. In this connexion, it should be explained that the 1939 costs on which the schedule is based
represent construction standards slightly above the minimum for each classification. No attempt has
been made to take into account the many variations in finish which distinguish individual buildings.
Indeed, to do so would so complicate the schedule as to make it virtually unworkable. Further, the
schedule does not provide for buildings of what might be termed monumental types, such as insurance
offices, banks and city theatres, for which we would expect that records of the actual construction costs will
be available.
114. The fullest measure of equity can be assured only if the actual construction costs can be
established and we suggest that, in the ease of existing buildings at the outset of the allowance, the
Commissioner might be authorized to treat with taxpayers on fairly broad lines to enable this to be
achieved in as many cases as possible. By this, of course, we do not mean that the Commissioner should
be required to accept a mere estimate by the taxpayer, but rather that he should be satisfied with substantial
evidence, such as the building account in the taxpayer’s books, or a record by the local building
authority of the tender price, and not insist on the vouching of each separate item of expenditure. Where,
however, the information available is insufficient to enable the actual costs to be established with reasonable
certainty, it can be taken that the schedule will afford the closest measure of justice possible in the
circumstances and it must be accepted as a final determination on this understanding.
115. Disputes may arise regarding the amount claimed by the taxpayer as representing cost of
construction for the purposes of the allowance and we consider that a right of appeal against the decision of
the Commissioner should be given in such cases. Where the schedule is applied, any right of appeal should
be limited to the question of the classification into which the building falls. We feel that such appeals
could be handled by the various taxation tribunals already in existence and that there should be no occasion
to set up a special body for this purpose.
Purchase at Less than Depreciated Value.
116. It is proposed that, where a building is sold for less than its depreciated value, the loss so
incurred by the vendor will be allowed as additional depreciation in the year of sale. As a corollary, it
will be necessary to provide that the future annual allowances to be taken by the purchaser for the remainder
of the term will be based on the amount actually paid by him for the building. The annual allowance
to the purchaser will be calculated by dividing the purchase price of the building by the number of years
in the remainder of the term. If this adjustment were not made, the result would he to give the purchaser
an allowance in excess of his actual expenditure.


117. This principle will apply not only to future transactions, but also to buildings purchased
before the commencement of the allowance. Although in the latter ease the vendor is not concerned, the
defect of giving the purchaser an allowance greater than his actual expenditure would remain.
Notional Depreciation.
118. For existing buildings, the actual depreciation to be allowed will be limited to the written-
down value at the commencement of the allowance. This' will be ascertained by deducting from the
original construction cost annual depreciation at the prescribed rates for the period from the date of
construction. Thus, on a weatherboard building constructed twenty years ago for £4,000, the amount of
notional depreciation to be deducted would be £2,000, leaving a balance of £2,000 to be allowed over the
ensuing twenty years.
119. The same process will be followed after the commencement of the allowance where a building
is brought into use in the production of income for the first time, the guiding principle being that the cost
of the building is regarded as being written off by equal instalments over each year of the prescribed term,
regardless of its use in any year.
120. So far as concerned existing buildings at the commencement of the allowance, it was put to us
that the deduction of notional depreciation for past years' would be unfair to persons who had not the
opportunity in the past of recouping the outlay on their buildings. As we see it, however, acceptance of
this viewpoint would be tantamount to a retrospective application of the allowance and we consider it
beyond our province to advance any such proposal.
Alteration and Additions.
121. Since it is proposed that the annual allowance is to be calculated on the prime cost method,
it follows that alterations and additions to the original structure must be treated for the purposes of the
allowance as separate buildings.
122. Some problems will arise in this regard where existing buildings have undergone substantial
alteration. We were given an example of a building which was originally a warehouse and was
subsequently converted into offices at a considerable cost. Unless complete records are available, difficulty
will arise in cases of this kind in separating the respective values of the original building and the
alterations. In such instances, the matter will have to be dealt with by negotiation on the best information
available. As a principle, we feel that it would be practicable to determine these cases on the general basis
of separation as proposed for the future. That is to say, the value of the original building would be
determined on the basis of its actual cost, if known, or alternatively on the basis of the schedule, and this
would constitute one asset for depreciation purposes. Alterations or additions in any subsequent year
would be valued separately as far as practicable and would be treated as a further asset for depreciation
purposes.
Rates of Depreciation.
123. From the evidence placed before us and our own researches, we. have found it quite impracticable
to lay down any reliable scale of annual rates of depreciation based on the estimated lives of buildings.
Something of this order might be possible by classification according to use, but a very wide range of
rates would result and there would be many complications of administration, as, for example, changes in
the use of a building from one purpose to another. We came to the conclusion, therefore, that the problem
should be resolved on a very broad basis, recognizing only a difference between—
(a) brick, stone or concrete; and
(i) timber, fibro or iron.
124. In considering the rate to apply to brick, stone or concrete buildings, we recognized that
some -would be used for probably 100 years, but evidence indicated that for others of this type the
expected life would be no more than 40 to 50 years'. This range of estimated life suggests that a rate
from 1 per cent, to 2 per cent, would be appropriate. We recommend that it be fixed at 14 per cent.,
corresponding to a normal life of 67 years.
125. It is generally accepted that the expected life of a timber, fibro or iron building is less than
one of brick, stone or concrete and, since again it is impossible to make an accurate determination, we
believe that a reasonable rate would be 2| per cent., corresponding to a normal life of 40 years.
126. Where a building is constructed partly of brick, stone or concrete and partly of timber, fibro
or iron, the predominant material will determine the rate to be applied.
127. Having recommended that the cost of a building should be written off over a fixed term, it
follows that the prime cost method should be applied for the calculation of the annual depreciation.
128. It will be noted that, on the rates we have proposed, the oldest buildings to qualify for the
allowance, assuming commencement at Ist July, 1955, will be those erected in 1889 if of brick, stone
or concrete construction and in 1916 if of other construction.


Balancing Adjustments.
129. It might appear at first that the principle of balancing adjustments as applied to plant should
be followed. However, an examination of the practical application of such a system to buildings shows
there are a number of unsatisfactory features, particularly in the ease of those sold for more than their
depreciated value.
130. Practical difficulties would arise in separating from the total purchase price for the property
the amount applicable to the building as' distinct from the land. This is already a troublesome problem
in relation to structural improvements on land used for primary production and would he greatly
accentuated in the case of buildings in view of the number of transactions and higher values which
would be concerned, and also the significanse of site values, particularly in regard to commercial and
industrial buildings.
131. Such a system could also produce capricious results if taken in conjunction with the principle
of a fixed term of depreciation, especially where a change of ownership occurred in the later years' of
the term. To take an extreme illustration—that of a building costing £IO,OOO and carrying a 21- per
cent, rate of depreciation and sold at the end of the thirty-ninth year for its original cost of £IO,OOO.
With the normal balancing adjustment, the vendor in such a case would he assessed in the year of sale
on the past depreciation of £9,750 and the purchaser would be allowed a full deduction of the original
cost of £IO,OOO in the following year. The result would be that the vendor would find the funds
he required for purchasing a building in replacement heavily depleted by a liability for tax, while the
purchaser would receive an unwarranted deduction. y-
-132. In view of these considerations, we do not recommend balancing adjustments in respect of
sales of buildings above their depreciated value.
133. We feel, on the other hand, that, in the event of a building being demolished before the
end of its term of depreciation, an allowance must be given at that stage for the balance of the con-
struction cost not already written off. This must apply in order to give equity where buildings prove
to have a shorter life than the fixed term.
134. We consider that an adjustment should also be given where a building is sold at a price less
than the depreciated value, so that the vendor will be allowed a deduction of the difference between
the depreciated value and the selling price. Correspondingly, the annual amount which the purchaser
will be allowed as future depreciation will be the price paid by him for the building, divided by the
number of years in the remainder of the term.
Wasting Assets.
135. As previously indicated, we received representations for allowances on a number of “ wasting
assets ”. These have been considered and we feel that the following items are deserving of some
allowance:—
Patents Rights and Similar Intangible Assets.
136. Under the Commonwealth patent laws, patent rights in Australia are normally for a period
of sixteen years. There is provision for limited extensions beyond this period on certain conditions,
but this applies in practice only in relatively few instances. In any event, it does not detract from the
basic fact that patent rights have a definite and measurable life. To the extent that expenditure in
relation to such rights is incurred in the production of assessable income, it is thus of a wasting nature
and a deduction ought to be given for it over the period of its life.
137. In this connexion, there are two types of cases to be considered. First, where a patent is
developed and used by the original patentee in his own business; and, secondly, where a lump sum is
paid for the purchase of patent rights, or for a licence to use such rights for a specified period.
138. In the former class, there are no doubt instances where, in practice, the costs of developing
the patent are deducted as part of the working expenses of the business, or as' expenditure on scientific
research under section 73a of the Act. Where, however, the developmental expenditure is not other-
wise deductible, we consider it should be allowed in equal instalments over the life of the patent.
139. The only other expenditure which would be involved in such a case would be the cost of the
original registration and periodical renewal fees. These expenses are relatively small amounts and, in
our opinion, should be given as an outright deduction at the time the expenditure is actually incurred.
140. Those who made the submissions to us, however, were primarily concerned with the second
class, namely, where patent rights, or a licence to use them, are purchased for a lump sum. We were told
that, although it would often be much more economical to do so, manufacturers frequently decline the
opportunity to purchase such rights or licence because the expenditure cannot be taken as a deduction.
Instead, they prefer to enter into arrangements for the payment of royalties, which are deductible as
current expenditure. The evidence was to the effect that this practice had added unnecessarily to
production costs. An example was quoted in which a licence was offered for a certain capital sum. Because


this could not be claimed as a deduction, a royalty arrangement was entered into, with the result that the
total royalties which have since been paid already amount to five times the lump sum originally asked.
As the patentee in this instance —as in the great majority of instances —is a non-resident of Australia,
there has been no corresponding recoupment of revenue from the recipient.
141. In both types of case, it would be necessary to have a recapture provision to enable any part
of the cost recouped on assignment or surrender of the rights or licence, up to the limit of the deductions
previously allowed, to be brought back as assessable income in the hands of the recipient.
142. Whilst we consider that the deductions suggested should be given, we recognize that the
situation must be looked at also on the side of the person who receives the payments. As the income tax
law stands at present, it seems that amounts received for the sale of patent rights are taxable only where
it is shown that the recipient is carrying on business as an inventor. Moreover, the more important
patents which are used under licence belong to non-residents of Australia, who are beyond the scope of
the Australian taxing laws.
143. Unless the allowance is qualified in some way, this position may leave the way open to possible
abuse of the deduction, such as the sale of rights between related parties at an inflated price to give a
capital profit to the vendor and a high deduction to the purchaser.
144. As a means of overcoming this' possibility, it was suggested to us that, where the rights or
licence are purchased from another party, the deduction should be conditional upon the vendor being
assessable on the proceeds, either in Australia or overseas. Apart from the practical difficulties which would
be involved in establishing that payments made to persons overseas were taxable, this does not appeal to
us as being an equitable solution.
145. The course we favour is to allow the deduction on the basis of parties at arm’s length. Where,
in the opinion of the Commissioner, the transaction is between parties not at arm’s length, the deduction
should be limited to such amount as the Commissioner considers would be the price between parties at arm’s
length.
146. We consider that the deduction should be allowed only where the expenditure by the purchaser
is an outgoing for business purposes and for the production of income from the patent rights. The
allowance should not be affected by the question as to whether or not the proceeds are taxable in the hands
of the vendor.
147. The considerations which apply to patent rights apply also to registered designs, the normal
period for which is fifteen years, and we recommend that they be treated similarly.
148. The normal period for copyrights is for the life of the author and 50 years afterwards.
Although the amounts paid for copyrights are usually relatively small, we think that such expenditure
should also qualify for deduction. We suggest that this be allowed over a period of 50 years or the
remaining life of the copyright, whichever is the less. In order to avoid the necessity of carrying forward
small amounts, the taxpayer might be given the option of writing off any amount under £SO in the year in
which it is incurred, or if it exceeds £SO, then at the rate of £SO per annum until extinguished.
Quarries, Claypiis, &c.
149. Requests were made to us that an allowance should be given for the capital cost of land
acquired for the purpose of extracting natural deposits of stone, gravel, clay, sand, &c.
150. This subject was examined in 1950 by the Commonwealth Committee on Taxation and we
support the principle contained in the recommendations set out in the Committee’s report on Reference
No. s—Taxation5 —Taxation of the Mining Industries in Australia, as follows:
(1) That an allowance of the cost of the land, spread over the life of the natural deposit
extracted from the land for the purpose of sale, be granted for the year ending 30th June,
1951, and subsequent years.
(2) That the residual value upon cessation of exploitation, or the amount received on the sale
of the land, to the extent of the deductions allowed, be brought to account as income.
151. We suggest that, in determining the period over which the allowance is to be given, the same
basis be followed as with developmental expenditure in the mining industry, namely, the estimated life
of the deposit or 25 years, whichever is the less.
Buildings and Roads Used in the Timber Industry.
152. We received requests that the timber-getting and saw-milling industry should be accorded
allowances for capital expenditure similar to those given in the mining industry, namely, that the cost of
mill buildings, housing and amenities for employees and roads to provide access to the timber stand be
written off over the estimated life of the stand or twenty-five years, whichever is the less. The requests
were based on the claim that such capital expenditure is related directly to the stand of timber which is
being worked and that it becomes useless for any other purpose once the timber has been removed.


153. Whilst this is true where the mill and housing site is located in an isolated area near the timber
stand, the evidence we received indicated that there is a growing tendency in some areas to set up the
sawmills in established towns away from the timber stands. The result has been that, in these areas,
the timber is now brought by road transport to a central location.
154. So far as buildings are concerned, therefore, any direct relationship to the life of a particular
timber stand has tended to disappear and we feel that these will be adequately covered by the general
allowance we propose for buildings used in the production of income.
155. The cost of access roads, however, is clearly related to the particular stand of timber which
they are designed to serve. As these roads take the place of logging railways on which depreciation is
allowable, we recommend that a suitable allowance be granted.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
156. The following is a summary of the conclusions and recommendations contained in this report.-
Term op Reference No. 1.
We are satisfied that the estimates made by the Commissioner of the effective lives of assets are fair
and reasonable (paragraph 16).
Term op Reference No. 2.
We recommend—
(a) That the rates of depreciation for the diminishing value method be increased by 50 per cent.,
such increase to apply to existing plant as well as future purchases (paragraphs 28 and
29).
( b) That an option be given to taxpayers using the prime cost method to change to the
diminishing value method, and those using the diminishing value method to change to the
prime cost method, in regard either to the whole of their plant or only to future purchases
(paragraph 30).
(c) That, in lieu of assessment in the year of receipt, taxpayers be permitted to set off any
recoupment of depreciation against the value of other assets subject to depreciation
paragraph 39).
( d) That taxpayers ceasing business be permitted to apply for assessment of any recoupment
of depreciation on a principle similar to that provided for authors and inventors in
Division 16a of the Act (paragraph 40).
Term op Reference No. 3.
We recommend that, to provide for obsolescence, taxpayers be given options, within prescribed limits,
to take rates of depreciation above the standard rates (paragraph 51).
Term op Reference No. 4.
We recommend that the present practice, under which overall rates of depreciation for particular
businesses or industries are fixed by the Commissioner on request, should be continued (paragraph 61).
Term of Reference No. 5.
We recommend —
(a) That an allowance for depreciation, on the basis set out in paragraph 100, be given for all
buildings used in the production of assessable income.
( b ) That an allowance, spread over the effective life or a prescribed period, be given for
expenditure on the following assets where used for business purposes:—
(i) Patent rights and similar intangible assets (paragraphs 136, 147 and 148).
(ii) Land acquired for the extraction of natural deposits of stone, gravel, clay, sand,
&c. (paragraph 150).
(iii) Access roads used in the timber industry (paragraph 155).
(Sgd.) A. S. HULME, Chairman.
F. ERIC HITCHINS, Member.
S. B. HOLDER, Member.
BASIL R. ORR, Member.
A. M. SIMPSON, Member.
Canberra,
31st March, 1955.


APPENDIX.
SCHEDULE OF AVERAGE BUILDING COSTS.
Summary of Classifications of Buildings.
Type “A”.—Residential Buildings—
(i) Brick, stone or concrete.
(ii) Timber frame.
Type “ B ”,—Office Buildings—
(i) Brick, stone or concrete —
(a) Superior.
( b ) General.
(ii) Timber frame.
Type “ C —Retail Shops ( excluding shops with dwellings attached) —
(i) Three or more stories—
(a) Superior.
( b ) General.
(ii ) One or more stories—
(a) Brick, stone or concrete.
(b) Timber frame.
Type “ D —Hotels—
(i) Brick, stone or concrete.
(ii) Timber frame.
Type “ E ”. — Theatres (Brick, stone or concrete) —
(i) With dress circle.
(ii) Without dress circle.
Type “ F ”■ — Factories, Warehouses, Storage Buildings, Commercial Garages, and other buildings not elsewhere
included —
Group I. —Three or more stories.
Group 11.-—One or two stories—brick, stone or concrete —
(i) under 10,000 square feet—
(a) wood or concrete floors,
(b) dirt floors;
(ii) over 10,000 square feet—
(а) wood or concrete floors,
(б) dirt floors.
Group 111. —One or two stories —frame construction, walls of wood, asbestos cement or iron—
(i) under 10,000 square feet—
(a) wood or concrete floors,
(b) dirt floors;
(ii) over 10,000 square feet—
(a) wood or concrete floors,
(b) dirt floors.
Group IY.—One story, frame construction and open sides —
(i) wood or concrete floors,
(ii) dirt floors.
Explanatory Notes.
The classification of any building depends upon the primary and principal purpose for which it is
constructed. For example, a building constructed primarily for use as a retail shop will be so classified, even
though part of the building is used as an office or a warehouse.
“ Residential buildings ” include dwellings, flats, semi-detached cottages, residentials, private hotels,
guest houses, rest homes and shops with dwellings attached.
“ Superior ” means —
(a) in relation to office buildings —buildings with steel or reinforced concrete frame; concrete
floors and stairs; stone, terra-cotta or similar facing to street fagade; corridor partitions
constructed substantially of polished joinery or faced with tiles, terazzo, marble or similar
material;
(b) in relation to retail shops —steel or reinforced concrete frame and concrete floors covered with
wood, tiles, travertine, linoleum, rubber or similar material; stone, terra-cotta or similar
facing to street fagade.
References to “brick, stone or concrete ”, “ timber frame ”, &c., mean buildings constructed substantially
of the specified material.
The specified rate per square foot is applied to the total number of square feet of fully enclosed areas
contained within the external walls on each story of the building, together with one-half of the number of
square feet of—
(a) windows, balconies, porches and other areas not fully enclosed but which form integral parts
of the building; and
(b) basements.
“ Story ” does not include a basement.


TYPE “ A ’’—RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
Year.
Brick, Stone or Concrete.
Timber Frame.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
s. d.
s. d.
1939
16 6
13 0
1938
15 6
12 0
1937
14 6
11 3
1936
13 6
10 6
1935
12 9
10 0
1934
12 3
9 6
1933
11 6
9 0
1932
10 9
8 6
K31
11 9
9 3
1930
14 9
11 6
1929
14 9
11 6
1928
14 9
11 6
1927
13 9
10 9
1926
13 9
10 9
1925
13 9
10 9
1924
13 9
10 9
1923
13 9
10 9
1922
13 9
10 9
1921
13 9
10 9
1920
13 9
10 9
1919
13 0
10 3
1918
12 6
9 9
1917
11 0
8 6
1916
9 6
7 6
1915
9 0
7 0
1914
8 3
1913
8 3
1912
8 3
1911
7 6
1910
7 6
1909
7 6
1908
7 0
1907 and previous years
6 3
TYPE “ B ’’—OFFICE BUILDINGS.
Brick, Stone or Concrete.
Year,
Timber Frame.
Superior.
General.
Bate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
8.
d.
8.
d.
8,
d.
1939
30
0
22
0
16
6
1938
28
0
20
6
15
6
1937
26
0
19
3
14
6
1936
24
3
17
9
13
6
1935
23
0
17
0
12
9
1934
22
3
16
3
12
3
1933
20
9
15
3
11
6
1932
19
6
14
3
10
0
1931
21
3
15
9
11
9
1930
26
9
19
6
14
9
1929
26
9
19
6
14
9
1928
26
9
19
6
14
9
1927
25
0
18
3
13
9
1926
25
0
18
3
13
9
1925
25
0
18
3
13
9
1924
25
0
18
3
13
9
1923
25
0
18
3
13
9
1922
25
0
18
3
13
9
1921
25
0
18
3
13
9
1920
26
0
18
3
13
9
1919
23
9
17
6
13
O
1918
22
6
16
6
12
6
1917
19
9
14
6
11
0
1916
17
6
12
9
9
6
1915
16
3
12
0
9
O
1914
15
0
11
0
1913
16
0
11
0
1912
15
0
11
0
1911
13
9
10
3
1910
. „
13
9
10
3
1909
,,
13
9
10
3
1908
12
6
9
3
1907 and previous years
11
6
8
6
Appendix— continued.


TYPE “ C ’’—RETAIL SHOPS (EXCLUDING SHOPS WITH DWELLINGS ATTACHED).
Three or More Stories.
Year.
Superior.
General.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per pq. ft.
5. d.
s. d.
1939
27 6
20 0
1938
25 6
18 6
1937
24 0
17 6
1936
22 3
16 3
1935
21 3
15 6
1934
20 3
14 9
1933
19 0
13 9
1932
18 0
13 0
1931
19 6
14 3
1930
24 6
17 9
1929
24 6
17 9
1928
24 6
17 9
1927
23 0
16 6
1926
23 0
16 6
1925
23 0
16 6
1924
23 0
16 6
1923
23 0
16 6
1922
23 0
16 6
1921
23 0
16 6
1920
23 0
16 6
1919
22 0
15 9
1918
20 6
15 0
1917
18 3
13 3
1916
16 0
11 6
1915
15 0
10 9
1914
13 9
10 0
■ 1913
13 9
10 0
1912
13 9
10 0
1911
12 9
9 3
1910
12 9
9 3
1909
12 9
9 3
1908
11 6
8 6
1907 and previous years
10 6
7 9
Year.
One or Two Stories.
Brick, Stone or Concrete.
Timber Frame.
1939
Rate per sq. ft.
s. d.
14 6
Rate per sq. ft.
s. d.
11 6
1938
, .
13
6
10
9
1937
12
6
10
0
1936
, ,
11
9
9
3
1935
, .
11
3
9
0
1934
, .
10
9
8
6
1933
10
0
8
0
1932
9
6
7
6
1931
10
3
8
3
1930
13
0
10
3
1929
13
0
10
3
1928
13
0
10
3
1927
12
0
9
6
1926
12
0
9
6
1925
12
0
9
6
1924
12
0
9
6
1923
12
0
9
6
1922
12
0
9
6
1921
12
0
9
6
1920
.
12
0
9
6
1919
11
6
9
0
1918
11
0
8
6
1917
9
6
7
6
1916
8
6
6
9
1915
7
9
6
3
1914
7
3
1913
7
3
1912
7
3
1911
6
9
1910
6
9
1909
, ,
6
9
1908
6
0
1907 and previous years
5
6
Appendix— continued.


TYPE “D”—HOTELS.
Year.
Brick, Stone or Concrete.
Timber Frame.
Kate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
s.
d.
6.
d.
1939
25
0
20
0
1938
23
3
18
6
1937
22
0
17
6
1936
20
3
16
3
1935
19
3
15
6
1934
18
6
14
9
1933
17
3
13
9
1932
16
3
13
0
1931
17
9
14
3
1930
22
3
17
9
1929
22
3
17
9
1928
22
3
17
9
1927
20
9
16
6
1926
20
9
16
6
1925
20
9
16
6
1924
20
9
16
6
1923
20
9
16
6
1922
20
9
16
6
1921
20
9
16
6
1920
20
9
16
6
1919
19
9
15
9
1918
18
9
15
0
1917
16
6
13
3
1916
14
6
11
6
1915
13
6
10
9
1914
12
6
1913
12
6
1912
12
6
1911
11
6
1910
11
6
1909
11
6
1908
10
6
1907 and
previous years
9
6
TYPE “
E THEATRES (EXCLUDING OPEN-AIR THEATRES).
Brick, Stone or Concrete.
Year.
With Dress Circle.
Without Dress Circle.
Rate per Seat.
Rate per Seat,
£
£
1939
, ,
13.5
10.0
1938
13.6
9.26
1937
11.75
8.75
1936
11
8
1936
10.25
7.76
1934
10
7.5
1933
9.5
7
1933
8.76
6.6
1931
9.6
7
1930
12
9
1929
12
9
1928
12
9
1927
11.25
8.25
1926
11.25
8.25
1925
11.25
8.25
1924
11.25
8.25
1923
11.25
8.25
1922
11.25
8.26
1921
11.25
8.25
1920
11.25
8.25
1919
10.75
8
19! 8
10
7.5
1917
9
6.6
1916
8
6
1915
7.25
5.5
1914
6.75
5
1913
6.75
6
1912
6.75
6
1911
6.25
4.6
1910
6.25
4.5
1909
6.25
4.5
1908
5.5
4.25
1907 and previous years
5
3.75
Appendix— continued.


TYPE “
F ’’—FACTORIES, WAREHOUSES, STORAGE BUILDINGS. COMMERCIAL GARAGES AND OTHER BUILDINGS
NOT ELSEWHERE INCLUDED.
One or Two Stories—Brick, Stone, Concrete.
Year.
Three or More
Stories.
Under 10,000 sq. ft.
Over 10,000 sq. ft.
Wood or Concrete
Floors.
Dirt Floors.
Wood or Concrete
Floors.
Dirt Floors.
1939
Rate per sq. ft.
a. d.
14 6
Rate per
3.
12
sq. ft.
d.
0
Rate per sq. ft.
a. d.
10 6
Rate per sq. ft.
s. d.
8 6
Rate per sq. ft.
a. d.
7 0
1938
13
6
11
3
9
9
8
0
6
6
1937
12
6
10
6
9
3
7
6
6
0
1936
11
9
9
9
8
6
7
0
5
9
1935
11
3
[9
3
8
0
6
6
5
6
1934
10
9
9
0
7
9
6
3
5
3
1933
10
0
8
3
7
3
6
0
4
9
1932
9
6
7
9
6
9
5
6
4
6
1931
10
3
8
6
7
6
6
0
6
0
1930
13
0
10
9
9
3
7
6
6
3
1929
13
0
10
9
9
3
7
6
6
3
1928
13
0
10
9
9
3
7
6
6
3
1927
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1926
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1925
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1924
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1923
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1922
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1921
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1920
12
0
10
0
8
9
7
0
5
9
1919
11
6
9
6
8
3
6
9
5
6
1918
11
0
9
0
8
0
6
6
5
3
1917
9
6
8
0
7
0
5
6
4
6
1916
8
6
7
0
6
0
5
0
4
0
1915
7
9
6
6
6
9
4
6
3
9
1914
7
3
6
0
5
3
4
3
3
6
1913
7
3
6
0
5
3
4
3
3
6
1912
7
3
6
0
5
3
4
3
3
6
1911
6
9
6
6
4
9
4
0
3
3
1910
6
9
6
6
4
9
4
0
3
3
1909
6
9
5
6
4
9
4
0
3
3
1908
6
0
5
0
4
6
3
6
3
0
1907 and
previous years
5
6
4
6
4
0
3
3
2
9
Year.
One or Two Stories—Frame Construction, Walls of Wood, Asbestos Cement, or Iron.
Under 10,000 sq. ft.
Over 10,000 sq. ft.
Wood or Concrete Floors.
Dirt Floors.
Wood or Concrete Floors.
Dirt Floors.
Rate per aq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
8,
d.
6.
d.
8.
d.
8.
d.
1939
,
10
6
9
0
7
6
6
0
1938
9
9
8
6
7
0
5
6
1937
9
3
8
0
6
6
5
3
1936
8
6
7
6
6
0
4
9
1935
8
0
7
0
0
9
4
6
1934
7
9
6
9
6
6
4
6
1933
7
3
6
3
6
3
4
3
1932
6
9
6
9
5
0
4
0
1931
7
6
6
6
5
3
4
3
1930
9
8
8
0
6
9
5
3
1929
9
8
8
0
6
9
6
3
1028
9
3
8
0
6
9
6
3
1927
8
y
7
6
6
3
6
0
1926
8
9
7
6
6
3
5
0
1925
8
9
7
6
6
3
6
0
1924
8
9
7
6
6
3
5
0
1923
8
9
7
6
6
3
5
0
1922
8
9
7
6
6
3
5
0
1921
8
9
7
6
6
3
5
0
1920
8
9
7
6
6
3
6
0
1919
8
3
7
0
6
0
4
9
1918
S
0
6
9
6
6
4
6
1917
7
0
6
0
6
0
4
0
1916
6
0
5
3
4
3
3
6
1915
5
9
5
0
4
0
3
3
Appendix— continued.


Type “ E ” —Factories, Warehouses, Storage Buildings,
Commercial Garages
and Other Buildings Not Elsewhere
Included — continued .
One Story, Frame Construction, Open Sides.
Year.
Wood or Concrete Floors.
Dirt Floors.
Rate per sq. ft.
Rate per sq. ft.
s. d.
s. d.
1939
4 6
3 0
1938
4 3
2 9
1937
4 0
2 6
1936
3 9
2 6
1935
3 6
2 3
1934
3 3
2 3
1933
3 0
2 0
1932
3 0
2 0
1931
3 3
2 3
1930
4 0
2 9
1929
4 0
2 9
1928
4 0
2 9
1927
3 9
2 6
1926
3 9
2 6
1925
3 9
2 6
1924
3 9
2 6
1923
3 9
2 6
1922
3 9
2 6
1921
3 9
2 6
1920
3 9
2 6
1919
3 6
2 6
1918
3 6
2 3
1917
3 0
2 0
1916
2 9
1 9
1915
2 6
1 6
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by A. J. Arthur at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra.
Appendix— continued.
