

REPORT
OF
AN EXPEDITION
TO SURVEY
PORT CURTIS, MORETON BAY, AND
PORT BOWEN,
WITH A VIEW TO FORM
CONVICT PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS THERE,
IN PURSUANCE OP THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSIONER
OF INQUIRY INTO THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By JOHN OXLEY, ESQ.
SURVEYOR-GENERAL OF THE TERRITORY.
B


■
I-
fficuy&n.
/Sl3.
fs7.sr.


Published as the act directs J&arch jBzS y/ohn3£urraz/ jllbemarle StreetP.ondon. JWalkerSculpt.


Published us the act directs Pet# hi/ Pehn Jlfiaray-cllhemailc Street London . . 11l <dhtf~J\ /dpt


REPORT
OF
AN EXPEDITION
TO SURVEY
PORT CURTIS, MORETON BAY, AND
PORT BOWEN,
WITH A VIEW TO FORM
CONVICT PENAL ESTABLISHMENTS THERE,
IN PURSUANCE OF THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSIONER
OF INQUIRY INTO THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By JOHN OXLEY, ESQ.
SURVEYOR-GENERAL OF THE TERRITORY.




REPORT,
&c.,
Surveyor-General’s Office,
Sydney, 10th Jan. 1824.
Sir,
I have the honour to report to you,
for the information of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Brisbane, my proceedings, in the execution of the
instructions contained in your letter of the 19th
September last.
I sailed from this port in his Majesty’s cutter
Mermaid on the 23d October, and on the sth
November following I anchored in Port Curtis,
after a tedious passage, occasioned by adverse north-
easterly winds and strong southerly currents.
From the description of the islands forming the
N.E. side of this port, by Captain Flinders, I con-
sidered that the purpose of my mission would be
best answered by commencing the examination of
the country on the S.W. side, or mainland, and
B 2


I now respectfully submit, for his Excellency’s
consideration, the result of a minute examination
of the S.W. coast of this port, extending from the
north head of Bustard Bay to Mount Larcom, and
in which I was occupied sixteen days.
Port Curtis is a very difficult harbour for
shipping to enter. Numerous sand shoals extend
off from the' mainland nearly to Facing Island,
and these are not distinguishable until nearly low
water, the rapidity of the tides causing the water
to assume the same turbid appearance in the deep
channels as on the banks. The best and most
marked channel for large ships is the one close to
Facing Island, which must not be approached
nearer than five fathoms. From that depth the
water shoals suddenly to the bank or reef which
surrounds the island, and which does not show
itself except at low water. When Gatcombe Head
bears north, the channel widens considerably, and
ships may anchor in security. A S.E. wind and
ebb tide however cause a considerable sea, and
there being no coves in which small vessels can lie
out of the set of the tides, it cannot be considered
as a good harbour for vessels of small burthen.


The coast of the mainland is covered with
mangroves, extending in some places more than
half a mile back, and the shore at low water is
rendered almost inaccessible by extensive mud-
flats. South-shore Head is the only point where
a landing could be effected at any time of tide.
The country between South Trees Point and
Mount Larcom is broken into low stony ridges:
in the valleys the soil is a poor sand; and in a
space of eight miles by about four I did not see
two hundred acres of even tolerable land. The
stony ridges terminate in mangrove swamps on the
harbour, and the whole of this range is bounded
in by steep rocky hills, covered with quartz and
coarse sandstone. Near to South Trees Point,
the hills appear at a distance somewhat better,
as they are thinly timbered, and thickly covered
with grass: the principal rocks are of slate, and
the whole surface is spread with small pieces of
quartz, granite, and a sort of shale.
On the west side of South Shore Head, a small
rill discharges itself into a salt-water creek, acces-
sible in boats at high water, when the stream can
be approached within a quarter of a mile; and


nearly four miles west from this, is another smaller
one, but it is lost among the mangroves.
On the banks of the first stream a few acres of
the best land I saw are to be found; and a low
range communicates with the harbour at South
Shore Head.
Both the streams I have mentioned derive their
source in the rocky hills to the S.W. Their course
is very short; but insignificant as they are, they
appear from the flood-marks to be, in the rainy
season, the channels of considerable torrents.
With the exception of these rivulets, I saw no
other fresh water, and as the country was strictly
examined between the head of the inlet round
South Trees Point (which proved to be an island
half covered at high water) and Mount Larcom, I
feel satisfied no other waters exist in that tract,
except during the rainy season, when a few ponds
(dry when I saw them) in some of the valleys will
necessarily be filled.
The timber in the tract of country above de-
scribed consists entirely of a diminutive species of
eucalyptus, quite useless for any domestic pur-
pose, and fit only for firewood. Neither did the


view obtained of the more distant country warrant
the probability of any timber of a better descrip-
tion being found, as I saw nothing but rocky hills,
on which it was impossible for any thing like tim-
ber to grow.
South from Gatcombe Head we discovered a rapid
mountain stream, which received the name of the
Boyne. The entrance is nearly blocked up by
sand-banks. At high water there may be from
ten to twelve feet in the channel. About three
miles from the entrance the rapids begin. It is
however navigable at high water for large boats
about four miles further, when the river becoming
fresh, navigation is stopped. Between this point
(marked A on the map) and the entrance, I did not
see any fresh water. The country was, alternately
on either shore, low forest hills of a better descrip-
tion than before seen, but so stony as to be almost
incapable of cultivation. The intermediate flats
were composed of a good light sandy soil, appa-
rently much flooded, since between this point and
the entrance flood-marks were observed twenty-five
feet above the usual level. From the hill marked
A, the anchorage under Facing Island was seen,


and signals from Gatcombe Head might be distin-
guished. A flat of good land extends a short di-
stance to the N.W. from this hill, and is bounded
by other broken ranges of stony hills, affording
very good pasturage. To the south the country
rises into lofty rocky ranges; but to the S.W.,
though considerably elevated and broken, it
seemed as if capable of affording good pasturage.
From point A the river was examined twelve
or fourteen miles further, the whale-boat being
dragged over a succession of rapids, separating
deep and picturesque reaches of the river. Much
rich alluvial land was seen, and the hills, though
very stony, were covered with grass. The floods
appeared to rise between forty and fifty feet, and
all the flats bore marks of being deeply flooded.
No fresh water was found except in the river,
which, when confined within its natural banks,
is in some places an eighth of a mile wide, the
outer banks much wider, but both insufficient to
afford a channel to the great accumulation of
waters, which, according to every appearance, is
periodically discharged by this river from the
mountains in the vicinity. The hills rest on a


granite base, though in two or three places, where
the hanks had been washed away hy the torrents,
large masses of blue slate rock were discovered.
The timber was universally small and useless. A
few large trees growing on the flooded lands can
scarcely be called an exception, as they consisted
of an inferior species of eucalyptus; and a few
acres on two or three spots on the bends of the
river were covered with vines and brush, among
which the light timber trees common to Port
Hunter were seen, as were also some coarse cedar
trees, of little value or utility.
The flat flooded lands on the banks of the river
are of no great extent: the soil is a deep rich sand,
and capable of producing any crops suitable to the
climate. Many of the hills, though very stony,
did not seem unfit to be applied to the cultivation
of coffee, while the general openness and grassy
nature of the country would seem well adapted
for grazing, if the apparent scarcity of water, away
from the river, did not greatly diminish the chance
of its profitable application to that purpose.
Facing Island, which protects Port Curtis from
the sea, is so scantily supplied with good water,


at least at this season (November), that, inde-
pendently of its being generally unfertile and de-
stitute of useful timber, it did not appear to be
capable of affording a subsistence for more than
half a dozen families. There were many indica-
tions of mineral substances found on the island;
and some trifling specimens were procured which
seemed to contain copper and tin.
Having viewed and examined, with the most
anxious attention, every point that afforded the
least promise of being eligible for the site of a
settlement, I respectfully submit it as my opinion,
that Port Curtis and its vicinity do not afford
such a site; and Ido not think that any convict
establishment could be formed there that would
return, either from the natural productions of the
country, or as arising from agricultural labour,
any portion of the great expense which would
necessarily attend its first formation. In short, it
did not appear to me that the country, taking it
in an extended sense, could either afford subsist-
ence, or supply the means of profitable labour, for
a large establishment; and even in one on the
smallest scale, the greatest difficulties would arise


from the scarcity of timber for building, and of
bark and shingles for covering. The station the
best watered, and of easiest access, is the inlet to
the west of South Shore Head; and for agricultural
purposes, the station marked A on the map of the
River Boyne.
The coast between the Boyne River and the
north head of Bustard Bay affords two other inlets,
the easternmost of which, called Rodd’s Bay by
Captain King, is of considerable extent, with good
anchorage and shelter for vessels of all descriptions.
The country was examined in the vicinity of this
last, but no permanent fresh water being found,
nor any timber fit for building, and the general
character of the country being precisely similar to
that surrounding Port Curtis, it will be needless
to enter into a detailed description of it. It was
equally destitute of any inducement to form a
settlement on its shores.
The length of time consumed in the examina-
tion of Port Curtis, the winds prevailing almost
constantly from the N.E., the approaching rainy
season, and the excessive heat of the weather,
induced me to defer the examination of Port


Bowen to a more favourable season, when greater
time could be devoted to it. I therefore returned
to the southward, and entered Moreton Bay on
the 29th November, anchoring the vessel close to
Point Skirmish, at the entrance of Pumice-stone
River.
Pumice-stone River had been so thoroughly
examined and well described by Captain Flinders,
that I conceived it would answer no useful purpose
to go over the same ground; but considering the
west shore of Moreton Bay as only cursorily exa-
mined, I determined to trace it entirely round, in
the hope to find, in such an extensive inlet, some
opening which would render an apparently fine
country of more utility and value than it could be
expected to be, if the accounts of the scarcity of
fresh water here were correct.
Our first day’s survey terminated a little above
Red Cliff Point. The shores are in general low
and covered with mangroves, off which extend
considerable mud-flats, dry at low water; but to
this remark the shores in the vicinity of Red
Cliff Point are an exception. The water is here
deep within a short distance of the shore, and the


country about it is open forest, of an indifferent
quality of clay land, with an admixture of sand.
A few miles behind Red Cliff Point, to the west,
the country again becomes low, and is apparently
wet, but soon rises into open forest-hills. There
was no want of permanent fresh water, though
not in streams; and in an inlet marked B is
abundance of good timber of the eucalyptus and
pine species.
Early on the second day (December 2d), in pur-
suing our examination, we had the satisfaction to
find the tide sweeping us up a considerable open-
ing between the First Islands and the mainland.
The muddiness of the water, and the abundance
of fresh-water mollusca, convinced us we were
entering a large river; and a few hours ended our
anxiety on that point, by the water becoming per-
fectly fresh, while no diminution had taken place
in the size of the river, after passing what I have
called Sea Reach. Our progress up the river was
necessarily retarded by the obligation of making
a running survey during our passage. At sunset
we had proceeded up the river about twenty miles.
The scenery was peculiarly beautiful—the country


on the banks alternately hilly and level, but not
flooded—the soil of the finest description of brush
land, on which grew timber of great magnitude,
of various species, some of which were unknown to
us. Among others a magnificent species of pine
was in great abundance. The timber on the hills
was also good; and to the south-east, a little
distant from the river, were several brushes or
forests of the common Australian cypress-tree
(Callitris Australis) of large size. Up to this point
the river was navigable for vessels of considerable
burthen, if not drawing more than sixteen feet
water. The tide rose about five feet, being the
same as at the entrance.
The next day the examination of the river was
resumed; and, with increased satisfaction, we pro-
ceeded about thirty miles further, no diminution
having taken place either in the breadth or the
depth of it, except that in one place, to the extent
of about thirty yards, a ridge of detached rocks
stretched across, having not more than twelve feet
at high water. From this point to Termination
Hill, the river continued of nearly uniform size;
the country being of a very superior description,


and equally well adapted for cultivation and for
grazing; the timber abundant, and fit for all the
purposes of domestic use or exportation, while the
pine-trees, if they should prove of good quality,
were of a scantling sufficient for the topmasts of
large ships. Some were measured upwards of
thirty inches in diameter, and from fifty to eighty
feet without a branch.
The boat’s crew were so exhausted by their
constant exertions under a vertical sun, that I was
most reluctantly compelled to relinquish my in-
tention of proceeding to the termination of tide-
water. At this place the tide rose about four feet
six inches, the force of the ebb-tide and current
united being little greater than the flood-tide—a
proof of its flowing through a very level country.
Nothing, however, indicated that I should speedily
arrive at that termination; and being upwards of
seventy miles from the vessel, with not more than
another day’s provisions (not having expected to
make such a discovery), I landed on the south shore
for the purpose of examining the surrounding
country. On ascending a low hill rising about 250
feet above the level of the river, which I called Ter


mination Hill, I obtained a view of its apparent
course for thirty or forty miles, and saw a distant
mountain (which I conjectured to be the “ High
Peak” marked on Captain Flinders’s chart) bearing
S. E. distant from twenty-five to thirty miles*.
Round from this point to the N.W., the country
declined considerably in elevation, and had much
the appearance of an extended plain, formed of low
undulating hills and vales, well, but not heavily,
wooded. The only elevations of magnitude were
some hills seven or eight hundred feet high, which
we had passed to the northward. The appearance
of the country, the slowness of the current even
at ebb-tide, and the depth of water, induced me to
conclude that the river will be found navigable for
vessels of burthen to a much greater distance, pro-
bably not less than fifty miles. There was no ap-
pearance of its being flooded, no mark being found
higher than seven feet above the level, which is
little more than would be caused by the flood-tide
* This cannot be the case, because Mr. Oxley places Ter-
mination Hill within six miles of the position that Captain
Flinders has assigned to his “ High Peak.” The mountain
must therefore be some part of the range to the north-west of
Mount Warning.-
P. P. KING.


at high water forcing back any unusual accumu-
lation of waters in rainy seasons.
The nature of the country, and a consideration
of all the circumstances connected with the ap-
pearance of the river, justify me in entertaining a
strong belief that the sources of the river will not
be found in a mountainous country, but rather
that it flows from some lake, which will prove to
be the receptacle of those interior streams crossed
by me during an expedition of discovery in 1818 ;
but whatever may be its origin, it is by far the
largest fresh-water river in New South Wales,
and promises to be of the utmost importance to
the colony, as it affords communication with the
sea to a vast extent of country, a great portion
of which appeared to me capable of raising the
richest productions of the tropics.
Proceeding S.E. from the river, we found a
gently undulating country of good soil, declining
in elevation towards the south, the peak before-
mentioned being the only high land in the direc-
tion from N.E. to south.
As the position of the entrance of the river was
to be fixed, and the channels examined, I lost no
c


time in returning down the river with the ebb-
tide, and at sunset stopped at the foot of a hill
about ten miles down it. This was ascended in
the morning, and the view from it was more ex-
tensive than I had anticipated. The high moun-
tain-range, of which Mount Warning is the nucleus,
appeared gradually to lose itself to the westward;
and with the exception of the peak before-men-
tioned, which is the termination of the north end
of the Mount Warning range, there was scarcely
an elevation above the low undulating level. If
any range of hills of ordinary magnitude had had
place within fifty or sixty miles, it must have been
seen.
So much time was spent in examining the
country about “ Sea Reach,” that it was dark when
we got to the entrance of the river, which from
respect to His Excellency the Governor, under
whose orders the bay was examined, was honoured
with the name of the Brisbane River. The whole
of the next day was spent in sounding the entrance
and traversing the country in the vicinity of Red
Cliff Point, and we did not reach the vessel until
late in the night of the sth December, amply


gratified by the discovery of this important river,
as it afforded every reasonable ground for expect-
ing that the most beneficial consequences would
result to the colony by the formation of a settle-
ment on its banks.
I feel it impossible to enter into a nautical de-
scription of so extensive an inlet as Moreton Bay.
The draught given of it by Captain Flinders, so far
as it comprehends the track passed over by him, is
extremely correct, but the whole extent of the bay
is no by means included in his map. There are
numerous sand-banks in the bay, divided and
separated by deep-water channels of various depth
and magnitude. It would require many months
to make a complete marine survey of it, and this
would prove of little service unless the channels
were buoyed. Ido not think, however, that there
would be any difficulty in taking a ship, whose
draught of water does not exceed eighteen feet, as
high as Red Cliff Point, being about twelve miles
above Mount Skirmish, which is the N.W. point
of the hay. Above Red Cliff Point to the entrance
of the river, the channels would require to be well
ascertained before vessels of large size could proceed
c 2


up the river. There is, however, no great danger,
as the shoals are of soft mud, and the water quite
smooth. A narrow sand-bank appeared to me to
extend across from Cape Moreton, at the entrance
of the bay, to the mainland. On this bank I did
not find more than three fathoms at low water;
but as the distance across is full twelve miles,
many deeper channels may have escaped my ob-
servation.
Pumice-stone River affords good anchorage for
vessels not drawing more than twelve feet water.
The best channel is close to the mainland. There
is plenty of fresh water in the vicinity of Point
Skirmish; and though the soil is poor and sandy,
the country is covered with good timber. Among
other species, the Callitris Australis is most abun-
dant. It grows close to the shore, and can be
procured of considerable size, adapted to most of
the purposes requisite in buildings.
Should a settlement be formed in Moreton Bay,
the country in the vicinity of Red Cliff Point
offers the best site for an establishment in the
first instance. It has an easy communication with
the sea, there is not that difficulty experienced


in effecting a landing which other situations in
the bay present, and the country to the west of
the point will communicate with the interior. It
is about ten miles to the north of the entrance
into Brisbane River, and must be passed by all
vessels intending to enter it. Red Cliff Point
must, however, be viewed more in the light of a
naval post, or dep6t for stores than as being well
adapted for a principal settlement. The Brisbane
River presents so many superior situations, that
although a post at Red Cliff Point may, in the
first instance, be indispensable, yet the country on
the west side of the river, at the termination of
the Sea Reach, appears to me a much better site
for a permanent establishment. The river is not
fresh there, but there is, plenty of fresh water:
the country is open, and no obstacles exist from
swamps or hills to prevent a ready communication
with the interior, either by the banks of the river,
or at a distance from it. The water is deep close
to the shore, and vessels of considerable burthen
could load or unload close to the bank. From a
hill near this last station, the entrance of the bay
can be seen; and by clearing a few trees, com


munication by signal may be held with Red Cliff
Point. The ground is dry and of moderate ele-
vation, and it receives the full force of the sea
breeze.
The bay abounds with what are called in the
colony mullet, whiting, king-fish, and flat-fish.
The natives, in the intercourse we had with them,
appeared to possess a most friendly disposition.
They are very numerous, ana .’re, to a certain ex-
tent, superior in their domestic habits to the savages
inhabiting the more southern coasts. For a more
detailed description of these people, I beg to refer
you to the information obtained by Mr. Uniacke
during my absence from the vessel, and which is
appended to the accompanying Journal.
There are several islands in the upper part of
Moreton Bay, to the southward of the entrance
into Brisbane River, two of which are formed of
dry good land, with water on them: the others are
mere mangrove swamps.
We had little opportunity of making any nautical
corrections of the present excellent charts of Captain
Flinders. We, however, discovered that the land
of Point Logout is an island, and that Moreton


Bay extends as far south as 28°, where it com-
municates with the sea by a shoal channel through
a sandy beach navigable for boats.
We had also the satisfaction to discover that
the high lands of Mount Warning discharged their
waters into the sea, by means of a considerable
stream, which empties itself close to Point Danger.
Across the entrance there is a bar, having twelve
feet water on it at half-tide: there may probably
be fourteen feet at high-water. I had not time
to proceed up it beyond a few miles; but this
was sufficiently far to perceive that the river had
its source to the west of Mount Warning. The
country appeared good, and abounded with fine
timber.
I derived an additional source of satisfaction in
the discovery of this river, since it established the
point that the Brisbane River did not receive its
waters from the lofty ranges of the sea-coast, and
that as its course had passed the N.W. extremity
of the coast-ranges, it must derive its waters from
some part of the S.W. interior.
From the observations of others, added to my
own limited knowledge of the winds and weather


on this coast, I think that considerable difficulty
will be experienced by vessels bound to the north-
ward from October to February; and this difficulty
increases after passing Break-sea Spit, when the
N.E. trade-wind, varying occasionally to the S.E.,
undoubtedly prevails, at this season blowing with
great strength. To the southward of Break-sea
Spit the winds are more variable, being much in-
fluenced by the direction of the coast, which to
that point is nearly north and south. The currents
to the south of Break-sea Spit, at a distance of
fifteen or twenty miles from the shore, set strong
to the south. Near the shore there is little current,
and I have there found it setting to the north. In
order to make a good passage during the summer
season, I would recommend vessels to keep the
land close on board. There are no hidden dangers,
and, besides being out of the strength of the current,
considerable advantage is obtained by being within
the influence of the land-winds, which commonly
blow off it during the night.' As a proof of the
general tendency and set of the currents, a log of
cedar with a staple in it was found on the sea-
shore on Moreton Island, which must have come


from Port Macquarie, being set along shore by a
current from the southward; and close to it a cask
and New Zealand canoe, which were recognised as
belonging to the Echo whaler, which was ship-
wrecked on Wreck Reef about three years ago.
On my return from Moreton Bay, at a distance of
twelve or fourteen miles from the coast, the vessel
was set fifty-eight miles to the south in twenty-two
hours, and a current of nearly equal strength acce-
lerated our return from Port Macquarie to Sydney.
The existence of this southerly current at this
season, and the situation of its greatest strength
with respect to the coast, are points well known to
the masters of vessels sailing out of this port.
I have the honour to transmit herewith a Journal
of my proceedings, together with a corrected map
of Moreton Bay, including Brisbane River; and
also some alterations in the coast-line about Point
Danger. The alterations and additions are co-
loured red. Detached draughts of the inlets in
the vicinity of Port Curtis also accompany this
Report.
From Lieutenant Stirling, of the Buffs, who
accompanied me by direction of His Excellency, I


derived the greatest assistance; and it is princi-
pally owing to his skill, in the rapid and accurate
delineation of the face of the portion of country we
examined, that we were enabled to effect so much
in so short a space of time.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient humble servant,
J. OXLEY.
To
Frederick Goulburn, Esq.
Colonial Secretary.
