

1895.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
ON
PROPOSED RAILWAY LINE:
MARBLE BAR TO PORT HEDLAND,
AND
COSSACK TO MARBLE BAR,
AND PLANS.
LAID ON THE TABLE THE HOUSE BY THE HONOURABLE THE COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAYS,
27TH AUGUST, 1895.
Ordered to he Printed.
PERTH:
BY AUTHORITY: RICHARD PETHER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1895.
A 20.


Report on Proposed Railway Line: Marble Bar to Port
Hedland, and Cossack to Marble Bar.
MARBLE BAR TO PORT HEDLAND LINE.
The Inspector of Surveys, Perth.
Sir, Port Hedland, April, 1895.
I have the honour to report that I have examined the country between Marble Bar and Port
Hedland, as instructed by you, and herewith forward tracing of the locality plan on which the route is
shown in blue.
FEATURES OP THE COUNTRY—DIRECTION OP ROUTE.
Starting from Marble Bar and following route shown in blue on tracing No. 1 to Station (B) gap
in range; thence bearing about 297°, crossing the Shaw River at Pungoworrah Pool, an old pool in bed of
river, but now completely filled up with sand; thence keeping same bearing, and crossing Strelly River
about 70 miles from Marble Bar. There is not any water in the Strelly, but water could be obtained by
sinking about 20ft.; thence keeping about the same bearing to Poondanah Pool, a large pool in
Petermarer Creek, which, by present appearances, seems to be permanent water; thence crossing
Petermarer Creek about a mile above the pool, bearing about 300° to 110 miles on the Condon and
Roebourne Telegraph Line; thence about the same bearing to Station (C) as shown on tracing. Prom
Station (B) to Station (C) the country is very uniform and presents no engineering difficulties with the
exception of the crossings over the Shaw and Strelly Rivers, which would require low level bridges.
Prom Station (C), edge of salt marsh to Port Hedland, will require very careful location. 1
carefully examined the Port on the Eastern and Western sides, also the surrounding country for some
miles, and am of opinion that the Eastern side of Port Hedland is the best, both for the railway line to
start from and also, by the appearance of the Port judging it from the shore and also from information
received from pearlers who have been into Port Hedland, the best for building a jetty; the distance
between contour lines, high and low tides (spring), is about 90ft. on Eastern side at point marked (D) on
tracing, and deep water appears to be close to low water line. The rise and fall of spring tides is about
16ft. Prom the (C) edge of salt marsh, and following where the tides from the inlets running to Indian
Ocean on the East join, seems to be the best place for railway line. There would be about two miles of
salt marsh subject to spring tides only; it being comparatively dry at neap tides, and would require a
bank of about sft. high and bridge openings about every 20 chains; thence there is a good leading ridge
all the way to Port Hedland, with sufficient room, about 40 chains from the entrance to Port, for a station
ground and also small townsite area.
Length op Line. — The probable length of line would be about One hundred and thirteen (113)
miles.
Waterways. —Like the route from Roebourne, the provision for waterways is the most serious
one to contend with, but low level bridges would answer over all the streams.
I attach list of principal streams with approximate waterways.
Formation. —The general formation is sandstone and slate, with small portions of ironstone at
Poondanah Pool, and small belt of granite and basalt about 15 miles from Marble Bar. There is fair
pastoral land all along the route, being covered with spinifex grass.
Timber. —A kind of stunted white gum grows on banks of rivers, but is not of any value for
railway construction ; but in event of a permanent survey being carried out, sufficient timber could be
obtained for making all pegs and posts connected with each survey.
Ballast. —As far as the appearance of the surface goes, and.the beds of streams, there should be
no difficulty in obtaining good ballast along this route.
Water. —G-ood water can be obtained by sinking to a depth from 20ft. to 30ft. along the route to
Station (C), but from there to Port Hedland there may be some difficulty in getting a good supply of
water; but that can only be decided by boring or sinking trial shafts in or near sand ridges close to
Port Hedland. At present good water is obtainable at: —
1. Well three miles from Marble Bar.
2. Well twelve miles from Marble Bar.
3. Pool in Taiga Taiga River (permanent water), Egina Gorge.


From B to D, as shown on
Tracing.
Mileage.
"Waterway.
Shaw River 55
30 chains.
Strelly River 70
20
Petermarer Creek 92
6
Creek 101
4
Creek 102
4
Marsh 108
20
4. Well in Coongan River, Robinson’s Homestead.
5. Pool in Creek running into Coongan River.
6. Poondanah Waterhole (permanent water).
7. Well in Wedge’s Homestead Paddock.
I have numbered the wells and shown approximately their position on tracing.
Settlement. —There is not any settlement along route except Robinson’s Station, and Wedge,
Richardson & Co.’s Station near Port Hedland.
Ants.- -The White Ant abounds along the route, and will have to be considered in the construction
of the line.
(Sd.) R. J. ANKETELL,
Railway Surveyor.
PORT HEDLAND TO MARBLE BAR.
Principal Waterways, with approximate Mileage.
Note. —For waterways from (B) to Marble Bar, see list attached to Roebourne-to-Marble Bar
Report.
COSSACK TO MARBLE BAR LINE.
The Inspector of Surveys, Perth.
Sir, Marble Bar, 2nd April, 1895.
I have the honour to report that I have examined the country between Cossack and Marble Bar,
as instructed by you, and herewith forward tracing of the locality plan, on which the route is shown in
red, and deviation via Robinson’s Homestead in blue.
Features of Country—Direction of Route. — Starting from wharf at Cossack the route can
follow near the present horse tramway to Roebourne, a distance of 8 miles. The country is level; the
crossing of salt marsh, a distance of about 1 mile 60 chains, presents the only difficulty. It would require
an embankment of about 4 to 5 feet high and ordinary timber bridges over the various inlets.
Leaving Roebourne and crossing Harding River about 15 chains North of present terminus of
horse tramway, and bearing about S. 66° E. to about 17-mile crossing of the Eastern Harding River;
thence bearing about S. 71° E., crossing Jones’ River, about 24 miles, the George River, about 31 miles,
to Little Sherlock, 36 miles; thence bearing about N. 73° E. and skirting the ranges to the South of line
to about 53 miles ; thence bearing IST. 87° E., crossing Balia Balia Creek, about 57 miles. Erom Roebourne
to 57 miles the country is open grassy plains, presenting no difficulties for railway construction with the
exception of crossing of various streams.
The country to North of line, extending to sea coast, is very uniform; but to South it is broken—
still keeping the same bearing to about 75 miles and crossing of Peewah River.
About six miles of this portion, extending East from Whim Well, is broken, with numerous small
gullies, and would require careful location.
The route passing through Mallina, a small mining town about 68 miles from Cossack, from
Peewah River bearing about S. 80° E., crossing the Yule River about 92 miles; thence to 100 miles;
thence bearing about S. 73° 8., skirting the North side of Mt. Dove ; crossing the West branch of Turner
River about 119 miles and East branch of Turner River at about 122 miles; thence crossing small creek
at Horse Well to 130 miles. Prom Peewah River to 130 miles the country is level, and presents no
difficulties, with the exception of crossings of various streams.
4


The country is level to the North, hut is very broken to the South of route, as shown on tracing.
From 130 miles, bearing about S. 88° E. to 145 miles, the country is broken with small gullies and spurs ;
but with lin 40 gradients and lOchs. curves the line could be taken on surface. Thence bearing about
N. 64° E. to 160-miles Station (A) on tracing, a good level route can be obtained.
Erom Station (A), following line shown red on plan, the country is very broken to Marble Bar,
and would require 6chs. radius curves and 1 in 30 gradients to give anything like a surface line.
Length op Line. — The probable length of direct line from Roebourne to Cossack, as shown in
red on tracing, would be about 192 miles. The probable length of line via Robinson’s Homestead would
be about 220 miles.
Waterways. —Provision for waterways is the most serious one to contend with on this route, as
the beds of various rivers and watercourses crossed en route show evidence of a great rush of water,
caused by the tropical rains, which generally fall in the month of February. As the streams are very
rarely flooded more than once in twelve months, and more often extending over a much longer period,
low level bridges would answer over all the large, streams; and as the country towards the head of the
various rivers is not timbered, very little damage would be done to the low level bridges in flood times.
I attach list giving the approximate mileage and waterway required of the various streams.
Formation.— As far as I could judge, the general formation is clay-slate and quartzite, with the
exception of a few miles to East of Roebourne, and a belt near the Turner River, which is of volcanic
formation (basalt and granite). The country for first 60 miles is very good pastoral land, well adapted
for sheep; the country thence to Turner River is fair pastoral land, the grass being principally soft
spinifex; thence to Marble Bar there are limited patches on creeks of fair pastoral land, the rest being
covered with a coarse spinifex grass.
Timber. —There is no timber of any value for railway purposes in the vicinity of the route
throughout. The only timber being a kind of stunted White Gum, found on the banks of the various
rivers. But, in event of a permanent survey being carried out, sufficient timber could be found for
making all pegs and posts connected with such survey.
Ballast. —By the appearance of the surface, and also the wash in the different rivers, I am of
opinion that suitable ballast can be obtained throughout the route.
Water.— The line is well watered throughout. Starting from Roebourne, good water is found at
the following places :
(i.) Eastern Harding, in well, about 17 miles.
(2.) Net Fisher Homestead, in well.
(3.) Little Sherlock River, well in bed of river.
(4.) Mount Broome, well, water slightly brackish.
(5.) Whim Creek, well in bed of creek.
(6.) Mallina, in well.
(7.) Peewah River, well in bed of river.
(8.) Well.
(9.) Large pool in River Yule (permanent water).
(10.) Well, 8 miles from McKay’s Upper Station.
(1 1.) Turner River, good water in pool (permanent).
(12.) Gillam’s horse well.
(13.) Green’s well.
(14.) Strelly River, water in pool (permanent).
(15.) Water in pool, near Cook’s Bluff in Miralga River.
(16.) Water in pool, Miralga River.
(17.) Marble Bar, water in well.
Taking the whole route, there would be no difficulty in obtaining a sufficient supply of water for
railway purposes.
Building Stone. — Good stone (granite) for building purposes can be obtained near Fisher’s
Homestead. At Mallina a good sandstone can be obtained, also, near Turner River, granite is obtainable
of good quality. From Shaw River to Marble Bar there is also good building stone (a kind of sandstone)
easily worked.
Population, Settlement, etc. —Cossack has 126 of a white population, and 146 of a colored
population.
Roebourne has 230 of white population, and 90 colored people.
Mallina —a small mining centre with fourteen mining leases, and a population, all told, of 80 people.
Marble Bar —a mining town, with population of about 250.


Harding Eiver
Mileage.
0
Waterway.
10 Chains
Little Harding River
Jones’ Creek
17
30 „
24
30 „
George River
31
15 „
Little Sherlock River
36
40 „
Sherlock River
41
30 „
Balia Balia Creek ...
57
H ..
Poverty Crossing
66
3 „
Creek at Mallina
68
3 „
Peewah River
75
41
»»
Creek
77
4 „
Yule River ...
92
62 „
West Turner River ...
119
26 „
Turner River
122
18 „
Horse Well Creek ...
127
1 „
Watercourse ..
130
30 Feet
Green’s Well Creek ..
138
40 „
Strelly Eiver
148
8 Chains
Shaw River ... ...
162
40 „
Miralga Creek
166
20 „
Creek
168
3 „
Creek
171
4i „
Creek
173
41
Creek
180
3 „
Creek
188
16 „
Creek
193
8 „
Coongan Eiver
200
30 „
Creek
205
3 „
Creek
210
2 „
The settlement along route, with the exception of above-mentioned towns, is small, and very
scattered: Mount Fisher Homestead, with 100,000 acres and 3,000 sheep ; Weir’s Station, on Little
Sherlock River, with about 300,000 acres and 16,000 sheep, 300 head of cattle, and 150 horses; and
McKay’s Station, with 567,000 acres, and about 70,000 sheep.
Ants. —The White Ant abounds along the route, and would have to be considered in the
construction of the line.
ROUTE VIA ROBINSON’S STATION.
Shown in Blue on Tracing.
Starting from Station (A), as shown on tracing, and shirting the hilly country, a good route can
he obtained, with no earthworks to speak of, to Robinson’s homestead ; thence the line, crossing the
Coongan River at about 200 miles and skirting close to tank of Taiga Taiga River at Egina Gorge, about
204 miles. This is the only difficult portion as regards earthwork on this route, as it would require a
side cutting in steep spin, which runs about angle of 30° to bed of river; distance would be about ten
chains ; formation a kind of clay slate.
Thence the line can follow approximately same course as Coongan River to Marble Bar townsite.
The country is undulating, but presents no engineering difficulties. Timber—a kind of stunted white
gum —can be found along banks of various streams, but is of no value for railway purposes.
Good water can be obtained all along route by sinking to a depth of from 20 to 30 feet.
Ballast. — Fair ballast can be obtained along this route.
Comparing this route with the direct one via Nuralga River, it has the advantage of passing
through, comparatively speaking, level country with easy gradients and flat curves; also, it would suit
the mining centres, Bamboo Creek and Glencoe, but of course it has the disadvantage of being 30 miles
longer. Still, I think the route via Robinson’s would cost less to construct than the direct route, and
also far less for maintenance afterwards.
Formation. —As well as I could judge, is sandstone and slate, with portion about 15 miles from
Marble Bar of granite and basalt.
(Sd.) R. J. ANKETELL,
Railway Surveyor.
ROEBOURNE TO MARBLE BAR.
Principal Waterways with Approximate Mileage.
Authority: Richard Pether, Government Printer Perth


