

?OTM pPrvY\
fcEXlCiouS PAMP.
ftsz




F \
vj J
I *
OF THE
SPECIAL COMMITTEE
,YJS *Io SOHcHff QHOiI 9xlJ .vail J r Ai!
Cl ,TB. to *lOllBl3 QHOJ .T»fl 0/fl
,r r,.w r JTIS(I/rTA n
FOR
DfioCl .CIIIOTJ/. .D .il .V9-H
THE DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE,
)Oft .T .Y 9 J I /
AUSTRALIA,
r -: trr
IN CONNEXION WITH
THE SOCIETY FOE THE PEOPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL
IN FOEEIGN PAETS.
isihoY ,!) [DWAS .1 .v
/jbiiia .i>Ba .k;: ihia
WITH A
LETTEE FEOM THE BISHOP OF MELBOUENE,
a ,juomio{i ,p.i ,vih(ivinvon /i
CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF
\ TJTA*' T / T O ' \
A RECENT VISIT TO THE GOLD-FIELDS.
LONDON: PRINTED BY RICHARD CLAY, BREAD STREET HILL
1853.


(Cnranritto.
r 4 r >[ r PTT lf ll < l / in r Aau
Li vi . I». \ * > } '■ v i ■ 1
The Right Rev. the LORD BISHOP of ELY.
The Right Rev. the LORD BISHOP of ST. DAVID’S.
Rev. G. AINSLIE, Walworth.
Rev. R. G. ALFORD, Doncaster.
Rev. C. U. BARRY, Ryde.
Rev. T. BEST, Sheffield.
Venerable Archdeacon BONNEY, Lincoln.
Rev. T. BOODLE, Virginia Water.
R. BROOKS, Esq. Cornhill.
Rev. R. BURGESS, Chelsea.
Rev. H. CALTHROP, Braxted, Witham.
Rev. Canon CARUS, Winchester.
Hon. RICHARD CAVENDISH, 1, Belgrave Square.
Rev. W. CONWAY, Rochester.
Rev. J. COOPER, Trinity College, Cambridge.
A. CUNNINGHAME, Esq. Chancery Lane.
L. DESBOROUGH, ? Esq. Sise Lane.
Rev. H. V. ELLIOTT, Brighton.
Rev. J. FAWCETT, Low Moor, Bradford, Yorkshire.
J. GADESDEN, Esq. Ewell Castle, Surrey.
H. GREEN, Esq. Blackwall.
Rev. J. D. HALES, Richmond.
Rev. W. H. HANSON, Wilton, Brandon, Suffolk.
J. GURNEY HOARE, Esq. Lombard Street.
A. J. B. HOPE, Esq. M.P. Connaught Place.
V. F. HOVENDEN, Esq. 13, Belmont, Bath.
Rev. W. G, HUMPHRY, 13, Arlington Street.
Rev. G. MADDISON, Cambridge.
Rev. J. MARSHALL, Clifton.
R. S. PALMER, Esq. 4, Trafalgar Square.
Rev. W. RAVEN, Streatham.
Rev. J. SCOTT, Hull.
Rev. Canon SELWYN, Melbourn, Royston.
ST. BABBE SLADEN, Esq. Parliament Street.
Rev. SAMUEL SMITH, Camberwell.
C. B. STEVENSON, Esq. Hernor, Herefordshire.
Rev. A. STRONG, Walcot Rectory, Bath.
Rev. H. H. SWINNY, Mortlake.
R. G. TALBOT, Esq. Alfred Club.
H. b. THORNTON, Esq. Clapham Common.
Rev, F. TRENCH, Reading.
THOMAS TURNER, Esq. Hampstead.
Rev. Dr. VAUGHAN, Master of Harrow School
W. WAIN WRIGHT, Esq. Clapham.
Rev. Dr. WELLDON, Master of Tonbridge School.
Rev. Dr. Master of Trinity College, Can
171 UHT
ill iln L
Cambridge.
THOMAS TURNER, Esq. Honorary Secretary.
J. GURNEI HOARE, Esq. Treasurer.


REPOB T.
The intelligence which has been received from the Diocese of Melbourne
during the last twelve months, although showing a continuance of serious
difficulties and embarrassments, is, in the main, of a very encouraging
character.
What especially deserves notice is the fuller appreciation which is year
by year shown by the Colonists of the blessings derived from the ministra-
tions of religion; and the continually increasing efforts which are conse-
quently made by them, both individually and collectively, to secure their
possession. The Deport of the Executive Committee of the “ Annual
Stipend Board” informs us that in the parishes of St. James and St. Peter,
Melbourne, the collections in the year 1853, for the support of the Clergy
of the diocese, amounted, after deducting expenses, to 1,134/. 25.; and that
the total sum contributed in the Colony, and placed at the disposal of the
Board, amounted to 1,828/. Bs. 6 d. But the Committee observe that ‘‘this
sum does not comprise the whole of the contributions of the people towards
the maintenance of the Clergy, but only so much of those contributions as
has been paid into the General Fund;” that “the inhabitants of Richmond,
Brighton, St. Kilda, Belfast, Kilmore, Kyneton, and the Wannon, have made
up the whole stipends of their ministers, without calling upon the General
Stipend Fund for any assistance; and the inhabitants of Ballan, Burnbank
(Lexton), Colling wood, Heidelberg, Newtown (Geelong), Pentridge, Port-
land, Tarraville, Warnambool, and Williamstown, have each contributed a
greater or less proportion.” The amount of the local contributions in 1852,
so far as they have come under the cognizance of the Committee, is stated
to have been 2,200/. 2s. 11 d., “ which, with the sum of 1,828/. Ba* 6 d, con-
tributed as above mentioned to the General Fund, gives a total of
4,028/. 11$. s d. raised for the maintenance of the Clergy by voluntary
contributions in Victoria during the year.” Our readers will join with the
Editor of the Melbourne Church of England Messenger , from whose columns


the above particulars are extracted, in “ thanking God for this evidence of
spiritual life ” in the Church in Melbourne, and in “ earnestly praying that
the increased aid to be now afforded by the State,* may encourage its
members to greater exertions for extending it to meet the wants of the
rapidly advancing population.”
Instances of further exertions are, indeed, not wanting. A very gratifying
one will be found in the fact of a special subscription having been opened in
the Colony for bringing out additional Clergymen from England. The amount
proposed to be raised is 2,000/, in order to provide outfits for ten or more
ministers; and early in the present year, contributions had been already
received to the amount of 1,09 G/., which sum has been duly remitted to the
Treasurer of the Melbourne Diocesan Eund in this country.
Considerable subscriptions have also been raised in the Colony during the
last year for the erection or enlargement of churches. In Melbourne itself it
is proposed to add to the three existing churches of St. James, St. Peter, and
St. Paul, (the last of which has only been very recently completed,) a fourth
church, to be called St. John’s, towards which a sum of 1,391/. 15s. had
been subscribed in Eebruary last; besides which, a church is in progress in
the parish of Richmond, a suburb of Melbourne, towards which 1,550/. has
been subscribed; and there is one contemplated in Collingwood, another
suburb, to be named St. Mark’s, for which a subscription has been lately
opened, and contributions are announced to the amount of 400/. Sums also
have been raised, although to what extent does not appear, for the erection
of churches and parsonages, at Williamstown, at Tower Hill, in the vicinity
of Belfast, at St. Kilda, and at Tarraville, in Gippsland.
To turn from the proceedings of individuals to those of the community;
a remarkable Act was passed by the Colonial Legislature at the beginning
of this year, by which the Lieutenant-Governor and Executive Council of
the Colony are authorized to issue, out of the public revenue, sums to the
amount of 30,000/. per annum in aid of the erection of buildings for public
worship, and of the maintenance of ministers of religion. The sums to be
applied to the latter purpose are not to exceed in the aggregate one-half of
the entire grant; but it would seem that if less than the moiety is required
for stipends, the entire residue will be applicable to buildings. The
distribution of the fund is subject to the condition, that no grant for a
church or parsonage is to exceed twice the amount raised for the same
* This is afterwards adverted to.


purpose from other sources, nor the maximum of 2,000/. for a church, and
400/. for a parsonage. The same condition as to the proportionate amount of
voluntary contributions applies, except in special cases, to grants towards the
stipends of ministers; and the maximum amount to be paid out of the 'public
revenue to any one minister is fixed at 400/. It remains, to be added that
this grant of 30,000/. per annum, which is in addition to the annual sum of
0,000/. appropriated to similar purposes by the constitutional Act referred to
in last year’s Report, is, in like manner with the latter sum, divisible among
the different denominations of Christians in the Colony, in proportion t ; o their
respective numbers, as determined from time to time by the census. This
rule now gives to the members of the Church of England about half the
entire sum, or (provided the necessary conditions are satisfied) 15,000/.; of
which 7,500/. or under is applicable to the stipends of clergymen, and 7,500/.
or upwards to the erection of churches and parsonages.
The Legislature has further granted considerable sums out of the public
revenue of the Colony for the establishment and support of schools; out of
which the sum appropriated in the beginning of this year for schools of the
Church of England is stated to be 2,807/. 9s. Gd. An Act has also been
O
passed for the establishment of a University, with an appropriation out of
the revenue of 10,000/. per annum for its support. The institution itself is
to be of a purely secular character, but the colleges to be affiliated to it
are to be left at liberty to make such regulations as they respectively think
proper for the religious instruction and discipline of their members.
All these are cheering facts; but it has already been intimated, that, in
examining the position of the diocese, there will be found to be two sides to
the picture, and that, gratifying as is the exhibition of zeal and activity
above presented, there is much wanting to make them effectual. There is
still a lamentable deficiency of Clergymen. The number of Clergymen is,
indeed, less in proportion to the population at the present moment than it
has been for some years past; and the disproportion is continually and
rapidly increasing. It is a melancholy fact, that whilst the population of
the Colony on the Ist January, 1853, was at least double its amount on the
Ist January, 1852, the number of officiating Clergymen was precisely the
same at both periods, viz. twenty-four only ; and, taking in the accounts up
to the latter end of May last, the date of the latest advices, there appears
an increase in the number of no more than one, making at that time but
twenty-five. This state of things would, indeed, be more discouraging than


it is, had it arisen from an absence of arrivals from this country ; but this,
happily, is not the case, as many as six additional Clergymen having landed
in the Colony in the interval in question, viz. between January 1852 and
May 1853; and the nearly stationary position of the staff of Clergy during
that period being in fact attributable to the occurrence of an unusual
number of retirements, from ill-health and other causes, amongst those who
were previously officiating. Had none of these retirements, however, taken
< ■» • •
place, the number of Clergy in the Colony would still have been by no
means equal to the requirements of the population; and, under existing
circumstances, a very considerable augmentation is most imperatively
required. Two additional Clergymen, (but it is deeply to be regretted, two
only,) viz. the Rev. John C. T. Stretch, a brother of the Rev. T. C. B.
Stretch, who went out last year, and the Rev. G. Goodman, have been pro-
vided with outfits out of the colonial fund already mentioned, and have
recently sailed for the Colony; but, taking these additions into account,
the number of officiating Clergy in the diocese at the close of the present
year will not exceed twenty-seven; while the population at that period
will probably be not short of a quarter of a million. Surely, it may
be hoped that the call which the Bishop of Melbourne makes to the Clergy
in this country, to come over and help him in the evangelization of his
diocese, will not be disregarded. “ I would appeal also particularly,” ob-
serves the Bishop, (after referring to the circumstances of his diocese,)
“ to my brethren in the ministry, whether there are not among them
• .
some whose hearts are stirred within them at the thought of the spiritual
destitution of this people, and who long to come to our help in the arduous
but glorious work in which we are engaged. I cannot promise them a
large measure of ‘ this world’s goods, 5 but I can promise them that which,
if they duly love the Lord’s service, will be more attractive to them—
a more important field of ministerial usefulness than any (except a very
few) of the Parochial Clergy of England possess. 55
Well, indeed, may the Bishop dwell upon the consequences involved in
the early training—and the peculiar claims to regard —of “ a people likely,
so far as we can read the future purposes of God in his present providential
dealings, to become, ere long, one of the most numerous families of the
British race. 55 “ The next few years, 55 remarks the Bishop, “ will probably
decide what shall be their character for all succeeding generations; how
important therefore is it that, in dependence upon the Divine blessing, we


should use every exertion to bring the influence of the Gospel to bear upon
them, and to connect them with their fatherland by the closest of all ties—
the tie of Christian fellowship. 55
, It may be here observed, that the appeal from which the foregoing pas-
sages have been taken, was written before the large grant from the colonial
legislature, hereinbefore adverted to, had been proposed; and that the pass-
ing of this measure may reasonably be calculated upon as likely to effect
a substantial improvement in the temporal condition of the Melbourne
Clergy. It is material to add, for the information of Clergymen who "may
be disposed to seek employment in this Diocese, that it is requisite for them
to obtain, before leaving England, a certificate from the Bishop 5 s Com-
missaries in this country. These are the Rev. H. Yenn, (Church Mis-
sionary House, Salisbury Square,) the Rev. T. H. Davies, (Ramsgate,) and
the Rev. J. Cooper, (Trinity College, Cambridge.)
Next in importance to the want of Clergymen, is that of churches and
parsonage-houses. There is a great deficiency of both all over the colony;
and the exertions of the inhabitants to supply the defect, considerable as
they are, are greatly impeded by the extraordinary prices, under the present
circumstances of the colony, of labour and materials, and the enormous
charges attending the carriage of the latter. Under the emergency of the
case, the Bishop of Melbourne applied, towards the latter end of last year,
for the assistance of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, at
whose expense a portable iron church, with a parsonage-house of the same
description, has been constructed by Mr. Hemming, of Bristol, and shipped
for Melbourne. This church, the first, it is believed, that has ever been
exported, is calculated to accommodate 750 persons. The parsonage con-
tains a moderate sized sitting-room and kitchen, and four small bed-rooms,
besides a servants room. A service was performed in the church (under a
licence from the Bishop of Gloucester), and a sermon preached by the Rev.
T. H. Davies, late Archdeacon of Melbourne, on the 13th May last, pre-
viously to the building being taken down and packed for shipment. An
interesting account of this service, which was attended by a crowded con-
gregation, with a sketch of the church, and a description of the structure,
will be found in the Home Friend , No. 61 (vol. iii. p. 203). Descriptions
and drawings of the buildings have also been given in the Illustrated
London News, The sum of 551. 10s. was after the service, and
has been applied towards the freight of the church.


A second iron church, constructed to hold 1,000 persons, and'another
parsonage-house, have since been procured from Mr. Hemming, and will, it
is hoped, be shipped for Melbourne in the course of a few weeks. The cost
of this latter church, when packed and shipped (but not including freight),
will be 1,600/.; and of the parsonage, 262/. 10s. These sums, together with
the further charges hereinafter mentioned, will, it is confidently anticipated,
be paid by the colonists on whose behalf the outlay is incurred, upon the
arrival of the structures. In the meantime, the payment for the building of
the second iron church and parsonage, has been guaranteed by a few friends
ol the Bishop. With regard to the charges for the freight and insurance of
the second church, and the remainder of the freight of the first church, over
and above the amount of the collection, with the insurance on that struc-
ture, amounting altogether, as it has been estimated, to about 900/., it has
been thought advisable, for the convenience of the Bishop, to whom the
fabrics are consigned, as well as of the colonists themselves, to pay them
provisionally out of the Melbourne Bund in this country, the draughts upon
which, in respect of outfits, have happily been relieved to a larger amount
by the remittance already mentioned from the colony.
The church tent mentioned in the last Report was not completed in time to
be shipped last year; but both this, and a second tent, each calculated to hold
upwards of 400 persons, have been shipped in the course of the spring of this
year. The entire cost of both tents, with the freight and other charges, has
been defrayed by special subscriptions, with the exception of a small balance
of 6/., paid by a draft from the general fund. The recent intelligence from
Melbourne leaves no room for doubt that these tents will be of the greatest
assistance to the Clergymen who are ministering at the diggings, and that
they are particularly well adapted, in consequence of their facility of
removal, for the use of the migratory population of those districts. In
order to designate, as well as the case admits, the objects for which these
tents are designed, they are each surmounted with a large flag, displaying a
St. George's cross, with a shield containing the arms of the See of Mel-
bourne in the centre. On one of the flags there is moreover inscribed, in
large letters along the length of the cross, " To God and his Church.”
It is to be hoped that the arrival of the two churches and parsonage-
houses, and of the two church tents above mentioned, although falling far
short of the requirements of the Diocese, will, at all events, sensibly miti-
gate the extreme inconveniences at present felt. And, if the description of


buildings sent is approved by the colonists, they will be able, with the aid
of the Government grant, to procure annually so large a supply as, in a
few years, to remove the pressure arising from want of church accommoda-
tion laitogehteEf of aid blnow aimlb oaadJ ni taamJui hr sinl oriv
With regard to the subject of finance, it will be seen, from the accom-
panying statement, that the condition of the Melbourne Bund in this
country, on the Ist August last, the day to which the account is made up,
presents a favourable contrast with it’s position at the date of the last pre-
ceding statement, viz. Ist July, 1852. It is to be observed, however, that
this improvement is due, in a great measure, to the remittance already men-
tioned from the colony, and to a transfer, under the directions of the Bishop,
to the general fund, of a sum of 350/., the balance of some private subscrip-
tions for the benefit of the Diocese, collected through the exertions of Sir
T. Blomefield. It must also be borne in mind, that the money in hand on
the Ist August, as appearing from the financial statement, remained liable
to considerable deductions in respect of the charges (which have been since
in part paid) for freight and insurance on the two iron churches and par-
sonages ; and that the remaining balance, valuable as it is, will not provide
outfits for more than a small portion of the Clergymen demanded by the
wants of the colony. If, therefore, as is most earnestly to be prayed, any
considerable number offer themselves for service in this field of missionary
exertion, a continuance of subscriptions from the Bishop’s friends in this
country will be indispensable, in order to enable his Commissaries to accept
their aid.
It will be seen from the statement, that from the Ist July, 1852, to the
Ist August, 1853, contributions have been received to the fund, in answer
mainly to the special appeal of last year, to the amount of 1,384/. Is. 2d. ;
adding to which the above-mentioned sums of 1,096/. 16s. 6d., and 350/. from
other sources, the total addition to the fund is 2,830/. 17s. B d. The prin-
cipal items of expenditure are 365/.for outfits, 152/. for books, 200/.towards
the freight of the first iron church, and 236/. Is. 11</. for printing and
postage. The unusually large amount of this last item is owing to the ex-
penses attending the issue of the Special Appeal, which it was thought
advisable to circulate extensively. Since the account was made up, a
further sum of 150/. has been paid for the freight and insurance of the first
iron church, leaving a balance at the present time of about 1,850/.
The Secretary takes this opportunity of inviting attention to the Melbourne


Church of England Messenger, a monthly publication which the Bishop has
been in the habit of sending to several of his friends, but which, as contain-
ing a succinct account of church affairs in the colony, many other persons
who take an interest in these affairs would possibly like to peruse, and for
which, as the publication appears at present to be carried on at some pecu-
niary loss, some of those who now receive it gratuitously, would probably
prefer to pay. The price in the colony is Qd. per number, and, in order to
defray the postage to this country, it is proposed that the subscription in
England shall be at the rate of 7d. per number, or 7s, per annum, payable
in advance. The Secretary will receive any subscriptions from parties
desiring to receive the Messenger on the above terms, which may be paid
01 remitted to him at the Office of the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel, 79, Pall Mall, and will forthwith transmit the names of the sub-
scribers, with their addresses (which it is requested may be given in full),
to Melbourne.
The letter which follows this Report, contains an interesting account of
a visit by the Bishop, accompanied by Mrs. Perry, to the Gold-fields, in the
months of April and May last. The letter was opportunely received by
the Secretary during the preparation of the Report, to which it will prove
a welcome addition.
THOMAS TURNER,
. ] .
HON. SEC.
79, Pall Mall,
Sept. 1, 1853.


LETTER FROM THE BISHOP,
£lOB /J9J80./
{Dated May 14, 1853,)
ADDRESSED TO THE HONORARY SECRETARY OF THE
MELBOURNE COMMITTEE.
You will like to have a report from me of our second visit to the gold-fields.
On Monday, the 28th of March, we returned to Melbourne from an excursion
to Geelong and Lake in order that I might consecrate St. Peter’s
Church. The ceremony, which was the first of the kind that I have been able
to perform since my arrival, took place on Tuesday; and the following Thurs-
day, March 31, we set off again in our usual travelling carriage, a spring-cart,
with the intention of first visiting the district of the Upper Goulburn, and
thence making a circuit of the nearer and most valuable gold-fields, viz. those
of Bendigo, Mount Alexander, and Ballaarat. We set off alone, trusting that
we should be able to obtain a guide, or a companion, upon those parts of our
road where we should really need either. Several reasons combined to pre-
vent us from taking a servant, —the want of a horse for his use, the additional
expense, and the feeling that in many parts of our tour he might increase
rather than diminish our difficulties. Our first stage from Melbourne was to
Kinlochawe, where we were, as we had been on former occasions, most hospi-
tably received at the house of Capt. Pearson, a handsome stone mansion , com-
manding a beautiful view. The Rev. W. Singleton and Mrs. S. had ridden
over the same morning to meet us, and accompany us to Kilmore. Thither
we proceeded the next day, (Friday,) and remained with them until the follow-
ing Tuesday. In my former letters I have mentioned the cheerful contented-
ness of Mr. and Mrs. S. under circumstances, in which almost any other persons
with so large a family (11 children) would have been oppressed with anxiety;
and the remarkable talent which they possess of providing against and over-
coming the difficulties of the times. When we visited them, besides their own
children and Miss Armstrong, who accompanied them from Ireland, and is as
a daughter to them, and a tutor who has resided with them above twelve
months, there were two sisters of Mrs. S. staying in the house. Nevertheless,
they insisted upon receiving us, and likewise provided accommodation for our
horses during the time that we remained there. lam afraid, however, that
they suffer many privations, and that, although they bear it so cheerfully,
they are not insensible to the discomfort of their limited accommodation, hor
supplying sleeping apartments every expedient was adopted ; a tent was
erected for two of the boys, and a wooden building, the work ol their own
hands, held two others. Several additions have been made to their little


cottage by these youthful builders, who also perform all manner of out-of-
doors work. Kilmore is much improved since we first knew it. It is now a
quiet orderly place, and contains several respectable families. The police
magistrate is Mr. Wriothesley Noel, a son of the Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel,
and the clerk of the peace is Mr. Koster, son of a clergyman in New Bruns-
wick. Every month Mr. Singleton makes a circuit among the stations round
Kilmore, returning home for the Sunday services. In these excursions Mrs. S.
usually accompanies him, and is a most welcome visitor everywhere. Her
kindness and good spirits make her universally beloved, and the same may be
said of Mr. S. I preached twice on Sunday, and on Monday held a meeting of
the people for the purpose of explaining to them the provisions of the recent
Act of Council, and the regulations subsequently issued by the Executive Govern-
ment, both of which have been inserted in the Church of England Messenger,
It is my earnest wish that exertions should be made for erecting a church at
Kilmore, and it was resolved to open a subscription at once, but I do not think
that the object is likely to be accomplished for some time to come. I am
also very anxious to procure a more suitable residence for the clergyman, and
if our friends in England send us out, as I hope they will, some iron buildings
for parsonages, to be paid for by instalments, it is probable that I may be
able to appropriate one of them to his use. There is no one in the Diocese
who has a stronger claim to be thus assisted.
Tuesday , April 5. —We resumed our journey towards the Goulburn, accom-
panied by Mr. S. and Miss Armstrong on horseback, and arrived safely at
Mr. Murchison’s, where we were very kindly received, and comfortably housed
for the night. On this road there is a remarkably steep hill, which is deno-
minated, par excellence , “the great hill.” At the top of it we found Mr. M.
and his son awaiting our arrival, with a rope to tie the wheel of our cart, and
ready to render us their assistance in going down the declivity. It is, indeed,
a descent, which would shake the nerves of an ordinary English coachman ;
but, having taken off the out-rigger, and tied up one of the wheels at the most
precipitous parts, Mr. M. jun. was able to lead down our staunch shaft-horse
(Wellington) without much difficulty. The view from the top of this hill was
very extensive, commanding not only the ranges at the head of the Goulburn,
but also some of the snowy mountains bordering upon Gippsland.
Wednesday, April 6. — Mr. Ker, who was to be our host on the Goulburn,
came over to conduct us to his house. On our way we had to cross a creek, called
the King Parrot Creek, no less than three times, and another distinguished
as the Muddy Creek, which however is a. misnomer, as far as its waters are
concerned, for they were quite clear, and the bottom firm and gravelly.
A good deal of rain had fallen while we were at Kilmore, but fortunately not
enough to render any of the fords impassable, or indeed at all dangerous,
although in some the water was deep, and the passage not altogether easy.
In scrambling up the bank from one our out-rigger (Taffy) fell, and cut his
knees a little, but he was up again in a moment. Our only serious difficulty
was at one of the fords, where the descent into the stream was by a steep,
indeed almost perpendicular, passage of four or five feet in height, cut through
the bank, and so narrow as scarcely to admit the cart and its pair of horses
together. Our conductor recommended to take off the out rigger, but at first


I declined, thinking that they would rather help each other. I therefore put
them to the edge, but they resolutely refused to go down. I then complied
with our friend’s suggestion, and took off Taffy, hut I could not succeed any
better in inducing "Wellington to venture into the depth below, until Mfi. K,,
in the true spirit of a bushman, jumped himself into the water, and led him
down. There was no real danger, for there was not room for the cart to be
upset, and the depth was not sufficient to hurt the hor|p, who, immediately
upon plunging in, was able to secure a good footing for himself, and draw
down the cart safely. It was, however’, for the moment a somewhat nervous
position, standing as I was almost upright upon the front of the cart, and look-
ing down upon the horse under me. I ought to mention that Mr. S., who had
ridden with us thus far, rendered no slight help by holding up the cart with
a rope, which he had tied to it behind. When I had got down into the stream
Mrs. P., who had been previously watching the proceedings, clambered in from
the bank. Upon reaching Killingworth, where Mr. K. resides, we found
Mrs. K., who had accompanied Dr. Macartney from Ireland, and was conse-
quently a fellow-passenger and well known to us, expecting our arrival, and
prepared to give us a most hospitable and friendly reception. Killingworth
is pleasantly situated, and theirs is a comfortable house. Our host and
hostess also were not only, as the settlers always are, kind and obliging, but
also persons of sound Christian principles and consistent piety of life. There
was, therefore, nothing wanting to our enjoyment during the few days we
spent with them. Nor were they days of idleness, for Mr. K., having inferred
that we should remain over Sunday, arranged that I should visit and hold
a service at some neighbouring stations on each of the remaining days of the
week, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, which I accordingly did. It matters
nothing on these occasions whether the family is English, Scotch, or Irish,
Episcopalian, Presbyterian, or of any other communion, they are equally will-
ing, I may say glad, to receive my ministrations, and unite in worship with
me. On Sunday we had a gathering from all the country round, and Ido not
remember to have ever spent a Sunday in the bush with more gratification. In
general there is a great difficulty in avoiding unprofitable and unsuitable con-
versation after service; the members of the congregation, who come from
a distance, remaining and chatting together during the larger portion of the
day; but on this occasion I was able to talk with many of them alone, and,
when they had taken a slight luncheon, they all dispersed. What a blessing
it would be to the country, if a number of men of decidedly religious character,
like Mr. K., were scattered throughout it! We remained in our agreeable
quarters during Monday, spending that day chiefly in writing letters; and the
following morning set off, somewhat reluctantly, down the Goulburn to Sey-
mour, where we crossed the river, and proceeded along the other side to the
station of Messrs. Nicholson and Roach, which we visited three years ago.
Our arrival was wholly unexpected, but we were not the less kindly received.
Mr. N. is a bachelor, and Mr. R. married, but without children, and they live
together apparently with the most perfect harmony as one family. In the
evening Mr. and Mrs. Singleton arrived, bringing us letters from Melbourne;
and Mr. Ker, who had kindly escorted us hither, left us on his return home-
wards. Our cart this day had a narrow escape of being upset, not however


while we were in it, for having to ford the Goulburn, the descent to which
presented some difficulties, we had got out, and Mr. K. was leading the cart
along a ridge of sand upon the side of the river, when to our consternation we
saw it, owing to the narrowness of the ridge, tilt up, and run, certainly not
less than a couple of yards, upon one wheel. We expected every moment to
see it overturned, but fortunately it righted itself. This is an incident of
Australian travelling. The prospect of obtaining Mr. Nicholson and his bro-
ther, who was staying with them, as our guides for the next stage, induced us
to continue where we were for the next day, (Tuesday,) and this I was the
more willing to do as it gave me an opportunity of visiting Seymour, and
holding a service there, which I accordingly did in the police-office, which was
lent me for the purpose ; a few persons only attended. The township of Sey-
mour is scarcely more populous now than when we first visited it four years
ago, nor does it seem likely to increase. It is situate at the crossing-place of
the Goulburn on the Sydney road, which alone appears to give it any import-
ance ; and there is a probability of the road being changed, in which case
I expect that it will be quite deserted. Unexpected circumstances may, how-
ever, arise to falsify this prediction, and make it suddenly become like some
others, a large and populous town.
On Wednesday, April 13, we pursued our way towards Bendigo, our imme-
diate destination being the new station of Mr. J. H. Patterson on the Cam-
paspe river. We were conducted by the Messrs. Nicholson for a considerable
part of the way across the bush; and, after resting in the middle of the day
by a “ water-hole of a creek,” (Angl. a pool in the bed of a winter brook,) to
refresh ourselves and horses with the provisions which we brought with us,
reached Mr. P.’s about five o’clock in the afternoon. Here we were ourselves
comfortably lodged and abundantly provided for, but not so our poor horses,
for whom there was no hay, and who were consequently obliged to be turned
out, and pick up what they could in the night from an almost bare paddock.
Mr. P.’s is another well-built stone house, beautifully situated upon a point
of high land, and commanding a view of a rich plain below, and a large extent
of country beyond. At the close of our journey I rashly allowed the horses
to drink at a “ water-hole ”by the road-side, into which ourselves, the cart,
and horses were all nearly plunged headlong, the strength of one of our guides,
applied to turn back the wheel, alone enabling Wellington to get out again.
This evening we were alarmed by the prospect of Taffy going lame with a sore
heel. However, his night-ramble did him good.
Friday.— We proceeded another short stage (ten miles) to Mr. Ross. Mr.
and Mrs. P. accompanied us, Mr. P. driving Mrs. Perry in his gig, and Mrs. P.
taking her place in our cart. Mr. P. had been twice stopped by “ bush-
rangers, and whenever we met a party of suspicious-looking men he was, as
he himself said, quite nervous. We found Mr. Ross's house empty, Mr. and
Mrs. R. being absent from home; but the overseer had received an intimation
of our coming, and the woman who was in charge gave us a cordial welcome,
so that we felt no hesitation in remaining there for the night. In the evening
a brother-in-law of Mrs. R. came in, and kindly performed all the duties of
an host. He was employed as a sort of gentleman-carrier between Melbourne
and the gold-fielos, and was travelling along the road with several loaded


bullock-drays. His sister-in-law's station was one ot his usual halting-places.
He gave us an account of a rencontre which he also had had with a party ot
bush-rangers, and in which he had received severe bodily injury. lam very
thankful that the present Government has put a stop to transportation, for
so long as it continued we could not but feel that England was guilty of sup-
plying 0 a continual succession of recruits to the hordes of banditti which at
present infest this country, and render property, and even life itself, insecure.
The robberies and murders, which have been so rife among us during the last
eighteen months, have been perpetrated almost without an exception by con-
victs let loose among us by the mistaken policy of our fatherland. Ido not
so much complain of the past, for there was much that was plausible in the
theory of the system; but, after its practical evils had become so apparent, to
have persevered in it would have been the most unjustifiable cruelty and injus-
tice. Even now, many years must elapse before we can hope to be free from its
baneful consequences. But lam digressing from my subject. At Mr. Ross’s
we hoped to find the Rev. J. H. Gregory, the resident clergyman upon the
Bendigo gold-field, but he had turned out his horse, being unable to pay the
cost of its keep at “ the diggings,” and therefore could not come to us. In
consequence we set off on Saturday alone , which, at this point of our journey,
was of little consequence, as the road was well marked, and we met every few
hundred yards with a party on their way from Bendigo to examine some new
diggings recently discovered on the M‘lvor Creek, in the direction from which
we were going. When we had proceeded about twelve miles, and were still
about six miles from the Commissioners’ camp, which was our destination, we
were met by a body of the mounted police, sent out by the commanding
officer to escort us in; a very unusual compliment in this country, where,
although my office secures for me all the practical assistance which I require,
and every kind attention, as well from officers of the Government as from pri-
vate individuals, yet the indifference with which the State regards all particular
denominations, prevents me from receiving any of those public honours
which would naturally be shown to the dignitary of an established Church.
This absence of pomp I do not at all regret, but rather regard it as conducive
to the real usefulness of a Bishop in such a mixed community as this.
We entered 4< Bendigo Flat” in the evening, and were greatly struck by the
appearance which it presented. Nothing which we saw last year was at all
comparable in effect with this gold-field. u The Camp,” i. e. the enclosure in
which the Commissioners’ and other Government officers’ tents are placed, is
situated upon elevated ground at an angle, from which extends along the flat
in both directions, for about five miles in length and an average of half a
mile in breadth, a closely connected line of holes, some circular like a well,
others square, others again oblong, like a grave, separated from one another
by the turned-up earth, and by a street , marked out by the store-tents on
either side, which runs along the middle. The flat is enclosed by ranges,
covered, except where they have been laid bare by the diggers, with an “ iron-
bark” forest, which of all Australian forests is the most dreary and dismal.
The view of these ranges from the Commissioners’ camp is, however, diver-
sified by what are called “ the White Hills,” the appearance of which the
spectator is at first quite unable to explain. They are, in fact, a succession of


hills, seven in number, covered with pipe-clay, which has been excavated by
the diggers, and gives them the colouring of the chalk cliffs of old England,
We walked to them on the following Monday, and looked down into the
holes, but we did not descend into any of them. The gold was found to lie in
a thin layer of earth (a sort of soft sandstone mixed with quartz pebbles,
I think it is,) from fifty to seventy feet below the surface, and just above the
pipe-clay. The method, therefore, which has been adopted by the diggers is
to sink a shaft through this layer into the pipe-clay, and then to carry on the
excavation horizontally, throwing out the pipe-clay, and afterwards working
at the auriferous stratum from beneath. In this manner some of these hills
have been completely undermined, so as to render it extremely dangerous to
walk over them; and more than one death has occurred from the earth
falling in, and burying those who were in the holes. Our guide on this occa-
sion was a Mr. Temple, an English Roman Catholic, of a good family, who had
been employed with his three brothers in gold-digging for more than twelve
months. Mr. T. told us that the expenses of housekeeping, or rather tent-
keeping, for the year had exceeded 2,000 Z. and that the gold which they had
obtained had been little more than sufficient to maintain them.
Besides the “ flat” already mentioned, there are included under the name
of the Bendigo gold-field, seven or eight, or perhaps even more, gullies,
separated from one another by iron-bark ranges, and each constituting a
distinct gold-field, more or less rich. On Tuesday we crossed several of these
on our way to one of more importance than the rest, called Eagle-Hawk
gully, which I wished to visit, with a view to the location of a Clergyman
there, if the Lord should provide a suitable man. On the range beyond this
gully there is a vein of auriferous quartz, in which two or three parties of
men are working. We visited one party, and saw the rude machine (used,
I believe, in California,) for crushing the quartz. The men were not at work,
but they civilly explained the process to us, and gave us several specimens.
There was a woman, the wife of one of them, a Wesleyan, who appeared to be
a true Christian. She shed tears when she showed me her Bible and her
class-tickets, and spoke of the destitution of all public means of grace. Upon
leaving this party we went to another, of a very respectable class, consisting
of three men and a woman, who was the wife of one and the sister of another.
I did not make out whether the third was related to the other two. The
auriferous quartz in which they were working was inclined at an angle of
perhaps (I am guessing) 45° to the horizon; and they worked it by first
excavating the lower stratum, and then breaking it away from beneath. The
excavation which they had made was in the form of a sloping trench, and was
nowhere deeper than eight or nine feet. We could see the gold thickly
sprinkled in the face of the rock, and the man who was at work knocked off’
several pieces of it for us as specimens. They told us that they had obtained
about 3,000 Z. worth in the last six months. At the time we visited them,
they were waiting for a crushing machine from Melbourne; and there were
two heaps of quartz which they had quarried, one already calcined, the other
laid upon a pile of wood to be calcined, preparatory to its crushing. The
former they estimated at 1,500 Z. On our return we inspected the washing of
several tin dishes ; but the produce was in no case great. I spoke also to


several of the workers, among whom were some young men evidently unac-
customed to hard labour; and their statements confirmed me in the impres-
sion, that there are not many at the present time who are making large gains,
and that the greater proportion upon this gold-field are doing little more than
pay their expenses. Some are wholly unsuccessful; nor can we be surprised
at this, when we consider the immense number of persons engaged in the
employment. For the present month no less than 16,000 licences have been
issued for the Bendigo district alone; so that, according to the ordinary cal-
culation, there must be between 30,000 and 40,000 persons upon the field.
We were most kindly received at “ the Camp/’ the senior Assistant-Com-
missioner giving up his own tent for our accommodation, and he and all his
colleagues showing us every attention. As you may not understand what the
nature of the Commissioners’ office is, I may mention that they are empowered
to issue the monthly licences, and to settle all disputes among the diggers
about their respective “ claims,” i.e. the space of ground allotted to each.
The “ Senior Assistant Commissioner ” at Bendigo, or Sandhurst, as the site
of the camp is called, is the superior officer there, and carries on all official
correspondence; but he is subordinate to “ the Resident Commissioner,’ ’
(Capt. Bull,) on the other side of Mount Alexander, at “ Castlemaine.” One
of the Assistant Commissioners is appointed to the special duty of receiving
all deposits of gold and cash for the escorts, and keeping an account thereof.
Hence he is called, par excellence, “ the Gold Commissioner but this name is
generally applied to them all without distinction. All the Government
officers mess together at one table, and the clerks at another. We lived
entirely with the former during the few days that we stayed there, and
a very agreeable company we found them. At present the escort for the
protection of the gold to Melbourne is formed of an officer and eight soldiers
of the 40th regiment.
At Sandhurst I found the Rev. J. H. Gregory, who has resigned the fields
round Castlemaine, Forest Creek, &c. to the charge of the Rev. J. Cheyne, and
since the Ist January has carried on his ministry wholly in the Bendigo
district. Practically, indeed, he can attend to little more than the popu-
lation upon the Bendigo flat, above described; so that the thousands working
in the gulleys beyond the succession ranges are wholly destitute of the ordi-
nances of the gospel. Even in this more limited field, zealous and inde-
fatigable as Mr. G. is, he can reach only a very few; for he has no place
where he can assemble a congregation of more than 150 persons, except in
the open air, and this is possible only in favourable weather. On Sunday
morning I preached in the Police-court, in the preparation of which much
pains had been taken. The little building was quite filled with an attentive
congregation, but I could not help thinking of the hundreds and thousands
around, who could not, however desirous they might have been, have found
admittance. In the afternoon I walked with Mr. G. about two miles along
the street of tents, thronged, I might almost say, with people, to a store, of
which the owner had offered Mr. G. the use for holding service. I had,
however, previously made up my mind to endeavour to gather a company in
the open air; and I was confirmed in this determination when I saw the
store, which scarcely contained vacant space enough for twenty people. But


I was not a little discouraged when I looked around, and saw no nucleus of a
congregation, except three or four persons who had been present in the
morning. I stood for some time in the street, speaking to the knots of
passers by, and Mr. G. went round to some of the tents in the neighbourhood.
At last I resolved, although with a heavy heart, to wait no longer, and
I walked a few yards off to a fallen tree, upon which 1 took my stand, with
my Bible and Prayer-book in my hand, and asked Mr. G. to begin and ring
the bell, which he had brought with him for the purpose. When he was
tired, one of the standers relieved him, and in a short time a few persons
gathered round. I then commenced our “ Evening Prayer,” and proceeded to
the end of the first lesson, by which time a considerable number of people was
collected. Being afraid of wearying them by carrying on further a service with
which most of them were probably altogether unacquainted, and which only
one or two had books to follow, I stopped short here, and passed on at once
to my sermon, which I concluded with a somewhat prolonged prayer. The
hearers in general were very attentive, but I could not hold them all; Some
from time to time went away, and others came up and joined us. Alto-
gether I was much encouraged, for there were many more present than could
have found a place in any building upon the gold-field; and certainly many
who would never have gone to a regular place of worship. lam very anxious
to obtain churches for the several gold districts; but lam sure that none
which we can hope to procure will supersede the need of “ field-preaching.”
Mr. G. has been much troubled about a church tent, which was sent up to
him from Melbourne many months ago, and pitched, and, I believe, for
a short time used for service; but it was put up so badly, that it was very
soon blown down, and he had not since been able to get the carpenter to put
it up again. While I was there I saw the man, and by the promise of some
additional remuneration induced him to promise to set about the work imme-
diately, so that I hope it will be available before the winter sets in. Mr. G.’s
disappointment has been attended with one advantage; viz. that he can now
place it in a more eligible situation than that in which it stood before, and
thus we can find comforts in our crosses. While I was at Bendigo, I
endeavoured, by inviting them to wait after the morning service, to bring
together some of the members of our Church, and form a committee for
raising subscriptions towards their minister’s stipend, and the management
of other matters. Very few, however, remained ; and although some of these
seemed interested in the subject, yet the impression left upon my mind was,
that nothing effectual is likely to be done by them; and that, during the
present year at least, the work of the ministry in this district must be
a missionary work. Indeed, the more I see of the gold-digging population,
the more strongly am I convinced that they will not make any exertions, or
contribute any portion of their gains (I speak of the great mass of them),
either for the building of churches or the maintenance of clergymen. By far
the greater portion are wholly indifferent to these things; and those who
acknowledge the obligations of religion, and perhaps even value its privileges,
prefer to contribute to religious objects at home, wherever that home may be,
and not at any particular gold-field, where they have no permanent abode
and no local attachment of any kind.


' The gold-digger is necessarily migratory. Even if he takes up the employ-
ment as his permanent occupation, which is very seldom the case, he is not
the less migratory; for he will remove from place to place, as old workings
are deserted and new ones opened. The Church, therefore, if she would
fulfil her duty towards this class of her people, must not say, “ They are
engaged in a lucrative employment, and making great gains; they therefore
ought to provide the ordinances and ministry of the gospel for themselves,
and not to be dependent upon others but she must rather say, “ They will
not, and, from the particular character of their employment and habits of
living, they cannot be expected to procure the public means of grace, and
unless others provide the ministry of the word for them, they will remain
wholly neglected and uncared for; they must therefore be regarded as
objects of the missionary enterprise of true Christians.” I do hope that
some will consecrate a portion of the wealth which the Lord has given them
here to his service; but I expect this from them rather after they have left
the gold-fields than while they are working there. But I have lingered
already too long at Bendigo, and must pass on to Mount Alexander , as the
district upon the south-west of that mountain, comprehending the fields
in and about Forest Creek, Campbell’s Creek, and Fryer’s Creek, is usually
called. „ '
Wednesday , April 20. —We left the camp at Sandhurst for Castlemaine,
about twenty-five miles distant, where we were most kindly accommodated
by Capt. Bull, the Resident Commissioner, in his quarters, a small weather-
board building. There is nothing particular to distinguish the camp at
Castlemaine from that at Sandhurst, except that the former, being the
central establishment, is upon a larger scale, the assistant commissioners,
police, and military, being more numerous, and also that there are more
permanent (wooden) buildings. The officers of Government, however, with
the exception of the Resident Commissioner, a captain of the 40th, who is
stationed there, and the police magistrate, are still “ under canvas.” There
is also this difference, that at Castlemaine are several ladies with their
husbands, whereas at Sandhurst there is only one. Several of the Commis-
sioners also are married men, but have left their wives for the present in
their former homes. The company at the mess-table is therefore some-
what more orderly and sedate, —not, however, that there was any levity
of manners at Sandhurst, for in both there was the most perfect propriety of
conduct and good order preserved. The “ diggings” have very much increased
since we were here last year, but they do not present so striking an appear-
ance as at Bendigo; the camp is not so much in the midst of them , and they
are more straggling, and divided into small detached fields. At Bendigo the
different gullies are separated from each other by iron-bark ranges : at “ the
Mount” they all branch out from the same valley. We saw here the process
of washing more fully than in any place we had previously visited ; and very
curious it was to see the gold appearing in the cradle, and to observe how its
specific gravity preserved it from being washed out with the earth and stones
in the rocking. Some of the gold here is so exceedingly fine, that, for fear of
losing it, the board at the bottom of the cradle where it collects is sometimes
covered with flannel, to which it adheres so fast as to be removable only by


a brush. There is nothing which deserves particular notice in these gold-
fields. That at Fryer’s Creek is about eight miles distant from the others,
and we did not visit it this year.
During the latter half of last year the Rev. J. Cheyne used to visit Mount
Alexander, every alternate week to hold service there; but since the Ist
January he has taken the entire ministerial charge of the district, and Mrs.
Cheyne and his family are now residing with him. lam sorry to say that
his dwelling consists only of two tents, which are not only very unsuitable
for his wife and daughters, but afford very inadequate accommodation for the
number of persons who are crowded in them. Mrs. C. has not yet been able
to procure a female servant, and this, with her large family and uncom-
fortable abode, renders her life at present one of much privation and hardship.
I trust, however, that some improvement may take place before the winter
sets in. He is very highly esteemed by the people ; and there appear to be
some, both among the Government officers and other residents, who will
really exert themselves on his behalf. Some of them even talk of erecting a
stone church upon a site lately granted by the Government; but I am not so
sanguine as to expect this at present: I shall be well content if they will
build two or three small rooms as the commencement of a comfortable
sonage. In respect to places of worship, Mr. C. is already better provided
than Mr. Gregory ; for he has within the camp enclosure a weather-board
building, in the form of a T, capable of containing 250 persons, and about
three miles and a half distant along Forest Creek, a large church tent, which,
when fitted up with seats, will probably hold 200. On Sunday I performed
service in the morning at the former, and preached in the afternoon at the
latter; Mr. Cheyne reading prayers at the latter, and taking the whole evening
service of the former. The first and last services were well attended, but
there was only a small number, about sixty or seventy, at the second, which
has only been just established. However, after it was concluded, I preached
a second sermon in the open air, and had a considerable company of casual
passers by for my audience.
I am disposed to think that this plan would be very suitable to the present
circumstances of the population. Those who wished to assemble themselves
together for worship would attend the service within, while the sermon with-
out would attract such as were willing to listen to the preached word; and
we might hope, that the power of the Spirit accompanying that word, would
constrain from time to time some of the latter to join themselves to the former
class. Mr. Cheyne is admirably fitted for the post which he occupies. Strong
in body, he is never tired; of a cheerful spirit, he is never cast down ; zealous
for his Master’s glory, and full of love for the souls of those committed to his
charge, he is always at his work. It is a cause for much thankfulness that we
have two such men as he and Mr. Gregory employed in this arduous and self-
denying service. 0 that the Lord would put it into the hearts of some of
their brethren who are likeminded in England to come and help them !
I have omitted to notice the schools upon the gold-fields. Adjoining
u Bendigo Flat ” there are two upon the Irish National system, assisted by
grants from the Colonial Treasury. Both are under the management of able,
and, I believe, well-principled teachers, members of the Church of England,


With one, which we visited, we were greatly pleased. Besides these, there is
at least one Wesleyan School. I did not hear of any in the neighbouring
gullies. At Mount Alexander there are two Church of England schools,
which we visited, one or two Wesleyan, and one National. The teachers of our
schools are very respectable persons; lam not able to speak of the others.
Before I leave Mount Alexander I must mention a visit which we paid,
under Mr. C.’s guidance, to a very pleasing little knot of families, who came
together from South Australia, had encamped close to one another, and
worked together. Each family had a neat little tent, with an inner room,
which, in three out of four which we went into, was covered with a corrugated
iron roof. We did not see any of the men, but the women would have been
regarded as most favourable specimens of the English peasantry. All appeared
to be true Christians, and, although Dissenters, welcomed Mr. C. with much
cordiality. They were Independents by profession, and had erected a little
chapel-tent for worship; but, as they had no minister of their own, they were
glad to lend it for the use of any Protestant preacher. Their children attend
Mr. C.’s school. These families showed me that there was not an absolute
destitution of domestic comfort upon the gold-fields. Mr. C. also took us to
call upon a physician, who had his wife and several children, almost grown
up, living with him. In this, and other similar cases, the tents of the family
form a little encampment; and one or more of them usually has a fireplace
attached to it. This physician and his wife had been Presbyterians, but were
constant attendants at Mr. C.’s services, and communicants.
On Monday, April 25, we went to see Mr. and Mrs. Selwyn, who are
encamped about ten miles from Castlemaine. Mr. S. has been sent out by the
English Government for the purpose of examining the geological structure of
the country. We found them very pleasantly situated in a retired spot,
removed from all the noises of the multitude in the auriferous regions around
them. We could not, however, stay to enjoy their society; for a few minutes
after our arrival, the rain, which had long been threatening, began to fall,
with an evident purpose of continuing through the afternoon. We therefore
hastened home as speedily as possible, but before we reached our quarters*
not being in our own cart, in which we should have been perfectly defended,
we were completely drenched. In consequence of the heavy rains, we were
prevented from holding a public meeting, of which we had given notice, upon
church matters; but I did not much regret this, as the following day (Tues-
day) Mr. C. invited a few of the most regular members of his congregation, to
whom I was able to explain fully "the position in which we were placed, and
who agreed to form themselves into a provisional committee for carrying out
the most important object, viz. raising the requisite stipend for their minister.
It was also agreed that a public meeting should be called on a subsequent day
for the consideration of this and other matters.
Wednesday , April 27. —We left Castlemaine, accompanied by a trooper, for
Ballaarat, or rather for Boninyong, the station of the Messrs. Learmouth, about
ten miles from Ballaarat, where we were to take up our abode. The day was
wet and chilly, and the road hilly and rough; but we accomplished our
journey (twenty-five miles) in good time to Captain Hepburn’s, where nothing
was wanting to our comfort, but there was no hay for the horses. On the


morrow (Thursday) we proceeded to Ballaarat (twenty miles), crossing a
range, in a gully of which was a gold-field, called Creswick’s Creek, with a
population of about 900. We remained only a few minutes at the camp in
Ballaarat, and then continued our route through some of the principal dig-
gings to Boninyong. On Friday we drove in from Mr. Learmouth’s to
examine the place more carefully.'
The gold-field at Ballaarat is remarkable as having been the first discovered
in Victoria, and as having produced the largest “ nuggets ” —masses they might
more properly be called—of gold yet found. “ The monster nugget v of all
was found nearly three months ago, and weighed, if I remember rightly, about
174 pounds; and shortly afterwards two others were taken out of another
hole, weighing, the one between 80 and 90, and the other between 70 and 80
pounds. We saw the first when it arrived at Melbourne, and you may perhaps
have seen it before you receive this in London, where it has been taken for
exhibition. It has no beauty as a specimen, being in shape and size very like
a small sirloin of beef, and of a dull colour. Ballaarat was for several months
almost deserted, in consequence of the greater promise of riches at Mount
Alexander, but it has recently come into favour again, and there is now a large
population at its different fields, some of which are several miles from the first
that was discovered. For the most part, the working there requires harder
labour and greater perseverance than at Mount Alexander and Bendigo ; and,
in consequence, the diggers are generally a superior class, I do not mean in rank,
but in character, than at the latter places. In Canadian Gully, where the above-
mentioned masses were found, the holes are 70 or 80 feet deep, and are carried
through a stratum of hard iron-stone, which requires to be blasted with gun-
powder; and then they frequently prove “blanks” as they are termed. We
went to look at the washing of a tub of auriferous earth, which contained two
pieces of three-quarters of an ounce each, and a number of smaller pieces of
various sizes. We remarked upon its richness; but the men said that the hole
was the fifth that they had sunk, and that one ounce at Mount Alexander and
Bendigo, taking the labour into account, was equal to two ounces there. The
party in this case consisted of seven men, who worked in turns day and night.
Two days in the week —Sunday, I am sorry to say, and Monday—were occu-
pied in emptying out the water. I asked them what was the quality of the
water, and they told me that it was brackish. In another part of the same
field, which we visited afterwards, the labour is not so great, the holes not
being so deep, nor the upper strata so hard; but there they find no large
“ nuggets,” but only a coarse gold-sand. At Ballaarat is to be seen the first
application of machinery to this new branch of industry. Among the old
diggings, now almost deserted, is a small steam-engine, which performs the
various processes of pumping up water, puddling the earth, and rocking a
cradle ; and which extracts already a sufficient quantity of gold to remunerate
the proprietor. He has applied for a lease, according to the new regulations,
of a portion of the land which has been dug over and left by the diggers; and
will thus doubtless carry on the work in a more perfect manner, and on a
larger scale.
The gold-field at Ballaarat presents from some points a far more picturesque
appearance than any which we had before visited; the tents being scattered


over a larger surface, and the natural verdure in some parts not having yet
disappeared before the crowd of diggers. Among the thickest of the holes the
varied colour of the up-turned earth, much of which seems to be a pink ochre,
produces a very singular effect. In consequence of our staying at Mr. L.’s,
instead of in the camp itself, we saw comparatively little of the officers here,
and were not present at the mess. The weather too was very unfavourable.
On Sunday it rained almost incessantly; and although this did not prevent
me from keeping my appointment, it deprived me of the congregation which
I hoped to have of “ diggers,” and obliged me to minister only to a few of the
Government officers and police at the Court-house. I regretted this the more
because the people here are almost entirely destitute of religious ordinances,
there being no minister of any kind in the district except a Roman Catholic
priest, and some Wesleyan local preachers; neither is there at present any
school. lam most anxious to supply this deficiency, but have not any
suitable clergyman at my disposal. As I think I have before remarked, a man
who undertakes the ministerial charge of a gold-field must be peculiarly
qualified for the work ; and if he be a married man, his wife must be prepared
to endure much hardness and discomfort. It is difficult to conceive a more
desolate scene than the valley presented on the Sunday morning, as we drove
through it. If, however, the hope of earthly riches induce so many to
undergo the labour and hardships of gold-digging, surely the hope of the
reward which is laid up for them in heaven ought to sustain a servant of
Christ under the privations and difficulties of the ministry there. Nor are
those difficulties and privations to be regarded as permanent; for we may
hope that within a few months, if a clergyman be really efficient, arrange-
ments would be made for providing him with a comfortable dwelling, and
supplying all his reasonable wants. This, however, would depend mainly,
under God, upon his own character, and the estimation in which he was
held. .... - a tut
On Sunday afternoon I held service in the schoolroom of the Free Church,
which is commonly used for worship, and was kindly lent to us for the
purpose. On Monday the rain still continued, and did not cease until the
following day, when we had already arranged to remain in our comfortable
quarters. You may remember that Dr. and Mrs. L. were our fellow-passengers
by the Stag, and have been ever since our intimate friends. His two brothers,
T. and S. L., who used to reside at Boninyong, are now travelling about the
world; and a third brother, Mr. Andrew L., has charge of the stations. He,
like his brothers, is a very intelligent, amiable, and well-principled young
man, and was a most kind host. On Monday he was obliged to leave home on
business; but his overseer, a gentlemanly, well-educated young man, and two
boys, sons of Dr. L., to whom he is tutor, took every care of us, and made us
the less miss our host. On Wednesday, May 4, we left Boninyong, under the
guidance of the Rev. T. Hastie, the Free Church clergyman, on our way to
Bacchus’ Marsh, where we hope to spend Sunday ; having visited some of our
old friends in the parish of Ballan, Mr. and Mrs. Cowie, and Mr. and Mrs.
Labilliere, en route, lam now (Thursday, May 5) writing at the cottage of the
former, and proceed, D.v., to the station of the latter this afternoon. This
district has experienced great changes, almost all the old settlers having left it.


Thursday, May 5. we arrived safely at Mr. Labilliere’s, where we remained
until Saturday morning. Mr. L.’s is a Christian family; and I saw, as I have
seen on many other occasions, the influence of the master upon those in his
employment. All the men about. the station came in upon both evenings to
family worship. Mr. L. always holds service in his house upon Sundays, and
the people are regular in their attendance. On Friday, Mr. L. and Mr. Cowie
rode over with me to the township of Ballan, in order to inspect the parsonage
and make arrangements for the reception of another clergyman in the place
of Mr. Hall. The plan which I propose, with the approval of the neighbouring
settlers, to adopt, is, that the clergyman resident at Ballan, instead of holding
service at the different stations, on which there are now comparatively very
few people, upon Sundays, should visit them upon other days, and hold
service on Sundays alternately at Ballan and at Bacchus’ Marsh, (sixteen miles
distant,) at which latter place there is a large population, and a clergyman is
greatly needed. Several months ago the people addressed to me an application
for a resident minister, engaging to provide a stipend for him; but it has not
been in my power hitherto to comply with their request. On Saturday we
proceeded thither, and were most kindly received at the rustic cottage of Mr.
Hector McLeod. In the afternoon we visited several of the people, and
among others a woman dangerously ill, in whom we were delighted to find a
simple-minded, rejoicing believer in the Lord Jesus. She said that she had
heard that I was expected, and felt sure that if I was u a man of God,” I should
come and see her. There were others of whom, from their conversation,
I was led to form a favourable opinion. At morning service the next day
(Sunday), more than fifty were present, although there happened to be a
Presbyterian service at the same time, and a large proportion of the inhabi-
tants are Presbyterians. At the afternoon service there were about half that
number.
On Monday, May 9, we set off on our return home, where we arrived safely,
and found the household safe and well. Surely /-'goodness and mercy have
followed” us. In all our journey we have not met with the slightest accident.
“ Bless the Lord, omy soul; and all that is within me, praise His holy name.”


LIST OF THE CLERGY OE THE DIOCESE OE
. , . . * . ‘ ' • . i *—l PC «' -<»»-•' O
• • ■ • • MELBOURNE.
{From the Melbourne Church of England Messenger, for January, 1853.)-
. • • •
Bishop of the Diocese .
The Right Reverend CHARLES PERRY, D.D.
-4-
*Very Rev. H. B. MACARTNEY, D.D. Dean St. James’s CathedraL
Rev. G. STUDDERT ’
Rev. H. H. P. HANDFIELD * „ St. Peter’s Church.
*Rev. S. L. CHASE . . \ St. p au rs Church.
Rev. L. A. BAKER *
Rev. G. M. DRUMMOND „ 1
Rev. J. A. CLOWES. Collingwood.
. „ The Gaol, &c.
Rev. C. T. PERKS Richmond.
Rev. D. SEDDON St. Kilda.
Rev. S. TAYLOR Brighton.
Rev. J. POTTER Williamstown,
Rev. F. HALES ’. Heidelberg.
*Rev. T. C. B. STRETCH | Gee i o ng.
T? oir F TANNER ’
Rev. E. TANNER
tßev. W. HALL Ballan.
Rev. P. T. BEAMISH Wagnambool and Woodford.
*Rev. T. H. BRAIM Belfast.
Rev. J. Y. WILSON Portland. ,
Rev. F. T. C. RtISSELL Wannon River.
Rev. J. CHEYNE \ Mount Alexander (Gold Fields).
TT FT CtRECtORY J
Rev. J. H. GREGORY
I Rev. J. SULLIVAN Kyneton.
*Rev. W. SINGLETON Kilmore.
Rev. W. BEAN. Gipps Land.
* These Clergymen are authorized by the Bishop, as his Surrogates, to grant
licences of marriage.
t These two Clergymen have resigned their cures since the publication of this
list. On the other hand, three additional Clergymen, whose departure from
England was announced in last year’s Report, have arrived in the Colony during
the same interval, viz. the Revs. W. Carter, W. F. Lord, and T. Budd.


O O co i—i o O t* | OMOO) ON n
O© O O
O5
05 O CO
0)00 O to to nf 05
pH r—l i-H >—l -Hi—. i—l i—t
I—l O o 10 O O rH l O ic COTh t-H
e.(x OO *>. 050 l>- / ©<MOO t>. 05
'tj >-<N Oi (M<M <Mi 10 O 05 05
CO QO CO \ r~< 05 CO *0
5 1 ~ is
o O *HN 05 r-i . • • * ♦ • . .
05 o S«so nh 1 [1! ,, 7i JO’ti’ * * • •
r-t g i-h r-> Ph
O WSPoO(M 05 co ** * * o * • * *
eo o i—^' io eo C 5
t>- eo <]Xh 05 • * a) • • • ..
©f £ 2
. s. • . • * -S *53 * * * • *
W . ©O g v s ••. .s 3L\o • •
t 3 • O o P< # £ *_ * ** 2 *O * *
r i tB o * * O Jr? •rt
Q-^ 00 a? S * c§ * * ,c & -+2 «>
J- 1 o 05 i-» 2JO K h •c 3 • • ,+j
tr. B Ci 3 £ O , £ *5 a C3J
O <M O O
|H W U 5 »3
I—l I—l
9 . o o ■ 2 * • .52 •'o * • • k
Qj P • • p-< . . •
U> • OO . 0> *-* *o * *
r I CO H_> Cl( * * © *rl
M • g a, £ •ea • -
n s S 2 § §■«••■§ g | 5 .S’ . . .2
g § « §8 • «• • |h |. 3 §•« S 3
g 8 • • go . *.. |a § H -g g
ih <j • . . &...,. c | | M ‘g<a ‘ ’S g h
m 2 g® « g® -5« • 'S3 „
S’* £8 • s• * *° .3 * &« 5
~ . B . ph . . ■g's n„ , Si, og, « ,
S, .2 &S . - *3 “£•«-; "
p rn . c * * & -*-* o<u ph uq
2 TO as O *—h be ‘ -O • • • Jri 'cj ° i 5 Jj rk
63 r- (-) .rH K> • .IH o fcj 4J X+H o rH w
I—, «3 pH * <U-m“ HJOOJi-H
sMS "» | . fi| •• • •fl» 6f
Sf-fij i' S «? * • • -s-|S| • • i: ■'
g|.S o|. S . . . *£7. . -
°o>hH k 5 m pSo
hflgg g.M - ® p - . . . . .
,p -s «p o 2p o p p n-i i r
CO
*o
00
I—l
•\
r—l
H
CO
o
<1
• • -*3 •
fl
■p <U
C • c_| *
H 2 t 3 2
.t3 g .t 3
H* ffirO O-H
Sh w o
»S(H (U<M
« PH Ptf2 O
«M P CtH
O Of O-^
q 22 2 2
< OPRCJPM
H
Eh
a
QiS • ■' 1J
A 1 I
(U • }
« «7 'P P
• • • -83
« ft *3 9 .... I^c
PhPh W Ph Phm
z” § ’ZS . . . . « s.« .» . .. .
r d r d_° z a *r o _th
.p:'3 q . m « *3 9 .... ... -
PhPh WPh W Ph Ph£
.!.!<]. '1 «
o
o
<
H
<X)
o
o
t—H
A
A
A
P
o
PQ
P
P
525 -
.f* 70 r si
tO ONfflOr
w 000
i n ono o
Co r->I r— < r —l
iH >ONOO
-r» C 5 CC r—l Ci lO
ip CO NNCCQ
r-> r-i r-i
Tfl OH .
W • • £j •
° o 3
g»- - §s ••
*"• tH +3 m • § fcc •
000 cs <u g£7
O CO fcr o r d>
o!-r
O)^ 4 * i - * >-h iSo'P*
. & S
V 1 ** • • <u ® ££ S
Ho • Ph’M o
rs -4-i • • »""< r “ H
D 9 05 0 0
«3
to I-H CO
LL OK
Ph H i-H
u *4?
'.i . '
• • •
■
■ ' * "rtf
■H
■S "g
£
C ei
ts- O §
.t 3 8 O'
f*HCC ,0
d a»
A +*
& 7 * * gJs • _: ;
w « * * -a) cj
LZJ W 'T-i es fm _
o <£ . »g
w . g r*S
Ph 2§ • o'g go M
o o o S »
• HO* CO in 11 p
HH HH
© o g
H-. O
CO t(_t
§2 • *s .|g|
°«S I" s£S
—I I— l pH o 'JH • p <D
’ J P O O | j r 7“^
C 3 ?H *iH 2
nH ® (0
p.g| a; gg S
” -•§ §^B«*a
o§S s|i^|g|
Pm h is
p. 2 o' pOj^^^
gfisSls
2 q g 6 p.-| I g
<3 £phH
Ph
<
H 1
3
Ph ,©
'C 5,3
joifart
O CO
5° ca
6 ° rH
S *; g
50 .T 3
vifl 2
O r 3
p 8
g p
O C 3
S *3
< M


LIST OF DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
TO THE SPECIAL USE OF
THE DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE,
TO THE 31st DECEMBER, 1852.
N.B. The contributions to which 1352 is prefixed are those received during that year. The other
sums denote the total amount of previous contributions , such previous contributions , however ,
are not inserted in this list unless they amount to £5, or upwards , or the subscription has been
continued during 1852.
£ s. d.
The Most Rev. the Archbishop
oF York . . 20 0 0
Ditto 1852 25 0 0
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop
of St. David’s 50 0 0
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop
of Ely 10 0 0
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop
of Llandaff ~ 50 0
Ditto, collected'by ...... 5 1 10
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop
of Melbourne '. . . . . 200 0 0
Ditto . 1852 50 0 0
The Lord Alvanley .... 1852 4 0 0
The Countess of Beauchamp ..1700
The Duchess of Beaufort . 1852 10 0 0
The Marouis op Cholmondeley 100 0 0
The Earl of Dartmouth, St.
James’ s-square 25 0 0
The Rev. the Lord De Saumarez,
Huggate, Yorkshire 50 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
The Lorl Lyttelton 5 0 0
The Earl of Powis ...... 20 0 0
A. R. A. . * . . . ■•. *rj * • • 712 6
Ditto 1852 21 0 0
Abraham, Miss, Bath 3 3 0
Ditto . 1852 1 1 0
Adkins, Miss, Executors of (Rev. W.
Cams and Dr. Spence) .... 50 0 0
Alford, Rev. C. R. Doncaster ...500
Allnutt, Rev. R. L. Damersham, Sa-
lisbury . . 1852 12 0
Anderson, Mrs. D. , . . . . 1852 20 0 0
Angerstein, John, Esq. Weeting Hall,
Brandon ......... 35 0 0
An Harrovian 1000
Annand, E.'Esq. Liverpool . . 1852 3 0 0
Anonymous, by Rev. A. Strong... 20 0 0
• *. * * £ s. d.
Anonymous, Tork ....... 5 0 0
Anonymous, per Rev. T. Wharton ,500
Anonymous, Cambridge 5 0 0
Anonymous . . ‘. .... 1852 10 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Ditto •.*... 1852 1 1 0
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Anonymous, per Record , . . 1852 3 0 0
Anonymous, Woodbridge . . . 1852 1 0 0
Arnold, Rev. C. Tin Well, Stamford .500
Ashington, Rev. H. Kirkby Thorpe,
Lincolnshire ~ 55 0
Atkinson, Rev. E. Clare Hall, Cam-
bridge , . . 12 12 0
Ditto 1852 2 2 0
Bacchus, John, Esq. Birmingham . .50 0
Bagshaw, ReV. W. Banner Cross,
Sheffield ..500
Bagster, H. M. 81, Mark-lane ...550
Baldwin, Rev. J. Dalton, Ulverstone. 10 0 0
Baldwin, Miss, F. H. 29, SusseX-sq. . 2 10 0
Ditto .... . . . . . 1852 10 0
Barkworth, Miss Mary, Bratfords.
Kirkella, Yorkshire . . . 1852 10 0 0
Barry, Rev. C. Upham, Ryde . . .10 10 0
Bartlett, Rev. J. 1852 2 0 0
Barton, Rev. J 1852 1 0 0
Battersby, A. G. H. Esq. Westbury,
near Bristol 50 0
Bayley, Rev. T.Co'dicote, Welwyn,lBs2 10 0
Bean, Major, Sydney-pl. Bath ... 8 0 0
Bentinck, Venerable Archdeacon . . 50 0 0
Best, Rev. T. Sheffield 5 0 0
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Bevan, L. C. Esq. Lombard-street. .20 0 0
Bevan, Rev. F. Carlton Rode, Attle-
burgh 20 0 0
Bird, Miss, 8, Hyde Park-st. ...1000
Bird, Miss Eliza, ditto ...... 20 0 O


£ s. d. £ s. d
Bird, Miss Sarah, ditto 20 0 0
Blackmore, Mrs. Bath 15 0
Blackmore, Mrs. Bath .... 1852 10 0
Blackmore, Miss 7 6
Ditto 1852 5 0
Blissett, Mrs. and Family. . . . .20 0 0
Blunt, Rev. Professor, Cambridge . .10 0 0
Bockett, J. Esq. Clapham Common . 35 0 0
Bolding, H. Esq ..500
Bonney, Ven. H. K. Archdeacon of
Lincoln 5000
Ditto r . -. .t ~ 1852 10 0 0
Bonney, Yen. T. K. Archdeacon of
Leicester 600
Bosanquet, S. Esq 1852 2 2 0
Bower, Rev. G. H. Bossington, Don-
caster 500
Bowles, the Misses, Long Ditton . . 10 0 0
Bracken, Miss H. E. Inveraw, N. B. . 70 0 0
Brewster, C. Esq. Halstead . . 1852 10 0
Brewster, Mrs 1852 1 0 0
Bridge, Rev. S. Camberwell . ...550
Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Bright, H. S. Esq. Hull ..... 5 5 0
Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Brodrick, the late J. R. Esq. . . .10 10 0
Ditto, bequest by, for the purposes •
of Education in connexion with
the Established Church (300 L con-
sols) 270 0 0
Ditto, friends of,Donation in further-
ance of‘the same object, per Vis-
count Middleton, and the Rev.
W. J. Brodrick ’. 175 0 0
Bromfield, Miss .*...'.*. 1852 4 0
Brook, S. B. Esq.’Denihark-hill *. *. 25 0 0
Brooks, R, Esq. St. Peter’k Chainbersf,
Cornhill ’. *. *. *. . ~ .21 0 0
Brown, the late ReV. J. Trinity Coll.
Cambridge 10 0 0
Brown, Anthony, Esq. Clapham Rise. 8 8 0
Browne, Rev. J. H. . ’. . . 1852 2 0 0
Browne, O. Esq. St. Peter’s Chambers,
London .' "... 10 0 0
Budd, the late ’R ev. H." White RoOth-
ing, Ongar, Essex . . ", '. . .7 2 0
Bugg, Rev. G. Hull ...... 5 5 0
Burgess, Rev.R.’s Congregation, Mem-
ber oY . ’. . . . . . . . .2Q 0 0
Burnaby,"Rev. F. G. Barkeston, Lei-
cester ... 25 0 0
Burnard, — 1000
Butlin, Miss, Rugby . . ". . 1852 1 0 0
Buxton, Sir E. N. Bart. 10, Upper
Grosvenor-street . . . . 1852 100 0 0
Caldecott, Miss C 1852 5 0 0
Calthrop, Rev. H." Gt. Braxted, Essex 15 15 0
Calvert, F. Esq. Lincoln’s-inii . . . 10 0 0
Cam, Mrs. and Miss, Sheffield ... 5 0 0
Cam, Miss 4 0 0
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Cancellor, C. Esq. Old Broad-street 100 0 0
Ditto .* .* 1852 20 0 0
Cancellor, J, H. Esq. Chester-terrace,
Regent’s Park . 10 0 0
Cancellor, Mrs. ditto 10 0 0
Cankrien, the late John, Esq. Anlaby,
Hull 5 o o
Cape, Rev. J. Clare Hall, Cambridge. 10 10 0
Carpenter, Mrs. Chmberwell .... 5 0 0
20 0 0 Carr, Rev. E. H. Milbrook, Ampthill. 10 0 0
15 0 Ditto 1852 5 0 0
10 0 Cartmell, Rev. J. Christ’s Coll. Camb. 5 5 0
7 6 Cams, Rev. Canon, Romsey, Hants. . 25 0 0
6 0 Cator, P. Esq. ...... 1852 5 0 0
20 0 0 Cavendish, Hon. R. 1, Belgrave-sq. . 10 0 0
10 0 0 Chambers, Miss, Sheffield ....550
35 0 0 Ditto 1852 1 1 0
5 0 0 Champion, Miss, Wandsworth . . . 75 0 0
Chance, J. T. Esq. Birmingham . , 10 0 O’
50 0 0 Chance, W. Esq. ditto 10 0 0
10 0 0 Channell, Mr. Serjeant ..... 5 0 Q
Chapman, the late Rev. Dr. Cains Col-
6 0 0 lege, Cambridge ...... 10 0 0*
2 2 0 Chapman, the Misses, Wraxall, Wilt-
shire IT Ot 000
5 0 0 Chattield, Rev. Dr. Bristol ....550
10 0 0 Childers, Mrs. L. Doncaster... . 10 0 0
70 0 0 Cholmeley, Mrs. Sarah 5 0 0
10 0 Christchurch, Newgate-street, Sunday
10 0 School 1852 515 0
5 5 0 Ditto, a Friend 1852 10 0
110 Ditto, Juvenis 1852 10 0
5 5 0 Ditto, S. G 1852 5 0
110 Clark,M.Esq.Hanover-ter.Regent’sPk. 10 10 0
10 10 0 Clark, Rev. H. Harmston. . . 1852 2 0 0
Clay, Mrss F. Twickenham . . 1852 10 0
Claypon, Benjamin, Esq. Hampstead .500
Clayton, J. P. Esq. Bath 3 0 0
70 0 0 v Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Cleaver, Rev. J. F. Gt. Canwell, Berks 5 0 0
Cleaver, Misses .... 1 ... 5 0 0
Clergyman’s Daughter,’ a'. . 5 0 0
75 0 0 Clerkenwell, St. Philip. *. . . 1852 1 1 0
4 0 Cocks, Lady C. Somers, Chester-sq. .500
25 0 0 Cocks, Lady Harriet Somers, ditto. .500
Cole, Miss, Coll, by 5 0 0
21 0 0 Coles,W.Esq.Angel-ct.Throgmorton-st. 5 0 0
Collections—
Bath, Margaret Chapel *, .... 43 0 0
Ditto, Walcot Church . . . .18 10 O
Beverley Minster . 10 13 4
Ditto, St. Mary's * 14 6 0
Birkenhead,'Trinity Church ~. 10 3 .7
Brighton, St. Mary’s, per Rev. H. V.
Elliott 80 6 4
Mrs. Page, Portland-pl. per do. 8 0 0
Mr. and Miss Austen, per do. 110 0
Ditto, Trinity Chapel (part of Col-
lection) . . . . . . ... 10 0 D
Burgh Apton, Norwich . . . 1852 13 12 0
Camber well,'Demhark-h. St. Matth. 36 9 7
t .. a m * i A 1 - > •
Cambridge, Great St.
including ’the following dona-I
tions- h 97 18 8
Viscount Feildin’g .* .’52 10 0L iy ' 18 8
H. Hoare, Es'q. Loud. 52 10 01
F.Barlow, Esq. Camb. 10 0 0/
Ditto, ditto 1852 22 1 0
Ditto, St. Botolph 8 12 11
Ditto, Christ Church . . . . . 11 18 6
Ditto, All Saints . . . . . . 13 12 0
Ditto, St. Michael’s 24 8 3
•yv » . , • • *• • 1 A T O 1 A n /i
Ditto ’ dittb '. . ’. 1852 10 3 6
-r-v *ii /s i -r\ ’ i • • • r) f /-v
Ditto, St. Paul , ’. . . . '. 8 10 9
Chichester, Public Meet, (one-third) 7 14
Clapham Rise, St.'John’s Chdrch . 54 3 2
Clifton, Christ’s* Church' *. . .45 6 0
Ditto, Parish Church . . . . . 41 3 7
Denmark Hill Chapel V . . ; . . 55 9 11


Collections, continued. £, s. d. t
Doncaster, Christ Church . , . .l, g * g
Ditto, Public Meeting , . . . . .j
Ely Diocesan Meeting.(one-fourth). 11 5 0
Ferriby, Yorkshire 40 15 4
Hampstead Chapel (exclusive of
don. of 51. from Dr. Moseley) .3614 0
Hampstead, St. John’s Chapel . ... 22 16 1
Harrow Parish Church . . . . ..37 16 3
Hendon, per Rev. T. Williams, 1852 12 0 9
Hessle, Yorkshire . . . . . .12 11 8
Hove, Sussex (part of Collection) .687
Hull, St. Mary’s . . , ... . . 39 11 0
Ditto, Christ’s Church ...... 21 1 8
Ditto, St. John’s ...... 6 12 6
Ditto, public meeting (moiety). .9120
Hunmanby, Scarborough, Harvest
Sermon Offering . . , . 1852 2 9 6
Kirkella, Sundry Contributions, per
Rev. S. W. Hall 710 0
Leamington, St. Mary’s . ... .26 9 0
Ditto, Parish Churches ... 49 7 8
Ditto, Melverton Church . . 27 15 2
Lincoln, St. Peter’s-at-Arches ... 25 0 0
Liverpool, St. Andrew’s . ’ . .44 4 0
Ditto, St. Augustine’s . . . . 46 10 0
Ditto, Christ’s Church, Waterloo 7 7 6
London, Christchurch, Newgate-st.. 7 19 5
Oakfield, Isle of Wight, St. John’s . 26 19 7
Reading, St. John’s . . . . 1852 29 4 0
Regent’s-park, St. John’s Chapel . 26 19 6
Richmond, Surrey, Parish Church . 57 14 0
Ditto, St. John’s Church , 19 19 10
Scarborough, St. M*ary’s Church .27 1 2
Ditto, Christ’s . . . . .52 16 2
Sheffield, Crookes . . , . . . .13 0 0
Ditto, St. James’ . . . . . . 25 12 8
Ditto, St! George’s 22 0 10
Streatham, Christ’s Church . . . 35 17 0
Stretton-on-Dunsmore,Coventry, 1852 8 12 0
Teddington . . . . .. . . . . 25 11 6
Twickenham ... . . . . .32 0 0
Walworth, St. Peter’s 40 0 0
Welton, Yorkshire 58 2 5
York, Moiety of Collection at Public
Meeting " .’ .’ .* .’ .’ .* .* .115 4
Ditto, Churcli of St. Michael-le-
Belfrey 13 2 10
Ditto . .: ,* . . . 1852 20 1 0
Ditto, St. Cuthbert’s . . . . . 10 11 10
Collyer, Colonel, Norwich . . . . 5 0 0
Collyer, J. Esq. ...... 1852 1 0 0
Colville,F.C.A. Esq. Moretonin Marsh 6 5 0
Colville, Miss . . . . . 1852 5 0 0
Conington, Rev! J. Southwell, Notts .500
Conway, Rev. W. Rochester. . . ,10 0 0
Conway, Miss, ditto .... 5 0 0
Cooke, Rev. R. H. Wittersham, Kent 5 0 0
Cookson, Rev. H. W. St. Peter’s Col-
lege, Cambridge 10 0 0
Cookson, Miss . . 5 00
Cooper, Samuel, Esq. Welton, Yorks.. 50 0 0
Cooper, Dr. Hull 25 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Cooper, E. P. Esq. Lincoln’s Inn ..880
Ditto . . .’ 1852 2 2 0
Cooper, Rev. J. Trin. Coll. Camb. . 150 0 0
Ditto, value of books sent ... 50 0 0
Cooper, H. K. Esq. Hessle, Hull , . 10 0 0
Cope, Rev. E. M. Trinity Coll. Camb.. 12 2 0
Courthorpe, G. C. Esq. . . . 1852 10 0 0
S* (I*
Courthorpe, Miss C. M. . . . 1852 10 0 0
Coxon, Miss, and Miss Dyke . 1852 2 2 0
Cradock, Miss . . . r * . . . 1852 10 0
Craven & Lucas, Messrs. Whitechapel 5 5 0
Cresswell, R. G. Esq* .... . 1852 10 0
Cresswell, Miss . . . . . . 1852 5 0
Creyke, Yen. Archdeacon, Beeford,
Driffield 500
Cummins, J. J. .Esq. .Union Bank of
Australia., j .......... . . . .5 0 0
Cunninghame, A. Esq. Thorntoun
House, £LB .5 0 0
Cutler, Mrs. Sheffield , . .... ... 2 0 0
Ditto . ..1852 1 0 0
Darnell, Rev.W.N. Stanhope, Durham, 25 0 0
Dawes, Henry, Esq. Crabhett, Crawley 30 0 0
Dawes, R. Esq. Denmark-hill . . .11 1 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 O:
Dawes, T. Esq. Wimbledon . 5 0 0
Denison, E. B. Esq. Doncaster.. ..500
Denton, Geo. Baxter, Esq. Liverpool . . 3 0 0
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Dering,Miss, and Miss Jacob, Brighton 5 0 0
Desborough, L. Esq. Sise-lane ... 30 0 0
Ditto 1852 10 0 0
Deverill,Mrs. Ashby-d.e-la-Zouch, 1852 1 0 0
Devitt & Idopre, Messrs. Billiter-st... 5 5 0
Dewring, Mrs. 500
Ditmas, William, Esq 10 0 0
Ditmas, Mrs. . . ... . ... ... 5 0 0
Dixon, Rev. A. Higham Ferrers 1852 10 0 0
Dobson,Rev.R.Gt.Horwood,Line.lBs2 1 0 0
Dodd, Miss, Ryde ... . 10 10 0
Downes, W. Esq. . . . ... 1852 1 L 0
Doxat, Miss 1862 1 0 0
Doxat, Miss C............ . .1852 1 0 0
Drew, Rey. Dr. Collection by . . . 16 0 0
Drummond, Rev. R. Fearing. ~1852 10 0
Dry, Rev. W. Gt. Marlovf, Bucks,lBs2 2 0 0
Duesbury, W. S, Esq .500
Duffield, Rev. G. T 1852 1 1 0
Dundas, Lady Charlotte, 1852 .2 0 0
E. A. (an Old Friend) .......... 5 0 0
E. C. F 100 0 0
Eames, J.Esq. Ashby-de-la-Zouch,lBs2 1 0 0
Eaton, Capt. & Mr§.. ........ .1852 2 0 0
Ebden, the Rev,. J.. C.. ..... . .1852 * 10 0
Edwards,Rev. B. Ashill,near Watton,
Norfolk 60 0 0
Elliott, Rev. H. Y. Brighton . . .21 0 0
Elliott,Rev. E.B.Heytesbury,Brighton 10 10 0
Ellis, Geo. Henry, Esq. Spring-gardens 15 15 0
Ellis, R.L. Esq. Trinity College, Camb. 10 0 0
Ellis, Thomas Flower,JEsq.Bedford-pl. 5 0 0
Emeris, Rev. J. Gloucester . , . . 10 0 0
Enderby, Messrs. Great St. Helen’s,
(for Geelong) ~..1000
Erie, Hon. Mr. Justice 10 0 0
Evans, Rev. R. W. Heversham, West-
moreland ............ .15 0 0
Evans, S. Esq.Darley Abbey,Derbysh. 10 0 0
Evans, the Misses, Darley House . . 15 0 0*
Evans, T. W. Es.q. Allestree-hall, Der-
byshire . . *5OO
Evans, W. Esq. ditto 500 0
Evans, Miss, Derby ...... .10 0 0
Everard,Rev.D.BnrnhamThorpe,lBs2 3 0 0
Fanshawe, Miss, Richmond .... 20 0 0
Fanshawe, Miss Anne, Torquay, 1852 10 0 0
Parish, Mrs. .... ... . . 1852 1 0 0


£ s. d.
Fendall, Rev. James, Harlton Rectory,
Cambridgeshire 25 0 0
Fendall, Mrs. ditto ... 5 0 0
Ferguson, Rev. T. P. Silsoe, Bedford-
shire . . 1852 30 0
Fitzgerald, R. W. Esq 1852 5 0 0
Fitzherbert, the late K. H. Esq. * . 10 0 0
Fitzpatrick, Rev. R. W. Bedford. 1852 5 0 0
Fitz-Wigram, Rev. J. . . , . 1852 1 0 0
Fitz-Wigram, Lady ..... , • 1852 5 0 0
Fletcher, Lieut.-Col. .... 1852 5 0 0
Fletcher, Rev. C. Southwell, Notts. .600
Flood, Mrs. L. 4, Addison-road,
Streatham . . . ,•. 5 5 0
Flower, P. W. & Co. Bucklersbury . 10 10 0
Fordham, J. E. Esq. Melboum, Cam-
bridgeshire .......... 5 0 0
Forster, Mrs. Ditchingham, Bungay,
Suffolk 13 8 0
Forsyth, Rev. J. H, Lansdown-place,
Bath .... . . . . . . . .6 6 0
Forsyth, Mrs. ditto . . • . 6 0 0
Fortescue, J. F. Esq 10 0 0
Foster, Jas.Esq.Fawley, Southampton 10 0 0
Fowler, Mrs. Winterborne-Whitchurch,
Blandford 1852 10 0
Fox, G. T. Esq. Durham ..*..1000
FoXj Mrs.. . . ditto. • . ... . .36 1 0
Fox, Rev. G..T. Trinity College, Cam-
bridge .......... .1010 0
Fox, W. Esq.Chester-ter. Regent’s-pk. 10 0 0
Fox, Mrs. Sarah ditto ..... 24 4 0
Fox, Miss ............ e., ..660
Fox, Miss E. .......... k . . 4 4 0
Fox, Mrs. Hickham House* Abberley 5 0 0
Ditto . .... ... 1852 1 0 0
Franks, Mrs. F. M. ....... 5 0 0
Ditto . . 1852 5 0 0
Ditto . . 1852 2 18 0
Franks, Miss . . 1852 1 1 0
Frere, Rev. J. A. Trinity College, Cam-
bridge . . •*■'*■•. . . .25 0 0
Ditto . 1852 5 0 0
Friend, a, by the Yen* Archd. Hare . 31 10 0
Friend, a, by Miss Fawcett, HilTs-rd.
Cambridge 1 0 0
Ditto . ..... . , . 1852 1 0 0
Friend, a, Cambridge .... 1852 5 0 0
Friend, a, perMrs.Smart,Malvern, 1862 1 0 0
Friend, a, per Rev. J. T. Toye,
Exeter * 1852 2 0 0
Friend, a 1852 10 0
Friends, Three, Cambridge .... 5 0 0
Friends, Two 1852 2 0 0
Frowd, Rev. C. Clatford . , . 1852 2 0 0
Gadesden, J.Esq. Ewell Castle, Surrey 21 0 0
Garland, A-G. Esq, St, Peter’s College 7 0 0
Gell, Rev.F.R.Christ’s College, Camb. 10 0 0
Gibbon, Mrs, & Miss, Staunton, Glou-
cestershire . 7 0 0
Gibbon, Miss 1852 2 0 0
Gibson, Rev, Wm. Fawley Rectory,
Southampton . • .10 0 0
Gilby, Rev. W. R. Beverley 5 0 0
Gilpin, Miss, East Sheen . . . 1852 1 0 0
Gipps, G. Esq 1852 5 0 0
Godfrey, Major J.R 660
Golightly, Rev. C. P. Oxford ... 20 0 0
Goodenough, Yen. Arch. Mareham-le-
Fen, Lincolnshire , 50 0 0 ;
£ s. d.
Grordon, Alexander, Esq, Wandsworth
Common . , 25 0 0
Ditto . . 1852 10 0 0
Grange, Somerset . . . . . 1852 1 15 0
Gray, R. A. Esq. Camberwell ...550
Greaves, H. M. Esq. Sheffield ... 15 0 0
Ditto . 1852 5 0 0
Green, H. Esq. Blackwall , , . .325 0 0
Green, R. Esq. Blackwall . . , ,100 0 0
Green, Rev. W. Penshurst, Kent ..500
Green, Miss K. Hertford . . . 1852 10 0
Greswell, Rev. R. Worcester College,
Oxford 5 0 0
Griffin, Rev. W. N. St. John’s, Camh. 5 0 0
Griffith, W. H. Esq. Clare-st. Dublin. 10 0 0
Griffith, Rev. J. Darley, Derbyshire .500
Guest, Edwin, Esq. d.c.l. Master of
Caius Coll. Cambridge 20 0 0
Guilleband, Rev. H. Trinity College,
Cambridge- .500
Guilleband, Rev. P. Clifton .... 5 0 0
Gurdon, Rev. E. Barnham Broom,
Norfolk 1852 1 0 0
H. H. B. 20 0 0
Hadley, Rev.G.Milbourne,St.Andrew,
Dorset 1 00
Ditto 1852 10 0
Haggitt, Rev. J. Bury St. Edmund’s .600
Haigh, W, Esq. Furze Down, Clapham 5 5 0
Hales, Rev. J. D. Richmond, Surrey .660
Hall, Rev.J.E.6,Cleveland-ter.Hyde-pk.
Collection by ........ 15 0 0
Ditto don. 2 2 0
Ditto ........ 1852 2 2 0
Hall, Miss-, 17, Upper Seymour-street,
Portman-square . • . . . . . ,20 0 0
Hall, Miss E. ditto ..... 10 0 0
Ditto . . 1852 1 0 0
Hanson, Rev.W. H. Wilton, Brandon,
Suffolk ,• .• .• .4 00
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Harris, G. T. Esq. The Park, Harrow .10 0 0
Harrison, the Misses, Weston House,
Sheffield . . . . ] . 25 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Harrison, Miss, Sheffield 5 0
Ditto . ... .... 1852 5 0
Harrison, Yen. Archdeacon, Clapham
Common 25 0 0
Harrovian, a . . . . . *. 10 0 0
Hart, G. B. Esq. Newington-pl. Surrey 25 0 0
Hawkins, Miss J. Cheltenham . 1852 110 0
Hayles, Mrs 1852 30 0
Heathcote, Mrs. Southwell, Notts . .500
Hervey, Hon. and Rev. Lord Arthur,
Ickworth, Bury St. Edmund’s . .15 15 0
Hervey, Hon. and Rev. Lord Charles,
Chesterford, Essex 5 0 0
Hill, Yen. Archdeacon-, Hasland, Ches-
terfield. . . ... . . . 1852 100
Hilton, Rev. J. St. Nich. Atwade 1852 5 0 0
Hoare, J. Gumey, Esq. Lombard-street 15 15 0
Hoare,Rev.W.H.Oakfield,Crawley,Kent 6 6 0
Hoare, Messrs. Fleet-street .... 5 5 0
Hodgson, Rev. H. Wanstead, Essex . 21 0 0
Holditch, Re-v. H. Caius College, Camb. 10 0 0
Hole, Rev. George, Exeter ....500
Holford, H. S. Esq. 4, Essex-court,
Temple 20 0 0
Hope, A. J, B. Esq. 1, Connaught-pl.. 50 0 0


£, s. d . I & s ' d*
Hopkins, Rev. A. Clent, Stourbridge. 10 0 6 Longmire, Rev.- J. M.W Testwood,Brad-
-1 Ditto 1852 2 0 0 ford, Wiltshire . . ...... 210 0
11U UiVlll Ol J-VV » • *»>• ~ O
Ditto 1852 2 0 0
Hopkins, Rev. W. B. Gains College,
Cambridge 1000
Hopkins, W. Esq.* St. Peter’s College,
Cambridge 10 0 0
Horrocks, S. Esq. Preston. .... 20 0 0
Horsfall, Mrs. .* .* .* v . . . 1852 1 0 0
Hovenden, Valentine Fowler, Esq. 13,
Belmont, Baih 12 0 0
Howson, Rev. J. S. Liverpool ... 5 5 0
Hughes, H. Kent, Esq 5 5 0
Hughes, Mrs. and Miss, Chelsea ..700
Humphry, Rev. W. G. ...... 5 0 0
Hussey, W. Esq. Clifton {from effects of
Son lately dead at Melbourne) . . .10 0 0
Huth, Frederick and Co. Moorgate-st. 5 5 0
Hyndman, J. B; Esq. 7, Hyde-pk.-sq.. 10 0 0
Irvine, Miss, Leddington House, Chert -
sey . . . . . .: .' .* v . 1852 10 0 0
J. R. . . . . . ... . . • • 5 00
J. T. T. .* .* .* .' .* ♦' •* •' 1852 1 0 0
Jacob, Miss. .• .• . .• .*.... 5 0 0
Jackson, Miss E 1852 10 0 0
Jarratt, Rev. J. North Cave, Yorkshire 12 10 0
Ditto ........ 1852 2 0 0
Jeffries, Miss, Biscovey . .* .'1852 1 0 0
Jersey, St; Peter’s . .* . . . 1852 10 0
Jesson, Thomas, jun. Esq 6 0 0
Johnson, Rev. J. B. Welborn,-Norfolk 4 4 0
Ditto .... . . . . 1852* 1 1 0
Johnson, Mrs. St. Andrew-st. Camb. . 10 0
Ditto ........ 1852- 10 0
Johnson, Mrs. Eastbourne . . 1852 1 0 0
Johnston, Mrs. Collection by ... 5 0 0
Jones, Mr. and Mrs. Hinton House,
Bath (for Geelong) 15 0 0
Jones, Hon. Mrs. . . . .* . 2 0 0
Ditto ditto . . . . 1852 1 0 0
Jowett, ReV. J. Hartfield, Chichester. 3 0 0
Ditto ,• . . . 1852 5 0 0
Keen, Mrs. Lyme Regis- 5 0 0
Kemp, Rev. H. W. Hull . .- . 10 0 0
Ditto * . . . .- . ... 1852 2 0 0
Kempe, Rev. E. Clifton ..... 5 0 0
King, Rev. J. Hull .• .• . 25 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Kingston, G. T. Esq. and the Misses,
Charlton House, Bristol. ....700
Knight, Rev. D. T. Earls Barton,
Northampton ...... 1852 10 0
Knowles, Rev. H. Martin, Salisb. 1852 18 0
Lane, Rev. J.;D. Profits from Ser-
mons, &c. . , . . . .' . 1852 5 0 0
Latham, Miss 1852 2 0 0
Latour,Rev. P. Boothby Graffoo, Line.loo 0 0
La Trobe, Rev. P. Ely-pl. Holborn .500
Laudon, Mrs. . * .• . . .■ . 1852 110
Laurence, Mrs. Beddington, Surrey .500
Lewes, J. S. Esq. Deptford . , 1852 3 3 0
Linton,Colonel,Buckden,Huntingdsh. 12 10 0
Linton, Rev. H.Diddington,Huntingd. 75 0 0
Ditto / • . . 1852 20 0 0
Linton, Mrs. . . •. . . . . 1852 10 0 0
Lloyd, the late E. J. Esq. Oldfield
Hall, Altringham
Lloyd, Rev. R. W 1852 1 0 0
Lock, Rev. G, Lee, Kent 5 5 0
Lodington, Rev. F. W. Brington,
Huntingdonshire , . . .15 0 0
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Longmire, Mrs.-ail'd Misses .... 2 10 0
Lucy, Charles, Esq 5 0 0
Lyall, G. Esq. jun. . .* . / 1852 10 0 0
M. W. per Rev.-J. Davies . . . 1852 10 0 6
M‘Culloch, Mrs. J. 35, Edwardes-sq.
Kensington ; .5 5 0
Mackwith, Rev*. Miles .• . 1852 1 0 0
Macleane, Rev. A. J.- Principal of
Brighton College . 6 0 0
Maddison, Rev. G. Cambridge ... 26 5 0
Malcolm, W. E. Esq. Burnlbot, Lang-
holm, N.B-. 880
Ditto 1852 2 2 0
Malcolm, Rev. A.-Dunstew, Oxon- . 55 0
Mansfield, Rev.* J. Blandford St. Mary,
Dorset. . . . . • • » • 1852 10 0
Ditto, young person by . . 1852 2 0
Marriott, Miss S. G. Rugby . . 1852 20 0
Marshall, Miss, Grosvenor-street ..500
Marston, Miss, 23, Hans-pl. Sloane-st. 50 0 0
Martin, Rev. F. Trinity College, Camb. 21 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 5 0
Martin, Rev. W. Fellow and Assistant
Tutor of Corpus College, Cambridge 10 0 0
Martin, Septimus, Esq. ? .5 0 0
Mathison, Rev. W. C. Trinity College,
Cambridge . * . * 15 15 0
Maude, Rev. Jv B. Queen’s College,
Oxford • . * ./ • *5 0 0
Maxwell, Rev. G. Winterbourne-Whit-
church, Blandford, Dorset . . . 10 0
Ditto 1852 10 0
May, Rev. G. Liddington, Wilts 1852 1 1 0
Mayo, Rev. R. Plaxtol, Sevenoaks .720
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Ditto . .' 1852 2 2 0
Meade, Rev. J. Newton Purcell, Ox-
fordshire 1852 100
Mellafid, Rev. W. Lichfield ; : 1852 * 10 0
Mendham, Rev. John and Mrs. Clop-
hill, Beds. . . . . 7 2 0
Merivale, Rev. C. Cambridge ... 5 5 0
Methuen, Rev. H. H. ... . 1852 1 0 0
Methuen, Rev. T. P. ~ . . . 1852 1 0 0
Michell, W. R. Esq. .... 1852 10 10 0
Michell, Mrs. .• . .' .* . . * / . 1 10 0
Ditto' .*.*... . . . 1852 1 10 0
Milton, Abingdon ..... 1852 15 0
Molineaux, Rev. W. H. Clare Hall .500
Moor, G. Esq 1852 1 0 0
Morrice,Rev. W.D. 20,Pulteney-st.Bath 6 0 0
Mortlock, Miss, Cambridge . . 1852 1 1 0
Moseley, Dr. W.W. 18, Bloomsbury-st. 5 0 0
Moxon, Mrs. Cottinghaifi, Hull. . . 6 0 0
Moysey, Rev. Dr. Batheal Court,
Wiveliscombe, Somerset . . . 100 0 0
Munro, Cecil, Esq. Register Office,
Chancery-lane .1010 0
Murray, Rev. W. W. Church Bramp-
ton, Northampton 10 0 0
Nash, S. Esq. .........500
N. C. L. Scarborough 5 0 0
Nevins, J. B. Esq ..500
Newbould, Miss, Sheffield .... 212 6
Ditto ........ 1852 10 6
Newham, Rev. W. L. St. John’s Col-
lege, Cambridge 50 0


£, s. d.
Newham,, the late Rev. Daniel ...600
Newnhanq, Rev. G. Bath ..... . .500
Nicholson, Rev* J..Y.,Emmanuel Coll. 15 15 0
Ditt0........ , . . .1852 5 5 0
Norman, Rev. C. M. North wold, Norf. 5 0 0
Oakley, Mrs. , ..... . . . . .10 0 0
O’Brien, Lady G 1852 2 0 0
Ogle, Rev. J. F. Flamboro’,Yksh. 1852 3 0 0
Ogle, Miss J. E. . . . . . . 1852 5 0 0
Ogle, Miss F. C. 1852 5 0 0
Olive, Rev. J ~..220
Ditto .. . . . . . . . 1852 2 2 0
Oliver, George, Esq, Blackheath ..550
Oliver, S. B. Esq. Chertsey, Surrey . 20 0 0
Oliver, Mrs. Woodford, Essex . . . 10 0 0
Owen, Rev. F. Crookes, Sheffield ..550
Ditto ........ 1852 10 6
Owen, Miss ditto 2 10 6
Ditto . . u . . . . . . 1852 10 6
Owen, Miss, Richmond, Surrey . .800
Ditto . .’ .* 1852 1 0 0
Paine, C. Esq. 9, Lewes-cres. Brighton 10 0 0
Pakenham, Hon. and Very Rev. H.
Compton Martin, Somersetshire ..500
Pakington, Sir John, Bart. 4,Eaton-sq.lo 0 0
Palmer, A. Esq. Cheam Park, Surrey .500
Pares, Miss, per Rev. C. J. G. Jones .500
Parker, Miss . 1852 5 0
Parry, T. G. Esq. fligham Ct. Glouc.. 50 0 0
Parsons, Rev. J. Sherborne . . 1852 5 0 0
Payne, Cornelius, Esq. . . . .10 0 0
Paynter, John, Esq. Blackheath . . 10 0 0
Paynter, Rev. Sam. Stoke, Guildford .10 0 0
Pears, Rev. S. A. Harrow . ... 14 2 0
Pearson, Rev. Dr. Sonning . . 1852 5 0 0
Peill, Rev. J. N. Queen’s Coll. Camh. 10 10 0
Ditto 1852 2 2 0
Pemberton, the late C. Esq. Cambridge 10 0 0
Perceval, the Misses, Ealing . .1852 3 0 0
Perry, R. Esq. Lincoln’s Inn . . 400 0 0
Perry, Miss A. Chester-ter. Regent’s-
park 125 0 0
Perry, Miss L. 8, Chester-terrace,
Regent’s-park 90 0 0
Perry, Miss Louisa Philippa . ... 80 0 0
Perry, the Misses 5 0 0
Perry, Miss Emily Ann, 8, Cambridge-
terrace, Regeht’s-park" . ‘ . . . .210 0
Ditto . . . . 1852 50 0
Perry, Miss Mary Jane .* . . 50 0 0
Perry, Rev. G. Shudy Camps ... 5 0 0
Philpott, the late Rev. Dr. Cambridge 5 0 0
Pilgrim, C. H. Esq. 17, York-terrace .880
Platt, Rev. G. Sedbergh, Yorkshire .300
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Porcher, Rev. G Maiden Erleigh,
Reading 330
Ditto *. ‘ 1852 1 1 0
Port Phillip and Colonial Gold Mining
Company. 1852 100 0 0
Powell, Wm. Esq. Notting-hill . 1852 10 10 0
Power, Rev. J., Clare Hall, Camb. . t 8 8 0
Prance, Robert Esq. Hampstead . . 10 10 0
Pratt, Rev. J. '. '. . *. . . 1852 1 0 0
Prest, the late John, Esq. York ..500
Preston, the Misses, Barton Hall, 1852 20 0 0
Proctor ,Sir W. B. Langley Park, Norf.
{for a Church at Mount Macedon) .20 0 0
Proctor,Lady, Collected by . . 8 7 0
Pjoctor, Rev. Francis, Whitton, Norf. 5 0 0
; , ) £ s. d.
Pryor, Robert, Esq. Lincoln’s Inn . . 25 0 0
Puller, C. W. Esq. Grosvenor-sq. . . 10 0 0
R. E. D. ..... . ./. 1852 2 G
Ragland, Rev. T. G. Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge ...... 25 0 0
Randolph, Captain, Plaxtol ....110
Ditto . .' .; .; / ; . . m 2 1 1 0
Rawson, Miss, Sheffield 33 0 0
Ditto . . .’ 1852 5 0 0
Rawson, Rev. W. Seaforth ....500
Raymond, Miss ........550
Remington, Rev. T. Cartmel, Lancash. 5 0 0
Rhodes, M. J. Esq. Norman-hill,
Dunsley 40 0 0
Richardson, Brothers, St. Helen’s-pl.. 10 10 0
Richardson, J. W. W. Esq. .... 10 0 0
Richardson, Mrs. Anlaby, Hull. , .10 10 0
Ditto 1852 2 0 0
Ridout, Rev. J. D. Christ’s Coll. Cam. 15 0 0
Ditto 1852 10 0 0
Riddell, Sir W. B. Bart." Linc.-inn.* .*550
Ridout, Miss .* .' .* ; . ; ; :: i o o
Ditto . . . . . . . . 1852 10 0
Rodgers, T. W. Esq. Sheffield ...500
Rodgers, Mrs 1852 1 0 0
Romilly, Rev. J. Trinity Coll. Camb.. 26 5 0
Rouse, Mrs. .... . . . 1852 1 1 0
Sandys, Mrs. ..*.... . . . 5 0 0
Savage, Captain and Mrs. Frindsbury,
Rochester 15 0 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Scholefield, the late Rev. Prof. Camb. 52 10 0
Ditto 1852 5 5 0
Scorer, William, Esq. Royal Exchange 5 0 0
Selwyn, Rev. Can. Melbourn, Royston 10 10 0
Seymer, Mrs. H. K 1852 5 0 0
Sharp, W. Esq. f.r.s. Hull .... 5 0 0
Sharpe, Rev. T. H. Rawsby, Hull .880
Ditto . . . . . . . .1852 2 0 0
Shawe, Benjamin, Esq. 13,Cambridge-
square, Hyde-park ..... 5 0 0
Ditto 1852 10 0 0
Ditto . . ; 1852 20 0 0
Shee, Miss, Bath . . 13 0 0
Shepherd, Rev. E. J. Luddesdown .110
Ditto ; ; ; . . . . . 1852 i o o
Silver and Co. Cornhill (for Geelong) .500
Simpson, Rev. J. Horsted, Sussex .700
Ditto' . . . .. . . . 1852 3 0 0
Sladen, Joseph, Esq. ......500
Sladen, St. Barbe, Esq. Parliament-st. 8 8 0
Smith, Rev. J. Barnard, St. Peter’s
Coll. Cambridge 1852 10* 0
Smith, Rev. Samuel, Camberwell ..550
Smith, William", Esq. Bedford-square 15 0 0
Smith, Miss ditto . .15 0 0
Smyth, Mrs. A. E. Newbuilding,
Thirsk .1852 1 0 0
Spence, Rev. Dr. Cambridge. . . .10 10 0
Ditto"; 1852 2 2 0
Sperling, Rev. H. J. Papworth, Cam-
bridgeshire 1500
Ditto . . . '. .... 1852 5 0 0
St. Patrick’s, the Very Rev. tfie Dean
of, St.Asaph. ..500
St. Peter’s, Walworth, Church Fund,
by the Rev.” G. Ainslie .... 55 0
Stirrup, H. G. Jukes, Esq. Worcester
College, Oxford ..110
Stobart,H.Esq.Etherley,Darlingtn.lBs2 10 0


£ s. d,
Stokes, Rev. W. H. Cains Coll. Camb. 35 0 0 Veasey, H. Esq. Woburn .
Ditto 1852 5 0 0
Stokes, G. G. Esq. Pembroke College,
Cambridge 1000
Stokes, Charles, Esq. . 5 0 0
Stone, William, Esq. Dulwich-hill .10 0 0
Stone, Mrs. G. ...... 1852 2 6
Stooks, Rev. T. F. 9, Suffolk-place .550
Stow, John, Esq. Greenwich ...600
Street, Joseph, Esq. Lloyd’s . . ,10 10 0
, 10 10 0
Stringer, Miss, Worthing . . . 1852 1 1 0
Strong, Rev. A. Walcot, Bath ...550
Strong, Mrs. Alfred-st. Bath .... 10 0 0
Ditto ........ 1852 10 0 0
Strong, Mrs. Charlotte, Coughton,
Hereford . . 4 4 0
Ditto . . : .' , . . • 1852 2 0 0
Strong, Rev. T. Bath , . . , . .20 0 0
Strong, Rev. T. Congleton, Ross . . 20 0 0
Strutt, Mrs. Camberwell 25 0 0
Sutcliffe, W.‘ Esq. ‘ . : 110
Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Sutton, Rev. Dr. Vicar of Sheffield and
Canon of York 5 0 0
Swaine, E. R, Esq. Herne-hill ...550
Swainson, Rev. C. A. Cambridge ..550
Swinny, Rev. H. H. Mortlake . . . 21 0 0
Sykes, Rev.G.M.Downing Coll. Camb. 21 0 0
Symes, J. C. Esq. Montagu-square .550
T. H. E • • 1852 15 0 0
Talbot, R. G. Esq. Alfred Club (for
Geelong) ....600
Taylor, James, Esq 1852 10 0 0
Tavlor. Miss, Moor Green ....500
Taylor, Miss, Moor Green . .
Ditto . .. v \ s - 1852 5 0 0
Tennant Reddings, Mrs. Long Preston 5 0 0
Tennant Reddings, Miss ditto 5 0 0
Thomas, Rev. V. Oxford . , . 1852 7 0 0
Thomas, Mrs 1852 3 0 0
Thompson, Rev.W. H. Trinity College,
Cambridge 10100
Thornton, H. Esq. Clapham Common 20 0 0
Thornton, Rev. Watson, Llanwarne . 50 0 0
Thornton, Rev. William, Dodford,
Northamptonshire 10 5 0
Ditto .' 1852 1 1 0
Thornton, J. R. Esq 10 0 0
Thurtell, Rev. A. Caius Coll. Camb. . 10 0 0
£ s. d.
5 0 0
Ditto 1862 1 10 0
Voase, Mrs. Analby House, Hull ..500
Wainwright, Mrs. Clapham .... 10 0 0
Wake, the late Dr. & Mrs. Leamington 5 0 0
Walford, Rey. E. Tonbridge School .10 0
Walker, Rev. R. coll, by . , . 1852 2 0 0
Ward, Rey. H. Hull ......300
Ditto. ........ 1852 1 0 0
Warde, Rpv. W. Camp sail, Doncaster 5 0 0
Ware, Rev. James, Wyverstone, Ick-
worth, Suffolk ........ 40 0 0
Wastell, Rey. J. D. .. ...... 1852 10 0 0
Wastell, Miss . * ..... , 1852 1 0 0
Wastell, Miss F 1852 I 0 0
Watlington, J. W. P. Esq. Moor-hall,
Harlow , . . 150 0 0
Ditto. 1852 50 0 0
Ditto . , ....... 1852 50 0 0
Watson, S. Esq. Cottingham, Hull .15 0 0
Welldon, Rev.Dr.Master of Tonbridge
School 10 0 0
Welldon, Rev. E. J. Tonbridge ...440
Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Well wisher to every good work . 1852 4 0
West, Miss C 1852 5 0 0
West, Miss A. M. . . . . . 1852 5 0 0
Whetham, Mrs. Kirklington, South-
well, Notts ...500
Whewell, Rev. Dr. Master of
Coll. Cambridge . 20 0 0
Whewell, Mrs. . 10 0 0
White, Mrs. Mary, Acton 25 0 0
Whytehead,W. Esq. Clifton, Yk. 1852 1 0 0
20 0 0
Wickham, Rev. E# D*. Godstone ..500
Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Wigmore, Maria 1852 3 0 0
Wilder, Rev. J. Fulham 5 0 0
Williamson, Rev. W. Clare-hall, Camb. 26 5 0
Wilson, Henry, Esq. Westbrook, Shef-
field 500
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Wilson, Miss Ann, Sheffield ...500
Ditto 1852 1 0 0
Wilson, Major 1852 2 6
Wingfield,Miss, Luffenham,Uffingham,
Rutland . 2 0 0
Ditto . . . . . .' . 1852 1 0 0
Wither, Miss C. B. Winchester . 1852 1 0 0
0 0
Tinney, W. H. Esq. 31, Montagu-pl. Wither, Miss C. B. Winchester . 1852 1 0 0
Russ ell-square 10 0 0 Wood, the Vice-Chancellor SirW.Page,
Ditto . . 1852 10 0 0 12, Gt. George-street, Westminster. 20 ,0 0
Todd, R. E. Esq. 20, Alpha-road, Re- Woodrooffe, John, Esq. Gloucester-
gent’s-park 10 10 0 place, Camden Town 5 0 0
Todd, Miss . . . ...... 5 5 0 Woodward, Miss P. Uckfield. ... 10 0 0
Todd, Miss ... ...... 5 5 0
Torr, John, Esq. Liverpool . . 1852 1 0 0
Towers, W. C. Esq. 31, Montagu-sq. . 70 0 0
Townsend, Rev. C. G. G. Lit, Braxted,
Woolcomhe,Rev.E. C. Balliol Col. Oxf. 7 7 0
Worthington,Mrs. Ashhy-de-la-Z. 1852 1 0 0
Wratislaw, Rev. A. H 5 0 0
Essex 1852 2 2 0 Wright, W. Esq. Fenstanton, St. Ives,
Townsend, Mrs 1852 1 1 0 Huntingdon 10 0 0
Tuck, Rev. G.R.Wallingford Rectory, Wright, H. Esq. 1852 5 0 0
Baldock 10 0 0 Wright, Miss, Brookfield, Bakewell .10 0 0
Turner, T. Esq. Hampstead . , . . 73 10 0 Wright, Miss, Cottingham, Hull ~500
Ditto 1852 5 5 0 X. Y. Z. by the Rev. S. Smith ...500
Turner, Rev. W. T. Ore, Hastings .50 0 0 Yates, Miss, The Wood, Winander-
Ditto 1852 5 0 0 mere, Cumberland 20 0 0
Yeadon, Rev. W. Waddington, Line.. 7 0 0
Turner, John, Esq. North-bank, Re- Yeadon, Rev. W. Waddington, Line.. 7 0 0
gent’s-park 10 10 0 Yeadon, Mrs .....51 10
Turner, Miss Caroline, Ferriby, Hull. 30 0 0 Ditto 1852 1 1 0
Ditto 1852 5 0 0 Yeoman, Rev. H. W. Marsk, Yorksh. 5 5 0
Vaughan, Rev. Dr. Master of Harrow Ditto 1852 1 1 0
School . 45 5 0


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FIRST CHURCH TENT.
ct
Barry, Rev. C. U. Ryde .....220
Bonney, Yen. Archdeacon, Lincoln .10 0 0
Clayton, Rev. C. . . 10 0
Conway, Rev. W. Rochester ....200
Cooper, Rev. J. Trin. Coll. Camb. ..500
Desborough, L. Esq. Sise-lane ... 5 0 0
Disputed Account, amount of, per
Rev. J. Cooper . ....... 15 0 0
Gibbins, T. H. Esq. ....... 26
Green, H. Esq. Blackwall ....500
Green, Rev. W. Penshurst .... 5 0 0
Hoare, J. Gurney, Esq. Lombard-st. .500
Maddison, Rev. G, 1 i o
Ollivant, Mrs. .......... i o 0
Perry, R. Esq. Chester-ter. Reg.-park 5 0 0
***' £ s d
Perry, Miss Amelia, Chester-terrace,
Regent’s-park . . . . . . .5 0 0
Perry, Miss Louisa, Cam.-ter. Reg.-pk. 10 0 0
Perry, the late John, Esq. Executors
of (for freight) 22 0 0
Rendell, Rev. F. . . 2 2 0
Selwyn, Rev. Canon, Ely . . 5 0 0
Sladen, Messrs: ...... *2OO
Strong, Rev. A. Walcot, Bath .-..220
Swinny, Rev. H. H. Mortlake ...500
Thornton, H. S. Esq. 5 0 0
Turner, Thos. Esq. Hampstead-heath 5 0 0
Watlmgton, J. W. P. Esq. Moor Hall 5 0 0
Whewell, Rev. Dr. Master of Trinity
College, Cambridge 5 0 0
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
SECOND CHURCH TENT.
Cockerell, C. R. Esq. Hampstead ..500
Perry, the late John, Esq. Executors
of (for freight) 21 0 0
Cooper, Rev. J. Trin. Coll. Camb. .500
Perry, R. Esq. Chester-ter. Reg.-park 5 o 0
Perry, Miss A. ditto .... 5 0 0
Turner, Thos. Esq. Hampstead-heath 50 0 0
Turner, Rev. W. T. Ore, Sussex . . 50 0 0
Watlmgton, J. W.-P. Esq. Moor Hall,
Harlow ............ 5 0 0
Perry, Miss L. Cambr.-ter.Reg.-park .500
Perry, the Misses 20 0 0
Zhe Secretary mil be obliged by information of any errors or omissions in the foregoing Lists , and
(where such occur) of the names of the parties through whom the money has been paid. He will
also be glad to be supplied with the addresses of any contributors whose residences are not
stated above, in order that the paper may be forwarded to them. Subscriptions for the current
year, together with any further donations, are requested to be paid, either to some member
of the Committee, or to the account;of the Diocese of Melbourne, at the Office of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, 79, Pall Mall; or at Messrs. Barnett * Co.’s, Lorn-
bard-street; or Messrs. MortlocTc fy Sons, Cambridge. • • •
K, CLAY. PRINTER, BREAD STRFF.T TT




