

SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION ON PLUMBISM;
TOGETHER WITH
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE AND APPENDICES.
Ordered by the House of Assembly to be July 21st, 1925.
[Estimated cost of printing (800), £241 18s. lOd. Lithographing, £lO 16s. 9d.]
«—No. 57.
[No 57.


COMMISSION.
South Australia,
to wit,
Tom Bridges
(■ L.B.)
"] His Excellency Sir George Tom Molesworth Bridges, Lieutenant-General,
| Knight Commander of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath, Knight Commander
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Companion
1 of the Distinguished Service Order, Governor in and over the State of South
J Australia and its Dependencies in the Commonwealth of Australia ;
To Keith Russell Moore, M. 8., B.S. ; John Lathern Pearson, Esquire ; Herbert William Gepp,
Esquire ; and Walter Robinette, Esquire.
Greeting :
I, the said Governor, with the advice and consent of the Executive Council, do hereby appoint you
to be a Royal Commission to inquire into and report upon the cause or causes, of the disease known as
Plumbism, the increase thereof amongst employees of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary,
Limited, at Port Pirie, and the best means of preventing or alleviating such disease : And I give you full
power and authority to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary and which may be lawfully
done for the due execution thereof: And Ido hereby appoint you the said Keith Russell Moore to be the
Chairman of this Commission.
Given under my hand and the public seal of South Australia, at Adelaide, this 20th day of
March, 1925.
By command,
A. A. KIRKPATRICK, Acting Chief Secretary
Recorded in the Register of Commissions, Letters Patent, &c., Vol. X,
H. BLINMAN, Under Secretary.
M. 1.. 116/1924.


REPORT.
To His Excellency the Hon. T. Slaxey Poole; Administrator of the Government and Acting Chief Justice
in and over the State of South Australia and its Dependencies in the Commonwealth of
Australia.
May it please your Excellency .
In pursuance of the Commission issued to us on March 20th, 1925, by His Excellency Sir Tom Bridges,
by which we were authorised to inquire into and report upon the cause or causes of the disease
known as " Plumbism,” the increase thereof amongst employees of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters
Proprietary, Limited, at Port Pirie, and the best means of preventing or alleviating such disease, we have
the honor to submit our report with conclusions and recommendations.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
1. The appointment of the Commission was due to the unions representing the employees at the
Broken Hill Associated Smelters having brought under the notice of the Government that there was a
large increase in the number of employees at the smelters reported as becoming incapacitated by lead
poisoning, a position which was stated by the management of the smelters to be inexplicable. It was
pointed out on behalf of the management that since the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary,
Limited, purchased the works in 1915 the company had spent thousands of pounds in improving the
working conditions, but, despite these improvements, the number of lead poisoning cases was increasing.
Upon investigation being decided upon arrangements were made by the South Australian Government
with the Government of the Commonwealth for Dr. K. R. Moore, of the Commonwealth Department of
Health, Melbourne, to act as Chairman of the Commission. Of the other members Mr. J. L. Pearson is
State Inspector of Mines and Quarries in South Australia ; Mr. W. Robinette, who was appointed on the
nomination of a mass meeting of unionists employed at the Smelters to represent the employees, is Secretary
of the Combined Unions’ Council at Port Pirie ; and Mr. H. W. Gepp, of Melbourne and Risdon (Tasmania),
who was appointed on the nomination of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited, as
their representative on the Commission, is General Manager of the Electrolytic Zinc Company of Aus-
tralasia, Limited, and previously was Manager of the Australian Factory of Nobel’s Explosives Company,
then General Manager of Amalgamated Zinc (De Bavay’s), Limited, Broken Hill. Mr. Gepp was President
of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy in 1924, in which year he was, conjointly with Mr.
Gilbert Rigg, awarded the gold medal of the Institution of Mining and Metakurgy.
2. The Commission commenced its sittings at Parliament House, Adelaide, on April 4th, 1925, and
on April 6th proceeded to Port Pirie, where a series of inspections of the various sections of the smelters
was begun. These inspections were continued from time to time as was found necessary during the progress
of the inquiry. A resolution was carried that all evidence should be taken on oath, and, on the casting
vote of the Chairman, it was resolved that the evidence should be taken in public, except when otherwise
decided by the Commission. Throughout the inquiry, during the taking of evidence, the proceedings
were open to the press and public. Between April 28th and May 7th thirteen witnesses were examined
at Port Pirie, and on May 12th the Commission proceeded to Broken Hill, where evidence was taken in
regard to the work of the New South Wales Government Bureau of Medical Inspection and of the Medical
Board in certifying cases of suspected plumbism among workers in the silver lead mines, inspections
were made of the change house accommodation of the principal mines, with a view to noting the provision
made for the welfare of the men, and of surface and underground workings in order to observe the pro-
vision made for the elimination and suppression of dust, &c. On May 18th the Commission, with the
exception of Mr. Commissioner Robinette, who was unavoidably detained in South Australia, left Adelaide
for Sydney, where important evidence was obtained from Professor H. G. Chapman, of the University
of Sydney, and Dr. S. A. Smith, two of the leading authorities in Australia on lead poisoning and its sequelae.
These Gentlemen were the principal experts in charge of the Broken Hill investigation into industrial
diseases some years ago, and have an international reputation in connection with their knowledge of such
diseases. As a result of this evidence, which raised new issues, the Commission found it would be impossible
to make satisfactory decisions until these doctors had examined the position at Port Pirie, studied the
medical reports obtained there, and reported to the Commission as independent medical men. Accordingly,
approval was obtained from the South Australian Government for Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith
to visit Port Pirie, where further evidence was taken from them and other witnesses on various dates in
June.


manufacture.
3 ’ While in S J dne y the Commission inspected the principal white lead manufactories from the stand-
point of the measures adopted for the observance of industrial hygiene, and took evidence from the manager
and medical men associated with the works in regard to the precautions adopted for the prevention of
plumbism amongst employees in the industry. In Melbourne a visit was paid to lead-rolling works, where
it was found that no hazard similar to that at Port Pirie existed. Evidence was taken in Adelaide from
time to time between the visits of the Commission to Port Pirie and elsewhere. In all, 24 witnesses were
examined, many of them at considerable length, and a number of them were recalled for further examina-
tion as the inquiry proceeded in order to satisfy the Commission in regard to various questions. The
witnesses included 11 medical men experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of plumbism and its sequelae,
including, as well as those previously mentioned, the local medical practitioners at Port Pirie and Dr.'
.B. H. Morris, Inspector-General of Hospitals for South Australia and a medical referee under the Workmen s
Compensation Act; also metallurgical experts, officers of health and industrial hygiene, smelter workers
and others.
CHAPTER II.
DESCRIPTION OF PLANT AND METHODS OF TREATMENT.
Description
of plant and
treatment.
Blast-roast-
ing plant.
Charge.
Huntington-
Heberlein
section.
4. The evidence submitted on behalf of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited,
included particulars respecting the materials treated, a description of the treatment processes, and a com-
parison of the existing metallurgical practice with former methods as far back as 1897. At the present
time the reduction of the lead ores into marketable form covers what are essentially three distinct pro-
cesses (a) Blast roasting and sintering of the crude ore and fluxes at the Dwight & Lloyd and Huntington-
Heberlein plants. (6) Smelting the sintered material in blast furnaces, (c) Refining the bullion
ootained from the blast furnaces to convert the metal contents into marketable form as refined metals.
The blast roasting and sintering plant consists of three sections, viz. :—(a) The “ A ” section comprises
six Dwight & Lloyd straight line machines, each having 42 pallets 42in. wide by 24in. long These travel
over a vacuum chamber 21ft. long. Each machine is equipped with an impeller-type fan, and the gases
collected are delivered t > cyclone dust collectors, from which they escape to the stack. The heat for
ignition is supplied by coke-fired stoves of reverberatory type suspended over the pallets at one end of the
vacuum chamber. (6) The "B ” section consists of five Dwight & Lloyd machines similar in type and
equipment to the "A " section, (c) The Huntington-Herberlein section consists of 15 sintering pots, each
of 91 tons capacity. The "A ” section is operated as a pre-roasting unit and deals with 800 to 1,000
tons of charge per 24 hours ; the other two sections are used as final roasting units. The charge for blast
roasting includes Granular lead concentrates, slime lead concentrates, siliceous lead ore, lime sand,
Risdon residues, and granulated slag. In treatment, the various components of the roasting charge are
delivered from stock piles or railway trucks to a series of bins known as the mixing plant. From these
bins the material is passed to the main charge-assembly belt, which delivers to the first of five conveyors
arranged in series, and thereby is transported to storage hoppers. During the passage moisture is added
by water sprays regulated to give a moisture content of about 7 per cent. From the storage hoppers the
charge is fed to the machines by a conveyor belt delivering to an oscillating chute. After treatment
the material falls from the end of the machine on to tray conveyors delivering to a belt conveyor, which trans-
its the pre-roasted material to an intermediate crushing station. There the sinter is passed through rolls,
then on to belt conveyors, which return the products to either the “ B ” section of the Dwight & Lloyd
plant or the Huntmgton-Heberlein pots for a final roast. The charge of the “B ” machine is moistened
to give a water content of about 5 per cent., and fed on to the machines from hoppers on lines similar to
those described m connection with the “A ” section. The product from “B ” section falls directly into
skips, m which it is transported to the blast furnace bins. The excess material from the pre-roasting
section is treated in the Huntmgton-Heberlein pots, where the desulphurising is completed by air
forced through the charge from below at a pressure ranging from 4ozs. at the commencement of treatment
to 22ozs. at the end of the operation. After sintering the charge is tipped on to floors underneath the
pots, where it is manually broken to 6m. gauge and loaded into skips for transfer to the blast furnace
bins.
Blast
furnaces^
5 - The W “ S * f “ mftC \ B “ t,O “ conslßts of ™d two small blast furnaces. The large furnaces
measure over 23ft. from the bottom of the crucible to the feed floor. The small furnaces arc equal in height
t 0 V but are ° f a leBser area ' The cllar ge material for the blast furnace is collected by five steam
or electrically operated aerial hoists, with spans of from 331 ft. to 472 ft., which deliver the various products
into a senes of bins above the feed floor and parallel to the blast furnaces. From these bins it is trans-
ferred to the furnaces in charge trucks handled by a hydraulically-operated mechanical traverser. The
large furnaces are operated on current sintered material with about 11 per cent, of coke on sinter treated.
Blast IS supplied at a normal working pressure of 44ozs. The gases liberated in smelting pass through
down-takes to the main flue, a structure 520 ft. long. 15ft. wide, and 17ft. high, connecting with a 14ft.
diameter stack, 202 ft high. About 50ft. from the junction of the flue and stack the furnace gases are
w thdrawn by an impeller-type fan, and delivered to the bag house. This consists of six brick chambers.


in which the bags for collecting fume are arranged in regular groups, and are mechanically shaken in rota-
tion at regular intervals, the fume dropping into a hopper, from which it is withdrawn by an archimedean
screw. The fume is subsequently burned to a clinker, and then returned to the blast furnace. The bullion
is withdrawn from the furnace crucibles through syphons constructed of fire bricks and is moulded into
bars. These, after cooling, are conveyed to the refinery in horse-drawn trucks. A scheme of mechanical
bullion handling is being installed. The slag flows through a settler into a cast-iron launder, where it meets
a stream of salt water, which separates it into granules. The launder discharges the granulated slag into
an elevator delivering into storage bins, from which a proportion of it is railed to the blast roasting section
and the remainder to the waste-slag dump. These smaller furnaces treat ordinary charge material, or
are utilised in dealing with copper dross or antimony slag returned from the lead refinery. Slag for fluxing
purposes in the blast furnaces is quarried from a portion of the material dumped in earlier smelting
campaigns.
6. The refinery comprises eight sets of refining units, three large and five small, each set including ;
One copper softening furnace, one antimony softening furnace, two desilverismg kettles, one refining furnace,
one market kettle. The charge capacity of the large sets is 50 tons, and of the smaller sets 37 tons, and
the refining method in use is the well-known Parkes process. The furnaces are of the reverberatory type,
and the zincing kettles are cast-iron vessels, hemispherical in section. The various units are so arranged
as to ground level that the molten bullion gravitates from one receptacle to the next in series until the
market kettle is reached. In addition to the lead refining sets, the following supplementary equipment
is used to free from impurity the other valuable metal contents of the base bullion : —Two antimony dross
furnaces, two gold alloy furnaces, four retort distillation furnaces, seven concentrating cupel furnaces,
three fine silver cupel furnaces, one litharge-making furnace, one electrolytic gold parting plant.
7. The bullion from the blast furnace is elevated to the level of the copper softening furnaces by a
hydraulically-operated lift, and the bars are thrown by hand into the copper softeners through the charging
doors where, after melting, the copper dross is removed from the surface of the molten metal by hand
skimming. After the removal of the dross the bullion is run by means of cast-iron launders into
the antimony-softening furnaces. In these the charge is maintained at a high temperature, and the
skimmings, consisting of oxides of arsenic, antimony, and lead, rise to the surface and run off through
a V-shaped notch in the end of the furnace. These skimmings, after cooling, are sent to the antimony-
dross furnaces for re-treatment, while the bullion is run down a cast-iron launder into the desilverising
kettles. When the bullion is tapped into the kettles a quantity of dross is formed, which is skimmed off
and returned to the dressing furnaces. Following this, the charge is alternately strongly heated and
cooled, zinc being added at each heating to recover the gold and silver contents of the bullion. During
each zincing the molten bullion is stirred mechanically for a period of 30 minutes, then allowed to cool,
and the alloy skimmed off. The handling of the skimmings is done by pneumatic lifts. The silver alloy
is pressed, broken into small pieces, and delivered to the retort-furnace bins. The lead then goes to the
final refinery furnaces, from which it is tapped into kettles and cast into market bars. The retort furnaces
are producer-gas-fired regenerative furnaces, each accommodating four retorts for the treatment of zinc
crusts. The zinc recovered from retorting is again used for desilverising, and the bullion and dross go
to the cupellation furnaces. Of the 11 cupellation furnaces, seven are used for concentrating the retort
bullion, three for running the concentrate to fine silver, and one for the manufacture of litharge. The
commercial litharge goes to a special mill, where it is ground and then packed into tins for marketing.
8. The zinc roasting plant consists of two Skinner and six Barrier roasting furnaces, with the necessary
equipment. Both types of furnaces are vertical. The Skinner furnace has an over-all height of about-
-36ft., and is divided into eight roasting-hearths. The material treated consists of zinc concentrates, both
granular and slime, which are converted into calcines. When delivered from Broken Hill it is unloaded
on to belt conveyors and delivered to storage bins, from which the material is transferred as required to the
furnace charge bins. In the roasters the ore travels by turns from the centre to the circumference on
alternate hearths, passing from one to the other through drop holes. The temperature of the lower hearths
is maintained by coal or oil fires, while the upper hearths are cooled when necessary by opening the furnace
doors or by blowing in cold air. The calcines are finally discharged through an automatic self-sealing
door into a hollow cylinder for cooling. From this cylinder they fall into a push conveyor, which, in con-
junction with another conveyor and elevator, delivers them to storage bins, from which the calcines are
railed to the wharf for shipment to Tasmania. In their passage over the conveyor, and at the bins, the
calcines, are moistened by water sprays. The Barrier roasting-furnaces have six hearths, the alternate
hearths being fixed and revolving. The charge and calcines are handled by methods similar to those for
the Skinner furnaces. .The gases from these furnaces are piped to the sulphuric-acid plant.
9 The sulphuric acid plant is of the contact type, and the process consists essentially ol purifying
the gases from the roasters, forcing them through pre-heaters and converters, where the sulphur dioxide
is converted into sulphur trioxide, cooling the latter, and absorbing it to form sulphuric acid.
10 The power required in the various sections of the works is supplied from a central plant in whic
the electrical equipment includes—(l) Two 3,000 K.W. turbo-alternators, each consisting of a Fraser


and Chalmers steam turbine of the Rateau type, directly coupled to a \ickers 5/5 volts, 3-phase, 50-cycle
alternator, also smaller units. The main switchboard is in the engine-room immediately over the fireproof
switch-room, which is located in the basement, and the motors throughout the works are controlled from
the power plant.
11. Blast for the furnaces is supplied by two Fraser & Chalmers Rateau-type blowers and one Parsons
turbo-blower, and compressed air is provided by two Beilis and Morcom vertical two-stage air compressors.
Steam is supplied by six Babcock and Wilcox type boilers fitted with superheaters and chain-grafe stokers.
Induced draught for the boilers is supplied by a turbo-fan, and the flue gases pass through Greens econo-
misers before entering the stack. The accessory equipment includes feed-water pumps for supplying the
boilers for condensing purposes, and for general, hydraulic, and fire services throughout the works.
The supplementary plant includes —( a ) Machine shops equipped to deal with the maintenance required
in the various operating sections. ( b ) Brick and pottery works, where South Australian clays are made
into the various specially-shaped fire bricks used in the construction of the different furnaces, (c) Material
arriving by sea and products for shipment are handled over the company s own wharf situated within the
works enclosure. To facilitate the handling of steamer cargo the wharf is equipped with two electrically-
operated Priestman self-dumping cranes. ( d ) The various sections of the plant are served by branch
railways of the same gauge as, and connected by a siding with, the Government railway system.
12. The tonnage at present being treated approximates 7,500 weekly, of which about 5,000 tons is raw
lead-bearing material, the balance fuel and fluxes (evidence of H. St. J. Somerset, q. 16). The output of
market lead is from 120,000 tons to 130,000 tons per year, which represents the largest individual production
of market lead of any smelter in the world. In addition to the smelting operations, about 1,250 tons per
week of zinc concentrates delivered from Broken Hill are desulphurised and the calcines shipped to the
Electrolytic Zinc Works, Risdon, Tasmania, for further treatment to recover the zinc in metallic form.
The material handled in this section contains from 5-| to 6 per cent, lead (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 76a), and
from the standpoint of hazard must be regarded as lead ore. After the extraction of the zinc at the Tas-
manian works, the residues containing about 18 per cent, lead and 30ozs. silver per ton are shipped back
to Port Pirie to recover these values. This material forms a regular percentage of the charge in smelting
operations, the quantity dealt with approximating 600 tons per week (H. St. J. Somerset, qs. 89 and 902).
There was no direct evidence enabling a comparison of the tonnages now being treated as compared with
those handled during the earlier history of the smelters. The former manager, however, stated that in
1900 the blast furnaces in operation numbered 13, and that on the basis of the results then obtained 25
furnaces would be required to deal with the material now being smelted in six furnaces (W. Robertson,
q. 687). It seems reasonable, therefore, to infer that the quantity of leady ores now handled is probably
nearly double what was being smelted, say, prior to 1915, the year in which the present company took over
the plant from the Broken Hill Proprietary Company. The same authority informed the Commission that
the Hegeler furnaces formerly used to roast zinc ores were producing about 40 tons of calcines per day,
which represents less than 25 per cent, of the output of zinc calcines from the Skinner and Barrier roasting
furnaces now in commission (W. Robertson, q. 777). In addition to the changes in plant already referred
to, there has been, with the evolution of the present metallurgical practice, an almost complete change in
the blast roasting plant, as well as in the handling of materials, due to the installation of a large number of
conveyor belts and other mechanical devices to replace manual labor for transporting various products
within the works (W. Robertson, qs. 731-735).
CHAPTER III.
STATISTICAL EVIDENCE RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL DISEASE AMONGST SMELTER
EMPLOYEES.
The General Health Position.
13. The fullest information at the disposal of the management of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters
concerning the personnel employed at the Port Pirie Smelters, and the reported incidence of plumbism
amongst them, was placed before the Commission in evidence by the General Superintendent. Tables
embodying this information (marked A to P) are included in the printed evidence {vide q. 110 et seq.).
Attention is drawn to the fact that these tables refer in the main to reported* cases of plumbism, many of
which, as is pointed out subsequently, may not actually be cases of plumbism. In considering the
tables it is necessary to have this in mind. Evidence as to the incidence of sickness other than
industrial sickness, was tendered by the company’s industrial hygiene officer and by the secretary of
the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Sickness and Accident Fund (q. 581.) Further evidence as to
the general health position at Port Pirie was obtained from the local health* inspector (Mr. A. R.
Leonard, q. 1066 et seq.) The tabulated statements deal only with the position from 1917 onwards,
and as regards the incidence of plumbism amongst the smelter employees prior to that year there
is no conclusive information. In 1910, the Chairman of the Central Board of Health (Dr. Ramsay Smith)
conducted, on behalf of that body, an inquiry into the causes and occurrences of lead poisoning
*ln the text o i this report the word ‘ reported in relation to cases of plumbism means certified and compensated under
the Workmen’s Compensation Act,


Period of Employment.
No. of
Cases.
Less than one month
One month and less than 2 months
19
Two months and less than 3 months
22
Three months and less than 4 months
Four months and less than 5 months
Five months and less than 6 months
Six months and less than 12 months
11
Total —Less than one year
or 80 per cent.
at Port Pine, and reported that in the absence of complete statistics from the evidence he estimated that
during the thiee years 1907-1909 there had been from 150 to 200 cases of lead poisoning/ 4 among people
working in the smelting works and those handling lead on the wharves, and painters.” The witnesses
ascribed the disease amongst the smelter employees chiefly to exposure to fumes on the top and bottom
floors at the blast furnace plants ( Report into Cause and Occurrence of Lead Poisoning at Port Pirie,”
by W. Ramsay Smith, D.Sc., M. 8., F.R.S.E.). To overcome this, late in 1909, the slag taps and pots were
covered with hoods and these fumes carried away from the smelter buildings. This apparently improved
the conditions, as from 1910 onwards to 1917 only occasional cases of lead poisoning were reported, and the
hazard was considered to have been effectively limited, (W. Robertson., q. 753.)
_ a ' sence °f any statutory regulation making plumbism a notifial le disease, the statistical
position is, at the present time, most obscure. The Commission, therefore, has had to rely mainly upon
the evidence before it, given by the witnesses already mentioned. It has not been found possible, in conse-
quence, to institute any very definite comparison between conditions in the smelters at Port Pirie and in
the town of Port Pirie itself and other industries and towns in Australia and elsewhere ; but the facts placed
before the Commission are sufficiently in detail to permit of a general appreciation of the situation. Broadly,
it may be stated . (a) That there is no evidence of the state of general health of the inhabitants of Port
Pirie being prejudicially affected owing to the existence in that town of the works of the Broken Hill Asso-
ciated Smelters Proprietary, Limited. (6) That there is no evidence of harmful effects otherwise for the
same reason, (c) That the health of the employees, apart from reported cases of plumbism, is at least equal
to the general average maintaining in the State. (This last generalisation is based on a comparison of
absenteeism due to sickness and accident as disclosed by the records of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters
Sickness and Accident bund, and the figures published by the Royal Commission on National Insurance,
which, dealing with the members of Friendly Societies, may be presumed to have included a substantial
portion of the industrial population of the State.)
Comparison
of plumlism
position in
S.A.
15. Evidence was tendered by the General Superintendent, Mr. Somerset (q. 28), and his predecessor,
Mr. Robertson (q. 746), was to the effect that working methods and conditions of hygiene at the works at
Port Pirie compared more than favorably with the generality of similar plants in other parts of the world.
Both these witnesses had had the opportunity (one in 1924 and one in 1919) of making a world tour of inspec-
tion, and the former stated that on the information supplied to him there was very little plumbism reported
amongst lead workers in the United States of America and in Great Britain and Europe. In the absence of
definite figures, however, the Commission cannot make any useful deductions. A report published by the
United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, in February, 1914, Bulletin No. 141, is
descriptive of the investigations made by Dr. Alice Hamilton into the incidence of plumbism in lead works,
principally smelters and refineries. Dr. Hamilton did not have the full information at her hands which a
complete statistical system would produce, but by careful and full inquiry she was able to make certain
summaries. In the first place are published figures showing the period of exposure and attack rate in 167
typical cases of plumbism in the industry. The details are as follows :
The figures furnished by the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited, show that of 429
cases reported from 1917 up to December 31st, 1924, 28 per cent, occurred within the first 12 months of
employment. When these figures are segregated into nationality groups, it is found that the percentages
of the totals in each group, calculated on the total cases in each group, are as follows :
British 20 per cent, of the total cases “ reported ”
Greeks 47
Maltese 46 “ “ “
Italian 50
German 28
Scandinavian Nil
Kussian Nil
Others 30
These figures show in the first instance that plumbism as reported does not affect the employees at the
smelters at Port Pirie as readily as it appeared to affect certain typical lead workers in America in 1912.


Nationality.
July-Dee., 1924.
Jan.-May, 1925.
British born
3-010 per cent.
9-133
2-090 per cent.
Average of foreigners
10-577
Greeks
6-667 per cent.
25.000
12-414 per cent.
Maltese *
18-072
Italians
9-028
1-351
Germans
4-167
16-667 " (very
few employed)
Scandinavians
3-704
5-085 per cent.
Russians
13-793
Nil
They also show much greater susceptibility of Greeks, Maltese, and Italians to what has been reported as
early plumbism. Two instances where Dr. Hamilton was able to get full information as to the type of
plumbism occurring are recorded :
(а) Of 175 cases reported—None severe, 41 moderate, 134 mild.
(б) Of 81 cases reported—Five severe, 17 moderate, 59 mild.
If those cases which have a period of disability of not more than 13 weeks are regarded as mild (there are no
absolute standards in this connection), then the mild cases reported as occurring at Port Pine constitute
47 per cent, of the whole, which is rather less than the percentage discovered by Dr. Hamilton. It must
be remembered, however, that Dr. Hamilton, in her report, was dealing with the lead industry in the United
States of America in 1912 and 1913, and that conditions at that time in the industry were, in all probability,
widely different from those at the Port Pirie smelters since 1920.
Incidence of
plumbism at
Port Pirie,
1910-1925.
16. An outstanding fact emerging from the evidence is that from 1910 to 1917 there were no reported
cases of plumbism at Port Pirie, notwithstanding that from the beginning of 1912 plumbism became a
compensable industrial disease under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. In 1917 only one case was
reported ; in 1918, five ; in 1919, five ; in 1920, four ; and in 1921, three. In 1922 the number rose to 56.
In 1923 it was 89, in 1924 it was 234, and for the first five months of the present year 126. The percentage
of reported cases on the total of persons employed rose from nil to 5 per cent., and principally during 1923
and 1924. It was pointed out, however, at a late period in the proceedings of the Commission, that plumbism
was not recognised as a compensable disease by the men until 1917, although cited as such by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act in 1912. Information from the Secretary of the Port Pirie Hospital showed that the
following number of cases of plumbism were treated at that institution during the years 1910-1925
inclusive :
1910 10
1911 9
1912 21
1913 58
1914 30 M
1915 22
1916 48
1917 31
1918 48
1919 13
1920
1921
1922 16
1923 19
1924 43
1925 (to end of May) 12
The years 1920-21, in which no cases were treated, represent the period during which the works were shut
down. The above statement does not represent the total number of cases of plumbism occurring as, in all
probability certain cases were treated privately, and the total would, therefore, be in excess of the figures
quoted. These facts modify the reported percentage of increase, but there has been marked increase in
the number of cases reported fcs occurring since 1923.
Influence of
nationality-
17. A possible explanation lies in the great change which has taken place in the composition of the
working force employed. At the beginning of 1922 the proportion of foreigners to persons of British origin
was as one to eight, whereas at the end of 1924 it was as one to two. When this fact is noted and the figures
as to the reported incidence of plumbism amongst the various nationality groups are considered, it appears
that Greeks, Italians, and Maltese, in particular, are much more susceptible to the hazards of the industry
than are persons of British or Northern European origin. The figures set out in the final two columns of
Table L illustrate the reported attack rate during the period July, 1924, to May, 1925, viz.


18. Evidence subsequently submitted, however, by Professor K. G. Chapman and Drs. S. A. Smith
and 0. M. Moulden, after a personal study of local conditions, and after having conducted clinical examina-
tions of a number of the persons reported to be suffering from plumbism, had the effect of disturbing very
seriously the statistical evidence of the witnesses for the company. The company’s tables deal with cases
reported and considered under the Workmen’s Compensation Act as cases of plumbism, and the attack
rates and severity rates deducible from them cannot now be deemed to be at all conclusive. Of 29 men
examined by Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith only seven were confirmed by them as undoubted cases
of plumbism. Of 97 men examined by Dr. Moulden only 26 were confirmed by him as undoubted cases
of plumbism. It is thus impossible for the Commission, in view of the conflicting nature of the medical
evidence educed, to determine absolutely the extent and severity of the incidence of plumbism at the Port
Pirie works. The important fact emerges that many cases formerly reported as cases of plumbism, may
be disorders of an entirely different origin, viz., carbon-monoxide absorption, or may be diseases ordinarily
existing in any community and in no way connected with the industry. Of those examined by them,
Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith diagnosed two persons as suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning
or its sequelae, and certain others displaying a train of nervous symptoms considered to be indicative of
carbon-monoxide poisoning, but only to be determined finally after further observation and examination.
Others again, represented as cases of plumbism, were considered to be suffering from appendicitis, myxoe-
dema, cholecystitis, cardiac hypertrophy, &c. Dr. Owen Moulden, the medical expert for the company,
concluded that of the 97 men examined by him no fewer than 53 were suffering from disability not arising
from lead absorption, but, in his opinion, from carbon-monoxide inhalation. His conclusions were reached
from a study of the symptoms and signs presented, and from investigations made in the works in places
where these persons had been employed. He, too, diagnosed the complaints of several cases represented
as plumbism as being definitely not so. He found various diseases not in any way referable to the nature
of employment at the smelters. Professor Chapman, Dr. S. A. Smith, and Dr. Moulden concur in the view
that continued research is necessary to reach finality as to the hazard or hazards presented by the works
at Port Pirie. Only as a result of such research will it be possible to plan an effective medical campaign of
prevention and to record statistically the facts of the situation.
Notes on Certain of the Tables Submitted.
Table B.—Numbers of Persons Employed during each Half-year, showing the Various Nationality Groups.
This table in the first two columns shows the steadily ascending proportion of foreigners employed,
sufficient British-born applicants for employment have not been offering during the past few years, and
foreigners necessarily had to be engaged. The principal increase amongst foreigners occurs in respect of
Greeks, Maltese, and Italians.
Table C. —Persons Reported as Having Plumhism, 1917-1925.
This table shows clearly the remarkable increase in the reported cases of plumbism during the past
three years, and particularly amongst the foreign element.
Table D. —Length of Service in Relation to Disability.
Of the total reported cases 46-15 per cent, occurred in persons having not more than two years' service.
Of the cases reported amongst the various nationality groups percentages as under occurred in those having
not more than two years service :
British 28-4 per cent.
German 42-6
Scandinavian 12-5
Greek 8055 per cent.
Maltese 81-89
Italian , 76-67
Russian 12-5 per cent.
Table E.—Length of Disability in Relation to Department of Origin.
Owing to the interchange of workmen between various departments of the works, this table is not
of substantial value.
Table F. —Length of Disability in Relation to Length of Service.
This table shows a general relation between length of service and length of disability. The chronic
cases occur mainly in old employees of British origin. Mild cases predominate, being 47 per cent, of the
whole.
Table G. —Length of Disabitity in Relation to Nationality.
This table does not assist to any conclusion of importance.
Table H. —Ages of Persons Affected.
The majority of persons affected come, as would be expected, in the age group 25-40 years. Of the
older men those of British origin predominate. These are men of long service.


Up to 4 Years’ Service.
From 4 Years to 10 Years.
Over 10 Years.
Northern Europeans, includine those
of British origin 57 *7 per cent.
Southern Europeans 42-3 per cent.
!
90-4 per cent.
9-6 per cent.
97*4 per cent.
2*6 per cent.
Table K. —Ages of Persons Affected in Relation to Length of Disability.
This table shows no useful comparison in the direction desired. It merely shows that industrial disease
is proportional to the numbers of persons of the varying ages employed.
Table L. —Consolidated Table.
This table embodies information contained in several of the previous tables. It shows the general
position at a glance as to—(a) Labor turnover ; ( b ) average number of men employed ; (c) the propor-
tion as between British and foreign born labor ; (d) the incidence of reported cases of plumbism each
half-year and in each nationality group. The labor turnover is heavy, due to (a) men coming
from and going to seasonal occupations, such as wharf work, farming, and shearing ; (b) the replacement
of foreigners by persons of British origin at every available opportunity.
Table M. —Department of Origin.
Vide remarks in regard to Table E.
Table N. —Length of Service in Relation to Nationality.
Table 0. —Ages of Employees in Relation to Nationality.
If this table indicates anything of value it is that 82-29 per cent, of the employees are not more than
45 years of age, and that of the men above this age most of them are of British origin.
19. It is necessary in considering the foregoing summary to have regard to the following points :
(a) It has not been possible, on the information available, to prepare morbidity tables (Professor Chapman,
q. 2085). ( b ) The fact that the majority of the Southern Europeans are of comparatively short service
makes a full comparison difficult, but this does not invalidate a number of the conclusions, (c) During
recent years foreigners have been employed in the production sections of the plant to a greater extent
than persons of British origin, due to circumstances over which the company had no control, and to some
extent this factor influences the statistics produced. The Commission holds the view, however, that the
conclusions which are drawn from the table may be regarded as sufficiently well-founded for the purposes
of the investigation.
CHAPTER IV.
SUMMARY OF MEDICAL EVIDENCE IN RELATION TO INDUSTRIAL DISEASE.
(a) Plumbism.
20. Toxicity of Lead Dust and Fumes.- —The various compounds of lead show different degrees of
toxicity according to their nature. In industrial processes the lead compounds which exhibit the greatest
degree of toxicity are the basic carbonate or white lead, the oxides (red and orange lead and litharge),
lead sulphate and oleate. A comparatively small number of cases of plumbism owe their origin to
chromates and chlorides. (Legge & G-oadby, 41 Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” 1912, p. 7). The
poisonous nature of any lead compound from an industrial point of view is proportional to (a) the size of
the particles, and (6) the solubility of the particles in the body fluids, such as saliva, mucus of the respira-
tory tract and the gastric and intestinal juices. The importance of the first factor, namely, size, is from
the point of view of the ease with which particles may be inhaled or swallowed and absorbed. The work
of the Broken Hill Technical Commission has demonstrated that lead sulphide is relatively less toxic than
the oxides or carbonates. According to the evidence of Dr. M. R. Finlayson and the report of the above
Commission, the average time of exposure which produced plumbism in workers at Broken Hill may be
placed, approximately, at 20 years. (Prof. Chapman, q. 1723 ; Dr. Finlayson, q. 1467 ; Report of Technical
Commission appointed to inquire into industrial disease at Broken Hill, 1922, p. 3). Sulphide of lead
as galena is brought to Port Pirie in two forms, mainly (a) as concentrates, finely granular in form ; and (b)
as slimes, which are the result of a flotation process (H. St. J. Somerset, qs. 30 and 31). The slimes are
much finer than the concentrates, and the physical condition is such that, in the absence of moisture, they
exist as a very fine dust. In the course of roasting the sulphur is driven off, and ultimately, after treat-
ment in the blast furnaces, crude metallic lead is produced. This bullion is then put through a refining
process, and the ultimate product is refined lead. The treatments call for the use of high temperatures,
and consequently a great deal of very finely divided.lead as impure lead dust and also as lead fume is
given oft into the atmosphere. Owing to the fineness of this dust and fume, a high degree of toxicity is
possible.
21. Causes and Processes of Plumbism. —There are three accepted channels through which lead may
enter the body—(a) The respiratory tract by inhalation ; (6) the gastro-intestinal tract by swallowing; and
(c) the skin by prolonged contact. (Legge & Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” pp. Bto


12, Dr. S. A. Smith, q. 1827.) Authorities seem to be universally of the opinion that the third of these
channels is a negligible factor, and the balance of opinion of late years is to to the effect that the inhalation
of lead dust and fume through the respiratory tract is the most important factor in causing poisoning by
lead. At the same time, most authorities are agreed that a certain proportion of the lead may enter the
system as a result of absorption from the stomach and intestines after it has been swallowed. The action
of the gastric juices, however, renders insoluble the bulk of the lead swallowed, and it is excreted by the
bowels. (Lcgge & Goadby, £ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” pp. 12 to 24.) When lead enters the
body through respiratory passages it lodges in the alveoli or end divisions of the lungs, and the minute
particles are then ingested by certain white blood corpuscles known as phagocytes. Any ingested lead
which is absorbed through the stomach and intestines is also absorbed by phagocytes after lodgment in the
minute ducts in the mucous lining of the tract. In both instances the lead thus enters the body and is carried
to all parts of the body ; but, where intestinal absorption occurs, a certain proportion probably enters the
portal circulation and is carried to the liver, whence it is excreted by means of the bile. Where respiratory
absorption occurs, no fibrosis or damage is caused in the lungs at the point of entry.
22. Susceptibility. Like many other substances, lead causes varying degrees of effect in different
individuals. Some may be said to be relatively immune by nature to the effects of lead as a poison, while
others are naturally susceptible, and show signs of plumbism very soon after exposure to a lead hazard.
(Prof. Chapman, q. 1765. Legge & Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” pp. 27 and 28.)
Legge & Goadby estimate that females are at least twice, and probably three times, as susceptible as males,
and that young persons are twice as susceptible as adults. The Broken Hill Commission estimated that,
approximately, 3 per cent, of male workers are susceptible. Such susceptibility may be classed as natural.
Persons suffering from certain diseases, chiefly anaemia, show a predisposition to early poisoning by lead.
In addition to the recognised state of susceptibility which exists in some people, there are others who,
working in lead, will gradually establish a tolerance which will enable them to absorb larger doses without
symptoms than they were able to absorb at the commencement of their employment. In these persons,
however, a sudden increase in absorption or an inter-current disease may upset that balance of tolerance
and precipitate symptoms of plumbism.
23. Lead Absorption. —There are recognised, therefore, among lead workers two conditions — (a) lead
absorption, and (6) lead poisoning. Many workers in lead exhibit signs of absorption without suffering
from poisoning. Lead absorption is regarded by Professor Chapman as being a chemical term only, and
the evidence of absorption is always the discovery of lead in the urine. (Prof. Chapman, q. 1760.) Leaving
aside the question of susceptibility of individuals, normal persons working in lead processes usually show
some effects of the intake of lead at an early stage, but they generally develop a tolerance or partial immunity
more or less rapidly. This state may be subject to fluctuation according to variations in the rate of intake
or the incidence of intercurrent disease. In effect, the state of tolerance is only relatively stable, and the
balance depends upon uniform conditions of health, and intake of lead. The state of absorption may exist
apparently indefinitely without developing into a state of lead poisoning (Prof. Chapman, q. 1758), although
in some instances it may progress into definite poisoning. The situation is summed up by Sir Kenneth
Goadby in phrases to the following effect :—Lead absorption is the ingestion or inhalation into the body of
quantities of lead which are subminimal poisonous doses. These are sufficient only to produce changes
in the body, which the body is able to deal with and repair. When the doses increase to cause damage
which the repair system of the body is unable to cope with, plumbism occurs, and the whole of the lead
then in the body may act as a toxic amount. (Report of Departmental Committee appointed to investigate
the danger attendant on the use of lead compounds, Cmd. 632, evidence of Sir Kenneth Goadby, p. 467.)
Signs of lead absorption are those evidenced by the majority of persons soon after first exposure to lead,
viz., slight loss of health with a slight degree of anaemia, some loss of weight, and some loss of subcutaneous
fat.
24. Lead as a Cumulative Poison.— Lead gradually banks up within the tissues of the body while absorp-
tion continues. Absorption mav continue under uniform conditions for many years, and then the individual
may suddenly show marked symptoms of poisoning. This event is usually precipitated by an attack of
illness, or by alcoholic excess. Under these conditions the whole of the lead stored up in the body as before
mentioned exerts a poisonous influence. In other words lead acts as a cumulative poison. (Legge and
Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” p. 28.) Certain illnesses tend to precipitate attacks of
plumbism where lead absorption is proceeding. The most common of these are disorders caused by chronic
alcoholism, chronic constipation, disturbances of the alimentary tract, oral sepsis or diseased conditions
of the mouth, with their train of sequelae. (Legge and Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,”
pp. 33 to 42.)
25. Tolerance. Tolerance to the harmful effects of lead seems to be a natural chemical characteristic
of certain individuals, but others, who show premonitory symptoms early in their industrial history, may
gradually rid themselves of these symptoms, and acquire a degree of tolerance. (Legge and Goadby.) Such
tolerance, however, may be easily upset by the conditions mentioned in paragraph 24.


26. Definition and Diagnosis of Plumbism.— The difficulty of diagnosis of plurabism lies in the fact
that definite standards for diagnosis do not exist (Dr. S. A. Smith, q. 1829). At the present time each
examining medical officer must conceive his own clinical standards, and thus arises the difficulty in cases
not presenting cardinal symptoms and signs of plumbism of determining the actual state of the patient.
Where cardinal signs such as colic, paresis, and anaemia are present, no difficulty is experienced. Professor
Chapman, in evidence, defined plumbism as “ any condition induced by the introduction of lead into the
body which may shorten or tend to shorten the duration of life or lessen the efficiency or mechanical energy
of the body or diminish the comfort or wellbeing of the body ” (q. 1721). The initial effects of the intake of
lead by industrial workers are usually manifested in them by some grade of anaemia, and some wasting of
the fatty tissues. This syndrome does not constitute plumbism, but is evidence only of absorption
and the signs mentioned pass away in the majority of persons with the establishment of tolerance. In
cases of susceptibility, or of progression to lead poisoning, the signs mentioned become accentuated and
associated with wasting of muscles, notably of the extensor groups of the forearm and leg. At the same
time a degree of lack of mental energy becomes evident. Coincident with these signs abdominal colic
appears. The presence of this colic is very definite, and if the patient is closely questioned it will not be
confused with abdominal pains from other causes (Prof. Chapman, q. 1762 ; Dr. Smith, q. 2169). Attacks
recur at intervals as short as half an hour apart, and the patient in describing an attack will characteristi-
cally place both hands over the lower abdomen. This colic is commonly ascribed to the effects of lead on
the nerve endings in the intestinal wall (Legge and Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,
pp. 110 to 122). Attendant on colic, as a general rule, is a history of constipation, but this may give rise
to a false diarrhoea (Legge and Goadby, Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption, p. 115). A distinguishing
feature regarding true lead colic in contradistinction to abdominal pains from other causes is the attendant
slow pulse, also the fact that the pain is relieved by pressure.
27. Additional more or less constant symptoms of plumbism are headache and the Burtonian blue
line. The former is usually frontal in character, but it may be general. It is frequently the precursor of
the cerebral type of poisoning. The true blue line is due to the deposition of lead in the form of sulphide
in the gums, and is not definitely a sign of lead poisoning, but rather of lead absorption. It is not commonly
found in persons with perfect teeth and gums, but in the presence of oral sepsis sulphuretted hydrogen is
formed in the mouth, and converts lead salts into lead sulphide. This characteristically appears along the
margins of the gums, especially where ulceration is present, as a blue line. In extreme cases it affects
other parts of the mouth, and even the tongue has a blue discoloration. (Legge and Goadby, " Lead Poison-
ing and Lead Absorption,” pp. 122 to 126.) Lead appears in the urine of all lead workers at an early period
of absorption, and tends to diminish or disappear as the stage of tolerance is reached. At this stage the
great bulk of elimination takes place by means of the bowels.
28. Cases of plumbism may be divided into three main types, or, as some would classify, into four
types (Dr. L. G. Tassie, q. 1212). These are— (a) The gastro-intestinal type, in which the predominant
symptoms are colic and constipation, (h) The nervous type, or neuritic type, in which paresis and paralysis
of the extensor muscles are the main manifestations, (c) The cerebral type, in which the tendency is towards
fits, manias, and other encephalopathies, (d) The arterio-renal type, in which the chief signs are thickening
of the arteries, and changes in the kidneys resembling Bright's disease. Apart from changes affecting
the nervous and circulatory and renal systems, symptoms of plumbism are subjective.
29. Objective signs of plumbism as affecting the nervous system range from tremor, with weakness
of the extensor muscles, through definite paralysis of these muscles, producing wrist-drop and foot drop,
to fits and definite mania as represented by class (c) in paragraph 28. These signs are associated with cramp
and muscular pains, which are attributed to local action of lead on the nerves and muscles. A rapid absorp-
tion of lead in fairly large quantities tends to produce the gastro-intestinal type of case and these cases
have been known to occur with fatal results in the absence of other marked symptoms. A less acute form
brought about by a more prolonged intake of smaller daily doses of lead would tend, in the bulk of instances,
to the neuritic type. The chronic type of lead poisoning, which usually occurs after a period of some years
of industrial history, is the arterio-renal type. This is brought about by prolonged action of lead on the
blood vessels and kidneys, and results in a condition closely resembling Bright's disease. In mentioning
the encephalopathic type, it may be stated that such cases are comparatively uncommon, and are the result
as a rule of the absorption of large quantities of lead in a relatively short space of time. This type of
poisoning is usually the result of chronic alcoholism. (Legge and Goadby, “ Lead Poisoning and Lead
Absorption,” p. 157.)
30. Examination of the Blood in Relation, tc the Diagnosis of Lead Poisoning. —An aid to the diagnosis
of lead poisoning is the examination of the blood. It may be here stated that no definite picture of blood
is per se an indication of lead poisoning, but in conjunction with other systems, an examination comprising
the red cells and haemoglobin estimations and the blood picture is of use. (Prof. Chapman, q. 1743 ; Dr.
S. A. Smith, q. 1828 ; Dr. Yeatman, q. 1333 ; Dr. Tassie, q. 1218.) Lead acts on the red blood cells and
causes them to become more fragile. This gives rise, through wear and tear, to a diminution in the numbers
of red cells. This anaemia is stated by Legge and Goadby to be the earliest symptom of lead poisoning.
(Legge and Goadby, " Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” p. 28.) The red cell count rarely falls as low


as 2,000,000 per c.mm. The estimation of a haemoglolin is regarded by some authorities as of more impor-
tance t an t i red cell count (1 rof. ( hapman, q. 1743). The loss of more than 20 per cent, of haemoglobin
must be regarded as a sign of anaemia. Much discussion has eventuated as to the significance of the
aPPearance of cells showing punctate basophilia in lead workers. The experience of experts in recent times
is, mainly, that while such basophilic degeneration occurs in many classes of anaemia, certain classes of
lead workers show it fairly constantly. At the same time it is to be regarded as a sign of lead absorption
rather than of one of lead poisoning (Prof. Chapman, q. 1746).
31. Contrasts in Regard to Lead Poisoning in various Industries .—Professor Chapman, in evidence, stated
that basophilic degeneration was not found among miners at Broken Hill, even among those who were
suffering from lead poisoning. 1 his class of lead poisoning, it should be noted, is of a particularly chronic
nature (Prof. Chapman, q. 1747). Dr. Matthew, medical officer in charge of the Commonwealth Health
Laboratory, Port Pirie, in his evidence, indicated that the bulk of cases examined at Port Pirie showed
basophdic degeneration. (Evidence of Dr. Matthew, q. 1124 ; see also Appendix.) The type of industrial
lead poisoning which may occur in any given industry will be subject to variations and will depend upon the
conditions of working and the rate of lead intake. Cases of lead poisoning found in Broken Hill were of
two types and were not regarded as cases of typical industrial plumbism (Prof. Chapman, qs. 1724 to 1731).
The first group gave a history of having suffered from repeated attacks of colic over 15 to 20 years and
showed evidence of a definite paralysis of lead type, had lost weight, showed a typical earthy pallor, mal-
nutrition, and complained of headaches, giddiness, and tremor.
Some of them also showed signs of Bright’s disease. The second group gave the same history of repeated
attacks of colic over many years, but no history of ever having had paralysis or pareses. They exhibited,
like the first group, pallor with the earthy tint, malnutrition, loss of subcutaneous fat, and some of them
complained of headaches, giddiness, tremor, muscular wasting, and loss of weight, and 50 per cent, of them
had evidence of Bright s disease. Professor Chapman, in evidence (q. 1733), mentioned that cases occurring
in potteries frequently manifest acute symptoms with encephalopathy.
32. Interesting evidence of the incidence of lead poisoning was obtained from the factories of Berger’s
Limited, and the British Australian Lead Manufacturing Company, in Sydney, where white lead is manu-
factured. It is recognised that white lead, the basic carbonate of lead, in the form of dust is very toxic,
and definite hazards exist at these works. In the case of Berger’s Limited, only four cases of plumbism
had occurred in seven years, and all these had recovered and returned to work (Dr. L. H. Rogers, q. 1556).
At the British Australian Lead Manufacturing Works six definite cases and a doubtful case occurred in
two years, all of whom recovered. In the subsequent two and a half years to date only two doubtful cases
occurred (Dr. Freeman, q. 1651). These cases were all of an acute type and totally unlike the Broken Hill
cases. Symptoms complained of were severe colic and constipation and in some cases paralysis. They
apparently represent the results of a large dose of lead in a comparatively short time, and may be classed
as acute.
33. In Port Pirie medical evidence was given to the effect that typical cases were of a sub-acute type
(Dr. Tassie, q. 1212 ; Dr. Yeatman, q. 1316). The prevailing symptoms were pallor, with the blue lead line
in the gums, loss of weight, loss of appetite, with foul taste in the mouth, constipation and colic, loss of
muscular tone with wasting, tenderness over the nerve trunks, sleeplessness, and pains in the joints. In
these cases any one particular group of signs and symptoms may predominate and determine the case
among one or more of three or four typical groups —anaemic, abdominal, neuritic, or cerebral. The cases
described may be taken to represent the results of absorption of lead at a more rapid rate than those of the
Broken Hill type, but less rapidly than the cases described as working in potteries and becoming acutely ill
with cerebral symptoms. Thus it may be gathered that the type of plumbism case will vary between
industry and industry, and will be determined by the working conditions relating to rate of intake of lead
dust and fume.
34. Broken Hill Survey.—The results of the work of the Technical Commission appointed to inquire
into the occurrence of industrial diseases at Broken Hill are given in details in its report published in 1922.
Clinical examinations were made of the urine of 209 men at work in the mines for some six months previous
to the investigation, and lead was found in every instance. This indicated uniform absorption of lead by
workers and, in connection with further experiments relating to dust estimation, formed the Commission’s
opinion that the concentration of absorbed lead to which Broken Hill workers are exposed is low. The
Commission examined 6,538 men who had worked in the Broken Hill mines for varying periods. Of these,
61 were found to be suffering from lead poisoning. Of the 6,538 persons, 3,302 or 50-5 per cent, had worked
for 10 years or less. Two, or -06 per cent., of these were found to be suffering from lead poisoning. Of 1851
who had worked for over 10 and under 20 years, 23 or 1-2 per cent, had lead poisoning. Of 1,104 who had
worked over 20 and less than 30 years, 30, or 2-7 per cent, were affected ; and of 256 who had worked over
■3O years, 6, or 2-3 per cent, were affected. These figures indicate that industrial lead poisoning in Broken
Hill is a very slow process, and the cases are of a chronic type.


Top floor
In 3 hours’ work, 4 to 11 per cent; in 7| hours, 9 to 11 per cent.
Bottom floor
3| hours, 2 to 8 per cent. ; 8 hours 3 to 8 per cent.
Barrier Roaster
4 hours, nil.
Skinner Roaster
4 hours, 3 per cent.
Baghouse
7 hours, 8 to 9 per cent. ; after 10 minutes inside a chamber of
the baghouse, 15 per cent.
Refinery
2 hours, 3 per cent. ; 7 hours, nil to 2 per cent.
H. & H. pots
3 hours, 1 to 12 per cent. ; hours, 3 per cent. (Showed
12 per cent, in morning. There was a south wind blowing
in afternoon).
Dwight & Lloyd “ A ” plant..
3 hours, 4 to 6 per cent. ; 7 hours, 10 per cent.
Dwight & Lloyd “ B ” plant..
3 hours, 1 per cent. ; 7| hours, 5 per cent.
Power house
4 hours, nil.
Blacksmith’s shop
4 hours, nil.
Sampling plant
4 hours, 4 per cent.
Coke heap
4 hours, 4 per cent. (Chairman’s statement, q. 2134).
English
works.
35. Experience in English Lead Works.— The incidence of lead poisoning in English factories and
works is discussed under the annual reports of the Chief Inspectors of Factories and V\ orkshops (England),
1914 to 1919 (Report for 1914, p. 81 ; Report for 1918, p. 66). In the report for 1919 (p. 61) Dr. Legge
states that the sole causative agents in industrial plumbism are leady dust and fume, and that the sheet
anchor of protection of the workers is locally applied exhaust ventilation.
(b) Carbon Monoxide.
Presence of Carbon Monoxide at the Smelters.
Carbon mon-
oxide hazard.
36. As a result of personal inspections of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters plant and works processes
by the Commission the conclusion was reached that there was a possibility of the health hazard at the works
being influenced by the presence in the atmosphere at various points of carbon monoxide gas. Cnder ex-
amination, the General Superintendent stated that such gas was present inside the bag house and furnaces. He
was not aware of the degree of saturation of the atmosphere by carbon monoxide necessary to cause injury
to persons exposed (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 934). The possioility of carbon moonxide intoxication was put
to several other witnesses. It had not come within the experience of the local medical practitioners.
Professor H. G. Chapman, of Sydney University, and Dr. S. A. Smith, consulting physician of Sydney,
in their evidence taken in Sydney, raised very definite suspicions in the minds of the Commissioners present
as to the existence at the works of carbon monoxide, and the harmful effect it might be causing both inde-
pendently of and concurrently with the lead hazard (Prof. Chapman, q. 1815 ; Dr. Smith, q. 1880). When
these experts visited Port Pirie, at the request of the Commission, made an inspection of the plant, and
examined a number of the men, they reached the definite conclusion that carbon monoxide was present in
the atmosphere at several places, that it was inducing neurasthenia amongst a number of the employees,
and that two out of the 29 employees examined, who had been certified as suffering from plumbism, were
in fact suffering from chronic carbon monoxide intoxication (Prof. Chapman, q. 2037, et seq. ; Dr. Smith,
q. 2163). They recommended, therefore, that a systematic survey of the atmosphere should be made
to ascertain where and to what extent carbon monoxide was present, and further that a blood survey
should be undertaken amongst the employees liable to a carbon monoxide hazard, with a view to ascer-
taining to what extent, if any, carboxy haemoglobin was present in them (Prof. Chapman, q. 2150). The
company had already made arrangements to carry out atmospheric analyses, apparatus for this purpose
having been obtained from the management of the Broken Hill South S.M. Coy., Limited.
investigation
of carbon
monoxide
hazard.
37. In pursuance of its investigations the Commission, under the personal supervision of the Chairman
and Mr. Commissioner Robinette, and with the assistance of local doctors and technicians, supplied by the
Company at the request of the Commission, ascertained the carboxy haemoglobin contents of the blood
of men working in various parts of the smelters. From 0 per cent, to 15 per cent, of saturation
was ascertained, the Barrier Roaster Plant, Power Station, and Workshops giving the lowest figures and
the Main Baghouse the highest. Details of the results obtained in the various departments of the works
are set out in the following table
Carbon
monoxide.
38. Properties of Carbon Monoxide. —Carbon monoxide is colorless and odorless. It is slightly lighter
than air and readily diffuses to make a homogeneous mixture with air. The relative affinity of carbon
monoxide and oxygen for the haemoglobin of the blood is 300 to 1.
Acute carbon
monoxide
poisoning;
39. Types of Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. —Carbon monoxide poisoning is of two types :—(a) Acute,
and (6) chronic. Acute carbon monoxide poisoning is caused in a short space of time by exposure to
atmosphere, containing as low as 0-15 per cent, of carbon monoxide by volume This type is met with
principally in coal mining and in industries which use large quantities of coal or coke. As for instance,
steel making and metallurgical treatment plants operating blast furnaces and retorts. When the blood
of a person is saturated to such an extent that it contains 30 per cent, or more of carboxy haemoglobin
there is grave danger of acute carbon monoxide poisoning, and possibly death resulting.


Degree of Saturation
(CO HB).
Symptoms Produced.
o%-io%
Nil.
0%-20%
lightness across the forehead, possibly slight headache, dilatation of
cutaneous blood vessels.
20%-30%
Headache, throbbing in temples.
30%-40%
Severe headache, weakness, dizziness, dimness of vision, nausea,
vomiting, collapse.
40%-50%
Same as previous with more possibility of collapse and syncope,
increased respiration and pulse.
50%-60%
Syncope, increased respiration and pulse, coma with intermittent
convulsions.
60%-70%
Coma, intermittent convulsions, depressed heart action, possibly death.
70%-80%
Weak pulse, slowed respiration, respiratory failure, and death.
40. Chronic Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. —Chronic carbon monoxide poisoning results from long
•continued exposure to small amounts of carbon monoxide. Text books on the subject state that when
the atmosphere contains as little as -01 per cent, by volume of carbon monoxide persons inhaling same
intermittently over long periods are likely to develop chronic carbon monoxide poisoning. Professor
Chapman holds the view that even a lesser density may induce the disease. The best medical opinion
is that long continued exposure to low concentrations of carbon monoxide is much m,ore serious in its con-
sequences than short exposure to a very much greater concentration.
41. Symptoms.— A publication of the United States Bureau of Mines (Public Health Bulletin, No. 150),
where a great amount of most important research work upon carbon monoxide has been carried out, contains
the following table indicative of the symptoms produced by varying absorptions into the blood of carbon
monoxide gas :
In connection with the co-operative work of the Bureau of Mines and the New York and New Jersey
"State Bridge and Tunnel Commissions in 1921, on the physiological effects of automobile exhaust gases,
the following statement was formulated by Dr. Yandell Henderson in regard to the probable effects of a
given concentration of carbon-monoxide gas in a given time :
1. When the time of exposure in hours multiplied by the concentration of carbon monoxide in
parts per 10,000 equals 3, there is no perceptible effect.
2. When the result is 6, there is just a perceptible effect.
3. When the result is 9, there will be headache and nausea.
4. When the result is 15 or more, the conditions are dangerous to life.
5. If the volume of breathing is increased by exercise (even by slow walking, and correspondingly
more by physical work) the rate of absorption of carbon monoxide is increased propor-
tionally.
42. Tests of Carbon Monoxide Absorption. —-Colorimetric determinations of carbon monoxide absorption
are readily made and the percentage of carbon haemoglobin in the blood is ascertained by reference to definite
standards. The technique of the making of these determinations may be seen in the following publica-
tion :—“ The Pyro-tannic Acid Method for the Quantitative Determination of Carbon Monoxide in Blood
and Air,” by R. R. Sayers, W. P. Yant, and G. W. Jones (Reprint No. 872, from the Public Health Reports,
U.S.A., October sth, 1923).
43. The Action of Carbon Monoxide on the Body.— The blood contains coloring matter known as haemo-
globin. The oxygen necessary to the maintenance of life is taken from the air inhaled by the lungs and
passing into the haemoblogin of the blood circulates throughout the body to perform its function of burning
up of waste matter. One gramme of haemoglobin carries 1*34 c.c. of oxygen. Roughly speaking, in
Australia, 100 c.c. of blood carries 20c.c. of oxygen. One gramme of haemoglobin, when saturated, carries
1-34 c.c. of carbon monoxide. One hundred cubic centimetres of blood will, therefore, carry, when saturated,
20 c.c. carbon monoxide. The exact amount varies with the weight of the individual, but the average of
the blood of an adult person is 5,000 c.c., or, approximately, 9 pints. The blood of an average person, there-
fore, when saturated, carries 1,000 c.c. of carbon monoxide. The amount of carbon monoxide absorbed is
proportional to the amount of air breathed and the percentage of carbon monoxide in that air. Experience
shows that a person becomes acutely affected when his haemoglobin is 30 per cent, saturated, and it is known
that the result is likely to be immediately, or within a few days fatal, when the blood is 60 per cent, saturated,
that is to say, when the person has absorbed 600 c.c. of carbon monoxide. As the blood containing carbon
monoxide passes through the capillary vessels to the veins it loses extremely little, if any, of the carbon
monoxide. Thus the tissues are denied the oxygen necessary to them and damage to them ensues. The
amount of damage which results is dependent not only upon the amount of carbon monoxide contained in
the blood, but also upon the sensitiveness of the individual to the gas. The opinion is held by some authori-
ties that the damage done by carbon monoxide is due simply to its interference with the oxygen carrying
capacity of the blood. It is believed, however, that in addition to this, it has a specific poisonous effect


upon the human tissues. Some cases of carbon monoxide poisoning of an acute type recover without
damage and disability. Others, however, reveal its effects after a period of delay, and in some persons
changes are set up some days after the inhalation of the gas. Carbon monoxide has a selective effect upon
certain nervous tissues in the brain, inducing degenerative changes. In this way tremor, rigidity of the
muscles, as well as what are known as neurasthenic symptoms ensue. Exercises, high temperature and
humidity, and low oxygen content of an atmosphere increase the degree of poisoning for any given concentra-
tion of carbon monoxide. Therefore, badly ventilated working places would increase the danger. Anything
which lowers the physical fitness of the individual, such as illness, overwork, or excesses of any kind, exag-
gerates its effects.
44. Sequelae of Acute Carbon Monoxide Poisoning.— The sequelae of acute carbon monoxide poisoning
include headaches, muscular pains, long periods of unconsciousness, loss of strength and mental derange-
ment, loss of memory, paralysis, and temporary blindness. Most persons affected completely recover in
a day or two, but there are cases known where the sequelae have persisted for several months and, in a few
instances, for years.
45. Carbon Monoxide Poisoning and Plumbism. --A study of the hazards of carbon monoxide at the
Port Pirie smelters reveals the possibility of the existence in certain parts of the works of a health hazard.
Where small quantities of carbon monoxide are intermittently absorbed by individuals there is a possible
danger, if not of neurasthenia, at least of loss of tone. Loss of tone affects the appetite and digestion, and
these in turn induce anaemia. Thus the individual may display steadily diminishing powers of resistance
to disease and finally become incapacitated.
CHAPTER V.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND TRADE EVIDENCE, WORKING, AND LIVING CONDITIONS.
46. The present position respecting reported cases of pluralism among the Smelter employees suggests
that the hygienic conditions at the Smelters have become worse than they were formerly. This view met
with a strong denial from the General Superintendent for the Company, who contended that the reverse
was the case, and gave particulars of a number of alterations made for the betterment of conditions as well
as of a number of other projected improvements, either in course of installation or for which plans were being
prepared (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 145 et seq.). In support of this view the industrial officer for hygiene at
the Smelters, who was appointed in 1923, gave detailed statements of measures taken sffice that date to
improve conditions, particularly in respect to the suppression of dust by the regular watering down of certain
portions of the works, the moistening of leady material in storage or in course of treatment, and particulars
of a number of other changes carried out for the purpose of reducing the hazard. Both these witnesses,
as well as the former Superintendent of the Company, maintained that a large number of changes made in the
plant and treatment processes, while introduced to obtain improved efficiency, had ameliorated working
conditions and lessened the health risk (G. Dey, q. 660 ; W. Robertson, q. 738). A witness, who had been
employed at the Smelters for 23 years, stated that the dust was much worse now than in 1921, referring par-
ticularly to that originating around the Skinner and Barrier Roaster furnaces, (J. Malycha, q. 494-5).
Another witness gave evidence regarding the escape of fumes from the baghousc connected with the blast
furnaces, and the presence of a quantity of fumes in the blast roasting section, particularly when the Hunting-
ton-Heberlein pots were tipped (A. H. Hart, q. 174). These statements \vere not contested, but evidence
was given regarding alterations in progress and proposed modifications in practice to minimise the dust and
fumes as the places specified. The evidence regarding the extent of the health hazard of the different
sections of the works was inconclusive, but its existence in all the operating departments was established.
The secretary of the local branch of the Amalgamated Engineers’ Union stated in evidence that out of
five cases of plumbism amongst the members of his union since 1923, four of the men affected had been
employed in repair work at the Dwight & Lloyd plant (H. R. Summerton, q 1178). This is the only definite
statement obtained as to the point of origin of any cases. From information obtained by the Commission,
by personal inspection as well as from evidence, it is clear that the condition of most working places is
affected to*a considerable degree by the prevailing weather conditions, such as direction of wind, humidity,
and the operations being carried out at the time. Consequently the hazard varies.
47. Working hours at the Smelters, as far as the operating departments are concerned, are governed
by an award of the State Industrial Court made in September, 1923, which regulates the wages, hours, terms,
and conditions of employment of the daity-paid staff of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary,
Limited, at its works at Port Pirie. Under clauses 5 and 6of this award it is prescribed that 48 hours shall
constitute a week’s work, and that time worked in excess of this on Sundays and holidays or outside regular
hours shall be paid for at overtime rates, viz., time and a half for shift workers, double time for day workers.
The practice regarding shift workers engaged in the treatment of ores and manufacture of lead is for the
men to work eight shifts in one week, seven the next week, and six the following week, or an average of seven
shifts per week (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 801). Under a condition of employment established by the company
in 1918 shift workers are allowed 14 days’ holiday per annum, on full pay, provided that they have not
lost more than 14 days without a certificate for sickness. Day workers are under the same terms allowed


12 days if thej ha\e not more than 12 days’ lost time. Men have not been employed for a full year
are en a e to a holiday allowance in proportion to the time worked (G. Dey, q. 598). The company also
maintains a holiday camp at Weeroona, on the opposite side of Spencer’s Gulf to Port Pirie, where the
company s employees and their families are accommodated at low rates.
as i n °ther countries, where there is, as in the lead-smelting industry, an
ami e lea lazart, t e practice for many years has been to limit the hours of employment either by
legislation or the awards of Industrial Tribunals. This was done in New South Wales as far back as 1904,
W6n v,° ° n US^ri ' r^^ra^on * n an awar d regulating the industrial conditions in the painting trade
a °^ e IS col * r ® e - same principle has been applied in other industries, such as mining, throughout
6 nrnon vca 1 1. C ( rtain medical witnesses were strongly of the opinion that a reduction in the number
of shifts worked per week from seven to six would be in the interests of the health of the employees (Prof.
Chapman, q. 1813 , Dr. S. A. Smith, q. 1890). The Company’s chief representative before the Commission
was m agreement with this opinion (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 803).
Housing and Living Conditions at Port Pirie.
49. Realising the importance of the housing and living conditions of employees as a contributing factor
in the matter of their general health, the Commission took evidence and made personal inspections with a
view to ascertaining the facts of the position at Port Pirie. The General Superintendent of the Smelters
stated that he had heard that a great number of the foreign-born workmen were in the habit of “ batching ”
together (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 150). The evidence of A. R. Leonard, Health Inspector for the Corporation
of Port Pirie (q. 1068 et seq.) was to the effect that a considerable number of the unmarried foreign-born
workmen batched together in houses, slept upon the floors, and were not cleanly in their habits. They
lived upon the cheapest quality food, desiring as it appeared to reserve their money for other purposes.
They were not regular in their washing of clothes, nor in their personal ablutions. They preferred their
meals on return from work without washing. They did not go in for healthy sport. This evidence was
confirmed by Hr. C. Yeatman, Health Officer (q. 1308). Others among the foreign element, he stated
observed quite satisfactory standards of living, particularly those who lived with their families. Many of
them were property owners. Joshua Retchford, Manager of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters’ Co-
operate e Store, stated in evidence that the foreign-born workers, particularly new arrivals and unmarried
men, were heavy purchasers of the cheaper lines of canned foods (q. 1380 et seq.). This would be anticipated
in persons who batched ’ as a means to minimise labor in the preparation of food.
50. The Commission, in company with the Health Inspector, made an inspection of typical areas in Port
Pirie. It may be generally stated that this inspection confirmed the evidence given by Mr. Leonard. The
average of the houses occupied by workmen of British origin and by foreign-born workmen in residence
with their families was found to be of a satisfactory standard. It appears that under the Health Act, which
is an old Act, the powers of the corporation and inspector are very limited (q. 1099 et seq.). The inspector
cannot deal with authority with any building. He has to rely largely upon moral suasion in order to secure
structural improvements, and it would be in the interests of public health if the Act were modernised.
Evidence was tendered by J. H. Leahey, Assistant Town Clerk, that 319 of the employees at the Smelters
owned their homes (q. 1897). This represented, approximately, 17 per cent, of the whole. The Commission
understands that at the present time the housing in the town is barely adequate. New houses are being
erected, but not in great numbers, and many people board or live in apartments. Consequently with any
increase in the employment of married men there would be a serious house shortage.
51. The members of the Commission (with the exception of Mr. Commissioner Robinette) during their
visit to New South Wales inspected the works of Lewis Berger & Sons (Australia), Limited, at Rhodes,
and of the British Australian Lead Manufacturers Proprietary, Limited, at Cabarita. Both establishments
are situated on the Parramatta River, near Sydney. Berger’s works were erected in 1917, and about 100
men are employed in the lead corroding, paint manufacture, and varnish making departments. All these
operations involve a definite health hazard, but this, from the evidence of the Company’s officials, has been
so effectively controlled that only four cases of definite plumbism have occurred, and no case of plumbism
has been reported within the past two years. The loss of time among employees from occupational disease
or accident was stated to be less than one day per annum, and from all causes less than eight days per annum,
which is below the average for the Commonwealth, as recently given by the Federal Commission on National
Insurance (Dr. Rogers, q. 1556). This favorable position and the low incidence of plumbism were ascribed
to : — (a) The factory hygiene conditions being up to date. (6) The prevention of dust by the installation
of dust collectors throughout the buildings, enclosing the crushing and elevating machinery, and the pre-
vention of the accumulation of dust throughout the buildings. ( c ) The provision of washing facilities,
and an allowance of time before meals to permit of employees washing. ( d ) The supply by the Company
of clean overalls twice a week to prevent employees' ordinary clothing becoming contaminated with dust,
(e) The provision of respirators for the use of employees where there is any hazard from dust. (/) The
enforcement of personal hygiene, (g) A weekly medical inspection of the employees, with free medical
examination of employees who complain of ill-health (C. M. Taylor, q. 1614). The medical officer for the
works attributed the favorable results to co-operation 1 etween employer and employees, and gave it as


his experience that this was the determining factor in industrial hygiene. At the British Australian Com-
pany’s works operations are at present confined to the making of white lead mixed with oil. The plant
has been in operation about four years, and an average of 27 employees are actually engaged in the lead
processes. The reported cases of plumbism total nine, and the medical officer of the company stated that
most of these occurred soon after the commencement of operations, when the precautionary measures now
in force were not fully applied. The employees are supplied by the company with clean overalls daily,
and other preventive measures are applied on the same lines as those described as being in force at Berger s
works (evidence of Dr. Freeman and G. H. Podger, pp.
CHAPTER VI.
MATTERS RELATIVE TO THE INQUIRY —PREVENTIVE MEASURES ADOPTED IN OTHER
STATES AND COUNTRIES.
52. Amongst the important matters subordinately connected with the inquiry was the question of
the measures found to be effective for dealing with plumbism in other States and countries. Most of the
countries where lead is extensively mined, smelted, or used in have laws and regulations
governing the conduct of operations in lead metallurgical processes. In addition to making regulations
aiming at the prevention of the disease, most of the countries where lead is produced or smelted in important
quantities have in recent years made lead poisoning and its sequelae a compensable disease under Work-
men’s Compensation Acts. This course was adopted in Great Britain as far back as 1907, and in South
Australia in 1912. From the reported results the general experience has been that the passing of com-
pensation laws has usually been marked by an increase in the reported cases in any particular industry.
This must obviously be attributed to the fact that when a compensation law is in force a workman suffering
from a compensable disease has not the same motive for repressing mention of his illness. As a consequence,
a number of cases are reported which, if not of a serious character, would probably have been repressed
before the passing of a Compensation AcU Despite this fact, in Great Britain there is reported a continual
diminution in the number of cases of lead poisoning and in the severity of the cases. This is attributed
to enforced attention under statutory regulations to the suppression of dust, prevention of fume, and
personal cleanliness on the part of employees. In this connection a witness, with long experience, stated
that during the first two years after the introduction of statutory regulations in Great Britain the incidence
of plumbism amongst employees in British white lead works was reduced to a fifth of the number pre-
viously reported (G. H. Podger, q. 1711). In 1900 one thousand cases of industrial poisoning by lead
were recorded in England ; in 1922 the number has fallen to 200, though more lead was used. (“ Lead,”
Monographs on Industrial Chemistry, Smythe, p. 311).
53. At present two of the Australian States (New South Wales and Tasmania) have regulations aiming
at the prevention of plumbism applying to smelters, while South Australia and Queensland possess the
power under existing legislation to make such regulations. The precautions taken in the various States
and other countries are indicated by the following summary ;
New South Wales. —-Regulations under the Mines Inspection Act, 1901, provide for—(a)
Prevention of dust and fumes :—Adequate provision must be made to prevent the emission of
flue dust from smelter stacks. The outlets through which flue dust is removed from main flues
must discharge into otherwise unoccupied space. The floors on to which the dust falls must
be hard and impermeable, and provided with a curb raised above the surrounding surface so as
to prevent the deposited dust or mud from being carried about. The dust must be wetted as soon
as it is drawn from the flue. The accumulation of flue dust must not be allowed outside the
flue unless within a securely closed receptacle. Respirators must be provided for men handling
flue dust, and for any men in the vicinity of where it is being handled. Furnaces must be
surrounded with a hood to catch the fumes from molten metal and slag. The tapping floors
must be ventilated to allow the ready escape of fume. (6) Change house accommodation for
workmen, &c. ;—Properly lighted and warmed change houses and bath houses must be provided,
and the latter supplied with hot and cold water. A workman engaged in smelting or otherwise
handling lead ores must change his ordinary clothes for working clothes in the changing room
before beginning work, and change clothes again on finishing work, (c) Records :—The manager
of a works must keep a record of all cases of lead poisoning, whether certified or uncertified, and
report them monthly to the Mines Department on a prescribed form. (New South M ales Mines
Inspection Act, 1901, Rules and Regulations).
Tasmania.-— The regulations of this State have been made under the Mines and M T orks
Regulation Act, 1915, and are included under the heading of “ General Rules for Smelters.
The provisions require the prevention of dust and fume, &c., on smilar lines to those described
as being in force in New South Wales.
South Australia.— The Mines and Works Inspection Act of 1920, by subsections 11 and 13
of schedule 2, gives the Governor in Council power to make regulations for ; —The prevention


and laying of dust, the prevention of the escape of deleterious gases and fumes from any chemical
or meta lurgical process , the provision of changing and washing accommodation and the supply
of pure drinking water.
Queensland. The Mines Regulation Act (Consolidated) of 1911 gives similar powers to
those contained in the South Australian Mines and Works Inspection Act.
Great Britain.— The British regulations came into force in October, 1911, and May, 1912,
and were made under the powers of the Factory and Workshop Act of 1901. Lead material is
defined as material containing not less than 5 per cent, of lead. Under the regulations, smelters
and works owners are required to make the following provisions :—Prevention of dust and fumes ;
all floors must be maintained in good condition and sprayed with water at least once a day ; no
lead material other than ingots of metal may be deposited or allowed to remain on any part of
the floor not set apart for the purpose or be moved to a furnace (a) unless it is damp, or unless
there is an efficient exhaust draught; or (6) the lead material is enclosed so as to prevent escape
of dust, or (c) the persons moving the material wear respirators. The following operations
must be carried on under efficient exhaust draught, or in such manner as to prevent the escape of
gas vapor, fumes, or dust into any place in which work is carried on — (a) Melting lead or dirty
scrap lead ; ( b ) heating lead material so that vapor containing lead is given off ; (c) cooling molten
flake litharge ; {d) feeding any furnace or retort ; ( e ) manipulating any lead material in any furnace
or retort; (/) removing lead material from any furnace or retort ; ( g ) placing in any hopper or
packing red or orange lead or flaked litharge. Overalls must be provided for workmen engaged
in certain specified operations, and such overalls must be washed clean or removed at least once
a week. Respirators must be provided where required, and those in use must be washed or
renewed every day. Meal rooms, change rooms, and a place for the storage of overalls must be
provided and maintained in good condition. Lavatory and bath accommodation must be pro-
vided. Every person employed in a lead process must be medically examined once in every
calendar month and a health register must be kept. After suspension, owing to illness, no person
may be re-employed in a lead process without obtaining a certificate from the examining surgeon
appointed by the Chief Inspector of Factories. As regards employees engaged in lead processes,
it is specified that clothing must be deposited in the dressing-rooms ; that the employees must
wash before eating, and that no person, except with the consent of the management, can interfere
with the means provided for the removal of gas, fumes, or dust. Under the Act passed in 1920
dealing with the employment of women and young persons in lead processes the main regulations
were added to by provisions enforcing (a) cleanliness of workrooms and tools, and ( b ) notification
to the Government authorities of all cases of lead poisoning. (“ Laws and Regulations relating
to Lead Poisoning,” by Gilbert Stone, p. 68.)
France. —A decree enacted .in 1913 relating to a large number of lead-working operations,
in addition to the smelting of lead ores, contained provisions applying to smelters similar to those
included in the British regulations. (“ Laws and Regulations relating to Lead Poisoning,” p. 18.)
Germany. —The original German regulations were made in 1905, and cover the subjects dealt
with by the British regulations. They also include provisions for the prevention of dust collecting
within buildings in which lead processes are carried on. (“Laws and Regulations relating to Lead
Poisoning,’ p. 19.)
Austria. —Regulations were adopted in 1901 similar in the main provisions to the German
regulations. (“ Laws and Regulations relating to Lead Poisoning,” pp. 21, 183.”) These
were revised in 1923 and the latest regulations deal with the design of new works, including
the lighting and ventilation of buildings, the prevention of dust, the collection of fumes, the supply
of drinking water, persons who may be employed, hours of labor, and medical supervision of health
of workmen. They also include a notice which describes the danger of lead poisoning and means
for its prevention, a copy of which must be issued free of charge to every workman. (International
Labor Office Publications, Legislative Series, 1923, I.)
United States. —The only State with definite legislation against lead poisoning is Missouri,
the Health and Safety Act, 1913, of that State including provisions applicable to smelting works.
(“ Laws and Regulations relating to Lead Poisoning,” pp. 212-215.) These follow generally the
lines of the British regulations as far as dust, fumes, changing and washing accommodation are
concerned. The Act also provides for all occupational or industrial diseases being notified to the
State Board of Health, and prescribes penalties for any medical officer failing to comply with this
section. In the State of New Jersey the Commissioner of Labor in 1914 circularised the lead and
copper smelting companies of that State, drawing attention to the danger from dust and fumes
in those industries and outlining regulations designed to reduce the hazard of the workmen
employed in smelters. (“ Laws and Regulations relating to Lead Poisoning,” pp. 21, 183.)


54. With regard to the practice concerning industrial disease amongst employees of the Broken Hil
Associated Smelters at Port Pirie, under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1911, a workman who believes
himself to be suffering from industrial disease is required to obtain a certificate from a qualified medical
practitioner to the effect that the subject is suffering from industrial disease. In the event of either the
company or the man being dissatisfied with the diagnosis, the case is referred to a medical referee, whose
decision is final. If a man is found to be suffering from a compensable disease compensation is paid weekly
or fortnightly on production of a certificate to the effect that the subject is still incapacitated from work.
It is also the practice to compound with men certified as suffering from plumbism by a lump sum payment
on the basis of the estimated disability as assessed by the certifying practitioner or medical referee. In
some cases the amount paid has been settled by arrangement between the company’s representative and a
union representative, and in others it has been referred to a magistrate for decision. For the purposes of
record, it may be stated that persons seeking employment ait the Broken Hill Associated Smelters must secure
a certificate of fitness from a duly registered medical practitioner (PI. St. J. Somerset, q. 920 et seq.).
CHAPTER VII.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.
REDUCTION OF HAZARD.
55. The Commission has given much attention to the best method for dealing with and, as far as possible,
for preventing plumbism and other industrial disease. There is undoubted evidence that the evils disclosed
are sufficiently grave to necessitate immediate action in the direction of the promulgation of regulations
under the Mines and Works Inspection Act, thus enabling closer supervision by the Government department
concerned. The need for preventive measures is based on two main points of view :■—(1) From the humani-
tarian aspect of the effects on the health and wellbeing of the employee ; and (2) from the aspect of the
economic effect on the industry.
56. Reduction of Hazard from Dust and Fume. —The principal cause of industrial plumbism is the
inhalation of lead in the form of fine dust. Certain authorities state that about 2 milligrammes or 0-002
grammes of lead is the lowest dose which, inhaled daily as dust and fume, may in the course of time set up
chronic plumbism (“ Memorandum on Industrial Lead Poisoning ” form 324, 1921, Factory Department,
Home Office, p. 12). Professor Chapman, in evidence, states that in his opinion a smaller dose would pro-
duce this effect (q. 1755). To prevent the liability it is imperative that, as far as possible, accumulations
of dust should be prevented, and fumes and noxious gases to be collected, as near as possible, to the point of
origin in order to preclude contamination of the atmosphere of working places. Dust should be collected,
preferably, in moist condition, and disposed of in such a manner as to minimise danger to those engaged
in handling it. Already the company has, as is shown in evidence by H. St. J. Somerset and G. Dey, had
in progress a large programme of alterations and additions which will, in the opinion of the Commission,
materially improve the working conditions and reduce the health hazard. Under this category come such
items as—
(а) The extension of the water service to cover all places of storage for lead-bearing materials
(G. Dey, q. 555).
(б) The building of a completely new set of mixing bins at the Dwight & Lloyd plant (H. St. J.
Somerset, q. 2197 et seq.).
(c) The completion of the bag houses for the gases from both sections of the Dwight & Lloyd
plant (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 268).
{d) The installation of the more powerful fans now on order (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 321) for deliver-
ing fumes into and for drawing them from the main blast furnace bag house.
In addition to these, other items which the Commission considers should receive urgent attention are —
{aa) The effective hooding of the discharge from “ A ” section of the Dwight & Lloyd plant, and
of the crusher used to reduce material from the same section.
{bb) The improvement of service roads within the works area and their maintenance in such a
condition as to prevent the dust from them affecting working places (q. 2383).
(cc) The cleaning of the floors, walls, and rafters of all buildings, and the keeping of them, as
far as practicable, free from the accumulation of dust.
(dd) The enclosing of conveyor belts, and provision of arrangements for damping spillage and for
its removal at regular intervals.
57. These matters, with others not here specified, are covered by the detailed special regulations which
the Commission recommend to be applied to the works under the powers contained in the Mines and Works
Inspection Act, 1920. Among the places where conditions in respect of dust were bad was the Zinc
Roasting Plant. Regarding this section, the Commission was informed by Mr. Commissioner Gepp that
as General Manager of the Electrolytic Zinc Company, he had authorised the expenditure necessary to
remodel portions of that plant in order to reduce the present hazard and make the conditions in conformity
with the suggested regulations to apply to the industry; further, that the necessarv alterations are


approaching completion (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 2200). Another source of origin of considerable dust,
and fume laden steam has been the practice of tipping the sintered material from the Huntington-
Heberlein pots as soon as the charge is cooked. The practice is now being considerably modified by
reducing the tonnage treated in that section, and allowing as long as 16 hours for the charge to cool prior
to tipping. This should effect substantial improvement in the conditions for the workmen engaged on
the pots and in adjacent areas (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 331).
58. In connection with the tapping of the lead bullion from the blast furnaces, the practice of running
into small moulds causes the liberation of lead-bearing fume. A mechanical transport system which will
handle this bullion on more efficient lines is being installed (H. St. J. Somerset, q. 283), and the Com-
mission has been informed that, since its last inspection, this plant has been put into partial operation,
b nder the new arrangements the bullion will be tapped into covered ladels and handled by an electric crane
instead of by manual labor. This should enable the bullion running spouts to be effectrvely hooded, and
the fume to be carried off by efficient exhaust ventilation with a corresponding reduction in the hazard
to the employees engaged around the blast furnaces.
59. While the terms of the reference of the Commission deal only with plumbism, the possible danger
to the health of the smelter employees from carbon monoxide poisoning has been so far established that
the Commission considers preventive measures should be observed in conjunction with those for dealing
with plumbism. These should comprise the collection of all gases and fumes, as near as practicable, to
the point of origin by means of efficient exhaust draught. The use of suitable respirators in doubtful
atmospheres, a regular study of the conditions by gas surveys, &c., limitation of exposure, and the educa-
tion of all concerned in the hazard.
60. In respect to the regulations for the control of the working conditions at the smelters the Com-
mission is unanimously of opinion that the enforcement of them should be vested in the State Mines
Department, which administers the Mines and Works Inspection Act. Further, that an official of this
department should be specially charged with the responsibility of seeing that they are observed and that
adequate means are evolved for complying with the various provisions. The Commission is convinced
that satisfactory results can only be secured by full co-operation between the employees, the management,
and the supervising inspector ; and it is considered that the appointment of a check inspector under the
Mines and Works Inspection Act by the employees would be a material factor in assisting to achieve this
object. The Commission also considers that from time to time the supervising inspector should arrange
conferences between himself, a representative of the management, and the workmen's inspector in order
to discuss details of the administration of the regulations and to devise further safeguards.
Medical Services and Compensation.
61. The Commission cannot settle the vexed question raised by the medical evidence as to how much
■of the serious increase in the incidence of industrial disease amongst employees of the Broken Hill Associated
Smelters Proprietary, Limited, at Port Pirie is due to plumbism or, as has been suggested, to carbon monor ide
poisoning or some other concurrent disease that has not yet been accurately diagnosed. The Commission
believes that carbon monoxide gas forms a portion of the industrial hazard at the smelters, and considers
on this account that industrial carbon monoxide poisoning should be made a compensable disease under
the Workmen s Compensation Act of 1911. The Commission realises chronic poisoning by this gas is at
present regarded as an ill-defined state concerning the diagnosis of which many opinions exist, but antici-
pates that research work at present in progress throughout the world will result in the establishment of
certain criteria which will obviate this difficulty. In the opinion of the Commission if carbon monoxide
poisoning be made a compensable disease it is essential that a body such as the Federal Department of
Health, should he asked to make an investigation with a view to establishing definite criteria of diagnosis
of the disease for the help of medical practitioners. In dealing with the matter of plumbism, authorities
state that certain persons are naturally susceptible to the effects of lead intake. Consideration has been
given by the Commission to this aspect, and it is of the opinion that employees who are found to be sus-
ceptible should be removed from further exposure to the hazard, or withdrawn from employment in the
Smelters. The Commission regard it as equitable that provision for compensation of these susceptibles,
if withdrawn, should be made, and that the basis for compensation should, if possible, be settled by dis-
cussion between the interested Unions and the representatives of the company.
62. The local medical practitioners, in evidence, expressed the desire that they as individuals should be
relieved from the responsibility of assessing the incapacity caused by plumbism under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act (Dr. Tassie, q. 1219). It is considered that different methods should be introduced
and a recommendation is included covering this matter. A majority of the Commission are of the opinion
that the health of the employees at the smelters would be further safeguarded by regular medical inspection
at periods varying according to the hazard in various operations. This practice is almost universally
adopted in other States and countries with similar industries, and medical witnesses before the Commission
expressed the opinion that such inspection would be an important factor in preventing industrial disease
by warning the cases showing early symptoms (Dr. Tassie, q. 1227 ; Dr. Yeatman, q. 1346 ; and Dr.


Morris q 1412) In view of the opposition of the men certified as suffering from plumbism to examina-
tion by the Commission’s medical experts, as well as from the statement of the employees’ representative
(Mr Commissioner Robinette) that a large majority, if not all, of the employees at the smelters would
object to any arrangement for inspection by a company’s medical officer, the other members of the Commis-
sion consider that no useful purpose would be served by making a definite recommendation on the subject.
It is, therefore, suggested that the matter should be considered in conference by representatives of the
management and of the employees’ unions with a view to arriving at some acceptable arrangement. From
September 1920 to March, 1921, the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited, had attached
to their stall a highly qualified medical officer, but co-operation of the men necessary to ensure results was
not obtained, and the works since that date, except for the provision of a first-aid station, have been without
a staff medical service.
63. Practically all the medical witnesses expressed the opinion that the proper care of the mouth and
teeth were an important factor in preventing lead poisoning (Dr. Tassie, qs. 1229-31 ; Dr. Yeatman, q.
1369 • Dr Morris q. 1414 ; Dr. Rogers, q. 1575 ; Dr. Freeman, q. 1675). On this matter the Commission
unanimously adopted the following resolution That in the opinion of this Commission the care of the
teeth amongst the smelter employees is an important factor in preventing lead poisoning, and that in view
of this facilities for dental treatment should be made available at Port Pirie for all smelter employees at the
lowest possible rates.” ...
64. Care on the part of the employees is a necessary condition in the prevention of plumbism, and
personal hygiene is a matter of utmost importance with those who are employed among lead risks. Atten-
tion should be directed to the following points :—Personal cleanliness and changing of clothes after work;
abstention from eating except in places set apart for the purpose ; the wearing of overalls and respirator*
when engaged in certain specific hazardous jobs ; care of the teeth and gums ; abstention by the employees
from the making of cigarettes and the cutting or rolling of tobacco when engaged in lead processes. A
number of these matters are dealt with in detail in the proposed regulations, and personal compliance with
the provisions set out will limit the occupational health risk.
l/JUV v " - JL f
65. With regard to housing, in the opinion of the Commission it is desirable that as far as possible
married men should be encouraged to work in such an important key industry as the smelters, and the
housing position is one that would require early attention were any considerable number of additional
families located in the town. The Commission considers it very desirable that the Government, the com-
pany, and the employees should, in co-operation, face the question of housing. From the provision of suffi-
cient homes of a good standard, under a scheme which would be based preferably upon the idea of personal
ownership rather than rental, substantial public good would accrue.
66. The Commission again wishes to emphasise the fact that in order to achieve the best results in the
elimination of industrial disease at the Smelters, complete co-operation between the company, the unions
representing the employees, and the Mines Department representing the Government, is necessary. On
the part of all concerned full and minute attention must be paid to details of dust prevention and other
matters dealt with in the proposed regulations. On the part of the company there must be a continuance
of efforts directed toward improving the conditions of work, and also toward the education of employees
concerning the hazards of the occupation and the best means of avoiding harm from them. On the part
of the men and the company there must be careful observance of regulations framed for the purpose of
preserving the health of the employees.
Authorities Consulted.
In the course of its investigations the Commission has had to consult a large number of works of reference
and periodical publications, and from these sources has obtained much valuable information. The most
important are listed among the appendices.
CHAPTER VIII.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
67. According to the terms of reference the Commission has been instructed to inquire into the cause
or causes of the disease known as plumbism, the increase thereof among the employees of the Broken Hill
Associated Smelters, Proprietary, Limited, at Port Pirie, and the best means for the prevention or alleviation
thereof. The Commission finds
(1) The cause of plumbism is the taking into the body of lead-bearing dust or fume. This process
occurs mainly by means of absorption into the body through the respiratory tract, and in a less degree
through the alimentary tract by ingestion. The lead in the body is eliminated by the natural excretory
apparatus of the body, but when the rate of absorption exceeds the rate of elimination, an accumulation
of lead in the system ensues, resulting in damage to body parts, chiefly blood vessels and nerves, and resulting
in lead poisoning or plumbism. As previously mentioned in paragraph 61 and elsewhere, the Commission
is of the opinion that carbon monoxide gas exists as a hazard at the Smelters, and that, therefore, plumbism
as known at Port Pirie presents in certain cases a complex in which the symptoms of carton monoxide
poisoning and of lead poisoning run concurrently in varying proportions.


(2) As before stated, a very marked increase in the number of reported cases of plumbism among the
employees at the Broken Hill Associated Smelters at Port Pirie has occurred within the last four years.
The actual increase in the number of cases diagnosed as and treated for plumbism in Port Pirie, however,
is not so great as it would appear, owing to the fact that during the years 1911-17 inclusive advantage was
not taken of the fact that plumbism was a compensable disease. It has been shown that in some of those
years upwards of oO cases have been treated in the local hospital, and that a total of 219 cases was treated.
Notwithstanding this fact, the numbers of cases compensated for 1923 and 1924 show a very large increase
over previous years, k rom the evidence submitted to the Commission and the results of inspections of
the works, the Commission is of the opinion that the principal causes of this increase in reported cases may
be stated as follows :
(a) The increased tonnage of lead-bearing material being handled for treatment in a comparatively
limited area.
(h) Ihe change in the physical character of the ores and concentrates treated, owing to the inclusion
in the deliveries from supplying companies of a greater proportion of fine slime products
and a possible increase in the dust created in the smelting operations.
(c) The change in the composition of the working force at the Smelters due to the increased number
of Southern Europeans employed, amongst whom the incidence of industrial disease is
greater. There is no definite evidence that this class of foreigners is more susceptible by
nature, but there appears to be an increased liability to industrial disease among them,
which may be attributed to (i) deficient knowledge of the English language, which causes
their employment mainly on laboring work in the operating departments, where the greatest
hazard exists, and prevents full understanding of the nature of this hazard and the means
of prevention ; (ii) a lower standard of living amongst a certain proportion of them than
exists amongst British-born and Northern European workmen ; (iii) recent arrival in Aus-
tralia, as is the case with a large proportion of the employees, with the attendant changes
of climate, occupation, and diet, reduces for a time their physical tone and renders them
temporarily at least more susceptible.
A contributing factor to the increase may be that modern methods of medical diagnosis are the means of
-determining cases as plumbism which would formerly have been designated chronic gastritis and other
diseases (Dr. Tassie, q. 1199. Dr. Yeatman, q. 1313).
(3) As a result of careful investigation, the Commission finds that three essential principles must be
observed in defining the best means of alleviating or presenting industrial plumbism, namely, the prevention
of the escape of fumes ; the reduction to a minimum of dust; and the education of the personnel in the
avoidance of the hazard.
The Commission, therefore, respectfully submits the following recommendations :
For the Supervision of Operations at the Smelters.
1. That, for inspection purposes, the Broken Hill Associated Smelters at Poit Pirie, apart from boiler
inspection, be brought solely under the Mines and Works Inspection Act, 1920, and that the following
regulations under this Act he made :
Definitions.
1. In these regulations, unless some other meaning is clearly intended,
“ Lead process ” means any process for the treatment of lead material for the recovery
of lead products and by-products :
“ Lead materials ” means materials containing not less than 2J per cent, of lead :
“ Owner ” means the owner of the mine or works :
“ Agent ” means the agent of the mine or works :
“ Manager ” means the manager of the mine or works :
“ Prescribed medical authority ” means the medical authority appointed for the purpose
of certification for compensation for industrial diseases among the employees of the
Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited, at Port Pirie :
“ Inspector ” means an inspector appointed under the Mines and Works Inspection Act,
1920.
Warning Notice.
2. In any place where any lead process is carried on so as to cause dust, or fume, or gas in the
atmosphere, the owner, agent, or manager shall exhibit to the satisfaction of an inspector notices
in the following terms :
Warning Notice.
Persons working in or about these works may take dust or fumes or gas into their bodies.
Danger to health may arise from the inhalation of—
(n) lead dust in suspension in the atmosphere :
(b) fumes given off by molten lead :
(c) carbon monoxide gas.


Early treatment prevents permanent injury to health from any of these causes. Persons-
suspecting themselves to he affected in any degree by lead or sufiering from headache, presistent
loss of appetite, constipation of the bowels, frequent nausea and vomiting, weakness in the
arms or legs, dizziness, pallor of the skin, lassitude or a foul mouth or foetid breath should
present themselves for medical examination.
This notice is exhibited in accordance with the regulations made under the Mines and
Works Inspection Act, 1920.
(Sgd.) • • •
Manager.
Posting of Regulations.
3. The owner, agent, or manager shall cause —
(a) legible copies of these regulations to be exhibited in conspicuous places throughout
the mine or works to the satisfaction of an inspector :
(b) a copy of these regulations to be handed to each person who is employed at the mine
or works at the time of coming into force of these regulations, and to each new
employee before commencing work, and shall keep an official record showing that
each employee has been supplied with a copy of these regulations as aforesaid.
Notification of Industrial Disease.
4. When in the opinion of the prescribed medical authority, after examination, any person
employed at the mine or works is suffering from any disease resulting from his employment, a report
shall be made by such medical authority in the prescribed form under the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1911, to an inspector.
Storage of Lead Materials.
5. The owner, agent, or manager shall cause all lead materials to be stored in such places as
an inspector directs, and whilst so stored such lead materials sliall be maintained in such a con-
dition as to prevent dust arising therefrom.
Handling and Manipulation of Lead Materials.
6. The owner, agent, or manager shall cause all lead materials in process of transit from one
place to another precedent to and during the process of treatment and/or being manipulated in
any furnace, retort, mill, or chamber, as far as practicable, to be handled and/or manipulated in
such manner as to prevent dust, fumes, and/or gas being liberated in the atmosphere of working
places.
Flue Dust.
7. (1) The owner, agent, or manager shall make adequate provision to prevent, as far as
practicable, the emission of flue dust from smelter stacks. If an inspector considers any alteration
or any additional appliances are necessary for these purposes, he may, by written notice, require
the owner, agent, or manager to make or supply the same, and'in such notice a reasonable time shall
be specified within which such required alterations or additions shall be made. If the owner, agent,
or manager objects to any requirements of an inspector in this direction, he may, within the time
specified in the notice, show cause in writing to the Chief Inspector of Mines, appointed under the
Mines and Works Inspection Act, 1920, who may confirm, vary, or veto the notice of an inspector.
No owner, agent, or manager shall fail to comply with the directions of an inspector unless such
directions have been vetoed or varied by the Chief Inspector of Mines. When the Chief Inspector
of Mines varies the direction of an inspector, no owner, agent, or manager shall fail to comply with
such varied directions.
Flue Dust —How to be Dealt with.
(2) (a) The owner, agent, or manager shall not allow the ports by which flue dust is removed
from main flues to open into the tapping floors, but the outlets shall be on the
other side of the flues into a space otherwise unoccupied.
( h ) The owner, agent, or manager shall cause the floors to which the dust falls when first
hoed out to be smooth and impermeable, and to be provided with a kerb raised
above the surrounding surface so that the deposit of dust and mud may not be
stepped on and carried about; the floors shall be perfectly clean except when in
actual use.
(c) Workmen employed to cleanse flues and to gather and transport flue dust shall change
clothes before going on shift and when leaving work.
(i d ) The owner, agent, or manager shall not allow any person to be so employed unless
such person uses a suitable respirator to cover his nose and mouth, or to engage in
work where other persons are so employed unless such person uses a respirator.
(e) The owner, agent, or manager shall cause the flue dust to be carefully wetted as soon
as it is drawn from the flue, and shall not permit the accumulation of wet flue dust
except within a securely closed receptacle ; and shall not permit any accumulation
of dry flue dust outside the flues.
Ventilation of Tapping Floor.
(3) (a) The owner, agent, or manager shall cause all tapping floors to be ventilated to the satis-
faction of an inspector.
( h ) The owner, agent, or manager shall cause all noxious fumes and/or gases being dis-
charged to atmosphere to be discharged at such height from the ground level as an
inspector may direct.


o rn. . Persons Entering Furnaces, Etc.
f rofArf 0 °" n ' ’> ' Ol manager shall not allow any person to enter into any furnace, melting
nracticflhlp* + C °v ° &m >er ’. ot ue as been ventilated, provided that where it is not
i n ° 611 V* ( same > suitable respirators shall be supplied bv the owner and shall be used
by tne persons employed.
Persons Employed in Flues.
• ®on net, agent, or manager shall not allow any person to remain in any flue not under
e ,■ C , ( * rang it or in any condensing chamber for more than three hours without an interval
of at least half an hour.
Provision for Standpipes and Hoses.
, • agent, or manager shall provide standpipes and hoses or other suitable con-
nvances on eei oors, tapping floors, and at every other place where dust is raised, so that dust
may be conveniently laid by sprinkling water.
Ventilation.
11. The owner agent, or manager shall cause all buildings in which lead processes are carried on
o ie adequately and constantly ventilated and the floors, walls, and rafters of all buildings to be as
far as practicable kept free from accumulations of dust.
4b
Maintenance of Roads.
12. ihe owner, agent, or manager shall maintain, as far as practicable, the service roads within
the mine or w orks area in such a condition as to prevent dust arising.
Provision of Overalls.
13. Ihe owner, agent, or manager shall provide suitable overalls for the use of all persons em-
ployed in am of the following processes, which overalls when required for use shall always be clean
and free from dust, and when in use shall be worn in such a manner as to protect the underclothes
and the body from dust :
(a) Cleaning any flue (unless damp) or condensing chamber :
(/>) Demolishing any furnace, melting pot, retort, condensing chamber, or flue, unless either
damp or under sufficient exhaust draught :
(c) Doing repairs inside any furnace, melting pot, retort, condensing chamber, or Hue with
material which has formed part of any such structure unless damp :
{(I) Breaking up, crushing, or grinding in the process of sampling lead material, unless
either damp or closed in an apparatus so enclosed as to prevent the escape of dust :
(c) Placing in any hopper or chute or packing red or orange lead or litharge.
Respirators.
14. The owner, agent, or manager shall provide suitable respirators for the use of all persons
employed in any process named in Regulation 13, and also in other places and on such other occasions
as an inspector, after consultation wdth representatives of the ow r ner and the employees, mav direct.
Meal Rooms, Etc.
15. The owrner, agent, or manager shall provide and maintain for the use of all persons employed
in any lead process and so that such places shall not be exposed to dust or fumes from any manu-
facturing process — .
(a) A suitable meal room or rooms situated with due regard to the maintenance of cleanliness
and hygiene, and adjacent thereto suitable arrangements for the washing of hands
and face prior to taking food and with either warm water laid on or with a supply
of hot water always at hand ; also boiling water for tea making as required.
(b ) A suitable place or places for the storage of overalls provided in pursuance of Regulation
13, which place or places shall be separate from those required by paragraph (a) of
this regulation.
f*) In or adjacent to such meal rooms suitable indiv' iual locker accommodation (and the
doors supplied wdth hasp and staple) to enable storage of food, soap, and tow r el.
Change Houses, Washing, and Bathing Places adjacent to or in connection
with Change Houses.
16. The owrner shall provide and maintain in a cleanly state and in good repair for the use of all
persons regularly employed in any lead process —-
{a) Adequate and suitable change house accommodation. Such change houses shall be
properly w r armed and ventilated with provision to carry off the steam and vapor
from the showers and w r ash basins, and wdth provision for drying working clothes.
The floors shall have smooth and impermeable surfaces so that they can be readily
cleaned. »
(6) Adequate lavatory accommodation with either —
(i.) a trough with a smooth impervious surface fitted with a waste pipe, without
plug, and of such length as to allow at least 2ft. for every five persons
regularly employed at one time, and having a constant supply of w'arrn
water from taps or jets above the trough at intervals of not more than
2ft; or
(n.) at least one lavatory basin for every five persons regularly employed at one time
fitted with a waste pipe and plug and having a constant supply of hot
and cold water or warm w r ater laid on.
(c) Sufficient and suitable shower bath accommodation wdth an ample supply of hot and
cold water laid on.


Drinking Water.
17 The owner agent, or manager shall provide an ample sup] ly of sweet and wholesome drinking
water, which shall at all times be freely and easily available to all persons employed. It shall be
stored in such a manner as to prevent contamination bx dust.
Duties of Persons Employed.
18. (1) Every person employed in any lead process shall deposit in the place or places pro-
vided in pursuance of Regulation 16 all clothing put off during working hours.
(2) Every person for whose use an overall is provided, in pursuance of Regulation 13, shall wear
the overall when employed in any process named in that Regulation, and shall remove it before
partaking of food or leaving the premises, and deposit it in the place provided in Regulation 15.
(3) Every person for whose use a respirator is provided, in pursuance Oi Regulation 11, shall
wear the respirator in the process for which it is provided. .
(1) Every person employed in any lead process or in any .place where anv lead process is being
carried on shall, before partaking of food, wash his face and hands.
(5) No person employed shall introduce, keep, prepare, or partake of any food or drink except
a non-alcoholic drink in any place in which anv lead process is carried on.
(6) No person employed shall make cigarettes or cut or roll tobacco in any place where any lead
process is bein? carried on.
Interference with Equipment.
19. No person employed shall interfere in any way without the concurrence of the owner or
manager of the mine or works with the means provided lor the removal of gas, vapour, fumes, and
dust, and for the carrying out of these regulations.
Penalties.
20. Any person who commits a breach of anv of these regulations shall be guiltv of an offence,
and shall, if no other penalty is prescribed, lie liable to a penalty not exceeding tor the first offence
£2O and for a subsequent offer.ee £lOO.
2. That an official of the Mines Department be specially charged with the responsibility of seeing
that the regulations under the Mines and Works Inspection Act,. 1920, as recommended, are observed, and
that adequate means are devised for complying with them.
3. That a workmen’s check inspector be appointed, and that should there be any doubt as to power
to appoint such workmen’s inspector at the Broken Hill Associated bmelters, 1 ort Pirie, under section 12
of the Mines and Works Inspection Act, the Act be amended to enable the appointment of such an inspector
by the workmen with the same powers as are defined in the Act.
4. That from time to time the supervising inspector under the Mines and Works Inspection Act arrange
conferences between himself, the representative of the management, and the workmen’s check inspector
in order to discuss details of the administration of the regulations and to devise further safeguards.
XI.-—Medical Certification and Compensation for Industrial Disease.
5. That a special Workmen's Compensation Act be passed having application only to industrial hazard
at the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie.
(a) That under this Special Act provision be made for the appointment by the Government
of a Medical Board, consisting of three duly qualified medical practitioners, one of whom
to be nominated by the management, one by the employees’ unions, and the third as
chairman, who would be the local officer of health for the time being located at T ort Pirie,
to be nominated by the Government.
(b) That the appointments to this board be for the duration of two years and renewable for like
periods.
(c) That this board exclusively exercise the duties of certifying surgeon and referee as provided
in the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1911 in respect of workmen disabled by any
disease mentioned in Schedule 3 of the principal Act or in the special Act recommended
as applying to the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie.
{(I) That the board have power to determine the period of incapacity of any workman in the
degree of his disability in respect to earning full wages at the work at which he was
previously employed.
(e) That the decision of the board in respect to determining such period of incapacity and degree
of disability shall be final.
(/) That the board be paid from consolidated revenue, the fees to be based on those paid to the
Medical Board constituted under the Workmen’s Compensation (Broken Hill-Lead
Poisoning) Act, 1922.
(g) That any workman who is in receipt of compensation for disablement by industrial disease
should, unless the board declare in writing that it is unnecessary for him so to do, submit
himself for treatment by a qualified medical practitioner selected by himself, either as
a hospital patient or otherwise, as the board may determine. The board should have


c iscretion to require any such workman to submit himself to treatment by an approved
medical practitioner provided and paid for by the employer. The employer should at
tlu dire etion of the board provide and pay a qualified medical practitioner to give
such treatment.
(h) 1 hat if aii} such workman refuse to submit himself for any such treatment or obstruct same
his right to compensation should be suspended or cancelled.
(Jc) That each payment for compensation should be made only on the production of a fresh
certificate from the board.
{I) That notwithstanding section 14, subsection 2, of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1911,
there should be no bar to a medical practitioner who has acted in his professional capacity
in connection with any case of specified industrial disease, or who has treated a person
so suffering, from acting as a member of the board, and dealing with such case, provided
that he has been duly appointed a member of the board.
( m ) U iat i )e obligatory for any medical practitioner attending any workman believed to be
suffering from industrial disease contracted at the Broken Hill Associated Smelters to
give notice to the board.
(-/) That the board have power to require any workman so notified as suffering or suspected
to be suffering from industrial disease to present himself to the board for the purpose
of being medically examined. Any person failing to comply with this provision should
forfeit his right to compensation.
(o) 1 hat it be made obligatory for the board to furnish to such workman a certificate of the
result of the examination, stating whether he is or is not suffering from any of the specified
industrial diseases, and to supply the employer with a copy of such certificate.
(P) That tl ie board be given power to certify that any workman previously certified as suffering
from plumbism who has recovered therefrom and who, in the opinion of the board, is
susceptible to further attack, should be removed from further exposure to the hazard
or withdrawn from employment in the Broken Hill Associated Smelters.
(?) I hat provision for compensation of workmen so certified as susceptible be made, and that
the representatives of employers and employees' unions meet in conference and endeavor
to arrive at a satisfactory basis of compensation.
6. I hat carbon monoxide poisoning be made a compensable disease under the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1911 (vide para. 61).
lll.— Gexeral.
7. That, as the medical evidence was unanimously to the effect that in such an industry as that of the
Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, a respite once a week is desirable in the health interest of the
employees, the working time should, save under exceptional circumstances, be six shifts per week, instead
of the average of seven shifts per week as at present on production work.
8. That a body such as the Federal Department of Health be asked to make an investigation with a
view to establishing criteria of diagnosis for plumbism and carbon monoxide poisoning for the help of medical
practitioners.
The Commission is of opinion that with the completion of the programme of construction, alteration,
and improvement on which the company has been engaged for some time, and of the further work in the
same direction covered by the Commission’s recommendations, and provided that the Commission’s recom-
mendations as a whole be adopted, and that the various suggestions by the Commission contained in this
report also be put into operation, as far as proves practicable, there will be a marked and satisfactory
improvement in the position at Port Pine.
We have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your Excellency’s obedient servants,
KEITH R. MOORE,
J. L. PEARSON.
Chairman
HERBERT W. GEPP.
W. ROBINETTE,
(subject to dissent).
J. SINCOCK,
Secretary.
Parliament House, Adelaide, July 14th, 1925.


DISSENT.
I dissent from the Commission’s report, and in doing so have no desire to reflect on the
collective judgment of the majority of the Commission. My principal reasons for dissenting are —
(1) Compulsory Medical Examination. — Although the Commission does not in its report make a
definite recommendation in regard to compulsory medical examination, nevertheless the report may have
a far-reaching effect in that direction. I object to any form of medical examination, whether voluntary
or compulsory, believing that it would not tend to reduce the industrial hazard as it is claimed to do .
Before any move is made in that regard, I am of the opinion that the company should exhaust every effort
to eliminate dust and fumes, which, according to medical evidence, are the principal causes of the prevalent
industrial diseases at the Smelters. The weight of medical evidence would appear to be in favor of medical
supervision of workers at the Smelters, but on reviewing the situation it will be found that no good purpose
would be served by it. It is apparent from the evidence given before the Commission, and from its inspec-
tions of the works, that before any attempt at medical examination of the men at the Smelters is made
it is imperative that the hazard should be attacked at its base, and the only successful method of accom-
plishing that is the adoption of scientific methods to eliminate the dust and fumes. Compulsion of any
kind is repugnant to Australian sentiment, and I am confident that any attempt a t compulsory examination
of men working at the Smelters would foment a serious industrial upheaval.
It would be grossly unfair to compel workmen periodically to submit themselves to a medical
examination without some scheme being provided for adequate compensation of those men found to be
in the first stages of, or susceptible to, an industrial disease. Even then such a provision would not tend
to industrial peace. No doubt the effect of having compulsory medical examination would lessen the
number of cases of industrial diseases to be compensated by the company, by reason of the fact that it
would place a weapon in the employers’ hands to be unfairly used against the workers, in that workmen
found to be suffering from, or susceptible to, industrial diseases would be dismissed from their employment.
As a matter of fact the company have already commenced upon a campaign of “ weeding out ” those men
who have been suffering from plumbism, and have teen medically certified as fit to return to worn. Mr.
Somerset, General Superintendent for the Company, admitted in evidence (q. 1290) that 29 such men had
been refused re-employment; but the records kept by the Australian Workers’ Union would show a greater
number than that admitted by Mr. Somerset, ft is reasonable, then, to assume that the company would
be more ruthless if in a position to know the state or health of their employees individually. 1 am, therefore,
of the opinion that compulsory medical examination would only serve the interests of the employer. In
view of the above facts it cannot be honestly claimed that compulsory medical examination would play
even a small part in preventing industrial diseases at the Smelters. As I have pointed out, it would reduce
the number of cases of industrial diseases at the Smelters, but industrial disease would still be prevalent
even to a greater extent in the community. Men whose health was partially impaired by industrial
diseases would be thrown into other avenues of employment, and it would eventually be found that com-
pulsory medical examination had been responsible for the effects of industrial diseases being prevalent
among a greater number of workers in the State than would have been the case without compulsory medical
examination.
. (2) Medical Certification and Compensation for Industrial Diseases. — Whilst lam not in full accord
with the creation of a new Workmen’s Compensation Act applying to Port Pirie, or the appointment of
a Medical Board there, I consider some alteration is necessary ; but whether a special Act or an amend-
ment of the existing Act is preferable I consider should be a matter for Cabinet to determine. I wish it
to be clearly understood that I oppose the creation of any board except the personnel consists of duly
qualified medical men in hona-fide general practice at Port Pirie, and provided that no doctor retained by
either the company or the employees’ unions, or the employees as a body, should be permitted to sit on
the board. I object to the board proposed by the Commission exclusively exercising the duties of medical
referee as provided in the M orkmen’s Compensation Act of 1911, vide paragraph (c) of Recommendation 5.
I suggest that provision should be made in the proposed new Act for either party to appeal against the
decision of the board to a referee as at present constituted in the principal Act. I object to the board’s
decision being final, as proposed in Recommendation 5, paragraph ( e ). 1 suggest that the powers of the
referee as constituted in the principal Act should be amended to provide that he be empowered to determine
the period of incapacity of any workman or the degree of his disability in respect to earning full wages
at the works at which he has previously employed should either party appeal from the board's decision
in those regards. My reason for making the above suggestion is that the confidence of the parties concerned
under the Act would not be shaken if they have an avenue of appeal from the board’s decision. I further


f i oar( i should be to examine any workmen who believes himself to be suffering
us isease, without his first having obtained a certificate from a medical man that he is
suffering from such a disease.
a p eV^ence §^ en before the Commission, and as a result of the inspections of the
,ii v. lne ’ am n conv i nce d that the company are doing all that is in their powder to reduce
r\\ P ’ P r tlCUlarly ]r * re^ bbe removal of accumulated dust in the buildings at the works.
. . o e sor lapman and Dr. Smiths Appointment, Evidence, and Methods of Examination. —l feel
p, en < commen t upon the irregular manner of the appointment of Professor
apman an r. k. A. Smith, of Sydney, and the reprehensible methods adopted by them in order that
eii or ung at the Smelters w ould submit themselves for medical examination, also upon the grossly
un air manner under which the examinations were conducted. Owing to unforseen circumstances, I was
una eto accompan} the Commission to Sydney, w r here it was decided to secure'the services of Professor
Chapman and Dr. Smith at a remuneration of £2l per day each. Those two gentlemen proceeded to Port Pirie
6 °, re 1G ® mm i s sion had returned from Sydney to Adelaide. I did not receive notification of the decision
unti a ter t ey had armed in Port Pirie, and had commenced their investigations, though a telegram
was sent to me on the day prior to their arrival. When the Commission met on June 3rd I learnt from
correspondence that notices had been served upon beneficiaries under the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
requesting them to appear before Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith, and that summonses had been issued
by the Secretary to the ( ommissiop for service upon men working at the Smelters who,were not beneficiaries,
commanding them to appear before Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith for no other purpose, apparently, than
to be medically examined. I telegraphed from Adelaide to Professor Chapman protesting against his action,
and also took up the matter with the Chairman of the Commission, and eventually these summonses were
withdrawn. The examination of the beneficiaries continued despite my protest. The action of the
Commission in sanctioning the issue of those summonses was illegal and most unfair, as a number of the
men had been previously examined by doctors appointed by the company. Moreover, the examination
of the beneficiaries proceeded in the presence of the company’s medical adviser (Dr. 0. M. Moulden), but
the beneficiaries medical advisers were not present, nor w r ere they consulted as to the clinical record of
the respecti\e beneficiaries. It appears to me to be singular that Professor Chapman did not see fit at least
to consult the beneficiaries medical attendants. Undoubtedly he was aware that the beneficiaries’ own
doctors could have given him more detailed and complete information than Dr. Moulden could. Despite
the fact of Professor Chapman having carried out similar investigations in Broken Hill, when the men’s
interests were safeguarded by union representatives being present at the examination, yet on this occasion
Professor Chapman did not arrange for the men’s representative to be present. His action in that respect
alone stamped his investigations with suspicion.
Another instance of the utter disregard of the beneficiaries’ interests in connection wdth these examina-
tions was that the names and addresses were supplied by the company and no effort was made by Professor
Chapman or Dr. Smith to have the lists, as supplied, verified by officials of the unions to which the men
belonged. There was no evidence that the men examined by Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith, assisted
by Dr. Moulden (the company’s medical adviser) were beneficiaries. The company, under such con-
ditions, could easily have supplied the names and addresses of men free from a compensable disease. I
consider these examinations, under the conditions I have outlined, were, to say the least, a grave blunder,
and they wall certainly shake the confidence of the public in the Commission’s report. When Professor
Chapman was giving evidence I endeavored to clear away the suspicion w r hich his action had created, but
I regret that my efforts were futile. lam of the opinion that the appointment of Professor Chapman and
Dr. Smith, and the enormous expense attached thereto, was a waste.pf public money. There are medical
men in this State who are, in my opinion, equally competent.as those two gentlemen. I refer, among
others, to Drs. B. H. Morris and Angas Johnson, who have had vast experience in the diagnosis of industrial
diseases, particularly plumbism. It is unfortunate that the Commission did not take into consideration
the qualifications of these doctors before recommending to the Government the appointment of Professor
Chapman and Dr. Smith. Whilst lam most anxious to meet the grave effects of industrial diseases amongst
the employees of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, and fully appreciate the commercial
importance of the lead industry to Australia, I* believe that the industry is in a sound financial position,
and able to make the provision necessary to ensure healthy working conditions.
I contend that the recommendation of the Commission under the heading “ Medical Certification
and Compensation for Industrial Disease ’’ does not come within the scope of the terms of reference
under which the Commission was appointed.
W. ROBINETTE.
Parliament House, Adelaide, July 14th, 1925.


Name.
Occupation.
Page.
Bromley, E
Divisional Meteorologist, Adelaide
63
Chapman, H. G. .
Professor of Physiology, Gniversity of Sydney
75, 90, 102
T)ey G
25, 27, 31, 43
54, 110
Dorsch, C. E
Medical practitioner, Port Pirie
Finlayson, M. R...
Medical officer, Broken Hill
64
Freeman, T. W....
Medical practitioner, Concord, N.S.W
72
Hart, A. H.
14
Jude' W. H
Secretary of B.H.A.S. Accident Fund, Port Pirie
39
Leahey, J. H. S. ..
Assistant town clerk, Port Pirie
86
Leonard, A.R. D.W.
Health Inspector, Port Pirie
47
26
Mathew, R. Y. ...
Medical practitioner, Port Pirie
49
Morris, B. H
Inspector General of Hospitals and a Medical Referee under Workmen’s Compensation
Act, Adelaide
61,111
Moulden, 0. M. ..
Medical practitioner, Unley
103
Rodger, G. H
Works Manager of B.A.L.M., Cabarita, N.S.W
74
Retchford, J
Stores manager, Port Pirie
60, 86
Robertson, W. ...
Metallurgist, Adelaide
33
Rogers, L. H
Medical practitioner, Ryde, N.S.W
68
Somerset, H. St. J.
General Superintendent of B.H.A. Smelters, Port Pirie
1, 5, 17, 20,
37, 40, 54,
57, 86, 102,
114
Smith, S. A
Medical practitioner, Sydney, N.S.W
82, 100
Summerton, H. R..
Turner and fitter, Port Pirie
51
Tassie, L. G
Medical practitioner, Port Pirie
52, 109
Taylor, C. M
Assistant to Directors of Lewis Berger & Sons (Aust.), Ltd., Rhodes, N.S.W. ........
70
Yeatman, C
Medical practitioner, Port Pirie
58, 110
INDEX TO WITNESSES.
INDEX TO APPENDICES.
Page.
A. —Authorities consulted 116
B. —Notice to Employees by B.H.A.S. Pty., Ltd., Port Pirie 116
C. —Table of Compensation under Workmen’s Compensation Act 116
D. —Diagram of Works Processes at B.H.A. Smelters Faces page 116
E. —Details of Attendance Bonus and Annual Holidays Granted on Full Pay at B.H.A. Smelters 117
F. —General Information regarding B.H.A.S. Accident Fund 117
G. —Notice re Proposed Dental Clinic at B.H.A. Smelters 118
H. —Statement re B.H.A. Smelters Accident Fund 118
J. —Record of 300 Blood Examinations at Commonwealth Health Laboratory, Port Pirie 119
K. —Clinical Card used at Government Medical Bureau, Broken Hill, N.S.W 120
L. —lnstructions issued to Workmen Employed by Lewis Berger & Sons (Aust.), Ltd., Rhodes, N.S.W., since 1917 121
M. —New South Wales Department Health Instructions to Workers in Lead Industries 121
N. —Notice to Employees at British Australian Lead Manufacturers’ Proprietary Works, Cabarita, New South Wales 122
O. —Notes by Professor H. G. Chapman on Clinical Examinations at Prot Pirie 122
P. Report by Mr. C. E. Chapman, F.1.C., F.A.C.1., on Tests for Carbon Monoxide Gas at B.H.A. Smelters, Port
Pirie 123
Q. —Certification by Mr. W. Robinette re Cases of Plumbism Treated at Port Pirie Hospital 124
R. —Graph of Employment and Lead Poisoning Statistics and Main Plant Alterations at B.H.A. Smelters during
Half-years Faces page 124


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
Tuesday, April 28th, 1925, at 2.30 p.m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
* Present—
Dr. K. R. Moore (chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr! W. Robinette.
The Chairman— ln opening the public part of the proceed-
ings of the Commission, I should like to mention that we are
appointed to inquire into the cause or causes of the disease
known as plumbism, the increase thereof among employees of
the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Limited, at
Port Piriei, and the best means of preventing or alleviating
such disease. It is too early at present to formulate the exact
lines of inquiry, but it is the duty of the Commission to
consider everything directly or indirectly affecting the ques-
tion, its bearing on the health of the employees at the smelters,
and on the lead-smelting industry. The Commission propose
to call for evidence, which may be taken here or elsewh re at
sittings arranged for the convenience of witnesses. We hope
all sides of the question will be put before the Commission
without reserve, and the efforts of the Commission will be
directed to obtain the fullest information with a view of
devising effective measures for the suppression of plumbism in
the industry. The forms of procedure followed in courts of
justice will be observed. The Commission have the power to
refuse to admit evidence considered improper or irrelevant, and
also to recall witnesses for further examination. It is one of
my special duties as chairman to secure for every witness a
dispassionate hearing.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, General Superintendent
of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie,
was sworn and examined:
1. By the Chairman —How long have you occupied your
present position? —I have been General Superintendent at the
smelters since August, 1919.
2. Were you associated with the company prior to that in any
other capacity?—Yes. I joined the Associated Smelters in
July, 1917, as Plant Superintendent.
3. By Mr. Gepp —What would you give as your profession?
-—Metallurgical engineer.
4. What professional credentials do you hold? —I belong to
a number of mining and metallurgical societies, the piincipal
one of which is the Institute of Mining and Metallurgy in
London. The others are the Australasian Institute of Mining
and Metallurgy, the American Institute of Mining Engineers,
and the Institute of Metals, London.
5. What is the standard of the Institute of Mining and
Metallurgy in London,?—lt is the foremost mining and metal-
lurgical institute in the world.
6. Can you tell me the qualifications requisite for full mem-
bership of that institution?—ln the first instance an applicant
for membership must be more than 30 years of age, and before
he can be elected he must have held the full control of an
operating plant for five years or more.
7. Following upon his application, it is submitted, I unde.-
stand, by the council to the men to whom he gives references?
—Yes.
8. Those men make confidential reports regarding the appli-
cant?—Yes; they make confidential reports to the institute.
9 So that I can take it that you, as a member of the
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, are considered by men m
that profession as possessing high qualificationsf-I suppose
that would be so.
10. Can you tell me what are the qualifications requisite for
membership of the Australasian Institute? —I do not remember
them in detail, but they are very similar to those of the
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy.
11. You are a full member also of that institute? —Yes.
12. May I take it that the American Institute of Mining
Engineers is a somewhat similar body in America? —It is the
American equivalent of the Institute of Mining and Metal-
lurgy.
13. The Institute of Metals deals principally with non-
ferrous metals?—Yes. I am a full member of that institute
also.
14. Will you tell me what positions of responsibility you
held in connection with metallurgical works prior to coming
to Port Pirie?—For some time I was works chemist at the
Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company’s plant in Queensland.
I was metallurgist in charge of the smelter at the Mount
Morgan Company’s property in Queensland. I was also
metallurgist in charge of the smelter at the Great Cobar Com-
pany’s plant, Cobar, New South Wales.
15. Coming to the operations which you control, can you
tell the Commission something regarding the raw materials
treated at the smelters and where they come from? —The main
part of the material treated comes from Broken Hill, and is a
lead concentrate in which the lead exists as galena. We also
treat small quantities of oxidised ores from Broken Hill, in
addition to small quantities of purchased ores which are
practically all sulphide ores and the residues that remain
after the extraction of the zinc from the zinc concentrates
that are treated by the electrolytic refinery at Risdon, Tas-
mania.
16. Can you give us an idea of the tonnages of raw material
that you treat? —We treat approximately 5,000 toms a week
of raw lead-bearing material.
17. Can you give us an approximate idea of the tonnages
of fluxes and other materials that you handle to treat this
amount of ore, including coke, coal, etc. ?—Roughly, it would
be another 2,500 tons a week. That makes a total of 7,500
tons a week.
18. What are the approximate tonnages of your various
products annually?—We make about 120,000 to 130,000 tons
of lead a year. We also make approximately 250 to 300 tons
of litharge a year, in addition to about 1,400 to 1,500 tons of
antimonial lead.
19. How do the Port Pirie smelters compare with other
smelters in the world in regard to size and output?—They
are the largest in the world in the output of market lead.
20. The fact that you are in charge of the biggest lead
smelters in the world gives you a position of very high stand-
ing in your profession? —I should say so.
21. Have you visited other parts of the world and inspected
the plants carrying on work similar to that of your own?—
Yes.
22. When did your last tour take place?—ln 1924.
23. What countries did you visit and what plants did you
see? —I visited Canada, the United States of America, Great
Britain, Norway, Belgium, France, Spain, and Burma, and in
all of these countries saw smelting plants of one class or
another.
24. Do you remember any of the plants that you visited in
the big lead-producing countries? —Yes. The main plants I
visited were in the United States. There I saw the Bunker
Hill and Sullivan smelter at Kellogg, the Midvale smelter and
the Murray smelter at Salt Lake City, the Omaha refinery at
Omaha, the Herculaneum smelter at St. Louis, the Collinsville


smelter at St. Louis, and the Federal smelter at the same
place; also the Perth Amboy smelter near New York City. In
England the only smelter I saw treating lead-bearing material
was at Swansea Yale, and it is classed as a zinc-producing
plant mainly. In Belgium I visted the Hoboken smelter, treat-
ing lead concentrates similar to those treated here, although not
necessarily obtained from the same place, and also other pur-
chased lead ores. I also visited the Pennaroya smelter in
Spain, the smelter of the Burma Lead Mines in Burma, and
various small metallurgical plants and some power stations in
Norway.
25. Can vou give us an indication of the annual output of
lead in the United States, which, I understand, is one of the
main producers in the world? —No.
26. It has the largest production in the world?—Yes.
27. The annual production in the world is about one million
toms? —Yes. I cannot give the exact figure.
28. How, in your opinion, does the Port Pirie smelter com-
pare with foreign plants from the point of view of up-to-date
treatment methods? —I consider the treatment of zincy-lead
ores in, Port Pirie is at least equal to that in any other
smelter I saw.
29. Can you give us a general plan and flow sheet of the
works? —I am having a special plan prepared that brings
every item of building construction on the works right up to
date. That will not be ready for a day or so, but in the
meantime, to assist the Commission, I have a plan of the
works’ layout which is practically correct now. In all major
points it is all right.
30. I would like a little information in regard to your pro-
cesses in detail, so that later the Commission may have on
record the processes in sequence in dealing with the evidence
of other witnesses and in considering their whole problem. I
should like an indication of your raw materials in so far as
their analysis or assay value is concerned, starting with leau
concentrates You might particularly specify the main con-
stituents, including such elements as lead, arsenic, antimony,
and any others you might think are pertinent to the metal-
lurgical general position? —I might say that on the copies ot
the flow-sheet given to members of the Commission the other
day the assays indicated in the lead concentrates there were
the averages for a period when the lead was somewhat lowei
than it is now. The figure now would be about 62 per cent,
of lead in the granular concentrate. The granular lead con-
centrates form the major part of the concentrate material that
is being sent to the smelters. They can be taken to contain
on the average about 62 per cent, of lead, 16 per cent, of
sulphur, .2 per cent, of arsenic, and .15 per cent, of antimony.
They are the main constituents. Zinc is about 9 per cent.
on the average.
31. Have you any other form of concentrate? —Wo call that
granular lead concentrate. We also have slime concentrate,
which carries somewhat less lead, its average being aiound 56
per cent. The zinc would be about 13 per cent., the sulphur
17 per cent., the arsenic about .08 per cent., and the antimony
about .2 per cent. These are approximate figures.
32. What silver is contained in those two concentrates?
Approximately 250 z. in the lead concentrate, and about 40oz.
in the slime concentrates. It depends entirely on the amounts
of each that come from different mines in a given period.
33. What is the approximate silver figure per annum?
Boughly we make 140,0000 z. a week, which equals about seven
to eight million ounces a year.
34. You have lime sand and limestone as fluxes? Yes. We
do not use any limestone at present, but the use of lime sand
is a regular part of the roaster charge. That does not contain
any lead.
35. Where is it obtained? —From Warding Island, in the
Gulf, about a hundred miles away.
36. Do you use crushed ironstone?—Not at present. We
have not used it for some years.
37. What about siliceous ore? —That is the oxidized ore that
comes from Broken Hill We use about 200 tons a week.
38. What is the assay of that? —It varies greatly, but con-
tains on an average about 20 per cent, of lead.
39. What silver and what sulphur? —About 15oz. of silver.
Sulphur varies tremendously, but could be taken as around 5
per cent. The arsenic and antimony are very light—.o3 per
cent, of arsenic and .04 per cent, of antimony.
40. Is any other raw material used, either in the roasting
plant, blast furnace, or elsewhere? —Yes; we have the residues
that come from Bisdon after the zinc has been extracted from
the roasted zinc concentrates.
43. What is the assay of that? —About 18 per cent, of lead.
42. The granulated slag which you return all the time to
your blast furnaces would go very low in lead? —Yes, about
2i per cent, to 3 per cent, in lead.
43. What do you do with this raw material? I presume you
can divide it into main sections, and we can then touch on the
analyses and products as we come to those particular products,
so that the Commission can be fully posted in the process?—
The first section is the ore unloading and handling section,
which deals with the delivery of all ores and materials to the
Dwight and Lloyd storage bins or to the reserve heaps in
various parts of the plant. A part of its functions is, of
course, the reloading of material from these reserve heaps as
and when required.
44. You keep certain quantities of raw materials in stock all
the time to draw on as required? —Yes, there are approxi-
mately three months’ supply of all materials necessary to
carry on the smelters on hand at all times.
4§. At this point will you tell the Commission briefly the
general process of lead smetling and refining until you reach
the finished products of lead and antimonial lead and bar
silver? —Yes; the ore when it is unloaded to the storage bins
at the Dwight and Lloyd plant is fed, together with the calcu-
lated amount of the various fluxes and materials necessary, to
a main collecting belt, which delivers it well mixed to the
super hoppers over the Dwight and Lloyd machines.
46. Will you rather describe the process, more or less, on
the metallurgical side? —When the concentrates reach Port
Pirie they are finely divided and carry the lead in the form
of sulphide of lead. It is not practicable to extract thei lead
and the silver from those concentrates until such time as the
sulphur has been practically all driven off and the material
agglomerated or sintered. When the material after passing
through the roasting and sintering plant is put into the above
condition it is delivered to the blast furnace, together with
coke and necessary fluxes, and smelted so that it produces
two products —a bullion that contains the greater part of the
lead that was in the original concentrates and also practically
all the silver. This bullion also contains small quantities of
sulphur, antimony, arsenic, copper, and zinc. The second product
is slag that contains the waste matters which were in the original
concentrates and ores, and also the fluxes that were added to
enable the roasting operations to be successfully carried out.
The slag also contains small quantities of lead and silver.
This slag leaving the furnaces is granulated in, water and sent
to the waste dump. The bullion containing the impurities set
out above is sent to the refinery. The first operation in the
refiner}" is the elimination of the sulphides of lead, zinc, and
copper that were originally dissolved in the bullion and car-
ried out of the blast furnaces with it. This is done by charg-
ing the bullion bars into a reverberatory furnace, where the
bullion is raised to a temperature which is sufficient to keep
it well melted, and at this temperature it rejects the sulphides
that were originally dissolved in it. These sulphides in the
form of a dross lying on the top of the molten bullion are
removed by the fuinacemen by means of paddles, drawn from
the furnace and delivered to small pots that are wheeled out,
drained of any metallic lead that may have been included in
the skimming, and dumped in a pile for return to the blast
furnaces for retreatment. The temperature at which this
operation is carried out is in the neighborhood of 700 degrees
centigrade. At certain stages, however, the copper-dressing


furnace is practically cold. Ihe bullion, after dressing in the
furnace mentioned above, is delivered to another reverberatory
furnace called the antimony softening furnace, situated at a
slightly lower level. Here it is heated to a temperature of
about 900 degrees centigrade and air is allowed to pass over
the surface of the molten bullion. This air oxidises the anti-
mony and arsenic in the bullion and also some of the lead,
and the compounds formed run off the surface of the bullion
in the form of slag through a small running notch at the end
of the furnace and are caught in small pots on wheels. These
are wheeled out, and the antimony slag, as it is called, is
dumped for treatment in another small reverberatory furnace.
The time of operation necessary in the antimony softening
furnace to properly soften one charge of bullion is about 12
hours. At the end of that time the bullion is run down into
desilvering kettles for the removal of small quantities of gold
and the silver. These kettles are set in such a way that the
greater part of the kettle is below the level of the working
floor, and they sit in a combustion chamber, by means of
which the temperature of the lead is kept up to the working
point. There would be about 550 z. of silver to the ton in the
bullion. The removal of the very small quantity of gold in
the bullion is the first step at this stage, and it is done by
adding a small quantity, about 1701b5., of zinc to the molten
bullion in the kettle. The amount of zinc added depends
entirely on the size of the charge that goes into the kettle.
This zinc is melted by raising the temperature of the bullion
in the kettle, and when it is thoroughly melted it is stirred
into the bullion by means of a mechanical stirrer, this opera-
tion going on approximately for 40 minutes. At the end of
that time the fire is drawn out from beneath the kettle, and
the contents are allowed to cool back nearly to the solidifi-
cation point of lead. The bullion then rejects the zinc in the
form of an alloy of zinc, silver, and lead. That contains also
the small amount of gold present in the bullion and some of
the copper contents. After the removal of the crust contain-
ing the gold the kettle is again heated and further quantities
of zinc are put into it, the routine followed being the same
as in the case of the gold. This further zinc removes the
greater part of the silver contents of the bullion. The tem-
peratures would be around about 500 deg. centigrade. A third
zincing is necessary to remove the whole of the silver, and
this is done in precisely the same way as before mentioned.
The bullion has now been freed of the impurities it contained
and of its silver and gold, but in the process of desilverising
certain amount of zinc becomes alloyed with the lead, appioxi-
mately .6 per cent., and in order to remove this the bullion
is syphoned down into a reverberatory furnace called a lefin-
ing furnace, situated on a lower level. Here the bullion is
heated to a temperature of about 950 deg. centigrade, and ab
passed over the surface of the molten bullion. This oxidises
the small amount of zinc that the bullion contains, and also
oxidises a considerable quantity of lead at the same time. The
drosses formed by the oxidisation of zinc and the lead are
removed by the furnaceman by the aid of a paddle, drawn
from the end of the furnace and tipped into small pots on
wheels. These pots are wheeled to a platform outside the
refinery and tipped. The lead is now pure, containing about
99.989 per cent. lead. It is run from the refining furnace to
a receiving kettle and moulded into market bars by means of
a syphon operated by the men in the moulding ling. The
market lead is taken out from the refinery by contractors in
small hand-drawn trucks and stacked on the wharf for ship-
ment as required. Going back to the desilverising section, the
zinc crusts containing the silver and gold are sent to receiving
bins, and in the case of the silver crusts, go to a small kettle,
where the major part of the lead is melted out and separated
from the true zinc-lead-silver alloy that the crusts contain.
The alloy is taken over from this kettle and sent to the re-
torting furnaces, where it is charged into plumbago retorts
that carry about 12cwts. to 13cwts. of crusts. These retorts
are set in a furnace in such a way that the neck of the retort
protrudes slightly from the outer wall of the furnace, and the
body of the retort is so placed that the firing gases, which are
producer gases, can circulate around the retort and heated up
to the necessary temperature to distil the zinc from the lead
and silver. The distilled zinc is caught in a condenser that
fits tightly over the plumbago retorts. In the upper part of
the further end of the condenser there is a small vent-hole to
allow the escape of a certain quantity of gas, so that the
internal pressure in the condenser will not cause it to separate
from the retort bottle and allow the escape of gas at this point.
At this vent-hole during the operation of the retort there
is always a small flame burning. This is metallic zinc vapor
burning to zinc oxide. The distillation of a charge of crusts
in one of these retorts takes about eight hours. When the
process is finished the condenser is drawn away from the
front and the operator ladles out from the retort bottle the
lead and silver alloy that remains there after the zinc has
been distilled. He moulds this alloy into small bars, and it
is sent from there to the silver yard, where it is further
treated. The temperature of the gas retort ranges up to
1,250 deg. centigrade. The lead-silver alloy first of all goes
into the silver yard and is fed to cupels, which are really small
reverberatory furnaces. Here it is heated to about 950 deg.
centigrade, and the air blown by means of a light blast over
the surface of the molten metal. This air oxidises the lead,
forming litharge, which melts and runs off the surface of the
bath and is granulated in a tub of water. As the lead oxidises
and runs from the cupel the level of the bath of molten metal,
of course, decreases, and further lead-silver alloy is fed in
to keep it up to the necessary level. This process is carried
on until ultimately the cupel is full of silver. The tempera-
ture at that point w T ould be l,osodeg. centigrade in the cupels.
When the cupel is finally full of silver, the silver is dipped
by means of ladles and poured into bars of about l,ooooz.
each.
47. You have an electrolytic refinery which operates at
intervals. What does that do? —Reverting now to the zinc-
silver-lead crusts that contain the small amount of gold
originally in the bullion, these are treated by melting them
in a reverberatory furnace called the gold alloy furnace, where
the zinc is oxidised and fluxed off by the addition of litharge
to the charge. A certain amount of the copper that, was in
the gold crusts goes out with the slag produced. This slag is
skimmed off and sent back to the blast furnaces for retreat-
ment. The lead-silver-gold alloy, after removal of the zinc,
is tapped from the furnace into a kettle and zinced for
removal of the silver and gold, which then follow the same
course as the silver alloy in regards to retorting atid cupelling.
The ultimate product is a silver bar that contains small
quantities of gold. This is east into anode bars and refined
electrolytically for separation of the gold and silver in a small
electrolytic refinery which operates for a short period about
twice a year.
48. How much gold is won by this smelter annually?—The
amount varies tremendously, because the major part of the
gold we get comes from purchased ores, but it would not be
more than 2,0000 z. a year. Going back to the retreatment of
the refinery by-product. The by-products from the refinery
operation are returned to the blast furnace department, mostly,
for further treatment. The first by-product produced is the
copper dross. This is returned to the blast furnace depart-
ment and smelted in a small blast furnace, together with
refinery furnace dross and certain other fluxes, producing a
lead bullion and a matte containing copper, Silver, lead, zinc,
a sulphide, a complex sulphide, of the metals that it
and small quantities of arsenic and antimony. The matte is
contains, such as lead, copper, iron, zinc, which are the main
metals. The bullion coming from this furnace goes back to
the refinery and is refined in the ordinary way. The matte is
tapped into pots, sent out to the dump, hand broken, and


stored, and ultimately shipped to the copper refinery at Port
Kembla, New South Wales. The second by-product produced
in the refinery is the antimony slag. This is remelted iu small
reverberatory smelters known as antimony dross furnaces in
the refinery building and a certain amouiP of coal is added to
it. These furnaces operate at a temperature of about 700 deg.
to 750 deg. centigrade. This process reduces some of the lead
in the slag, and the furnace ultimately produces a lead bullion
known as hard lead, because it contains sufficient antimony
to make it murh harder than ordinary lead, and a slag that
contains the greater part of the antimony that was originally
in the antimony slag and also lead and arsenic, the anti-
mony and arsenic being combined with the lead in the slag. The
hard lead produced by the furnaces goes back to the antimony
softeners for retreatment, and the slag goes to the blast
furnace department. The temperature of the blast furnace
would be about l,2oodeg. centigrade in the crucible of the
furnace. Once in every six months a campaign is run, in
which this antimony slag is reduced to antimonial metal, con-
taining about 12 per cent, of antimony and 88 per cent, of
lead. The arsenic that was in the antimony slag before its
reduction in the blast furnace is eliminated by the addition
of metallic iron to the charge. This metallic iron combines
with the arsenic, forming the speiss, which is separated from
the matte when cold and thrown over the dump. The third
by-product in the refinery is what is known as refiner
skimming. These refiner skimmings are mainly oxide of lead,
but contain an appreciable quantity of oxide of zinc and a
small quantity of antimony. This dross is returned to the
blast furnace department and smelted, either in conjunction
with the ordinary charge or in the matting furnace in con-
junction with the copper referred to before.
49. You have dealt with the metallurgical side practically
completely. In the roasting department what happens when
the raw materials are mixed and delivered into the roasting
grates? —In order that the Commission, may more thoroughly
understand the process of roasting, I will explain briefly what
a Dwight & Lloyd machine consists of. The machine is, in
effect, an endless belt composed of separate pallettes, each one
of which is really a small section of grate that inns between
guides and makes a tight joint with those pallettes cn either
side of it, when it is traversing the operating part of the
furnace. The palettes, coming to the beginning of the operat-
ing section, pass under a chute that delivers to them the
charge that is to be roasted. Having got that charge, they
pass under a levelling plate, which sets the depth of the
charge at this point at about 3Jin. After levelling, the pallette,
in its low progress forward, passes under an ignition stove,
which is delivering red-hot gases to the surface of the charge.
Just at this point the under-side of the pallette makes contact
with a suction chamber that runs in two sections right along
to the end of the operating section of the Dwight & Lloyd
machine. These suction chambers being connected with a
fan, that is pulling about 14,000 ft. of free air per minute,
draw the air down through the charge, and, of course, as the
pallette comes to the point where the fiery gases are available
they are drawn by the suction of the fan down through the
charge and ignite the surface, starting the sulphides of lead,
zinc, and iron to oxidise, and generating so much heat that
as the belt travels forward over the remainder of the suction
box the temperature caused by the oxidation of the sulphide
is such that the whole depth of the charge has been partially
roasted by the time the end of the operating section is reached.
The travel of the charge over the suction-boxes on the first
section of the Dwight & Lloyd machines is from 28in. to 32in.
a minute.
50. I want the Commission to be informed as to what
happens in that charge from the chemical standpoint and the
change in the chemical form of the lead?—ln the operation
of roasting the charge, which originally contained around 11
per cent, of sulphur, and which in addition contains most of
its lead and zinc as sulphides of lead and zinc, is roasted
during its progress over the machine to such an extent that
when it is finally discharged from the end of the machine it
contains about 7 per cent, of sulphur and the lead and zinc
sulphides originally present are partly or wholly oxidised. The
charge at this point contains about 43 per cent, of lead. The
gases that are drawn by the fan from the roasting charge
contain the sulphur that has been eliminated from the charge
during roasting, and these are sent by the fan to what are
known as Cyclone dust catchers. These cyclones take out the
mechanical dust that is carried by the gases, but do not take
out all of the fumes. After passing through the Cyclone the
gases are at present discharged directly into the air through
chimney stacks.
51. In regard to the chemical reaction occurring in the
Dwight and Lloyd machine, the preparation of the Dwight and
Lloyd mixture is done by means of bins, feeding belt con-
veyors and cross conveyors, is it not? —Yes.
52. Will you very briefly desciibe the arrangement and the
condition of the material in each ease, whether line, whether
dry, and whether coarse? —The preparation of the charge for
the Dwight and Lloyd machine is done from a series of bins,
called the mixing bins. These are a number of small bins
set side by side, that contain a few hours supply of each of
the materials requisite for the roaster charge. Granular con-
centrates, slime concentrates, lime sand, siliceous ore,
granulated slag and Eisdon residues are stored at this
point. From each of these bins, a small belt runs out
above a general collecting belt, and by regulation of the
doors at any individual point the quantity of material de-
livered from these bins per minute can be accurately guaged.
Each door is therefore set at the requisite point and all
the bins that are delivering material for the charge are de-
livering simultaneously on to the collecting belt. This belt
discharges its contents on to another belt which in turn dis-
charges to a further belt, the reason for these continued
discharges being that it is essential that the material should
be as thoroughly mixed as possible before it reaches the super
hoppers of the Dwight and Lloyd machine. Eeverting to the
materials going to make up the charge, I would say that the
lead concentrates are granular in form, consisting of sulphides
of lead and zinc with small quantities of gangue, and come
to the bin in a damp condition, and in the process of dis-
charging from the bin they make no dust. The slime con-
centrates are in a very much finer state of division than the
granular concentrates and carry as a rule more moisture. In
fact they usually carry so much moisture that they occasion
considerable trouble in ensuring their regular discharge from
the storage bin. The Eisdon residues are in very much the
same category as the slime concentrates. The lead content
of these, however, is in the form of sulphate. The granulated
slag discharges wet from the bin to the collecting belt. The
lime sand contains not more than 2 or 3 per cent, of moisture
and the siliceous ore about 4 per cent of moisture as a rule.
53. There are no dry materials fed on to that belt at all?
—That is so, they are all moist.
54. Those materials go up a belt and are mixed by passing
from one belt to another. Is there any other mixer of any
sort? —Yes, there are two mixers situated at the discharge
end of two of the belts that catch the charge as it is being
dropped from one belt to the other and give it a mixing.
55. I understand this material is then fed into hoppers and
from the hoppers on to the first machine, the A machine
Dwight and Lloyd?—Yes.
56. It then passes along, and the sulphur is partly burned
out and Hie sinter made? —Yes.
57. What do you do with it as it discharges over the end
of this grate?—The sinter from the first section of the
Dwight & Lloyd machine drops from the discharging end
of the machine to a hooded hopper and from there falls on
a tray conveyor that places the material on to an inclined belt
leading to a cracker where the material is broken down to about


l£in. size. I rom there it travels by belt conveyor to a set
of rollers which are operated as and when required and the
metal reduced to such a state that about 84 per cent of it
will pass a lin. mesh.
The Commission adjourned.
Wednesday, April 29 th, 1925, at 10.30 a.m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present—
Dr. K. R. Moore (chairman).
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. W. Robinette.
HENRT ST. JOHN SOMERSET, General Superinten-
dent, Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie,
was recalled and further examined:
58. By Mr. Gepp —When we adjourned yesterday after-
noon you were describing the way in which the material is
delivered from the A machine on the Dwight & Lloyd plant,
and the method of treatment of this material prior to
delivery to the next operation. Is that material dry or wet
on its delivery from the A machine and through the process
of treatment to the B machine? —On. the A machines a
little before the point of discharge there is a water spray
from which water is played on to the surface of the roasted
sinter. The water is regulated so that the sinter shall be
wetted as far as practicable before it drops through the
hopper on to the tray conveyor underneath.
59. What is the purpose of having the A and the B
machine series? —Because the material cannot be efficiently
roasted and sintered in the one operation on a Dwight and
Lloyd machine.
60. What are the specific specifications for the final pro-
duct from the Dwight & Lloyd plant?—lt must be as strong
as practicable and as low in sulphur as it is possible for us
to get it. It usually assays about 1.9 per cent, of sulphur.
61. What do you mean by “as strong as possible”? —The
sinter must be strong in order that it shall not break up too
much between the point of discharge on the final Dwight and
Lloyd machine and the blast furnace tops.
62. Why is it necessary to get the sulphur down so low
as under 2 per cent? —Because if the sulphur is not got
down to a point somewhere around 2 per cent, there is
metallurgical trouble in the blast furnaces, and the loss of
lead carried away in the slag is greater than if the sulphur
is reduced to the figure I have given.
63. What is the operation on the B machines? —The sinter
that is made on the A machines is called pre-roast. This is
crushed for delivery to the B machine section, so that 84
per cent, of it approximately will pass through a quarter-
inch mesh. In this condition it is delivered mostly to the
super hoppers of the second section of Dwight & Lloyd
machines —the B section —but part of it goes to a bin
that supplies the Huntington-Heberlein sections. That part
which goes to the Huntington-Heberlein section is much
more coarsely crushed. Further, our practice on the second
section of the Dwight & Lloyd machine is such that we are
now beginning to crush the greater part of the pre-roast
much more coarsely than was the custom a few months ago.
The material once delivered into the super hoppers of the
B Dwight & Lloyd machines is delievred to the machines in
precisely the same way as is done in the A section. At
this point it is quite damp. As a matter of fact, it is usually
damp right through from the crushing machines to the feed
on the B section. If it is not damp enough further water
is added at the B section. I might explain to the Com-
mission here that both in the A and B sections it is im-
practicable to produce good results unless the feed is well
damped before going on to the machine. Once it is fed
to the B machine the operation is precisely similar to that
on the A machines. When the material is delivered over
the discharge end of the B machines it is much stronger and
more compact than it was when leaving the A machines.
It contains about 44 per cent, of lead and about 2 per cent.
of sulphur. It falls from the B machines into skips that are
placed below, and these skips and the discharge sections of
the machines are covered over by hoods that are carried back
above the suction chamber on the machine, and air is in
this way drawn up from around the skips and in through
the roasting charge again. This serves to eliminate dust
at this point. Once the skip is full of sintered material
it is pushed out by hand to a point underneath the aerial
hoist, and from there it is lifted and delivered to the blast
furnace bin.
64. You have one more roasting operation, I understand,
called the Huntington-Heberlein process, in which you treat
some of your pre-roast material from your A machines. Why
should you do this and not do it on your B machines? —Until
comparatively recently it was necessary to produce a con-
siderable proportion of Huntington-Heberlein sinter as
compared with Dwight & Lloyd sinter in order to ensure
that the blast furnace operation would run smoothly. This
is so because the Huntington-Heberlein sinter is much
stronger and coarser than the Dwight & Lloyd sinter, par-
ticularly when the Dwight & Lloyd sinter is below standard
quality. If the proportion of Huntington - Heberlein
sinter in that case is reduced to a low figure, very considerable
trouble develops in the blast furnace tops. Latterly, how-
ever, the Dwight & Lloyd work has been modified, with the
result that the sinter is stronger and better than it used to
be, and this has enabled us to reduce considerably the
amount of pre-roast going to the Huntington-Heberlein
pots. The method of operating the Huntington-Heberlein
pot is, shortly, this: —The pot itself is a bowl that holds
from 8 tons to 10 tons of charge. It is equipped near the
bottom with a false bottom, consisting of a perforated steel
plate. Underneath this steel plate there is an opening that
connects with the blast main that delivers the air neces-
sary for the sintering operation. When the pot is ready to
charge, a certain amount of red-hot coke is drawn in trucks
from a stove and delivered into the Huntington-Heberlein
pot, where it rests on the perforated false bottom. On top
of this hot coke the moistened pre-roast material is directly
tipped, and the pot gradually filled up, the blast in. the mean-
time having been turned in through the bottom of the pot.
The roasting then goes on, the blast being regulated as
occasion demands until the pot is completely sintered right
through. The fumes from the pot while it is under operation
are carried away by a hood that sits down over the pot, and
are drawn by the stack draught and delivered directly to
atmosphere. When the sintering operation is completed the
pot is tipped, and the material, which is largely a solid cake,
is hand-broken, loaded to skips, and delivered to the blast
furnace bins. Its analysis is practically identical with that
of the Dwight & Lloyd sinter, but physically it is much
coarser.
65. In your answer to question No. 46 yesterday you said
that the material, after passing through the roasting and
sintering plant, is put into a certain condition; that is, the
siulphur eliminated and the material agglomerated or sin-
tered, it is delivered to the blast furnace, together with
coke and necessary fluxes, and smelted so that it produces
two products, namely, a bullion and a slag. You have ex-
plained to the Commission that the roasting operation is for
these two purposes, namely, sulphur elimination and pre-
paration of an agglomerated or sintered material. Will you
now tell us in brief the operations on the blast furnace on
the same lines as you have given us the operations on the
roasting plant?—The bins that contain the material neces-
sary to the blast furnace operation are situated above the
feed-floor level, and along under the discharge openings of
the bins a railway track runs on which the charge ca r 's travel.
These charge cars take the materia! from each bin in quan-
tities that are set by the blast furnace superintendent, that
is to say, each charge car takes a portion of Dwight and
Lloyd sinter, a portion of Huntington-Heberlein sinter,
some return blast furnace slag in lumpy form, the coke that
is necessary for the smelting operation, nnd on occasions


some of the by-products that are returned for smelting from
various sections of the plant. The truck passing from one
bin to the other receives its full charge, and is then trans-
ferred automatically to the opposite side of the feed-floor
and at the end of the feed-floor. It travels from there
along a railway track that runs over the tops of the blast
furnaces and about 7ft. above them. When the truck arrives
over the furnace to which the charge is to be delivered, it is
disconnected from the hauling-rope and allowed to stand
over the furnace. The feeder then releases a catch, and the
truck is so made that half the charge delivers into the front
of the furnace and half to the back.
66. What is a blast furnace, purely f rom a, layman’s
standpoint?—A blast furnace is essentially a rectangular
column sitting on a crucible. This collumn is built so that
the lower portion is made up of hollow cast-iron boxes through
which water is circulated when the furnace is in operation.
These boxes are known as water-jackets. Above the boxes
the column is built of firebricks up to the level of the feed
floor. Through the jackets near the bottom of the furnace
there are certain openings cast, through which the blast
necessary for the smelting goes. These openings are known
as tuyere openings. On the feed-floor level there is a hood
fixed to take away the fumes and gases from the furnace
when it is in operation. This hood is set down along the
centre line of the top of the furnace, and is, in effect, a
box with one side open, that side being the one that is
pointing downwards into the furnace, and is in connection
with the charge when the furnace is operating. From the
ends of the box, flues lead away into the main smelter flues and
the fumes are drawn off in this way. When the furnace is ready
to operate, the crucible on which the furnace sits is filled with
molten lead. A wood fire is started above this, coke is put on the
top of the fire, blast furnace slag and coke again on top of
that, and then the regular furnace charges. The blast is
turned on, being increased gradually from a few ounces
pressure up to about 440 z. when the furnace is operating
normally. The action of the blast is to burn the coke and to
supply heat necessary for smelting the charge. It also is
regulated in such a w r ay that the atmosphere in the furnace
is kept on the reducing side. This is necessary in order
that the oxide of lead that goes into the furnace in the
sinter can be wholly reduced to the metallic form, and so
separated from the waste matters that the sinter contains.
As the material melts it runs dowm through and among the
partly molten charge, and collects in the lower part of the
furnace, where the metallic lead separates out from the slag.
The metallic lead, having the greater specific gravity, col-
lects in the crucible of the furnace, and flows out through
an inverted syphon that makes connection with the bottom
of the crucible. The slag, on the other hand, accumulates
above the level of the molten lead in the crucible, and is
periodically drawn off through tapping holes in the ends of
the furnace. As it runs out of the furnace it falls first
into the bowl of a slag-pot, and from there overflows into
a launder, in wdiich there are strong water jets. These
water jets chill the slag very rapidly, breaking it into small
granules, and in this form it is swept away by the water
into a pit, from which a bucket elevator lifts it to storage
bins, and from these storage bins it is drawn off periodically
into railway trucks, which are taken by a locomotive, and
the slag is dumped over the waste dump. The purpose of
the slag-pot situated immediately under the tapping-hole of
the furnace is to catch any metallic lead that might other-
wise escape with the slag.
67. You have a product you call litharge.. What is it?
It is an oxide of lead, and is used in glass work, pottery
work, and largely in the rubber trade.
68. Is it a product that you make specially at the works?—
Litharge is the result of a special process. It is not connected
with the production of market lead.
69. Where do you get the raw material for the litharge plant
from?—The litharge is made from the pure lead which is
produced in the refinery.
70. Will you describe briefly the litharge plant from the •
point of view of mechanics? —Litharge is made in a cupel
similar to the cupels in which the silver-lead alloy is cupelled.
The lead bars are melted in the cupel hearth, and when the
hearth is full of metal an air blast is played on to.the surface
of the molten lead. This converts the lead to oxide, and this
oxide, being in molten form, runs out through a small notch
into pots set to receive it. When the pot is full of litharge,
which by this time is solidified, it is wheeled out and delivered
to the litharge mill. In this mill the material is fed to a pul-
verising plant, which is entirely closed, the feeding being done
through a small opening that is opened as required for the
delivery of the lump litharge. In this mill the litharge is
crushed to a fine powder, and taken by an air blast and delivered
into a storage bin, the top of which is also covered. From
this storage bin it is delivered into kegs that are set on a shaking
table. The purpose of this shaking table is to settle the litharge
down as closely as possible in the keg, and enable the requisite
quantity to be put into it. When the kegs are filled they are
taken from the shaking table by the man in charge, and
delivered to a small table in another part of the room, and there
the kegs are lidded. When they are lidded they are wheeled
out into another room, where the painting and the marking of
the kegs are done.
71. Reverting for a moment to the question of roasting and
blast furnace operations, I understand that you came to Port
Pirie in 1917. In those days a certain amount of the sulphide
ore was treated in Ropp furnaces, was it not? —Yes.
72. Afterwards it was sintered by what means? —The function
of the Ropp furnaces, which were long mechanical furnaces,
in those days was to pre-roast the ore for the Huntington-
Heberlein section of the sintering plant. That is to say,
they were doing part of the work that is now done by the
A section of the Dwight & Lloyd plant. The material, when
it was delivered from the Ropps, was entirely different from
the material that now comes from the A section of the Dwight
and Lloyd plant. It was not sintered at all. It was partially
roasted, and was in a dusty condition. From the Ropp furnaces
it was delivered while still hot to the Huntington-Heberlein
pots, and the operation carried on in the usual way after that.
73. You consider that the elimination of the Ropp furnaces
and the, installation of the Dwight & Lloyd A machines con-
stitute a definite improvement from the metallurgical and health
standpoints?—Absolutely. The material coming from the
Ropps to the Huntington-Heberlein pots made a very poor
sinter. Instead of the material coming out in a solid lump,
as it now mostly does, it then contained a large quantity of
unsintered dusty material that had passed unchanged through
the operation. The conditions in those days at that particular
plant were much worse than they are now. The Ropps furnaces
no longer exist. They were pulled down recently.
74. But portion of the Huntington-Heberlein plant does still
exist? —Most of it does.
75. You have another operation at Pirie in connection of
the roasting of zinc concentrates and the manufacture of
sulphuric acid? —Yes.
76. What is the analysis of the zinc concentrates that are
roasted here? —They contain, approximately, 47 per cent, of
zinc, 6 per cent, of lead, and 29 per cent, of sulphur.
76a. What, approximately, is the analysis of the product
which, I understand, is called calcine?—lt carries around 53
per cent, of zinc, 54 per cent, of lead, and about 54 per cent,
of sulphur.
77. Where does this product go?—The calcine is delivered
from the furnace bin to stock piles on the wharf front, and
fiom there it is loaded mechanically into ships for transport
to the Electrolytic Refining Company’s works at Risdon, Tas-
mania.
78. An acid plant is worked in conjunction with the roasting
plant The function of the acid plant is to take the gases that
are when roasting the zinc concentrates, and convert
the sulphur di-oxide in them to sulphuric acid.
79. Where does this acid go?—lt is then sent by railway in


(Special cars to various superphosphate manufacturers in South
Australia for the manufacture of superphosphate.
80. To what part of South Australia is it delivered?—lt
mostly goes to Port Adelaide, but some of it goes to Wallaroo.
81. What type of acid plant have you at the works?—lt is
what is known as a contact acid plant.
82. What is the strength of the acid produced by it? —
Roughly, 100 per cent, sulphuric acid. It varies a little.
83. Are there other types of acid plants?—Yes; the com-
monest is what is ordinarily known as the chamber process.
84. What strength of acid does that produce?—Acid of about
60 per cent, sulphuric acid.
85. The contact acid has a number of special uses, particu-
larly in wartime? —Yes. It is essential to have concentrated
acids for certain munition work.
86. So that in ease of necessity for the defence of Australia
this acid could be railed to any portion of Australia in con-
nection with the production of munitions? —Yes.
87. Therefore, to that extent this plant may be regarded as
a definite contribution to the defence question in Australia?—
It would certainly be useful in that connection if ever required.
88. How many furnaces have you in the zinc roasting plant?
—•That plant carries two different types of furnaces. It has
two furnaces known as Skinner furnaces, and six which are
built on the Ue Spirlet principle, and are known here as
Barrier roaster type furnaces.
89. Is the tonnage treated in the Skinner plant and the
Barrier roaster plant separately? —The Skinner furnaces each
treat about 50 tons of zinc conceuerates in 24 hours, and the
Barrier roaster furnaces from 10 to 12 tons in the same period.
90. Briefly, what happens in these furnaces from the chemical
standpoint? —In these furnaces, the Skinner furnaces I par-
ticularly refer to, there is a certain amount of coal used to
assist in maintainng the heat necessary to oxdise the zinc
sulphide to zinc oxide, and SO' liberate the sulphur. In the
Barrier roaster furnaces the oxidation is carried on entirely by
the aid of the heat furnished by the oxidation of the sulphides,
that is to say, there is no extraneous fuel used in these latter
furnaces. In the furnaces themselves are really a series of
hearths, superimposed one upon the ether. In the case of the
Skinner furnaces these hearths are fixed, and the ore is moved
from one hearth to the other by means of rabbles, which push
it along until it ultimately comes to a discharge vent, which
the ore to drop on to the hearth immediately beneath.
The operation is repeated there by another set of rabbles, and
so on until the ore finally reaches the bottom of the furnace,
by which time the major part of its sulphur has been eliminated.
In the Barrier roaster type furnaces every alternate hearth
, revolves, and the ore is moved on each hearth gradually towards
a discharge opening by means of rabbling blades that are set
in the hearths themselves.
91. Prior to the war the zinc concentrates from Broken Hill
were practically all treated in Europe? —Yes. A small tonnage
was used out here for the production of spelter by the ordinary
distillation process.
92. When you say Europe what do you mean? —Mostly on the
Continent.
93. Owing to the development in the demand for zinc during
the war it was discovered that the British Empire was very
•short of internal production of zinc? —Yes. It was not pro-
ducing nearly enough for its own requirements.
94. Was that the reason for the development of this industry
in Australia? —It was the reason for the development of the
industry that arose in Tasmania, in which connection this roast-
ing is carried on.
95. The roasting in Europe of the zinc concentrates from
Broken Hill was carried on mostly by hand labor?—l cannot
say definitely.
96. When the roasting plants were erected here they were
originally to a considerable extent experimental? —The original
Barrier roaster type furnaces and the Skinner furnaces were
to a certain extent experimental. Particularly was this so in
regard to the Barrier roaster type furnaces.
97. Is there another type used in South Australia besides
these two types?—Yes. At Port Adelaide Herreshoff furnaces
are used for the same purpose that we use the Skinner and the
Barrier roaster types.
98. Has the utilisation of all these furnaces for this par-
ticular purpose been worked out in Australia in its application
to Broken Hill concentrates? —Yes.
99. And still further improvements are being made in the
roasting work? —The Barrier roaster type furnaces are very
greatly improved over those that were originally erected at
Broken Hill.
100. In addition to the plant you have described, you have,
of course, the ordinary shops and offices connected with any
big industrial establishment? —We have the usual service offices
throughout the plant.
101. Can you say how many men are employed at the works?
—The number varies slightly from day to day, but it is between
1,600 and 1,700.
102. Can you supply any statements showing details in
regard to the men employed?—Yes. I hand in a statement
showing the number of daily paid men employed at the
smelters in the different departments on April 24th, 1925.
It reads as follows: —Refinery, 271; top floor, 78; bottom
floor, 129; Dwight & Lloyd, 132; Huntington-Heberlein, 48;
heap sintering, 18; ore discharging, 17; slag pit, 62; Skinner
and Barrier roasting furnaces, 54; acid plant, 28; service,
830; total, 1.667.
103. What do you mean by the service department?—Those
employees that are not definitely connected with any one
regular operating department engaged in the actual treatment
of the ore, such as the workshops, power house, the yard gangs
generally, and the wharf gangs.
104. I find I have missed one operation in asking you for
a description of the plant generally. You mention here heap
sintering. What is that? —Heap sintering is a process that
will be eliminated from our operations about August this year.
The material treated in this way is the residue that remained
after the treatment of the zinc ores in the zinc distillation
plant that used to operate at Port Pirie. These residues carry
small amounts of lead and silver, and it is with the object of
recovering these metals that the heap sintering process is
carried on. In effect it is very like the Huntington-Heberlein
process carried on in heaps in the open air, as against the
sintering in a special pot. The material is laid down over
small brick flues that are set on the surface of the ground.
Before it is laid down a certain amount of kindling wood is
laid along these flues and when this is covered it is ignited,
and a gentle blast turned on into the flues. Prom these flues,
which are simply made of loose brick work, the air is delivered
out practically all over the bottom of the ore heap, and the
coke which the residues contain becomes ignited, and under the
influence of the blast partially smelts the material of the
residues, sintering them together and putting them into such
a form that they arei suitable for blast furnace reduction after
having been broken up.
105. I presume that if the Commission desire any further
information in regard to table A it can be supplied from your
records? —Yes, at any time.
106. By the Chairman —With regard to the 1.667 men shown
to have been employed on this particular day, I presume that
the number varies considerably from day to day?—Yes, that is
why we had to take one specific day, and why I mentioned
that the number varied between 1.600 and 1,700 men.
107. Have you any idea of the total number of men from
whom your employees are drawn. Would it amount to 2,000?
—I propose to put in a labor turnover table which will give
you the information you desire. I cannot say definitely what
number of men are available for work in Port Pirie. At times
we are short, and sometimes we have an overplus.
108. By Mr. Bohinettc —Has there been any excess during
the last 18 months?—Yes. There have been 30 or 40 men
outside the gate nearly every shift for some months past.
They have mostly been foreigners.
109. By Mr. Pearson —What is the lead content of vh©


Half-year
Ended
N
Nationalities.
Total
British.
Total
Foreigners.
Greek.
Maltese.
Italian.
German.
Scan
dinavian.
Russian.
Other.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
No.
Per
cent.
23/12/19
2,019
83-706
393
16-294
124
5-140
56
'
2-322
35
1-451
54
2-239
49
2-032
47
1-949
28
1-161
2,412
23/6/20
1,256
88-763
159
11-237
33
2-332
4
0-283
12
0-848
42
2-969
27
1-908
32
2-261
9
0-636
1,415
22/12/20
1,167
89-631
135
10-369
27
2-074
3
0-230
13
0-998
41
3-149
22
1-690
27
2-074
2
0-154
1,302
22/6/21
830
91-713
75
8-287
5
0-552
2
0-221
8
C-884
28
3-094
18
1-989
14
1-547
— | —
905
21/12/21
1,180
88-191
158
11-809
31
2-317
13
0-972
26
1 -943
41
3-064
23
1-719
15
1-121
0-673
1,338
21 /6/22
1,366
88-414
179
11-586
39
2-524
1 21
1-359
35
2-266
36
2-331
24
1-553
14
0-906
10
0-647
1,545
20/12/22
1,471
84-250
275
15-750
61
3-494
1 47
2-692
72
4-124
34
1-947
21
1-203
17
0-973
23
1-317
1,746
20/6/23
1,819
78-813
489
21-187
117
5-069
j 110
4-766
138
5-979
35
1-517
24
1-040
25
1-083
40
1-733
2,308
19/12/23
1,714
77-451
499
22-549
207
9-354
! 95
4-293
76
3-434
32
1-446
37
1-672
24
_
1 -085
28
1-265
2,213
2/7/24
1,853
72-610
699
27-390
336
13-166
137
5-369
100
3-918
33
1-293
40
1-507
25
0-980
28
1 -097
2,552
31/12/24
1,761
67-342
854
32-658
465
i 17-782
96
3-671
144
5-507
24
0-918
54
2-065
29
1-109
42
1-606
2,615
Nationality.
Number.
Percentage.
British . . ..
1,320
66.97
Greek .. ..
362
18.37
Italian . .
104
5.28
Maltese .. ..
68
3.45
Scandinavian .
47
2.39
Russians . . . .
20
1.01
Germans .. ..
18
0.91
Others
32
1.62
Total. . .
1,971
100.00
material treated by heap sintering? —The lead content varies.
It can be taken as around 8 per cent, to 10 per cent.
110. By Mr. Gepp —You have an exhibit, table B, showing
the labor turnover?—Yes. It is as follows: —
Table “ BA—LABOR TURNOVER.
Nationalities and Numbers of Individuals Employed during each Ha>f year for the Perwd 23/6/19 to 31/12/24
It will be noted that the foreigners are divided into various
sections. This return would include a man employed at
the works on only one day. As long as he became an em-
ployee of the works during a half-year he would be included.
The table shows that for the half-year ended 23-12-19 the
labor turnover in Britishers alone was 2,019 men, representing
83.706 of the total labor turnover. The total foreigners
numbered 393, and they represented 16.294 per cent, of the
total labor turnover for that period. Of those 393 foreigners,
124 were Greeks, representing 5.140 per cent, of the total
labor turnover; 56 were Maltese, representing 2.322 per cent;
35 were Italians, representing 1.451 per cent.; 54 were
Germans, representing 2.239 per cent.; 49 were Scandi-
navians, representing 2.032 per cent.; 47 were Russians, repre-
senting 1.949 per cent.; and 28 were various nationalities not
otherwise enumerated, representing 1.161 per cent.; the com-
plete total being 2,412 men.
111. Will you give us the period when your percentage of
British-born labor was the lowest? —In the half-year ended
31/12/24 the total labor turnover was 2,615 men. Of that
number, 1,761, equal to 67.342 per cent., were British; and
854, equal to 32.658 per cent., were foreigners. Of those
foreigners, 465, equal to 17.782 per cent., were Greeks; 96,
equal to 3.671 per cent., were Maltese; 144, equal to 5.507 per
cent., were Italians; 24, equal to 0.918 per cent., were
Germans; 54, equal to 2.065 per cent., were Scandinavians;
29, equal to 1.109 per cent., were Russians; and 42, equal to
1.606 per cent., were various nationalities not elsewhere
enumerated.
112. What was the reason for the very large increase in
foreign labor between those two periods, particularly Greeks
and Italians?—lt has been due to the fact that British labor
has not been available, and the only source of labor suppi/
was the foreign element. That has been the position for some
considerable time past.
113. Has the company at any time ever organised any im-
portation of Southern European labor for Port Pirief—No,
decidedly not.
114. By Mr. Bobinette —During 1919 were not the works
shut down?—Ves.
115. That wnuld affect the position, so that the figures
would not be a true reflex of the position?—Those in the first
line of the table might not be.
116. Would not the shut-down in 1919 reduce the percent-
age of foreigners? —It would considerably. We were shut
down for about half of 1919.
117. Due to what cause? —The Broken Hill strike and the
cessation of ore supplies.
118. By Mr. Gepp —With regard to the period of low labor
turnover, marked “22/6/21,” I take it that the smelters must
have been closed for a part of that period?—They were closed
during that time owing to a fire in the Dwight & Lloyd plant,
which occurred early in 1921.
119. By Mr. Bobinette —You said there was a shortage of
British labor. Can you give any reason for that? —No, excppt
that I understand South Australia is particularly prosperous
at the present time, and there is very little unemployment
anywhere.
120. By Mr. Gepp —You have another table showing segre-
gation into nationalities of the labor turnover for the fort-
night ended 11/3/25? —Yes. It is as follows: —
Table 81.
121. Is there any difference between Table B and Table Bl?
—The latter is for a very recent fortnight.
122. It is really an extension of Table B?—It would be
called so. It is simply to give the Commission some know-
ledge of the conditions existing at present. The order of per-
centages is about the same as for the half-year ended 31/12/24.
120. By Mr. Bobinette —During the fortnight ended March
11th, 1925, were not a large number of foreigners discharged
in order to make room for an influx of wharf laborers?—l
could not say that at all. I was in Melbourne at that time.
124. By Mr. Gepp— When was the industry established at
Port Pine?—ln 1889, I understand, the smelters started.
125. How many men have the smelters usually employed
from the date when they were really established and run until


Half-year ended.
Nationality.
Total
British.
Greek.
Maltese.
Italian.
German.
Scandinvn.
Russian.
Others.
No.
%
No.
%
No.
% I
No.
%
No.
O/
No.
%
No.
%
No.
0/
/o
No.
%
26/12/17
(100-00)
1 -40
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
0-23
26/6/18
3
(75)
1-18
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
(25-00)
7-69
4
0-93;
25/12/18
1(100-00)
1 ; -40
—
- 1
_ 1
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
0-23
25/6/19
2
(100-00)
•79
—
—
—
-
—
—
-I—
—
—
—
—
2
0-47
23/12/19
3
(100-00)
1-18
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
3
0-70
23/6/20
4
(100-00)
1-57
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(
_
—
—
—
4
0-93 ;
22/12/20
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
-
—
—
—
—
—
22/6/21
—
—
—
—
—
_
—
—
—
—
1
(100-00)
12-5
—
—
—
—
1
0-23
21/12/21
2
(100-00)
•79
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
-
—
—
—
o
0-47
21/6/22
20
(83-33)
7-87
1
(4-17)
1-39
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2
(8-33)
25-0
1
(4-17)
7-69
24
5-59
20/12/22
28
(87-51)
11-02
2
(6-25)
2-78
—
—
1
(3-12)
3-33
—
—
1
(3-12)
12-5
—
—
—
32
7-50
20/6/23
30
(78-93)
11-81
2
(5-27)
2-78
1
(2-63)
2-70
2
(5-27)
6-67
—
—
.
(5-27)
25-0
—
1
(2-63)
7-69
38
8-86
19/12/23
37
(72-55)
14-57
9
(17-65)
12-50
—
—
2
(3-92)
6-67
2
(3-92)
28-57
—
1
(1-96)
7-69
51
11-88
2/7/24
57
(55-34)
22-43
23
(22-34)
31-94
4
(3-88)
10-81
10
(9-71)
33-33
2
(1-94)
28-57
1
(0-97)
12-5
2
(1-94)1
25-0 j 4
(3-88)
30-78
103
24-00
31/12/24
53
(40-47)
20-87
31
(23-66)
43-05
24
(18-32)
64-87
13
(9-92)
43-33
i
(0-76)
14-29
2
(1-53)
25-0
4
(3-05)
50-0
1 3
(2-29)
23-08
131
30-53
1/1/25 to 11/3/25
13
(40-62)
5-12
4
(12-50)
5-56
8
(25-00)
21-62
1 2
(6-25)
6-67
2
(6-25)
28-57
i
(3-13)
12-5
—
2
1 (6-25)
I 15-38
32
7-45
Total
254
, (59-22)
100-00
72
(16-79)
100-00
37
(8-62)
100-00
|
30
(6-99)
100-00
7
(1-63)
100-00
8
d-86)
100-00
1 8
d-86)
100-00
13
i (3-03)
1 100-00
1
| 429
100-00
Months.
Yeaks.
Nationality.
Up
10
13
19
25
49
73
97
Over 10
! 16
21
26
Over
Total.
4 to 6.
7 to 9.
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
and up
to
to
to
30.
3.
12.
18.
24.
48.
72.
96.
120.
to 15.
20.
25.
30.
(4-72)
(7-09)
(6-30)
(7-57)
(3-55)
(5-51)
(11-02)
(12-99)
(10-24)
(8-66)
(9-05); (7-09)
(7-09)
(1-97)
(3-15)
(100-00)
British
12
18
16
4
9
14
28
33
26
23
18
18
5
8
254
54-55
45-oo
45-71
16 -00
23-08
37-84
59-58
76-74
74*28
81-49
79"3 J
100-00
94-74
ioo-oo
100*00
59-2i
(5-55)
(16-67)
(9-72)
(15-28)
(22-22)
(11-11)
(IMl)
(2-78)
(4-17)
(1-39)
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
Greek
4
12
7
11
16
8
8
3
1
—
—
*
—
—
72
i8-i8
30-00
20-00
44-00
4 I "°3
21-62
I7-02
4-85
8-57
3-70
“ *
—
16-78
(2-70)
(8-11)
(18-92)
(16-22)
(18-92)
(27-02)
(8-11)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
<100-ooy
Maltese
1
3
7
6
7
10
OO
WsO
'
—
—
37
8-62
4'54
7'5°
20-00
17-95
27-03
(16-67)
(13-33)
(13-33)
(6-67)
(16-67)
(10-00)
(10-00)
(10-00)
(3-33)
—
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
I talian
5
4
4
2
5
3
3
3
1
—
—
—
-
—.
30
8-oo
12-82
8-n
6-38
6-98
2-86
22*73
10-00
”'43
German
—
(28-57)
9
—
(14-29)
1
(14-28)
1
(14-29)
1
(14-28)
1
(14-29)
—
—
(100-00)
7
—
5-0°
—
—
2*70
2-33
2-86
3-70
3-45
i-«>3
—
—
(12-50)
—
—
(25-00)
(12-50)
(50-00)
—
—
—
(100-00)
Scandinavian
—
—
—
—
1
—
-
1
4
—
.
—
8
—
—
—
—
2*70
5'7i
3-70
13-79
1-87
(12-50)
—
(50-00)
(25-00)
(12-50)
—
—
—
—
—
— '
(100-00)
Russian .
—
—
—
1
—
4
2
1
—
—
—
—
8
—
—
—
—
2-56
—
8-51
4-95
2-86
--
~
1-87
(7-69)
(7-69)
(15-39)
(7-69)
—
(7-69)
(15-38)
(7-70)
(15-39)
(7-69)
I
—
(7-69)
—
—
(100-00)
Others
— p.
1
1
2
1
—
1
1
2
.
—
*
13
—
2-50
2-86
8-oo
2-56
—
2-13
4-65
2-86
7-41
3-45
5-26
3-03
Total
(5-13)
•79
(9-32)
40
(8-16)
(5-83)
25
(9-09)
39
(8-62)
37
(10-96)
47
(10-02)
43
(8-16)
35
(6-29)
27
(6-76)
29
(4-20)
18
(4-43)
19
(1-16)
5
(1-87) (100-00)
8 1 429
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100*00
100-00
100*00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
ioo-oo
100-00
ioo-oo
ioo-oo
100*00
the present period?—The number would range between 1,000
and 2,500 men employed on any one day.
126. What was the number in 1900 and again in 1914?
In 1900, I understand, about 1,200 men were employed, and in
1914 practically the same number.
127. Have you any information touching on lead poisoning
or suspected lead poisoning? —I have had a number of tables
prepared giving certain details. They contain an analysis of
the reported cases of lead poisoning. I put in the tables, which
are marked C, D, E, F, 6, H, K, and L.
Table “ C.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Number of Persona Compensated for Lead Poisoning for the Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
Numbers in parentheses represent percentage of the total numbers in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent percentages of the totals
at the foot of the table.
Table “ D.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Length of Service in Relation to Nationality for the Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
Numbers in parenthesis represent percentages of the total numbers in the last column. Smaller figures represent percentages of T he numbers at Die
foot of the table.


Department.
Weeks of Disability
Total
4 &
under.
5 to 13.
14 to 26.
27
to 39.
40 to 52.
53 to 78.
79 to 104.
105 & over.
No.
%
No.
%
No.
%
No.
O/
No.
o/
No.
%
No.
o/
/o
No.
%
No.
0/
Refinery
20
(21-98)
20-84
22
(24-18)
20-76
10
(10-99)
20-41
8
(8-79)
20-51
6
(6-59)
37-50
—
—
6
(6-59)
42-86
19
(26-88)
19-39
91
(100-00)
21-22
Top Floor .
12
(20-69)
12-50
19
(32-76)
17-92
8
(13-79)
16-33
3
(5-17)
7-69
4
(6-90)
25-00
1
d-72)
9-09
—
11
(18-97)
11-23
58
(100-00)
13-52
Rottdm Floor
22
(27-50)
22-92
19
(23-75)
17-92
11
(13-75)
22-45
9
(11-25)
23-08
1
(1-25)
6-25
9
(2-50)
18-18
1
(1-25)
7-14
15
(18-75)
15-31
80
(100-00)
18-65
1 )wifeh't & tloyd
16
(25-00)
16-67
13
(20-32)
12-26
. 3
(4-69)
6-12
4
(6-25)
10-26
—
—
5
(7-81)
45-46
2
(3-12)
14-29
21
(32-81)
21-42
64
(100-00)
14-92
Hfmttngton-Herberlein
8
(19-05)
8-33
5
(11-91)
4-72
11
(26-91)
22-45
8
(19-05)
20-51
4
(9-52)
25-00 ! 2
(476)
18-18
—
—
4
(9-52)
4-08
42
(100-00)
9-79
Rcrjlp' Roasters
—
5
(45-45)
4-72
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
6
(54-55)
6-12
11
(100-00)
2-56
Hd&p 'Sintering
—
i
(100-00)
0-94
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
(100-00)
0-23
Orte 1 Discharging
1
(33-33)
1-04
2
(66-67)
1-89
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
3
(100-00)
0-70
Slag Pit
1
(25-00)
1-04
—
—
1
(25-00)
2-04
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2
(50-00)
2-04
4
(100-00)
0-93
Skinner ,
2
(28-56)
2-08
3
(42-86)
2-83
1
(14-29)
2-04
1
(14-29)
2-56
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
(100-00)
1-63
Acid Plant
1
(100-00)
0-94
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
(100-00)
0-23
Service
13
(19-40)
13-54
17
(25-38)
16-04
4
(5-97)
8-16
6
(8-96)
15-39
1
(1-49)
6-25
i
(1-49)
9-09
5
(7-46)
35-71
20
(29-85)
20-41
67
(100-00)
15-62
•i ,
Total
96
(22-38)
100-00
106
(24-72)
100-00
49
(11-42)
100-00
39
(9-09)
100-00
16
(3-73)
100-00
ii
(2-56)
100-00
14
(3-26)
100-00
98
(22-84)
100-00
429
(100-00)
100-00
t _ •
' ‘ * '
Months of Service.
Years.
Weeks of Disability.
Up
19
25
Over 10
16
21
31
Total.
10
13
49
73
97
26
to
4 to 6.
7 to 9.
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
and up
to
to
to
and
3.
12.
18.
24.
48.
72.
96.
120.
to 15.
20.
25.
30.
Over.
(10-42)
(12-50)
(16-67)
(7-29)
(5-21)
(7-29)
(11-46)
(10-42)
(4-16)
(3-12)
(521)
(2-08)
(417)
(100-00)
Up to 4
10
12
16
7
5
7
11
10
4
3
5
2
4
—
—
96
45-46
30-00
45-7i
28-00
12-82
18-91
23-40
23-25
u-43
II*II
17-24
ii*ii
21-05
—
—
22-38
5 to 13
(7-55)
(10-38)
(12-26)
(5-66)
(7-55)
(12-26)
(15-09)
(7-55)
(6-60)
(5-66)
(6-33)
(3-80)
__
(2-53)
'
(100-CO)
8
11
13
6
8
13
16
8
7
6
5
3
—
2
—
106
36-36
27-50
37-14
24-GO
20-51
35-13
34-04
18-60
20-00
22*22
17-24
16-66
—
40*00
—
24-71
144*) 86 -
(4-08)
(22-45)
(6-12)
(14-29)
(14-29)
(14-29)
(6-12)
(612)
(6-12)
(2-04)
(4-081
(100-00)
2
11
3
7
7
7
3
3
3.
1
2
—
—
49
s
9-09
27-50
8-57
28-00
17-95
18-92
6-38
6-98
8-57
3-70
6-89
—
—
—
—
11*42
27.to 39 „
(5-12)
(10-26)
(2-56)
(5-13)
(33-33)
(5-13)
(12-82)
(7-69)
(7-69)
(5-13)
d-27)
(1*27)
--
(100-00)
2
4
1
2
13
33-34
2
5-4i
2
1
5-56
39
9-09
9-09
io-oo
2-85
8-oo
10-64
6-q8
8-57
7-41
3-45
—
—
—
40 to 52
—
(6-25)
(6-25)
(12-50)
(18-75)
(12-50)
(12-50)
(6-25)
(12-50)
(6-25)
(6-25)
(100-00)
1
1
2
3
2
' 2
4-26
1
2
5-7i
1
1
16
3*73
—
2-50
2-86
8-oo
7-69
5-41
2-33
3-70
3-45
—
—
—
—
—
—
(9-09)
—
(9-09)
(27-27)
(9-09)
(27-27)
—
—
(9-09)
(9-10)
(100-00)
1
5-56
11
2-57
—
—
2-86
—
2-56
8-11
2-13
6-98
—
—
3-45
—
—
—
79 to 104-
—
—
(7-14)
(14-29)
—
(7-14)
(21-43)
(35-71)
(14-29)
(100-00)
—
—
—
1
2
—
1
3
5
2
—
—
14
—
—
—
4-00
5-i3
—
2-13
6-g8
14-29
7-41
—
—
—
—
—
3-26
IQ 5 and over
—
(1-02)
1
—
—
(3-06)
3
(8-16)
8
(12-25)
12
(11-23)
11
(12-25)
12
(14-28)
14
(11-23)
11
(15-30)
1 5
(3-06)
3
(8-16)
8
(100-00)
98
V
2-50
—
—
8-n
T7*02
23-90
31-43
44-45
48-28
6i-n
78-95
6o-oo
100-00
22-84
. Total
(513) (9-32)
22 40
(8-16)
35
(5-83)
25
(9-09)
39
(8-62)
37
(10-96)
47
(10-02)
43
(8-16)
35
(6-29)
27
(6-76)
29
(4-20)
18
(4-43)
19
(116)
5
(1-87)
8
(100-00)
429
‘ ■
100*00
100-00
IOO- 0
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100*00
100-00
100*00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100*00
Table “ E.”—REPORTED CASES Op LEAD POISONING.
Length of Disability in Relation to Department of Origin of Contraction of Disease, 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
Numbers in parentheses represent percentages of the total numbers in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent percentages of the totals
at the foot of the table.
Table “ F ’’—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Length of Disability in Relation to Length of Service, Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
Numbers in parentheses represent percentages of the total in the last column. Smaller figures represent percentages of the totals at the foot of the table.


Nationality.
Weeks of Disability.
Total.
Under 4.
5 to 13.
14 to 26. 27 to 39.
40 to 52.
53 to 78. 79 to 104. Ove
r 105.
B. ;
British
No.
%
(23-23)
61-46
No. %
(24-80)
63 59-43
No.
13
% j No.
(5-12)
26-53 j 14
%
(5-51)
35-89
No.
4
%
(1-57)
25-00
No. %
(1-97)
5 45-46
No I %
! (3-55)
9 ; 64-29
No.
87
0/
/O
(34-25)
88-78
No.;
(254
%
(lOtf-00)
59-21
G.
(16-67)
12-50
(19-44)
14 13-21
12
(16-67)
24-49
17
(23-60)
43-59
9
(12-50)
56-25
(417)
3 27-27
2
(2-78)
14-29
3
(4-17)
3-06
72
(10Q-00)
16-78
(lOO-OO)
S-62
M.
Maltese
11
(29-74)
11-46
(32-43)
12 i 11-32
9
(24-32)
18-37
2
(5-41)!
5-13 S 1
(2-70)
6-25
(2-70)
1 9-09
(2-70)
1 7-14
37'
X.
Italian
5
(16-67)
5-21
11
(36-68)
10-38
7
(23-33)
14-29
(13-33):
4 i 10-26 | —
—
, *
1
(3-33)
7-14
2
(6-66)
2-04 30
(10d-00)
$-99
H.
German
—
—
2
(28-57)
1-89
2
(28-57)
4-08
1
(14-29)
6-25
2
(28-57)
18-18
—
—
—
—
*
(l(X)-OO)
1-63
s.
Scandinavian
3
(37-50)
3-12
—
—
i
(12-50)
2-04
—
—
j (12-50)
1 ! 6-25
—
—
(12-50)
1 7-14
2
(25-00)
2-04
8;
(ICO-00)
1-87
R.
Russian
1
(12-50)
1-04
3
(37-50)
2-83
3
(37-50)
6-12
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
i
(12-50)
1-02
8
(100-00)
1-87
Others
5
(38-46)
5-21
1
(7-69)
0-94,
2
(15-38)
4-08
2
(15-38)
5-18
—
—
—
—
—
—
3
(23-09)
3-06
is;
(100-00)
303
Total
06
(22-38)
100-00
106
(24-72)
100-00
49
(11-42)
100-00
39
(9-09)
100-00
16
(3-73)
100-00
n
(2-56)
100-00
14
(3-26)
100-00
98
(22-84)
100-00
429
(100-00)
xco-oo
Nationality.
Ages—Years.
Total,
21 & under.
22 to 25.
26 to 30.
31 to 35.
36 to 40.
41 to 45.
46 to 50.
51 to 55.
56 to 60.
Over 60.
B.
Britisli
No.
7
%
(2-76)
77-78
No.
24
%
(9-45)
46-15
No.
38
%
(14-96)
46-91
No.
41
%
(16-14)
51-25
No.
46
%
(18-10)
62-16
No.
26
%
(10-24)
65-00
No.
25
%
(9-84)
71-43
No.
16
%
(6-30)
69-56
No.
18
%
(7-09)
85-72
No,
13
%
(5-12)
92-86
No.
254
(100°-00)
59-21
G.
Greek
1
d-39)
1111
10
(13-89)
19-23
23
(31-95)
28-40
17
(23-61)
21-25
10
(13-89)
13-51
4
(5-55)
10-00
6
(8-33)
17-14
—
1
(1 - 39)
4-76
—
— j 72
(100-00)
16-78
M.
Maltese • • • •
_
11
(29-72)
21-15
10
(27-02
12-35
9
(24-32)
11-25
3
(8-11)
4-05
2
(5-41)
5-00
2
(5-41)
5-71
—
—
—
—
—
37
(100-00)
8-62
X.
Italian
1
(3-33)
11-11
5
(16-67)
9-62
8
(26-67)
9-88
5
(16-67)
6-25
6
(20-00)
8-11
3
(10-00)
7-50
i
(3-33)
2-86
1
(3-33)
4-34
—
—
—
—
30
(100-00)
6-99
H.
German ....
1
(14-29)
1-23
—
2
(28-57)
2-70
1
(14-29)
2-50
i
(14-29)
2-86
2
(28-56)
8-70
—
-
—
- l 7-
(100-00.
1-63
S.
Scandinavian
1
(12-5)
1-25
3
(37-5)
4-06
1
(12-5)
2-50
—
—
2
(25-0)
8-70
1
(12-5)
4-76
—
—
8
(100-00)
1-87
R.
Russian ....
—
4
(50-0)
5-00
3
(37-5)
4-06
— I “
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
(12-5)
7-14
8
(100-00)
1-87
0.
Others
1 __
2
(15-38)
3-85
1
(7-69)
1-23
3
(23-08)1
3-75 j. 1
(7-69)
1-35
3
(23-09)
7-50
—
—
2
(15-38)
8-70
1
(7-69)
4-76
—
—
13
(100-00)
3-03
Total ..
1 9
(2-10)
100-00
52
(!2- 12 )!
100-00 81
(18-88)
100-00
80
(18-65)
100-00
i 74
(17-25)
100-00
40
(9-32)
! 100-00
35
(8-16)
! 100-00
23
(5-36)
100-00
21
(4-90)
100-00
14
(3-26)
100-00
429
oo
99
66
oo
i
!
Weeks of Disability.
Total.
Age.
4 & under.
5 to 13.
14 to 26.
27 to 39.
40
to 52.
53
to 78.
79 to 104.
105
& over.
%
(100-00)
2-10
No.
2
22
%
(99-22)
~2-08
No.; %
(44-45)
4 3-77
No.
2
O/
(22-22)
4-08
No.
1
% No.
(11-11)
2-56 —
%
No.
%
No. %
.No.
%
No.
9
(42-31)
22-92
16
(30-77)
15-10
8
(15-39)
16-33
4
(7-69)
10-26
1
(1-92)
6-25
—
—
_ —
1
(1-92)
1-02
52
(100-00)
121-12
26 to 30
24
(29-63)
25-00
1 (30-87)
25 j 23-59
7
(8-64)
14-29
10
(12-35)
25-64
3
(3-70)
18-75
3
(3-70)
27-27
(3-70)
3 21-43
6
(7-41)
6-12
81
(100-00)
18-88
16
(20-00)
16-67
19
(23-75)
17-92
12
(15-00)
24-49
8
(10-00)
20-51
6
(7-50)
37-50
5
(6-25)
45-46
(10-00)
8 57-14
6
(7-50)
6-12
80
(100-00)
18-65
11
(14-87)
11-46
23
(31-08)
21-70
; (10-81)
8 16-33
■
9
(12-16)
23-08
2
(2-70)
12-50
2
(2-70)
18-18
(2-70)!
2 14-29 j 17
(22-98)
17-35
74
(100-00)
17-25
(22-50)
9-38
j (17-50)
7 i 6-60
4
(10-00)
8-16
5
(12-50)
12-82 j 1
(2-60)
6-25
—
—
(2-50)
1 7-14
13
(32-50)
13-27
40
(100-00)
9-32
7
2
(20-00)
7-29
(22-86)
8 1 7-55
6
2
(17-14)
12-24
2
(5-71)
5-13 I 1
(2-86)
6-25
i
(2-86)
9-09
—
—
10
(28-57)
10-20
35
(100-00)
8-16
(8-70)
2-08
3
(13-04)
2-83
(8-70)
4-08
—
— I 1
(4-35)
6-25
—
— ! —
15
(66-21)
15-31
23
(100-00)
5-36
i
(4-76)
1-04
—
—
—
—
—
1
(4-76)
6-25
—
—
—
—
19
(90-48)
19-39
21
(100-00)
4-90
(14-20)
2 ! 2-08
1
(7-14)
0-94
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
' —
11
(78-57)
11-22
14
(100-00
3'26
96
(22-38)
100-00
106
(24-72)
100-00
49
(11-42)
100-00 j 39
(9-09)
100-00
16
(3-73)
100-00
n
(2-56)
100-00
14
(3-26)
100-00
98
(22-84)
100-00
429
(100-00)
100-00
i ! —
Table “ G.”- REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Length of Disability in Relation to Nationality, Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
Numbers in parentheses represent the percentages to the total in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent the percentages to the totals at the
foot of the table.
Table “ H.” —REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Ages of Persons Compensated for Lead Poisoning for the Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25 in relation to Nationalities.
Numbers in parentheses represent the percentages to the total in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent the percentages to the totals
at the foot of the table.
Table “ K.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
Ages of Persons contracting Lead Poisoning in relation to Length of Disability. Period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
percentageTtcTthe total In the « colnmn. N„n,be„ net In parent,,e,.. ~p,...nt to tota.a
at the foot of the table.


26/12/17
26/6/18
25/12/18
25/6/19
23/12/10
23/6/20
22/12/20
22/6/21
21/12/21
21/6/22
20/12/22
20/6/23
19/12/23
2/7/24
31/12/24
1/1/26 to
31/5/25
'UMMARY — - , ,
Total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
Average daily strength. .... *
Total number of lead easels during half-year ended ....
Total lead cases as per cent, on total employed during half-year ended
-
4
1
2
2.412
1,0 7 Off
3
0-124
1,415
65lo
4
0-283
1,302
7 04ff
005
410«
1
0-110
1,338
688o
2
0-140
1,545
1,004
24
1-553
1.746
1,208
32
1-833
2,308
1,339
38
1-646
2.213
1,430
51
2-305
2,552
1,595
103
4-036
2,615
1,601
131
5-010
2,650
1,681
126
4"755
British—
Total number employed during half-year ended
2,010
1,256
1,167
830
1,180
1,366
1,471
1,819
1,714
1,853
1.761
1,818
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
83-706
88-763
89-631
91-713
88-191
88-414
84-25
78-813
77-451
72-61
67-342
68-604
Total number of lead cases during half-year ended
i
3
1
3
4
—
—
2
20
28
30
37
57
53
38
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
100-00
75-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
—
—
100-00
83-33
87-50
78-96
72-55
40-46
30'16
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—-
—
0-124
0-283
—
—
0-149
1-294
1-604
1-299
1-672
2-234
2-027
1‘434
% lead cases on total number of British employed during half-year ended
—
0-140
0-318
—
•—
0-169
1-464
1-903
1-649
2-159
3-076
3-010
2-020
Total Foreigners —
Total number employed during half-year ended
393
150
135
75
158
179
275
489
499
609
832
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
16-294
11-237
10-369
8-287
11-809
11-586
15-75
21-187
22-549
27-39
32-658
3l"396
Total number of lead cases during half-year ended
—
1
—
—
—
—
—
1
—
4
4
8
14
46
78
88
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
25-00
—
—
—
—
—
100-00
—
16-67
12-50
21-04
27-45
44-66
59-54
69"84
% lead cases bn total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
—
—
0-110
—
0-259
0-229
0-347
0-S33
1-803
2-983
3*321
% lead cases on total number of Foreigners employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
•
—
—
1-333
—
2-235
1-454
1-636
2-806
6-580
9-133
10-577
Greeks —
Total number employed during half-year ended
_
124
33
27
5
31
39
61
117
207
336
465
435
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
5-140
2-332
2-074
0-552
2-317
2-524
3-494
5-069
9-354
13-166
17-782
16"415
Total number of lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
■
—
1
2
2
9
23
31
54
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
•
4-17
6-26
5-26
17-65
22-34
23-67
42"86
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0-065
0-115
0-087
0-407
0-901
1-186
2038
% lead cases on total number of Greeks employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
2-564
3-279
1-709
4-348
6-845
6-667
12-414
Maltese —
Total number employed during half-year ended
—
_
4
3
2
13
21
47
110
95
137
96
83
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
Total number of lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
2-322
0-283
0-230
0-221
0-972
1-359
2-692
4-766
1
4-293
5-369
4
3-671
24
3*132
15
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—•
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2-63
3-88
18-32
11'90
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
*—
—
—
—
—
—
0-043
0-157
0-918
0'566
% lead cases on total number of Maltese employed during half-year ended
■
—
—
—
—
—
0-909
—
2-919
25-00
15-072
Italians —
Total number employed during half-year ended
—
35
12
13
8
26
35
72
138
76
100
144
148
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
1-451
0-848
0-098
0-884
1-943
2-266
4-124
5-979
3-434
3-918
5-507
5’585
Total number of lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
2
2
10
13
2
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
3-12
5-26
3-92
9-71
9-92
1 -50
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
■
—
.
0-057
0-087
0-090
0-392
0-497
0*075
% lead cases on total number of Italians employed during half-year ended
— ■
—
—
—
—
—
—
1-389
1-449
2-632
10-00
9-028
1-351
Germans —
Total number employed during half-year ended
—
54
42
41
28
41
36
34
35
32
33
24
24
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
2-239
2-969
3-149
3-094
3-064
2-331
1-947
1-517
1-446
1-293
0-918
0’906
Total number of lead cases during half-vear ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
•—
—
.
2
2
1
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
-— ■
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
3-92
1-94
0-76
317
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0-090
0:078
0-038
0151
% lead cases on total number of Germans employed during half-year ended
~
—
—
—
-
—
—
—
—
—
6-250
6-061
4-167
16-667
Scan i) an avi ans —
Total number employed during half-year ended
—
49
27
22
18
23
24
21
24
37
40
54
59
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
2-032
1-908
1-690
1-089
1-719
1-553
1-203
1-040
1-672
1-567
2-065
2"226
total number of lead cases during half-year ended
—
•
—
—
—
—
1
—
.
1
2
1
2
3
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
100-00
—
3-12
5-26
0-97
1-53
2'38
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
—
—
—
•
0-110
—
0-057
0-087
0-039
0-076
0113
% lead cases on total number of Scandanavians employed during half-year ended .
—
—
—
—
—
5-555
—
4-762
8-333
—
2-500
3-704
5 085
Russians—
Total number employed during half-year ended
_
47
32
27
14
15
14
17
25
24
25
29
22
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
*—
—
—
—
1-949
2-261
2-074
1-547
1-121
0-906
0-973
1-083
1-085
0-980
1-109
0'830
Total number of lead cases during half-vear ended
—
—
—
*—
.
—
•
—
—
2
—
2
4
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—•
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
8-33
—
1-94
3-05
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
•
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0-129
—
0-078
0-153
% lead cases on total number of Russians employed during half-year ended
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
14-286
—
—
—
8-00
13-793
—
Others —
Total number employed during half-year ended
28
1-161
9
2
9
10
23
40
28
28
42
61
% of total number of individuals employed during half-year ended
—
—
-—
- —
0-636
0-154
—
0-673
0-647
1-317
1-733
1-265
1-097
1-606
2'302
Total number of lead cases during half-vear ended
—
1
• —
-—
—
—
—
—
—
1
•
1
1
4
3
10
% lead cases on total lead cases during half-year ended
—
25-00
—
—
—
—
■
—
4 17
—
2-63
1-96
3-88
2-29
7'94
% lead cases on total number of individuals employed during half-year ended ....
—
—
— i
—
—
—
■
-
0-065
—
0-043
0 045
0-157
0-114
0-378
% lead cases on total number of others employed during half-year ended
1
~ |
_ j
i
*
—
10-00
—
2-500
3-571
34-286 ,
1
7-143
16-393
a During these periods the rotation scheme was in operation.


The tables practically cover the period of my employment with
the company, that is, from the middle of 1917 to the end of the
third month in 1925, Table C shows the reported cases of lead
poisoning gauged by the number of persons compensated for
lead poisoning for the period 26/6/17 to 11/3/25.
128. The table covers practically eight years of the figures
on the reported cases? —Yes.
129. What do you mean by reported cases?—Those cases
which are regarded as plumbisrn on the certificates of the
doctors.
130. What connection have those cases with the Workmen’s
•Compensation Act. Are they all Workmen’s Compensation Act
cases? —Yes.
131. We may take it those are the compensable cases? —Yes.
132. What is the meaning of the red figures and the black
figures in the tables? —If you look at the first period you will
see that one Britisher was compensated for lead poisoning under
a doctor’s certificate in the half-year ended 26/12/17, and that
he represented 100 per cent, of the cases for that period. He
also represented .4 per cent, of the total number of British cases
of lead poisoning that occurred in the eight years. Then there
is another figure in the total column on the right-hand side of
the table, which gives the total number of cases. That shows
that this Britisher, whose case occurred in the half-year ended
26/12/17, represented 0.23 per cent, of the total cases we have
compensated for lead poisoning, including both foreigners and
Britishers.
(Note. — The red figures referred to are printed in
parentheses. —J. S., Sec.)
133. Will you take one or two other causes as illustrative for
the Commission’s information? —Yes. Take, for example, the
period ended 2/7/24. In that half-year there were 57 British,
23 Greek, 4 Maltese, 10 Italian, 2 German, 1 Scandinavian, and
4 unspecified (other nationalities) cases, or 103 cases in all.
The 57 Britishers represented 55.34 per cent, of the total cases
in that half year. They also represented 22.43 per cent, of all
the British cases that occurred in the eight years. The 23
Greeks represented 41.94 pef cent, of all the Greek cases in
the eight years, and 22.34 per cent, of all the cases in that
half-year.
134. This table indicates an average of slightly over 50
reported cases per year, with a large increase during recent
years?—Yes.
135. At the moment I understand that the indications are
that the cases are increasing?—That is so. The reported cases
are increasing at the moment.
136. We have no indication whether this particular rise
beginning in 1923 is likely to be permanent under present con-
ditions, or whether it will ease off again? —I have no idea about
that. As a matter of fact the whole thing is incomprehensible
to me. The cases continue to increase despite the fact that we
are continually improving the working conditions.
137. There has been a substantial increase in the reported
cases of late, and particularly in the last few months? —Par-
ticularly in the last six or seven months there has been a
considerable increase,
138. Is the increase -general ? —No. By far the bigger per-
centage of cases are coming from among the foreign element.
139. Have those foreigners been with you long?—The greater
number have been employed for comparatively a short time—
around 12 months would be their average length of service.
140. To what do you attribute the recent increase in the
number of reported cases? —If the cases are genuine, then I
am at a loss to account for it. We have been constantly
improving the working conditions on the plant for some years
past, and yet the cases continue to increase right up to the
present time.
141. To what do you attribute the greater susceptibility of
the foreigner?—lf the cases are lead poisoning cases then I
can only think that it may be due to the habits of life of the
foreigner, to the fact that he is a man of poorer physique on
the average than the Britisher, and to the fact that when they
originally come here they do not look particularly healthy
people. Of course, I refer to the majority of them.
142. I understand that in 1922 the ratio of foreigners to
British was much lower than it is to-day. Those figures, I
believe, are shown in another table? —Yes.
143. The figures show, I understand, that in 1922 there was
one foreigner to every eight Britishers, whereas in 1924 the
proportion had increased to one foreigner to two Britishers?—
That is so.
144. Why is this? —It is simply because in the last year or
so we have considerably increased our labor forces, due to a
great deal of constructional work that is going on, and, being
unable to obtain British labor, we have been forced to engage
foreigners as the only labor available at the gate. The increase
in our labor force has been to a very large extent an increase
of foreign labor.
145. Is that due to a big construction programme?—Yes.
146. If there were a reduction in the number of employees
the ratio would come nearer to the 1922 ratio? —I think it
would come back approximately to the same figure.
147. Does the type of work which the British workman does
compare with the w r ork done by the foreigner?—They do similar
types of work throughout the plant.
148. Therefore, assuming that the reported cases of plumbisrn
are genuine, does it not appear very definite that the foreign
labor is more susceptible to lead than the Britisher? —The
figures make that appear so.
149. Can you assign any reason for that?—No. I cannot
add anything to what I have said.
150. Do a great number of the foreigners batch together in
houses in the town?—l have heard so, but I cannot say definitely
that it is dene.
151. Has your company any preference between British and
foreign labor? —Yes. Preference to Britishers.
152. Is that preference exercised?—Yes. Whenever British
labor is available at the gate the Britisher is given preference
over foreigners who are available there, provided he is an em-
ployable man.
153. The position you have indicated in regard to reported
cases of lead poisoning suggests that the hygienic conditions
in your works have become seriously worse than formerly. Is
that so? —Most decidedly not. In fact, they are very much
better than formerly. For years past we have been making
every effort to improve working places around the plant, and
the effect to those of us who have been here during these years
is very noticeable.
154. That is, you will be able to produce evidence of very
great improvements in all matters connected with the health
hazard? —-Yes.
155. Yet these figures are increasing?—The figures indicate
that the conditions are becoming worse.
156. You therefore fear that these figures and the whole
position calls for most critical and careful examination?—That
is what we are hoping will be made.
157. Because you cannot understand the position as repre-
sented? —I cannot understand it.
158. I presume the company has always appreciated that
there is a certain health hazard in the process of lead smelting?
-Yes. That is always recognised, but until the last few years
the number of reported cases of lead poisoning was so few that
we did not realise that there was any serious hazard in the
industry as carried on at the time; but, despite that fact, we
were continually trying to improve working places on the works,
p ven before the big increase in the number of reported eases
became evident.
159. What has been the company’s policy in regard to this
aspect of the industry—the health hazard? —As soon as the
reported cases showed definite signs of increase, extra attention
was given to the matter, and everything we could see we could
do was done around the plant to make working conditions
better.
160. The examples you propose to give are numerous? —Yes.


161. And involved very heavy expenditure? —Yes. Aery
heavy indeed, some of them.
J 62. Can you give any instances of a major type where action
has been taken to improve working conditions? Take handling
of raw material to start with? —That is done entirely differently
from the way it was done when 1 joined the smelters. In
those days the trucks were run up an incline over the top of
bins that received the concentrates as they were shovelled from
the trucks. These concentrates dropped into big' bins so
constructed that it was very often necessary for men to go
inside them to bar down the ore, and ensure that it discharged
decently from the bins. Those bins have been replaced by a
scheme of unloading on to a travelling belt in the open air,
and this belt delivers to bins which discharge so efficiently
that it is not necessary for anyone to go inside them to remove
the ore. Furthermore, there are fewer men employed around
the new bins than were employed around the old bins.
163. How about the Dwight & Lloyd plant? —The Dwight and
Lloyd plant as it stands to-day is a different one from that
which existed in 1917, because early in 1921 the old Dwight and
Lloyd plant was burnt out, and the present one substituted.
When w r e were designing the new plant we gave, as we always
do, the greatest consideration to the improvement of working
conditions in the new plant as against those existent in the
old plant. The building covering the old plant was largely
enclosed, having end walls, back walls, and a roof that com-
pletely covered it.
164. I wish to interrupt your answer to that question to ask
you about the cases enumerated in table C. Does that table
cover all eases, whatever the period of illness? —Yes; all cases
that have been certified as plumbism by doctors.
165. And many of them are of short duration? —Yes.
The witness withdrew.
ALFRED HENRY HART, laborer, 29 King Street,
Solomontown, was sworn and examined:
166. By the Chairman —Where have you been employed
recently?-—The last place was the Barrier roasters. Previous
to that I was a boilermaker’s assistant at the Broken Hill
Associated Smelters in Port Pirie.
.167. By Mr. Robinette —How long have you worked at the
smelters?—About 14 months.
168. Do you remember the 17th instant, when this Commission
visited the works? —Yes.
169. Where were you working that day?—At the bag house,
as boilermaker’s assistant,
170. What happened that day in connection with your work ?
—We went to work as usual at 7.30 a.m. It was about 9
o’clock when 1 saw the Commission going through. The fumes
up to that time were practically nil. After the Commission
had gone past about half an hour the fumes began to come
through, and we could see them plainly, also smell them plainly.
I inquired of the baghouse attendant, “What is the stunt of
starting these fans?’’ and he said, “You had better see Mr.
Hughes.” I at once informed my mate, George Dunbar, a
boilermaker, and asked him what I should do. He instructed
me to see Mr. Hughes and ask him if the fans could be stopped.
I at once saw Mr. Hughes. He was on tiie bottom floor at the
time. I asked if we could have the fan stopped, and said that
otherwise we could not continue to work. He told me he had
instructions from the manager that the fan was to kept going
up to at least dinner time. He said, “I may be able to stop
the fan after dinner. I will come along and let you ifnow,
anyway. Is there any other job you can get on with?” I
went back to my mate and told him the fan could not be
stopped. I detailed Mr. Hughes’s reply word for word. My
mate said, “We will go on plumbing up the uprights on the
shaker gear outside the baghouse. ’ ’ The fumes were bad all
day. After dinner Mr. Hughes came back. He did not speak
to me, but spoke to my mate. We carried on all day the same
as after the Commission arrived, working outside just potter-
ing round. After the Commission had been gone about three
uays the men were supplied with respirators.
171. How long were you employed in the bughouse prior to
the visit of the Commission? —Between two and three weeks.
172. What was the condition of the baghouse during that
period?—Bather good. 1 went through every chamber one day.
The only effect was that where there were fumes left in the
chamber they made my eyes smart. Prior to the Commission’s
visit, the fan was always stopped during tire night shift be-
tween (5 and 7 in the morning to let the chambers get free so
that we could work in the baghouse.
173. Were there many fumes there caused by the attendant
filling the trucks? —Yes. That was the main trouble we had.
The baghouse attendant comes along and pushes his truck into
the screw conveyor which winds the smoke out of the chambers.
It goes down through a little pipe. Over that pipe they have
a sort of bagging protector made of canvas. He undoes this
and allows the smoke to run freely out of the chamber into
the truck. It is line, dry and hot, and the wind, if any, blows
it all over the place.
174. Your work causes you to be employed on various parts
of the works? —I have worked in practically every depart-
ment of the smelters.
175. Which do you consider the worst place in the works
for dust? —There are two places about equal—th e Barrier
roasters and the chambers of the Dwight & Lloyd.
17(5. What about the Dwight & Lloyd itself? —There it is
more fumes than dust, where they turn the big cooking pots
over. That is all on top of the Dwight & Lloyd. Then there
are the fumes which come down from the stuff burnt on the
palettes.
177. You have worked in Broken Hill a lot? —Yes.
178. Underground or on the surface? —Both.
179. Do you consider the dust worse in the smelters at Port
Pirie than on the surface in Broken Hill? —Absolutely.
180. You have worked in the acid plant?—Yes.
181. Have you suffered any ill effects through working there?
—Yds. We were repairing pipes there, and some acid got into
my eyes and I was blind for a whole day. I saw Dr. Tassie,.
who gave me a prescription. ,
182. Have you lost any time on the smelters through illness?
—Yes. I have been off since last Friday—five days.
183. Did the doctor attend you?—Yes. I am under Dr.
Dorsch. He told me I was suffering from bronchitis and
influenza.
184. By Mr. Gepp —What nationality are you?—English.
ISS. Where were you born? —In Woolwich, London.
186. When did you come to Australia? —Just before Christ-
mas, 1922.
187. Have you any trade? —No. I served in the war as a
boy from the age of 14 years and eight months till the end of
the war.
188. What is your age now ?—Twenty-five.
189. Have you been all the time in South Australia? —No.
I spent some time in Broken Hill and the remainder in South
Australia.
190. You worked at Broken Hill, both underground and on
the surface? —Yes.
191. On what plants?—South Mine, Block 14, and the Junc-
tion North.
192. What occupations did you follow there? —On the South
Mine I was a fitter’s laborer. On Block 14 I was a mullocker.
On the Junction North I was a laborer on the roasters.
193. What periods did you work at each of these places?
—Roughly, six months at the South Mine, three months at the
Junction North, and six months underground at Block 14. The
total time was, roughly, one year and three months.
194. Have you spent the rest of your time in Port Pirie?—
No. I spent some time at Laura working for Mr. P. G.
Humphries.
195. How long altogether have you been' in Port Pirie? —
Just over a year, I should say.
196. Your record at the smelters, which I have before me,
shows that you worked for a period of five shifts in the
refinery, 34 shifts on the Huntington-Heberlein, one on the


slag-pit, three at the refinery, one at the sample mill, six at
the slag-pit, half on the Dwight & Lloyd, two on the slag-pit,
45 on the smelters, 11 handling and stacking, and 134 as boiler-
maker’s assistant; and that during that period the lost time
was four shifts at the refinery, the reason being that you left;
two shifts absent without leave; three shifts when you were
booked off; six shifts at the refinery, “work too hard 77 ; four
more shifts, “booked off”; and several other cases; showing
a total of shifts lost time during that period. You did
lose a considerable amount of time for one reason or another?
—Yes.
197. Have you been absent for a number of shifts without
leave?—Yes. Sometimes I did not feel up to the mark of going
to my work.
Mr. Robinette —What has this to do with the inquiry? This
is not a military inquiry.
The Chairman —We want to arrive at the actual amount of
work done by the man.
Mr. Robinette —A man has a right to be absent without leave
if he wants to. The witness does not want to be subjected to
any indignity.
198. By Mr. desire to examine the witness’s record
at the works as part of his credibility generally?—During my
work in Port Pirie it was broken because I am a member of the
St. Mark ’s Band, and I found that through working shifts I
could not attend band meetings. I manager! to obtain casual
employment with the Howard Smith Shipping Company so as
to have my evenings free.
199. But you have been absent from work without advising
the company?
Mr. Robinette —How does this affect the witness’s credi-
bility?
The Chairman —It is all relevant.
200. By Mr. Gepp —You were employed in and around the
baghouse for from 14 to 21 days as a boilermaker’s assistant?
—About that length of time.
201. The conditions were rather good generally?—Yes.
202. What work were the boilermaker and yourself employed
on? Did he have a man going into the baghouse at all, or was
it all work done outside the baghouse? —Our real object was
to erect a shaker-gear for the baghouse, but to do this, and to
ensure that we had proper measurements, it was found neces-
sary to go into each chamber to take measurements of its,
breadth and height.
203. How often would it mean going in every shift to do
work inside the baghouse? —That rests with the boilermaker
himself. One afternoon we spent two and a half hours there.
We were paid time and a half for that work.
204. Were the other sections of the baghouse woiking regu-
larly during these periods?—No. They were stopped.
205. The whole baghouse?—l did not visit the fans myself
to see, but when we opened the doors and went in we found
there was gas, but could see no fumes coming down from
the top.
206. Do you understand the construction of the baghouse?
Do you know it is divided into compartments? —Yes.
207. Which compartment were you working on? —To take
measurements we visited every compartment. There are six
compartments, and we worked from No. 6 towards No. 1 erect-
ing the shaking gear outside the baghouse. In going along
we found that the iron seemed to be about 2in. out. The
of the boilermakers advised us to take measurements. We went
into each chamber and found the walls had little inlets and
outlets all the way, and we had to take bits off here and there,
and bore different holes to make it fit.
208. Who was the boss of the boilermakers who gave Dunbar
instructions ?—Norris.
209. Is he a foreman or leading hand? —I should say a fore-
man. I hardly understand his real position, but he ranks next
to Mr. Tonkin in the works.
210. Which fan were you sent to request Hughes to stop?—
It is the fan where you see big black pipes coming out from
the bottom floor tunnel. As the pipes take a junction off into
tire baghouse there is a big fan on which the words “Off’ 7 and
‘ ‘ On 7 7 are clearly written.
211. There are, I understand, two main fans —one a pressure
fan blowing the smoke into the bags, and then there is another
fan over behind the main flue of the smelters, which sucks
gases away off the filters? —I asked him to stop the fan which
was turning the fumes into the baghouse. I was given to
understand by the baghouse attendant that the fan was on and
that was the cause of all the fumes and gas, so I asked
Hughes if the fan could be stopped.
212. We will take it for the purpose of this examination
that it was a pressure fan which you asked should be shut off;
that is, the fan blowing fumes into the baghouse. How are
the gases taken from the baghouse, after they are filtered? —
The only way I can see is that they have cone-shaped funnels
on top of the baghouse, where at almost any time gas can be
seen coming out from the top underneath those cone-shaped
funnels.
213. How are the bags cleaned? —I have witnessed men who
were baghouse attendants going into the chambers, and shak-
ing them by pulling a wire. They went in with an electric
light first. Then they wmuld come out and pull a long wire
which was through a hole in the wall.
214. Is it not a fact that those bags are shaken by
mechanical means, so that there is no need to go in and shake
them?—That is what is being done now. The old shaker-gear
is pulled down and is not working now.
215. What are the bags made of? —Flannelette.
216. It is not flannel?—l cannot say definitely.
217. Is it not natural to suppose that with all that
mechanical gear it is sometimes necessary to repair either in
connection with mechanical fittings or the replacement of a
bag?—lf you wanted to replace a bag it is necessary to go
into the baghouse.
218. It will be necessary at times to replace them? —Yes.
220. Did you not notice sections of the baghouse out of
action from time to time? —I did.
221. Did this occur at regular intervals, or irregular in-
tervals? —I always found that the, whole of the baghouse
seemed to be stopped of a morning when I went into the
works and the conditions were rather good. We did not get
much effect from them. We got a little smell of the gas, but
kept out of the way while that was going on and they were
filling trucks. On this particular day that I was asked about
when the Commission visited the works the fumes were rather
bad. That was the day when there was more coughing and
spluttering going on than I had seen there before.
222. What are the walls of the baghouse built of? —Brick.
223. Do they leak? —In several places.
224. In what parts?—Where the wire which is connected to
the flannel bags comes through the wall there is a hole which
is a lot too big for the wire. Another place of leaking is
through the doors. The doors did not seem to close properly,
especially at the bottom.
225. Is it not possible that the smoke on that particular day
which you mentioned came from elsewhere, rather than from
the baghouse, due possibly to change of wind between 11 a.m.
and 3 p.m.?—Everyone of us there witnessed it quite clearly,
and we mentioned it in conversation among ourselves. There
was a broken door which had been leaking for at least a week.
The hole in it was about 6in. wide and 9in. long. Smoke of a
bluish color was coming through there.
226. The date on which the Commission visited the works
was Tuesday, April Tth, and you say that the members of the
Commission were in your vicinity at about 11.30 a.m.? —It was
earlier than that.
227. It -was some time between 9 a.m. and 12 noon? —Yes.
228. And you think smoke was put into the baghouse some
little time after the Commission had gone?—Yes.
229. Do you knew that it was put in? —Yes.
230. What was your evidence to that effect?—There was no


smoke when 1 first went there, and after the Commission had
gone by about half an hour the smoke began to come through.
We could both see and smell it.
231. Did the baghouse attendant tell you there had been any
alteration in the arrangement for starting and stopping the
fans?—He told me the fan was on.
232. Did he tell you that it had been put on?—I asked him
what was the cause of the fumes, and he said, 4 4 The fan is
on. ’ ’ 1 said, 4 ‘ What about shutting it off ? ” He replied, 4 4 I
cannot; Mr. Hughes has told me to keep it on.”
233. Did he say definitely that it had previously been off
and had been put on?—I did not mention that. He said that
he had to keep it on.
234. You cannot give us any proof that it was previously
off when the Commission w r as there?—The only thing I can say
is that there were no fumes or smoke there when I first wont
to work, which there would have been had the fan been working.
235. Is it not possible that there might have been a burst
bag which would have caused the fumes, and the fan may have
been on all the time? —It would have come through other
chambers had one bag burst. I cannot say definitely how many
bags there are in a chamber.
236. You do not knew definitely that the fan was off when
the Commission went there, but all you can say that, in your
opinion, the smoke increased at a later time in the day? —Yes;
there was no smoke at first.
237. You do not know that the fan was off in the earlier part
of the day?—l never went to sec whether it was on or off.
238. The inference which you made this morning, namely,
that the fan was put on later in the day, was only supposition,
and it may have been on all the time?—lt may have, but if the
fan had been off there would not have been any smoke.
239. Can you definitely prove to the Commission that the fan
was off during the morning, and it w 7 as put on later in the day?
—Not at present.
240. You mentioned the matter of masks, and stated that
masks had been issued a few days after the Commission’s visit.
Do you know 7 that those masks were a new 7 type being issued for
trial? —We' were wearing two types. The type my mate and
1 wore was made of rubber wdth a sponge in it, and I should
say it was an old type. The sailor gang, two members, were
wearing what I should think would be a new 7 type, made of
a kind of metal, with gauze in front.
241. Those types w 7 ere always available prior to the Com-
mission’s visit, wore they not?—l think they w 7 ere.
242. Have you ever asked for respirators yourself?—No.
243. You know that a respirator would be supplied if you
requested it?—l think it would be.
244. You have never been refused the supply of a respirator?
—No.
245. Do you know that the new type you said were issued
three days after the Commission’s visit are a special type,
which it is thought may be an improvement on the respirators
of other various types which have always been available?—They
look a very good kind of respirator. I did not like the old type,
but this new respirator should be good.
246. The possible inference from your previous evidence is
that respirators were only issued as a new move by the com-
pany as a result of the Commission’s visit?—l do not wish to
mislead the Commission on that. I am net making any biased
statements. The Commission is here for the purpose of getting
evidence, and as a past worker at the smelters I am here to
assist the Commission without any malice or bias.
247. The possible inference from your evidence is that
respirators were issued three days after the Commission’s visit,
but that is incorrect, as other respirators were always available?
—Yes.
248. You said you had been employed at the smelters for 14
months. Are you sure of that?—l made a rough statement
when T said that. I am not in a position to go and get my
papers from the smelters, and see on which days I worked and
on which I did not work. I have to carry my mind back a
year or more to the actual date when I joined the smelters. 1
should say it was, roughly, between a year and 14 months ago.
249. The records show that you joined on May 14th, 1924,.
and finished up on April 16th, 1925. That would lie eleven
months. You would take that as correct ? —Yes.
250. Your absences from work have been due to various
reasons previously dealt with, and not much to sickness?
Sometime it was sickness. On some days 1 stopped away not
feeling fit to go into the works, but 1 did not go and pay ss„
to the doctor, and ask him to give me a certificate. 1 would
go to work next morning, perhaps feeling a little better, and
they would show on my ticket ‘ ‘ A.W.L. ’ ’ On one occasion,
1 recollect sending a note down to say that 1 was sick, but
4 ‘ A.W.L. ’ ’ was entered in my book. Afterwards I had it
altered and had 4 4 sick ’ ’ substituted.
251. In that 11 months you worked in 11 different depart-
ments? —That is so.
252. You never kept one job long?—That is so.
253. Was that on account of the casual nature of your em-
ployment?—l suppose it could be put down to that, or that
I come from Irish stock, who are known as wanderers through-
out the world.
254. Do you remember how many times you were booked
off? —No.
255. As there is a regulation that Britishers are to be
given preference every time so long as a man is employable,,
you cannot give me any reason why you were booked off quite
a number of times during this period? —On two occasions—
when on the bottom floor and also in the Dwight & Lloyd—
I was booked off for being absent without leave.
256. That is, you were absent without advising the office
you could not come to work?—Exactly. In the slag pit, and
also in the sample mill, I was booked off because those special
branches did not have enough work in hand.
257. On April 16 you left before 5 o’clock?—Yes.
258. What time did you leave?—Abou't 3 o’clock.
259. Why did you do that? —I was not feeling too good..
The fumes were getting me, and I felt it.
260. What did you do after 3 o’clock?—l went up the road,
but missed my bicycle. Somebody mentioned a name to me
that I did not like, and I answered him with two fists instead
of my tongue, with the result that the arm of the law took me
and put me in a new boarding house for the night.
261. You did not happen to indulge in too much liquor during
that period?—l had two drops of whisky. As a matter of fact,
lam practically a teetotaller. Since that day I have not had
a drink.
By Mr. Bohinette How many days did you work in the
baghouse before the Commission came along?—About a fort-
night. We had three days there when Mr. Tonkin came along
and told us to get on to a more important job. Before the
time the Commission made their visit I had worked there 14
days.
263. Did you ever notice any smoke there prior to that day?
—Sometimes there was a little, but it would not last long. You
could not say that you were being absolutely poisoned.
264. You worked there several days after the Commission
went through?—Yes.
265. It was only on the day that the Commission was there
that there was an abnormal quantity of smoke?—l came for-
ward with my evidence because that was the day that I saw
the smoke was increased.
_66. By Mi. Pern son I take it that if the fan were stopped
01 ' Oll °^ iei people employed in the baghouse, the smoke
had to escape so newhere ?-Yes. It went up the big stack,
or example, at n v on to-day there was very little smoke going
s^ because it was then going into the baghouse.
-lw. If you neople were getting preferental treatment be-
cause of the fan would it affect employees in other parts of the
works?-! believe it affects the top floor, and that the com-
pany loses a lot of smoke.
The witness withdrew.


HENRY 81. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent,
Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, was
recalled and further examined:
268. by Mr, Gepp When you finished your previous evi-
dence you were dealing with the Dwight & Lloyd plant and the
improvements to it?—Yes. In addition to what I indicated,
the front wall of the old building came down to within about
7ft. of the floor, and at one time of its operation the front
was entirely closed in, except for doors, which were used as
and when required to get to the discharge ends of the machines.
In addition, on the old plant there was a crushing machine (a
cracker) at the end of each machine —into which the discharge
from that machine fell as it loft the palettes. These crackers
were always running while the machines were running, and
they continued to make a considerable amount of dust at this
point. They were hooded, but the hoods were not so effective,
nor as big, as those on the present plant. When we were
designing the new plant we kept the building as open as pos-
sible in order that any fumes or dust that did arise from
the operations would have as much chance as possible of getting
away. We removed the crackers from the ends of the machines!,
and now deliver the material from all the machines to one
cracker situated at a little distance from the machine floor.
In addition, the hoods over the ends of the discharging
machines have been considerably improved, and lately there,
has been a modification made that we hope will do away with
all trouble at this section, because it will enable the material
discharging from the machines to be wetted evenly, which is
not practicable at present when the material happens to be
very hot.
269. Briefly, what is that suggested improvement?—lt is an
enclosed conveyor that is attached to the bottom of the hopper
that receives the material discharged from the machine.
Further, the wind boxes in which the dust, that is drawn
through the roasting-bed by the suction fan, collects, are very
much improved in the new Dwight & Lloyd plant compared
with those that existed in the older plant. Furthermore, since
we have had such a heavy increase in the reported lead cases
we have tried a number of devices for diminishing dust at this
point. It used to be one of the worst places on the Dwight
and Lloyd plant, but we have now installed water-sprays
inside the hopper-bin itself that have to a great extent over-
come the trouble at this point. These have been operating for
perhaps only three or four months. Further, the new Dwight
and Lloyd plant was constructed in such a way that less labor
is required around it than was the case in the old plant. That,
I think, covers in the main the alterations to the Dwight and
Lloyd section.
270. Have you mentioned anything about the watering-down
ef returns? Ha,s that improved? —That applies generally
around the whole works. Since we have been paying so much
more regard to the matter, in consequence of the reported
cases of lead poisoning, our instructions regarding wetting-
down throughout the works, and particularly in regard to
returned materials, have been much stricter. This is receiving
considerably more attention than it used to.
271. Does your new Dwight & Lloyd plant compare well with
those you saw on your tour last year? —It is easily the best
Dwight & Lloyd plant I saw T during the whole of my travels.
272. Will you describe the improvement you have made on
the discharge from the Dwight & Lloyd cyclones, which, I
understand, has been a great success? —Until comparatively
recently the fine dust that is caught in the cyclones attached to
each Dwight & Lloyd A machine was discharged periodically in
n dry state through the bottom of the cyclone. This operation
gave rise to a considerable amount of dusting during the short
period that it was carried on. However, each of the cyclones
is now equipped with a special device at the discharge end, by
means of -which the whole of the dust is thoroughly wetted, and
now comes out in the form of a thick mud, and no dust at all
exists at this point.
273. Is the watering down throughout this plant done under
an organised programme? —Yes. It is done at least twice a
shift. The watering down of the floors is done more frequently
if the superintendent finds that, owing to special weather con-
ditions, drying takes place more rapidly.
274. Has the new plant improved feeding devices which
would eliminate the close supervision that was necessary for a
good job with the old plant?—The construction of the plant is
such that fewer men are required in and about the Dwight and
Lloyd plant than were required before.
275. And is less attention required?—The attention required
is not so close, because the job is a better mechanical one than
the old job.
276. In regard to dust-trapping devices, have you made any
improvements in the discharges of the Dwight & Lloyd plant ?
—As regards the A machines, I have already indicated that. I
described in my evidence on the operation of the B machines
that the discharges were hooded, and a draught was drawn up
into them and through the working bed of the charge on the
Dwight & Lloyd machine itself.
277. Have any improvements been made in regard to vacuum
chambers? —I have also indicated that before in my description.
I called them wind boxes.
278. In regard to the blast furnace department, are there
notices everywhere on the top floor to the effect that the feed
must be kept wet? —Not everywhere, but on those bins from
which leady materials are drawn. For instance, the coke bin
has no notice, nor the returned slag bin. The other bins have.
279. The instructions are definite that these notices must be
carefully observed? —We do not rely on the notices, because we
find that a number of men do not seem to even read them. We
rely more on the instructions given by the foremen to the men
that they take on to the jobs of charging, &c.
280. By Mr. Robinette —The notices are only written in the
English language?—Yes; at this point.
281. By Air. Gcpp —Will you give us a general survey of the
improvements that have been made in the blast furnace
department since you have been in charge of the plant?—On the
feed flood itself there are comparatively few changes made.
The principal one is in the transfer of the feed cars from one
side of the building to the other. This used to bo effected
under the control of men who were stationed one at each end of
the building throughout their eght-hour shift. At present it
is done mechanically, these men being eliminated, and there is
thus less labor on the floor than there used to be. Very much
more attention has been given to wetting down, both of the
charge and of the working floor, than used to be the ease a
few years ago. This was done in consequence of the apparent
increase in the leading eases throughout the works. On the
bottom floor of the furnaces there have been considerable
changes made. The principal one was the substitution of the
slag granulating system for the old method of removing slag
in double-bowled pots, drawn by horses. These pots were
unsatisfactory, because, wdiile they could be fairly effectively
hooded immediately at the blast furnace, as they were being
drawn away the driver was to a considerable extent exposed
to the fumes that used to blow from the surface of the slag
pot. Under the present conditions the slag runs into one pot
that is hooded to catch the fumes, and from there through a
short spout into the granulating launder. This has enabled
us to much more effectively control the fumes at this point.
282. It becomes wet at the point where the water strikes it?
—Yes.
283. From that point it is practically cold, and no fumes
arise? —Yes. One of the furnaces is equipped at present with
an improved device for drawing off the fume during the slag-
tapping operation, and this is working excellently well, and
orders are to equip the remaining furnaces as early as possible
with this device. In connection with the running of the lead
bullion to the moulds, fume and steam are given off by the
load before it cools. We have tried very many devices for
overcoming the trouble at this point, but have not yet found
a satisfactory one. In the course of a few months, however,
possibly in one month, we shall have a different system of
handling the molten bullion from the furnaces, which will admit


of our very effectively hooding the bullion running spouts, and
so catching the fume that is now given off at this point.
284. There is a certain amount of by-products that used to
be shovelled on the bottom floor at the blast furnaces. Has any
improvement been made there? —Yes. It -was the custom only
a few years ago, perhaps three years, to return all refinery by-
products, that is to say, the copper dross and the refinery
furnace dross, to a point on the bottom floor of the furnace
building and at the back of it. When they were needed for
the furnace charge they were hand shovelled to small charge
carts, and drawn by the men to lifts, hoisted to the feed floor,
and tipped on the plates at the side of the furnaces, and then
shovelled into the furnace. About three years ago, however,
we arranged to have these drosses sent up by means of a hoist
to a bin on the charge floor, from which they are delivered direct
to- the charging trucks, and trucked straight into the furnace.
The old method of handling drosses is not entirely eliminated,
because there are certain materials, such as antimony slag, that
are still taken up by hand labor in these charge carts. This,
however, is an intermittent operation, not a continuous one.
285. When was this mechanical charging scheme put in? —
Ido not know. It was before my time.
286. You would prefer to leave the matter of the improvement
that that made to another witness?—l cannot speak definitely
on it.
287. You can imagine how an improvement would be made
from your experience in other directions? —I think it would
be very probable.
288. You are using English coke? —Yes.
289. Why is that? —We use mostly English coke. We get a
few hundred tons a week from New South Wales also. The
reason is that the concentrate we are at present treating at
Port Pirie is a difficult one to smelt, and while we have been
improving our metallurgy in other respects, we found that the
furnace work until comparatively recently, about 18 months
ago, was not as good as we could wish. We had considerable
difficulty in keeping the feed floors always clear of fume. We
put a deal of thought and experiment into the matter,
got shipments of various classes of coke, and tried these out
on the furnaces, and we ultimately came to the conclusion,
which was proven very definitely, that Australian coke, with
the exception of a small tonnage made in a special plant at
Newcastle, was unsuited to the blast furnaces if the best
.results were to be had, and if the feed floor was to be kept
as clear as practicable of fume. We were therefore forced to
go to England for suitable supplies of coke. We are now
using, with the exception of a small quantity from New- South
Wales, all English coke in the blast furnaces, and since w r e
have been doing this the feed floor conditions are immensely
improved. The first start to use more suitable coke was about
18 months ago.
290. There is considerably greater expense involved, I pre-
sume, in the purchase of English as compared with Australian
coke? —It costs us considerably more per ton, not more than
the New South Wales coke we are purchasing, but more than
coke from the ordinary sources of supply in New South Wales,
and considerably more than the coke which we were producing
at our own coke plant in that State.
291. I am not sure whether you have mentioned the new
bullion smelting plant, which is practically completed?—l
have dealt with it, and mentioned that the Commission will
probably see it in operation in a month or a little longer. It
wdll not be on all the furnaces for practically five or six
months.
292. Has anything been done in the refinery in your regime?
—Yes; the main part of the refinery is precisely the same as
when I joined the company’s service, but we are giving more
attention to the suppression of dust in the handling of the
by-products that are made at this point, and there have been
improvements in the method of delivering lead to the market
lead kettle, whereby the formation of the considerable amount
of dross that used to form at this point is now obviated.
Further, we have evolved here a method of handling the silver
crusts that come from the desilver in g kettles whereby the re-
torting work and the subsequent cupelling work have been con-
siderably decreased.
293. That is an achievement of your own research depart-
ment?—That is so. As a matter of fact, it is a very consider
able improvement, and one that has been troubling research
departments of lead smelters for solution for many years. We
have been the first people to solve the problem.
294. Are there any other important improvements which you
have instituted in connection with the works generally?— I
think the principal one is the appointment of a hygiene officer.
This appointment was made about April, 1923.
295. What have you done in regard to the suppression of
dust, &c., in roads throughout the plant?—Some few years
back it was not the custom to water the roads down except at
irregular intervals. But when we were faced with the realiza-
tion that apparently the lead hazard was greater than we
thought, we turned our attention to this problem among
others, and divided the works area into a number of smaller
areas. For the wetting-down of each the different depart-
mental superintendents are responsible. The instructions are to
keep down dust, irrespective of how much water is used or how
long a time watering is carried on.
296. With regard to the litharge plant, you have well-con-
sidered and strict regulations?—-Yes.
297. Those were put in some years ago?—Yes. A little
before I joined the smelters the litharge plant was put into
operation. None of us was familiar with the method of manu-
facture, and we had a few lead poisoning cases coming from
the small number of employees at that point. We therefore
made considerable improvements in the enclosing of the work-
ing parts of the litharge mill, and instituted a set of rules
with regard to the wearing of overalls, caps, gloves, and
respirators by the men working in the inner room of the
litharge mill. Further, the men who are engaged on packing-
have a definite task to do. That is to say, they either empty
a bin of the amount of litharge crushed, or else they have a
maximum given number of tins, and when these are done
they are at liberty to go to the bathroom, bathe, change, and
go home.
298. What has been done in the last few years regarding-
crib-houses and so forth? —It is now some years since the first
of the crib-houses was put in, but at present we have crib-
houses attached to the various departments throughout the
works. In these crib-houses there are washing basins, and
there is also a hot-water supply, where the men can get the
requisite water for making- tea and so on. The crib-houses
are under the care of an attendant, whose duty it is to see
that they are kept clean and in decent order for the men to
use them.
299. What arrangements are made throughout the woik for
the supply of drinking water?—ln special little houses drinking-
fountains are installed in r-arious places throughout the
voiks. Ilrese drinking fountains are built so that the water
from the ordinary town supply passes under the town' pressure
through a filter of special fibrous material, and after filtering-
it goes through a metal coil that passes into the ice chamber
of an ice-chest standing alongside, and from this comes out to
an ordinary jet drinking fountain such as are used in various
towns in Australia. Naturally, the ice is only used during the
hotter weather.
300. Have you a change-house in the plant?—Yes; we have
a modern change-house built outside the gate through which
pi actically all the men leaving the works pass.
■ >OI. Is it equipped with lockers, sanitary appliances, etc.?—
5 es, it is equipped with lockers, washing-trough basins, with
hot and cold water, and shower-baths with both hot and cold
water available. There is also a sanitary system on the
septic tank principle.
302. What arrangement have you for drying clothing if the
men wish that done?—There is a drying-room which is operated
under the care of the change-house attendant.
• >o.>. W ith regard to respirators in places where dust mar


be unavoidable temporarily or where a man is working, what
arrangements are made by the company?—Respirators are
available throughout thei works for any men who care to use
them, but we find it difficult to induce the men to use them
in many instances.
304. You have a first aid department?—Yes; there is a first
aid department, with a properly qualified man in charge on
.each shift.
305. \\ hen Dr. Robertson was here as your works doctor
he recommended that there should be made available efferves-
cent fruit salts. Is that still carried out? —Yes; they are
made available in the first aid department, or from foreman
in each department, for anyone who cares to take them.
306. You have a notice published in the works? —Yes.
307. Will you produce a copy of it? —Yes. [Copies produced
in different European languages and marked Exhibit L]
308. What is the purpose of this notice? —To try to induce
the employees to give sufficient care to themselves, in order to
obviate as far as possible the hazard of lead poisoning.
309. Would you like to make any alterations provided it
were possible to enforce those alterations? —Yes. The first rule
might be altered to say that the hands and face must be well
washed clean before food is eaten. The second one might
read that smoking is absolutely prohibited. 1 would like to see
it compulsory that men change their clothes on entering and
leaving the works.
310. By Mr. Robinette —Provided that there is adequate
provision to do so? —Quite, and that they make full use of the
change-house. I would like to say that in making these re-
commendations I am guided very largely by literature I have
read on the subject, and by what has been adopted in regula-
tions in certain of the European countries and in England.
311. By Mr. Gepp —ls there not a very strong recommen-
dation in the volume by Legge and Goadby in regard to meals
before coming to work? —Yes; they state that no man should
come, to work unless he has had a decent meal before he does
so, and that coming to work with an empty stomach increases
the liability to leading.
312. What suggestion would you like to make as regards
respirators? —I would like to see a clause framed making the
use of respirators compulsory in places where they are con-
sidered advisable by the works doctor.
313. By Mr. Robinette —Who is the works doctor! —There is
none at present.
314. Are you anticipating engaging one? —I hope so.
315. By Mr. Gepp —Do you think that the men would fall in
voluntary with the rules you mention? —No.
316. Smoking, for example ?—I think they would raise very
strenuous objections, because they would consider it an inter-
ference with customs that have been established a long time
on the plant.
317. You believe that the alterations you suggest would
make for improvement? —Yes.
318. What leads you to that opinion? —Ordinary common
sense firstly, and secondly, the opinion of the authorities on the
subject I have read.
319. The British regulations say something specific about
the matter, do they not?—Yes; I refer the Commission to the
British regulations, pages 147 and 148, summary of Gilbert
Stone. [3l9A.] Dr. Oliver, a British authority, also deals
with the same matter?—Yes; but I have not got his book here.
320. Are there any other means calculated to improve the
health position now being installed? —Yes.
321. Will you give the Commission a general idea of some of
them? —At present the baghouse that is taking the smelter
fume is equipped with two fans, one of which drives the fume
into the bags inside the baghouse. The other draws the
filtered gas off, and discharges it into the main smelter stack.
This arrangement has been in operation only a comparatively
short time, and we now find that the fan drawing the filtered
gas from the baghouse is hardly big enough for its work, with
the result that there is a slight pressure inside the baghouse.
-and this pressure causes a leakage of gas through any crevices
that exist in the structure. We have ordered a larger fan to
replace this suction fan, and when it is installed the whole of
the trouble that now conies from the fumes escaping in the
bughouse should cease. In addition we are building a baghouse
to take the whole of the smoke from the A section of the
& Lloyd plant. This baghouse is about half completed.
Furtnor, approval has been granted and the work started on
the construction of another baghouse that will take all the
fume from the B section of the Dwight & Lloyd plant. The
filtering of the Dwight & Lloyd gases has been the result of
considerable experiment in various parts of the world, and has
always presented very considerable difficulty. Five or six years
ago we were operating an experimental baghouse that was
taking the fume from one machine of the Dwight & Lloyd
plant. We were unsuccessful in operating this machine con-
tinuously, due to the heavy condensation of moisture on the
bags and the consequent , difficulty in keeping the bags strong
enough to stand the pressure.
.‘122. You mean due to the condensation of acid mist? —And
water.
3215. The diminution in strength was due to a slight trace of
acid in the moisture condensing? —Yes. Part of my mission
on my recent visit to the United States of America was to go
as closely as practicable into the methods of handling this fume
at the various smelters in that country. I found that it had
caused them all a lot of trouble. Some of them had got over
it by mixing the roaster fume and blast furnace fume together.
Others had installed various devices with indifferent success,
and they finally came to the conclusion that probably the best
way to handle the material was to pass it into baghouses, and
so to arrange the baghouses and devices leading to them that
the temperature of the gases could be kept up to a point where
the moisture could not condense, and the gases would still be
sufficiently cool to make the bags safe. At two plants
particularly in the U.S.A. they had given up temporarily the
treatment of the fume, because they had found that their
baghouses were being set on fire continually. However, I think
we have discovered the reason for that, and that the danger
will not exist in our installation.
324. Was not a baghouse erected with the early Dwight and
Lloyd plant? —That was the one I was speaking of just now,
325. You have dealt with the improvements you anticipate
putting in on the Dwight & Lloyd gases. Have you any hope
of eliminating the Huntington-Heberlein section? —A very con-
siderable hope. As a matter of fact, the amount of sinter
being made in the Huntington-Heberlein section now is just
about half of what it was a year ago, and the improvements
that we are making on the B section of the Dwight & Lloyd
machines will, I think, result in the shutting down of the
Huntington-Heberlein plant. On this point lam not certain,
as, of course, metallurgical considerations must enter into the
matter.
326. You will make every endeavor to eliminate this Hunt-
ington-Heberlein section? —It wall certainly be reduced and
probably eliminated. As far as the metallurgical efficiency
of blast furnaces is concerned, the Huntington-Heberlein
material is very much better than the Dwight & Lloyd material.
It is only health considerations that prompt us to try to cut it
out.
327. Are any further measures contemplated. For example,
have you any intention of improving your refinery?—l cannot
say definitely that there is a certainty of the present refinery
going cut of commission, but I think that that is very probable,
and that a new refinery will be put up. In this new refinery
we would pay full attention to ventilation and all those points
that could possibly atiect the health of the employees.
328. Does the new system you contemplate indicate a health-
ful operation? —Two processes are being considered. The one
that you refer to has hardly been fully proven, but if it proves
successful in the plants in which it is operating now, and we
put it in here, all danger of lead poisoning from the refining
section, with the exception of the retorts and cupels, would
disappear absolutely.


329. A decision on this may be expected shortly ?—Within
six months.
330. 1 presume there is a studied attack on the whole question
of improving all mechanical handling on the job, such as con-
veyor systems and so on, from the standpoint of dust? —We
are always trying to improve working conditions, and at the
■same time endeavoring to improve mechanical appliances on
the job. In any case whenever anything new is contemplated
we pay the greatest attention ao the working conditions that
will result if the change is made.
331. If you have to keep some of your Huntington-Heberlein
section going, have you any scheme to improve the operation?
—Yes. If, as I think we can, we can reduce the Huntington-
Heberlein material for sintering to a smaller volume than at
present, then I think it would be practicable to allow the
material to remain in the pots for some hours after the operation
was finished, and to continue blowing air through it so that it
would be cooled down, and it would be possible to wet it
thoroughly before the tipping operation was performed.
332. Regarding your change-house accommodation, I presume
you will increase that as you find any indication of the necessity
therefor?- —Yes. The present change-house is one section of a
larger contemplated change-house, and the wall is so constructed
that other sections can be built on as required. The reason
we have not increased the change-house capacity is because
we find it difficult to induce the men to use it. It is not now
being used to its full capacity. When we see any need fer-
tile new gne, and if we can arrange that the employees will use
it, we will be only too pleased to make the change without
delay, irrespective of expense.
333. I understand that a discussion is going on regarding a
dental clinic? —Yes. At present rve are discussing with our
employees the advisability of constituting a dental clinic follow-
ing closely on, the lines of the one operating so successfully
at Risdon. The company is greatly in favor of it, because
we think that possibly much of the sickness existing on the
works is due to the poor condition of the teeth of a number of
the operatives. The executive of the Co-operative Council is
now discussing with the employees their ideas in the matter,
and we hope in, a very short time, probably in a week, to have
some definte indication of the employees ’ desires in the matter.
I greatly hope they will be in favor of a dental clinic, because
a clinic could do nothing but good.
The Commission adjourned.
Thursday, April 30th, 1925, at 10 a.m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Robinette.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent,
Broken Hill Associated Smelters, was recalled and
further examined:
334. By Mr. Gepp —Before the adjournment yesterday you
were dealing with further contemplated measures, and we had
reached the subject of a dental clinic. Are there any other
points you wish to mention in that connection? —I think I have
covered practically the whole of that ground.
335. Will not these things call for large financial outlay? —
Yes ; very large.
336. Do you, as general superintendent, experience any diffi-
culty in securing authorisation of necessary expenditure
to improve conditions in the plant?—l have no difficulty what-
ever where health is concerned.
337. The board approves of these matters withour demur and
without delay?—That is so.
338. Having regard to the work necessary to be done to keep
the plant operating, have these plans for improvement been put
into effect with all reasonable expedition?—Yes. Of course
some of them have taken considerable time to put into opera-
tion, but that has been due to the fact that we have suffered
very often from a shortage of certain classes of tradesmen.
339. In the designing of your new plant, is special considera-
tion given to the question of the protection of the operating
conditons from the standpoint of health? —Yes; it is always
given the greatest possible consideration.
340. Yesterday you put in a number of tables, marked
C, D, E, F, G, H, K, and L (Exhibit 2), and we dealt in
detail with Table C. Will you now please explain ‘to us Table
D ? —This table deals with an analysis of the reported case
of lead poisoning, having regard to length of service in relation
to nationality, and covers the period 28/6/17 to 11/3/26. You
will notice! that up to a period of 120 months the headings are
given in months. Those are the periods during which a man
was absent from work covered by doctor’s certificate and receiv-
ing compensation. Then you will see a heading “over 10 amt
up to 15.” That and the subsequent ones are years of service
in relation to nationality. Of course, these only deal with
cases that have been certified as lead cases. If you take the
British section you will see that up to three months of service
there have been 12 cases of reported lead poisoning. Those 12
cases are 4.72 per cent, of the total British lead cases reported,
and the figure 54.55 means that those 12 British cases represent
54.55 per cent, of the total cases of all nationalities that have
had a lead poisoning history with up to three months’ service,
the total being 22 cases. Under the heading “over 10 and
up to 15 years” there have been 23 cases of British workmen
who have been certified as lead poisoning cases. These 23
cases represent 9.05 per cent, of the total Brtish cases reported
during those eight years. They further represent 79.31 per cent,
of the cases of all nationalities reported as lead cases, and
having a service of over 10 and up to 15 years. The total
number of cases reported, including all nationalities, with over
10 years ’ service and up to 15 years service, is shown at the
bottom of the column as 29 cases. It represents 6.76 per cent,
of all the lead cases reported during those eight years.
341. The lengthy line of months and years is the period of
service?—The headings relate to the period of service, up to
three months’ service, four to six months’ service, and so on.
342. This table is not dealing in any way with the period
of disability?—No.
343. A number of those cases may have been only a week or
a fortnight?—That is so.
344. But this table does not show that?—lt does not deal
with that at all, but is simply to show in a definite period of
service how many cases of leading occurred, and how thev were
divided into different nationalities.
345. In a great number of cases those men may have been
on compensation for a week, a month, or three months, and then
in many instances have returned to the works again and carried
on?—Yes; and some of them would appear twice. It is quite
possible that the men who appear in the period 25 to 28 months
also appear in the period 73 to 96 months. In the ease of
Greeks reported as suffering from lead poisoning, and having
a period of service between seven and nine months, both
inclusive, we had seven reported cases of lead poisoning. These
represented 9.72 per cent, of the total Greek cases reported
during the eight years. These cases further represented 20
pei cent, of the total number of cases of all nationalities having
a period of service of seven to nine months -when their disability
arose. You will understand that the period seven to nine
months does not include four to six months. It is a specific
period in itself. In the case of Maltese having a period of
service of 19 to 24 months there were 10 eases certified as
plumbism. These 10 cases represented 27.02 per cent, of the
37 lead cases of people of Maltese nationality that occurred
during the eight years. They further represented 27.03 per
<< nt. of all cases of all nationalities that occurred in men having
a period of service of 19 to 24 months. It is evident from


this table that the period of service of the Maltese is com-
paratively short.
346. Is there any general indication you can give the Com-
mission as the result of a study of this table?—lf the cases
reported are genuine it definitely appears that the foreigners
are more suspectible to lead poisoning, that is to say, a greater
percentage of them suffer from plumbism in the earlier months
of their service,
347-9. A very large number of the eases are of short service
men, and a large number of the short service men are southern
Eu ropeans ? —Y es.
350. We wish you now to deal with Table E?—Table E sets
out the lead poisoning statistics having regard to the length
of disabiltiy in relation to departments of origin of the contrac-
tion of the disease, and covers a period from 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
The main heading shows the weeks of disability, and is divided
into four weeks and under, five to 13 weeks inclusive, 14 to
26 weeks inclusive, and so on, until the final heading is 105
weeks and over. The other main heading gives thp depart-
ments and the works divided up as far as possible. The table
has the most careful regard to the statistics available in the
plant, that is to say, if a case is given as a refinery case it is
the case of a man who was working in the refinery at the time
he was certified as being lead poisoned. It does not follow
that that man had worked all his time in the refinery. He
may have worked in other sections of the plant at different
times. We had to take some starting point, so we took the
point that the cases certified from a department had their origin
in that department. If you take the refinery you will see that
the number of cases of disability of four weeks and under total
20. These represent 21.98 per cent, of all the cases coming
from the refinery, which were 91. They further represent 20.84
per cent, of all the cases showing four weeks and under
disability that have occurred or been certified on nthe whole
works, which were 96 cases.
351. I gather from the table that there were 91 cases in
the refinery for the eight years of reported cases? —Yes.
352. There were 58 cases on the top floor and so on? —Yes.
353. Taking that first column, you had 96 cases of four weeks
and under of disability? —Yes.
354. You show 106 cases of five to 13 weeks disability and
49 cases of 14 to 26 weeks? —Yes.
355. By Mr. Robinette- —Take the 105 weeks. How do you
arrive at that? —That is for two years.
356. How do you arrive at those figures? Ho you include
the men that have been compounded or actually working?—We
could not include the men who have left the place.
357. By Mr. Gepp —All the compounded cases are included?
Yes, but I shall supply the information Mr. Robinette desires
later.
358. Am 1 right in saying that 96 plus 106, or a total of
202 eases, which represent approximately 47 per cent of the
total number of cases, are cases that have been under 13 weeks
of disability?—Yes.
359. Will you explain Table F? —It deals with
statistics relating to certified cases of lead poisoning, having
regard to the length of disability in relation to length of
service, and covers a period from 28/6/17 to 11/3/25.
360. What is just the difference between Table E and Table
F? —Table E dealt with length of disability in relation to the
department of origin of contraction of disease. 1 able 1 i s
length of disability in relation to length of service, irrespective
of what department the man was working in at the time he
contracted the disease.
361. Can you from this table make the same point, namely,
that nearly 50 per cent, of the cases are under 13 weeks of
disability?—A study of the table will show that 47.09 per cent,
of the total cases of reported plumbism have a length of dis-
ability of 13 weeks and under. Now, take the period up to four
weeks of disability. The figures given under the heading
“weeks” relate to the length of disability. Taking the “up
to four weeks” disability and the period 10-12 months, there
were seven cases having a disability of up to four weeks that
occurred in men who had a length of service of 10-12 months
inclusive. These seven cases r< presented 7.29 per cent, of the
total cases that had disability up to four weeks. They further
represented 28.00 per cent, of all the cases that occurred among
the men that had 10-12 months’ service irrespective of the
period of disability. Table G deals with the statistics of certified
cases of lead poisoning, having regard to the length of dis-
ability in relation to nationality, and covers the period 28/(3/17
to 11/3/25. The main heading is “Weeks of disability,”
divided, as in the other cases, into “Four weeks, 5-13 weeks,”
and so on; and the other main heading is the “nationality”
of the various reported sufferers from plurabism. Taking the
British, the first figure shows 59 cases with a period of dis-
ability of under four weeks out of a total number of British
cases of 254.
3(32. That number, 254 is large compared with the individual
totals of foreigners. Is that due to the fact that during the
earlier years of this eight year period, you had comparatively
few foreigners employed? —For the greater part of the eight
years that is so.
363. If these figures had been taken out for the last two
years the percentages won 1 d have been very different? —Yes.
Those 59 cases represented 23.23 per cent, of all the British
cases. They further represented 61.46 per cent, of all the cases
having a disability of under four weeks, irrespective of
nationality.
364. May I take' it that in regard to this table the shorter
period during which foreigners have been employed, in largo
numbers, makes a comparison with the British figures rather
impossible?—You cannot make a direct comparison because the
greater number of the foreigners are of comparatively short
service, whilst a large proportion of the Britishers are long
service men.
365. Except in special cases, the weeks of disability among
the longer periods of service, would not apply to foreigners at
all, because yon have few foreigners who have been employed
for over five years?—That is so. Taking the Maltese so*■ion
under the heading “5-13 weeks” of disability, there were 12
Maltese cases certified as plumbism. Those 12 cases represented
32.43 per cent, of all the Maltese cases. They further rep-
resented 11.32 per cent, of all the cases of plumbism having a
disability period of from five to 13 weeks, and including all
nationalities.
366. Will your percentage of Maltese employed at the works
be shown on any other table against disabilities? —Yes. Table
L covers all these statistics.
367. The number employed is comparatively small? —Yes.
There are about 96 at present.
368. Will the same point, in regard to compound cases, that
you have referred to the office for information in regard to
other tables, apply to this table also? —I think so. Table II
sets out the statistics regarding certain cases of lead poisoning,
having regard to the ages of persons compensated during the
period 28/6/17 to 11/3/25 in relation to nationalities. The
main heading gives the ages in years of the various certified
cases, subdivided into headings, ‘‘ 21 years and under, ” “ 22-
25, ’ ’ and so on up to the final heading ‘ ‘ over 60 years old. ’ ’ The
other heading simply gives the nationalities sectionalised. Taking
the British cases under the heading “21 years and under,” there
were seven cases of Britishers certified as lead poisoning who
were 21 years old or under at the time the certification was
made. These seven cases represented 2.76 per cent, of all the
British cases. They further represented 77.78 of all the cases
(nine) where certification had been given to persons 21 years
old or under, irrespective of nationality. It is evident that the
British proportion would be heavy in that section, because
comparatively few foreigners of that age would come out here.
369. This table shows the greater number of cases between
the ages of 25 and 40, which is the general working age?-
There is a bigger percentage of workmen between those ages.
370. Is there any special point brought out by this table?—
I do not at the moment recall anything particularly striking
in it.


371. It has been prepared, I presume, in order to assist the
Commission to ascertain whether any particular age is
susceptible ? —Yes.
372. It will have to be taken into consideration with all the
other facts when the Commission consider the matter in detail?
—I presume that would be so.
373. Table K deals in another way with the same question
of age in relation to disability?—Yes, but it is not divided into
nationalities. That is the only difference. Table K deals with
the statistics regarding certified cases of lead poisoning, having
regard to the ages ,of the persons contracting it in relation to
the length of disability. This table does not divide the certi-
fied eases under the heading of nationalities; but in the series,
for instance, up to 21 years of age, all cases are included irre-
spective of nationality. Those cases under that heading having
four weeks and under of disability number two. Those two
cases represented 22.22 per cent, of all the cases certified as
regards persons 21 years old or under, the total number of cases
under that heading being nine. They further represent 2.08
per cent, of all the cases that had a period of disability of four
weeks or under.
374. The last column shows again that there is not any par-
ticular age, remembering always that these tables are all com-
plicated by the introduction of Southern European labor during
the past two years? —That is so.
375. To make absolutely certain of that you would have to
have a very clear analysis?—Yes. I further think that a lay-
man could not do it even in that case. All sorts of factors
would enter in.
376. Table L gives a summary of all reported cases, and
brings together in one sheet the conclusions indicated in all the
detail sheets? —That is practically so. It is not practicable to
put everything in.
377. Will you explain the main object of this sheet?—lt is
to set before the Commission in as clear a form as possible as
much as possible of the information we have regarding reported
cases of plumbism. That is to say, it is much easier to take
the main features from one sheet than to have to search among
a number of them for information.
378. Will you bring out any points from this summary to
which you desire to draw the attention of the Commission?—
The table deals with the certified cases of plumbism occurring
between the period 28/6/17 to 31/12/24. Yon will see that it
is taken in half-yearly periods, and consequently it has not
been practicable to carry it further than the end of 1924. You
will note very clearly from the summary at the top that there
was comparatively very little reported plumbism until the early
part of 1922, and from that period on the cases have grown
very rapidly each half-year until in the half-year there were
131 reported cases.
379. Will you explain what are the first, second, and third
lines in the summary at the top of the table? —The first line
in the summary is the total number of individuals employed
during the half-year ended as indicated.
380. That, I presume, is the turnover? —Yes; for the first
four years those figures were not available, but since then, in
the half-year ended 23/12/19, for instance, you find the total
number of persons who had employment during that period,
irrespective of whether they worked one day or the whole
half-year. It is the labor turnover.
381. What is the second line?—The total number of lead
cases during *.m half-year, that is, the certified cases of
plumbism, that came in to us, and were compensated during
each of those half-years. The third line is the total of lead
cases as a percentage on the total number of men employed
during the half-year; that is, of course, the total employed, not
the total in average employment. You will see that those per-
centages get very much heavier during the latter part of the
table.
382. Take the average percentage and illustrate to us the
figures of the same percentages in respect to the different
nationalities?—ln the earlier half-years there is practically
nothing.
383. Britishers, for instance, rise from .To per cent, in 1919
to 1.46 in 1922? —Those figures are the xjerceutages of certified
lead cases in the total number of British persons employed
during the individual half-year to which they refer.
384. What about the foreigners?—Taken as a group they
rise from 1.333 in the half-year ended 22/6/21 to 9.133 per
cent, in the half-year ended 31/12/24. That is the percentage
of load cases of foreigners on the total number of foreigners
employed during that half-year.
385. It shows a sudden jump in 12 months from under 3 per
cent, to over 9 per cent.? —Wes; a very sudden jump.
386. Let us consider the Maltese?—The percentage of lead
cases of Maltese employed during the half-year ended 20/6/23,
the first figure that appears, was .909 per cent, of the Maltese
employed during that half-year. The next figure appears under
the heading 2/7/24. For that half-year 2.919 per cent, of the
Maltese employed were returned as certified lead cases. For
the last half-year shown, that is the period ended 31/12/24, 25
per cent, of the Maltese were returned as certified lead cases.
387. During the period you have just mentioned the number
of Maltese employed has not varied at all from the point of
view of this question?—From the first half of 1923 to the
present time the numbers have varied between 110 and 137.
For the half-year just ended there were 96.
388. That is to say, during the period when these heavy
percentages have occurred Maltese have been employed to the
extent of about 100 men, as against less than 50 men during
the period prior to 1923? —That is so. I would like to point
out that up to the period 20/12/22, although we had in some
cases fully 50 per cent, of the Maltese employed that we have
at the present time, there were no reported cass at all from
them, and at that time the condition of the works was un-
doubtedly not so good.
389. The compensation has not varied considerably until
the beginning of this year?—No. The new Act came into
force on January 15th, 1925.
390. What are the compensation amounts payable under the
present Act?—Fifty per cent, of the average weekly earnings,
plus 7s. 6d. per week for each dependent child under the age
of 14 years, with a maximum payment of £5 per week.
391. What is the compensation for permanent and total
incapacity?—£7oo.
392. Does that mean inability to work at all or inability to
work in this industry ?—That is a point on which the certificates
are not very clear.
,)9.). We may take it for the time being that when a certificate
is given for permanent and total incapacity it means that a man
should not work in the inlustry again?—lt may mean only that
or more than that. I do not know.
394. When did the original Act come into force?—ln 1911.
395. Can you give figures for payment in respect of so-called
Permanent incapacity since then up to date? —In 1911 the
amount for permanent and total incapacity was £3OO. In 1918
an amendment raised this to £4OO. In 1919 it was raised again
to £SOO, and in 1924 to £7OO.
.>96. Does the extraordinary percentage of cases among
foreigners apply generally? Is there a great difference between
the percentage of foreigners and that of British?—Southern
Europeans, yes; other foreigners, no.
397. The first record appear under the heading 19/12/23,
when 6.25 per cent, of the Germans employed during that half-
year were certified as lead poisoned ?—Yes. In the following
half-year 6.061 were , certified, and in the half-year ended
31/12/24 4.167 per cent., so that in the case of the Germans
the percentage has slightly decreased.
•>9B. Take the Scandinavians?—The percentage of certified
load cases of Scandinavian nationality figured on the total
number of Scandinavians employed during the respective half-
years shows that the first record is under the half-year 22/6/21,
when 5.555 per cent, of the Scandinavians employed during that
period were certified as plumbism cases. There were only 18
Scandinavians employed during that half-year. The next record
appears when there were 21 employed, with a percentage of


4.762, there being only one ease. Next is under the heading
20/6/23. There were 24 employed, and two cases, representing
8.333 per cent. In the period ended 2/7/24 there were 40
employees and one case, the percentage being 2.5. In the half-
yeai ended .>l/12/24 there were 54 Scandinavian employees and
two cases, and the percentage was 3.704, so it can be seen that
just as in the case of the Germans, instead of rising heavily, as
in the case of foreigners generally, the percentage of certified
cases on the men employed during the latter half-years de-
creased among the Scandinavians.
399. As a comparison, please give us the Russian?—The
Russians are another section comprising a very small number
of employees, smaller even than Scandinavians. The first
record in respect to certified plumbism appears under the half
} eai ended _l/6/__, when there were 14 Russian employees,
two of whom were certified as suffering from lead, the per-
centage being 14.286. The next record appears under the
half-year 2/7/24, when there were 25 Russians employed, and
two certified cases, representing 8 per cent. The next record
is under 31/12/24, when there were 29 Russian employees and
four cases, and the percentage was 13.793, so that in the case
of the Russians there has been practically an average number
carried forward.
400. The Italian have risen, 1 see, from 1.4 per cent, in
1922, to approximately 10 per cent, in 1924?—Yes; 94 per cent,
for 1924.
401. Generally speaking, this table indicates that Southern
Europeans generally have shown a very considerable increase in
cases of plumbism, and a number of the northern races have
rather decreased, also that Britishers, having increased up to
a maximum in the first half of 1924, have not increased since?
—That is so.
402. What arrangement, if any, have you made for the special
study of health matters by your staff ? —ln April, 923, we
appointed an officer to give special attention to this department,
that is, the department of industrial hygene.
403. Who is the officer now performing those duties?—Mr.
George Dey.
404. What is the general nature of the instructions under
which he operates?—He w 7 as instructed that he was to take
under his supervision all these matters that related to the safe-
guarding of the health of the employees in all departments of
the works.
405. Those instructions have been amplified from time to
time ?—Yes.
406. Mr. Dey’s work would cover all things under the heading
of hygiene and health hazard? —Yes. He has those matters
under his supervision. Mr. Dey has not held always the full
authority that he now has during the terra of his appointment.
407. Has he any other duties at present but those of indus-
trial hygiene officer ?—No.
408. Are your works inspected from time to time by
Government officials? —Y"es. The officials of the Mines De-
partment and of the Factories Department inspect them.
409. You, of course, have always followed out the suggestions
of those officers when offered? —Yes.
410. When you were inspecting plants abroad, did you find
anywhere that a medical service was part of the organisation?
—Yes. There is a medical officer employed by the company
at the Herculaneum smelter at Rt. Louis. Several cf the
smelters of the American Smelting and Refining Company have
doctors as members of their staffs, and the Burma Corporation
smelter employs three doctors to oversee the health of their
employees.
411. How many men are employe/1 by the Burma Company?
—Roughly, about 5,000.
412. You were in full touch with the general manager and
all his staff when you visited Burma? —Yes.
413. They gave you full information regarding all their
operations ? —Yes.
414. What did the general manager and his staff tell you
about the effect of such services? —On my trip generally I was
very much interested in the lead poisoning side of lead smelting,
and 1 made close enquiry at all smelters as to the extent in
which it existed and as to how they combated or attempted
to combat lead poisoning. At Burma, 1 was told by each of
the three medical officers that there was practically no lead
poisoning. Apart from the fact that 1 took the doctors to be,
perfectly honest men the company had no object in hiding
any such cases, if they existed, because they are under no
liability to compensation or penalty whatever in regard to the
matter.
415. The doctors told you that, by their study of the working
conditions and their examination and treatment of the em-
ployees and by their instructions to the employees in health
directions, the effect had bsn excellent. The management
informed me particularly that the doctors co-operated with the
operating staff in the endeavor to improve the working con-
ditions throughout the plant.
416. You mentioned that the American Smelting and Refining
Company have doctors on the staffs of their organisations. Do
they regard them as an essential part of their organisation?—
r l hey informed me that they regarded the doctors as an essen;
tial part of their organisation. They thought they derived
very great benefit from the employment of these doctors.
417. By Air. Robinette —Does a Compensation Act apply
there?—Only in two States. They have smelters in those two
States. I did not have an opportunity of speaking to two
doctors mentioned to me as employes of the American Smelting
and Refining Company, but I spoke to several of the yice-
presidents and mining engineers and managers and metallur-
gists on the plants that I visited.
418. You were in very close touch with the heads and with
the chiefs of staffs of all the big smelters in America?—Yes.
I had close and cordial relations with them, due to the fact
that we had interesting information to exchange.
41!). They were very open?—They appeared to be entirely
open in the matter, and I particularly questioned them as to
the prevalence or otherwise of lead poisoning at the various
smelters, because the conditions as 1 saw them in the smelters
generally were at least no better than those existing at Port
Pirie; in fact, in many cases, they were a good deal worse. I
was told, without exception, that the cases of lead poisoning
were comparatively few, that is, just two or three a year.
420. Did they indicate in any way the effect of prohibition
upon the position, having regard to the labor and health of the
men employed?—ln practically every case I was told that this
greater immunity from lead poisoning came with the intro-
duction of prohibition in the United States.
421. The evidence generally you have read from time to time
in regard to the effect of alcohol upon men employed in an
industry such as this, I believe, that excess in this or in other
directions is harmful?—Yes. The authorities seem unanimous
that alcohol, taken in excess, renders any man more susceptible
to plumbism than he would otherwise be.
422. Have you ever thought of the advisability of appointing
a works doctor? —Yes.
423. What steps did you take?—ln 1920 we actually ap-
pointed a doctor to act as works do'etor, and to assist in safe-
guarding the health of the employes by periodic examination
of all employes.
424. What was the doctor’s name?—Dr. D. G. Robertson.
He was especially appointed because he had had considerable
experience in industrial hygiene.
425. What were the duties it was decided the doctor should
perform?—lt was our desire that in the first place ho should
make periodic examinations of all employes, including the staff,
with the object of protecting their health so far as was
practicable, not only from industrial disease but to advise them
in all matters regarding their health and to co-operate fully
with the operative staff in the endeavour to improve the work-
ing conditions generally throughout the plant.
426. is Dr. Robertson still with you?—No.
427. Why not? —Because our action in this regard met with
such strenuous opposition from some of the unions that we


were forced to cancel the arrangement we had made with Dr.
Robertson after he had been with us only six mouths.
428. Was any explanation offered as to the attitude of the
unions in this matter? —Yes. The representatives of the unions
told me that they objected to medical examination, periodic
and compulsory, and that they thought further that the results
of Dr. Robertson’s examinations, being available for the general
superintendent, he might use those results unjustly, and perhaps
dismiss men whom it was shown had an incipient industrial
disease.
429. Do you consider this attitude justified?—No. I think
it was unreasonable, and that the unions had no reason to believe
that the company would act unjustly. On the contrary, I
think that the company’s record with its employees shows that
it has always endeavored to act fairly and justly with them.
Further, 1 think the unions should have recognised that unless
we had available information we could have got through Dr.
Robertson’s examinations we would be very much less able to
improve the health hazard position than we otherwse would be.
430. Do you consider it important that a doctor should be
appointed to specialise in hygiene in your works, and in
improving the general health of your employees?—Yes. I still
consider it is important, and I am quite certain that the com-
pany is still willing to make such an appointment. Without
snuch help from a qualified medical man we are placed at a
grave disadvantage in attempting to maintain or improve the
health conditions throughout the works. It is a very common
practice in England and Europe for big organisations such as
ours to carry as a regular part of their operating staff a
qualified doctor, who endeavors in every way to safeguard the
health of the operatives employed.
431. You would, therefore, welcome the hearty co-operation
of all employees in this matter? —Certainly.
432. You are aware that one of the functions of this Com-
mission is to recommend measures for the elimination or
alleviation of plumbism at the smelters. Can you offer the
Commission any constructive proposals in this direction?—Y'es.
In the first place I consider that it is eminently desirable that
all applicants for work at the smelters should undergo a
thorough examination by a competent doctor to determine
whether or not they are suitable for employment in this
industry.
433. Do not they do that now?—-I think the examination
should be more searching than it is now. Further, I think it
should be competent for the company to have a doctor, who
would make an examination of all employees, perhaps, after they
had been a month in the company ’s service. I think this is
particularly desirable, as if we were unable to get the informa-
tion that would be available in that way the men might go
on acquiring lead poisoning, and no one would be any the wiser.
434. By Mr. Gepp —Y T ou would desire to have the men’s
co-operation in trying to eliminate the susceptible stage when
there is danger to the susceptible?—Yes.
435. In regard to the periodical examination of all operators
and men directly connected with the production, have you any-
thing to say?—l think that should be made at such periods
as the works doctor sets ouf, having regard to the places and
conditions under which different operatives are working. He
might consider it desirable to examine monthly in some places,
three monthly in others, and six monthly in others, according
».s lie considered the risk greater or less.
436. Further, that he would examine all employees, including
those not connected with the actual operations, at longer inter-
vals, as he might decide? —He would examine all employees,
including the staff, from the health hazard point of view.
437. Would the examination, in your opinion, cover all ques-
tions of sickness or possible sickness, in addition to protection
against plumbism?—Yes; to this extent, that our instructions
to Dr. Robertson were that where his examination -showed that
medical attention was necessary, he would advise the man he
was examining that he had better go to his doctor, and also
state that if that doctor desired to have the result of Dr.
Robertson’s examination he would be glad to collaborate with
him. I would not at present take it that the works doctor’s
duties would extend to the general treatment of all employees,
except as regards advice, and possibly medicine delivered at the
works to those who might be contracting industrial disease.
438. He would act as adviser to all employees, and tell
them to be careful in regard to certain points of diet or habits?
—Yes, and further, would advise them when he thought it
necessary to go to their own doctor for specific treatment.
439. If this work proved to be too much for one medical man,
would your company be prepared to call in further permanent
assistance? —I have no doubt they would.
440. You would hope in this way to get definitely the develop-
ment of methods by which early lead absorption could be recog-
nised?—That would be one of the objectives. We would hope
to be able, by specific treatment, perhaps, to arrest lead poison-
ing when it began to show itself, or perhaps under the doctor’s
advice to change the class of work that a man had been doing
to some other, in his opinion, more healthy class, and so on.
441. And as all the specialist medical books on this subject
indicate that a great number of the signs and symptoms of
plumbism are also shown by people suffering from oral sepsis,
such as pyorrhoea and bad condition of the mouth, your doctor
would doubtless work closely in co-operation with the dental
clinic? —If a dental clinic existed, he would, I think, work veiy
closely in conjunction with it. He would be very useful in send-
ing men to the dentist when they particularly needed attention.
442. You consider there is ample work for at least one doctor
on the plant, and you hope to obtain the full co-operation of
all employees, as well as a recommendation from this Com-
mission in this regard?—Yes. I particularly hope to get such
a recommendation.
443. I presume you would hope for the complete co-operation
of all employees in the development of all reasonable precautions
in regard to other matters than plumbism?—Yes.
444. That would mean the tightening up of discipline in
a number of directions? —It would be necessary to tighten up
discipline in many directions if we had to compel men to
observe rules and precautions which they of themselves should
voluntarily agree to do.
445. The best discipline is that which is supported by the
sound judgment of the majority of the employees?—That is
probable.
446. You have given your views as to- what steps should be
made compulsory. Have you anything more to say in that
regard?—Experience has shown us, on the works particularly,
that it is very difficult to get men to take even the most
ordinary precautions to safeguard their health. They do not
seem to realise that the health hazard is as grave as it may be,
and even when men are warned against doing certain things
we find them doing them. Such rules and regulations as are
essential to safeguard the health of the employee on the works
should have the power of law. That is to say, just as the
employer is compelled to observe a certain procedure, so the
employee should be compelled to observe rules and regulations
that are for the protection of his own health*
447. The advice of the works doctor would also extend to
employees in regard to such details of their home life as the
matter of diet? I think so, particularly as most of the
authorities are very insistent that proper feeding acts towards
lessening the susceptibility of any man to contract plumbism.
448. At Broken Hill under the Act now in force breaches of
regulations such as dry boring are offences against the law?—
Y es; and any operative who breaks the regulations in this
iaspect is taken to a Court of Summary Jurisdiction and
fined for breach of the rules.
449. And in other factories disobedience of factory rules
entails dismissal ?—From the literature I have read I gather
that that is the case. It seems to me that the present law in
(South Australia operates very one-sidedly. It lays certain
penalties and liabilities on the employer, whereas it does not
iii any way compel the employee to observe any rules that may
be made to safeguard his own health. On that point I would
like to repeat that if rules and regulations are devised or


instituted as a recommendation of the Commission they should
have the force of law. If this is not done the Taw will operate
one-sidedly, and act, I think, very unfairly on the employer,
and the employer cannot be held wholly responsible for any
industrial disease that may be contracted by the operative.
450. Cannot you hope that, by further intensive efforts in the
direction of putting all the facts before your employees in
detail, with reasons why certain precautions are to be enforced,
you would get great support from a large number of the men,
which would make compulsion under the law very much easier?
—The great majority of our men now would see the thing in a
reasonable light, and assist as far as practicable towards
the observance of rules that would safeguard their own health.
Unfortunately, in any organisation a certain section do not look
on matters in that light, and it is to control that section only
that I think compulsory observance is necessary.
451. That is to say, you fully realise that any law is
applicable with the agreement of a majority?—Yes.
452. With fegard to the Workmen’s Compensation Acts,
would you like to put in details as an exhibit?—Yes. I hand
in a sheet containing tabulated extracts, and setting out the
scale of payment instituted under the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1911, and the subsequent amendments, under the headings
of “Permanent and Total Incapacity” “and “Death and
Weekly Bate through Total Incapacity.” I put that in fox-
easy reference by the Commission. [Vide Exhibits.]
The witness withdrew.
GEORGE DEY, industrial hygiene officer, Balmoral Road,
Port Pirie, was sworn and examined;
453. By the Chairman— What position do you hold?—I am
industrial hygiene officer for the Broken Hill Associated
Smelters.
454. How- long have you held that position?—l was appointed
originally in April, 1923.
455. Prior to that did you hold any similar positions?—No.
456. Were you connected with the smelting works in any
other capacity prior to your appointmennt as hygiene officer ?-*-
Yes. I joined the smelters in January, 1907, and for a year
at that time I was laboring abbut the -works in various depart-
ments for the purpose of getting experience. Then I was
appointed a shift boss in the Carmichael Bradford process plant.
That plant has gone out of existence for some yeax-s. Subse-
quently for three years I was shift metallurgist. Then there
was a break of two and a half years during the war. After
that I was assistant superintendent in the refinery for six
months, and for five years I was in charge of experimental
work, being two years ago appointed to the position of indus-
trial hygiene officer.
457. By Mr. Gepp —You were a member of the A.I.Fi? —Yes.
458. When did you enlist? —In April, 1915.
459. What unit were you in? —I left Australia as a company
■commander of the 27th Battalion on May 31st, 1915.
460. You were severely wounded? —Yes; at Pozieres.
461. Have you quite recovered? —As far as possible.
462. You are in generally good health and fit to do your
vv<jrk? —I was never better.
463. What experience had you in mining and metallurgy prior
to coming to Port Pirie? —I was for six months in the Kaitan-
gata Coal Mine in New Zealand. Prior to working in the
field I attended the Otago University School of Mines, and
obtained an associateship in mining and metallurgy.
464. After your coal mining experience in New Zealand,
where did you go? —To the Bonanza Gold Mine at Mcßae s
Flat, in the Dominion. After that I was with a civil engineer
in Dunedin, and subsequently was for six months in an engineer-
ing shop there. Next I went to Broken Hill, and worked 12
months underground and 12 months on surface work in the
milling operation. After that I came to Port Pirie in January,
1907.
465. Except for your period at the front, you have been at
Pert Pirie since then? —Except when the works were shut down
owing to a strike in 1909, and I worked as technical man with
a prospecting syndicate in New Zealand for a few months.
466. You have held your appointment as industrial hygiene
officer since April, 19231 —Yes.
467. What are the general instructions of the management
in regard to your duties? —The control of those matters which
are related to the improvement of the working conditions
throughout the plant from the point of view of the health
cf the employees generally, and to ensure that the various
appliances which may be installed from time to time to meet
these requirements are availed of to the fullest degree, also to
have control of the change house. I supervise the watering
down of all areas about the works and any sanitary measures.
I examine the working places from the health standpoint, and
undertake any compilation of the history of employees from
the industrial point of view. I supervise safety appliances
throughout the works, and improve them if possible. The
first-aid room and its attendants come under my supervision,
also the reporting of accidents to which they attend. In
addition I control the fire-fighting department and appliances.
That is necessary, because it is so closely associated with the
watering down of the roads, which is done from the fire service
main. A big part of my efforts consists in trying to assist
the men I see not taking precautions, and to explain
to them the dangers which they run through negligence,
ignorance, or carelessness. In such cases I speak to the men
and draw the attention of the foreman or superintendent to
any practices that may be dangerous.
468. Are you aware of the serious increase in the number
of reported lead poisoning bases during the last two or three
years?—Yes.
469. Have you from your study of the subject been able to
arrive at any definite reason for this increase? —I have not.
470. Are the conditions in the plant now better or worse
than they were in 19211—They are very much better.
471. Amongst sections of the workers, has the incidence of
lead poisoning, aecordng to the reported cases, been particularly
heavy? —Yes; we notice that foreign labor generally shows a
very much heavier incidence of reported cases of plumbism than
ordinary British labor. The Maltese are the worst on figures
of all the foreigners.
472. Your figures would be the same as have been put in by
Mr. So'merset? —Yes.
473. Generally speaking, are those men of long or short
service ?—Generally of short service.
474. Would you say that foreigners appear to be more
susceptible to lead than British-born workers? —Our records
are the only guide as to that, and when our records show such
a high percentage of foreigners becoming affected, 1 should say
yes.
475. Would you say that, in your opinion, they are not as well
able to look after their health under Australian conditions as
the average Australian? —The doctors’ reports indicate that
the incidence of plumbism is apparently heavier among
foreigners than among British-born workers, and by comparison
one would be inclined to think so.
476. Might this indicate that a change of environment and
of food and climate has an effect? —I could not shy as to that.
The fact stands out on the figures that they are more susceptible.
477. I understand that you are a member of the local muni-
cipal council? —Yes.
478. Do you know anything of the conditions under which
many of the foreigners are living? —I have no personal know-
ledge cf their conditions, but I have a recollection of the housing
conditions of foreigners being mentioned from time to time
by certain councillors with regard to their conforming to the
Health Act in the matter of crowding and that sort of thing.
479. Why is it that so many foreigners are now employed
by the company? —British labor is not always available in the
quantity required, and at times there is seasonal variation in
the work of the State which takes men away. When foreigners
are there we employ them in that case.


480. Has the company ever taken any step to encourage the
influx of foreigners to Port Pirie? —No.
481. Does the company exercise any preference in favor of
British-born labor? —Yes.
482. Will you describe the procedure in that connection? —
At the gate when the timekeepers are calling for labor British
labor is called before foreign labor. If there are British
available at the gate their names are called and exhausted before
foreigners are put on.
483. You have stated that the conditions in the plant are now
better than they were in 1921. I presume you can support that
statement with details from your own knowledge? —Yes.
484. For the information of the Commission, you might
indicate improvements made in as full detail as you can?
Taking the plant in metallurgical sequence and following the
ore through the plant, in the first place more watering down
services are available when any ore is handled from our stacks,
and at the ore unloading belt at the Dwight & Lloyd plant,
where most of the ore which we treat is unloaded, a watering
down service has been installed, so that the man unloading the
ore may water down any ore that is dry. On the A machine
of the Dwight & Lloyd plant the uptake shafts which carry the
fumes away as the palettes discharge have been improved, and are
now very much more effective than previously. A screw conveyor
to deliver the pre-roast from the A machine on to the tray
conveyor has been installed and found effective. This is being
extended to all machines. The water sprays on the tray con-
veyor have been improved to keep down the dust. Water sprays
have been installed in the vacuum chambers so that the chamber
material may be removed in moist condition, thus eliminating
the dust which previously attended this operation. Water seals
have been fitted to the cyclone hoppers, so that the cyclone dust
is now removed in the form of sludge instead of fine dust as
was the case before. On the B machines of the Dwight & Lloyd
plant hoods have been placed over the discharge shoots, so that
dust due to the tipping of the palette is now drawn back on
to the surface of the charge instead of being allowed to blow
about as previously. In general a more extensive watering
down service has been installed, and closer attention paid to
this phase all round.
485. What has been done at the Huntington-Heberlein plant?—
The flues of the plant were rebuilt some time ago with much
more satisfactory results.
486. Has anything been done in the feed bins of the
Huntington-Heberlein, which has helped the position, since
1921? —Sprays have been installed over the feed bin to keep
down the dust there.
487. You come from there to the blast furnaces? —The biggest
improvement in the blast furnace department is the elimination
of the old slag pot method of removing slag in the molten state,
and the substitution of the granulating process, which not only
reduces the number of men exposed to any risk of leading, but
makes it a much cleaner, better, and safer process.
The witness withdrew.
JOHN MALYCHA, enginedriver, 8, Frederick Road, Ellen-
dale, was sworn and examined:
488. By Mr. Robinette —What is your occupation?—l am an
enginedriver.
489. How long have you been employed at the smelters? —
Twenty-three years.
490. Have you been in one department all the time? —Yes,
with the exception of about 18 months, when I worked on the
steam crane on the wharf.
491. Practically all the time you have been employed on the
slag boilers and engines? —Yes.
492. You have been absent from work because of lead
poisoning ? —Yes.
493. For what periods? —I was absent nearly four weeks in
July, 1919. I was also away a few days in 1923 with lead
poisoning. I had another bad attack last November, although
I continued working. Then I was absent four weeks in
January, and am away from work now, having been off since
Easter Sunday.
494. Do you consider that the dust is worse now than it was
prior to the shut-down? —Yes, absolutely.
495. Can you tell the Commission what causes you to form
that opinion? —The dust I speak of comes from a point near
the engine-house. The most dust I receive comes from the
Skinner and Barrier roasting furnaces.
496. Can you see the dust? —Yes. I have seen it flying
around inside the engine-room pretty nearly every day, more
or less.
497. You clean the engine every day? —Yes, and I notice
that two or three hours after I have cleaned the engine the
dust collects on it again. I notice it mostly flying around
where the sun is shining. You can see the shining specks in
the sun. Without the sun I cannot see it in the atmosphere,
although I can see where it is settling down. All the time
I feel grit in my mouth, which causes me to spit repeatedly.
498. Did you notice whether the dust settled anywhere else?
—lt settles on the coal heap. Coal was brought to the stoke-
hole near the engine-house, and in a day or two it was covered
with dust. I have also noticed the dust settle on my clothes.
The fumes were very bad last Good Friday. They were so bad
that all the afternoon I could not see my signalman.
499. You get the dust from the bottom and top floors? —Yes,
and also from the Dwight & Lloyd at times.
500. When the wind is from the west you get the dust and
fumes from the heap sintering?—Yes.
501. You are practically working in fumes no matter which
way the wind blows? —Practically. Of course, if there is no
wind the fumes go straight up.
502. By Mr. Gepp —You have worked on the smelters for 23
years? —Yes.
503. Practically all the time on the slag boilers and engines,
except for 18 months on the wharf? —Yes.
504. Prior to July, 1919, did you suffer from any industrial
sickness? —Yes, but I do not remember the occasions now.
505. Would it be back in 1910 or some date of that sort?
—I think it was in 1918. Dr. Dawson attended me and
ordered me to go away for a month. I do not remember how
long I was away from work.
506. Was your illness then certified as lead poisoning? —Yes.
507. How old are you?—l shall be 50 next month.
508. So that you were about 27 years of age when you came
to Pirie? —Yes.
509. You say that in your opinion the dust is worse now
than it was prior to the shut-down? —Yes. I have never ex-
perienced anything like it before.
510. Do you mean that in relation to all the works or to
your particular job?—l cannot speak of other parts very
much. Where I am working, however, the dust is much worse.
511. Your occupation is near the boilermakers’ shop? —Yes.
There is a boiler and engine-room there.
512. By Mr. Pearson —You said you consider the dust comes
from the Skinner and the Barrier roaster furnaces. Do you
mean from the whole of the operations in connection with
those furnaces? —It comes from the building that houses thfise
two furnaces.
513. You were driving that hoist before that building was
built? —Yes; when the old Hegeler roasters were up,
514. You consider the conditions are worse now than under
the old arrangements?—Yes.
515. By the Chairman —Since and including 1919 you have
received four certificates for lead poisoning—four weeks in
July, 1919, half a week some time in 1923, four weeks in
January, 1925, and since Easter Sunday?—Yes.
516. Were the attacks similar in each instance? —Yes.
517. What has been the chief trouble?—A pain in the upper
abdomen. Afterwards I get pains in my side and back, especi-
ally at night time when I am in bed.


518. Have you had any trouble with your teeth during that
period?—l did in 1917. The doctor ordered me to have them
drawn. I had them drawn then.
519. Do you wear a plate now?—Yes.
The witness withdrew.
GEORGE DEY, industrial hygiene officer,. Broken Hill
Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, recalled and further
examined:
520. By Mr. Gepp— You were dealing with the improve-
ments within your knowledge on the blast furnace plant, and
had covered the elimination of slag pots and the substitution
of the slag granulating process, and also, I think, the
improved hoods and curtains?—l have not dealt with the last
named. Within the last two years all the old hoods have been
taken from over the slag pots, and a much better type has
been erected to more efficiently draw off the fumes that rise
as the slag runs from the furnace, and as a further pro-
tection curtains of iron plate have been hung round the
bottom of the hoods to cover the space between the bottom
of the hood and the top of the slag pot. These have made
the hood much more effective, so that the amount of fume
that escapes when the slag is running is negligible.
521. What improvements are there on the top floor? —On
the top floor the water service on the top of the bins has
been improved by installing a new hydraulic water service.
The ordinary town pressure is not always sufficient to carry
water to the tops of the bins in sufficient quantity to spray
the material up there, so a high pressure service has been
laid on, and that is always sufficient. The control of the
sprays on the top of the bins rests with the man operating
the bin below, so that he knows when to turn on the water
and how much to turn on. He is the man most affected by
dry material, therefore he has the remedy in his own hands.
One of the biggest improvements there is the utilisation of
British coke. Owing to the nature of this coke it conduces to
better furnace conditions, so that the furnaces run more
regularly, and do not give the metallurgical troubles that we
used to get from the coke w'e previously used. That means
less attention necessary to the furnace, and less smoke and
everything. That is a big improvement. Many additional
taps have been put in, and the watering down of the floor
itself is more regularly done now than it was before.
522. Have you anything to say regarding the refinery?—
In the refinery the uptakes from the retort furnaces have been
improved. New pipes have been put in, giving each hood an
individual pipe to draw away the fumes instead of two hoods
running into one pipe. Previously one pipe served two retorts.
The shape of the hoods has been improved. In addition,
small pipes have been placed over the vent hole of each
condenser to carry off the fumes which issue from this hole.
An improved hood has been made for the cupel furnaces to
draw off the fumes generated during mipellation. At the
antimony slag tip a good water service has been installed
to water dowm the slag before it is shovelled aw r ay. The
method of transferring the refined lead from the refinery into
the market lead kettles has been greatly improved. Previously
the refined lead ran from the refinery furnace through an
open chute, fell into the market kettle, and produced a con-
siderable quantity of dross during the process. This dross
had to be skimmed off and handled back to the blast
furnaces. Now the refined lead is run into the market kettles
through a closed pipe, delivering right to the bottom of the
kettle. This prevents oxidation, and so reduces the quantity
of dross formed. Previously up to three or four pots of
dross were produced from each charge. Now only a few bars
Of dross are produced per charge, and this dross is of a
much better nature to handle. In the litharge mill the exhaust
fan has been speeded up, so that the dust caused through the
packing of the litharge is drawn away. Special precautions are
taken there besides this with regard to bathing and general
hygienic measures. A hood is placed over the ore crusher
bin so that the ore being handled into the bin is put there
under suction, and any dust produced in tipping the ore into
the bin is drawn away. This has effected a great improve-
ment. Previously dust used to rise, and the men used to
inhale it, but now it is practically eliminated.
523. There must be a number of general points about the
job where improvements have been made? —One big improve-
ment is the watering down of the works area, and a regular
wintering down of all wmrking floors. This is very much more
systematically and thoroughly carried out than it used to be.
Hydrants from the fire service have been installed all over
the works area where the bulk of the men work, so that
there is practically no part of the plant that is not com-
manded by a fire hydrant for watering down purposes. That
is done on an organised system, so that different officers of
the company are responsible for their own areas. That has
been put down on a plan. The change house has been
installed for about two years, and additional crib houses
with wash-basins, &c., have been put in where necessary, and
some of the older crib houses have been improved. In order
that the men’s cribs might be more palatable during hot
weather, cool cupboards have been provided in most of the
crib houses. In addition there has been a constant watch
over operations, and a number of things difficult to specify
have been done. All these things are receiving attention, and
anything we can do is being done.
524. If a shift worker is feeling a bit off color, but not ill
enough to stop away from work, do you make any arrange-
ments to give him a change from shift work? —Ever since I
have been on the works it has been the custom to transfer
any man to day work or on to another part of the works on
shift work if he desires for any reason, such as that the
job does not suit him.
525. Are any further improvements being made at present?
—One big improvement nearing completion is the new bullion
handling scheme. This will effect a very big improvement
from a health standpoint. With the present method of
running lead from the furnaces into small moulds it is very
difficult to devise any scheme whereby the fumes may be
drawn away; that is to say, any ventilation scheme depends
for its success on being able to catch dust or fumes at the
point of origin. To catch them from the lead furnaces under
present conditions at the point of origin would be a very
difficult matter, but when the new scheme comes in with
large pots there will not be so many men around the furnace,
and it will be possible to take care of fumes. They will be
more like slag pots, and it will be possible to put a hood
over the top. That will greatly improve the conditions.
Moreover, it will reduce the number of men -who will be
exposed to any danger of plumbism. In that connection
there will be dressing furnaces as a part of the scheme, which
will mean that that work will be done near the blast furnaces
instead of in the refinery, with probably less handling of
the bullion by the men and under perhaps better conditions.
Another improvement being carried out is to the bag houses.
When this is completed not only will the gas be blown into
the bag houses, but the filtered gases will be boosted up the
stack by a fan and delivered right away from the works.
526. These improvements are being done on day shift now?
—Yes.
527. And that is the reason why the big stack is showing
smoke at present? —Yes. Until this scheme is completed the
bag house at present has not the full capacity to deal with
all the furnace gases.
528. When all these are completed, will all the furnace gases
be filtered? —Yes.
529. What happens to the fume when it gets into the bags?
—lt falls from the top of the bag into a hopper underneath
each line of bags, there being one hopper for every two or
three lines. From there it is carried to the outside of the
bag house by means of an archimedean screw into hand
barrows. These barrows are then wheeled into a burning
chamber, where the fume is ignited. Once ignited, it burns


to a clinker. It is then taken in the same barrow, after
being thoroughly wetted, and sintered in the Huntington-
Heberlein pots. K
, 530. There have been for some years mechanical shakers
at the bag house?—Yes.
531. But the present alterations are connected with an
improved design invented at the works. Is that so? —Yes.
The old type were not quite satisfactory, and required con-
siderable maintenance.
532. Of what material are those bags?—Flannel.
533. So that you consider the alterations now in progress
at the bag house will effect considerable amelioration of any
conditions that may have been previously occurring?—Yes,
very great.
534. In regard to the main bag house at the blast furnaces,
am I correct in assuming that when the improvements are
made, the whole of the gases, after being filtered, will be
delivered the top of the big stack? —Yes, at a height of
212 ft. The A Dwight & Lloyd bag house is at present und ?r
construction.
535. Will the design of this bag house be on the improved
principle which you have been describing?—Yes.
536. And this programme will proceed until the gases from
both the Dwight & Lloyd plant wall be treated? —Yes.
537. Is there any other point in relation to the Dwight
and Lloyd machine that you wish to mention? —A slow
conveyor to deliver material from the A section of the
Dwght & Lloyd machine has been tried and very effective.
This type of conveyor is being installed on all A section
machines.
538. With regard to additional improvements at present
under consideration or contemplated, Mr. Somerset has dealt
in fairly full detail with some of the items, such as the
cooling of the Huntington-Heberlein pots, the alterations in
the refinery, addition to the change house arrangement and
improvements therein, and some other points. Seeing that
it is in your department, you might deal in somewhat more
detail with the change house arrangement?—When the
original change house was built it was erected in such a
way that it rvould be very easy to extend it on either side,
and as the demand for the change house grows the company
will extend it as required. Any improvements that we can
make with regard to the lay out of it will be incorporated.
It is the intention of the company to make the change house
as up to date as possible.
539. I have heard comments, quite unofficially, that the
change house is draughty. Does that mean that it feels
cold to the men? Do you think any improvement could be
made by providing a certain amount of heating?—That might
possibly help.
540. Is it on the cold side in wdnter? —The temperature
would depend on the temperature outside. There is no
heating apparatus there.
541. Supposing the men were coming off at 12 midnight,
it might feel chilly to them on a cold, frosty night?—Yes;
but I should think that if the men were coming off work
in a hot state, even for a few minutes cold to be endured before
getting under a hot shower would be preferable to sitting in
one of the buses and going home in their working clothes.
542. As officer of this department, any representations to
you would be most sympathetically considered, I presume, in
connection with the warming of a portion or all of the change
house if desired? —Certainly.
543. Is there any other point you wish to make in regard
to the change house? —We are making improvements in the
size of the lockers. They were originally too small, and
representations were made to the company on the matter. A
number of lockers of large size are on order, and we are
converting the smaller ones to the larger size.
544. There is a man in charge of this change house every
shift? —Yes.
545. So that there is a complete safeguard against theft?—
So far as the man is capable of protecting the men’s
property, but thefts are reported to me from time to time.
546. A man could not use a hammer and chisel, for example,,
on a padlock? —No.
547. Have you any preference for the locker compared with
the overhead system of storing shift clothes, such as they
have at South Broken Hill?—I prefer the locker, because
once clothes are locked up, and they can be hung up when
we get the larger lockers, or put away, it is much better
than having them hanging on a rack up on top.
548. Hoes the drying system for the men’s clothes work
satisfactorily ? —Y es.
549. It is availed of? —To a limited extent.
550. Have you arrangements for men doing their own
laundry work if they so desire ?—-Yes; there are wash troughs,
alongside the change house and a very good supply of hot
water.
551. I mentioned some of the points given by Mr. Somerset
in his evidence in chief. Are there any other points regard-
ing additional improvements, considered or contemplated, on
which you wish to give evidence?—The matter of removing the
feed bins from the top floor of the smelter furnace’s, and the
doing of that work on the ground away from the furnaces,
has been mentioned, and, I believe, is under consideration.
The matter of suction fans to draw off fumes is also receiving
attention.
552. In particular places, or all round the job?—ln the
refinery it is now under consideration, and the work is on
the way for the cupel yard. I am considering the matter of
suction in other parts of the works to deal with certain dust
and fumes.
553. Have you a plan of the works for the information of
the Commission? —Yes, although it is not quite up to date.
The information on it will be incorporated in one wdiich, I
understand, is being prepared {vide Exhibit 4).
554. Will you describe the plan?—lt is a plan of the
works area, and the different colors specify the areas over
which different superintendents are responsible for watering.
Copies of that plan, or parts of it, have been placed in the
hands of the superintendents concerned, and they are
responsible for the watering down of the area specified in
their particular plan. The plan also marks the sites of the
change house, crib houses, and drinking fountains around the
works. A list on the left hand side sets out the number of
drinking fountains, change houses, and crib houses on the
works.
555. The company has spent a considerable amount of
money in the last year or so in connection with the watering
down of the whole plant. Is any work going on now in the
direction of extending watering down? —That work has been
proceeding constantly since I have been connected with my
present position. It is still going on, and the area to be
watered down is being very greatly extended/
556. There is still a considerable amount of money being
spent in that direction? —Yes.
557. And more is to be spent?—Yes. I recently issued one
order for 1,500 ft. of piping for the railway yard, and another
order covering quite as much material for what we call the
salvage dump, where the old building material is taken when
not required.
558. What particular work is done in the railway yard?—
All ore from Broken Hill is delivered to our railway yard,
and in order more thoroughly to moisten any dry material
there it will be necessary to have a fresh water service
commanding every siding.
559. You will continue this programme until every part of
the works you consider necessary is covered? —Yes. The work
has been going on constantly. There is difficulty in carrying
it out, however, as we are short of tradesmen. To keep all
the improvements going means that some of them must be
spread over a considerable period.
560. Are you aware of the important bearing that personal
cleanliness has upon the prevention of plumbism?—Yes.
561. Do you feel satisfied that the men are cO-operating as
fully as is desirable in this important particular?—No. I
think there is room for considerable improvement in that regard.


562. What is being done to provide facilities for cleanliness?
• In the first place there is the changediouse and the crib-rooms
containing hand and face washing facilities. They enable the
men to leave the works clean, and to leave their working clothes
behind them. It also enables them, before they* have meals,
to wash their faces and hands.
563. Do you find it is a matter of slow growth to convey by
education the necessity for care in those directions?—lt seems
difficult to make the men realise that care is necessary.
564. It is really part of your work to keep pegging away at
this particular thing in order to get co-operation in this regard?
—Yes. Every day lam at that work. I speak to different
men, and point out mistakes they are making in this respect.
I bring such lapses under the notice of the superintendent and
foremen.
565. Have you a plan which shows the lay-out of the crib-
houses, change-houses, and so on?—The plan I tendered shows
the watering down process. It also shews the location of the
crib-rooms, change-houses, and drinking fountains.
566. Can you give us any statistics in regard to the change-
house and the number of men using it?—For this year the
average number of men using the change-house in 24 hours
is 281. Of that number an average of 210 bathe. That means
on an average 61 men used the change-house merely to change
their clothes or to wash their faces and hands.
567. By Mr. Robinette —Does that mean that an average of
271 men change their clothes in the change-house?—lt may
not mean that, because the figures include what we call casuals.
The changq-house attendant at each shift picks out the number
of men who use the change-house on ea,ch shift. He divides
this number into two classes, namely, the number of men who
come off in the shift and casuals who drift in during the day
for a bath. The casuals may not use the change-house as a
change-house but as a bathing-house.
568. There are not 271 lockers, are there? —Yes. There are
more than 300 lockers.
569. By Mr. Gepp (to the Chairman) : When we were making
inquiries the other day we found that the lockers used were
about 20 short of the available lockers. The attendant told us
that he was never sure of the exact number used, because a few
of the men were always going away and leaving their things in
the lockers for him to watch for a couple of weeks. He said
definitely that about 20 were spare lockers available to any
man who wanted them. (To witness) : There are 320 lockers
in the change-house? —Yes.
571. Your figures are averaged? —Yes. The maximum number
of men using the change house in any single day was 329,
including men who came off shift, and those who came from
their homes to have a bath and went back home again.
572. In your figures you do not include men who went to the
works and did their laundry work? —No. I have not taken the
number of these men.
573. What is the maximum number who bathed in one day?
265.
574. What is the minimum number who bathed in one day?
—153.
575. In regard to the education of all concerned in respect
to the necessity for personal hygiene, have any instructions
been issued, either in writing or through the various devices,
to indicate to the men the necessity for taking precautions?
Yes. Instructions have been issued in four languages. They
were handed to the Commission by Mr. Somerset.
576. Are verbal instructions given regularly by departmental
officers and yourself when the men are observed to be taking
unnecessary risks? —Yes.
577. Do you make regular tours of the works? —Yes. I am
around every day.
578. On those tours do you watch for carelessness or ignorance
on the part of the men in a health direction ?—All the time.
579. What action do you take when instructions are diso-
beyed?—l speak to the man straight away, and then go to his
boss and tell him. If I found the boss first by the time I got
him on the scene the conditions may have changed, that is to
say, the man may be somewhere else, and not doing what he was
when I noticed him. Therefore I speak to the man to be sure
of it. If necessary, I also speak to the superintendent.
580. Have you any idea of the sickness generally amongst
the employees, apart from plumbism? —I have the figures from
our sickness and accident fund, which I will band in.
581. What is the average time lost per annum? —The average
period of absence per member per annum in the last two years,
apart from plumbism, was days.
582. Do you consider that unduly heavy? —No. It is lower
than the average for Australia. It is below the figures of the
Royal Commission on National Insurance.
583. Have you any details as to the types of illness that
predominate among the men at the works? —My table sets out
the main ones.
584. What are the main types?—Bronchitis, gastritis,
rheumatism, and tonsilitis are responsible for a large number
of the cases.
585. In your reading on plumbism have you come across any
mention of the effects of over-indulgence in alcohol? —Yes. All
the literature I have read condemns the use of alcohol as
being very injurious in the case of plumbism, and as a pre~
disposing factor to plumbism in lead work.
586. When you say “use,” do you mean “abuse?” —Yes.
587. Do you think alcohol, which may be defined as the'
abuse of alcohol, is influencing the position at Port Pirie?—l
cannot say for certain, but I think probably it is in some cases.
588. Would you say the employees at the smelters are not
sufficiently aware of the dangers of drink in connection with
themselves?—l feel sure some of them are not.
589. Do you know the holiday camp at Weeroona? —Yes.
590. VvTien was it established, and by whom?—lt was estab-
lished in 1918 by the company.
591. What was the object of establishing it?—The idea was
that not only would it enable an employee to have a holiday,
but it would enable him to take his wife and family with him.
592. Would that in any way reduce the cost of the holiday to
the man and his wife and family?—Yes. The company trans-
port an employee, his wife, and his family to Weeroona free
of charge, and accommodate them there at a very low cost.
I have the figures. The company arranges for employees and
their wives and children to go there at 255. a week for a man
or a woman or a child over 11 years of age, and 12s. 6d. a
week for children between three and 11 years old. Children
under three are kept free. That means that, with no expense
in transportation, and such a scale for young children, a man
could take a holiday there at very low cost —lower than he
could in practically any other way. By making this arrange-
ment the company felt that, since it was necessary that both
the man and his wife should have a holiday, it would be taking
proper care of the man by also taking care of his wife and
family.
593. The facilities for transporting both ways were and
are reasonably ample for such a scheme? —I think so. As many
boats are are necessary to carry the people across are provided.
594. Has any use been made of Weeroona as a convalescent
camp for reported lead poisoning cases? —Yes. Last .year 12
cases went there.
595. Is it optional for them to go?—-Yes.
596. What cost is laid upon a man who goes there in those
circumstances? —None at all. The company pays his expenses.
597. Has that been a benefit in cases within your knowledge?
—I do not know much about that phase, but I should say it
would be a benefit.
598. Is there anything in the way of holidays provided among,
the conditions of employment at the smelters? —Yes. The com-
pany has arranged a scale of holidays for employees. I have
the scale here. Briefly, it is divided into two scales, one for
six days a week men, the other for those who work seven days


a week. The six-day men get 12 holidays per annum on full
pay, provided they do not miss more than 12 days without a
certificate for sickness.
599. And without leave from their foremen? —Leave from
their foremen is counted as ordinary absence. Absence witho-ut
leave is penalised by being counted more.
600. By Mr. Pearson— Do I understand that that cuts out
the 12 days that they are entitled to under the scale? —No.
601. By Mr. Gepp —A man who lost 13 days under this
regulation would not have his whole holiday cancelled? —No.
He would lose one day. He can lose 12 days without inter-
fering with his holiday. If he loses one day above that 12
days it is a day that he misses from the holiday.
602. Then a man who is working as a shift worker seven
days a week gets his full 14 days? —Yes.
603. For that he has to be employed 12 months? —Yes.
604. And if a man is employed six months he gets half his
holidays?—Yes.
605. Do you wish to put in this table? —Yes. [Table put
in and marked Exhibit 5.]
606. I presume that in those circumstances most of the
employees get their full holidays? —A very large number of
them get a full holiday. Most of them get some holiday out
of it. When holidays become due the names of men entitled
to them are put cm a list. The number of days due to them
is put alongside their names.
607. When was this scheme put into operation? —Covering
the 12 months ended September 3rd, 1919.
608. What was the object of the scheme? —The company
recognises the necessity of a man having a holiday once a
year, and it recognises that if a man could have his holiday
on full pay he would be more ready to take that holiday
than if no pay were attached to it. If he were getting his
holiday on full pay there would be less financial worry, and
in every way it would be an inducement to a man to keep
more regular time and so benefit the man in that way.
609. If a man on the works is overtaken by accident or
sudden illness are there any facilities for dealing with him?
—Yes. We have a first-aid room and a qualified attendant
•on every shift,
610. Do you make a study of the literature on plumbism?—
Yes. I am always reading something about it.
611. Have you come across any mention of the need for
medical examinations of employees engaged in this industry?
—Yes. All the works I have read on the subject stress that.
612. What is the trend of the best opinion on this subject?
—That before a man is engaged in any lead industry he should
have a preliminary examination.
613. Is any other examination recommended? —Yes,
periodical examinations.
614. What authorities can you mention as supporting these
views? —Legge and Goadby and Ehglish regulations on the
subject.
615. What is the title of Legge and Goadby’s book? —“Lead
Poisoning and Lead Absorption.”
616. Who are Drs. Legge and Goadby? —They are two very
eminent authorities. Dr. Legge is a medical inspector of
factories in England and lecturer on factory hygiene at the
University of Manchester. Dr. Goadby is pathologist and lec-
turer on bacteriology at the National Dental Hospital, Eng-
land; also surgeon to certain smelting works and white lead
factories in East London.
617. Are the English regulations mentioned by you issued by
the Home Office of the British Government? —Yes.
618. Legge and Goadby’s book is taken as the standard work
in the English language on the subject, is it not?—l believe so.
619. What do you know of regulations covering the white
lead industry, either from your reading or personal observa-
tion? —Special precautions are taken in the way of examina-
tion of the employees. Frequent inspections have almost
eliminated plumbism from the white lead industry. Previous
to those regulations being enforced this industry suffered very
badly.
620. Are the employees examined regularly? —The men are
examined weekly.
621. The result of these regulations and examinations is
that the position has been so improved as almost to reach
elimination f —Yes.
622. Is there a litharge mill at the smelters? —Yes.
623. Is the work in that mill regarded as hazardous? —Yes.
624. Have there been any cases of reported plumbism from
there? —When the mill first started there were cases, but the
industry was new in Port Pirie, and since proper precautions
have been put in force the trouble has been practically
eliminated.
625. What do the precautions consist of that have eliminated
the trouble in the litharge mill? —In the first place there is
an exhaust fan attached to the crushing mill, which is en-
closed, and the fan creates a minus pressure in this enclosure,
so that the dust does not escape out of the enclosure. That
dust is carried into a cyclone collector. Smoking is pro
hibited in the building. Then there is a change-house next
to the building where the men bathe as soon as they have
finished their work. Overalls are provided, also caps, gloves,
and respirators. The men are given a certain amount of work
to do, and after they have finished that work they are free
to go, so that they have every inducement to shorten their
time in the litharge mill.
626. These precautions, of course, are very strict and very
considerable on account of the particular nature of the em
ployment in that place? —Yes, and they have proved quite
effective.
627. Do you have any difficulty in securing men to go into
the litharge mill? —No; there is no trouble there. The men
get a higher rate of pay, and their being able to go home after
finishing the particular quantity of work allotted is an induce-
ment. In any case the work is intermittent and the tonnage
is not great during the year.
628. As the officer particularly responsible for hygiene at
the smelters can you make any specific suggestions in regard
to the alleviation or elimination of lead poisoning? —Yes. 1
believe a starting point is medical examination of new em-
ployees, and the provision of a medical department as a per-
manent part of our organisation.
629. What would this do? —It would enable effective pre-
ventive work to be done. It is recognised by authorities such
as Legge and Goadby, and others, that some people are- likely
to be predisposed to plumbism, and if they were advised that
the industry was not safe for them, it would be better for them
and for the industry generally.
630. As to working conditions? —That is a matter of con-
stant study. There is always some point cropping up, and
medical and technical men could work together and do a lot
of good in prevention, supervision, and education of all con-
cerned. A warning given by a medical man would carry more
weight than one coming from a layman. It is essential that
employees should take greater care of themselves. They could
be given encouragement to do so, and any rules for the pre-
servation of health must be loyally observed. They should be
made enforceable.
631. You mean, I presume, that the company and the men
working together in a sort of helpful co-operation could bring
about a much better condition by the education of all con-
cerned? —Yes, and by adhering to regulations which exist in
Great Britain and elsewhere. Certain parts of those regula-
tions are enforceable, not only against the employer, but against
the employee.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.


Cut off the bottom of the ventilating funnels so
£
s.
d.
that they will be 6ft. above the floor level
Make repairs and adjustments to the D. & L.
5
18
1
ventilating fan
Box in returns elevator, making the top sides
8
4
11
moveable to facilitate repairs to elevator ..
56
5
11
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Friday, May Ist, 1925, at 10.30 a.m.
Present—«
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Robinette.
GEORGE DEY, industrial hygiene officer, Broken Hill
Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, was recalled and
further examined;
Mr. Bobinette (to the Chairman) ; I draw attention to ques-
tion 629 of yesterday’s official transcript of the evidence. The
witness, Mr. Dey, used the term “weeded out” in relation to
people predisposed to plumbism where the words “advised
that the industry was not safe for them” now appear. The
latter phrase was substituted upon my calling attention to the
words “weeded out.”
632. By Mr. Gepp (to witness) : You have heard what has
just been said, and if you desire to make any explanation in
regard to the matter the Commission will be pleased to hear
you? —The explanation which appears in the evidence would
certainly have been added to my original remarks, whether Mr.
Robinette had called attention to the phrase ‘ ‘ weeded out ’ ’
or not.
632 a. When you used the term ‘ ‘ weeded out, ’ ’ did that mean
that men not physically fit should not be permitted to be em-
ployed in the industry?—Yes. The idea in my mind was this.
If, on a man applying for work in the industry a medical
examination revealed that he was likely to be susceptible to lead
poisoning, then in his own interests and the interests of every
one it would be better that he did not enter the industry.
633. You did not desire to cast any slur, direct or indirect,
on anybody connected with the industry?—That is beyond my
power altogether. It will be realised that my evidence was
dealing with preliminary application. Therefore, it must apply
to people not already in the industry.
634. By Mr. Bobinette —You were not dealing with appli-
cations, but with men who had been employed a month? —No;
I was dealing with applicants only.
635. You know that the chief objection in the medical exami-
nation dispute was that the men employed in the works con-
tended that, if the principle of medical examination by the
company’s doctor were instituted, men found to be suffering
from lead poisoning would be weeded out? —I know that that
was their objection, but whether it was right or wrong is
another matter.
636. By Mr. Gepp —Are you a member of any institute of
mining and metallurgy or any institute of a technical character ?
—I am a member of the Australasian Institute of Mining and
Metallurgy.
637. Which indicates that your past experience was as pre-
viously given in Mr. Somerset’s evidence ? —I presume so.
638. Have you any figures in regard to expenditure in relation
to work, directly or indirectly, associated with the question of
improvement of health conditions? —Yes.
639. Will you give us those in order? —Yes. In the first place
there is the supply of magnesium sulphate effervescence to keep
the men’s bowels open.
640. What is the prescription? —It is as follows: —Magnesium
sulphate (dried at 54.4 degrees C.), 77 parts; sodi bi-carbonate
(powder), 72 parts; tartaric acid (powder), 38 parts; citric
acid (powder), 25 parts; refined sugar (powder), 21 parts.
This is available to the men, and it was instituted on the advice
of Dr. Robinson in 1923. Up to date, from June, 1923, to
March, 1925, more than half a ton of this has been used by the
men—l,472 lbs., at a cost of £215 17s. 6d.
641. It is made up in bulk in Adelaide? —Yes; and sent to
the works.
642. Can you give us any figures in regard to Weeroona? —
Yes. The company established the camp at Weeroona at a
capital cost of £24,600.
643. How much has been spent by the company in connection
with the operating of Weeroona? —£9,201.
644. So that the total cost to the company has been how
much?—£33,B33.
645. There have been (as described by Mr. Somerset and
yourself) a number of crib houses erected during the last
five years? —Yes.
646. Can you give us the capital costs and any other
expenditure in connection therewith? —The cost of erecting and
equipping them was £2,648.
647. What about the drinking fountains that were mentioned?
—The cost of installing them was £1,376, and, including the
year ended July, 1921, to this month, the cost of maintaining
them has been £1,486.
648. Do you mean by maintenance the upkeep of the filters
and the provision of ice? —I referred to the cleaning, repairing,
and maintenance of the fountains. The figures did not include
the cost of ice.
649. In regard to watering down you mentioned yesterday
that very heavy capital expenditure had been incurred during
the past few years in making this more efficient, and that further
expenditure was continuing. Can you give the Commission any
figures in regard either to the capital or operating costs in this-
direction ? —lncluding the year ended July, 1921, to April, 1925,
£3,042 was spent in labor.
650. That is labor only, without the cost of supplying water?
—That is so.
651. And does not include any question of upkeep at the main
or pumps? —The amount relates to labor only. The roads may
be watered down with salt water, but the ore has to be wetted
with fresh water for metallurgical reasons. Including the
year ended July, 1921, to April, 1925, the cost for fresh water
for that purpose was £849.
652. The fresh water is used because it would be inadvisable
to use salt water on account of the metallurgical reactions? —
Yes.
653. By Mr. Bobinette —Do your figures give the total cost
of water or the cost for watering down? —It is the cost of the
water used for watering down only.
654. How did you arrive at the cost? Have you separate
meters? —There are separate meters all over the works. An
estimate has been made of the water used for this purpose.
The figures are an estimate, but they have been safely esti-
mated.
655. In the refinery where you water the dross down you have
not separate meters. You cannot, therefore, tell whether the
water is used for watering down or for drinking? —It is an
estimate.
656. It is an estimate, not the actual cost?
657. Mr. Gepp (to the Chairman) : The witness is on oath,
and the estimates must be considered as reasonably close for
the purpose for which he is giving them.
658. By Mr. Gepp (to witness): There have been a large
number of jobs connected only with the questions of improving
the health conditions and the elimination of dust and smoke.
Have you any figures covering such jobs—such jobs, I mean,
as are not individual picked jobs, but are numerous in character
all over the works? —Yes.
659. Will you please give us some of the figures as examples?
—Yes.
660. Please proceed to do so? —I would explain that some of
these things were done before I was actually connected with
this work, and the figures are taken from the company’s records.
The narrative on the job order to which the work was done is
set out as on the original order. The details are as follows: —


£
s.
d.
Make necessary alterations to the stack valves to
prevent leakages
16
9
5
Bolt down iron plate on floor A and B sections,
and repair floor
15
14
9
Shift D. & L. coppers to the shed at H.-H. plant,
and make alterations to buildings .. , . ..
51
0
4
Fix covering over scales of D. & L. mixing plant
10
13
5
Make and instal dust collecting hoods at tip end
of 4, 5, and 6B machines similer to B3 . .
309
0
0
To carry the cost of preventing leakages of gas
in A and B sections, D. & L. fans and stacks
159
0
0
Level and concrete floor around B1 and B2 fans
at east side of shift bosses’ ofiice
120
0
0
Plate floor at No. 8 conveyor, D. & L
181
0
0
Alterations to hoppers at discharge end of A
machine to reduce dust .
101
0
0
Alterations to hoods at discharge epd of B
machines to reduce dust
80
0
0
Carry cost of concreting western floor of D. & L.
plant from north side A cyclones to south
end of spare part house
410
0
0
Increase height of stack at discharge end of A1
15ft., and make alterations to the intake . .
85
0
0
Erect stacks at discharge end of A2, 3, 4, 5, and
6 similar to that of A1 ....
354
0
0
Fix new type dust collecting hood over B3
machine
114
0
0
Make one spare bottom for the cyclones similar
to that supplied to A6
42
0
0
Make new type bottom for A6 super hopper . .
63
0
0
Carry cost of concreting floor on east side of A
section extending to No. 10 conveyor . . . .
251
0
0
Erect dust hood at the discharge end of B4
machine .
78
0
0
Make and instal a dust hood at B6 machine .
72
0
0
Alterations to A1 cyclone, D. & L.
32
0
0
Carry cost of stopping gas leakages in stacks,
fans, and cyclones to 1/7/25
9
0
0
Instal a dust hoed at discharge end of B5
machine, D. & L
123
0
0
Instal sprays in B section vacuum chambers . . . .
81
0
0
Carry cost of erecting roof over No. 3 conveyor
135
0
0
■Cover No. 7 conveyor similar to No. 3
20
0
0
Cost of installing screw on A2 and A3 machines
190
0
0
Jnstal a trough and water service at A5 and A6
cyclones, and altering chute of No. 6
cyclone to old type ; . . .
25
0
0
Plate the floor of B section, D. & L. . . .
178
0
0
Making and installing dust-catching attachment
on Al, 2, 3, 4, and 5 cyclones similar to A6
85
0
0
Installing chutes on brickwork on A and B
machines similar to B2 . .
27
0
0
Covering No. 12 conveyor similar to No. 3 con-
veyor ...
64
0
0
Carry the cost of renewing and extending plates
on the A machine floor . .
48
0
0
Instal experimental feeder at tray conveyor on
B. & L. plant ...
321
0
0
Experiments in connection with water sealing of
D. & L. cyclones
2
0
0
Erect extension nose on slag pot hoods to carry
fumes away from overflow chute . . .
36
0
0
Renew smelter charge watering down. Drainage
trays, and put in suitable valve in pipe to
sprays
22
0
0
Connect fresh water service with Jin. tap to be
fixed to steps at south-west corner of smelter
bughouse for watering down purposes . . . .
6
0
0
Lay fin. fresh-water pipe on south end of bag-
house, with taps between Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4
chambers . .
11
0
0
Remodel slag pot hood on No. 2 furnace as
arranged
67
0
0
Make and erect slag pot hoods for Nos. 1, 3, and
4, and south end of No. 2 furnace similar to
hood north No. 2 furnace . . . .
820
0
0
Fix fresh-water taps between Nos. 3 and 4, 5 and
6 chambers, south end
6
0
0
Fix fresh-water tap on No. 1 floor at north end of
bag house
3
0
0
Fix water sprays in D. & L. bin as arranged with
Mr. Tonkin .
38
0
0
Fix sprays in dross bin similar to those in H.-H
and D. & L. bins
12
0
o
Connect hydraulic water to existing pipes at the
top of D. & L. and H.-H. bins, the valves to
be controlled by the charge weighers; also
alter direction of existing sprays as arranged
5
0
0
£
s.
d .
Make and erect slag pot hoods at both ends of
No. 5 blast furnace
162
0
0
Connect hydraulic water with pipes leading to top
of slag and Coke bins respectively; also put
taps in good order . . . . . . . . . . ....
20
0
0
Renew charge spray near coke bin, top floor, as
arranged . .
15
6
0
Fix wash troughs and replace basins, and renew
towel rollers in top floor and bottom floor,
crib houses
58
0
0
All expenses in connection with experiments on
ventilation of working places on bottom floor
smelters . . . .
111
0
0
Costruct uptake in front of blast furnace as
'
arranged with Mr. Ahern
106
0
0
Adjustments to uptakes in front of No. 2 smelter
furnace
185
0
0
Fix two fin. hoses on dross platform at refinery
2
0
0
Change over the smoke hoods at present erected
on No. 4 set of gas retorts to No. 1 set at
refinery
76
0
0
Make provision for removal of fumes from retort
furnaces at refinery, as advised by hygiene
officer
304
0
0
Fix suitable pipes at refinery lead pans to charge
in the lead, as advised
241
0
0
Connect flues from antimony dross furnaces info
main stack
6
o
0
Erect at Cupel stack refinery one ‘ ‘ sirocco ’ ; fan
to deliver 10,000 cub. ft. of gas per minute,
as arranged (This order is still open; it is
being proceeded with) : . .
15
0
0
Make 12 new dross pots for use in refinery .. ..
32
0
0
Fix hoods on all cupels at refinery after design
prepared by Mr. Langstaff, and connect all
hoods to main flue, as arranged with Mr.
Dibdin . .
1
o
0
(The above item is still open.)
Cover packing table in litharge mill with £in.
plate *
3
0
0
Enclose pulleys for twin belts at litharge mill to
make them dust proof, as arranged . . . . .
21
0
0
Erect hood on packing table to connect with fan
to remove litharge dust from workmen . .
59
0
0
Construction of fin. water service to heaps and
Mag pit
35
0
0
Maintenance of repairs to ventilating pipes and
valves at Ropp roasters . .
30
12
6
Maintenance and repairs to ventilating fan pipes
and valves, Ropp roasters
15
0
0
Have belt of calcihe loader covered to prevent
wind , blowing material off belt, also have a
water spray put at end of belt at point of
delivery
21
0
0
Overhaul elevator structure to prevent spillage
3
19
0
Minor experiments at Skinner furnace, tests on
water atomisers
10
12
0
Erect hoods and flue for dust suppression at
Barrier roaster furnaces ,
67
12
0
Make two watering down hoses each 60ft. long
for hygienic department . .
14
0
0
Make one watering down hose 35ft. long . . .
6
0
0
All expenses in connection with maintenance of
watering down hydrants and equipment . .
223
0
0
Make frames for notices as per list, and put same
in positions to bo indicntod by Mr. J. Murrie
18
0
0
Experiments in connection with vacuum dust
catchers
o
0
Experiments with dust-catching by means of air
■suction at Skinner furnaces . .
154
0
0
Instal watering down hydrants where required at
various places around works
558
o
o
Instal additional watering down hydrants as
required about works . . . .
95
0
0
661. Are those figures which you have just read all
the
work, or are they samples typical of the work that has been
carried on?—It is very difficult to get all the figures, but they
lepiesent the bulk of the work that has been done
on ordinary
maintenance.
662. Charged against maintenance f—Yes; against ordinary
operating expenses. There is other work, such as the improving
of the bagheuse condition, which is a very expensive job that
does not come into this fit all.
663. These are of the nature of the numerous similar
items
which are being carried out all the time, and are
irrespective


of the big jobs such as the new baghouse?—Yes; or the bullion
handling scheme and so on.
664. Is there a total made up?—There was a total, but I
have emitted one or two items, and that would affect the total.
665. By Mr. Eobinette —You have a sum total made up on
the sheet? —Yes; there is a sum total.
666. Have you the totals made up on those sheets? —The total
is there.
667. You intended to give that? —I did not. I did not
intend to put these sheets in. They were not typed. It was
just a matter of being able to quote examples of work done
on the job. This was information got out in a hurry. All the
items are correct, but there were some which I did not choose
to put in. Therefore, the omission of them would affect the
total; but what I have given is typical of what has been done
on the works.
The wdtness withdrew.
WILLIAM ROBERTSON, metallurgist, 14, Marlborough
Street, College Park, Adelaide, was sworn and
examined:
668. By Mr. Gepp —Are you a member of any recognised
institutions or associations of mining and metallurgy?—Yes.
I am a member of the Institute of Mining and Metallurgy,
London, and a member of the Institute of Metals, London.
669. What is your present position? —Consulting metallurgist
to the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary, Ltd.
670. Were you not for a number of years in charge of the
smelters at Port Pirie? —Yes; from 1897 to 1919, a period of 22
years.
671. Have you other experience in lead processes? —Yes. I
have had 40 years’ experience of lead smelting.
672. Where was this, in addition to your 22 years at Port
Pirie? —I started as chemist and assayer with the Glasgow
Smelting Company, whinh was engaged in the smelting of
lead and silver ores at Glasgow. From there I went as chief
chemist and assistant manager to the Mines du Nord Company’s
smelter in New Caledonia.
673. After leaving New Caledonia where did you go? —I
returned to Great Britain, where I was appointed manager of a
silver-lead refinery in London. From there I was engaged
by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company as metallurgist. I
proceeded to Broken Hill, and, after passing six months there,
came to Port Pirie.
674. Were the smelters at Pirie operating when you came
here ?—What are known as the old smelters were operating. The
blast furnaces in the position they are in to-day were being built.
They were finished some time in 1897.
675. We may take it, then, that your knowledge of Port Pirie
goes right through the life of the present smelting plant?—
Yes.
676. How many men were working on the smelters when you
were there ? —The number has varied from time to time, but
in the early days the number would be about 1,200. Of course,
during the war period, we employed up to 2,500 men.
677. Was there much foreign labor employed in Port Pirie
in those days?—No. Our men were mostly Britishers.
678. Were you working on the same kind of raw material as
the smelters are now using ? —At the start, no; but from 1900
you can take it that the ores treated were substantially the
same as at present.
679. Wa-s the process prior to 1900 similar to what ,it is
now, or has it been improved? —There has been a gradual
evolution as the result of experience.
680. Can you give us a few outstanding points in regard to
this matter? —Yes. In 1897 the new blast furnaces were
started, and the charge at first was composed principally of
oxidised ores from Broken Hill, with only a small percentage
of roasted lead concentrates. The smelting for a short time
■was a comparatively easy matter. However, shortly after-
wards the quantity of concentrates sent from Broken Hill
increased considerably.
681. By concentrates you mean sulphide concentrates ?
Yes. In order to put them in proper condition for smelting
it was necessary to get rid of the sulphur. This was done by
passing the concentrates through what were called Ropp
roasting furnaces. These furnaces were what were known as
straight-line furnaces. The concentrates were fed in at one
end and gradually carried throughout the entire length of
the furnace by means of rabbles. The necessary heat was
supplied at first by four fire boxes situated at different points
along the length of the furnace. These fire boxes were later
substituted by gas firing. The feed end of the furnace was
comparatively free from dust, as the concentrates fed in arrived
from Broken Hill in a moist condition. But at the discharge
end of the furnace the calcines were discharged in a red-hot
condition into trucks, and a considerable amount of dust was
raised. The hot calcines were trucked out into the yard and
dumped. •
682. Wiere they dry or wet at that time? —Dry. You could
not water them down on account of them being red hot. From
that point they were picked up by the charge wheelers, taken to
the top floor of the blast furnaces, and dumped down on the
cnarge plates.
683. The description you are now giving of the metallurgy
at that date was the best known practice at that time? —Yes.
684. It was mainly due to the fact that prior to that date
mostly oxidised ores had been treated —I refer to 20 years ago —
and this was a new development, that is, the utilisation of such
a considerable quantity of sulphide ores? —Exactly.
685. What you are describing is really the history of the
treatment of sulphide concentrates by blast furnace methods?
—Yes. From the charge plates the calcines, together with
the other ore and fluxes which made up the charge, were
shovelled into the furnace by the feeder man. The charge for
a blast furnace ought to be in a fairly rough condition, that
is to say, the size of the material charged should be from
6in. or Tin. downwards in diameter, and with a very small
proportion of fines. That is the ideal condition. As the pro-
portion of concentrates increased, and the oxidised ores
decreased, we found that we had to smelt a charge with a
very large proportion of fines. The result was that considerable
trouble occurred in the blast furnaces. The charge, instead of
smelting in the usual way, would hang up and cause scaffolds,
resulting in blowholes, through which quantities of lead fume
were discharged into the furnace shed around the feed floor.
686. And also dust to a considerable extent? —Sometimes,
but on the feed floor there was more fume than dust.
687. By scaffolds do you mean accretions on the side of the
furnaces? —It means that the ore started to smelt higher up
in the furnace than it should, causing bridges to form from
wall to wall. Firstly, we started with eight large smelters
and one small one. These were estimated at the time to do
all the work, but on account of the trouble we encountered in
the treatment of the fine calcines we had to erect another four
furnaces, making 13 in all.
688. What tonnage would those 13 furnaces treat under your
then metallurgical methods and knowledge?—The quantity
treated was very small indeed, as usually we would have
at least 50 per cent, of them stopped for barring off, owing
to the accretions and scaffolds that had formed from the fine
ore.
689. Can you give us any figures of the yearly or half-yearly
tonnages of these furnaces? —Not at that particular time.
690. The conditions you have described would mean a con-
siderable number of men being around these furnaces for your
output? —Yes.
691. Many more than now? —Yes.
692. In those days all the ore was tipped by hand into the
open top furnaces? —No'. It was tipped on the plates, and
then shovelled in. The smelting conditions became so bad that
it was pratically impossible to continue unless some new means
was devised of treating the fine calcines before feeding to the
blast furnace. Just about that time a machine called the. White
mineral press had been patented. It was really a briquetting


machine for converting fine ore into suitable sizes for blast
furnace work. Three of these were procured, and the concen-
trates were passed through the roasters in the same way as
before, except that a certain quantity of shell or crushed lime-
stone was added to the charge. A proportion of this lime
material w T as converted into sulphate of calcium, which had a
certain setting power, and when the mixture of calcines and
sulphate of calcium was put through the briquetting machines,
the briquettes formed, after standing for two or three days,
became fairly hard, and were in a much better condition for
smelting than the fine calcines had been.
G 93. It was moistened before briquetting?—Yes.
694. That caused the dehydrated calcium sulphate to take
up the moisture and set? —Yes. The conditions at the dis-
charge end of the roasters were not improved, as the hot ore
was taken out in the same way as before, but the handling of
the briquettes from the bottom floor to the smelters was con-
siderably improved so far as dust was concerned, there being
practically no dust in this connection. The effect on the
smelting itself was considerable, as we were able to run the
furnaces over a much longer period without barring off, and
there was certainly a considerable reduction of fumes on the
feed floor.
695. Will you proceed with your history of development on
the smelters? —In 1900 the Broken Hill Proprietary Company,
Limited, put in a number of baths, 16 in all, to find out
if they would be appreciated; if so, they were prepared to
ei'ect proper bathing and change-house accommodation. The
result, however, was very disappointing. In the first year only
2.4 per cent, of the men used them, and the numbers gradually
decreased until only two or three men a week used them. Then
they were closed. The baths were provided with hot and cold
salt water and cold fresh water, with cubicles for the men to
undress in, and a man was in attendance to keep the place
clean, &c.
696. What was the next outstanding development that you
remember? —Though the briquetting system was a considerable
improvement, it yet left much to be desired, and in 1902 a
process was brought under our notice called the Huntington-
Heberlein process, which is usually referred to as the H. & H.
This process treats the partially calcined concentrates, burns off
part of the remaining sulphur, and agglomerates the fine ore;
that is, converts it into lump form.
697. That is the form which you previously mentioned was
desirable for blast furnace feeding?—Yes. The concentrates
were pre-roasted in the Eopp furnaces as before, with the
addition of suitable fluxes and crushed ironstone and lime-
stone. The partially roasted material was taken from the dis-
charge end of the furnaces, elevated to a platform running
parallel and higher than the Huntington-Heberlein kettles. In
the days gone by the conditions were slightly different from
what they are now. The hot material from the roasters was
dry and fine, and was tipped from a height of about 4ft. into
the kettles along a chute, and there was at times considerable
dusting. The process itself was not as efficient as it is now
when we are treating pre-roasted material from Dwight & Lloyd
machines. The matrial was not so well cooked as at present,
and very often very large quantities of only partially cooked
material existed in the agglomerated lump when tipped, causing
a considerable quantity of dust.
698. That is, by the feeding of fine material into the pots
instead of the pre-roast as now, the agglomeration and sinter-
ing were not so successful as at present?—That is so.
699. Therefore, the dust was greater when tipping?—Yes.
The effect of this Huntington-Heberlein material in the blast
furnace was considerable. We were able to put a much larger
tonnage through the furnaces than before, and conditions on
the feed floor were considerably improved. The rate of smelting
was such that we were able to close down two or three of the
13 furnaces I mentioned.
700. What was the date of the introduction of the Huntington-
Heberlein process?—lt was in 1902.
701. What is the next date that you desire to mention?—Up
till 1904 the blast furnaces were of the type known as open-top
furnaces. The size at the top was practically 20ft. long by
6ft. Gin. wide; this was partly covered over with iron plates,
leaving an opening over the centre of the furnaces of about
2ft. Gin. by 13ft. long. The gases were taken off; from imme-
diately under these floor plates by means of a downtake, and
delivered into' the main flue.
702. Was that by natural draught of the chimney?—Yes.
703. Was it the same chimney as is there now? —Yes. The
charge, consisting of the Huntington-lleberlein material and
other leady materials, together with the necessary fluxes and
slag, was tipped on the plates around the opening, and from
there fed in by hand. To obtain good smelting results it is
necessary that the ere and fluxes should be evenly distributed
in the furnaces, and it is obvious that with the dimensions, 20ft.
by 6ft. Gin., it would be rather difficult for a man to do this
correctly; so at that time what was called central uptakes were
introduced. The plates covering the top of the furnaces were
removed, and an oblong flue was let in the top of the furnace
for a distance of about 3ft. That flue w'as of such dimensions
that it left from 18in. to 20in. clear space all round the furnace
top. In those days the uptake was slightly different from the
present one. It rose straight up for a distance of about 12ft.
to 14ft., then took a gooseneck form and entered the main flue,
thus taking the gases off from the top of the furnace. The
feeder man, instead of having to distribute his charges over
aie space already mentioned, had only this opening around the
furnace of not more than 20in. wide in which to place his
charge. The charge was usually kept up whenever practicable
nearly to the level of the feed plates, thus forming a sort of
seal, and preventing a lot of extraneous air from entering the
top of the furnace. The outcome was that we obtained a much
octter smelting result, and, what is more, the amount of fume
i.nrown out by the furnace previously was again considerably
lessened, and we have run over considerable periods without
any smoke being seen on the feed floor at all, except on such
occasions as when a furnace was being run down for barring.
Of course you will understand that so far these improvements
have only been in relation to the feed floor. The next im-
provement was the introduction of turbo-blowers; that was
in 1907.
704. What did you use before that? —We were using the Green
blower.
705. Was that a reciprocating blower?—lt was a pulsating
blower of the Boots type.
706. At approximately what pressure did you work with the
Green blower?—We got up to 260 z. Previous to that we were
using a very inferior blower, which could give a blast pressure
of only 15oz. to 18oz. I will explain the reason why we had
to get the turbo-blowers. The furnaces when originally built
were 16ft. high. After the Huntington-Heberlein plant w T as put
in we increased the height of the furnaces by 4ft. That is to
say, we had an additional 4ft. of ore column in the furnace, and
naturally with that increase the amount of resistance to the
blast was considerably increased, and we were not able with
those blowers to get the requisite quantity of air through the
furnace to effect a proper speed of smelting, so we installed
turbo-blowers.
707. By the Chairman —Does your reference in ounces to the
pressure of a blower mean ounces pressure over atmospheric
pressure? It means ounces per square inch over atmospheric
pressure. These turbo-blowers were capable of giving a pres-
sure up to about 80ozs. at that time.
708. By Mr. Gepp —When were these turbo-blowers installed?
—The installation started in 1907.
709. They were the original Parsons type?—Yes.
710. Are those the type you now use? —No, we use the
Bateau.
711. Those are a further improvement over the original
Parsons? —They are from a mechanical standpoint.


712. What pressure does these deliver ?—Speaking from
memory, they would deliver up 'to 80 ounces, but that pressure
we never use. We found that from 44 up to occasionally 55
was all that was necessary. The usual pressure is in the
neighborhood of 48 ounces.
. 713. Would that improve the speed of smelting?—Con-
siderably. We were able to put out of commission a great
number of other furnaces.
714. The furnaces were of the some general design as they
are now? —Yes, but there have been minor alterations made
from time to time, as, for example, in the early days the
furnaces were wider at the tuyeres than they are now, and
the tuyeres projected into the furnace about eight or nine
inches.
715. The furnace now is a further improvement on that?
—Yes. The size and shape of water jackets have changed
from time to time and there have been other small alterations
of that character.
716. How did you take the slag off in those days? —The
slag was tapped, from both ends of the blast furnace, passing
near a short chute and flowing into slag pots. In the earlier
days there was comparatively little smoke given off from the
slag, and at Broken Hill when running on an acid slag run-
ning 40 per cent, of silica, there was practically no fume
given off at all.
717. That is with high silica in the slag?—Yes. Here in
Pirie in the earlier days the quantity of zinc in the ore was
comparatively small and we were able to run with a slag
running about 28 per cent, of silica. With this slag, as
previously stated, there was not an abnormal quantity of
fume given off, but as the zinc increased in the ore, it was
found necessary for smelting reasons to reduce the silica in
the slag and the basic slag formed gave off quantities of
fume. This became so bad that it caused sickness or
plumbism amongst men, not only on the bottom floor off the
furnace, but in my opinion throughout the works generally,
depending of course on the direction the -wind was blowing.
One part of the works would suffer more at one time than
another part would. To overcome this we introduced hoods.
We tried several forms at first, but eventually settled on the
hood which I think was the same as in use to-day. The slag
tap was covered, also the slag pot into which the molten slag
was being run.
718. In what year were they introduced? —1909, in Septem-
ber or October.
719. By Mr. Bohmette —Were the works in operation at that
time?—Yes, that was after the strike, or, as some people call
it, the lockout. I think we started up in June. These hoods
proved very effective, and removed all the smoke and fumes
clear of the building.
720. By Mr. Gepp —During the period you have been des-
cribing, that is, from 1900 to 1910, on the metallurgical side
was the assay of lead in the slag about the same as it is now?
xip to 1902 the lead contents of the slag would be higher
than they are now, that is until we put in the Huntmgton-
Heberlein process. The roasting was very incomplete in the
Ropp roasters, both when we were using calcines direct into
the smelters and also when the briquetting plant was working.
The result was that fairly large quantities of matte were
produced. This had to be crushed, roasted, and re-smelted.
That, of course, has been done away with for a number of
years by better roasting practice.
721. What is the next point you wish to bring forward?
In 1909 we erected a baghouse in order to catch the fume
given off by the blast furnaces.
722. Mr. Somerset described the practice now. Was that
the same type of baghouse as exists now? The baghouse
itself was the same.
723. Was it worked by mechanical means? —Not altogether.
The bags were shaken mechanically, but the material collected
in the bags fell into a chamber underneath, until the fume
had collected to a depth of between sft. and 6ft. The fume
entering that particular chamber was then shut off and several
of the bags undone from the nipples on the floor so as to
leave a vent for the smoke. The fume would then be set
alight by means of a few firesticks and allowed to burn in the
chamber. During that time we would not be able to use the
chamber. When the fume had all burned and cooled off, men
would go into the chamber, load it, and stack it nearby for
the charge of wheelers to take it to the feed floor. That was
certainly a most objectionable job.
724. The men had to break up this stuff?—lt was fairly
friable and a pick would bring it to pieces.
725. They had to pick it down from the burnt heap?—From
the five or six feet heap the fume would be reduced in height,
to about 18 inches or two feet. The baghouse has been im-
proved on since. The bags when shaken now deposit the fume
into a sort of trough and at periods this fume is drawn off
by means of a screw conveyor and discharged into trucks.
These trucks are removed to a burning house where the con-
tents are set alight and burnt in the same way as was
previously done in the chamber itself, this obviating the
handling of burned material by manual labor.
726. Is there any other point you wish to make regarding
the story of the baghouse development? —Yes. The fume
smoke delivered to the baghouse is drawn off from the top
of the blast furnaces by means of a fan. The draught being
mechanically produced is much stronger, and, of course,
is constant, while the natural draught caused by the chimney
varies considerably, depending on the difference betweeen the
temperature of the gases going up the stack and that of the
outside air. The hotter the atmosphere the more sluggish is
the draught. In summer this is accentuated, and at times
in the summer the natural draught is very poor. In fact
on some hot days in summer I have known there to be a down
draught instead of an up draught in the chimney. That
happened on several occasions, and we had to put a fire at
the bottom of the chimney so as to increase the temperature
of the ascending gases in order to create a sufficient draught.
Of course the draught caused by the fan is constant. This
tends to minimise the amount of smoke that may escape on
to the feed floor. There is another point in connection with
the baghouse, and that is that the men who had to go into
the baghouse to repair the bags and stop leaks were provided
with overalls and respirators. They were also allowed time
in the Company’s time to have a bath when they had finished
their work.
727. You have dealt with the baghouse question and the
date you give as the time this was installed in 1909. Will
you go on now with the chronological history?—Yes. Until
1911 the charges for the furnaces were all fed to the furnace
mouth in charge barrows drawn by men. When a furnace
was running in good order it would take 11 men a shift to
bring the charges for one furnace. It varied sometimes, as
if the furnace were not running to speed the number would
be fewer. You can take the average as 11 men. The number
of men on the feed floor when we had seven or eight furnaces
running rendered the feed floor congested. There was no
room. We went into the matter very carefully, and a
mechanical feed arrangement was evolved, which was prac-
tically the same as that now being used. The only difference
is that now it is automatic both ends. In those days we used
to have one man per shift at each end of the feed, so as to
manipulate the levers which regulate the gear for bi inging
the trucks from one set of lines to the set of lines for the
furnaces. The result of the installation of the feed was that
we were able to do away with practically 200 men. Al-
though the mechanical feed itself did not alter the position
so far as fumes or dust were concerned, the number of men
exposed to any risk was lessened by 200.
728. For 14 years the furnaces were fed by hand, and from
1911 they have been fed mechanically? —Yes. The mechanical
feed also did away with the heavy work of feeding the
furnaces by hand.
729. Have you any other points to make in regard to the
blast furnaces or will you now describe to us any further im-


provements made in regard to roasting?—Prior to 1912 a new
method of de-sulphurising sulphide ore concentrates was
brought under our notice, namely the Dwight & Lloyd process.
After experimenting on a small machine we came to the con-
clusion that the new process would be an improvement on the
Huntington-Heberlein. In 1912 the Dwight & Lloyd plant
was put in. Of course, like all new plants it gave us con-
siderable trouble at first, but gradually this was overcome,
and for some time past the plant has been giving good results.
730. In your opinion does the new plant on the Dwight and
Lloyd compare favorably in design from the health stand-
point with the one that was burned dowm in 1921? —Yes. It
is considerably better. The working conditions and ventila-
tion are much better, and there is far greater freedom from
dust. In the first plant put in, we used disintegrators for
breaking up the pre-roast, and when first put in they caused
a considerable quantity of dust to escape into the building.
731. What are now used? —Rolls, and these make much less
dust. The first disintegrators we put in were fairly close to
the machine, and the material could not be wetted down pro-
perly before it got to the disintegrators. The result was that
part of the material was dry, and as the two cages of the
disintegrators in revolving created a strong current of air,
naturally the very fine dust was lifted into the atmosphere.
Another improvement effected in the Dwight & Lloyd plant
on the A machines is the elimination of the rolls that used to
bo immediately under the discharge end of each machine. This
gave a preliminary crushing to the pre-roast as it fell from the
machine. Here again a certain amount of dust was created
because of the inability to moisten the hot stuff prior to it
entering the rolls. These have now been done away with, and
on No. 1A machine an arrangement installed which has been
running now for some time on trial, and in my opinion has
almost eliminated the dust from that part of the plant.
732. That is the screw feeder?—Yes.
/ 33. Are there not other directions in which improvements
nave been made as a result of experience and discussion with
people in other countries; for instance, the adoption of the
trail gate has helped to reduce the amount of work in cleaning?
Yes. Prior to the adoption of the trail gate, which is a
rocking grate, we used a straight line grate. That grate was
a fixed one, and the openings in it were at right angles to the
long axis of the grate. These openings used to fill up with
sintered ore, which had to be chipped off by hand, making a
certain amount of dust. Other improvements have been intro-
duced there since I left, namely, sprays under the vacuum boxes,
whereby all the dust that passes through the grates is
moistened before being drawn out. Sprays have been intro-
duced also to cyclones with the same object, and the ventilation
has been enormously improved. In the old plant on the A
section the machines were practically closed in. Now they are
open to the atmosphere.
734. Do you approve, from the point of view of health con-
ditions, of the efforts that Mr. Somerset described for the final
elimination, as far as possible, of the Huntington-Heberlein
process?—Yes. If the Huntington-Heberlein pots are tipped
hot a certain amount of fume is given off. I understand
arrangements have been made to cool them back till they are
nearly black, and water the dust on top of the pot befero
tippmg. The down draught process in the Huntington-Heber-
lein kettles has been entirely stopped. That, in my opinion,
was a dangerous part of the works.
735. On your recent visit were you able to study the very
recent improvements in the way of the deepening of the bed
on the Dwight & Lloyd machines?—l have not seen it in any
other part of the wmrld. I have seen it here.
736. Does that indicate further improvement, and the elimi-
nation of more Huntington-Heberlein work?—Yes.
737. What other points in your survey of the history of the
works would you like to mention?—lt is very difficult for any-
one who is not a metallurgist, or has not been connected with
lead smelting for a number of years, fully to appreciate the
improvements I have mentioned. To put it in a way more easily
understood, at present there are six furnaces running there
treating a certain tonnage of ore material. If we had to revert
to the conditions existing in 1900 we would require 25 furnaces
to do the same tonnage, with a much inferior result. These are
actual figures which there is no getting away from. One can
only imagine what the state of the place would be with 25
furnaces running as in 1900, with prabably 50 per cent, of them
smoking.
738. Have these improvements, in your opinion, also improved
working conditions? —Undoubtedly. I think the two things go
hand in hand. Whenever new designs were under considera-
tion the utmost importance was attached to the working
conditions.
739. Are the works in a better shape now from the health
hazard point of view than, say, 10 years ago? —Undoubtedly.
740. Did you have any reported cases of lead poisoning under
the Workmen’s Compensation Act 10 years ago?—No.
741. Was there any evidence of plumbism?—Yes. Occasion-
ally when a man had been away sick, on returning to work he
would produce a doctor’s certificate saying that he had been
suffering from plumbism.
742. Have you any idea of the number of such cases? —No.
No records were kept at the time.
743. Do you know how the number of reported cases has
grown since 1917, particularly since 1923? —Yes.
744. Can you suggest any reason for that increase?—l have
noticed from returns that the reported eases occur principally
among foreigners. It may be that the change of climate, of
food, and of occupation, and the general conditions under which
these people live, render them more susceptible.
745. Do you remember the inquiry made by Dr. Ramsay
Smith in 1910 touching on lead poisoning at Port Pirie? —Yes.
746. You were in charge of the smelters then?—Yes.
747. Did you give evidence at that inquiry? —Yes.
748. Do you remember the recommendations made by Dr.
Smith?—Yes. He made two recommendations. The first
stated that the recent action of the company had enormously
reduced the number of cases, but I think it would be well, as
suggested by the manager, to draw up a set of instructions to
the workers, advising them how to take advantage of the
facilities provided, and how to attend to matters of personal
health and habits, so as to avoid those dangers that are
inseparably connected with their health and livelihood.” The
second read: “ Although it has been found necessary in other
places to introduce legislation making certain precautions com-
pulsory on the part of the workers as well as the employer, I
do not advise procedure unless it should appear that cases
of lead poisoning still continue to occur on account of the
negligence of the men themselves. ’ ’
749. What did Dr. Smith refer to by “recent action of the
company?” The hoods that had been put over the slag taps
and slag pots some months before.
750. Dr. Smith estimated that during the previous three
years, 1907-1909, there has been between 150 and 200 cases of
lead poisoning. Was that an estimate? He had no figures to
guide him?—The only figures he could get were from the
medical men who gave evidence.
751. What was thought to be the danger spot?—The slag
taps and pots, and they were hooded over and the fume carried
to stacks clear of the building.
752. That is what is meant by “the action which had enor-
mously reduced the number of cases?”—Yes.
753. Prom 1910 onwards was this improvement maintained?
—Yes. We had only occasional reports from the doctors, but
no claims for compensation.
‘ 54- Was lead poisoning compensable in those days?—Yes.
The clause referring to lead poisoning came into force on
January 1, 1912, the Act having been passed the previous year.
755. You had every reason to believe that with the improve-
ments made the health hazard was not very great? Yes.
756. Did you let it go at that?—No. Throughout the period


•of my association with the works better treatment methods and
better working conditions have been steadily evolved, and since
I left the works the same course has been pursued.
757. As consulting metallurgist to this company, how often
do you visit the works?—About every three months.
758. Do you keep in touch with what is being done?—Yes.
759. Can you offer any definite theory about the increase
in reported cases of plumbism?—No. Considering the great
improvements that have taken place recently, both metallurgical
and in the general conditions of work, it is incomprehensible to
me how there should be such an increase.
760. When did you last visit Europe and America? —In 1919.
761. Did you inspect any plants comparable with the Port
Pirie smelter?—Quite a number.
762. How long did you spend on that trip? —A year.
763. What are the names of some of the smelters and refineries
you visited?—l inspected the St. Joseph Smelting Company’s
plant in Missouri, the Federal plant in Illinois, the St. Louis
Smelting Company’s plant in Missouri, the Omaha Refinery in
Nebraska, the Globe, the Pueblo, the Salida, and the Durango
plants, all in Colorado, the Selby plant in California, the Murray,
the Midvale, and the Tooele plants, all in Utah, the East Heena
plant in Montana, the Bunker Hill and Sullivan plant in Idaho,
the Trail plant in British Columbia, the International Refinery
in Indiana, the Perth-Amboy Refinery and Balback Refinery
in New Jersey, Cookson & Son’s plant, the Enthoven Refinery,
and the Lock, Lancaster Refinery, in England. I also inspected
the Pennaroya plant in Spain, and the plant of the Societe
de I’Escalette in France.
764. What is your view of the Broken Hill Associated
Smelters at Port Pirie as compared with the generality of these
plants from the standpoint of health conditions? —I saw no
place where the working conditions were better, where there was
a greater freedom from smoke or dust, or where the ventilation
was better than the Port Pirie smelters. In works in the
United States and Europe the ventilation cannot possibly be
as good as it is here, as owing to the rigors of winter in
those countries most of the plants are all closed in. In fact,
some of them are built of stone and brick.
765. Do you know of any special conditions that are imposed
on this industry in those countries in regard to regulations of
Jaw and codes of rules?—l know that in Great Britain, there
are regulations governing the lead industry.
766. How do you know of those regulations? —I have read
extracts from them.
767. What do they provide? —For the elimination, as far as
practicable, of all factors making for health hazards. They
provide for proper medical supervision, and then require the
recognition of all concerned of the importance of certain pre-
cautions whilst at work.
768. In your evidence at the 1910 inquiry you favored the
application of a code of rules having statutory force covering
the precautions to be adopted by all concerned to minimise the
health hazard. Do you still adhere to that view after your
further experience of another 15 years? —I most certainly do,
and I think the rules and regulations ought to be made com-
pulsory.
769. On both the company and the man? —Naturally.
770. Would you say regulations similar to the British regu-
lations could wuth advantage be adopted? —Yes. I think
regulations somewhat after the lines of those in force in Great
Britain would prove beneficial here. Of course, in the framing
of those regulations or rules, local conditions require to be taken
into consideration, but I think the general principles of the
British regulations would be applicable here.
771. In the labors which the Commission has undertaken,
if there is any further assistance you could give in connection
with the problem facing us, you would be glad to give it? I
would be only too pleased.
772. There was a zinc distillation plant under your control
during your regime? —Yes.
773. In that connection there was a zinc roasting plant? —
Yes; called the Haegler roasting plant.
774. It carried out the same operation, in a somewhat
different way, as the Skinner furnaces? —Yes.
775. Where was it situated? —On the present site of the
Skinner plant.
776. What tonnage did it treat? —About 40 tons a day,
probably a little more.
777. Can you make any comparison of conditions there then
with conditions now? —The Haegler roasting plant was a
straight-line double furnace, consisting of two tiers of seven
super-imposed hearths in each. There was considerable dust
from the elevators handling the dried concentrates to the
furnace, but the dusting from the furnace itself was exception-
ally bad. Every time a rabble passed a hearth it brought
out with it a certain amount of calcines, which were blown
about the building, and also every time a charge dropped from
a hearth to the one underneath a quantity of dust was
projected through the front door of the furnace into the shed.
The calcines were not wetted down, but were fed direct from
the furnace into trucks, run out, and tipped in the yard,
causing more dust. In fact, the dust in that plant was so bad
that the workmen had to be provided with goggles to keep
their eyes clear.
778. Was the material that was roasted in there of approxi-
mately the same composition as now? —Practically.
779. Mr. Somerset gave us the average of the raw material
put into the zinc roasting plant as about 5.5 per cent. lead.
The material would not be any lower in lead than in former
days? —It used to be 6.7 per cent, of lead.
780. By Mr. Bob incite —What was the blast that was on the
furnaces in 1909?—From 44ozs. to 48ozs.
781. What was it in 1897, or soon after the smelters started?
• —From 16ozs. to 18ozs.
782. What is it at present?—My impression is that it runs
in the neighborhood of 44ozs. I am not certain of that figure.
The witness withdrew.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent,
Broken Hill Associated Smelters, was recalled and
further examined:
783. By Mr. Gepp —We were not quite clear where the com-
pounded cases show in the various tables? —When a case is com-
pounded it is on the basis of a doctor’s estimate of the period
of disability. If a man has been in receipt of compensation,
and is then compounded, he is shown in the table submitted
in the period column, which represents the total of the time
during which he has received weekly payments, plus the period
of further disability estimated by the doctor. For instance,
a man may have been drawing compensation for three months,
and then have been compounded on the basis of six months’
further disability. In the tables he is shown in the nine-
months’ table. Also, a man compounded as permanently
incapacitated is shown in the last period column in the table.
784. We have not yet had a definition in regard to the
meaning of permanent incapacity. Does it, as far as you know,
indicate complete inability for any other work for ever after-
wards? —It would be best to get the meaning from the doctors.
I could not define it in the sense doctors use it.
785. In your evidence you gave it as your considered view
that certain regulations having statutory force should be
imposed. You stated that it was decidedly unfair for regu-
lations to apply only to the employer and not to the employee,
and that unless both parties were bound by law to the observance
of approved rules the health hazard could not be overcome, nor
should the whole responsibility for industrial disease be laid
at the door of the employer. Do you recollect that portion of
your evidence? —Yes.
786. What regulations had you in mind, and where have they
been made applicable ?—Taking the question of smoking and
using tobacco for chewing whilst at work. A regulation in


force in Victoria is as follows: —“No person shall chew tobacco
or take snuff whilst employed in a lead process. ’ ’ Regulations
under the Indian Factories Act prescribe, inter alia, that no
persons employed in a lead process shall bring into or consume
tobacco in any room in which the process is carried on. The
German regulations include a similar prohibition. Regulation
20, paragraph 4, contains it. The English regulations include
the following:
Regulation 15. No person employed shall introduce, keep,
prepare, or partake of any food or drink (other than a non-
alcoholic drink approved by the surgeon), or make use of
tobacco in any place in which any lead process is carried on:
provided that except in processes named in regulation 8 ( e.g
clearing of flues or condensers, demolition of furnaces, &c.)
this regulation shall not prevent any person from using tobacco
other than cigar or cigarette if his hands are free from lead.
I have quoted this regulation in full, but in my opinion the
proviso' included vitiates the regulation, and I should say from
my practical experience over many years in control of men
that it would be impracticable to give effect to such a proviso.
To amplify that, I should say it is obvious that in those places
where a respirator has to be used it would be impracticable to
allow smoking, and obviously it should be absolutely forbidden.
787. What about medical examinations? —Regulations pro-
viding for compulsory examination are a common feature of
the industrial legislation dealing with lead processes. Regu-
lation 13 in Great Britain provides: —
Every person employed in a lead process shall be examined
by the surgeon once in every calendar month, or at such shorter
or longer intervals as may be prescribed in writing by the
Chief Inspector of Factories on a date of which due notice shall
be given. A health register containing the names of all persons
employed in a lead process shall be kept in a form approved
by the Chief Inspector of Factories. No person after suspension
shall be employed in a lead process without the written sanction
of the surgeon entered in the health register.
Legge & Goadby, the standard British authority on lead poison-
ing, lays great stress upon the prevention of plumbism, and the
importance of not employing persons unsuitable physically for
the industry. It also emphasises the importance of regular
medical supervision of the employee from the time he enters
the industry. The report of the New South Wales Board of
Trade, 1921, on the painting industry, is also emphatic in these
regards. In France regulations 15 and 16 state :
No worker may be permitted to undertake any work as con-
templated in regulation 1, unless provided with a certificate
issued by the medical man to the effect that he shows no
symptoms of lead poisoning or of any illness which is liable to
be dangerously aggravated by le.„d poisoning. No worker shall
be kept on the same class of work unless the certificate is
renewed one month after engagement, and afterwards once a
quarter.
788. Does regulation No. 1 cover work in lead factories? —
Yes. German regulation No. 17 states: —
The medical officer shall examine every worker before engage-
ment, and at the same time shall inform him of the danger of
lead poisoning. Only those workers shall be engaged in respect
of whom the medical practitioner declares there is no pre-
disposition to lead poisoning.
The Indian regulations say: —
The persons employed must undergo the prescribed medical
examinations at the prescribed intervals, and the prescribed
record must be kept with regard to their health.
Regulations in force in Missouri, U.S.A., are to the effect that
every employee engaged in a lead process shall be examined
by a competent, licensed, and reputable physician as often as
once a month, for the purpose of ascertaining if there exists in
any employee any industrial or occupational disease or illness,
or any disease or illness due to or incident to the character of
the work in which the employee is engaged.
789. what regulations can you quote in regard to personal
cleanliness?—Section 48, paragraph 5, of the Mines and Works
Regulation Act of New South Wales, for example, is quite
specific. It states: —
Every underground workman shall change his ordinary clothes
for working clothes in the change-rooms before descending to
his work, and shall change clothes again on finishing work and
before leaving the mine. Surface workmen engaged in smelting
or otherwise handling lead ores shall also make the same change
of clothes.
The British regulations require that every man shall wash the
face and hands before taking food, anod before leaving the
premises shall wash the face, neck, and arms. I believe that
a bath once a day is desirable for everybody, not alone a lead
worker, and that the lead worker, that is the man engaged on
operating work or the maintenance work that brings him into
touch with such operations, should bathe at the end of his
day’s work.
790. Are there any other rules that you have in your mind?
—Yes. Simply, with regard to respirators, I think it is
imperative that these should be used in all places wdiere their
employment appears to be desirable. As I mentioned before,
had we the advice of a doctor in this matter, we would take
him into consultation in this regard.
791. The regulations you have quoted cover laws passed by
Great Britain, France, Germany, India, and sonie of the States
of the United States of America, and all seem strongly to
advise a similar action to be taken in these great smelting
works in Australia? —One must assume that those regulations
were framed after very close examination and investigation
of the conditions that exist in the various processes connected
with lead manufacture or in the use of lead compounds. One
must be impressed by the fact that there is a great similarity
in all the regulations, and that consequently all investigators
have come to practically the same conclusion in the matter;
and it is for that reason that I think they must be of benefit
if applied in this industry also.
792. These regulations are administered by departments of
the British Government and similar departments in other
countries? —Yes.
793. Do the workmen in the countries mentioned heartily
co-operate with the employers in carrying out these regulations,
or does the contrary prevail? —I have not heard anything either
way.
794. Nothing has come to your knowledge in regard to dis-
putes between employers and employees?—No.
795. By Mr. Robinette —Do you know whether in any of the
countries you visited compensation was paid to men who had
been eliminated from the industry in accordance with the
regulations you mentioned? —In no place in America is that the
case. I think it is done somewhere, but am not certain. I
will look the matter up.
796. You mentioned that respirators should be worn where
desirable. On what parts of the works do you consider they
are desirable or practicable?—l could not indicate largely. It
depends on the nature of a man’s work on a given day. On
some days a certain place is quite good; on other days the
prevailing wind make it less desirable to work in. I would be
very largely guided by the advice of a doctor, if it were
available.
797. Would it be practicable to wear them, say, near a zinc
pan in the refinery? —Yes. If they desire them there they can
have them.
798. Would it be desirable to wear them there? —I should
not think bu.
799. Could a man work with them on?—Yes. There has
recently been introduced a new type of respirator, about which
possibly you have no knowdedge, as you have been so busy on
the Commission’s work since the time it was introduced. This
respirator is stated by the men to be very much easier to wear
than those forms we have previously tried.
Mr, Gepp (to the Chairman) : In explanation I may say that
after much experimentation this type seems to be by far the
most generally applicable and simple respirator, consisting of
butter muslin, including sufficient layers of cotton wool for the
purpose. They are comfortable and easy to wear. One or
two are used per day and discarded.
800. By the Chairman —As to working hours, is it a fact that
the works are in operation 24 hours a day and seven days a
week? The operating section of the works, that is, the section


that is directly concerned in the process of lead reduction and
manufacture, is operating for seven days a week on all three
shifts, but the service department work in the main only six
days a week.
801. What are the arrangements made for men to work seven
days a week? What weekly day off are they allowed, and so
on? It is simply the usual method of changing shifts. In one
week a man works what is called quick shifts. He works two
eight-hour spells, with a spell of eight hours between, whereas
in the other case he has a long period off. A man might be
working on a aay shift to-day, and go home and rest for eight
hours, and come back on night shift. On the long shift off,
on the contrary, he gets 32 hours off.
802. By Mr. Eobinette —The man works eight shifts one
week, seven the next, and six the next?—Yes. That averages
seven shifts a week for all shift workers.
803. By the Chairman —ls the working of seven shifts a
week desirable from the point of view of health?—From that
standpoint I should say it is not desirable for a man to work
every day of the week all the time.
804. In the event of this Commission making any recom-
mendations on that subject, I presume the company would
co-operate to improve the health of the workers? —Yes. The
company would do whatever it could in that regard. In some
departments it would be more difficult to arrange than in others,
but if it were made an instruction we would naturally have to
provide for it in one w r ay or another.
805. By Mr. Eobinette —When was the holiday bonus system
introduced? —In 1918.
806. Might not that system lead to an increase in the number
of cases of lead poisoning, through being an incentive to a
man to overtax his strength ?—I do not regard it in that light
at all. A shift man, for example, is allowed to lose 16 shifts
during the year from causes other than accident or sickness
before his holiday bonus is affected.
807. Might it not be an incentive for a man who is not fit
to get out of bed and go to work when otherwise he would not
go ? —He has 16 such occasions on which he can stay at home
without affecting the bonus.
808. Supposing he had already missed 14 shifts? —In such
case it is just possible that what you suppose might happen.
809. By Mr. Gepp —Have you ever tried six shifts a week
on the plant? —Only in the power house, although I understand
it was done at one time in the refinery.
810. Can you tell us anything in regard to the practice in the
power house, and if it has been discontinued, the reason why?
—lt was put in originally at the request of the F.E.D. and
F.A. Union officials, made before Mr. Justice Higgins to me.
After it had been in operation for a little while I was asked
to discontinue the practice of working the employees in that
department six days a week only.
811. By whom were you asked? —By the secretary and execu-
tive of the organisation in Port Pirie. I informed them that,
having made the promise before Mr. Justice Higgins that I
would agree to the unioiUs request, I would not discontinue
six shifts in the powerhouse unless I had a written request
from the union officials to that effect. The request was
repeated to me on several other occasions, but on no occasion
was the written request preferred until a time perhaps about
two years after the introduction of the roster system, we got
the request in writing from the union secretary, and the roster
system was, at their earnest request, discontinued in favor of
seven days per week per man.
812. Does that indicate a desire to earn more money by
w'orking more hours in the w r eek? —Yes.
813. The request by His Honor was in connection with the
question raised by the chairman, one day’s rest in seven as a
contribution to health? —It is obvious that it has been in the
minds of the Arbitration Court Judges to discourage the work-
ing of seven days a week as much as possible, because we are
penalised by overtime for working on the seventh day, the
Hun day.
814. Sunday is always overtime? —Yes; for shift men time
and a half, and day men double time.
815. By Mr. Pearson —You referred just now to the regula-
tions respecting the State of Missouri. What important lead
plants are there in that State? —It was only at the Herculanean
smelter that V I heard about compensation being compulsory.
The full compensation is the same as we now have, £7OO.
816. In giving tables the other day for the two half-year
periods in 1924, you gave the number of certified cases of lead
poisoning as 103 and 131, making a total of 234 for the year.
Will you supply information as to the department in which
those cases contracted the disease? —I will do so.
The witness withdrew. •
The Commission adjourned.
Monday, May 4, 1925, at 10 a. m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. E. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Eobinette.
WALTEE HEWAET JUDE, Afford Eoad, Port Pirie
South, secretary of the Broken Hill Associated
Smelters’ Acecident Fund, was sworn and examined:
817. By Mr. Eobinette —When were payments for industrial
sickness first instituted in connection with the fund? —On
March 19th, 1923.
818. Prior to that they were not classified as industrial cases?
—No.
819. Have you any figures as to the number of lead poisoning
cases prior to that? —I have not any definite record of the
number of lead cases prior to March 19th, 1923. I have made
out a statement showing the total number of claims admitted
by the fund, in respect to which the persons received compen-
sation from the company, covering a period of six years and
two months to March 11th, 1925. It is as follows: —
Statement showing total number of claims in respect of lead
poisoning for which compensation has been paid, and which
have been admitted, for period of six years and two months
ended 11/3/25, also the average absence per beneficiary, and
benefits paid:—Number of claims, 277; total time lost, 25,545
days; average time lost by each beneficiary, 92 days; weekly
benefits paid during the period (total), £3,675 Bs. 9d.
820. How did you arrive at the average time lost by each
Deneficiary? —By dividing the total time lost by the number of
uencficiaries.
s2l. In arriving at that number of days did you count the
wme which the men were paid when they were compounded?
Eor instance, there was a lump sum up to £52 paid to a man
wiicn he was compounded by the company. Did you include
tne difference between the £52 and what he had already received
in making out your statement? —No.
822. Could you give the various yearly or half-yearly periods
indicating what was paid in respect of industrial disease from
the start of such payments? —I have not the information with
me at present, but it could be got out if the Commission desired.
823. Have you the last balance-sheet? —No; that also I could
get if it was wanted. I have balance-sheets for the two half-
yearly periods ended 8/7/24 and 9/1/25.
824. What was the total amount paid for industrial sickness
in that period of 12 months? —£2,359 17s. 7d.
825. By Mr. Gepp —ls that in respect to sickness generally
or plumbism only?—That represents industrial sickness
only.
826. By Mr. Eobinette —What was paid in respect to indus-
trial sickness for the previous five years?—£l,3ls 11s. 2d.
827. By the Chairman —Will you obtain for the Commission
the various half-yearly balance-sheets? —Yes.
828. By Mr. Eobinette —Have you any figures showing
increases in industrial sickness which have taken place covering


those half-yearly periods?—l have not them with me, but 1
will get them.
829. What other figures have you to put before the Commis-
sion? —The only other figures I have compiled in statement
form embody general information as to the activities of the
Fund and alterations in the amount of benefits that have, taken
place. (Put in and marked Exhibit 6.)
830. Is there any other statement which you wish to make
to the Commission that would assist us in regard to the inci-
dence of plumbism in Port Pirie? —Not apart from what has
been asked for.
831. By Mr. Gepp —You have a book of rules of this accident
fund?—Yes. (Put in and marked Exhibit 7.)
832. This book of rules gives in more detail the points set
out in Exhibit 6, marked “General information?” —‘Yes.
833. Why is it called an accident fund? —The original name
was accident fund, because originally we only paid for accci-
dents.
834. Since then the fund has been extended to cover sick-
ness of all kinds? —Yes.
835. It is a co-operative undertaking between the men and
the company?—Yes.
836. What amount is paid by each party to the fund? —
One shilling per .week per member by the men, and 9d. per
weeK per member by the company.
837. Is it compulsory or voluntary?—Voluntary.
838. Is the control in the hands of the company or a com-
mittee? —It is vested in a committee of trustees appointed by
the unions. There are eight union representatives among the
trustees, and three from the company. The chairman is not
elected by the trustees, but at an annual general meeting held
in March each year.
839. How is the executive work of this fund carried out? —
We meet once a fortnight, and the treasurer submits a state-
ment showing the receipts and payments for the past fort-
night. He also submits a sheet showing the nunjber of claims
received during the same period. These are submitted to the
trustees, and gone through thoroughly. Usually most of the
claims are passed, but in most cases it is found necessary to
reject claims owing to men not being members of the fund.
840. You are the secretary?—Yes.
841. Is your time paid by the fund? —No. The company
pay the whole of my salary.
842. That is, in addition to the 9d. per week, the company
make a further contribution of your time?—Yes.
843. By Mr. Bobinette —Your time is not wholly devoted to
the fund?—No.
844. By Mr. Gepp —Such time as you devote is not charged
against the fund? —No.
845. Are other incidentals, such as paper and telephones, paid
for by the company?—Yes. They pay practically the whole
of the running expenses. The fund pays for such minor items
as stationery and stamps. That is about all.
846. How much is the amount paid in case of sickness other
than plumbism?—lt is 355. a week.
847. Is there any difference between the payment to married
and to single men?—No.
848. How much is paid in case of accident? —It is 15s. a
week.
849. How many of the trustees are employees’ representa-
tives ? —Eight.
850. When are these meetings held? —At 10 o’clock every
second Monday meriting.
851. Is that during working hours? —Yes.
852. If one of the trustees is working, either on day or
shift work, is he allowed off by the company for the purpose
of attending?—Yes.
853. Is he paid for that time? —Yes.
854. Does the company debit the amount back to the fund? —
No.
855. Is he paid at the rate he would be getting at his job?
• —Yes.
856. That is another contribution the company make to the
fund? —Yes.
857. How many members have you?—Approximately 1.160.
858. What is, therefore, your weekly income? —About £175.
859. Do you find the fund is generally appreciated by con-
tributors ? —Undoubtedly.
860. By Mr. Bobinette —You are also> secretary to the
B.H.A.S. Co-operative Council? —Yes.
861. That body propose to institute a dental clinic?—Yes.
862. They are taking a ballot on it to-morrow? —Yes.
863. Who is to give out the ballot-papers? —The foremen or
shift bosses.
864. What is the wording of the ballot-paper ?—I cannot
remember. It is really a question of agreement to the estab-
lishment of a dental clinic, and to contribute at a rate of 3d.
a week.
865. If 50 per cent, of the employees signify their willingness,
to establish that fund it will be established? —Yes.
866. What will be the position of those men who do not
signify their willingness?—They will not become members.
867. What will be the position of a new employee? Will
it be a condition of employment that he must join the fund?
—Yes.
The witness withdrew.
V , 4. : J
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superin-
tendent, Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie,.
was recalled and further examined:
868. By Mr. Bobmette —In answer to question 135, you
said the reported cases of lead poisoning are increasing at
the moment. What did you mean by “at the moment”? —-
I was speaking at the time of the, first 15 days of April.
There was a reported average of almost two cases a day.
869. In question 140 you say, ‘ ‘ If the cases are genuine I
am at a loss to account for it. ’ ’ Do you doubt the doctor ’a
certificate? —In some cases, yes.
870. In many cases? —In many cases I have: not been
satisfied that the cases reported were genuine lead poisoning
cases; but I admit I am not qualified to criticise a doctor’s
certificate. That is my personal opinion.
871. Have you sent any men to other doctors? —-Yes.
872. What has been the result? —In somei cases the opinion
of the local doctors have been confirmed, and in others they
have not been.
873. Can you give the figures regarding cases referred to
another doctor during the last 15 days or month? —Not from
memory.
874. In question 147, comparing British with foreign
workmen, you said they do similar types of work throughout
the plant. Do not the foreigners do the more menial jobs
where there is more hazard? —I should say the bulk of the
foreigners are employed on the basic wage jobs.
875. Is not the hazard greater there? —I should not say
so. Around the bottom of the blast furnace, for instance, a
tapper is not on the basic wage, and he is just as exposed
to fumes as any other man. A lot of basic w T age men work
outside in the open air all the time.
876. A good many cases have occurred recently among men
working in the open air?—l cannot give figures on that. I
do not think those figures are shown separately even in the
table. It is difficult to say exactly where a service man will
work from time to time. The bulk of his work is in the
open air.
877. To a man cleaning up at the Dwight & Lloyd
machines the hazard would be greater than to a man work-
ing on a machine?—lt would be difficult to say.
878. The improvements you mentioned in question 162 were
not carried out entirely to reduce the health hazard, but also
to reduce costs? They have not been made entirely to reduce
the health hazard. Many were started with a view to improv-
ing the metallurgical work, but while that was being done
we took the opportunity to improve the health hazard, even-


though we had to make modifications for that specific
purpose.
879. In question 421 you said that the authorities seem
unanimous that alcohol taken in excess renders men more
susceptible to plumbism than they otherwise would be. Do
you consider a foreigner to be more temperate in the use
of alcohol than the average Britisher?—l am absolutely
unable to say.
880. Have you ever seen a foreigner drunk in this town?
—I cannot say. I have seen very few people drunk here.
881. Do you not know foreigners arc more temperate?—
I do not know. I understand their drink is more usually
wine than any other form of alcohol.
882. In question 427 you say that Dr. Robertson was dis-
posed of on account of opposition from some of the unions?
—Y cs.
883. Did you consult the unions before employing Dr.
Robertson? —No.
884. You issued peremptory notices demanding the men to
submit themselves for examination? —I cannot remember that
we issued notices. If we did so I can secure copies.
885. I am afraid your memory is defective? —It is very
difficult to remember whether notices were issued, even if we
did send them out.
886. You .sent out a notice calling upon the men to submit
themselves for examination and fixed the time? —In some
cases. I think all those cases applied to members of the
start.
887. That is not so? —Practically all the men examined
were members of the staff.
888. They would have lost their jobs if they had not been
examined? —I will not discuss that point.
889. You did issue a notice calling upon the men to
submit themselves for examination without consulting the
men?—When you say “notice,” I am not sure whether we
issued a notice, or whether we advised the men to submit
themselves to Dr. Robertson at different times.
89U. Will you ascertain whether you sent out written
notices? —If they were sent out by us and not by Dr.
Robertson I think we could find them. If the notices were
in the form of a circular we could certainly find them.
Byi. They were addressed to the men personally? —If sent
out by the office, and you can give us the name of any one
man, we can find them.
892. In your answer to question 433 you said you favored
a periodical medical examination. Would you be prepared to
compensate the man who was found to be unfit for work in
the industry after having been declared fit on the initial
examination?- —No. That is not done, so far as I can ascer-
tain, at any place except Broken Hill.
893. Would your company be prepared to compensate
them? —No.
894. I take it your answer would apply also in regard to
question 435, where you dealt with periodical examinations? —
I think I should bo allowed to explain my attitude. The
answer is the same, because a man when he returns and ap-
plies for work at that time is certified by a doctor as healthy
and fit to work, and there are other avenues of employment
in the town besides the smelters. We have known of cases
where men left the smelters on plumbism certificates and
went to work practically immediately in other works in the
town, even though they had certificates declaring them unfit
to work anywhere. Those are much worse cases than those
of the men who come with certificates showing they are
healthy, and I submit those men have other avenues of
employment in and around Port Pirie, and consequently should
not be compensated for loss of employment, when such probably
would not exist.
895. In those cases you mention of men having been com-
pensated, did not the doctors’ certificates say that they were
incapacitated from earning the full wages they were getting
previously? —Yes.
896. The doctors’ certificates did not say that the men were
totally incapacitated for earning money? —I should like to
look at the exact wording. They say the men are totally
incapacitated, but there is some qualification.
897. In reply to question 449, you said that the law
operated onesidedly, laying certain penalties and liabilities
on the employer, whereas it did not compel the employee to
observe any rules that may be made to safeguard his own
health. Has your company ever been penalised for a breach
pf the rules? —I say that the law lays penalties and liabilities
on the employer. Our penalty is that if a man contracts lead
poisoning on our works we have to pay him compensation.
898. You w r ere speaking of the penal clauses wdien previ-
ously giving evidence? —We have not been penalised in that
way.
899. Has there been any variation in the class of ores used
in smelting during the last two or three years?—l do not
know that that is so in the last two or three years, but there
has been in the last four or five years.
900. Just prior to the shut-down what was the percentage
of heavy concentrates to slimes you were using? —From
memory I should say that of all concentrate forwardings 66
per cent, would be granular concentrates. That is purely
an estimate.
901. What is the percentage now? —The percentage we are
at present treating is somewhat less than that of granular
concentrates and more of slime concentrates. It varies accord-
ing to the forwardings from Broken Hill. The current for-
wardings from Broken Hill are about 70 per cent, of granular
concentrates and 30 per cent, of slime concentrates, but our
reserve stocks at Port Pirie are mainly slime concentrates, and
we are treating these slime concentrates in greater proportion
than the percentage on the current despatches from Broken Hill,
We are at times treating on the charge about 66 per cent, of
slime concentrates and 33 per cent, of granular concentrates.
There are more slimes than granular on some days, and vice
versa on other days.
902. What percentage of Tasmanian residues are you using?
—About 600 tons a week, which on the concentrates would be
about 14 per cent, of the concentrate weight.
903. Ho you think the increase in the percentage of slimes
is one of the causes of the increase in lead poisoning?—l do
not think so, because although the slimes material is finer and
more dusty than the grauular concentrate if allowed to dry, it
is wetted up to the time it enters the Dwight & Lloyd machine,
and the final Dwight & Lloyd product we now make is very
much freer of unroasted fines than it used to be. Therefore
there should be less dust from the Dwight & Lloyd material
after it is sintered than there used to be, although the initial
material is certainly finer.
904. By Mr. Gepp —Referring to construction you mentioned,
in reply to Mr. Robinette, that new construction was undertaken
not only in respect of the health hazard, but also in regard to
metallurgical improvement ? —Yes.
905. Is it not so that in all cases new construction is never
undertaken unless it definitely and specifically reduces the
health hazard as compared with the previous plant?—That is
absolutely so.
906. In regard to Dr. Robertson, you told Mr. Robinette that
there was no consultation with the men prior to his appoint-
ment. Was there any consultation after that date? —Yes; there
were a number of meetings with the unions.
907. Can you tell us how those consultations occurred and
for what general reasons they did occur? —They were held at
the request of the unions, who wished to put their views regard-
ing the appointment of the doctor before us, and to give us an
opportunity of putting our views regarding Dr. Robertson ’a
appointment before them. Some of the meetings lasted a long
time- —until 2 or 3 o ’clock in the morning on some occasions.
Finally the unions definitely and absolutely refusd# to work
on the smelters if the men were to be examined medically by Dr.
Robertson. In those circumstances we could see no use in con-
tinuing Dr. Robertson’s appointment, and we terminated our
engagement with him.
908. You have previously said that your feeling in this matter


was that the men feared that the information which it would
be necessary for you to obtain from the doctor would be used
unfairly against their interests? —That was the union’s argu-
ment.
909. You have said previously that you felt that was incor-
rect, and that the information would not be used except from
the point of view of the best interests of the men and the
industry?—l know that on my part it would have led to no
injustice whatever in any case.
910. An exceedingly important question before the Commis-
sion is that of medical supervision, which is universal in lead
industries in all the large manufacturing countries of the world.
I am sure the Commission would be glad if you could submit to
them any thoughts or suggestions in regard to the way in which
a medical man, if appointed, could carry out his work to remove
any such suspicions as might be engendered. Would you be
prepared at a later date to submit your thoughts in writing to
the Commission for consideration? —I would be glad to do so.
911. In regard to the question raised by Mr. Eobinette con-
cerning workmen’s compensation, that is, compensation for a
man who- might be declared not suitable for the industry, after
a certain amount of employment, is there not a difference
between a skilled worker, such as a miner at Broken Hill, and
a workman at Port Pirie who in quite a number of cases would
be classed as a laborer?—Yes; there is a difference. In the
first instance, the ordinary labor is not skilled any more than
any other ordinary labor. In the second place, it has not been
uncommon for us to take on a man from the gate and put him
on as a fumaceman, which is a higher rate than the basic wage,
when he had never worked in such a position before. He Avas
doing fumaceman’s work, but could not in my opinion be called
a skilled man in any sense of the word. We have a number
of cases of that sort throughout the works.
912. By Mr. Pearson —ln your reply to the questions respect-
ing the lead contents of the different proportions of the charges,
you gave certain figures. Is the average lead content of the
full charge higher or lower than it was, say, two years ago? —
It is almost exactly the same as two years ago. It is lower than
it was in 1917, but it has remained around 44 per cent, for five
or six years.
913. Witli regard to the zinc concentrates, the material being
roasted for sulphuric acid making, you gave the lead content
as approximately 6 per cent. Do you regard that as lead
material from the standpoint of health hazard?—lt is higher
than the limit set by the authorities. Their limit is 5 per cent.
914. Would you accept the English authorities as a standard?
—I do not know that I am competent to judge, but we have
been accepting it in that light.
915. Have you any information as to the composition of the
rumes liberated at various stages in the roasting, smelting, and
refining operations, in connection with the lead ores?—No exact
information. It is natural that all fumes coming from the
roasting and smelting operations contain oxides of sulphur,
also some lead and zinc.
916. In the form of oxides? —The lead as basic sulphate in
most cases, and the zinc in most cases oxide.
917. Has there been any systematic dust survey made of any
section of the company’s works? —We are making dust surveys
at present. We have made a general preliminary survey of
certain parts of the works, but I need hardly explain that in
order to get the average of any particular part the work would
have to be done again and again in different winds and different
weathers, and so on, before you could say your result was
indicative of the average condition at that place. In one place
to-day we might get one figure and to-morrow it would be
entirely different if the wind changed, or if the weather condi-
tions were heavy or light, and so on.
918. Tim work is going on, but you have no results which
might as authoritative?—None that I could put
before the Commission. They might mislead the Commission
cither way.
919. In regard to the change-house, we noted during the
inspection that there were no heating appliances. I understand
mat the men using the change-house had complained of the
extreme cold under winter conditions. Would the company be
prepared to make some provision for warming it?—Wo would
be prepared to do anything the Commission considers desirable.
920. In connection with the questiop of medical examination,
I understand that all new employees taken from the gate have
to possess a medical certificate. How are these certificates
obtainod?—A man before being registered at the gate for
work, that is, before being eligible for employment on the
•smelters, must go to a doctor and get a certificate showing that
he is free from plumbism or industrial disease, and is otherwise
physically fit for work on the smelters.
921. A certificate would be accepted from any duly regis-
tered medical practitioner in South Australia?—Yes; and we
have accepted certificates from Melbourne doctors given before
men have been sent ever here.
922. As to the fee charged for examination; does the applicant
for work settle personally with the doctor? —Yes.
923. In your replies to questions 786 to 792, you quoted
portions of the regulations relating to lead poisoning in various
countries, and advocated their adoption in South Australia.
The portions of the regulations to which you drew attention
apply only to employees in the industry. In most of the
countries where these regulations are in force there are also
detailed regulations affecting the works, while in South Aus-
tralia there are only general regulations which apply to all
works? —That is so.
924. From the general standpoint, do* you think it is advisable
that detailed regulations should be adopted for both sides? —
Personally, I would have no objection at all to that. It is
cnly right that if one side is bound to comply with certain
rules, the other side ought to be bound. I naturally anticipated
that that would come were any regulations made covering the
industry.
925. In connection with some works I notice there are
regulations which are particularly stringent against dust
accumulation in buildings or in connection with the framework
of buildings. They provide for no sills being left and for
details of a similar character. I take it that in the interests
of health you think that would be desirable as well as prac-
ticable? —In the lead smelters which I saw while abroad, in
no case was that given any greater attention than is done at
Port Pirie. It is a matter which would naturally have to bo
attended to when a building was being constructed originally.
926. In one of the Continental regulations, German or Aus-
trian, they provide for established buildings being modified to
meet these conditions within a certain time after the regulations
coming into force?—l do not know. I was not in either Ger-
many or Austria. It would be a very big job indeed to alter
the present smelter buildings in such a way that no beams
were left on which dust could settle. It would be practically
impossible without completely rebuilding.
927. In your reply to question 24, you gave a list of smelters
which you visited in various American States. Could you give
us any idea of the extent of plumbism amongst the employees
on those works? No. The only information I got was general-
In all instances it was to the effect that there w r as very little
plumbism. A\ hen I asked what that meant the reply was,
■ ‘ Two or three cases a year. ’ ’ I saw no figures of any sort.
9_s. A report of the Lnited States Bureau of Labor, describ-
ing the conditions in 1912, states that the total number of
employees was 7,500, and an investigation had shown that 1,769,
oi approximately 23 per cent., were affected by plumbism?—•
I knew of that figure, but that is 12 years ago. What the
condition of the American lead smelters was like in those days
Ido not know. I had not seen them before 1924. Maybe
the condition is very much better. From what these men told
me it must be so.
929. Do you know how the lead content at American smelters
would compare with ores being treated at Port Pirie? —In a
number of them the ore is practically identical with ours as


regards lead content, but it contains less zinc as a rule. Physi-
cally, at most of the smelters it is the same as ours, in that
there are gianulated concentrates and slime concentrates —-
they call them flotation concentrates—treated at the smelters.
The processes are generally the same as ours. That is to say,
there is pre-roasting done, either in Dwight & Lloyd machines
or in Wedge furnaces, and a finishing roast either on a second
section of Dwight & Lloyd machines or in Huntington-Heber-
lein pots. There are some smelters in America, however, that
smelt with a considerably lower percentage of lead on the
charge than we do. Usually their percentage is around 40
per cent, of lead in the sinter, but in some smelters it goes very
much lower than that —around 20 per cent. I visited mainly
the big smelters, wffiere it is mostly around 40 per cent.
Obviously the endeavor is to keep the lead as high as possible
in charge roasted and smelted, so that the cost per ton of lead
will be lower. If you had a given quantity of lead in two
tons of charge the cost would be lower than if you had that
tonnage distributed over five tons.
930. You mentioned the Herculaneum smelter, and the fact
that they had medical supervision with a view to reducing the
hazard in connection with lead poisoning and other industrial
diseases. There or elsewhere did you notice any other special
precautions taken against plumbism?—Nothing except the
change-houses. At the Herculaneum smelter no man was em-
ployed on the wmrks unless he passed every day through the
change-house. That is a comparatively small smelter, and every
man I saw there was wearing a sort of blue overall. They
had two change houses—one for black and one for white men.
They were equipped with hot and cold water, shower baths,
and basins, just as ours are, but the clothes were drawn up
on wires to the roof, as is usual in many mine houses I have seen.
931. By the Chairman —Did you have an opportunity in
America to observe the nationalities of employees in smelters?
•—Yes. I took particular notice of the men, largely to see
whether they looked healthier than our men, and in doing so
«eould not help noticing that there was a lot of foreign-locking
men working on most of the smelters. Getting down towards
Bt. Louis and Omaha the percentage of negro workmen increased
immensely, until on some smelters they preponderated largely
over w'hite workmen.
932. Were the negroes of good physique, —Yes.
933. You say there were few reported cases of lead poisoning.
You did not have an opportunity of determining whether there
was any question of increased susceptibility in the case of
negroes? —I particularly asked that question at the Federal
lead smelters, where there were a great number of negroes
compared with white men. The superintendent told me there
was very little plumbism, and it did not exist any more among
the negroes than among white men.
934. Are you of opinion that at any particular point in the
process in the Port Pirie smelters a dangerous amount of carbon
monoxide is liberated? —There is only one point where it might
be possible. The gas that passes through the baghouse con-
tains small quantities of it. The blast furnace process is one
in which the atmosphere of the furnace must be kept on the
reducing side, otherwise it is impossible to get the lead out or
the sinter, so that the gases that issue from the top of the
blast furnace contain small amounts of carbon monoxide. The
tops of the furnaces are open, and air is drawn in there.
If you eliminate that diluent the percentage of carbon monoxide
taken out over the surface of the charge w r ould be around
per cent, to 3 per cent.
935. That air is not breathed?—No. It is taken in under the
hood erected over the blast furnace.
936. Do you consider that, there is a possibility of chronic
poisoning by carbon monoxide occurring in the smelters? It
would be difficult to say. Ido not know sufficient about the
subject, or what quantities of carbon monoxide are necessary rn
the air to bring it about. The only place where I would con-
sider it possible is in the case of effluent from the baghouse
being continually breathed. That might do it. I do not know.
Mr. Gepp (to the Chairman) : This point has had the atten-
tion of the smelters, and apparatus is being brought down from
Broken Hill now to make a number of determinations to check
the position. The estimation of very minute quantities of
carbon monoxide is tricky, has to be done by an expert, and is
a slow job.
937. By the Chairman— Has the company at any time during
the history of the smelters dealt with ores containing appreciable
quantities of manganese? —In its very early days there was
appreciable manganese in the ore. At present our slags assay
about from 6 to 6 per cent, of oxide of manganese.
938. Where does that come in? —From the gangue in the
Broken Hill concentrates. There is one specilic mineral in
the Broken Hill lode from which the manganese comes.
939. By Mr. Robinette —When you were in Burmah were the
doctors there employed exclusively on mine work, or on work
in the town also? —They were employed for the w T hole of the
people there, because the mine is the only industry of any kind
at Namtu.
940. What is the population? —Including itinerant Chinamen,
etc., about 20,000.
941. By the Chairman —Were there native doctors there? —I
do not know. I did not got into the native settlement.
942. By Mr. Pearson —ln the regulations detailed by Stone,
where medical examination is mentioned, the medical prac-
titioner is usually referred to as the certifying or reference
surgeon. It is not clear who has the appointment of that sur-
geon. Have you that information?—No.
943. The American Bureau of Mines have a recent publication
advocating the diluting of fumes before distributing them by
forcing air in with fans. Did you see that method in use in
any foreign plants? —Yes. In some of those plants where the
fume was sent direct to atmosphere without previous treatment,
they were using diluent fans at the foot of the stacks. That
was so at the Murray and the Midvale smelters.
944. Did that made conditions better? —It was not done for
that purpose, they told me. They said the sulphur fumes were
acting on the vegetation around the place. It was to dilute
the air to such a point that the sulphur dioxide did not affect
the vegetation that they did this. At Murray particularly I
was told that the trouble before they had the diluting fan was
due to the stack being very low. At the same time that they
diluted the air they put up a very much higher stack. A higher
stack, but not a diluting fan, was put up at the Federal Smelter
in Illinois also, and overcame the trouble completely.
945. In regard to Mr. Pearson’s question respecting the con-
struction of buildings, a number of the buildings you referred
to are of considerable age? —Yes. Some are over 20 years old.
946. Do they go back almost to the foundation of the com-
pany in 1897 or 1900? —They must go back to nearly that time,
but I do not know to what extent they have been added to.
947. The Commission cannot hope to deal in detail with the
whole of the smelting operations, but it can be expected to
cover in general principles a number of suggestions and recom-
mendations after discussion with you and your experts, and
may be able to make certain recommendations, such as the
improvement of buildings by the reduction of areas for settle-
ment of dust, &c. I presume all such things as are within the
realms of practicability would be heartily welcomed and under-
taken by the company?—That is so.
The witness withdrew.
GEOEGE DEY, industrial officer for hygiene, Broken Hill
Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, w T as recalled and
further examined:
948. By Mr. Gepp —What is the body known as the Broken
Hill Associated Co-operative Council? —It is a body represen-
tative of both the company and employees throughout the whole
of the plant.
949. How is it constituted? —The employees’ representatives
are elected by ballot and the company’s representatives are
nominated by the company.


950. How many representatives have the company?—Eight.
951. How many representatives have the employees? —Twenty-
six.
952. That is to say that the men have the majority of the
representation on the council? —Yes.
953. For what general purposes does the council exist? —It
governs all the co-operative activities carried on in connection
with the works.
954. Such as? —The co-operative store and any matters of
interest to the men that are ventilated at the meetings of the
council.
955. Has it any connection with the accident fund? —No.
955 a. Does it not in general interest itself in all matters
of community interest to the employees and their welfare? —
Yes; all matters of common interest to the employees and their
welfare are dealt with by the council.
956. Are you a member of this council? —Yes.
957. How long have you been a member of it? —Since June,
1924.
958. Has the council recently been discussing the advisability
of establishing a dental clinic? —Yes; the matter was under dis-
cussion before I joined the council, and it has been gradually
developed all through the past year. Many difficulties pre-
sented themselves in outlining a detailed scheme that would
work, and the council sent delegates from the Co-operative
Council to the electrolytic zinc works at Risdon to investigate
any welfare arrangements or co-operative activities over there,
and to report back to our Co-operative Council.
959. Would you regard the dental clinic as inspected at
Risdon as a community benefit to come under the Co-operative
Council’s activities? —Yes.
960. What was the result of the investigations of the dele-
gates?—As the result of the investigation the council unani-
mously decided to approach the Associated Smelters Company
with a proposal for the establishment of a clinic at the works.
961. What was the result of the representations made to the
company?—An arrangement was reached as to a scheme, and
that was,set out in a circular, which I put in (Exhibit 8), that
sets out the whole thing.
962. By whom was the circular issued?—By the Co-operative,
Council.
963. It is signed by whom? —By the chairman, vice-chairman,
and secretary of the council.
964. The chairman is Mr. R. A. Burgoyne; who is he? —He is
the accountant at the works, and was elected chairman by the
cuunCll.
965. Who is Mr. J. L. Polmear, the vice-chairman? —He is
an ironworker at the works.
966. Mr. Jude is the secretary?—Yes.
967. This circular tells all concerned of the suggested arrange-
ment made between the company and the Co-operative Council,
subject to confirmation? —Yes; subject to confirmation by 50
per cent, of the employees.
968. I have before me an advertisement, signed by Messrs.
Polmear and Jude, which appeared in Saturday’s issue of the
Recorder, Port Pirie, advising that the vote is to be taken.
What is the substance of the advertisement otherwise?—The
substance of the advertisement is to bring the matter under
the notice of all employees, and to advise them not to miss this
chance of having a dental clinic. It asks them to vote solidly
tor the appointment of the clinic, and advises them that it is
not an experiment, but that a similar institution had been an
unqualified success in other centres of industry, notably at the
electrolytic zinc works, Tasmania. (Advertisement put in and
marked Exhibit 9).
969. In your evidence you gave it as your opinion that there
was room for more complete co-operation between the company
and the men in regard to matters of health. Do you antici-
pate the whole-hearted co-operation of the employees in this
proposal?—From the unanimous attitude of the council towards
a proposal it considered so important and attractive, we, as a
council, were hopeful that the whole body of employees would
support the scheme cordially. We were surprised and dis-
apppointed to notice an advertisement appearing in Saturday’s
issue of The Recorder, as follows: —
A.W.U.
Members are hereby notified that participation in any ballot
at the -works is contrary to a resolution carried some years ago,
and re-affirmed at last Tuesday’s meeting.
Members are requested to loyally adhere to this decision, and
refuse to accept ballot-papers on the dental clinic.
W. ROBINETTE, Organiser.
(Advertisement put in and marked Exhibit 11).
970. You say you were disappointed at this turn of events.
Please explain a little more fully?—From my own personal
experience I know how important it is to keep my teeth and
mouth in good order. From my experience as a company com-
mander in the A.I.F. during the war I know that the Dental
Corps performed great service in preserving the general health
of the troops through keeping their teeth in order. This fact
was recognised to such an extent that a dental organisation
was built up in every brigade. In every training camp through-
out the army, both in Australia and abroad, there was a dental
organisation working in touch with the medical service. No
man was drafted as lit to be sent abroad on active service
without first having been examined, and, if necessary, attended
to by a dentist. In all works on general hygiene in connection
with industries mention is made of the importance of the teeth.
Our council fully realised that this matter of the teeth was
important, and that was why we wished to put into operation
a scheme which would give the men dental attention at the
lowest cost. The council felt it would be a benefit to the men
in increasing their general standard of health. Knowing these
*things the council are disappointed that this advertisement has
appeared, because if the men follow that advertisement it will
be a very important factor in the vote recorded.
971. Was it not a fact that the rejections among the men
who volunteered for the first and second divisions of the A.I.F.
were to a considerable extent due to teeth?—Yes.
972. In the early stages of the career of the A.I.F. the
necessity for a dental unit was not recognised, was it? —At
first it was not recognised, but it wms later. Although I am
quoting no authority for my opinions, it is commonsense on
one’s part to realise that anyone who was with the A.I.F.
knows these things as a matter of general knowledge.
973. By Mr. Robinette —What matters do the Co-operative
Council deal with, other than the management of the store? —•
A matter which comes before them from time to time is the
question of regulating collections at the smelter gates. At most
meetings of the council matters are brought up drawing the
company’s attention to different conditions about the plant.
974. Working conditions?—Yes.
975. Anything else ? —From memory I cannot specify anything
now. For the past year the dental clinic has occupied consider-
able time and discussion. Further, the proposed bakery and
other institutions in a co-operative regard have been mentioned.
976. Do the employees get a detailed report of the activities
of the Co-operative Council from the representatives of the
various departments?—Do you mean a written report?
977. How do the representatives report to the general body of
workers?—l should say by personal contact.
978. Is it permitted on the works for representatives to inter-
view the men and give details of the activities of the Co-operative
Council? There is always a certain amount of conversation
going on among the men. That is so among every body of men.
979. Do you think it possible for 26 representatives to give
detailed reports to all the employees at the wmrks? —I think
they would come in contact with the majority of the men from
day to day. I speak to a good many men in a day myself and
I think you do, too. It does not take a man long to meet
100 men, and that is above the average number of employees
per council representative. On matters of extreme importance,
such as this clinic, there is practically a report of what is being
done published in the exhibit which I have put in.
980. Are you aware that one of the first symptoms of lead
poisoning shows in the teeth? —I understand that lead absorp-
tion may show in the teeth.


981. Lou say that if a doctor were appointed he would co-
operate with the dentist?—l did not know I did so.
982. Lou heard Mr. Somerset say that?—From memory I can-
not say I did.
983. He did say it. Do you agree with that ?• —I should say
he would.
984. You agree that the doctor, if appointed, would co-operate
with the dentist? —Yes.
985. Lou know that when a tooth is drawn there is a loss of
blood? —Unless the tooth is very rotten.
986. Invariably?—Not a serious loss of blood. I have had
some teeth pulled out with no more stain of blood that I could
spit out. I think it is exceptional if there is a great loss of
blood.
987. There would be sufficient loss of blood to take a blood
test in respect to lead poisoning?—l am not qualified to speak
on that. I have never taken a blood test.
988. Do you know how a blood test is taken? —I have seen
it taken. I am not qualified to say where a test would be
taken. I do not thiuk.it is a fair question to put to me.
989. It would be possible for a doctor to take a blood test
if there?—l do not know. I think it is a matter for the doctor.
990. If this proposal is agreed to- by 50 per cent, of the
employees, it will make it compulsory on new employees to
join that dental clinic? —It will make it compulsory on any
one who signs, I think. I am not quite clear from memory as
to new employees. I would like to refer to the circular. (Wit-
ness referred to the circular). I do not see it in the circular.
991. Has the aspect of making it compulsory for new
•employees been discussed before the Co-operative Council? —Not
to my knowledge.
992. Have you been present at all meetings of the
council?—Not all.
993. Would it be possible for it to have been discussed and
you not be aware of it? —I think I would have been told of
it, or got to know of it, had it been discussed.
994. You heard the secretary’s evidence, in which he said
it would be compulsory for new employees?—l did not hear
that. He may have said it.
995. You stated in your evidence that you worked in New
Zealand in 1909. In what portion of that year? —From about
aome time in January to about half-way through the year.
996. Did you work in the smelters at all during the lock-
out? —I do not know of a lockout.
997. Or strike? —No.
998. You were never in those smeltelrs working during the
strike? —No.
999. Are you aware that you are regarded as a loyalist by
the men on the smelters? —Would you define a loyalist?
1000. Yes; one who is loyal to the master during a strike,
and not to the men? —I do not know whether I am so re-
garded or not. I have at home a list of those who were so
regarded, but my name is not on it. Still, the list may not
be complete.
1001. You received a roll of honor and your name is not on
it?—That is so. A roll of honor was published, but I do not
regard it as being complete.
1002. You say that you try to instruct the men regarding
precautions. Do they disregard your instructions? —Some do,
and some accept them.
1003. Can you advance any reason why they disregard your
instructions? —No definite reason, except that perhaps they do
not realise the necessity for them.
1004. Is it because they do not think you are competent to
give instructions? —They have never told me so. It may be
that.
1005. Do the foreigners do the more menial work down
there, and do you think the hazard would be greater if they
did? —No; I think the foreigners are pretty well distributed
ever the works.
1006. How do you know that the company does not encourage
foreigners to come to Port Pirie?—The company issued a
circular all around the works to those responsible for the eon-
trol of the different departments, giving instructions that
British were to receive preference, so the two conditions would
not harmonise.
1007. Would that prove they did not encourage them? —It
would be obviously foolish to encourage them to come to the
works and then to issue a circular not to employ them.
1008. Still, they like to have a lot of men on the gate?—l
do not know that they do.
1009. The installation of the granulating process was not
solely to reduce the health hazard? —Decidedly not. It is a
It is a mark of progress in the development of the industry,
and all progress goes hand in hand with the improvements of
conditions generally. That is recognised.
1010. It was installed to reduce the cost of disposing of
the slag? —It has accomplished that.
1011. You stated that you consider alcohol was a predis-
posing factor to plumbism?—l have read so.
1012. Do you believe it? —In excess of a reasonable
amount, certainly, as I admit in my evidence.
1013. Are you of the opinion that alcohol plays a big part
here in lead poisoning cases, and the incidence of lead? —I
am not prepared to say what part it plays.
1014. Do you think the holiday bonus is an incentive to a
man to overtax his endurance? —No.
1015. The new bullion-handling plant is installed to reduce
cost, and not purely with the object of reducing the health
hazard? —It is installed to reduce the cost, but will reduce
the health hazard.
1016. But it was installed principally to reduce the cost? —•
I am not prepared to answer that question. 1 don’t think
it cuts any ice at all. It will reduce the health hazard. It is
another sign of progress.
1017. By Mr. Pearson —From your duties, you have a detailed
knowledge of the various sections of the company’s works at
Port Pirie? —Yes.
1018. Have you noticed the dust that collects on the frame-
work of the various buildings and under the conveyors?—Yes.
1019. Is there any arrangement for cleaning down the build-
ings?—Hosing and sweeping are the only arrangements we
have.
1020. Hosing and sweeping are confined more at present
to the floors? —Yes.
1021. You would not say that at the present stage much
attention has been given to the walls of the building?—Not
a great deal.
1022. Have you inspected recently the slag hoist boilers? —
I was in there two or three days ago. I have often been in.
1023. Did you notice the accumulation of dust on the frame-
work of the building?—l daresay there is dust there.
1024. In regard to that building, an employee stated in
evidence last week that the conditions there have become much
more dusty latterly. Do you consider that to be a dusty situa-
tion?—That place, I daresay, may get dust. There is traffic
there, but the place is pretty regularly watered down.
1025. You mean outside of the place?—Yes. I have had
hydrants put commanding that place. There is one on the
corner of it.
1026. We have had from Mr. Somerset a complete description
of the metallurgical processes. Could you give us any
information, taking the plant in the same order, as to the
working conditions for the , men employed with a view to health
hazards, commencing with the unloading gang?—Those con-
ditions in any part of the works vary from time to time.
Mr. Somerset indicated that very clearly this morning. Some
time ago we arranged with the Broken Hill South Silver-Lead
Mining Co. to supply us with apparatus for the purpose of
determining that position over a period of time. These
investigations are now going on. They will probably be the
best answer to the question. I would not like to state definitely
which place is or is not bad until these results come out.
1027. You refer to a dust survey of the work? —Yes.
1028. A dust survey conducted with such repetitions as to
include practically every condition of wind and of weather? —
Yes. That has been found necessary in other places, and we


are following that practice. Two of the instruments have been
obtained from Broken Hill, and I think we are arranging for
a third.
1029. As to bin attendants, what are the arrangements for
keeping down dust and cleaning up the dust that falls? —
Following the ore in metallurgical sequence, the ore comes into
the works in trucks, and all our dumps are provided with a
water service. I will not say all, because they are being
extended from time to time. We are going to make them more
complete in the railway yard, for instance. At present when
slimes are being loaded they have been found difficult to
moisten, because when a hose is played on them the surface
material becomes mud, while the underneath portion may be
unaffected. Our present system is to make what practically
amounts to garden beds on top of the dump. The dump is
levelled and made into beds, the sides of which are combed up,
and the beds are allowed to soak, so that the water has time
to soak through. This greatly improves the situation, and
eliminates dust from it. On the concentrate dumps there is
water available, and on the siliceous dumps also. When
siliceous ore is being taken direct to the top floor of the smelters
the trucks are watered before it is unleaded, and at the point
where it is unloaded there are a tap and hose, and a notice
reading somewhat like this: ‘ ‘ This material must be wetted. ’'
Some of the fine bag slime we receive is spread out on the
ground in beds, and watered similarly to the slime we receive
from Broken Hill. With the ore that is crushed at the crusher,
the hood over the crusher bins draws the dust away as the ore
is taken from the bags into that bin, and the water service in
the bin moistens it, as does also the water service on the belt.
1030. That hood is connected also with an exhaust fan? —
Yes, with a small baghouse to collect the dust. That covers
the unloading of the ore. On the Dwight & Lloyd unloading
belt a water service has been installed, so that any dry trucks
of ore from Broken Hill may be wetted down there before being
unloaded by the contractors. A pipe runs the full length of
the belt, with hoses every few feet. The attendant on top of
the storage bin has a watering can with which he waters down
the floor. It is difficult to know where to put taps, because
they are so liable to be left running, and a tap on top of a
building left running becomes a serious nuisance. Therefore a
can is used to sprinkle the floor before the man sweeps. All
round the Dwight & Lloyd plant there are hydrants for water-
ing the ground, and watering cans are used for watering the
floors of the plant as required. The charge as it issues from
the mixing bin is moistened on the belt, so that the material
from that bin becomes moist. In regard to the taking of the
chamber material, sprays have been put into the vacuum
chamber, and the material can be taken from that quite moist
now. The position there has very much improved. The same
applies to the cyclones. They have been fitted with water seals,
so that the cyclone dust can be run out as slime or sludge.
The tips off the A section machines were always provided with
hoods, but these hoods have been very much improved during
the last two years by being extended so as to be higher than
the top of the machine floor and the intake —the bottom part
level with the machine floor—has been extended to cover the
sprays over the palettes, so that all the steam, fume, and dust
that rise when the palette tips are now carried right out clear
of the building. That has been a great improvement. When
they started to put them in the men on that floor spoke very
nighly of the improvement. The bottom of these A machine
discharge chutes or hoppers was made a very much tighter fit
on the tray conveyor, so that the amount of fume that was
belched forth as a palette dropped has been greatly reduced.
1031. The fume that escapes from that tray would, under
certain conditions, go back on to everybody employed in the
process?—lt used to to a greater extent than now. There is
a little of it now, but it is greatly improved. That is evident
to anyone who has watched the process. A worm screw dis-
charge has been tried, and these are being installed on the
remaining machines. They will enable the material to be more
thoroughly moistened, and the discharge will be even, so that
it will be possible to eliminate the tray conveyor and substitute-
a conveyor belt. This will mean that the heavy maintenance
at present necessary to such a device as a tray conveyor will
be greatly reduced. That will act in two ways. It will be
an improvement mechanically and economically, and also reduce
greatly the number of men who will have to work round there.
1032. In your former evidence, in reply to question 484, you
described improvements made to the Dwight & Lloyd plant.
Were they made to benefit a particular section of employees
only, or all the employees?—What was done with regard to the
cyclones and the machine chambers wdll benefit those men who
work on those parts. A gang of several men will be affected.
If we are able to do away with the tray conveyor, that will
benefit a number of men —ironworkers, &c. —who do repair work.
1033. They are the men classed as service men in Mr,
Somerset’s statements ? —Yes.
1034. In regard to the cleaning of the buildings, has any
consideration been given to the adoption of any method of
cleaning them periodically, such as with motor vacuum
apparatus?—A considerable sum of money has been spent
experimentally with a vacuum cleaner. Experiments are still
going on. The cleaner was tried running at a high speed to
give suction of about Sin. manometer pressure, and indications
are that it will be a success. I would not like to say definitely
it will be, but should it be a success it will probably be
adopted.
1035. Would that be useful in cleaning up the dust around
the buildings, and the buildings generally? —Possibly it would.
There is another view, namely, that if the buildings were once
cleaned down, the use of a light spray might wet the material
sufficiently to allow it to be cleaned without the vacuum cleaner.
That is a matter that is now receiving attention.
1036. The dust in many of the buildings is the result of
many years’ accumulation? —Possibly it is.
1037. You think it may be practicable to evolve a method,,
by means of the use of a motor vacuum cleaner, that would be
useful? —Yes. It is a question I have seen referred to in
literature. I cannot quote the authority, but the -point was
whether the frequent disturbing of the du§t caused any gain,
because the risk of disturbing it might be even more serious
than leaving it as it w r as.
1038. Might not that refer to enclosed buildings? In open
buildings like yours, where ventilation is good, and in a climate
like ours, the dust is bound to be circulated with certain wfinds.
Is it not true that the more dust there is collected the more
there will be to blow about? —It would if the buildings were
being disturbed much, but some of our buildings are not dis-
turbed much. It is difficult to give an answer that will apply
to every case. I have looked at various places in the works,
and it is a question whether you would not raise more dust by
disturbing things than by leaving the dust wdiere it was. J
have seen the same thing mentioned in works I have read for
information on the subject. I am placing a report on some of
these questions before the company at present, and I quite
realise the difficulty of the matter. The question Mr. Pearson
has raised is not new, and it puzzles me as much as it puzzles
anybody else. It is a many sided question. If the Commission
can come to any decision on the matter and give us any advice
we shall be glad of it.
1039. Y T ou have referred to the unloading arrangements, the
railway yard, and the Dwight & Lloyd plant. With regard to
the dust at the Huntiugton-Heberlein plant, Mr. Somerset
described what was being done to reduce the fume by giving
the charges greater time to cool before tipping. Is there any
special point in connection with the reduction of dust there on
which you could give the Commission information? —I think the
cooling in the pots is the best solution of it. If the material
is tipped hot it cannot be moistened adequately. If it is tipped
as cool and as moist as possible, that is all that can be done.
1040. By Mr. Gepp —Being allowed to cool right off the
material should be moist wdien tipped? —Before thorough
moistening came into vogue the material was hot axid, of course.


very dusty. By giving it more time to cool it is more moist,
and does not give off fume or dust to such an extent as before.
1041. By Mr. Pearson Can you tell us anything about the
dust in connection with the refinery? In the first place, is the
refinery dusty with the wind in certain directions?—l do not
think the wind has much influence on the refinery in itself,
but it may blow smoke towards it from other parts.
1042. I take it that smoke would also include light dust? —
Yes. The road dust would not blow about, because that is
taken care of.
1043. Y T ou have made a considerable study of the condi-
tions in the works. Are the conditions in certain parts of the
plant worse when the wind blows from certain directions? —Yes.
1044. Can you give us any information as to the parts af-
fected by the wind and in which direction the wind is the
worst? On the bottom floor conditions are affected by the
wind. An east wind would be bad for the bottom floor, as it
would blow out any smoke toward the men.
1045. A wind from the north-east or south-east would act in
the same way in a partial degree?—Yes, but an east wind is
the worst.
1046. Are there any other parts of the works where men are
employed in numbers where the wind affects the conditions? —A
south wind is the best for the H.-H. plant. A north wind would
affect the position and carry the smoke back to the men.
1047. What about the zinc roasters? —I do not think the
wind has any particular effect there, because the men are all
around the furnace.
1048. Does not the wind affect the position by blowing fumes
to the men in the slag pit?—lf any acid fumes are coming
off they are carried about. They would not be carried far
toward the slag-pit, however.
1049. By Mr. Gepp —ln connection with the cleaning down of
buildings, you have indicated that, particularly in view of the
old type of buildings, it has been rather a difficult problem to
solve? —Yes.
1050. You said that a vacuum apparatus is being tried?—
Yes.
1051. Mr. Peiarson seems to have put out rather an interest-
ing suggestion, namely, the installation of a travelling vacuum
apparatus like that used in big cities for the cleaning of houses,
walls, carpets, &c.? —Quite so.
1052. The point Mr. Pearson particularly desired to bring
out was that if the vacuum tests indicated success, would you
give favorable consideration to a recommendation to look into
the permanent installation of a motor vacuum travelling ap-
paratus to deal with places where otherwise it would be diffi-
cult to remove the dust? —I have already mentioned the matter
of such affairs as one sees in cities, but there is this difficulty,
The vacuum cleaner is all right when handling absolutely dry
and dusty material, but we do not know whether our heavy
material would be transported successfully by vacuum. I have
heard of experiments made in dealing with concentrates whefre,
owing to the moisture the pipe became clogged. Unless the
material was absolutely dry the machine would not work. If
the experiments we are making prove successful I have no doubt
the company would consider the matter most favorably.
1053. We know that material like wheat, coal, and othefr
heavy material is successfully transported by suction apparatus,
therefore the type of apparatus should be the only thing to con-
sider? —I suppose so.
1054. So far as the type of motor was concerned, the operator
could judge whether it w T as suitable to operate at a particular
place or not? —Yes.
1055. You mentioned the question of the wetting down,
once you have a place cldan, of the wall, wall purlins, and
rafters ?—Yes.
1056. Is there any serious difficulty in spraying very fine
material? Does not the water tend to run off? —The very fine
material -will form globuleb when sprayed and run off.
1057. That is one of the serious troubles of using water
sprays on fine material? —Yes.
1058. I trust this matter will have your studied attention to
see if it can be applied?—l am reporting thoroughly on the
question now. Every detail is being considered.
1059. By Mr. Pearson— When asking about the zinc roasters
I omitted to ask about the moistening of the material around
the zinc-roasting plant. I refer to the stock piles of concen-
trates prior to treatment? —There is a water service alongside
the unloading belt with a long hose that ean be used on those
concentrates. The only calcines about the plant are in the
shape of cleanings up and flue) dust, which are wetted down
before being handled; in fact, they are hosed almost into a pug.
1060. The product as it comes from the roasters is moistened
as soon as it is cool enough?—There are conveyors of the push-
plate type running from all the furnaces, and the material is
pushed along these conveyors until cool enough to be moistened
by a spray without causing steam.
1061. It is moistened down sufficienlty to make no dust what-
ever, delivered into bins, and taken to the wharf? —Yes, on lines
I have previously dealt with.
1062. The stock piles of zinc concentrate are kept continu-
ally moist?—Yes.
1063. With regard to the zinc-roasting plant, do you know
the work now proceeding to reduce the amount of dry material
in the plant?—Yes.
1064. You know that it is hoped to eliminate altogether dry
ore from the feeding side of the! furnace? —Yes.
1065. This work is being very actively pursued?—Yes. The
material will be moistened to such an extent that it will be
transported without dusting. I cannot give the Commission the
average moisture content of the zinc calcine.
Mr. Gepp —lt is about 8 per cent. •
The witness withdrew.
ARTHUR ROBERT DYCE WATSON LEONARD, health
« inspector for the corporation of Port Pirie, Town Hall,
Port Pirie, was sworn and examined:
1066. By the Chairman —Under what Act of Parliament are
you appointed? —The Health Act of 1898.
1067. What was the date of your appointment?—July, 1917.
1068. The Commission desire the benefit of your experience
in regard to health conditions here. We recognise that success
in the operation of any industry depends primarily on the sound
health of the employees, and one large factor governing health
is the occupation of good homes. Can you say from your
observations what is the general position of housing in Port
Pirie, in the matter of the type and number of houses? —Houses
in Port Pirie may be divided into two types—stone and brick
and wood and iron. The best class of houses are the stone
and brick, but there are also a large number of good-quality
houses of wood and iron. There are also wood and iron
houses of very poor quality . There are about 12 houses of
very poor quality indeed in the town out of a total number of
2,583, not including shops which have no dwelling accommoda-
tion.
/
1069. Are the houses which you class as a very poor type
occupied by British or foreigners?—As a rule the poor quality
places are inhabited by foreigners.
1070. Will you give us a statement covering your duties and
responsibilities on the question of housing, also concerning the
powers with which you are vested? —I have full powers to enter
any house at any time during the hours of daylight, say, from
9 a.m. to 6 p.m., and any business while it is being carried on.
My duties are to see that houses are kept in, fair habitable
condition. I supervise them by visiting them from time to
time, and telling the occupants where necessary what to do and
how to improve the conditions. If necessary I serve a notice
on the owner to carry out improvements. That I have power
to do. Of course, I have not the power to do everything. We
have no Building Act in operation in the town, and there are
many things which I cannot order to be done, but which I can
get done by a little tact or exercising the personal factor.
.1 have had several houses taken down by the owners where I
considered them not fit for human habitation. I could not order


them to be taken down, but after the facts had been presented
to the owners they agreed to what I wanted, and the premises
aisappeared. Generally speaking, the state of houses in the
town ranges from good and fair to indifferent. The majority
are in a very fair state. ,
1071. Can you give us any information as to the living habits
of the foreigners?—They may be divided practically into four
classes. There are those who live in bachelor quarters, and
they are generally the most careless. Usually they are single
men or widowers, and they go into bachelor quarters and look
after themselves. The landlord, as a rule, is not there. Men
of this class are the most difficult of all to manage, as they
are careless in their ways, their food preparation, and so on.
ivext are those who go into what are called barracks. Young
unmarried fellows take a whole house, and they ‘ 1 barrack ’ ’
or sleep in different rooms. Some of them are very clean,
others are passably so, and as a rule there is not much trouble
with them. Young fellows who live under the barrack system
generally go in for the best of food, whereas men in bachelor
quarers are as a rule content with the cheapest food they can
get. They purchase threepennyworth of bones for soup, a fry,
or bit of liver, or something of that sort.
1072. They eat a fair amount of meat? —Yes; but it is
always the cheapest kind, and they go out into the country and
kill sparrows and other small birds, and make them into pies.
They have the idea that their particular job is to save money for
drink or some other purpose, so they do not put much into
actual living. A third class are married couples who hire rooms
at a boardinghouse kept by English people generally. These
live fairly well. Then there are married people who have
houses of their own. Some of these are well kept, whereas
some of the people have slovenly ways, and do not feed well.
1073. Are the last few classes you have mentioned as a rule
cleanly in their habits or otherwise? —The bachelor quarters are
seldom clean. The barrack men are nearly always clean. If
there is one fault with them, it is that they have been used to
earth floors in their own country, and doi not realise that wood
floors have to be scrubbed from time to time, and I have to
serve them with notices to clean floors and walls. Generally
they do not have much furniture, their beds consisting of
blankets rolled out on the floor. In the morning they air their
blankets outside, then stack them around the wall, and it is
possible to see howl many sleep in a room. As a rule not more
than four sleep in a room. Ido not permit more than four.
There may be seven or eight of these men in a house. There
is no real overcrowding among them, as if I find too many I
tell them that some must go out. They are not too particular
in regard to their sanitary arrangements, and want a great
deal of looking after in that respect. It takes more time to
look after the foreigners in this connection than all the
Britishers put together. Some of the married folks have bought
houses of their own. There is a lot of property in this town
owned by foreigners. Generally those who have any money
have decent homes. There are people who sublet to foreigners,
and do not look after them at all. They leave me to do the
looking after.
1074. Are the houses in the main fairly clean? —Yes. From
time to time I have to go and serve a notice to have a floor
cleaned, or walls cleaned down.
1075. I suppose a house would have to be in a pretty bad
state to oblige you to adopt that course? —I do not allow them
to go too far„ Since I have been here the town has been
improved in health, and I am not running any chance of letting
them go without supervision. lam generally on the spot, and
when I think it is time for something to be done I serve a
notice. As a rule they obey orders. In my opinion the actual
living conditions have not so much bearing on the question
as their mode of spending their spare time. They never go
in for sport. Most of their leisure is spent at their own cafes
or clubs, playing cards and billiards all night long, and many
of them get home in the early hours of the morning on a
•crooked path.
1076. Do they do much drinking?—Yes; of light wine.
1077. By Mr. Pearson — “ Pinky?—l do not know.
1078. By the Chairman —Have you had any opportunity of
observing their laundry arrangements, espec/Gly those of the
bachelors? —They generally wash their own clothes and hang
them out in the yard.
1079. Do they wash them with any degree of regularity, or
only as occasion demands? —I do not think they are regular
in their washing of clothes, or their ablutions either. I
generally see them come from their work and prepare a meal
without washing.
1080. Are you of the opinion that any considerable percentage
of them live in their working clothes after work? —Except on
Sundays I have never seen them out of their working clothes.
If they took part in sports, or had some interest in gardening,
it would help them to keep in a better condition of health.
They do not, however, go in for anything of that sort. They
go to work and back, prepare their food, and are then off to
cards or billiards, or to sit on a kerb. One seldom sees them
in the open except on a kerb. There are one or two exceptions.
A very decent lot live in Federation Eoad, who wash their floors
without being told, and the neighbors speak highly of them as
being decent in their ways. lam sorry that I cannot say the
say the same of foreigners in the gross.
1081. By Mr. Pobinette —You said they only wear their good
clothes on Sunday?—No; I said I only noticed them in their
good clothes on Sunday,
1082. There are two foreign tailors in the town?—l know of
one. There may be two.
1083. Are not some of the foreigners the best-dressed men in
Port Pirie? —I believe they are when they are in their best
clothes.
1084. To which particular nationality do you refer?—l refer
to them generally. I do not go about looking for felloes
in good clothes. My time is taken up with my official duties.
I do not wish to' infer that they do not go in for good clothes
or that they have not got them.
1085. You say you have seen them going home on a crooked
path. Have you seen much of that? —Only at night. Some-
times I have had to get out of bed and steer them home, as
they have been making such a row when going home.
1086. By Mr. Gepp —Are there different types of foreigners
here? —Yes; Italians, Greeks, Bulgarians, Serbs, Maltese, and
so on. i
1087. Do the Maltese live together, or are they scattered
throughout the town? —They are scattered.
1088. From your experience of the Maltese, have you any
particular point to- give us with regard to them ? —I include them
with other foreigners. They do not stand out in any way.
1089. What standard of hygiene have foreigners when they
arrive in Port Pirie from Europe?—They have primitive ideas,
and have to be taught a lot.
1090. That makes it very difficult for you in your position? —•
Yes; that is why it takes so much time.
1091. Where can we get information as to the proportion of
employees at the smelters who own their own houses? —The
town clerk would give you that. A list of all ratepayers is
kept there.
1092. Can you say that a large number of employees at the
smelters do own their own homes? —I do not know. I do not
know who the petrmanent employees at the smelters are, for one
. thing. The only time I come in contact with the men as-
owners is when I have to serve a notice, and hunt up their allot-
ment.
1093. Would it be possible for you to show us a few sample
houses such as you have described? —Yes.
1094. From the point of view of a large industrial centre,
what is your personal and official view of the homes that are
owned or available for rental for married men in this town?
—They are very habitablei, and in fair condition, because if
a house is not in such condition I intimate to the owner that
he m”st make it so before he rents it. There is one now being


made more habitable because of such a notice from me. Most
of the twelve houses uninhabitable are so simply because I will
not pass them until they are improved.
1095. Are there sufficient homes of a reasonable quality for
men who would be prepared to settle in Port Pirie provided
they had a permanent job at the smelters? —I think so. New
houses are going up every day. Three were practically finished
last week.
1096. Are the allotments connected with the houses reason-
ably sufficient for recreation such as gardening? —The majority
are.
1097. Have they conveniences in the way of fences and
water supply? —Yes.
1098. Do you think that, from the point of view of health,
housing conditions in Port Pirie are reasonably good?—Yes.
The houses are there and in reasonably good condition, and if
there arel any adverse factors they are the fault of the occu-
piers. If a person who goes into a house is not a first-class
sanitary person, he can soon make the house second, third, or
fourth class.
1099. Is the Act you are working under sufficiently all-em-
bracing for all the purposes that you think you should serve?
—No. I think there are lots of loopholes in it. I am pre-
vented from doing many things that I should like to do.
1100. And which the council would like you to do? —Yes. I
think the council would be only too pleased to have it much
wider. I cannot deal with authority with any building. I can
only do it by the personal factor, and by contact. I cannot say
to a landlord, “You must improve your housei in such and
such a way.”
1101. By the Chairman —You mean that neither you nor any
other inspector can do that? —Yes. It is only conditions we can
deal with, «iot material.
1102. Would it be in the interests of the health of the
town if you had further powers? —Yes.
1103. Have you the power to declare a house uninhabitable?
—No. I can make a report to the council, and it remains wih
the council to do anything with it. But the Health Act does
not give even the council much power. If w r e had a Building
Act in conjunction with the Health Act we should have more-
power.
1104. By Mr. Gepp —If we wish to cover this matter gener-
ally in our report the best way would be to write to the town
clerk, and ask the council to confer with us, or appoint a sub-
committee to do so? —That would be a good idea.
1305. Are the opportunities for recreation reasonably good
in Port Pirie? —Yes. There is ample space for the people if
they like to use it.
1106. Do you deal in any way with the health of school
children here? —It is included in my work. If there is any-
thing wrong with the health of the school children I deal with
them and with schoolmasters the same as with other people.
1107. Are the schools in a reasonably healthy condition?
Yes.
1108. Do you inspect the children? —No; only the buildings
and the sanitary conditions attached. If I deal with the
children at all it is in their homes under their parents’ control.
When they have infectious disease I give them instructions
according to the Health Act,
1109. What is your relation to the health officer for the
town? —I am under his control. I report to him,
1110. He is Dr. Yeatman? —Yes.
1111. You carry out any instructions he gives? —Yes; in-
structions from the health officer or the secretary to the local
board of health.
1112. Do the Government arrange for medical inspection of
the school children here?—l cannot say. I have not seen any-
thing of it.
1113. Has there been dental inspection of the school children?
-—I do not know. I do not think so.
The witness withdrew".
WALTER HEWAET JUDE, secretary Broken Hill Asso-
ciated Smelters Accident Fund, Port Pirie, was re-
called and further examined:
1114. By Mr. Eobinette —Have you prepared the statement
asked for this morning?—Yes. I hand in a statement showing
the total number of claims in respect of lead poisoning for which
compensation has been paid, and which have been admitted, for
a period of six years and two months ended 11/3/25; also the
average absence per beneficiary and benefits paid. It is ex-
tremely difficult to go through our old records and pick out
these cases, because they were not kept so well as they could
have been several years ago. I have lumped the seven half-
years from 8/7/19 to 5/7/22 altogether. I did not think it
necessary to waste much time going into the matter. There
were only 14 claims, and the total time lost was 971 days, with
an expenditure of £3OB 18s. 4d. From then on we have
accurate data, and these have all been segregated into separate
half-years.
1115. The number of claims for the year ended 9/1/25 on
the statement you supplied this morning was 168; on this one
it is 144?—Yes. The difference would be represented by claims
that were rejected. This statement deals with claims that
were admitted.
1116. By Mr. Gepp —The average time lost is decreasing.
Can you account for th at ?—lt is hard to explain. I know we-
used to have a good many men on the fund who were off for
long periods. I have here for Mr. Robinette’s examination;
several loose copies of the balance-sheets, one for each of the
half-years since 5/7/22.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Tuesday, May 5 th, 1925, at 2 p.m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. E. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Eobinette.
EANDOLPH YULE MATHEW, medical practitioner,
Commonwealth Health Laboratory, Port Pirie, was
sworn and examined:
1117. By the Chairman —What are jour degrees? —M. 8., 8.5.,
University of Melbourne.
1118. What is your present position?—Medical officer in
charge of the Commonwealth Health Laboratory, Port Pirie.
1119. How long have you held that position?—For 10
months.
1120. Prior to that you were trained in bacteriology and
laboratory processes at the Commonwealth Serum Laboratory,
Melbourne ? —Yes.
1121. What are the functions of the laboratory in Port Pirie?
—lts function is to render assistance in the diagnosis and
treatment of sickness, such as can be used by the medical men
of the district.
1122. You receive specimens for examination from the
private practitioners of the district as well as from the public?
hospitals? —Yes.
1123. On the reports you make is founded in some measure
the ultimate diagnosis of cases that are in their hands? —I
presume so.
1124. I understand you have examined the blood of a good
number of cases of lead poisoning. Can you give us some
tabulated result of your findings in those cases? —Yes. I hand
in a statement in regard to them (Exhibit 12).
1125. The total number of examinations shown at the top
concerning nationalities does not necessarily refer to the number
of different individuals? —No. Several examinations of one
man may have been made. Nor are they necessarily cases that
were diagnosed as plumbism.


1126. In these cases did the men come to see you, or did you
go to see them? —The majority of the men were sent to me
by the medical attendant. A number of specimens were pro-
cured by me from the hospital at the request of the medical
attendant.
1127. Can you demonstrate Table 1? —It is divided into
classes of 100 per cent, and over, 90 per cent, to 100 per cent.,
80 per cent, to 90 per cent., and so on, and in each division I
have put the number of men of each nationality whose blood
contained a corresponding percentage of haemoglobin. On the
right hand side is the average for the lot, and the bottom line
gives the totals.
1128. By Mr. Gepp —Does Table 1 show the percentage of
red corpuscles as compared with normal men, say, in the country?
■ —lt has no reference to red corpuscles. It refers to the pig-
ment carried by the red corpuscles. All of the classes show a
reduction in haemoglobin, but a fairly uniform amount of
reduction. I divided the cases into nationalities because that
was the only point outside of the blood examination of which
I had complete records of all the men.
1129. What is the purpose of a haemoglobin estimation as
an estimation apart from the red cell count? —Upon the presence
of a requisite amount of haemoglobin depends to a certain
extent the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. That is
important in the carrying out of the functions of the blood.
1130. Do you know from your reading or experience whether
there is any difference in the haemoglobin of various nationali-
ties?—No.
1131. I notice that five Greeks have 100 per cent, or over? —
These are not necessarily men who were ill; or, rather, they
may not be ill to such a degree as to affect the blood.
1132. Do figures like 80 per cent, indicate anaemia, or does
it only necessarily do so in conjunction with many other signs
and symptoms?-—The latter would be the more correct.
1133. By the Chairman —Will you demonstrate Table 2?—l
have again divided the men into nationalities, as nationality
was the only outside factor that we had information on in
every ease. The counts are divided into quotas of half a
million difference to the cubic millimetre.
1134. What are the normal limits for ordinary healthy
people?—From my own observation, between four and a half
and seven million.
1135. By Mr. Bohinette —ln a healthy person would the
variation be as great as that?—That is the variation from
individual to individual, not in the same person.
1136. By Mr. Gepp-— ls that due to age, or constitution, or
heredity, or habits? —Largely to all of those factors.
1137. You mentioned basophilic degeneration. Is that an
indication of anaemia? —It is recognised to be so by most
authorities.
1138. Not necessarily of any specific disease? —According to
most authorities, no.
1139. It is estimated by the use of certain stains and the
counting of the number of red cells which have degenerated?—
By observing them, and in some cases by counting them.
1140. In Table 2A you say these films show no evidence of
basophilic degeneration. There is, I notice, a constant increase
of red blood corpuscles in Table 2A over the averages given in
Table 2. That would indicate, possibly, a certain degree of
associated anaemia in cases showing basophilic degeneration?—
That is what I would deduce from the figures.
1141. The anaemia might be due to many causes and many
specific and different diseases? —I have not stated personally
that the anaemia was there. When you asked me between
what limits, I said between four and a half and seven millions.
None of those on the average were below four and a half
millions, but, of course, individual cases go below that figure.
1142. By the Chairman —In the last vertical column of these
tables, according to your statement, there would be evidence of
anaemia?—Yes. Another point should be brought out. If the
limits are between four and a half millions and seven millions,
a man with six millions possibly might be anaemic. We would
not know what his original figure was. It might have been,
near the seven millions mark.
1143. By Mr. Gepp —If a man entered an industry and you
examined him from the start and took a sample of his blood,
and then 12 months later a blood test showed a definite reduc-
tion, it would help you in diagnosing whether the industry was
causing him any trouble; that is, provided you had made a
test of his blood before he went into the industry?—That is,
provided other causes were excluded.
1144. Provided that his medical and physical history was the
same, it would help you in ascertaining any posible effect of
the industry upon his health? —Yes.
1145. By the Chairman —Will you give us the meaning of the
words polychromatophilia, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis, and
of the phrase ‘ ‘ proportional and morphological variation of
leucocytes”?—Yes. Polychromatophilia is the alteration in th e
staining properties of the red blood cells; anisocytosis is the
variation in the size of the red blood cells; poikilocytosis is the
variation in shape of the red blood cells; and the phrase pro-
portional and morphological variation of leucocytes relates to
the variation in the proportions in the respective white cells
and in the forms of the respective white cells.
1146. Would you define and explain briefly the significance
«f normoblasts? —A normoblast is a red blood cell which
normally is found in the bone marrow. On its entrance to the
blood stream the nucleus which it contains is extruded. In the
event of a rapid call being made by the body for red blood
cells immature forms are sent out. The presence of normoblasts
in the circulating blood is evidence that this is taking place.
1147. Will you define basophilic degeneration?-—Yes. Baso-
philic degeneration is evidenced by the finding in a stained
blood film of numbers of red blood cells which stain in an
abnormal manner. In the substance of the cell are scattered
fine granules which have taken the basic portion of the stain
and appear as dark specks under the microscope.
1148. By Mr. Bohinette —Does this table give the total
number of blood examinations you have made? —It gives the
total number of men examined who worked at or had been
working at the smelters. I made examinations of men and
women quite apTirt from industrial work, but I did not include
them in the list.
1149. Do you receive blood specimens from the private prac-
titioners without seeing the men personally? —For these tests,
No. The men come along. Apart from these tests we do.
For instance, there is the Wassermann test for syphilis. In
such cases we receive a specimen of the blood from the doctor
without seeing the patient, but it is totally different in regard
to the cases enumerated in the tables.
1150. In all cases of examination for lead poisoning you see
the patients ? —lnvariably.
1151. Do you receive any information from the private prac-
titioners concerning the patients, such as their industrial history,
etc. ?—ln some cases, yes. It would be as well to state, perhaps,
that the routine is to forward a printed form with the patient.
This is the universal practice in the health laboratories through-
out the Commonwealth. With any specimen submitted to us it
is required that the prescribed form be submitted with it. On
that form certain data are asked for. It is not always supplied,
but I generally fill it in myself as much as I can for the sake
of records.
1152. Have you a copy of those forms to put before the
Commission?—l will supply one.
1153. Is it necessary to have those data in order to take
those tests? —It is not necessary for taking the tests, but in
order to carry out my duties as medical officer in charge of
the Commonwealth Health - Laboratory I am required to keep
records.
1154. Do you confer with officials of the Broken Hill
Associated Smelters in regard to blood tests?—No. The report
I make is given to the medical attendant. I deal entirely with
medical attendant and patient, and my reports are given to
the medical attendant.


1155. Lou do not give the company’s officials any information
whatever ?—N o.
1156. Do you give the man a duplicate of the result of the
test?—No. I have done that, but not in all cases. I would
give it at the request of the medical attendant.
1157. If a man asked for it, would he get it? —I have done
it, but I do not do it now.
1158. For what reason did you cease to give these duplicates?
—I looked at it in the light that the report in the first place
was submitted to the medical attendant, and a subsequent report
should therefore be submitted to him,
1159. 5 ou think the man has no right to know his condition
at all? —I do not report upon his condition. The medical
attendant deals entirely with him. It is not my place to come
between him and his medical attendant.
1160. By Mr. Gepp —l understand that your position is more
in the way of giving reports on samples of blood submitted to
you from various people rather than making diagnoses of
particular conditions?—lt is.
1161. Have you given any consideration to the question of
plumbism in Port Pirie from the standpoint of the results you
are obtaining?—l have.
1162. Do you think this to be correct— ‘ ‘ That the frequency
of basophilia in the blood of persons with lead poisoning is
is such that in the absence of other symptoms it should
be regarded as an alarm signal, and should place one on guard
against latent lead intoxication”?—l am not in a position to
give that a proper answer.
1163. Have you any figures at all from very serious lead
cases in regard to the diminution of haemoglobin? Figures are
given in some of the literature as low as 2,800,000? —I think
you have confused that. That is the count of the red cells.
I have counted as low as 3,800,000.
1164. Was that case regarded as a serious one? —As far as
I know, it was.
1165. From your point of viewq would you agree with or
comment upon the following:—“Among the alterations of the
blood the diminution in haemoglobin and in the number of red
cells, and the inversion of the leucocytic formula, certainly from
the point of view of the early determination of saturnism, are
less important than certain alterations of the red cells”? —I
could only give you opinions which I have read, but not from
my own personal experience.
The witness withdrew.
HUGH RALPH SUMMERTON, turner and fitter, 65,
Gertrude Street, Port Pirie, was sworn and examined:
1166. By Mr. Robinette —You are secretary of the Port Pirie
branch of the Amalgamated Engineers’ Union? —Yes.
1167. How long have you been employed on the smelters? —■
About 20 years. I started there in 1900. I left in 1912, and
returned in 1919.
1168. What is your opinion of the conditions now in regard
to dust and smoke, compared with when you first started at the
smelters? Is there a greater or lesser amount now?—From 1900
to 1912 I did not take much notice of the dust.
1169. From 1915 or 1916, how does it compare with the
present?—l could not altogether answer that, as I have not
taken that much notice of the dust.
1170. A number of the members of your union receive dirt
money in respect to places in which they work? —Yes.
1171. Has the number of such places increased recently?—
It has since 1919.
1172. Has the number considerably increased? —Yes. Be-
tween 1920 and 1921 we accepted Is. a day for shift fitters
in the Dwight & Lloyd plant, but after 12 months the members
who were working there complained so much that we had to
approach the company with a view to getting an increase in
rates, which was granted to us.
1173. Since you got that increase has the number of places
in which you receive it increased? —It has, for the simple reason
that they have built extra plants, that is the Barrier and acid
plants. In the acid plants we do not get the inciease for dirty
work, but on account of the acid.
1174. For the obnoxious nature of the work? —No; simply
on account of the burning of clothing by the acid.
1175. Have you any figures as to the number of cases of
lead poisoning amongst your members? —Five members have
suffered since 1923.
1176. Do you know of any cases of lead poisoning amongst
your members previous to 1923? —No.
1177. Is there anything else you can advise the Commission
upon, regarding the working conditions of your members, or
whether improvements could be effected that would minimise
the health hazard? —Yes; there are occasions when a break-
down occurs in the Dwight & Lloyd plant, when the men are
asked to get into the work immediately, and in some cases that
plant has been running anywhere from three to six months or
perhaps longer, which means that during all that period dust
has been accumulating on that machinery. When those men
touch that part of the machinery they get a lot of dust all over
ineir clothes. Instead of having a clean suit of overalls after
finishing the job, so as to continue in their usual work, they
work in them for perhaps a week or a fortnight, which means
that every time they touch those dungarees they get a certain
amount of dust on their fingers and elsewhere, and when they
shake them there is so much dust that they inhale some of it.
1178. What would you suggest? —In case of breakdown, as
soon as a man has finished that job he should have clean dun-
garees to put on until such time as the others are washed, so
that he will not have to wear dirty dungarees for any lengthy
period. I do not know of any such place except the Dwight
and Lloyd and the Skinner machines. Of the five men I men-
tioned four worked in the Dwight & Lloyd plant.
1179. Where did the fifth work? —He is a man who served his
apprenticeship there. He has been there 15 years.
1180. Were all these cases compounded?—Yes, except the
fifth. That man is waiting for the six months to elapse.
1181. He is still off lead w T ork?—Yes. He is the only man
who has suffered from lead poisoning for any time. Of the
five men, No. 1 started at the smelters in July, 1918, and died
in March, 1923. He received compensation. He was about 57
when he died. No. 2 started in June, 1919. His case was
compounded in January, 1924. He was between 45 and 50
years old. No. 3 started in June, 1917. His case was com-
pounded in February, 1925. He was between 40 and 45.
1182. By Mr. Gepp —Only one of the five men died? —Yes.
No. 4 was working in the Port Pirie smelters in April, 1919,
but I could not trace the day he came. He was working here
before he went to Broken Hill in 1919. His case was com-
pounded in March, 1925. No. 5 is about 28 years old now.
He started at the smelters either in 1911 or 1912. He is still
awTiy with lead poisoning. He was away with lead poisoning
in 1924. He took bad while away, and the doctors said he
was suffering from some sort of rheumatism. The union sent
him to Adelaide, where a specialist certified that he was suffer-
ing from lead poisoning. After the Pirie doctor saw that cer-
tificate he decided to give him a good overhauling, and sent a
blood specimen to the laboratory, which proved that he was
suffering from lead poisoning.
1183. By Mr. Robinette —ln what places did No. 5 work? —
He was working anywhere about the works. He did not, to my
knowledge, put in any lengthy period on the Dwight & Lloyd
plant. Ido not know of what nationality three of those five
men are.
1184. How many members of the A.E.U. are working on the
smelters? —About 110. We cover fitters, turners, blacksmiths,
barmakers, angle iron smiths, plumbers, electrical fitters, elec-
tricians, and wiremen. About 25 of the 110 are apprentices.
1185. Have you anything to add? —We get very well treated
by the management, but some of the foremen seem to be a
little against giving us the concessions that the company has
granted, such as dirt money in special places. Though the
company is prepared to pay it, we sometimes have difficulty in
getting the foremen to be just to us.


1186. By Mr. Gepp —When was the first of the five cases of
lead poisoning you mentioned? —In 1923.
1187. What number of your members have passed chrough
the works since 1918, or are now in the works? —About 228.
1188. Can you get particulars of the labor turnover for me?
• —Yes; I will get them.
1189. You said the increase in dirt money was due to an
increase in the plant. Might it not be due also to a certain
extent to your representations to the company from time to time
that another place ought to be brought under the dirt-money
category?—lt is only natural that the organisation will better
the conditions as it goes along. We come across different points
and learn different things, which naturally brings about better
conditions.
1190. Whenever you have a point to bring up do you find
the management willing to see you and sympathetically inclined
to discuss the matter fully?—Yes. They are very just.
1191. The appointment of Mr. Dey with fuller powers than
before is also welcomed?—By the organisation, yes.
The witness withdrew.
LESLIE GEMMEL TASSIE, medical practitioner, Port
Pirie, was sworn and examined:
1192. By Gie Chairman —What degrees have you obtained? —•
M. 8., 8.5., Adelaide.
1193. What appointments do you hold in Port Pirie? —
Acting medical superintendent at the Port Pirie Hospital,
deputy and assistant quarantine officer for Port Pirie, and
medical referee under the Workmen’s Compensation Act.
1194. How long have you been in practice in Port Pirie? —
Since the end of 1912, with the exception of a period of absence
on active service.
1195. During your practice here I presume you have paid con-
siderable attention to the question of lead poisoning? —Yes.
1196. Have you observed an increase in the number of cases
coming under your notice in recent years? —Yes.
1197. Can you give an approximate idea of the time when
the increase was first noticed by you? —From memory, about
1921 or 1922.
1198. Can you assign any apparent cause?—No.
1199. Do you think it possible that modern research and aids
to diagnosis have resulted in the detection of a larger number
of cases that were formerly diagnosed as chronic gastritis,
chronic bronchitis, or such diseases? —It is quite possible that
modern methods of diagnosis have assisted largely, and been of
great value in the diagnosis of lead poisoning.
1200. Can you give us an idea of the number of cases of lead
poisoning from the smelters that you have seen in a period of,
say, a year?—l cannot give any figures further back than the
middle of 1924. Frcm the middle to the end of 1924 I
certified 19 cases as suffering from lead poisoning, and from the
beginning of this year to the present time, 34, making a total
of 53 since June, 1924.
1201. Can you give us the approximate proportion of mild
and severe cases in these 53? —I would class only six of them
as severe.
1202. Were the bulk of the cases acute or chronic? By
‘ ‘ acute ’ ’ I mean fulminating eases, with an exceptionally short
duration of symptoms?—A few would be of the acute type,
but the majority I would class as sub-acute cases. I would not
class them as chronic, because I would call chronic cases those
that are far advanced, and in which the patient will not recover.
1203. What is the ratio of Britishers and foreigners among
the 53? —There were eight British and 45 foreigners.
1204. Did you observe more severe types of attack in British
or in foreign cases? —One would see the severer form oftener
in the British.
1205. Can you explain that?—By severer type I mean a case
which is approximating or has reached the condition I have just
described as a chronic lead case. I have seen more of such
cases among Britishers, possibly on account of the longer
service they have had in the works compared with the foreigner.
1206. Do you think the British subject is liable to reach a
stage of intoxication at a later date during continuous work
than a foreigner? —I would not care to express an opinion on
that.
1207. In your opinion does length of service at the smelters
bear a direct ratio to the incidence of the affection?—Yes.
Bronx some years’ experience I should say that the incidence
of affection is in direct proportion to> the length of service.
1208. Have you made any observations as to the relation of
physique, condition of nourishment, and history of alcoholism
to the incidence of plumbism?—l have not made any particular
investigation into those matters, and cannot speak on them apart
from anything I may have noticed incidentally in my examina-
tion of the patients.
1209. Do you consider that there is a racial variation existing
concerning the question of the incidence of plumbism?—The
only way I could speak would be on the figures I have quoted,
which show an incidence of 45 foreigners to eight Britishers.
I think those figures speak for themselves.
1210. Have you observed any cases of plumbism among the
sections of the population not employed at the smelters? —No.
1211. What are the prevailing symptoms complained of by
persons afflicted with plumbism in your experience?—ln my
experience the more usual symptoms complained of are weak-
ness and lassitude, sleeplessness, loss of appetite sometimes
associated with vomiting, abdominal colic and constipation, and
pains in the extremities.
1212. In your experience I presume you have noted varying
types of the disease. If so, will you describe the prevailing
signs elicited from those main types? —I will first describe the
abdominal type, in which the prevailing system would be
abdominal colic and constipation. Then there is the anaemic
type, in which the prevailing indications are anaemia and other
associated blood changes. Then there is the neuritic type, in
which the prevailing symptoms complained of are pains in the
extremities, and the signs found are tenderness over the main
nerve trunks, and muscular wasting. The fourth type might be
classed as the cerebral type, with signs and symptoms of acute
brain involvement; and, lastly ; there is the arterio sclerotic
type, in which the symptoms would be signs of arterio sclerosis
and chronic nephritis.
1213. Does, in your opinion, one particular type prevail in
the eases you have seen ?—Among the cases I have seen, what
I have classed as the neuritic type would prevail, but not un-
associated with the symptoms of other types as well.
1214. Do you associate particular types of the disease with
any given set of conditions relating to nationality, length of
service, and so forth?—l would associate the arterio sclerotic
type with long length of service. On, Die other hand, the
abdominal type might arise in a very short period of service or
might occur at any time during a more or less long length of
service.
1215. Do you consider that intercurrent ailments have a
determining influence on lead poisoning?—They certainly would
have an influence.
1216. They would tend to predispose to an attack of lead
poisoning? —Yes.
1217. In the matter of diagnosis of the complaint I should
be glad if you would give the Commission a short narrative
concerning that point?—First, one w r ould take into considera-
tion the industrial and medical history, both past and present,
of the man; then his symptomatology; then the results of an
examination held with a view to eliciting any known signs of
lead poisoning, and from a summary of the whole a diagnosis
would be arrived at.
1218. Do you hold any opinion concerning the value of
basophilic degeneration in blood films as an aid to diagnosis?
—I consider it of value as an aid to diagnosis.
1219. You informed us that one of your appointments was
that of medical referee in connection with the Workmen’s
Compensation Act. In your opinion does the present scheme
of certification under the Act operate to the best advantage


of cases of plumbism?—Speaking as a general practitioner I
<lo not consider that certification in its present form operates
in the best interests of any one concerned. Especially do I
refer to the certification of incapacity required for the pur-
pose of redemption of weekly payments. I think that too great
a responsibility is placed on the practitioner in this matter.
He has to rely solely upon his own opinion and experience,
and in the absence of any fixed standard upon which to work
the estimates of the same cases of different practitioners must
vary considerably.
1220. On the question of estimation of incapacity, can you
advise th 6 Commission as to any recommendations you would
make personally to ameliorate the condition? —To my mind the
first remedy is compulsory notification of cases of lead
poisoning. The duties of the general practitioner should cease
there. Any further steps taken with regard to the estimation
of incapacity I consider should be carried out by a medical
board, the chairman of which would be a medical man of ex-
perience in such matters, and which would have a fixed
standard to gauge the estimate of incapacity.
1221. In what light would you regard the appointment of a
medical officer at the works, to act as the company’s medical
officer? —I consider that the introduction of some form of in-
dustrial hygiene supervision is essential, and that such a
scheme as that outlined by Mr. Somerset in his evidence is
practicable, although, personally, I am doubtful whether one
medical officer alone could carry out the work to the fullest
advantage.
1222. By Mr. Gepp —The Commission is instructed to inquire
first of all into the cause of the disease known as plumbism,
secondly the reason for the recent increase in reported cases,
and thirdly the best means of preventing or alleviating such
disease. In this connection I should like your views as to the
suitability for employment of foreigners in the industry. What
do you think of their physique as compared with Australians
and Britishers?—From my experience I find their physique to
compare very favorably wdth that of the Britisher.
1223. Do you consider that the change of conditions, of food,
and of work which occurs when these people migrate to Port
Pirie and take up employment at the smelters is a factor af-
fecting their general health? —I consider it must have some
bearing upon their general health.
1224. By Mr. Bohinette —You have not seen their living
conditions in their native lands? —We know the climate is dif-
ferent from ours, and that here they cannot get the same food
to which they are accustomed.
1225. By Mr. Gepp —From your consulting work and visiting
their homes, would you say that their standard of diet and
housing—not in all cases, of course, but among a substantial
number —is likely prejudicially to affect their health? —Yes;
that is, taking into consideration the work they are doing.
1226. Would it be a good thing not to admit brand new
arrivals into the industry, but rather to take only those who
have been in this country some time and have become acclima-
tised? Further, would it not be wise to insist upon a rigorous
physical standard among prospective employees? —I am afraid
I cannot answer the first part of the question, and I doubt
whether my knowledge of the industry is sufficient to enable
me to give an opinion on the latter part of it.
1227. Would you be in favor, in order to help the position,
to a stringent entrance medical examination? Supposing you
were medical officer at the works, would you recommend that? —•
If I were medical officer at the works I would recommend a
medical examination to prove that men were fit.
1228. The reported cases among the Maltese are extraordi-
narily heavy. Our figures show 25 per cent, during the last
half-year, which, at least, is nearly three times any other figure.
Are there any special factors within your knowledge which
would account for this? —No.
1229. If you were in the position of works doctor would you
appreciate the assistance that an efficient dental service could
render? —I would.
1230. Is it a fact that of recent years more and more im-
portance has been attached by members of your profession to
the condition of the mouth? —Yes.
1231. From your inspection of the mouths of your patients,
would you say that in very many cases they would be greatly
benefited by regular and efficient dental attention? —They
would.
1232. In your experience has pyorrhea been a prominent
symptom in cases diagnosed by you as lead poisoning?—lt has
been a symptom in a great number of cases.
1233. Do you consider pyorrhea a definite pre-disposing factor
in lead poisoning? —Yes.
1234. I expect that you have a fair general idea of the work-
ing conditions at the smelters? —A very general one.
1235. Do you think that if regulations having statutory force
were imposed upon employer and employee, requiring each to
conform to certain approved rules of health, it would assist the
position at the smelters? —I can only answer that question from
my general knowledge of what I have read on the subject of
lead poisoning, and what I have seen, and cannot answer it
with a view to any of the conditions which exist at the smelters,
because I know nothing of them. I consider that it would have
a big bearing on the prevention of lead poisoning.
1236. When you answered the chairman’s question regarding
the effect of inter-current disease, did you cover such diseases
as gout, syphilis, and so forth? —Yes.
1237. Those would be pre-disposing causes to an attack of
plumbism in men who had either had previous attacks or had
undergone lead absorption?—Yes.
1238. Do you agree that alcoholism, that is, the abuse of
alcohol, is a potent factor in producing plumbism? —I have seen
cases which have been made worse by the abuse of alcohol.
1239. By Mr. Bolinette —That, of course, would occur in any
disease ? —Possibly.
1240. By Mr. Gepp —How far, if at all, does lead paralysis
occur in Port Pirie? —I mean such things as wrist drop and
foot drop?—Not very often.
1241. In the cases diagnosed by you as lead poisoning, has
lead pallor been common? —Yes.
1242. In your opinion, what is the significance of the blue
or Burtonian line in reference to workers in lead industries? —
You mean how it should be regarded from the diagnosing
standpoint in relation to lead poisoning?
1243. Yes. Do you regard it as a definite proof or only
supplementary and complementary? —I would not regard it as
definite proof of lead poisoning, but I would place value on
it as confirmatory of other symptoms and signs.
1244. It is thought that there is pronounced fear among
foreigners when they are out of their own country, and not in
touch with their own people, or at least in the case of some
of them reported as lead poisoned, and that this tendency
militates against their recovery by auto-suggestion. Have you
had any experience of this? —No.
1245. Have you ever considered the question of the psycholo-
gical effect upon men of the idea given to them of the
lengthened period during which they would be ill from lead
poisoning? —dt is possible that such an effect would occur.
1246. You cannot say from your experience that this would
be more so amongst foreigners at Port Pirie than amongst
Britishers? —I think their nature is more emotional, and they
are more prone to fear than Britishers, and therefore the effect
upon them from the psychological point of view would be
greater than upon Britishers.
1247. You gave figures showing a considerable number of
extra certificates during this year. How far is that due to any
extra number of patients you have had to deal with owing to
the absence of one of your colleagues?—Possibly a large factor
is the fact that I am doing double practice work and probably
seeing double the number of patients this year in a month
compared with the corresponding month last year.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.


Total
CO
d- CO
to
jO o
5 ►*
to *2
jo
g to
CT JO
to
to
to
to
to
oo
3 5 7?
to
to
w
too,®
~to
M W
>® o to
g tS
w lo
MO -®
i5
to
CD
to
to
o to
I— 1
MO*
B
hj
CD
d
B 3
>rJ hd
99)
99
99 1
dj
hj
o
9
* *
o o
CD y-j CD
d- O ct-
d d
CD CD
B
d- O ct-
d d
CD CD
§ ZB
ct- O ct-
d hi
CD CD
§ z§
ct- O d-
d d
CD CD
§ zs
d- O d-
d d
CD CD
2
d- O d-
d
CD
CD
P
d-
d
CD
p d-
d d
O CD
§ ZB
d- O d-
o
% oo
. . 'to
co Ow co
h! 0° 6
to
03 to to
2- W M
(25-49)
13
14-77
to
3-
9i
Refinery,
O
00
00 CD
Ox O
S
-4
CO
CD
1— 1 _
O . i- 1
Of"M
(9-92)
13
24-53
to
top M
Oi . .93
CO
CO
Cl
93
"to
Top Floor.
0 vS
Ih- 3
CD QQ
CD CO
— J CD
CO
CO
Oi
to
(17-88)
71
100-00
(16-79)
22
30-98
(15-54)
16
22-54
fin d-"tO
• CO Cl
S2
CO
(28-95)
11
15-49
(9-37
3
4-23
Ci
CD
CO
(16-67
4
to
GO
to
(11-11)
2
Bottom
Floor.
O _ >—
og«
Cx „ 03
-* -O *
O 00
tO H-*
00 CD
CO Ol
w 6i
O Oi
• CD •
O -1
d to
00 O
CD
s
d
. CD
s
OC
CO
to
°9
Dwight and
Lloyd.
3
3
■
—•
O
CO ,
Huntington-
o ° o
O CO
9
O
o
6i 00 03
O to
o ob
° o
• h— 1 •
Cl CD
o CO
s ®
o to
O Oi
1
o
CO
. CO
1
11
Heberlein.
o
o to
<Q
£«S
to
to
to cb
cp
o^cb
co to
O CD
to -
• CO •
to CO
1
i
CO
o
9
6i
Ropp
Roasters.
3
00 M
°c
3
w 3
1
o
9 W^
o -1
O CD
1 1 1
(•97)
1
33-34
1 1 1
(2-63)
1
33-33
1 1 1
1
1
CO
9
CO
CO
6i
CD
Ore
Discharging.
: o
||»9
1 1 1
CO
CO
co cb
1 1 1
1 J 1
1 11
1
1
cd C:
CD
1^7
CD
Slag Pit.
O
CD
_
Skinner
l|*|
<33 O
03 Ol
cd cb
1 1 1
CD CD
CO
1 1 1
I
1
1
1
Furnaces.
,
E>
D
5 to
D Ox
*o
o
1 1 1
I I 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
1
,
1
1
Acid P lan t.
1
i_
O 03
(15-36)
61
100-00
(18-32)
24
39-34
to
O *—* CJ*
to cjl
CO tf*-
CO _ d
CD •
GC -1
d- "to
-1 CD
Oi co
(6-25)
2
3-28
CO 00
• to •
to CO
GO CO
to d
00 t—«
Service
Depts.
(100-0C
397
lOO-OC
,
t t 72
7?
72
72
72
72
WWO
o^o
Sgo
cb w o
o
to Cl O
QC> p
O^o
ci°°o
o o
9^9
0*0
Oi 00 o
Total.
i —
1 o
03
Department—
Period.
20/12/23 1 No.
to y
31/12/24 J Percent.
61
26 07
Refinery.
25
10-68
Top Floor.
38
16-24
Bottom
Floor.
26
11-11
Dwight
Lloyd.
31
13-25
Huntington-
Heberlein.
5
2-13
Ropp
Roasters.
CO
Ore
I ischarging.
CO
Slag Pit.
5
2-13
Skinner
Furnaces.
CO
Acid Plant.
40
17-10
Service
Department.
234
100-00
Total.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
On Wednesday, May 6th, 1925, at 10 a.m.
Present—
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman)
Mr. H. W. Gepp
Mr. W. Robinette
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
CARL EMIL DORSCH, Medical Practitioner, Norman
Street, Port Pirie, sworn and examined:
1248. By the Chairman —What are your qualifications?—M.B.,
Ch.B., Edinburgh.
1249. How long have you been practising in Port Pirie? —
Six mouths.
1250. During that time have you come across cases of lead
poisoning?—Yes.
1251. Can you give some idea of the number of such cases?—-
Thirty-seven.
1252. Were the majority of those cases Britishers or
foreigners?—The majority were Britishers. Eighteen were
Britishers and 12 Greeks. The others comprised Scandinavians,
Germans, and other nationalities.
1253. Did you see any severe cases of plumbism among the-
37?—Yes.
1254. Was there a predominance of a particular type of
plumbism? —I should say the type with neuritis predominated.
1255. By Mr. Gepp —Would you say that the majority of
cases in Port Pirie, so far as you know about them, were of the
mild or sub-acute type?—l should say they were of the sub-
acute type.
The witness withdrew.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent
of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, was re-called
and further examined:
1256. By Mr. Gepp —As the result of your previous evidence
you have prepared some further tables for the information of
the Commission. Some of them, I understand, were prepared
at the request of the Commission. Will you please submit these
tables and explain them? —Yes. Following the request of the
Commission for the information given in Table Ml, we now
put in that table, together with Tables M, N, O, and P, which
will give further detailed and analytical information, for the
benefit of the Commission. (Tables M, Ml, N, O, and P put
in and marked Exhibit 13) :
Table “ M.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING, 28/6/17 TO 31/12/24.
Department of Origin of Contraction.
Numbers in parentheses represent the percentage of all cases reported during the period indicated in the first column Numbers
not in parentheses represent percentages of all cases reported during the total period under review. '
Table “ MI.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING, 20/12/23 TO 31/12/24.
Department of Origin of Contraction of Disease.


Length
of Service —Months.
Years.
Nationality.
—
- 3.
4/6.
7/9.
10/12.
13/18.
19/24.
25/48.
49/72.
73/96 .
97/120.
11/15.
16/20.
21/25.
26/30.
Over
30.
Total.
British -(
P*c.
No.
(12-20)
161
(7-27)
96
(4-39)
58
(4-24)
56
(8-94)
118
(4-24)
56
(12-43)
164
(6-52)
86
(10-30)
136
(7-50)
99
(8-04)
106
(5-15)
68
(4-92)
65
a- 74)
23
(2-12)
28
(100-00)
1,320
p.c.
64-14
35*04
53-70
47-46
53-88
63-64
72-25
81-90
88-89
84-62
86-89
97-14
98-48
95-83
96-55
66-98
Greek <
'p.c.
No.
(9-67)
35
(35-08)
127
(9-67)
35
(12-71)
46
(16-02)
58
(4-97)
18
(6-63)
24
(2-21)
8
(1*94)
7
(MO)
4
—
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
362
.p.c
13-94
46-35
32-40
38-98
26-48
20-45
10-57
7-62
4-58
3-42
—
—
—
—
—
18-37
Maltese ■<
(13-24)
9
(11-76)
8
(8-82)
6
(10J>9)
(30-88)
21
(4*42)
3
(14*71)
10
(2-94)
9
(2-94)
O
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
68
lP-C.
3-59
2-92
5-56
5-93
9-59
3-41
4-41
1-91
l~3l
—
—
—
—
—
—
3-45
Italian ■{
No.
(19-24)
20
(26-92)
28
(4-81)
5
(5-77)
6
(15-38)
16
(2-88)
3
(16-35)
17
(1-92)
9
—
(1-92)
9
(4*81)
5
—
—
—
(100-00)
104
.p.c.
7-97
10-22
4-63
5-08
7-31
3-41
7-49
1-91
—
1-71
4-10
—
—
—
5-28
German ■
f p.c.
No-
—
—
—
—
(5-56)
1
(11-10)
2
(5-56)
1
(16-67)
3
(22*22)
““4““
(16-67)
3
(11-10)
(5-56)
1
—
(5-56)
1
(100-00)
18
1 p.c.
—
—
—
1-14
•88
•95
1-96
3-42
2-46
2-86
1-52
—
3-45
•91
Scandinavian . ■
f p.c.
No.
(25-53)
12
(8-51)
4
(2-13)
1
(2-13)
1
(2-13)
1
(10-64)
(10-64)
(B-51)
4
(6*38)
(6*38)
(14 : 89)
—
—
(2-13)
1
—
(100-00)
47
Lp.c.
4-78
1-46
•93
•85
46
• 5 68
2-20
3-81
1-96
2-56
5*74
—
—
4-17
—
2-38
Russian
'p.c.
No.
(5-00)
1
(10*00)
2
(5-00)
1
(5-00)
1
(15-00)
3
—
(25 : 00)
(10*00)
2
(5-00)
1
(20-00)
4
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
20
Lp.c.
•40
•73
■93
•85
1-37
—
2-20
1-90
•65
3-42
—
—
—
—
—
1-01
Others
f p.c.
No.
(40-62)
13
(28-13)
9
(6-25)
2
(313)
1
(6-25)
2
(6-25)
2
—
—
(313)
1
(312)
1
(312)
1
—
—
—
—
(100-00)
32
Lp.c.
5-18
3-28
1-85
•85
•91
2*27
—
—
■65
■85
■81
—
—
—
—
1-62
Total
r p.c.
(12-73)
(13-90)
(5-48)
(5-99)
(11-11)
(4-46)
(11-52)
(5-33)
(7-76)
(5-94)
(6-19)
(3-55)
(3-35)
(1-22)
(1-47)
(100-00)
No.
2 51
2 74
108
118
219
88
99.7
105
153
117
122
70
66
24
29
1,971
L
100-00
100-00
100-00
100*00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100*00
100*00
100*00
100-00
100-00
100-00
Nationality.
Years.
Total.
- 21.
22/25.
26/30.
31/35.
36/40.
41/45.
46/50.
51/55.
56/60.
61/-.
fPer cent.
British No.
1 Per cent.
(8-86)
117
93-60
(17-80)
235
59-34
(15-83)
209
59-89
(12-96)
171
59-37
(12-13)
160
62-26
(11-06)
146
70-53
(8-56)
113
72-90
(5-98)
79
84-93
(3-49)
46
90-20
(3-33)
44
88-00
(100-0
1,320
66-97
Greek ■<
'Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
(1-38)
5
400
(26-80)
97
24-49
(23-20)
84
24-07
(18-51)
67
23-26
(13-81)
50
19-45
(6-91)
25
12-08
(6-90)
25
16-13
(1-66)
6
6-45
(•83)
3
5-88
—
(100-00)
362
18-37
Maltese ■<
'Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
—
(39-71)
27
6-82
(22-06)
15
4-30
(13-24)
9
3-13
(10-29)
7
2-72
(5-88)
4
1-93
(5-88)
4
2-58
(2-94)
2
2-15
—
—
(100-00)
68
3-45
Italian «
" Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
(•96)
1
•80
(20-19)
21
6*31
(25-96)
27
7 74
(22-12)
23
7-99
(14-42)
15
5-84
(9-63)
10
4-83
(2-88)
3
1-94
(2-88)
3
3-23
—
(•96)
1
2-00
(100 00)
104
5-28
German -
r Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
—
_
(5-55)
1
•29
(16-67)
3
1-04
(16-67)
3
1-17
(16-67)
1-45
(16-67)
3
1-94
(5-55)
1
1-96
(22-22)
4
8-00
(10000)
18
•91
Scandinavian -
'Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
(4-26)
2
1-60
(17-02)
8
2-02
(10-64)
5
1-43
(10-64)
5
1-74
(27-66)
13
506
(23-40)
11
5-31
(4-26)
o
.. 1-29
2-12
1
108
—
—
(100-00)
47
2-38
Russian -
r Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
—
—
(10-00)
2
•57
(35-00)
7
2-43
(20-00)
4
1-56
(10- 00)
2
•97
(20-00)
4
2-58
(5-00)
1
1-08
—
—
(100-00)
20
1-02
Others •<
' Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
—
(25-00)
8
2-02
(18-76)
6
1-71
(9-37)
3
1-04
(15-63)
5
1-94
(18-76)
6
2-90
(3-12)
1
•64
(3-12)
1
1-08
(3-12)
1
1-96
(3-12)
1
2-00
(100-00)
32
1-62
Total -<
r Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
(6-34)
125
100-00
(20-09)
396
10000
(17-71)
349
100-00
(14-61)
288
100-00
(13-04)
257
100-00
(10-50)
207
100-00
(7-86)
155
100-00
(4-72)
93
100-00
(2-59)
51
100-00
(2-54)
50
100-00
(100-00)
1,971
10000
Table “ N.”_PAY ROLL, FORTNIGHT ENDED 11/3/25.
Length of Service in Relation to Nationality of Employees.
The numbers in parentheses denote percentages of employees of the various nationalities who have been working for the periods stated.
The numbers not in parentheses represent percentages of the total employees of the different nationalities in the same column.
Table “ 0 ’’—PAY ROLL, FORTNIGHT ENDED 11/3/25.
Ages of Employees in relation to Nationality.
The numbers in parentheses represent percentages of employees of the various nationalities who have been working for the periods
stated. The numbers not in parentheses represent percentages of the total employees of the different nationalities in the same column.


Half-year ended
23/12/19
23/6/20
22/12/20
22/6/21
21/12/21
21/6/22
20/12/22
20/6/23
19/12/23
2/7/24
31/12/24
1. Labor turn-
over
2,412
1,415
1,302
£05
1,338
1,545
1,746
2,308
2,213
2,552
2,615
2. Daily average
strength
*1,079
*651
*794
*419
*683
1,004
1,208
1,339
1,430
1,595
1,601
2 as per cent, of 1
44-73
46-01
60-98
46-30
5D05
64-98
69-19
58-02
64-62
62-50
61-22
Table “ P.”—LABOR TURNOVER AND EMPLOYMENT.
Showing Average Daily Strength as Percentage of Total Turnover Each Half-year.
* During these periods the Rotation Scheme was in operation. During the shut down period from July, 1919 to August, 1921,
owing to the Broken Hill strike and the fireattheD. & L., a labor Roster was drawn up,and the available work distributed among the
men in order to minimise distress.
1257. Why do you call one Table Ml?—lt is marked Table
Ml because it bears a very close relation to the information
given in Table M. Table Ml sets out the reported cases of
lead poisoning from 20/12/23 to 31/12/24, dividing the reported
cases into departments of the origin of the contraction of the
disease. ,
1258. Am I right in saying that the top line denotes per-
centages, and that the second line refers to the actual number
of cases? —Yes.
1259. Your total is not the figure we have been previously
working on. Will you explain that? —This total of 234 cases
covers a specific period of 12 months only.
1260. The percentages on the top line, so far as you are able
to follow, are the results from each of the different depart-
ments, but I presume there is some difficulty in this matter, as
men go from one department to another to' a certain extent?—l
explained earlier in my evidence that these are the depart-
ments from which the cases were reported. It is absolutely
certain that the disease did not originate in all cases under
the heading in which it now appears. This is so because men
change from one department to another in the works, and it
is impracticable to say with certainty where the disease was
originally contracted.
1261. What particular work does your service departments
cover? —-They cover all the construction and maintenance work
throughout the plant, the wharf, and stables gangs and other
similar services throughout the plant.
1262. Will you please deal with Table M? —Table M gives
information very similar to that in Table Ml, except that it
covers a longer period, that dealt with being from 28/6/17 to
31/12/24. You will notice by scanning the period column that
the period from 28/6/17 to 21/12/21 is bulked in one set of
figures. That is done because there were very few cases during
that period, the total being 18, shown in the last column. For
the rest of the table the periods are shown as six monthly
terms. In explanation of the table, taking the initial period
in the refinery, there was one case. That case represented
5.56 per cent, of all cases reported during that period. Further,
it represented 1.13 per cent, of all the cases reported from the
refinery during the period under review, namely, seven and a
half years. An examination of the table will show that by far
the greater majority of the cases have occurred since 1922.
1263. For the benefit of the Commission any other point you
have noticed from a study of this table might be submitted,
because this is one of the most important questions the Com-
mission is dealing with, namely, where the cases are occurring.
We desire the most complete details so that we may trace what
particular influences are causing the cases, provided, of course,
the cases are proved finally as lead poisoning cases ?—Personally,
I do not place very much value on the information given in
this table, for the reason that I cannot say definitely that the
disease was actually contracted nnder the head under which
it now appears. So that really the analysis of the figures might
not necessarily disclose the true position.
1264. We do not ask you to admit either the accuracy of the
diagnosis in all cases or the accuracy of these figures; but,
assuming that they are correct for the purposes of discussion,
it seems that the Commission should consider this table
seriously, possibly with the view of consulting later with you
and your experts on the possible causes of the high rates in
some particular department. For example, it is pointed out
that more than 60 per cent, of the cases in the refinery have
occurred during the last 12 months. Provided that is so, it
would indicate that a very close survey by yourself of those
conditions is being made? —That is so, but I should like to point
out that that peculiarity is in all the departments that appear
in this table. The increase shown under the refinery heading
is general throughout every department. Every one of the
departments shows the same peculiarity.
1265. What I understand'is that the increase is not specifically
to the refinery, but is general throughout the various depart-
ments? —That is so.
1266. Will you now take Table N? —Table N shows length
of service in relation to the nationality of employees, and does
not deal in any way with lead poisoning. The figures are
taken from the payroll for the fortnight ended 11/3/25. The
points of interest in the table, to my mind, are the facts that
if you will look at the British employees, for instance, you will
see that 21.97 per cent, of them have had over 10 years of
service. Further down the table you will see that 38.89 per
cent, of the Germans have had over 10 years of service.
1267. You are making an addition of certain figures in the
table to get those percentages?—Yes.
1268. This table indicates generally the long service of the
Britishers, and the short service of nearly all the other
nationalities? —Except the Germans, of whom 38.89 per cent,
have had over 10 years’ service. There are, however, only a
very small number of employees in the German section, 18 alto-
gether. Practically all the other nationalities, with the
exception of the Scandinavians, show no man with a service of
10 years or over. .The British table further shows 28.2 per
cent, of the British were under 12 months’ service, and in that
connection I want to make an explanation. Within the last 12
months, we have undertaken a great deal of new construction
work, which has necessitated the employment of a considerably
greater number of tradesmen and helpers. As most of the
tradesmen we engage are British, this 28.2 per cent, is on the
t ble greater than it would be had we had only normal em-
ployees at work.
1269. Prom this table may we draw the conclusion that the
increase in the reported cases of plumbism is contemporaneous
with the increase in the employment of men other than British?
—lt is contemporaneous with the greater employment of
foreigners.
1270. By Mr. Pearson —By foreigners in this connection, you
mean south-eastern Europeans?—Yes. I also want to point out
that 67.13 of the Greeks have had under one year’s service-
with us.


1271. Looking at the table, it would seem that few of these
foreigners have had more than four years’ service?—Com-
paratively few.
1272. By Mr. Gepp— Will you explain Table 0?—It is an
analysis of the payroll for the fortnight ended 11/3/25, having
regard to the ages of employees in relation to nationality.
1273. That is the same payroll as you dealt with in Table N?
—Yes. Taking the British section, for instance, this table
shows that of the total men employed during that fortnight,
that is to say, not the men employed on any one day, but the
total ’labor turnover for that fortnight, 117 were Britishers
under the age of 21 years or 21 years old. This 117 represents
8.86 per cent, of all the Britishers, and it further represents
93.76 per cent, of all employees aged 21 years or under for the
period.
1274. That is to say, that most of the men under 21 are
Britishers? —Yes; 93.76 per cent, of them.
1275. Which is the minimum position of the British at any
particular age on percentages? —22 to 25 years old, which is
almost identical with the period 26 to 35 years.
1276. That is to say, the minimum position of Britishers
employed, and the maximum percentages of other nationalities
are among men between 22 and 35 years of age?—That is so.
1277. Does this indicate also that practically all the men of
mature age are Britishers?—The big majority are.
1278. In that connection, I would like to revert for a moment
to Table N. Will you give me' the number employed of 10
years’ service or over, in total number, not percentages?—Alto-
gether 290 Britishers out of a total of 1,320 have a length of
service of over 10 years.
1279. How many of those have length of service of over 20
years?—ll6 Britishers have a length of service of over 20
years.
1280. What is the period of operation of this plant? —
Since 1889.
1281. Will you explain Table P?—Table P sets out the labor
turnover figures and the employment figures, comparing one
witli another for specific periods. That is to say, taking the
half-year ended 23/12/19 the labor turnover was 2,412 men,
the daily average strength was 1,079 men, and the daily average
strength on the labor turnover w r as 44.73 per cent. You will
notice, however, that there is a note affecting the figures 1,079
and several of the other figures in the table. The note states
that during these periods the rotation scheme was in operation.
During the shut-down period from July, 1919, to August, 1921,
owing to the Broken Hill strike, and the fire in the Dwight and
Lloyd plant, a labor roster was drawn up, and the available
work distributed among the men in order to minimise distress,
so that those figures are really abnormal where the letter A
appears. For the rest of the table, they are, of course, normal
figures.
1282. Do you know whether your average percentage of
around CO per cent, on the turnover applies more or less to
industries of a similar character? —I have no idea.
1283. The population of Port Pirie, which is a big shipping
port, is to a certain extent a floating population? —To a certain
extent it is.
1284. That affects the question of turnover in industries
working at such a port?—Yes; always. Furthermore, our labor
turnover is affected by the fact that during harvesting and
shearing operations certain employees leave Port Pirie to take
part in those activities.
1285. I understand you desire to ask leave to make an
addition to Table L?—Yes. We thought it would be for the
convenience of the Commission if we added to the summary
of Table L a special line setting out the average daily strength
as shown on Table P. (Amended Table L handed in.)
The Chairman —That alteration may be made.
1286. By Mr. Gepp —In regard to the incidence of the disease,
the Commission has been instructed to inquire, first of all, into
the cause or causes, and, secondly, into the reason for the
recent increase. You told us the other day that, whilst dis-
claiming any special knowledge on the medical side, you
doubted some of the reported cases. We have been told within
the last day or two that a considerable number of the cases
are of the mild or sub-acute type, which probably have a short
period of disability, after which the men can return to work.
Can you, from your general knowledge and special interest in
this matter, say as a layman that there has been an increase in
the methods of diagnosis, and the points of the diagnosis, which
might tend to explain to a certain extent the increase? I
understand that is so, but I have only hearsay to guide me.
1287. By Air. Robinette —Where did you get that understand-
ing?—For instance, I understand it has not teen a general
practice until lately to have blood examinations made of all
applicants for certificates.
1288. By Mr. Gepp —When was the Government laboratory
instituted here? —It started whilst I was away on my trip. Dr.
Mathew came here some time during the last 12 months.
1289. By Mr. Pearson —Can you prepare against the return
•if the Commission to Port Pirie a table showing the number of
vases of lead poisoning from January 1 to May 31, and the
departments in which the disease was contracted, to complete
Table M, but to be shown separate from that table? —Yes; I
ahall do that.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Thv/rsday, May 7th, 1925, at 10 a.m.
[At Congregational Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Robinette.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent,
Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary Limited,
Port Pirie, was recalled and further examined:
1290. By Mr. Robinette —Have you the figures asked for by
the Commission yesterday?—l have a statement showing the
number and the nationalities of men not re-employed after
having been certified free from lead poisoning. The total is
29, of whom 13 were Greeks, 5 Maltese, 4 Italians, 1 German,
1 Russian, and 5 British.
1291. Why were they refused employment? —Some were
booked off before they got their lead certificates; others got
their lead certificates while still actually in the employ of the
company. Most of them had contracted lead poisoning after
short periods of service with the company. Further, the whole
of their records with the company, together with the facts that
I have enumerated, were taken into consideration, and the men
were not re-employed.
1292. You have not the names? —No; only the numbers. I
was not asked for the names.
1293. I specifically asked for the names. Are you prepared
to give them? —Yes, if the Commission requests it.
1294. You have no objection?—l think it inadvisable to do
it.
1295. Why? —If a list of the names were submitted it might
be necessary for me to elaborate on the records of some of the
men, and that might militate against their getting employment
elsewhere. Some have very bad records.
1296. What do you mean by “bad records”? Bad lead
poisoning? —No. Drunkenness, bringing drink on to the works,
etc.


Mr. Robinette (to the Chairman) ; I wish to lodge a protest
against the names not being given. I consider that the evi-
dence is no good without being substantiated. Obviously they
wish to suppress the names.
1297. By Mr. Robinette —How do you know these figures
are correct? Some of the cases occurred while you w r ere
abroad? —I have been informed by Mr. Woodward, who was
acting in my place while I was away, that that is the list
referred to.
1298. You do not know whether it is correct? —Of my own
personal knowledge, no.
1299. By Mr. Gepp —Are your records always kept officially?
—-Y es.
1300. In producing such a list does not the general superin-
tendent in every case have to rely upon his officers?—On the
official records, yes.
1301. Were you not asked yesterday to nominate the officer
of the company who could produce this list, and answer any
questions in connection with it? —Yes.
1302. You nominated yourself because you were the officer
of the company who has the responsibility of deciding in these
cases? —When I am here, yes; otherwise Mr. Woodward has it.
1 also stated that either myself or Mr. Woodw r ard would give
the information desired.
Mr. Gepp (to the Chairman) —It seems to me that this Com-
mission has no authority in connection with the enquiry into
specific cases, or in connection with the action of the company
in regard to any particular case; that the production of
names in this instance would not, for that reason, be justified;
that if any cases have been dealt with wrongly by the com-
p-cinj that would be a matter for inquiry by quite a different
body, with definite instructions, and not by this Commission;
and that if there are specific cases which would illustrate the
necessity for, or the fairness or otherwise, of compensation to
men who have been refused employment, the Commission would
doubtless consider the question if witnesses were produced.
Mr. Robinette (to the Chairman) —I contend that this Com-
mission has the fullest powers to inquire into any individual
case of lead poisoning. In my opinion there is a desire to sup-
press evidence on individual cases. It was obvious at the
outset when the Commission met that there was a desire for
suppression, and it was only because of my strong represen-
tations that the public and the press were allowed to be pre-
sent to hear evidence.
Mr. Gepp —The case for the company has been very fully
presented without any pressure from the Commission.
The Chairman —My conception of the terms of appointment
of the Commission is that they do not allude to any individual
cases.
Mr. Robinette —l respectfully differ. Dead poisoning occurs
in individual cases, and we have full power to inquire into any
case.
The witness withdrew.
CHARLETON YEATMAN, medical practitioner, 119,
Florence Street, Port Pirie, was sworn and examined:
1303. By the Chairman— What are your qualifications?—
M. 8., B.S. (Adelaide).
1304. What are your appointments in Port Pirie?—l am
health officer, honorary medical officer of the hospital, and
certifying surgeon under the Workmen’s Compensation Act.
1305. How long have you been in practice here? —-Since the
end of 1919.
1306. As health officer, I presume you have a good idea
from visits to cases of the conditions of housing in Port Pirie?
—Yes.
1307. What is the general condition of housing among
foreign laborers?—l cannot answer merely by saying it is
good or bad, as there is a wide variation according to the
rises to which the houses are put. Many foreigners with
families live very comfortably, and the state of their dwell-
ings will compare very favorably with those of any other
people in the town.
1308. From the standpoint of cleanliness, as well as other
conditions? —I include that in the term. Single men and men
who are batching together are not at all particular in their
mode of living and in their general cleanliness and hygiene.
Un the whole, I should say that a strict eye is kept upon
houses that are known to be occupied by people suspected of
lapses of hygiene, and there is no general nuisance created
by them.
1309. Do you observe much evidence of alcoholism amongst
foreigners?—No; they appear tO' be a very sober community.
1310. During your practice in Port Pirie, I presume that
you have paid considerable attention to the question of lead
poisoning ? —Necessarily.
1311. Have you observed an increase in the number of cases
coming under your notice in recent years?—They certainly
have increased in the last year. I am speaking without
figures, but the increase has been noticeable.
1312. Could you assign any cause for this increase? —I
should not like to offer any speculation not based upon suffi-
cient knowledge.
1313. Do you think it possible that modern aids to diagnosis
have resulted in the detection of a larger number of cases
than formerly that might previously have been classed as
chronic cases of bronchitis and gastritis?—l think it very
likely. I myself have never varied my methods since I have
been here, which has been a short time comparatively.
1314. Could you give an idea of the number of cases of
plumbism from the smelters which you have seen from year
to year?—l cannot give from year to year, as I have not the
figures, but I have figures from June 1924 to the present
time, the cases totalling 137.
1315. Could you give the Commission an approximate idea
of the proportion of mild and severe cases in that 137? —I am
unable to do that.
1316. Relating to the cases under review, were the bulk of
them acute, sub-acute, or chronic? —Sub-acute.
1317. By sub-acute, to what particular set of conditions do
you refer, or the particular type of case? —I should describe
such sub-acute cases as exhibit pallor, blue lead line in the
gums, evidence of loss of weight, complaining of lack of
appetite, foul taste in the mouth, constipation and abdominal
sense of unrest, with occasional exacerbations of colicky pain,
loss of muscular tone, sleeplessness, and pains in the joints
and limbs.
1318. What have been the proportions in your list of
Britishers and foreigners?—l have divided them into south-
ern Europeans and northern Europeans. Of the former there
has been 64, and of the northern Europeans, which means
Britishers, Scandinavians, and Germans, 73.
1319. In your opinion, does length of service at the smelters
bear a direct relation to the incidence of infection? —Yes.
1320. Have you any observations as to the relation of physi-
cal condition by nourishment and history of alcoholism to the
incidence of plumbism?—lt is recognised, and my experience
confirms it, that any bodily weakness or deterioration of
health, due to any cause whatsoever, predisposes to the effect
of lead absorption being produced. As far as alcoholism is
concerned, I think there is a relationship, but it is not neces-
sary to assume by any means that because a man has lead
poisoning he is alcoholic.
1321. Do you consider that there is a racial variation con-
cerning the question of the incidence of plumbism generally;
do you think that some races are more susceptible than
others? —I should not like to advance that proposition.
1322. Have you observed any cases of plumbism among the
section of the population who have not been employed in the
smelters or have net been so employed in the past? —Only one,
which came from outside Port Pirie. It w T as the result of
drinking beer which we found to contain a definite quantity of
lead, due to the lead pipes it was drawn through.
1323. By Mr. Robinette —That was not a Port Pirie case?
No.
1324. It came from the country?—Yes.


1325. By the Chairman —l take it, then, that it is your
opinion that no eases of plumbism are caused in Port Pirie
among the population other than employees in the smelters?—
I have not seen the slightest evidence of it.
1326. Not as the result of fumes or other effects from the
smelters ?—No.
1327. What are the prevailing symptoms complained of by
persons affected ydth lead poisoning in your experience?—lt
depends on the type of case.
1328. You notice varying types of the disease ?—Yes.
1329. Can you describe briefly these main types?—l should
prefer to classify them in this way:—Cases of lead absorp-
tion, cases of lead impregnation, and cases of lead intoxica-
tion. A case of lead absorption will merely complain of a
vague feeling of not being as well as he should be; he may
have colic and constipation, slight attack, and a certain
amount of loss of appetite, but he is not disabled from doing
his work. The case of lead impregnation will be such a man
as I have described as a sub-acute case. Amongst the cases
of lead intoxication I would class all those who have gone
through the period of lead impregnation and are suffering from
a chronic form of the disease, wdth the secondary effects of
the lead on the organs and tissues of the body. Such cases
would exhibit either gout and swelling of the joints, or the
main effect might fall upon the heart, kidneys, and blood
vessels. Other cases still have shown degenerative changes
in the brain. In any individual case there is necessarily
overlapping. One man may have gout and renal disease as
well, for example, and later show brain changes.
1330. In your experience, does one particular type or another
prevail in Port Pirie?—l have seen more of the sub-acute
type, to be classified as lead impregnation, than any other.
1331. Do you associate particular types of the disease with
any given set of conditions relating to nationality or length
of service at the smelters, or any similar condition?—l should
say lead absorption is usually to be regarded as likely in a
man who has been at the smelters a particularly short time; a
man suffering from lead impregnation has been there longer—
months to several years—and in the case of lead intoxication,
it is almost certain that he is a long service man in the
smelters. f
1332. On the subject of diagnosis, will you give the Com-
mission an idea of the criteria of diagnosis in your opinion?
—The diagnosis is based on all the available information one
can get from the man, and one’s own observation of him, and
examination. The industrial history of the man, the history
of his present illness, and the method of onset, and the
symptoms, a full detailed clinical examination, and the results
of special examinations of blood, are all co-related to enable
one to make a definite diagnosis.
1333. Do you attach considerable importance to the ques-
tion of blood examination? —It is a valuable part of the
general examination.
1334. Regarding the Workmen’s Compensation Act, you are
a certified medical officer. In your opinion, does it operate
to the best advantage of cases of lead poisoning at present?—
As a certified medical officer I am merely called upon to
examine a man who desires it. I issue to him one of two
certificates, .either that he is suffering from plumbism and dis-
abled from doing his work, or that I am not satisfied that he
is so affected as to disable him. I produce copies of the
certificates I issue, and they show where my duties finish. I
do not say how ill a man is or how long he is likely to be
ill. I simply state the fact that I am, or I am not, satisfied
that he is suffering from lead poisoning.
1335. By Mr. Robinette —Do you notify the company how
long a man is likely to be off? That has been done.
1336. That is in regard to your private patient? If the
company asks you for information you supply it?—Under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, if a man has accepted certifi-
cates under that Act the employer is entitled to the results
of the examination and certain information. That informa-
tion, also, is definitely available to the man just as much as
to the company, and he receives anything he wishes in the
way of information from me.
1337. You know the Act pretty well? —I am not a lawyer.
1338. You have read it? —Yes.
1339. You know the company is given the right if it dis-
putes a medical certificate to send the workman to another
doctor? —I am aware that can be done by the company.
1340. Do you not think that the proper procedure for a
doctor to adopt? —I do not think I have done anthing im-
proper.
1341. Do you not think it is proper for the company to get
information from another doctor, and not from the patient’s
private medical man? —I am not going to decide what the
company shall do, because I have not sufficient knowledge of
the legal position so far as they are concerned. From my own
personal standpoint I am unable to agree that the procedure
has not been fair to my own private patient.
1342. Do you not think it is a breach of professional
etiquette to give information concerning a patient to a third
party?—l certainly do not. I do not recognise the conditions,
to be on all fours with the usual practice in that respect, and
T do not consider I have done anything I should not have
done.
1343. Do you not think it is a breach of professional
etiquette for any doctor to give information to a third party
concerning his private patient? —That is asking my opinion
un a general proposition. I am not going to discuss that. I
can only discuss a particular point.
1344. By the Chairman —As certifying medical officer are
you called upon to estimate the incapacity of a patient?—No.
1345. By Mr. Robinette —You are not called upon to do it,
but you do give that information to the company?—Of course
I do, but not as certifying medical officer.
1346. By the Chairman —Do you hold any views concerning
the appointment of a company medical officer for the care of
the workmen at the smelters? —I say that some such scheme
is very desirable.-
1347. By Mr. Robinette —Would it be possible for a man
to be leaded and not show any lead in a blood test? —Lead
itself is not shown in the blood test, unless the lead is esti-
mated by special methods. You do not see lead in the blood,
but in most cases of lead poisoning I should say there are
changes in the blood cells, which, being confirmed by other
signs and symptoms, would lead you to believe that the man
was suffering from lead poisoning.
1348. The positive result in a blood test is only confirma-
tory?—lt would be confirmatory of other findings, but it would
not be specific evidence of plumbism as compared with some
other diseases. There are certain diseases other than plumbism
which give very similar blood changes.
1349. By Mr. Gepp —Have you any knowdedge that the
foreigners eat large quantities of tinned foods? —I am unable
to state that.
1350. In your opinion, would it be possible to contract lead
poisoning through eating a large quantity of tinned food? —
I have never met with any evidence to that effect.
1351. You know of Sir Thomas Oliver’s work on industrial
diseases? —I have read some of it, but I have not any particu-
lar knowledge of it.
1352. Sir Thomas Oliver, in an article in his new book
called “Industrial Health,” -which w-as edited by Kober and
Hayhurst and issued in 1924, states: —
Another accidental source of lead poisoning is food —especi-
ally tinned food. An acid fruit such as pineapple is particu-
larly prone to attack the lead present in the solder of the tin.
One of my worst cases of lead poisoning was that of a lady
librarian. ' She suffered severely from colic and double wrist
drop in consequence of having eaten almost daily for months
tinned salmon.
From such an authority as that you would be fully prepared
to accept a statement of that sort? —Yes, especially as it is
agreed among authorities that any acid foods, salads, and
lighter acid wines are more disposed to lead —to absorption
and lead impregnation.
1353. It is also stated in the same book that lead is soluble


in olive oil. From such an authority you would accept that
statement as the result of test? —I did not know of that par-
ticular statement, but I certainly would accept it from Sir
Thomas Oliver’s book.
1354. If proved by further evidence that a very large quan-
tity of tinned foodstuffs is consumed by some sections -at the
works among the southern Europeans, it might indicate pos-
sibly a supplementary explanation of lead poisoning based
upon this evidence? —I do not think so. I should say that
was unimportant. One swallow does not make a summer, and
one case quoted in Sir Thomas Oliver’s book would not lead
me to imagine such a thing as that.
1355. What would you suggest would be the best way to
investigate a matter of this sort —by an analysis by the Com-
mission of the tinned material? —I think the Commission’s
energies should be directed towards the smelters and the lead
processes inside the Avorks, not towards tinned foods outside.
1356. We are seeking for all causes of plumbism, and might
not the consumption of large quantities of tinned foods be
supplementary, provided it were proved there were recognis-
able quantities of lead in some of the products being con-
sumed? —I think it would be a waste of time to investigate
that phase. I do not think you would get anything of impor-
tance out of it.
1357. Has your number of cases increased during the last
few months, owing to the absence of one of your colleagues?
• —Slightly so, perhaps. I could not estimate the number.
1358. From your inspections of the mouths of your patients
would you say that in many cases they would be benefited by
regular and efficient dental attention? —Many of them have
dirty mouths. It certainly would improve their general health
if they had them looked after properly.
1359. In your experience, has pyorrhea been a prominent
symptom in cases diagnosed by you as lead poisoning?—ln
very many cases.
1360. You would consider pyorrhea a definite predisposing
factor in lead poisoning?—No. I think a man with a septic
mouth would so have his health impaired that he w'ould be
very likely to become leaded. He is a more likely subject to
suffer from the effects of lead, but I do not think the fact
that he had pyorrhea beforehand would operate, except so far
as its effect on his general health was concerned.
1361. Does pyorrhea or oral sepsis give the same general
condition of the blood as lead poisoning? —There may be
secondary anaemia, but, in my own experience, the blood
pictures have been distinct ones.
1362. In your opinion, what is the significance of the Bur-
tonian line in reference to the workers in lead factories? —
When the blue lead line, as distinguished from the false blue
line, is present, it certainly shows that absorption of lead is
taking place, and that the person is exposed to a lead hazard.
After some experience, I believe I can distingush the false
blue line from the blue lead line.
1363. From your general knowledge, would you say that
new arrivals among foreigners are, as a rule, anaemic looking?
—No. I have examined a number of them as to their fitness
to enter the smelters. I should say they compare favorably
with men of other nationalities. A number of them appear
to be picked men who have been examined previously.
1364. What is their general physique?—On the Avhole, good.
1365. Do you notice much difference between northern-south-
ern and southern-southern Europeans? —The Greek migrant is
an immigrant. The northern European avlio comes here is
often an ex-stoker from a, ship. He very frequently shoAvs an
anaemic appearance because of the nature of his occupation,
it is difficult to make a comparison, because Ave do’not get
the same class of person from each country.
1366. From your general knowledge as a result of your
practice in Port Pirie, Avould you think it aauso to insist upon
» very rigorous physical standard amongst prospective em-
ployees at the smelters? —Yes. I think the men should be
perfectly healthy before they are permitted to engage in that
industry.
1367. Would the appointment of a works doctor, employed
full time on the job, be a good thing?—l think so. I think
resarch is necessary, but I doubt whether one whole-time
medical officer could do the work efficiently and thoroughly.
1368. If you were in the position of works doctor, would
you appreciate the assistance that an efficient dental service
could render? —That would be one of the means of improving
general health that I would welcome.
1369. Is it not true that recently more and more importance
has been attached by all members of your profession to the
condition of the mouth? —It is recognised as one of the sources
of ill-health.
1370. We have had reported to us an extraordinary number
of cases of lead poisoning amongst the Maltese. Can you help
the Commission in that connection? —I have no knowledge
why they should suffer specially.
1371. From your knowledge of diet, can you tell us anything
about the relative nutritive values in tinned food as compared
■with fresh food? Suppose you had the opportunity to live on
either, which would you prefer?—Naturally, the fresh. Tinned
food has had certain vital properties which exist in fresh food
destroyed by the heat necessary for cooking and sterilisation.
1372. By “vital properties” you mean such things as vita-
mines? —Yes.
1373. And these are present to a much less degree in tinned
and canned foods?-—They may be entirely absent.
1374. In that way it would render the value of the food less
than that of fresh food? —It would depend entirely upon
whether the deficiency was or was not made up by other fresh
foods taken at the same time.
1375. By the Chairman —Have you read any recent works
on the subject of carbon monoxide poisoning in what we may
term a chronic form? —Yes. I noticed recently that a great
deal of the lassitude and muscular weakness and inability to
work hard was said to be due to minute doses of carbon
monoxide inhaled by men whilst working.
1376. Are the symptoms you mention all part and parcel of
the symptom complex of lead poisoning?—Yes.
1377. Have you ever observed in the symptoms of your
patients indications which would lead you to suppose that there
was an excess of carbon monoxide in any parts of the smelters?
—I have never been able to incriminate it. I certainly have
thought of it.
1378. Might that be a contributing cause to disability? —I
cannot offer a definite opinion.
The witness withdrew.
JOSHUA RETCHFORD, stores manager, Broken Hill
Associated Smelters Co-operative Council, Port Pirie,
was sworn and examined:
1379. By the Chairman —You are the officer in charge of
the co-operative stores at the smelters? —Yes. /
1380. The Commission want to obtain an idea of the quantity
of tinned stuff which the foreign laborers at the smelters pur-
chase. Do they customarily purchase large quantities from
you?—Yes.
1381. What is the nature of the tinned foods they purchase?
—Mostly sardines, what are called kipper snacks, salmon, and
red herrings.
1382. Do they buy tinned fruit also in quantities?—Yes; they
are big buyers of that.
1383. Are they appreciably larger buyers of tinned goods
than the British laborers? —Yes; decidedly so.
1384. Are you willing to produce samples of the products
consumed by the foreigners?—l have brought some with me.
1385. Can you give an idea of the quantities of Monk Brand
Sild, from Norway, that are bought?—That is usually bought
for cribs, and is known to us as the crib sardine. From figures
for the last two or three purchases, approximately, six cases
of these are sold per week. Each case contains 100 tins. That
makes 600 tins a week.
1386. Have you any idea from the purchases of the average
meal of a man off this product?—l cannot say. It is mostly


purchased in dozen or half-dozen tins. I should say one of the
larger tins of snacks would be eaten per meal.
138 Can you find out for us the comparative npmbers of
each that are sold? —Yes.
1388. By Mr. Gepp Do the foreigners generally buy the
better or the cheaper lines? —Mostly the cheaper lines.
1389. Do they purchase very much vinegar ?—Yes; they are
large users of vinegar.
1390. How do they buy it?—By the half-gallon. We have it
in kegs, and tap it for them.
1391. You know that a large number of foreigners have been
here for some time, and have settled in their own homes, and
there are also a large number who batch together or live in
quarters. Do you notice any difference between the types of
purchase of the married, settled man, and of the unmarried
man?—There is a decided difference. The married man switches
off tinned foods on to cheese and bacon.
1392. Do you mean that, as he becomes more acclimatised
and used to the country, he tends to eat more of the food of
the country, and less of the food of the country he came from?
—That is so. That could be instanced in this way: The
quantity of loose beans sold to single men is much greater than
the quantity sold to married men. I refer to dried broad beans
-and dried lima beans. They are big users of them.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission Adjourned.
Monday, May 11th, 1925, at 2.30 p.m.
[At Parliament House, Adelaide.]
Present-
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
BEDLINGTON HOWEL MORRIS, Inspector-General of
Hospitals, Adelaide, and Medical Referee under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, sworn and examined:
1393. By the CJiairman —What was the date of your appoint-
ment as Medical Referee under the Workmen’s Compensation
Act? —About 1915.
1394. What is the mechanism of that position? —Briefly, in
cases where an employer or employee is aggrieved by the action
of a certifying medical practitioner in withholding or in giving
a certificate, the matter is referred to me fbr final decision.
1395. In the course of your tenure of that position you have
examined certain cases of plumbism?—Yes.
1396. Can you give us an approximate idea of the number
of such cases from Port Pirie? —The total during the last two
years was 10. I cannot go further back than that.
1397. Can you classify that series of cases as to types?—
There were three appeals by the Broken Hill Associated Smelters
and seven by workmen. Five appeals were dismissed, three
upheld, and in regard to two decisions have not yet been made;
they are sub judice. That six eases certified as lead
poisoning, two not certified, and two cases still under obser-
vation by me.
1398. Those cases would be border-line cases in which the
diagnosis was doubtful to ordinary methods? —Those in which
the decision has been in the affirmative were to my mind unmis-
takable cases of plumbism.
1399. But the prima facie evidence of such cases would not
point very conclusively to a diagnosis of plumbism? —Possibly
not.
1400. Did the symptoms of these cases generally point to
any particular type of case in the main or to varied types? —In
the main, to similar types.
1401. What were the outstanding symptoms? —Anaemia,
general health depression, in one or two cases early nephritis, a
history of colic, and in one or two eases a history of neuritis.
1402. In all these cases have you had blood examinations
made? —Yes.
1403. Was there basophilic degeneration in all cases? —In
practically all cases.
1404. Did you receive from the pathologist a report dealing
with the amount of haemoglobin and the red blood count in
each ease?—Yes.
1405. Can you give us an idea how they range?—About 70
per cent, haemoglobin. The red blood count varied, but in the
last case there is very much increase in the white blood count.
I do not place my diagnoses on blood tests, although they are of
assistance.
1406. By Mr. Gepp—We have first to inquire into the cause
of plumbism at Port Pirie. Can you, from your general know-
ledge of the conditions at Port Pirie make any comments
thereon? We know from our reading, dealing with investiga-
tions made all over the world for a long time, that there are
specific causes such as dust, fume, low resistance, which apply
to all cases, and probably there are a certain number of causes
which are specific to a particular place and industry. We have
come across definitely two or three points. First, a large
number of the cases reported are mild or sub-acute; secondly,
the increase in the reported cases has been very great for the
past year or so, and coincides with the increase in the number
of foreigners employed. Can you give us any help or statistics
«m that matter ? —I can give you my opinion. Lead poisoning
is due to lead absorption into the system. This does not cause
blood poisoning in a large percentage of cases. When the
absorption is greater than the elimination by the excretory
organs there is a balance in favor of lead poisoning, which is
a cumulative poisoning in the system. That leads to the point
that if the person wlio absorbs the lead is perfectly healthy
in regard to his excretory organs he is less liable to suffer from
lead poisoning. Lead is absorbed by three main channels,
namely, the respiratory and alimentary channels, and by the
skin. More particularly, however, lead is generally found in
the naso-pharynx. If you have a perfectly sound healthy man
both in regard to his organs and physique, and whose physical
strength is not below par, he has a better chance, other things
being equal, of resisting the onset of plumbism than a man
in the opposite condition. With regard to foreigners, those
I have examined, with one exception, have been men that I
should class as being somewhat below par.
1407. You mean originally?—Probably, originally.
1408. By Mr. Pearson —I take it that in referring to
foreigners yon mean southern Europeans, as that is the way
that the term has been applied in connection with the Commis-
sion’s inquiry?—The men I have examined would, in the main,
come within that category, although they include others. One
of the exceptions was a Russian. He was a particularly healthy,
robust man, but he suffered from lead. You get a greater
incidence of plumbism among the Greek element. A point that
has come to my notice is that, although the management of the
smelters post up notices in seven languages, some of the men
say they have not seen them. It may be, perhaps, that having
seen them they were not able to grasp what they meant, and
in consequence have not carried out the instructions. That
may be another reason for the lead poisoning. Whereas the
Britisher is told straight out to do certain things which a notice
informs him he must do; and goes and does them, it is possible
that foreigners might not understand the notice or see it, and,
therefore do not obey the instructions.
1409. By Mr. Gepp —Possibly the foreigner cannot read? —•
That may be so. Further, speaking generally, in regard to
the laws of personal hygiene, the class of men I have seen pro-
bably would not be so particular as a Britisher.
1410. All these points would have an effect would they not?
—I should say they would have the greatest effect. Further,
I understand, although I have not seen them personally, that
the conditions under which some of these men are living are
not in the best interests of their health. lam only speaking
from hearsay, but I have seen one or two places which did not
tend toward the best health of the people occupying them.
1411. In any industry in which a health hazard exists, from


your previous remarks it would appear that it would be wise
to institute a very careful and systematic initial examination
for all men entering the industry?—l should say so, not only
in the interests of the men, but also the industry.
1412. Would you also support a periodic medical examina-
tion? —I think the men should submit themselves periocLcally.
It is of the greatest importance in cases of lead to ascertain
early whether they are absorbing it. It is of the greatest
importance for the treatment of an employee afterwards, before
his health is really undermined, that he should be seen and
treated before the disease progresses very far. Of the cases I
have seen some of them have become chronic, and it will take a
long time to eliminate their symptoms.
1413. What you suggest is that by a more systematic periodic
examination those cases that have become chronic could have
been prevented? —Possibly. Take, for example, the case of
defective teeth, which plays a very important part. Those
things could be seen and remedied early.
1414. As part of the medical service which you agree is
desirable with a big industry such as this is, you would include
definitely a dental clinic? —I would.
1415. If you were in the position of the leading medical man
in the service of the company you would arrange that the dentist
and doctor would co-operate in all their work both in pre-
vention and in cure? —Prevention, particularly.
1416. Does such a disease as pyorrhea and other manifesta-
of oral sepsis give somewhat similar signs and symptoms ?
—I should not say pyorrhea per se.
1417. Would it not give an anaemia of a similar type from
the point of view of pallor and blood picture?—-It would lower
the general vitality of the patient, ’but I do not consider there
would be much difficulty in distinguishing between the anaemia
of plumbism and ordinary anaemia.
1418. Would you say that pyorrhea would predispose to
plumbism ? —Undoubtedly.
1419. If a man’s mouth were in a bad condition he would
be much more liable to plumbism?—Yes. His vitality would be
lowered and, therefore, he would be less resistant.
1420. The evidence given at Port Pirie by the medical men
indicated that a very large percentage of the men they had
examined had a very bad condition of the mouth. Do your
examinations confirm that? —I should not say that the 10 I
examined were very bad, but their mouths were certainly not
as good as they might have been. I am speaking relatively,
because a bad condition of the mouth is almost universal, until
attended to. I do not know that the condition of the mouths
of those 10 men was worse than that of the average man
following the same class of work.
1421. By Mr.- Pearson —Their mouths were out of condition
due to them not having been attended to?—They appeared to
be so.
1422. By Mr. Gepp —From your general knowledge of health
conditions in South Australia, could you give us any approixima-
tion as to the percentage of people who should receive dental
attention. Would you say it was 80 per cent.? —Quite. As
a matter of fact, I should say that a 100 per cent, of the people
should visit a dentist periodically.
1423. Eighty per cent, do not? —I cannot answer that
question.
1424. There is a general neglect of dental hygiene in Aus-
tralia ? —Yes.
1425. We should like to receive any suggestions from you
in connection with the methods of reporting and refereeing
cases of plumbism, in order to assist this Commission to get to
the point mentioned in our reference, namely, the alle-
viation or prevention of this disease. For instance, are
you satisfied that the present method of certification by one
medical man and a reference to you as medical referee in th®
city is as satisfactory as it might be from the point of view of
the results. Supposing you were instructed to make a recom-
mendation as to the best method. Would you take it on the
lines of Broken Hill with a body of three men specially charged
with this work? —I think I have answered that to some extent
in answer to another question, and that is that periodical
examination of the men by competent examiners in regard to
their health conditions would overcome that difficulty to a very
great extent.
1426. By Mr. Gepp —That is dealing with inside the works?
—Yes.
1427. Now we come to the certification which would justify
a man, if he received a certificate, making a claim under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act either for weekly allowance or
finally, at the end of six months, for full payment under the
Act? —In doubtful cases you would always have some difficulty
*n getting a final decision.
1428. At Broken Hill they have a board of three —a medical
t>oard of reference and decision —one of which represents the
men, another the company, and another the Government nominee
in charge?—l do not think that would be good. I think the
referee should be absolutely independent. He should be abso-
lutely untrammelled or unbiased. His view will never please
both parties. That system might work, but it does not appear
to me to be a good judicial system.
1429. However good a single expert may be, three experts
must be better, provided they are equally able. For the pur-
pose of the Broken Hill Lead Poisoning Act there are three
medical men appointed. These three men function together as
one certifying body —certifying surgeon *and medical referee
together?—That sounds quite practicable. Whether it is better
than the existing system lam not prepared to say. It appears
to be a sort of consultation between three men. It does away
with all the judicial effect of it.
1430. I suppose at Broken Hill the chairman would be the
referee? —I am not prepared to say which is the better system.
I have had no experience of the other.
1431. In receiving evidence from Dr. Tassie at Port Pirie
the following were the question and reply:—
You informed us that one of your appointments was that of
medical referee in connection with the Workmen’s Compensa-
tion Act. In your opinion does the present scheme of
certification under the Act operate to the best advantage of
cases of plumbism? —Speaking as a general practitioner I do
not consider that certification in its present form operates in
the best interests of any one concerned. Especially do I refer
to the certification of incapacity required for the purpose of
redemption of weekly payments. I think that too great a
responsibility is placed on the practitioner in this matter. He
has to rely solely upon his own opinion and experience, and
in the absence of any fixed standard upon which to work the
estimates of the same cases of different practitioners must vary
considerably.
Under the present circumstances the general practice at Port
Pirie is to give a decision as to whether it is a case of plumbism?
—The certifying medical practitioner is the man they have the
trouble about generally. He either refuses to give a certificate,
and does not satisfy one party, or gives it, and does not
satisfy the other party. I understand there would be no certi-
fying medical practitioner. What brings it under the notice
of the board?
1432. A reference from the man’s own medical attendant.
Supposing a man goes to the doctor at Port Pirie. The doctor
examines him, and sends him to the board. It seems to me
that both the company and the man would have much more
reason for definite satisfaction if that board of three definitely
decided, unanimously or by majority, that it is or is not a case
of plumbism? —It might work that way. lam certain that the
three members would never be unanimous. One member’s
criteria of diagnosis would differ from the others.
1433. Supposing that, as the result of the work of this Com-
mission, we can get a number of leading authorities on plumbism
in this country, by discussion, to come to a definite statement
to be embodied in the report of the Commission, giving the
criteria in regard to plumbism, would that not be a big step
in advance? —They would be taking upon themselves what no
experts or authorities in the world are prepared to do.
1434. Does that mean that the diagnosis of plumbism is, in.


•essence, the opinion of individual men, taking into consideration
all the signs and symptoms, and that they have no definite
basis to go on?—Not in all cases. There are quite definite
symptoms in unmistakable cases.
1435. Me are trying to evolve some system whereby the
dissatisfaction which exists at present on both sides can be
eliminated? There will always be dissatisfaction. You will
never, by any process of examination, satisfy both sides. I
think the Commission should direct their attention more par-
ticularly to the methods of preventing lead poisoning in Port
Pirie. While the company has done something towards the
elimination of lead poisoning, there is nothing in force which
compels the employee to carry out any measures, such as the
wearing of caps, washing the hands before eating, and so on,
for the prevention of lead poisoning. In a white lead works
with which I was connected in the old country, there were some
strict regulations—the employees had to wear caps and wash
their hands, &c. At Port Pirie there is no legal power to
compel that. If I may say so, attention must be directed
to the prevention of lead poisoning at the works.
1436. But you must have a criterion; you must get down to
some method which will give as much satisfaction as possible
in the way of diagnosis?—Well, if they will be satisfied with
what you suggest I have no objection, but are you anticipating
sui increase in the dissatisfaction? Ten cases in the last two
years dees not seem to indicate a high percentage of dissatis-
faction.
1437. You cannot take that as an indication of the dissatis-
faction because of the expense and the trouble involved in
sending men down, and of the doubt as to the result. From my
point of view perhaps a secondary, but very important part, of
this Commission’s work is to recommend methods to relieve
dissatisfaction in regard to the results of examination? —
Undoubtedly.
1438. We have gathered some very interesting information
regarding the extent to which the foreigners at the works live
on tinned foods —tinned fish and so forth. Have you had any
experience of the possibility of lead poisoning from eating
tinned foods? —That is given as one of the causes —carelessly
put up food and the acid in the solder coming in contact with
the tin —but it is very remote. In the interior of Australia,
Kalgoorlie, for instance, canned food was very much used, and
I do not know that lead poisoning was very prevalent there.
1439. Would it be recognised? —I think so.
1440. Supposing an ordinary general practitioner in a country
district had a ease of lead poisoning, might he not diagnose it
as gastritis? —No; it is an easy thing to diagnose an ordinary
case of lead poisoning. It is an easy thing to prevent, and
an easy thing to cure, providing it is net too far advanced.
1441. Would you say that it would be better for a man to
live on fresh than canned foods if working at the smelters? —
Undoubtedly, and at any time it is better, because fresh food
is more nutritious.
1442. By the Chairman —Suppose minute quantities of lead
are absorbed in eating tinned food, would you admit in the
case of men already absorbing lead in the course of their work
they might be sufficient to determine lead poisoning?—Oh, yes;
but if you are going into those points you will have to go into
r.lie question of the water supply of Port Pirie smelters. In
Great Britain cases of lead poisoning were proved to have come
from reservoid water. Water that comes through peat leleases
an acid which affects lead pipes, and in Birmingham all lead
pipes have to be glazed. What the water supply of Port Pirie
is like I cannot say.
1443. We have been told that there is no indication of lead
poisoning in the general population at Port Pirie ? Then that
answers the point, and probably it is also an answer to the point
raised in regard to the use of canned food.
1444. What would you say in regard to the abuse of alcohol?
—lt increases the liability to plumbism.
1445. And it affects other diseases, such as gout and syphilis,
which are also a contributory cause of plumbism?—l should put
it the other way round —lead is a cause of gout.
1446. By Mr. Pearson —Did I understand you to say that the
examination of a person’s blood was relied on to some extent
in diagnosing lead poisoning?—As confirmatory only. You
would not rely on a blood test alone for a diagnosis of plumbism.
1447. Do you think that a man who has once suffered from
lead poisoning should be precluded from w r orking in the smelt-
ing industry?—That would depend on the individual. If it
could be shown that the man was of low po*wer in general
vitality, and was an unsuitable man to be employed at the
works, he should not be re-employed; but, on the other hand,
if a man contracted the disease through carelessness, such as
the neglect of hygiene, I cannot see why he should not be
re-employed. The evidence is that casual employees are more
liable to the disease. In Germany one large firm made a
practice of employing as many casuals as they could, in the
belief that by continually having new men the incidence of
plumbism would be reduced, but it was found to have the con-
trary effect, because the casuals did not try to protect them-
selves from the disease. A man who is permanently engaged
is more careful.
1448. That brings in the question of the employment of
south-eastern Europeans. Their lack of knowledge of English
and consequent inability to understand the instructions given
them is probably a contributory cause of their contracting the
disease? —I have formed that opinion. I favor absolute power
to enforce, not only the employer, but also the employee, to
carry out proper precautions against lead poisoning.
1449. By Mr. Pearson —I have read that the greatest danger
existed from dust. Would you confirm that? —Dust and
fumes are great dangers, but I cannot say they are the greatest.
1450. By the Chairman —Would you care to make any further
statement? —I am aware that much has been attempted by the
company at Port Pirie in the nature of modifications and
improvements in the smeltery plant and equipment, with a
view to eliminating as far as possible noxious dust and fumes.
I understand that better facilities for enabling the employees
to carry out strict attention to personal cleanliness, &c.,
by the provision of lavatories, crib houses, &c., have
been established, It is evident that the incidence of plumbism
at the smelters is still high, and must be against the best
interests of both employee and employer. I am of opinion that
much good might result from the enactment of legislation
making it obligatory on employees as well as employers to carry
out in detail all precautions for the mitigation of this malady.
The witness withdrew.
EDWARD BROMLEY, Divisional Meteorologist, Adelaide,
sworn and examined:
1451. By the Chairman —What is your position?—l am
Divisional Meteorologist for the State of South Australia. The
department here is a branch of the Commonwealth Meteoro-
logical Department, Melbourne.
1452. Can you give us any information regarding the pre-
vailing winds at Port Pirie or in the area around Port Pirie?
—ln the short time at my disposal I have been able only to
take out the prevailing direction of the wind as collected from
the telegraphed reports sent every morning. They have a wind
vane at the Port Pirie Post Office, which would give a fairly
good indication. These figures are taken at a particular time
only—B.3o a.m.—and, therefore, probably would not give full
information. The wind vane is not similar with the one at
the Observatory, and in strong winds may perform a circle, but
during a strong wind you are able to gauge the direction by
other means, such as by the feel of the wind on the face and
by flags. Taking the three years, 1922, 1923, and 1924, which
are the only years that Port Pirie has been a climatological
station, the prevailing direction of the wind from December to
April is from the south-east. From May to August the pre-
vailing direction is from exactly the opposite quarter, namely,


the north-west. In September it is from the west, north-west
again in October, and in November it is really variable, being
partly from the south and north. Of course on quite a number
of occasions conditions have been calm, but, taking the whole
of the three years, the prevailing direction of the wind is from
the north-west. It is curious that south-east and north-west
are the two prominent wind directions at 8.30 a.m. Of course
the wind in most cases would be light only, and as a matter of
fact the calms are almost as frequent as the number of times
the wind blew from the north-west. To give the prevailing
direction of the wind throughout the day is not possible at
present, although I should say it would be west to south-west.
The tendency would be for the wind to blow off the sea, because
of the difference in temperature between the water and the
land. The south-easterly wind direction at Port Piric rather
surprised me, because the situation of Port Pirie in Spencer’s
Gulf is very similar to that of Adelaide in St. Vincent’s Gulf,
and the prevailing summer wind throughout the day in Adelaide
is south-westerly. On winter mornings at 9 o ’clock our prevail-
ing wind direction is north-east, and I thought the same would
apply at Port Pirie. There is an estuary at Port Pirie, haw-
ever, and the Port Pirie Post Office is right up against it, and
perhaps that is the explanation—the estuary causing a local
wind. I should say that the wind at Port Pirie, particularly
in the summer time, would swing round during the day to a
westerly or south-westerly direction. At night it would then
veer round and probably come off the land. During the day
it would strengthen from a westerly quarter.
1453. Would the Flinders Eange have any effect? —Yes. It
would simply give a land breeze at night, but it would not affect
the prevailing wind during the day. Generally speaking, at a
place like Port Pirie, which heats up considerably during the
summer, there would be a marked difference in temperature
between Port Pirie and the gulf, which would result in a south-
westerly wind.
1454. By Mr. Gepp —Are there any recording instruments for
wind determination at the Adelaide Observatory ? —Yes.
1455. Are they expensive? —I could not say what they cost.
An anemometer simply recording the force of the wind might
cost about £5.
1456. Would £SO cover an outfit to record the force and
direction of the wind? —It depends on the type. I should say
that for £SO you would be able to secure an anemometer for
direction and force,
1457. Do the Government ever make arrangements with a big
firm like the Broken Hill Associated Smelters to take records
day and night, and forward them to you, or is that always
done by the post office? —By the post office at present. As a
matter of fact, outside of Adelaide we have no wind recording
apparatus, with the exception simply of wind vanes.
1458. What would be the best way to arrange for the regular
supply to you of data from Port Pirie over a period?
—Could the Broken Hill Associated Smelters make definite
arrangements with your department for the provision of instru-
ments and the supplying of records to you so that the data
would be always on record? —So far as the records supplied to
us are concerned that would be all right, but who would procure
the data.
1459. Supposing the management of the smelters undertook
to do that work, and sent the records down regularly, would
your department supply the instruments? —I could not say
that. All supplies are determined from the central office. I
doubt whether the Homes and Territories Department would
supply expensive instruments like that.
1460. Would it not help your work if you had regular records
at Port Pirie? —It would give definite information as to wind
direction.
1461. It would be better for the company to write to you
asking how arrangements can be made, and that could be
referred by you to the central office? —Yes.
1462. Are there any records of humidity at Port Pirie —
either for the town itself or the surrounding area? —I do not
think so. They have a maximum and minimum thermometer,
but not a wet bulb.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Thursday, May 14Wq at 2.15 p.m.
[At the State Government Bureau of Medical Inspection,
Broken Hill, New South Wales.]
Present —
Dr. K. E. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Eobinette.
MALCOLM EOBEET FINLAY SON, medical offieer-in-
charge of the Bureau of Medical Inspection, New
South Wales Department of Labor and Industry,
Broken Hill, was sworn and examined:
1463. By the Chairman —What are your degrees? —M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Sydney).
1464. When were you appointed to your present position?—
On July Ist, 1922.
1465. Under what Act, if any, are you working?—l hold
two appointments under two different Acts. I am Medical
Authority under the Workmen’s Compensation (Broken Hill)
Act, 1920, and Chairman of the Medical Board constituted
under the Workmen’s Compensation (Lead Poisoning—Broken
Hill) Act, 1922.
1466. Your work in this department brings you in contact
with cases of plumbism, I understand. Can you give this Com-
mission any statistics in regard to the number of cases you
have seen, dealing with nationality of the patients, type of
eases, and any further points which you think would be of
assistance to us? —The board, since it commenced -working in
May, 1923, has seen 62 cases of lead poisoning. Of that
number 44 had been previously certified by a medical referee
as suffering from lead poisoning.
1467. Was that certification some time prior to the present
illness which came under your notice? —They -were receiving
compensation. That leaves 18 new cases that have been
diagnosed by the Medical Board. Of the 62 cases, six were
foreigners, none of whom had been in the country for less
than 13 years. One of them had been in Australia 38 years.
Of the six foreigners referred to, two were Jugo-Slavs, two
were Germans, one was an Italian, and one a Eussian. Of
the 62 cases, one is recorded as acute, four as sub-acute, and
the remainder as chronic. The average number of years of
exposure of all the cases is 24, and the average of exposure
of the chronic cases 23 years.
1468. That is less than acute and sub-acute combined? —
Yes. The 38 years brought up the average a bit. That man
had been working here practically all his life. Dividing the
cases into age groups, there was one man aged between 20
and 30 years, three between 30 and 40, 15 between 40 and 50,
17 between 50 and 60, 24 between 60 and under 70, and two
aged 70 years or over. Of the first group, 20 and under 30,
the average exposure was five years; the second group, eight
years; the third group, 19| years; the fourth group, 24
years; the fifth group 284 years; and the last group, 344
years; giving a total average exposure of 24 years. In divid-
ing the cases into exposure groups, I have divided them into
exposure to lead at Broken Hill for under 10 years, exposure
for over 10 and under 20 years, over 20 and under 30 years,
over 30 and under 40 years, and over 40 years. There are
four in the first of these groups, 15 in the second, 31 in the
third, 11 in the fourth, and one in the fifth. Thus half the
cases occur in the group over 20 and under 30 years.
1469. Taking the varying types of the disease you have
met here, what were the outstanding symptoms complained of?
—The board has dealt with very few cases that are not


chronic. The great majority are men who have had a long
exposure, having been exposed to carbonate ores in their
earlier days before sulphides were worked, and they now show
chronic degenerations of various types, which are really taken
by the board to be the sequelae of lead poisoning. The sub-
acute eases and the acute ease were all put under treatment,
and completely recovered from the disease, returned to work!
and have not since to the knowledge of the board had any
further symptoms.
1470. Regarding the sub-acute cases, and the acute case
also, I presume that they all complained of colic?—Four of
them did. One did not.
14:71. Did you find paresis in those cases?—We found no
actual paresis in any of those sub-acute cases, nothing more
than a general weakness.
1472. In regard to the chronic cases, were the majority of
them of the cardio-vascular and renal type, showing evidence
of chronic nephritis, &c.?—Yes, most of them were men who
showed degeneration in the cardib-vascular and renal tracts.
1473. Did you frequently meet with palsies in that particu-
lar group?—Not in any great number. In some a history
of palsy was given.
1474. Was there evidence in any considerable proportion of
them of muscular weakness in specialised groups of muscles?
—Only in very few.
1475. Were blood examinations made in all eases? —No.
At the commencement they were taken, but we found that
it was not a great deal of help in the chronic cases.
1476. Do you regard the blood picture as helpful in the
diagnosis of a mild sub-acute case? —It can be taken as con-
firmation of other signs.
1477. We all know that certain eases of lead poisoning are
unmistakable to all practitioners, but we are also inclined to
the belief that certain cases would present difficulties of
diagnosis which would lead in a great measure to the confu-
sion of general practitioners outside the lead area. Could you
give the Commission a statement of the criteria of diagnosis
which would enable, perhaps, the formation of standards to
diagnose lead poisoning? —In our work on the Medical Board
Ave have not had much to do with the diagnosis of acute or
sub-acute cases. I can outline some of the difficulties in deal-
ing with chronic cases. Some of these cases, of course,
present a great similarity to diseases due to other causes, and
the only possible way a diagnosis can be made is to take
fully into account the history of previous disease, exposure
of the man to causes Avhich may produce the complaint from
Avhich he is suffering, his present complaints, and signs found
on a full clinical examination. Cases that we have seeen ha\ 7 e
been lengthy, men—as I said before —with c long exposure
aa'lio ha\ r e been previously affected by acute or sub-acute lead
poisoning, and Avho since that time have been more or less
continually exposed to the risk of lead poisoning. Where a
man shows chronic degenerations such as are produced by
chronic lead poisoning, and all other causes can be eliminated,
the condition must, in the opinion of the board, be ascribed
to the cause that has been operating, namely, exposure to
lead. In those cases blood film examination is practically
of little use. It has been necessary, of course, in some cases,
to test the blood in other ways to ascertain if the condition
is due to other diseases, such as syphilis.
1478. In these cases have you made haemoglobin estimates
and red cell counts? —In a number of eases at the beginning
of our Avork, about 20 cases, approximately, Ave did.
1479. In the sub-acute and acute cases you still consider
that to be of A r alue? —Yes.
1480. But not in the chronic cases? —No.
1481. In relation to the operation of the Acts under AA'hich
you Avork, will you please give a short statement as to your
functions and the functions of the board?—The Medical Board
does the Avork in the Broken Hill district of certifying sur-
geon and medical referee in cases of lead poisoning. That
is, under the Act any man who Avishes to be compensated for
any disablement by lead poisoning comes direct to the board,
and the decision of the board is final. Previously the man
had to go to a certifying surgeon, and the employer or
the man could appeal against his decision and apply
to the medical referee to decide on the case. In Broken Hill,
under the 1922 Act, lead poisoning is a notifiable disease.
That is, if a man considers he is suffering from lead poison-
ing, or if a doctor considers one of his patients to be so
suffering, the fact must be notified to the board. The three
members of the board examine each case, and the decision of
the board is given for the board under the signature of the
chairman.
1482. Have you in your experience found this arrangement
to work satisfactorily?—l think it is very much preferable to
cases being dealt with by one man.
1483. You do not find that the board has any difficulty in
any cases of coming to a unanimous decision or a just deci-
sion? —In my opinion, a just decision can be arrived at very
much better by three men examining each case than by one
man. An aspect of a case that may not obtrude itself to one
man may become apparent to the other members of the
board, and it is much easier to get from the man, and discuss
thoroughly, all the points which help in making a just
diagnosis.
1484. Is there any further statement you would care to make
in relation to that part of the subject with which we are
dealing, or any expression of opinion? The Commission is
engaged in inquiring into all factors relating to lead poison-
ing at Port Pirie, and amongst other things the question of
legislation has cropped up. We are anxious to obtain from
all those who are in a position to speak on the subject opinions
relating to the satisfactory working of legislation for the
prevention of lead poisoning, and for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of the disease?—lt has been my experience, not only
from reading but actual work in Broken Hill, that the inci-
dence of lead poisoning depends entirely on the control of
eases and working conditions. Anybody who has read much
on the subject cannot help being impressed by the fact that
modern methods of dealing with working conditions have
decreased the amount of lead poisoning very considerably, and
from the standpoint of the medical men it is very desirable
that cases which are withdrawn from work should be kept
under observation in order to see that they receive adequate
treatment which will restore them to health, and enable them
to return to work. It is the intention of the two Acts passed
by the New South Wales Parliament that such control should
be given to the board. Any man on compensation may be
examined by the board at any time with a view to his receiv-
ing treatment. If, in the opinion of the board, he will be
improved sufficiently to enable him to return to his
former employment, it may order him to receive treat-
ment either at his own expense or the expense of the company
paying his compensation. The board must receive information
as to the treatment he is receiving from the doctor who is
treating the man, and it is able to review him at any time
in order to see the effect the treatment is having. This has
enabled a number of men to return to their employment. If,
in the opinion of the board, a man shows susceptibility to the
action of lead .it can give him a certificate to that effect,
and the company must pay a certain lump sum, which depends
on his service on the Broken Hill Mines, to enable him to
obtain work in a more suitable occupation. This, of course,
does not apply very much to the Barrier at present, as few
sub-acute cases are occurring here, but it appears to me to
bo an admirable way of dealing with lead poisoning cases.
1485. Can you give us an approximate idea of the number
of men exposed to lead hazard at Broken Hill at present,
including the number of men working in deep mines—because
I presume there is still slight hazard there—and of surface
workers in the mills? —The only figures I can give are that
approximately 5,200 men are employed on the line of lode, all
of whom are more or less exposed to absorption of lead.
1486. The number of eases you have examined —18 fresh
cases in two years —is relatively small. On the question of


susceptibility, you have not in your series stated any case of
lead poisoning without a history of less than some years of
total exposure? —Of the sub-acute cases, one had been here
four years.
1487. Was that the man’s first appearance as a lead case?
—Yes. Another of the sub acute cases had been here four
years, another nine years, and another 15 years. The one
acute case had been affected after one year’s work on the
mines.
1488. Do you hold any view on the subject of relative sus-
ceptibility, apart from actual cases you have seen? Do you
base any opinion upon variations in individual susceptibility?
—I have had no experience of it, but from my reading I would
say there is a certain type of individual who is susceptible
to lead risk. Our experience shows that the development of
chronic lead poisoning is affected by other conditions, when
the man suffers from other chronic diseases or alcoholism.
Strangely, we have found very little association of tubercu-
losis with lead poisoning here.
1489. Do you frequently find a history of alcoholism in con-
nection with lead poisoning? —We have had very definite cases
which we consider have been accelerated by alcoholism.
1490. In your opinion, does inter-current disease predispose
to attack of lead poisoning where perhaps lead absorption
with toleration has gone on for years?—Yes, I think so.
1491. By Mr. Gepp —Do you know of any work that has
been done in the way of diagnosis through examination of
the blood for lead as lead?—Yes, I have read some work
on the subject.
1492. The authorities seem to agree, do they not, that pre-
liminary action of lead is found to be typically and invari-
ably, on the blood, setting up degenerative changes? If that
is so, and if the lead is circulating, it should be possible,
spectroscopically at least, to recognise the lead in the blood ?
—I would not express any opinion on that.
1493. You do not know of any work that has been done in
that connection?—No, not in detail. The only thing I have
got is determination of lead in the blood in post-mortem cases.
1493 a. Has there been any definite indication of lead in the
Blood in these cases? —I did not receive any information from
It that helped at all.
1494. If you could prove definitely that people not exposed
to lead hazard never showed any lead in the blood qualita-
tively, and that people made susceptible to plumbism did show
it. it would be of further assistance to other methods of
examining the blood, would it not?—The question would be
whether it would be of any further use than examination of
the urine.
1495. By Mr. Eobinette —Is it possible to detect lead in the
urine ?—Y es.
1496. By Mr. Gepp —You mentioned one acute case that
had occurred in one year. Did that patient recover ?—Yes,
and returned to work.
1497. You mentioned to the Chairman that treatment is
given in a number of cases by the man’s medical attendant,
and that the board is advised. Is that treatment general or
specific to each case? —It is general treatment, as a nile.
1498. For plumbism? —To enable the man to eliminate any
excess of lead that is causing his disability. With the excep-
tion of the acute case which I mentioned, we have seen most
of our cases only in the sub-acute stage, and the treatment
has been practically an attempt to eliminate lead and to raise
the man’s general resistance, so that the treatment is entiielj
general. No other specific treatment that has been found of
any particular value has been reported to the board. One of
the things done in practically all cases is to clean up the
man’s teeth. Many of them, like most workmen up here, suffer
from a great deal of pyorrhea. By cleaning up their gums
you can increase the efficiency of their gastric processes, and
raise their general health.
1499. You mentioned that when a general practitioner con-
siders that his patient is suffering from plumbism, the case
is referred to the board. Does the doctor give a certificate
for plumbism, or does he say to the patient, ‘ ‘ I want the
board to determine whether you have plumbism or not?”—
There is a special certificate provided for in one Act. It
says in effect that if a man has reasonable cause to consider
that he is suffering from plumbism he must interview the
board.
1500. Does the general practitioner say, “You have
plumbism. I refer you to the board, ’ ’ or does he say, ‘ l l am
not sure that you have not plumbism, and refer you to the
Board?”—That is more or less to the effect. There is a
special certificate under the regulations to the Act which has
oeen supplied to all doctors.
1501. Would the man receive compensation on those certifi-
cates, or on one from the board? —It w r ould be on a certifi-
cate from the board.
1502. By Mr. Pearson —The board is the only authority
under the Act? —Yes. The notification to be given by the
medical practitioner is shown in Form 9 under the regulations
to the Workmen’s Compensation (Lead Poisoning—Broken
Hill) Act, 1922:
Section 11.
Notification of Lead Poisoning.
To the Chairman, Medical Board, Broken Hill.
I hereby notify that person named hereunder is (*) believed
by roe to be suffering from lead poisoning:—
Name:
Address;
Place of employment:
Age:
(Signed)
(Address)
(Date) *
This notification must be given by the medical practitioner
attending such person, or by the persoh himself.
* Strike out, unnecessary.
1503. By Mr. Gepp —ln regard to diseases predisposing to
lead poisoning would this statement be correct;—“Diseases
which lower the general resistance of the body tissues to the
influence of lead, predispose to lead poisoning, anaemia, kidney
disease, syphilis, alcoholism, gout, and inflammatory conditions
of the mouth or digestive tract are particularly in point?”—
Yes, I think they do.
1504. Might this, which is also quoted from Legge and
Goadby’s work, be regarded as correct according to experience
under Australian conditions. —■ ‘ People suffering from these
disease may be regarded as in a non-tolerant class?” —That
applies, as does practically all of Legge and Goadby’s w r ork,
to acute and sub-acute cases.
1505. Would you consider it necessary to make a very
strict preliminary examination in view of the conditions of
working at lead smelters, so as to eliminate men who have such
diseases as I have mentioned? —I certainly would.
1506. You think the examination should be very strict in
it-gard to such industries? —I certainly think it should.
1507. What do you do in connection with the entrance
examination asked for here? —Prior to the institution of the
Bureau of Medical Inspection here, medical examinations were
insisted upon by some of the mining companies, which em-
ployed their own medical officers to do the work. When the
bureau was established it seemed more satisfactory to every-
body that the work should be done by a man under the Gov-
ernment and in Government employ quite apart from either
side. Therefore, all men who are employed at the Broken
Hill mines are now examined at this bureau before they are
taken into employment. They are examined by the medical
officer in charge of the bureau.
1508. That is, examined by Mm in a different and distinct
capacity from Chairman of the Medical Board? —Yes.
1509. With regard to the position at Port Pirie, could you
tell us for our guidance what your wmrk here involves in the
way of time, in view of the possibility of the Commission
recommending a similar organisation for Port Pirie, and in
view of the fact that the Commission may or may not recom-
mend one or two medical men, who possibly may be engaged
by the smelter company, both for the supervision of the staff
and men from the standpoint of general health and working
conditions, and the prevention of plumbism. There are about


2,000 men employed?—ln any place where acute lead poison-
ing is occurring in any degree, I am of the opinion that it
is necessary to have periodical examinations of those engaged
in the industry, for their own protection and the protection
of the company.
1510. Assuming that the company has in its emplov one or
two medical men? —Much would depend on the daily average
labor turnover.
1511. That is about 60 per cent, of the 2,000 men. If
there were sufficient medical men on the works to do the
internal work, those men could not also be in the capacity
which you and your colleagues on the Broken Hill Medicnl
Board are in?—No.
1512. It would not be right to have the company’s medical
men certifying under the Act?—No.
1513. If, again, a body of three were appointed for the
purpose of certification, they could comprise either two local
practitioners and a Government man, or three local men. If
you eliminate from the duties of the chairman of such a
board any work that could be done by the company’s medical
officer, and all the work that would be done by general prac-
titioners in the town —and in that connection I would like
to say the company’s man would do no general treatment—
would there be justification in the work remaining to be done
for the appointment of a full-time Government medical officer
at Port Pirie to do the work which you are doing in connec-
tion with the Medical Board only, because the company’s man
would probably do the examination work? —It would not
justify the appointment of a full-time man. I understand you
io mean a man who would occupy my position as Chairman
of the Medical Board without any other of my work—work for
me Joint Committee, and the making of examinations for
entrance. The Medical Board does not at present take a great
ueal of my time.
1514. There would also be, of course, re-examinations from
time to time of the considerable number of mild cases which
are occurring at Port Pirie? —At present we meet as a board
on an average only once a week for an hour and a half or
iwo hours.
1515. From your experience, Avould you say it would be a
definitely workable scheme to have, say, the leading, oldest,
and most experienced medical practitioner in the district as
cnairman of the board, and two other men as members of a
committee of three medical men, acting as a board? —I think
it would be preferable to have as chairman a man who is
not doing any general practice, if that is possible. That
would be a very much better scheme than for a general prac-
titioner, whose patients include staff and workmen, to have to
take the position of chairman of the board.
1516. By Mr. Robinette —ln other words, he should not um-
pire a case which he has possibly been treating? That is so.
His is really the ' final decision if there is disagreement
between the other two members of the board. No doubt
the scheme mentioned by Mr. Gepp would be workable in most
cases, but there might arise cases where difficulty would be
experienced, and it would be preferable to have in the chair
a Government man who is not in general practice in the town.
1517. It might be arranged for the chairman to go up once
a week or fortnight from Adelaide and go through the vari-
ous cases? —Yes.
1518. By the Chairman —There are on an average nearly
20 cases a month at Port Pirie? —I think we can do on an
average one case at a meeting of the board. All the patho-
logical work and that sort of thing is done by me previously
amongst my other w r ork.
1519. Your experience here is with a number of chronic
cases, whereas the experience at Port Pirie at the moment
is with a considerable number of mild and sub-acute
cases. In that connection what is the time taken to decide
a single case by careful examination, would it be two hours
in addition to the biological and pathological work prior to
the examination?—l do not think it would take two hours.
If you are doing blood examination it might take anything
up to two hours, but I take it that that work would be done
at a laboratory.
1520. You mentioned the cure of acute and sub-acute cases.
Is it possible to give any length of treatment that is required
for such cure? —They vary so much that it is impossible to
state a particular time.
1521. Would you agree that the chairman of the board,
if such a board were constituted at Port Pirie, would need
to be an experienced man in regard to lead-poisoning cases
previously?—lt would certainly be advisable.
1522. You mentioned oral sepsis and pyorrhea. Is it your
experience here that a great number of people suffer from
defects of the mouth? —Yes, a large number.
1523. Would you consider it a good move to inaugurate a
dental clinic in such works as the smelters at Port Pirie? —
I think every man is the better for having his teeth attended
to, and if he can get them well done cheaply it is certainly
to his advantage. Most men do not look after their teeth and
gums because they do not know the dangers that neglect
involves.
1524. Statistics have been placed before the Commission
showing a very large number of cases amongst foreigners at
Port Pirie, who, in the great majority of cases are short
service men. Have you had any experience which would
indicate a greater susceptibility to plumbism on the part of
foreigners?—l do not think our experience has been enough to'
warrant us in making any statement about the matter. It is
only interesting that the one case of acute poisoning which
we had was an Italian who had been in Broken Hill just
under 12 months.
1525. Do you get a large number of cases of blue or Bur-
tonian line amongst your cases here? —Yery few. We rarely
see them.
1526. Would it be correct to say that the blue line is rarely
seen in the mouths of persons who pay attention to dental
hygiene? —Not altogether. I have seen it in healthy gums.
1527. It is now believed that the blue line is not definite
proof of lead poisoning, is it not? —Not of poisoning.
1528. By Mr. Robinette —It shows lead absorption?—Yes.
1529. Is it definite proof of lead at all? —I think that the
blue line in gums is definite evidence of absorption of lead.
1530. By the Chairman —In the case of an acutely inflamed
tooth socket, do you think you might get a purplish zone
which might be mistaken for the Burtonian line? —Yes, one
sees quite a lot of that.
1531. In that case, would it be easy to mistake it for the
Burtonian line?—Yes, it is hard to differentiate in many
cases.
1532. That might occur in a person not in contact with
lead at all? —Yes.
1533. By Mr. Gepp —From your experience here, and as
one having a general knowledge of the operations of big
lead smelters, what is your view of the necessity or other-
wise of full time medical men being attached to the staff
in such organisations? —From my reading on the subject, it
has proved of much value in such plants and works elsewhere.
1534. From your experience of the operation of the Act
under which you are working, would you consider it advisable
that statutory regulations should be passed in connection with
such an industry as lead smelting, covering the health hazards
«nd governing the actions of both the company and the men,
for the prevention of disease? —I think so. They are covered
coy statutory regulations here.
1535. What is the board’s notice under the Workmen’s Com-
pensation (Lead Poisoning —Broken Hill) Act, 1922? —It is
found in form 11 in the schedule to the regulations, and is
us follows: —
Warning Notice to Workmen.
Prevention of Poisoning by Lead.
All men working in or about this mine take dust containing
lead into their bodies. Early medical treatment prevents per-
manent injury to health from this cause.
Men suspecting themselves to be affected in any degree by
lead or suffering from persistent loss of appetite, constipation
of the bowels, griping pains in the stomach, frequent nausea


and vomiting, headaches, weakness in the arms or legs, pallor
of the skin, or a foul mouth and footed breath, should present
themselves to the Medical Board for medical inspection.
Compensation is payable for temporary disablement due to
lead poisoning.
Failure to notify the Medical Board immediately as to- the
possible occurrence of lead poisoning may prevent a workman
obtaining compensation.
The address of the Medical Board is Protestant Hall, Beryl
Street, Broken Hill.
Hours from
Department of Labor and Industry, Sydney (date).
1536. By Mr. Pearson —I think you said the incidence of lead
poisoning depended upon control of the working conditions.
I take it that you mean by that the prevention of dust? —Yes;
where dust is the hazard, as in most cases it is.
1537. You regard dust as the worst danger?—Absolutely.
1538. You have the right to determine that men are sus-
ceptible and exclude them from the industry, for which they
are entitled to compensation. Is the compensation based on
length of service or the possible length of disability?—The
compensation of susceptibles who should not go to work amongst
lead depends on whether they have done 10 years’ work or
under, or 20 years or under, &c.
1539. By Mr. Bobinette —Supposing that a man had worked
here only three months? —He would get £SO.
1540. By Mr. Pearson —With regard to the chairman of a
board on similar lines to your Medical Board, with local modi-
fications, at Port Pirie, I understand you to say that your
board is limited merely to the duties of a referee board, and
that there would not be sufficient work for a full-time chairman.
If the chairman of the board had to undertake the examination
of all entrants, it would considerably increase his duties? —It
would keep him very busy, I should think. My remarks about
the first position not keeping him very busy would, of course,
depend entirely on the number of cases to be dealt with. Here,
Jf the men were to go to work among absorbable ores, I would
probably require to have assistance.
1541. By Mr. Bobinette —What percentage of the men
-examined for employment are rejected?—ln the last 12-monthly
jreriod, ended June 30, 1924, it was 14.7 per cent.
1542. Has the percentage varied? —For the year ended June
'3O, 1923, it was 19 per eept.
1543. By the Chairman —What are the chief causes for rejec-
tion? —The great majority of the rejections are on account of
respiratory, cardio-vascular, and renal abnormalities, owing to
the special risk.
1544. Including silicosis? —Yes.
1545. That 14.7 per cent, would not include anyone who had
worked previously in mines? —They may have worked before
in a mine. Any man coming up here to work would have to
go through that examination.
1546. There would be some percentage of silicosis among
them? —Yes; but not much.
1547. By Mr. Pearson —ls there any arrangement whereby
applicants for work in the mines may be examined elsewhere
than at Broken Hill?—The bureau has representatives in Ade-
laide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Wallaroo.
1548. By Mr. Gepp —With regard to- the 18 new cases of
plumbism which you mentioned, are they definitely cases which
-nave developed since the board has operated here, or are they
possibly cases which were more or less tolerant, and have come
«m afterwards? Are they definitely cases of new arrivals and
men not in the industry previously?—No-; not any of them,
Avith the exception of one acute case.
1549. Is it an indication of a slight, steady incidence at
Broken Hill, or were they possibly a few cases just on the
tmrder line previously, which are now just coming out? —In
most cases they are the culmination of years of employment.
1550. They are not definitely cases of lead poisoning which
have been contracted ab initio during the last four or five
years?—Three of them have occurred within the last four or
five years, and the rest are old employees.
1551. Tire incidence of new cases is rmry small? —Yes.
1552. Our references are to enquire and report upon, firstly,
the cause or causes of plumbism at Port Pirie; secondly, the
increase in the number of reported cases; and, thirdly, what
can be recommended wdth a view to eliminating or alleviating
the disease. Can you make any other suggestions to the Com-
mission from your knowledge, reading, and experience?—ln my
opinion what is most to be stressed is the importance of
scientifically regulating the amount of dust to which the men
are subjected in various working places.
1553. That would come as one of the items under statutory
regulations ? —Yes.
1554. Of course, medical supervision would cover the question
of an entrance examination? —Yes.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Thursday, May 2,lst, 1925, at 11 a.m.
[At Lewis Berger & Sons’ Works, Rhodes, New South Wales.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
LESLIE HAJLSE ROGERS, medical practitioner, Ryde,
New South Wales, was sworn and examined:
1555. By the Chairman —Will you explain your appointment
with Lewis Berger & Sons (Australia) Ltd.? —Some seven or
eight years ago the firm decided to erect a factory here and
commence the manufacture of white lead, paint, and varnish.
The directors from the outset recognised that the work their
men would be called upon to do was possibly injurious to
health, and they set out to guard against the dangers in every
way possible. The buildings were designed to give maximum
light and air, and machinery of newest design and protected
character w r as installed. The general factory conditions were
made absolutely up to date as to hygiene. Regular medical
examination of all employees was decided upon, and I was
appointed medical officer.
1556. You have a statement to make covering your duties
and experience?—Yes. Up to the present the results have been
most satisfactory and gratifying, only three or four cases of
plumbism having been reported. Upwards of 40 men have been
employed in the corroding of lead, 40 in paint manufacture,
and 10 in the varnish department, making in all about 100.
The cases reported have all been among those engaged in the
corroding sheds. Each employee is provided with a locker for
clothes, bags, and personal effects. Wash-basins and showers,
with hot and cold water, soap, nail-brushes, and towel are also
provided. Employees are given two changes of overalls per
week. Each man is instructed to change into overalls before
commencing work and to change and wash thoroughly before
leaving, time being allowed for this; not to wear home any
clothing soiled with paint or lead, and to be especially careful
to wash the hands before taking food; to take regular aperients,
and drink plenty of milk. Smoking while working is pro-
hibited. Printed notices are posted in various departments
setting out the dangers of lead poisoning, how this may be
acquired, and how best to guard against it. The men engaged
in rooms where dust is likely to be present are provided with
mask respirators and instructed to wear them. Vacuum dust-
collectors are installed where dry lead is being packed. Medical
examination is made regularly once a week. Visits are also
made when any complaint is reported or any accident occurs.
Inspection consists in personally observing each man, examina-
tion of mouth, teeth and gums, hands, and finger nails. If
any have complaints they are again seen separately and
thoroughly examined system by system. Where lead infection
is suspected blood and urine examination is undertaken. Each
man’s history is taken and the record kept by means of a
card system. The employees at first were somewhat reluctant
to present themselves for examination, and some resented it,
but on finding it was to be insisted upon and was for their


protection and benefit, soon fell in with the employers’ wishes.
The experience gained after several years has shown that
these men, although admittedly exposed to health risks, are
better conditioned and more hygienic than the average. Many
men on being engaged have presented themselves dirty in
appearance and evidently dirty in habits. Many have had
mouths full of filthy and decayed teeth. These * have been
attended to, and in a few months the change made has greatly
impioved their general condition and appearance. Experience
also teaches that medical examination before engagement in
this occupation is desirable. Previous history can be ascer-
tained, general conditions noted, and a very good idea of fitness
reported. In some men cleanliness is among the traits unde-
veloped and unattainable. These men should be rejected. The
men engaged in the corroding sheds are given turn about
with the dirtiest and most dangerous jobs—drawung, no doubt,
being the task most likely to cause infection,. Several men
have shown evidence of lead absorption, such as blue line on
the gums. I hey have been removed for a time from contact
and given, when possible, work in open yards, even though they
have not complained of indisposition. Others have absented
themselves for minor ailments which, without just cause, are
sometimes attributed to lead. No case of plumbism has been
reported during the last two years. The average absence
through sickness during the last year, in days, per man was:—
Paint department, 1 day; white lead department, .8056 of a
day; varnish department, .4073 of a day. Four cases only of
definite plumbism have occurred. The first was soon after
the work commenced. A foreman in the corroding shed became
leaded. He had severe colic and obstinate constipation, slight
blue line being also present. After an absence of a few weeks
this man returned and has since shown no signs of recurrence.
In this case the source of infect on was probably inhalation of
dust from dry white lead, the employee having admitted that
he cleaned out several drying pans without wearing a mask
and respirator as he had been instructed to do. The second
case occurred two years later in an employee engaged in the
corroding shed. This man had been working turn about
setting and drawing practically from the start of the work.
He complained of backache and general weakness and debility.
Some abdominal pain followed, with lightning pains in lower
-extremities, slight wrist drop, and wasting of muscles of fore-
arms (extensors and small muscles of hand). Urine examina-
tion showed no lead, blood picture no pasophilia, haemoglobin
high value, no blue line on gums. This patient was very
afraid, and convalescence was prolonged. On returning he w r as
■employed in open yard for a time, and later returned to cor-
roding shed. He has since been working for upwards of two
years with no recurrence. The third case w r as in a man
engaged in the corroding shed, but this man had been working
for a few weeks only when he showed signs of lead poisoning.
He was anaemic, had a blue line on gums, and had attacks of
severe colic. He also complained of exceedingly bad taste in
his mouth. He had no headaches or sign of encephalopathy and
no sign of paralysis or paresis. He received treatment, and
after an absence of three weeks returned to work. He had no
recurr&nce, but was afraid, and decided to change his occu-
pation. A fourth case was one reported from private con-
sultation as plumbism, but in regard to which I think the
diagnosis was very doubtful. This man had been working, set-
ting, and drawing for two or three years. He had previously
absented himself for an acute attack of abdominal pain, which
was then diagnosed as lead poisoning, but which on careful
investigation proved to be ptomaine. On this second occasion
the man complained of severe backache and weakness in legs
and feet. He had no colic, no sleeplessness, and bowels well
open. He had anaemia and legs very thin and muscles poorly
developed, no extensor paresis, and blue line. Blood picture was
normal, and there was no blood in urine. This man recovered
and returned to work, and has improved in general condition.
Many of the men at the works have been at the same job
for years, some feeding the lead kettle exposed to fumes, others
handling pig lead, others again handling and packing dry
white lead. The majority of these show no sign of lead
absorption or lead poisoning. JSTo doubt they have developed a
gradual tolerance to lead absorption. The men engaged in the
varnish department and in the paint mixing have been exposed
to turpentine fumes, but not any have developed an attack of
so-called ‘ ‘ painters ’ colic, ’ ’ which by some writers is attribut-
able to turpentine and not to lead. There is no doubt that in-
dustrial hygiene as aimed at and carried out by co-operation
between employers and employees in this instance is the deter-
mining factor in the possibility of such a favorable report
being presented.
1557. You mentioned in regard to certain men showing signs
of lead absopption such as blue line in the gums, that they
were removed from lead work for a time. Do I understand
that they returned to that at a later date?—Yes.
1558. Did the blue line disappear?—Yes.
1559. Approximately how long would it take for the blue
line to disappear when men were removed from lead hazard ?
—I could not say exactly, but in most instances is was visible
for only two or three weeks.
1560. There was no impairment of the man’s general health
associated with that blue line? —No.
1561. What type of respirators are in use at the works here ?
—The mask respirator (with a moistened sponge) fitted over
the nose and mouth.
1562. Your duties in connection with this establishment do
not occupy your full time?—No.
1563. Could you give the Commission an idea of the arrange-
ment you have with the company?—An inspection is made
regularly every week at practically the same time on Wednesday
afternoon. The time occupied varies according to circum-
stances. I go right round among the men employed in the
different departments, and if there are any complaints made
I bring the men over to the administration block and examine
them individually. The weekly inspection might last an hour
or two hours more or ‘less.
1564. You make individual examinations when necessary?—
Yes.
1565. By Mr. Pearson —The ordinary examination is just a
general examination, with the men passing before you?—Yes.
1566. In connection -with the examination have you some form
of records? —A card system tally is kept in the office.
1567. With regard to lead poisoning generally, do you con-
sider dust the most likely source?—Yes, the inhalation of dry
lead in the form of dust is the most likely form of infection.
1568. You referred to personal cleanliness and said men who
gave no evidence of it were not suitable for employment in an
industry like this? —Yes; I said it would be desirable to have
a look at a man about to be employed and form an idea ,of
his general habits and condition.
1569. There are many south-eastern Europeans employed at
the Port Pirie Smelters. Have you had any experience with
that class of labor? —No.
1570. A, low standard of living would make men more
susceptible?—l should say such men would be more likely to
become affected. The question is where they could be made
to take precautionary measures.
1571. By Mr. Gepp —Our references from the South
Australian Government are to enquire into and report upon the
causes of plumbism, the increase in the number of reported cases
at the Port Pirie Smelters during the past two or three years,
and what steps may be recommended for prevention or allevia-
tion. As far as we have gone the position has developed to this
extent: the number of reported cases has increased from
practically none five years ago to several hundred Jast year,
out of an aggregate of between 1,500 and 1,600 employees.
While the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, in
regard to lead poisoning came into operation on January Ist,
1912, they were not realised by the men until about 1917, or
at any rate no applications were made under that Act. Whether
or not there were cases we have at the moment very little
proof, extent that in 1910 an enquire by Dr. Eamsay Smith
gave an indication of a certain number of cases occurring in.


previous years, which he thought would be greatly reduce! as
a result of improvements the company were putting in for the
removal of fumes, etc. Undoubtedly an improvement did take
place in the health of men employed at the blast furnaces or
thereby, but since T 913 the applications for compensation have
increased very rapidly. During the past few years the number
of employees of the Mediterranean-Eurcpean type has increased
from one to every eight Britishers to one to every two
Britishers. In your statement you mentioned an entrance
examination? —Yes, I said experience also teaches that a
medical examination before engagement in this occupation is
desirable. A man’s previous history is important. He may
have been leaded somewhere else before coming here and it
would not be fair for that man, after a few weeks to be
reported as having been leaded at this establishment. He might
be a stone mason who has had silicosis.
1572. The preliminary medical examination is done by your-
self? —Yes; we have not carried that out absolutely. All men
who have been taken on have not been examined by me before
starting, and that is why I put it in. If they had been so
examined I do not think one or two would have become leaded
who did so.
1573. From the experience you have gained do you strongly
recommend for an industry dealing with lead the necessity for
a thorough medical entrance examination? —Yes.
1574. What is your experience both here and in general prac-
tice in this district regarding the condition of the teeth of the
people?—ln a good percentage of working men the teeth are in
a bad condition.
1575. If it were possible to arrange for sound and good treat-
ment by the institution in large works, such as the Port Pirie
smelters, of a dental clinic, do you think it would be a definite
help towards general health? —Yes; towards general health as
well as against susceptibility to lead poisoning.
1576. Oral sepsis generally would tend towards anaemia? —
Yes.
1577. Would that anaemia give a blood picture which would
in any way compare with lead? —Not necessarily.
1578. Would it be possible from your experience to dif-
ferentiate between cases of anaemia due, say, to pyorrhoea, and
that due to lead? —In definite lead poisoning you get an increase
in some of the different types of cells, called basophilia, and
when that was noted as occurring it is more or less evidence
of lead' poisoning, but I would not say that because a man
had basophilia he had lead poisoning, though if he had lead
poisoning he would probably have basophilia.
1579. By the Chmrman —You would not expect to find a
case of basophilic degeneration due to pyorrhoea?—No.
1580. By Mr. Gepp —The average number of days of absence
through sickness amongst members of friendly societies is shown
by a recent report of the Federal Commission on National In-
surance as about 10 to 15, according to the State. Do I under-
stand you correctly to say the days of absence amongst employees
at these works is less than one per annum? —That is during
the last 12 months. I asked for the statistics, and that is the
report.
1581. In some industries there is an arrangement for sick and
benefit funds, which have tended to increase the time lost per
man. Is there such an arrangement here? —No; unless it is
some accident or sickness in connection with the business.
1582. Is examination of the urine done here systematically
among the employees?—No; it has been done in the cases I
have reported. If it had to be done systematically mine would
be a full-time job.
1583. In some cases where you get past a certain absorption
point in lead it does show in the urine, but obviously it
has not been necessary here and so has not been done? —Quite so.
1584. With regard to the abuse of alcohol and its effect on
■workers among lead, did any of your cases of lead poisoning
occur in men inclined to over-indulge in alcohol?—I could not
say that.
1585. We are not yet completely certain that all the reported
cases at Port Pirie are plumbism, as there is such a large per-
centage of mild cases, which are certified to by one man, a.
general practitioner. It is possible that there may be other
causes. Have you any experience of the possibility of other-
diseases giving the symptoms of early plumbism? —There are
definite symptoms and signs of lead poisoning, but some other
diseases, such as anaemia, give those signs.
1586. Have you had any experience of carbon-monoxide
poisoning in your general practice? —Only in suicidal cases.
1587. Not in industrial cases?—No.
The witness withdrew.
CLARENCE MENSLEY TAYLOR, assistant to the
directors of Lewis Berger & Sons (Aust.) Ltd., Rhodes,
New South Wales, was sworn and examined:
1588. By Mr. Gepp —What are the products made at these
works? —White lead, both in oil and dry, paints, and varnishes.
1589. In the production of white lead which operation do you
regard as the most hazardous ? —There are two really—the
emptying of the stacks, which we call drawing, and the pack-
ing of the dry white lead.
1590. How many men on an average are employed on those
two operations? —Twelve in drawing from the stack, one in
drawing lead from the pan, and two in packing dry* lead.
1591. Are those men employed regularly, or are they changed
around into other occupations? —They change around. The men
engaged on drawing in the shed are only on for alternate weeks,
the man drawing from the pan gets only about one week in
three at that work, and the men packing dry lead about the
same.
1592. Do you draw men from other operations in the works
for those particular jobs?—lt is the same range of men all the
time.
1593. In regard to the precautions you have adopted since
the beginning of your manufacture here, have you found the
organisation function satisfactorily?—Yes.
1594. Have there been any objections from the men to the
precautions and restrictions necessary in order to protect them?
—Not that I recall. We occasionally had men who would not
conform to what they disliked doing, but if they were persistent
in their slackness we got rid of them.
1595. That is, you have maintained discipline as a necessary
part of the job?—Yes.
1596. Have the American U H. S. Cover” respirators, a
sample of which you put in as evidence (Exhibit 17) been used
from the beginning? —Yes.
1597. Have you found them satisfactory?—As far as I have
been able to judge.
1598. You have not found it necessary from results to make
any experiments regarding other methods? —I do not think we
would be justified in abandoning that type.
1599. What do they cost approximately?—About 11s. 6d.
1600. Is each man supplied with an individual respirator?—
Yes; and he keeps it usually in his locker. When necessary he
is supplied with a fresh one. All the men in the works do not
have respirators.
1601. They are supplied to all men carrying out operations
where you consider they should be used? —They are supplied
for all operations with lead where it is likely to be in a free
form.
1602. The use of them there is compulsory?—Yes; we had
difficulty in the first place. They used to get mixed up.
1603. The utilisation and cleanliness of respirators is an
essential condition of employment?—Yes; and each man is
responsible for his own mask.
1604. Have you found medical supervision in the works to be
a definite advantage?—Yes; absolutely.
1605. Have your methods of exhaustingg dust to the bag
houses been fully satisfactory?—l believe so.
1606. Is it a definitely practicable scheme to carry out work
of that sort in an industry like this? —I am of the opinion that
the results prove that here.
1607. Could you give us briefly the story of your statistics
concerning absences from work due to various causes?—l have-


.some statistics compiled quite independently from those of the
doctor. Although compiled two years ago they would be true
now, as they were taken over a period of four years, and the
results were approximately similar for each period. The
average worked out from them shows in the case of men in
the corroding shed and lead mill the average loss of time from
all causes was identical—. 97 of an hour per week, which is
equivalent to about eight days a year.
1608. Is that for sickness or football matches and so on? —It
is loss of time from any cause whatever. At the time I took
out the absences due to occupational illness or accident, and
they ran out for the lead mill at .4 of an hour per man per
week, or 7.4 hours per year, and only about a fourth of that
for the shed men.
1669. Does your figure of approximately eight days a year
include absences due not to sickness, but to other reasons, such
as the death of a mythical grandmother?—That eight days a
year is the maximum figure, and includes both sickness and
other absences. When a man is away for a day or two we never
inquire the reason unless it is something connected with the
works.
1610., There would be nothing to show what percentage of
those absences was caused by illness of any kind? —Without
knowing I should say 75 per cent, would be due to illness. The
men stick pretty closely to their work. We have never been
troubled by men getting on the spree and losing time in that
way. Apart from a day or half a day which men may take
off for some domestic reason the absences are few. A man, for
instance, may be laid up with influenza or something like that.
1611. Apart from the few cases of plumbism mentioned by
Dr. Rogers, have you noticed any other industrial disease in
the works? —None whatever.
1612. Could you let us have a copy of the printed instructions
issued to your employees?—Yes; I put in the instructions we
have had displayed since 1917 over the signature of Mr. Sulli-
van, our works manager (Exhibit 18), and hints on the pre-
vention of lead poisoning received at a later date from the.
Department of Public Health, Sydney (Exhibit 19). I also
put in the current award of the New South Wales Industrial
Court relating to the wages and conditions of employees in the
industry of making paint, varnish, and white lead (Exhibit 20).
1613. What are the hours of work? —In the lead and paint
mills nominally 44, but less than that actually.
1614. What are the main rules which employees in the lead
works must obey in regard, firstly, to personal hygiene; secondly,
clothing; and thirdly, respirators; such things as you consider
are connected with the prevention of any industrial disease?—
We have an employment bureau for the enrolment of applicants.
If a man is wanted for the lead mill or any other portion of
the works an application is made to the bureau, where an
applicant is selected. The bureau officer has noted on a card
some personal details of the applicant, and his judgment dic-
tates the man he will choose for a particular job.
1615. Is that officer one of your permanent staff?—Yes; a
man from the head office.
1616. Does he do anything else in regard to industrial
organisation? —No; he is really an employment registrar.
Having selected a man his recommendation goes to the works
superintendent, who either approves or disapproves it. If the
selection is approved the man comes in. Occasionally we have
had men sent to Dr. Rogers first for examination, but not often.
We have accepted the selection as being good enough. In any
case the doctor will be at the works on the Wednesday of every
week, and a man cannot be here very long before he is looked
over. A man whose personal habits look to be unclean would
never be selected for approval. Having been angaged, the man
is provided with overalls, which he is compelled to wear, and
they must be changed twice in five days.
1617. Who provides the overalls? —The company, which
also keeps them in repair, and has them washed. The man
does nothing but don them and take them off.
1618. Does he change his underclothing before commencing
work? —That rests entirely with the men. Some do and some
■do not.
1619. Is bathing compulsory? —It is, but is often honored
in the breach, though we allow time in which to do it —15
minutes in general, and 30 minutes in special cases. The cor-
roding shed men are in the latter category. They always
cease work before the rest of the employees —half an hour
before sometimes, and they are paid for that time.
1620. Supposing the w r ork wns a little bit behind and you
wanted to get certain stacks finished, so that the men had to
bathe after hours if they cared to do so; would you pay
ordinary time or overtime for that? —The men are paid up to
the time at which they cease work. If they are a quarter of
an hour later than othet branches a proper amount of time,
after actually knocking off, sufficient to enable them to have
a bath, is allowed for.
1621. By Mr. Pearson —In other words, that allowance is
always made? —Yes.
1622. By Mr. Gepp —Do you find the w r ear and tear on
overalls heavy? How long do they last? —Much depends on
whether a man plays football during his lunch time. The
life of overalls is not very long, usually less than six months.
1623. With a comparatively small working force, I presume
that you are able to choose a high class of men for the
special jobs, so that on an average the men treat the com-
pany’s property in that way with a reasonable amount of
respect?—The average man does. A good proportion of our
men are bearing on to middle age, especially those in the cor-
roding shed and lead mill. No one under the age of 21 years
is employed there. The majority of the men in those branches
have been with us since the plant started about eight years
ago.
1624. What is your basic wage?—For lead employees,
£4 Bs. 6d. for week of 44 hours; and in the paint department,
£4 6s.
1625. How are those rates fixed? —Last time by agreement,
which was confirmed by the State Industrial Court.
1626. Are there special rates for special jobsi over and above
the £4 Bs. 6d.? —Yes, that is the minimum. The remuneration
goes up to £5 3s.
1627. What is the highest paid job?—That dealing with the
dry lead in the stacks and grinding.'
1628. That difference is paid by agreement in recognition
of a certain industrial hazard?—Yes, and, of course, some of
it is harder work, and some calls for more skill.
1629. Would you say any part of the extra pay is due to
industrial hazard? —Undoubtedly that has something to do with
it, but I do not think that point .was discussed when the
agreement was being framed. The whole aspect of the matter
was considered.
1630. Do the men enfployed in the stacks work on some task
basis, that is to say a certain number of men get through a
certain amount in a certain number of hours? —We expect them
to do so, and it is an honorable agreement that they should. The
men contended that they could do just as much work in 44
hours as in 48, and we said, “If you give us your word, you
can do that. ’ ’ Most of the men were willing to give 44 hours
a trial. They undertook to do so, and .they live pretty well
up to it.
1631. In regard to compensation, are you working under
the Workmen’s Compensation Act? —Yes.
1632. In the matter of the very few cases of plumbism you
have had, do you come under special clauses of that Act? —
The men under the Act are entitled to two-thirds of their
weekly wage for the period they are absent. We have always
paid them the full rate when suffering from occupational
illness, and have recovered only two-thirds from the insurance
company.
1633. Have you had any cases where in the interests both
of the men and yourselves you have felt it necessary to refuse
re-employment, or have you been able to put such men into
some other job?—We have always changed their positions.
In one instance the man was made a lift driver, and in another
he w r as not asked to work in any place where there was a
possibility of lead dust being present.
1634. After having inspected your processes and methods,
am I correct in saying that the steps you have taken have


been towards the prevention of dust as your main effort to
keep down the incidence of plumbish to a minimum? —Yes,
that is the main effort we have made, both by the installation
of dust collectors in the stacks, and dust collectors through-
out the buildings.
1635. The second step is personal hygiene and the provision
of overalls to prevent clothes carrying dust away after working
hours? —Yes, medical inspection also, and the insistence of
the doctor on men having bad teeth attended to.
1636. You regard the condition of the mouth as being
especially important?—The doctor always lays stress upon it,
and we recognise his authority and in the matter.
1637. Have your change houses, which are excellently laid
out, been available since the beginning of operations here? —
Yes, they have been enlarged since the beginning.
1638. Is there any regulation regarding the washing of hands
preparatory to the mid-day meal? —There is no regulation,
but the men are given from three to five minutes in which to
wash. It is understood that they must wash before going
into the dining room or partaking of meals. Hot water and
soap are provided, each man has a towel and nail brush, and
each departmental foreman is reponsible for his men keeping
clean.
1639. With regard to health regulations, are there any con-
ditions or restrictions under the State laws applying to works
of this kind? —The only obligatory thing I call to mind is the
quarter of an hour for bathing at the end of the day. That
is under the arbitration award under which the men work.
We not only conform to that, but give them more. The regu-
lations which are observed were framed by the company for
protection of the health of the employees, and while originally
based on English legislation have been improved beyond that.
1640. The only State regulations you observe are conditions
imposed by regulation in the Arbitration Court?——Yes.
1641. By Mr. Gepp —But those are in excess of the statutory
regulations of other countries? —Yes. The only other regula-
tions with which we have to conform are those of the Fac-
tories Act in regard to fire risk, machinery, &c.
1642. By Mr. Pearson —Do the men change their boots as
well as don overalls? —Yes, uniformly they wear old boots
without socks.
1643. In the preparation of the health notices issued by the
company, had you the assistance of your medical suerinten-
dent? —They were framed by Mr. Sullivan, the works manager,
based on English and American regulations for white lead
works.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Thursday, May 21st, 1925, at 2.30 p.m.
[At the Works of the British Australian Lead Manufacturers
Proprietary, Ltd., Cabarita, N.S.W.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
* Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
THOMAS WILLIAM FREEMAN, medical practitioner,
Concord, N.S.W., was sworn and examined:
1644. By the Chairman —You are the medical officer attached
to the British Australian Lead Manufacturers Proprietary?—
Yes.
1645. What was the date of your appointment?—l com-
menced in July, 1921, when white lead was first produced at
these works.
1646. Will you relate your experience as medical officer of
the company touching also on the question of lead hazard in
the processes and giving any other statement which you think
will be helpful to this Commission in its inquiry concerning the
lead posoning which exists at Port Pirie?—First, as to pre-
cautionary measures, the men have overalls which are changed
every day. The men emptying the stacks may change theirs
twice a day if necessary. We prohibit smoking in the works.
The men engaged in the removal of white lead from the stacks,
wear masks. Our idea is to keep the process wet; that is to
say, any white lead is kept wet as much as possible. For that
purpose we have a hose tixed at the end of the stack which is-
being opened so that the content is thoroughly watered before
it is distributed at all. The hose is supposed to be kept playing
the whole time the stack is being emptied. In the factory there
is one man employed entirely for cleaning purposes. Both
floors of the factory are washed down twice a day. The lower
floor v is hosed. In between times this man is walking about
the factory with a damp rag wiping down the rails or any
woodwork where there is any liklihood of dust settling. As to
the men themselves, they are given ten minutes before lunch
and before knocking off time especially for cleaning them-
selves up. In addition we have an occasional inspection of
hands by the foreman before the men go to lunch in order to
see that they wash themselves thoroughly. There are always a
few men who haven’t done so, and they have to go back and
wash again. As an extra precaution we move the men around
to a different process every fortnight or three weeks. Thus
a man is not permanently in the stacks where white lead
is, but goes into the stacks where bulk lead is being put in or
is moved into the packing-room. In addition, we have the
usual aperients which they can take, and on occasions where
we think it necessary we make them take also an iron aperient
mixture if they are off color. These are supplied by the
factory. When a man who has been away from work on
account of lead is well enough to come back he is given an
outside job.
1647. What aperient do you mainly use? —Whitehouse mix-
ture. The iron aperient mixture contains two grains 'of ferri-
sulphate and half a drachm of magnesium-sulphate.
1648. Is washing made compulsory before mealtime?—Yes,,
ten minutes is definitely given out of factory time for that
alone, also before the men go home at night.
1649. Is bathing under showers optional?—Yes.
1650. Do the men use the shower-baths to any great extent?
• —Yes, very largely.
1651. Will you proceed to deal with cases of lead poisoning
which have come under your notice, mainly from a statistical
point of view? —In six months in 1921, that is, from July
until December, we had two definite cases, both characterised
by colic. One cleared up well. The other man I lost trace
of, but a.s far as I know he is all right. Another man
developed abdominal pains, and I diagnosed his trouble as-
c ironic appendicitis. He went to a hospital and was told that
he had lead poisoning, but after that he went to the metro-
politan certifier, who said he had not got lead poisoning.
Another man was in the works for three weeks and spent alter-
nate days actually in the factory. He became ill, with
vomiting and various other symptoms which I did not for a
moment consider to have been due to lead poisoning, though I
believe he was certified later as suffering from it. That man
could not have been in the factory more than nine alternate-
days. As a matter of fact, he was a heavy drinker. In 1922
up to September there were four definite cases of plumbism
and one query; that is to say, a man had pains in the
stomac-h and back, and was off work for three days, but he has
never had symptoms since. From that September there were no
cases in the same year, and in 1923 none at all. We went through
1924 until March 30 without a case, then had a man who-
developed a lead colic. At the same time he had an acute
attack of influenza, which was followed in about a week by
quinsy. He had a pretty big dose of it altogether. On May 13,
1924, I felt reasonably certain that he was free from any
symptoms of lead and that he was fit for light work. He said
he was not. I held a consultation with Dr. S. A. Smith, of
Macquarie Street, who agreed with me that he did not show
any definite signs of lead, but suggested that he should be
given another three weeks off work, -when, in his opinion, it
would be possible to regard the man quite free from symptoms,,
and that he would recover without disability or any damage-


to his health. That was Dr. Smith’s statement in a certificate.
At the end of the three weeks the man said he was still not
well enough to come back to work. Later on we heard he had
been admitted to a hospital suffering from lead poisoning. We
got into touch with Dr. Smith, who looked up the hospital
record and found that he had been in the hospital suffering
mainly from neurasthenia and tonsilitis. However, the urine
contained a trace of lead. Dr. Smith’s statement now was.
That there was no permanent damage from lead, since he was
not anaemic, nor was there any kidney disease present.” He
also stated that the urine should be free from lead in about
one month. That is the last we heard of the man, except
that I believe he is still drawing compensation. The next case
was on February 16 this year. This man had a wrist drop.
The wrist drop having cleared up, the man felt quite, well,
and we put him back to work on March 24th in the packing-
room, where we thought there would be small chance of him
getting a recurrence. In the meantime he had put on half
a stone in weight, which was very much against a severe
toxaemia from lead. Later on he went off work again, com-
plaining of numbness in the left arm and in the side of the
head. He is still away from work, although he is able to
play the drum in a local band.
1652. That is nine caes in all? —Yes, in practically four
years.
1653. The bulk of those occurred in the first year or eighteen
months after commencing white lead operations?—ln the -first
fifteen months.
1654. Have you details of the position these men occupied
in the works?—Most of the original cases worked at Lie
crushing plant, which has since been altered.
1655. By Mr. Gepp —Was that a wet operation,?—There was
a lot of splashing. The two eases we have had since then
worked all over the factory.
1656. By the Chairman —Were they men of comparatively
long service? —One was over a year, probably eighteen months,
and the other had been there some three years.
1657. To your knowledge did any of those earlier cases pre-
sent an industrial history which indicated that they had been
employed in lead operations prior to coming here? —No, they
had not.
1658. Have you any idea of the average duration of work
here, especially in relation to that crushing operation, neces-
sary to bring about symptoms of lead poisoning in those men?
—The first two were here two or three months.
1659. That would indicate that the dose of lead they were
receiving was comparatively large? —Yes.
1660. Did the cases represent an acute type?—They were
not acutely ill, but it was more of an acute type of the disease
in relation to the time they had been engaged. One case in
the second part of 1922 had been in the factory only three
or four months. His was the most acute colic we have had,
but the case cleared up remarkably quickly as soon as we got
his bowels in proper order. If I remember rightly he was back
at work in about a fortnight.
1661. Of those early cases how many returned to work? —
We have one man who has been wmrking in lead stuffs since
without signs of lead poisoning. Most of the other men left.
1662. To the best of your knowledge was there any general
impairment of health following the attack? —No; they all re-
covered.
1663. So your average for the last two or three years indi-
cates comparatively a negligible amount of poisoning? —-Yes.
1664. Would you be inclined to attribute this to the absence
of hazard or the observance of precautions on the part of the
men? —i think both. The men are coming to realize that pre-
cautions are necessary. At first they used rather to scout the
idea of them when we were lecturing them on the matter. I
believe they thought we were exaggerating, and some were
most careless. The majority of the men who have suffered
were careless in their habits.
1665. Were they in physique more or less robust than the
average worker? —Three of the seven, cases were quite well-
built men and robust. The others were doubtful. Now we do
not engage a man who is not comparatively robust. Men are
taken into employment on the presumption that I will pass
them.
1666. You examine the men accepted for work? —Yes. I see
them every Tuesday. If a man is engaged before that day
it is on the condition that he will be passed by me.
1667. In that examination would you reject a man of poor
physique?—lf he was definitely of poor physique I would,
although I have no standard to work upon.
1668. You would not, for instance, adopt the army standard
of fitness?—No.
1669. In your opinion does susceptibility to lead depend on
physique?—lt does not from my experience.
1670. But you recognise the fact that certain individuals
are vastly more susceptible than others? —I feel quite certain
about that.
1671. Do you inspect the men’s mouths? —My routine is to
take their blood pressure once a month, from which I have
found nothing, I weigh them regularly, inspect their mouths,
and more or less get a general idea of their appearance. Those
are the main things. Apart from those I keep a look out for
the appearance of any anaemic signs.
167_. In the event of a man exhibiting signs of advanced
pyorrhoea and dental caries, would you give him any advice
on the matter?—Yes.
1673. Do you recognise that as a more or less important
factor?—Yes.
1674. You were a member of the Commission who inquired
into miners ’ diseases at Broken Hill. During your work there
did you have any special experience of the deleterious effects
of carbon monoxide?—No.
1676. Have you at any time seen eases which you considered
subject to chronic poisoning by carbon monoxide?—No.
1676. Are the employees at these works all or practically all
of British nationality?—Yes.
1677. Are there any southern Europeans?—No.
1678. By Mr. Pearson —You said you considered that
susceptibility to lead poisoning did not depend on the physique
of the man. As far as this Commission’s investigation at
Port Pirie has gone, south-eastern Europeans appear to be
particularly liable to get it. Do you think their diet and
probably defective nourishment would be a contributing factor?
—Defective nourishment would be most certainly, I think. I
have no experience of it, but it suggests itself to me that it
would be.
1679. We have had evidence that that class of workman lives
largely on tinned foods. Do you think that that might make him
more susceptible than a man who has had an ordinary diet? —I
think so. One of the things we impress on a man who has had
any trouble is that he should drink plenty of milk and eat plenty
of fresh vegetables.
1680. By Mr. Gepp —For what period was your appointment
with the Broken Hill Commission?—l was there for only two
months, covering the latter portion of their stay.
1681. Was your work in connection of cases?—Yes,
. I 7
generally physical examination.
1682. Our evidence to date shows the occurrence of a large
number of reported cases of mild, very mild, and sub-acute
types, which for the moment we are accepting as cases of
plumbism, subject to further review. At the Port Pirie
Smelters we have the peculiar phenomenon of a very rapid
increase simultaneous with a considerable improvement in
working conditions, which indicates either very intense diagnoses
and (or) a considerable number of men coming on to the job
who are more susceptible or less tolerant, and (or) other things,
such as other conditions in the work which we will have to
recognise apart from lead, since the symptoms are nearly all
of a mild type. For instance, wrist drop is almost, if not
entirely, absent. Pallor, anaemia, want of muscular tone, loss
of appetite and headache are sometimes complained of. Would
you say that there are a certain number of diseases which
predispose to plumbism? —From my experience here I have


nothing to indicate that. If a man is down in health as a sequel
to influenza, for instance, I think it is most likely he is more
susceptible. To a certain extent, where possible, Ave “nurse”
after an illness, in that the foremen are asked to keep an eye
on them. What is done in this Avay is merely precautionary.
I have not had a case of plumbism folloAving such an illness.
1683. Would you say that amongst the more common causes
of susceptibility to lead are alcoholism, acute or chronic;
syphilis, gout, and anything which tends to cause intestinal
stasis or constipation? —Most certainly.
1684. There is an interesting point connected with the diffi-
culty of diagnosis. The Committee on Industrial Paints
appointed by the Home Secretary in England in 1923 Avere
instructed to re-examine more particularly in the light of
further information wdiich became available since the depart-
mental committee Avas appointed in 1911 concerning the use
of lead, as in the painting trade, particularly in view of the
resolutions passed by the GeneA'a Conference. They make the
following statement: —“As to the allegation which has also
been made that cases among house painters are not verified,
it must be remembered that in lead poisoning diagnosis the
practitioner confronts difficulties which do not trouble him in
the notification of infectious diseases. There is no standard
as to Avhat constitutes lead poisoning, and every medical prac-
titioner must form his oavh criterion.” Would you agree
that the criteria are difficult to define, and, therefore, that
each practitioner must, to a certain extent at least, take many
things into consideration in addition to the symptoms stated
by a patient?—Yes, the main difficulty Ave are in is to get a
standard as to what is lead poisoning. Practically any one
of the symptoms or signs that you get may constitute lead
poisoning, and it is rare to get several of them together, but
we have no standard to go on. A man with a blue line in
his gums has not necessarily got lead poisoning, and a man
with lead in his urine has not necessarily got it.
1685. Some authorities say that pyorrhoea, anaemia, and
exposure to lead co-existing may very easily be wrongly
regarded as lead anaemia. Do you agree Avith that? Yes.
A good number of the blue lines I haA r e seen arose from
pyorrhoeal condition.
1686. Based on your experience here, and remembering the
difference with works with, say, 50 men and works with 2,000,
AA'ould you say it Avould be desirable to institute full time
medical attention in such an industry as the big smelters at
Port Pirie? —The question resolves itself entirely into one of
the time required for seeing the men. Here I see 40 men
once a week, my visit for the purpose occupying about tAvo
hours.
1687. If you Avere the responsible officer for hygiene at a
big works, Avould you say you ought to have as much medical
service as Avould give you a good job at the rcorks from the
standpoint of protection from lead and other troubles ? Apart
from the medical inspection there is not much else. I always
see the foremen. Apart from seeing the men I occasionally
go over the factory and make suggestions, and between us
all here we have gradually added more precautions.
1688. I presume you agree Avith published statements that
dust is the main trouble? —Y'es.
1689. If you Avere the medical officer in charge of the
medical service at AA’orks like those at Port Pirie, Avould you
feel that the institution of a dental clinic in conjunction Avith
it, where attention to the men’s teeth could be done Avell and
cheaply, A\ T ould be desirable? —Yes, it is an excellent idea.
The Avitness withdrew.
GEORGE HERBERT PODGER, works manager for the
British Australian Load Manufacturers Proprietary
Ltd., Cabarita, Ncav South Wales, Avas sworn and
examined:
1690. By Mr. Gepp — What are the main products of your
works? —We are making at present solely white lead in oil.
1691. Hoav many men are employed? —At present,. 43. Of
that number 10 are employed handling metallic lead and dross,
13 are employed in handling (white lead or damp lead), four
in handling white lead in oil, and 17 in sundry work, so that
there are only 27 men out of 43 who are actually handling
lead.
1692. Will you supply the Commission with a copy of your
printed instructions that are posted up at the works? —Yes.
(Exhibit 21.)
1693. Have you any further points to make concerning
industrial hygiene and the discipline you consider essential
in any operations where lead is handled? —I think it is very
desirable that there should be some definite order to the
employees to carry out those > instructions. The Department
of Labor and Industry makes certain regulations which the
employer has to carry out, but there is no compulsion on the
employee to carry out his part of the regulations. In England,
if a man breaks one of the Home Office regulations he is liable
to be summoned before a court of summary jurisdiction, and
fined. I have known them to be so fined for not wearing
respirators. It would be very desirable to have some compul-
sion on employees as well as on employers.
1694. By Mr. Fearson —You advocate similar regulations in
corresponding industries here? —Yes. Practically speaking,
the only method we have of enforcing regulations is to warn
a man a second time, and then if he does not conform, dis-
charge him; but meanwhile we may be fined, and there is the
possibility of the man becoming sick through no fault .of our
own.
1695. Your recommendation would be that statutory regula-
tions governing both the company and the men employed
would be a benefit in all such industries? —Yes.
1696. Would you also say it would assist in maintaining
the best health in everyone connected with such industries if
those statutory regulations included regular medical supervi-
sion? —Yes.
1697. What power would you give in connection Avith such
questions as compulsory bathing?—lt is desirable that a man
engaged in a section of the Avork which is admittedly hazardous
should bathe every day before leaving Avork. A regulation for
bathing once a week Avould be besides the point. We encourage
the men to bathe every day.
1698. By places that are admittedly hazardous I take it
vou mean places Avhere the men come into direct contact with
lead or are handling lead products? — Yes, and are exposed to
dust. I have chiefly in mind the process of stack stripping.
1699. By Mr. Gepp —lt is generally admitted that the res-
piratory tract is the main entrance of lead into the body as
far as plumbism is concerned? —Yes.
1700. When you Avere having trouble due to splashing, how
do you think those eases occurred? Was the trouble due to
the splashes drying and dust coming therefrom? —Yes, men
Avere splashed from head to feet. The splashes dried rapidly,
and there is no doubt that a man who became ill inhaled a
quantity of very fine dust.
1701. Did he take off his clothes afterwards? —Yes.
1702. It is also possible that while he Avas Avorking the
splashes dried and dust, getting into the air, was inhaled?—
Y'es, I think so.
1703. There are two, ways in which clothes can be handled
in an industry such as this, namely, by a complete change into
working clothes, and by the wearing of overalls over ordinary
clothes. If you were laying down an ideal system for such an
industry, Avhere there is a certain amount of dust, what would
you say Avould be the better way?—The ideal is undoubtedly
complete change in a separate change house. I find that in hot
weather the men discard practically the whole of their clothes
and wear nothing but the overalls, or they will keep on a
singlet and discard the overall coat which is given to them.
The ideal would be to have complete change and to have the
men pass practically naked from a point where they leave their
own clothes into another place where they Avill put on overalls,
and where at night they will leave their dirty clothes and pass
through to the other place and get back to their own outdoor
clothes again.


1704. With regard to overalls, which theoretically should pro-
tect the men fairly well, do you find any trouble through men
leaving them open, unbuttoning them round the neck, and so
on? ies; if it is at all warm they discard the coat altogether.
1705. That situation would be helped if here were definite
statutory regulations as to how they should be worn?—That
would give us more power over them.
1706. Are overalls washed every day here? —Yes.
1707. Has that been brought about as the result of the
absorption of an amount of lead which accumulates on overalls
during the day?—Yes; splashes dry overnight, making the men
liable to inhale dust when putting on a dirty set next morning.
My experience in the past was that it was very much better to
give a man a clean set every day.
1708. You had experience in this industry in Great Britain
before you came here?—Y"es; I have now been over 24 years in
the industry.
1709. Briefly, what has been your experience of the pre-
cautions taken during your long period of work in this industry
from the standpoint of reducing the hazard? —Precautions have
been carried out very much as we are carrying them out here
to-day. The precautions we take here are based on the British
regulations and experience with them in Great Britain. We
have improved upon them somewhat. We have more modern
facilities in the way of baths and washing apparatus. We
have improved on them in respect to daily change of overalls,
and working conditions in the factory itself are infinitely
superior to what they were in the Old Country. My experience
there was that, roughly speaking, on an average in a white
lead factory, employing about 60 hands, you would get about one
case of colie per annum, and that case always recovered and
returned to work in a short time. I have never known a fatal
case or a case in which a man has been permanently disabled.
The only precaution in my experience -which used to be taken
and has since been dropped in England, and has never been
established here, was the provision of milk or hot coffee to the
employees before starting work, but in those days the time of
starting work w r as 6 a.m., and admittedly nobody had time to
eat before commencing work.
1710. When were the statutory regulations originally intro-
duced by the British Government? —About 1895.
1711. Did those regulations reduce the incidence of the disease
in the industry?—Yes, enormously. The drop in the number
of cases was almost instantaneous. I think in the first two
years the drop was to a fifth or a sixth of the number previously.
1712. Were those regulations issued by the Factories Branch
of the Home Office? —Yes.
1713. There were penal clauses therein applying both to
employers and employees? —Yes.
1714. Were they strictly carried out by the Home Office and
the employers?—Yes; inspectors used to pay frequent visits,
going carefully round a factory and looking into every detail.
1715. Were those regulations mainly based upon the
elimination of dust? —Yes; and cleanliness of the person.
1716. By Mr. Pearson —What were the duties of the certify-
ing or reference surgeons as provided under the English regu-
lations? —A medical officer appointed by the employer acted as
certifying surgeon. That is to say, he certified as to a case
of lead poisoning. He made a weekly inspection in white lead
works and a monthly inspection in smelting works. In the case
of a dispute between the certifying surgeon appointed by the
employer and a general practitioner there was appointed a
medical referee, whose decision, I think, was final.
1717. Would that medical referee be appointed by the Home
Office? —Yes.
1718. By Mr. Gepp —ln that connection a system has been
introduced at Broken Hill by the New South Wales Government
under a special Act, whereby there is a board of three medical
men, one of whom, the chairman, is a Government fuil-inme
officer, one is nominated by the employers, and one by the em-
ployee, and a general practitioner need not certify as to any
man beyond stating that he believes the man may be suffering
from lead poisoning. The case is then sent to the board, and
the board, which is merely a referee, issues a certificate, signed
by the chairman, giving the decision of the board in respect to
the case. Would that appeal to you as being preferable to
having a single referee after two medical men have given their
decision?—l think it is preferable in this country, because the
medical profession here has not a very wide experience of lead,
and there is always a very debatable point as to what consti-
tutes lead poisoning. It is a difficult matter to differentiate
between lead absorption and lead poisoning and to have a board
of three is an excellent idea.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Friday, May 22nd, 1925, at 10 a.m.
[At Parliament House, Sydney].
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
HENRY GEOEGE CHAPMAN, Professor of Physiology in
the University of Sydney, and formerly Professor of
Pharmacology in the University of Sydney, was sworn
and examined;
Ul9. By the Chairman —You were Chairman of the Cam-
mission appointed by the New South Wales Government to in-
quire into miners’ diseases at Broken Hill? —I was Chairman
of the Technical Commission appointed by the Board of Trade,
and afterwards I was Chairman of the Commission appointed
by the State Government.
1720. Part of the work accomplished by that Commission had
to do with investigation of the effects of lead on the miners? —
Yes.
1721. Will you give this Commission, in your own manner, a
definition of the term ‘‘lead poisoning,” wdth any comments
you may care to make? —Lead poisoning is any condition in-
duced by the introduction of lead into the body which may
shorten or tend to shorten the duration of life or lessen the
efficiency of the mechanical energy of the body or diminish the
comfort or wellbeing of the body. I do not regard any change
induced in the body by lead as necessarily being lead poisoning.
For example, people exposed to lead may diminish in weight by
11b. without any other condition of the body being altered.
I do not consider that such a fall in weight should be regarded
as lead poisoning. If the condition shortens or tends to shorten
life, or if it diminishes physical efficiency or capacity to do
work, or brings about a change which diminshes comfort or well-
being, I think the change should be regarded as constituting
lead poisoning.
1722. Do you then recognise certain states as a result of the
absorption of lead which are not to be classified as lead poison-
ing? —No; but I do regard it as a fact that lead can be
introduced into the body without producing poison.
1723. You consider that there is a reasonably well marked
boundary line between what we might term absorption of lead
wuthout poisoning and lead poisoning? —Yes; the Technical
Commission saw at Broken Hill some 2,500 men, all of whom
were excreting lead, and who from the evidence before us had
been absorbing lead during the period of their employment at
Brokoii Hill, and a number of whom had worked there for periods
more than 30 years. Those 2,500 men gave no history of
ever having suffered from illness of any kind whatever. On
medical examination they presented no sign of any disease.
They fell into groups. Well over 100 had worked,at fhe.mineg
for 30 years, more between 20 years and 30 years, and more again
between 10 years and 20 years, and still more for under 10
years, so that they had been exposed for varying periods. They
had never had an illness of any kind, and when examined they
showed no signs of disease at all. They would have been
accepted as first-class lives by any insurance company.


1724. You came across certain cases of definite lead poison-
ing at Broken Hill? —Yes.
1725. Can you describe a typical case which you met there?
-—The Broken Hill cases of lead poisoning form two groups.
Firstly, there was a group consisting of about half of the
persons considered to be suffering from lead poisoning, who
gave a history of having suffered from repeated attacks of
colic, ranging mainly from 15 to 20 years previously, who
gave a history of having suffered from definite paralysis of
the type recognized to be due to lead, and 31 out of 35 of
whom at the time we examined them showed evidence of that
paralysis in their bodies, who were under weight, who showed
pallor and the earthy tint associated with lead poisoning, who
showed signs of malnutrition in the absence of subcutaneous fat,
and who suffered in varying degrees, but not all of them, from
headaches, giddiness, and tremor, and some of them also from
Bright's disease. These represented the first group, that is,
persons who had in their bodies undoubted signs of having
had previous lead palsy, and who suffered from this condition
of malnutrition. In addition, there was another group of
persons showing a long history of colic, which, in many eases,
was checked by evidence that they had been in hospitals suffer-
ing from colic for weeks and months, but no history of ever
having had nervous paralysis or paresis. They also suffered
from pallor and anaemia, showed the earthy tint, showed this
peculiar cachexia, malnutrition, absence of subcutaneous fat,
and some of them suffered from headaches, giddiness, fibrillary
tremor in the muscles, general muscular wasting, loss of weight
for their height, and about 50 per cent, of them had Bright’s
disease, showing various signs suCh as raised blood pressure,
thickened arteries, retinal haemorrhage, and so on. Those
constituted the second group. All these men were over
40 years of age. I draw your attention to Table 111.
on page 4 of our second report, which shows the
distribution of these symptoms. Many of them had chronic
-constipation, giddiness, fits, and pains in the limbs.
1726. By Mr. Gepp —How many were in each class? —Thirty
.and 31.
1727. Which were the more severe? —All were about the
same, but there were different manifestations.
1728. You would not call one more severe than another?—
No.
1729. What names w r ould you give to the two classes? —One
had nervous signs and those in the other class had not.
1730. Did one class show more signs and symptoms of
nephritis than the other? —No. They were divided into these
groups because the first contained those who had unmistak-
able lead poisoning of a subacute type, and who had, more-
over, the signs of malnutrition. The second group resembled
the first in every way except that they did not have the
slight traces of extensor paralysis and so on.
1731. By the Chairman —Would you say that the type of
cases which you met at Broken Hill was typical of industrial
lead poisoning?—No, not typical.
1732. Could you describe briefly a typical case, or would
you consider that the manifestations vary tremendously accord-
ing to circumstances? —It depends upon where you say a case
is typical of. As far as Sydney is concerned, we do get a
typical form of lead poisoning, which might be called indus-
trial lead poisoning. In other parts of the world there are
other conditions which do not occur here, and other forms of
typical lead poisoning of an industrial nature which we have
not seen in Sydney.
1733. By Mr. Gepp —ls there any reason for that? —There
are certain industries, such as potteries, in which acute lead
poisoning occurs, usually known as lead encephalopathy, which
leads to death within a few' months. This disease is found in
association with certain industries in Europe. We have not
those industries here.
1734. Is that form brought about largely through exposure
to the hazard over short periods?—Yes.
1735. It if in such cases that brain affections occur? —Yes.
We have apparently no considerable group of industrial
workers exposed to such large amounts of lead dust in their
daily occupation.
1736. Is there any association between the encephalopathy
and what are described as nervous symptoms of lead poison-
ing?—lt is a more acute form of nervous lead poisoning. It
is not what we commonly mean when we refer to the nervous
type of lead poisoning.
1737. It would not be a more intense manifestation of the
nervous type?—lt is a more intense manifestation of the ner-
vous type. One is a brain lesion, whilst the ordinary nervous
type is a peripheral or nerve lesion.
1738. Supposing a man is exposed to conditions which give
him a severe type of lead poisoning, if he continued in those
conditions would he then develop into brain lesion? —No.
1739. By the Chairman —We have been inquiring into the
incidence of cases and other aspects connected with cases of
reported plumbism which have occurred at the Port Pirie
smelters. I want to read to you a definition of the typical
cases met with there, and you may desire to comment on those
statements: —
(Port Pirie Evidence, Question 1221.) What are the pre-
vailing symptoms complained of by persons afflicted with
plumbism in your experience?—ln my experience the more
usual symptoms complained of are weakness and lassitude,
sleeplessness, loss of appetite sometimes associated with vomit-
ing, abdominal colic, and constipation, and pains in the
extremities.
(1212.) In your experience, I presume you have noted vary-
ing types of the disease. If so, will you describe the prevail-
ing signs elicited from those main types?—l will first describe
the abdominal type, in which the prevailing symptoms would
be abdominal colic and constipation. Then there is the anaemic
type, in which the prevailing indications are anaemia and other
associated blood changes. Then there is the neuritic type, in
which the prevailing symptoms complained of are pains in
the extremities, and the signs found are tenderness over the
main nerve trunks and muscular wasting. The fourth type
might be classed as the cerebral type with signs and symptoms
of acute brain involvement, and, lastly, there is the arterio
sclerotic type, in which the symptoms would be signs of
arterio schlerosis and chronic nephritis.
(1213.) Does, in your opinion, one particular type prevail
in the cases you have seen? —Among the cases I have seen,
what I have classed as the neurotic type would prevail, but not
unassociated with the symptoms of the other types as well.
That was from one witness. I will give'a definition by another
witness on similar lines: —
(1316.) Relating to the cases under review, were the bulk
of them acute, subacute, or chronic? —Subacute.
(1317.) By subacute to what particular set of conditions
do you refer, or the particular type of case?—l should des-
cribe sucn subacute cases as exhibit pallor, blue lead line in
the gums, evidence of loss of weight, complaining of lack of
appetite, foul taste in the mouth, constipation, and abdominal
sense of unrest, with occasional exacerbations of colicky pain,
loss of muscular tone, sleeplessness, and pains in the* joints
and limbs.
Would you care to give the Commission any comment on those
statements? I feel great difficulty in commenting upon this
information. All I can say as to the first of those descriptions
is that I would not describe lead poisoning in the terms used
there. As far as the second description is concerned, I think
that the description is that of very mild incipient lead poison-
ing, but I would regard the occurrence of colic in a case as
absolutely necessary to be sure of lead poisoning since those
very varied symptoms are found with so many conditions.
The one thing which I think is necessary in those cases to make
them recognisable lead poisoning is colic. I regard the occur-
rence of colic as the one important symptom of lead poisoning
of this type. With regard to the first group, not having seen
the cases I would not care to comment. All I can say is that
they do not resemble the cases I know of industrial lead
poisoning as they occur in Sydney and Broken Hill. Here, in
order to clinch a diagnosis of lead poisoning, we regard as
essential that there should be undoubted evidence of colic or
undoubted evidence of nervous lesion. Without that we do not
regard the symptoms as being diagnostic of lead poisoning.
I am not thinking now of cases like those we saw at Broken
Hill, but cases of sub-acute or mildly chronic lead poisoning.
We are not talking of the delayed chronic form which occurs


in people who have been exposed, roughly speaking, more than
20 years to lead.
1740. That first witness mentioned quite definitely as among
the signs tenderness of the main nerve trunks and muscular
wasting?—General muscular wasting is not, in my opinion, a sign
of early lead poisoning. The typical wasting of muscles in lead
poisoning occurring after a year or two of exposure to lead, is re-
stricted to particular muscle groups. It may be in the extensor
muscles of the forearm, or it may be in the thenar eminence, or it
may be in the extensor muscles of the leg, and very occasionally
elsewhere, but th e characteristic feature is that it is not general,
but particular.
1741. Will you glance at the summary of the blood
examinations performed at the Commonwealth Health Labora-
tory Port Pirie, and make any comment relating to the degree
of anaemia?—l do not want to offer any comment.
1742. Would you consider that definite cases of lead
poisoning, even though mild, would present a series of blood
pictures consistent with them?—Yes. It is just as consistent
" ith lead poisoning as with anything else. I do not regard
it in any way as being evidence for the existence of lead
poisoning.
1743. Will you give the Commission your views on the
importance of blood examination in regard to the diagnoses of
lead poisoning?—The blood examination is important in making
certain of the presence of anaemia. The blood examination also
enables one to make certain of the type of anaemia as that which
may occur in lead poisoning. It enables on© to exclude certain
anaemias which are different from those seen in lead poisoning.
With regard to any special blood change, in certain indirstres
in which exposure to lead takes place changes in the red blood
corpuscles occur, but not in all industries in which men are
exposed to lead. In my experience no characteristic change in
the white blood corpuscles exists in lead poisoning. I regard
the estimation of haemoglobin as a most important sign of
anaemia in persons suffering from lead poisoning. I think,
further, that that should be done by an accurate method.
1744. Do you regard the Hawkesly-Haldane haemoglobino-
meter as an accurate method? —Yes.
1745. Referring to changes in the red blood cells, I am
presuming that you refer principally to basophilic degeneration?
—Both to that and changes in the shape of the red cells.
1746. Do you consider that a pathologist on examining the
film of blood can say, ‘ ‘ This picture points definitely to lead
poisoning”?—l definitely do not think that.
1747. Was basophilic degeneration discovered in the blood of
Broken Hill miners to any great extent? —Not at all. One sees
as much of that in practically normal people. In painters and
plumbers basophilic degeneration is seen, though I have no
idea of the amount. We have not examined enough painters or
plumbers to determine the proportion.
1748. Do you consider that painters and plumbers are subject
to the absorption of a relatively large quantity of lead per
diem? —Yes.
1748 a. Do you consider that that might account for the
more frequent appearance of basophilic degeneration? —I
have no evidence that they absorb more lead than people at
Broken Hill.
1749. Do you think the former absorb lead in a form more
calculated to give rise to diagnostic symptoms?—No. I think
that when you get the quantities which are absorbed at Broken
Hill the form makes no difference to the condition.
1750. Can you give any explanation why basophilic degenera-
tion should occur more often in those cases than in miners at
Broken Hill?—No. Some people assume that basophilic de-
generation in painters is due more to turpentine than to lead.
I do not subscribe to that. Ido not know.
1751. By Mr. Gepp —Does basophilic degeneration occur in
people who are not exposed to lead or other industrial disease?
—Yes.
1752. Is the general condition of anaemia, from whatever
cause, necessarily indicated by basophilic degeneration? No.
There may be practically no anaemia, yet basophilic degenera-
tion may be present.
1753. There may be anaemia without basophilic degenera-
tion?—Yes, very frequently.
1754. What are the blood indications of anaemia and per-
nicious anaemia? Is it lower haemoglobin count or what is it?
You may have a diminished percentage of haemoglobin or a
diminished number of corpuscles, or they may go together or
separately. Then you may get less haemoglobin in the indi-
vidual corpuscle, or sometimes the fall in the number of cor-
puscles is accompanied by an equally proportionate fall in the
amount of haemoglobin.
1755. To the Chairman —With regard to the mode of entry
of lead into the body, the evidence available shows that the
greatest amount of industrial lead poisoning is induced by lead
entering the respiratory passages, and the evidence available
also shows that the amount of lead which produces industrial
lead poisoning must be greater than two milligrammes of lead
in dust in the amount of air breathed per shift or per diem
by the employee. We are inclined to think here that the quan-
tity may be reduced to one milligramme, though we have never
seen cases of lead poisoning here in which the quantity
breathed in amounted to only one milligramme.
1756. The very essential point, surely, is to define whether
that is the absolute minimum that would affect the most sus-
ceptible person. We know of a man having been killed at
Broken Hill by 110 volts of electric current and other men
have not been killed by 550 volts. When you say one milli-
gramme or two milligrammes do you mean the amount that will
cause plumbism in the most susceptible, the least susceptible,
or the average person?—Any susceptible.
1757. That is taking susceptibles as a class? —Yes. We
think there is undoubted evidence of lead poisoning from
breathing air containing one or two milligrammes in four
cubic metres, though it is not yet possible to be definite on that
point. All our experience goes to show that a quantity of one
milligramme in the daily air breathed involves risk, and for
local purposes in this State we have laid down that .5 milli-
gramme in 10 cubic metres is safe. We have never seen any-
thing at all to suggest that .5 of a milligramme of lead dust
in 10 cubic metres of air ever produces lead poisoning.
1758. By the Chairman —A workman could continue breath-
ing or ingesting .2 of a milligramme per diem of lead for the
rest of his natural life without any ill-effecting at all? —It
looks like it. Those quantities which we mention are the quan-
tities of dust in the air. That is not saying how much goes
into the person’s body.
1759. By Mr. Gepp —'When you say the amount of lead, do
you take it on any average of the lead content in the dust? —
Those figures are for lead, because they are arrived at by a
method which determines lead.
1760. Supposing you were breathing dust which contains 5
per cent, of lead and took in two milligrammes of lead, would
that bo as harmful as the same two milligrammes taken in dust
containing 50 per cent, of lead?—l think it would be just the
same. I referred to milligrammes of lead. Some industrial
lead poisoning is caused by alimentary absorption of lead, but
what evidence is available shows that much larger quantities are
required to produce lead poisoning through the alimentary canal
in industrial processes. The suggestion is that 15 grains per
diem is the minimum amount, but I have no evidence of my
own on that question. All the industrial lead poisoning I have
seen in Sydney has been due to respiratory absorption. There
has also been put forward the suggestion that lead poisoning
takes place through the skin, but all one’s experience here is
that there are few such cases, even if it does take place occasion-
ally. Under ordinary circumstances people can be covered with
lead dust, and even by lead oxide, and show no lead poisoning.
There is very little evidence of absorption through the skin.
With regard to the terms ‘ ‘ lead absorption ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ lead poison-
ing” the term “lead absorption” was regarded by members of
the Broken Hill Commission as being a chemical term only,
indicating that lead is passed into the blood, and the evidence
of that fact is always the discovery of lead in the urine. In our
experience whenever lead is absorbed, lead appears in the urine.


With regard to the types of lead poisoning, there are the acute
and subacute forms. Many people call the subacute form
chronic lead poisoning. We prefer to divide them into acute
and subacute forms, which develop after some months, or,
rarely, shorter periods of exposure to lead, and secondly the
delayed chronic form, which develops after years. The acute
and subacute forms are either nervous or alimentary, and the
delayed chronic forms are either renal or general.
1761. By the Chairman —Most of the cases which have been
described as occurring at Port Pirie and presenting an industrial
history of months or very few years would appear to be of that
acute or subacute type?—Yes; I think if they are cases of
lead poisoning they should either show colic or localised paralysis
or paresis.
1762. I would be glad if you will comment to the Commission
on the subject of the differential diagnosis of plumbism? —In
considering the differential diagnosis of plumbism arising as an
industrial disease, attention should be given to the examination
of the industry and the examination of the individual. The
examination of the industry is in respect to the determination
of the* amount of exposure to lead, and evidence as to the
number of individuals in the industry who absorb lead. We
regard that as of the greatest importance in determining the
danger in an industrial group. Ido not think any industry can
be properly examined without a determination of the number
of individuals who are absorbing lead. By that we mean the
number of people who are excreting lead in the urine. That
needs to be done first. We examined printers in Sydney and
found no person absorbing lead. There was no lead in the
urine. Our whole medical examination is profoundly influenced
by that. Then we come to the examination of the individual
in the light of the knowledge gained in that other respect. For
that purpose a complete examination of each individual is
necessary. The reason for that being made is that many of
the signs and symptoms which occur in persons suffering from
lead poisoning occur in other conditions, and it therefore be-
comes of great importance to determine whether any other con-
dition is present. In order that that medical examination
should be complete I think the use of some printed form which
covers the examination to be of great value, so as to be certain
that accurate information is obtained on all points from each
individual. Very great attention should be given to the history,
because in my experience the history is one of the factors of
utmost importance in arriving at the diagnosis* especially the
history of illnesses, such as colic. The patient should certainly
be asked what doctors they consulted and when they went into
hospital, and attempts should be made to obtain evidence from
doctors and hospitals in regard to the condition of the patient.
In this respect I would like to say something about malingering,
which is often supposed to be likely to occur in connection with
history. My experience is that malingering has no relation to
industrial lead poisoning. In my own experience I recollect
only one case in which I saw it attempted, and in which every
one who examined the person concerned was able to recognise at
once that the man in saying he suffered from an attack of
lead colic was telling a deliberate lie. As a matter of fact,
in the hands of a competent medical man who asks questions,
it is difficult for a lay patient to answer a question in such a
way as to carry conviction unless he is telling the truth, and
nearly always they give definite evidence that their attack was
not an attack of colic. Colic is a very severe condition in
lead poisoning, so severe that a man must—at any rate when
he first gets it—seek medical advice. When people suffer from
attacks of colic at their work the attack is so severe that every
one in the place becomes aware that the patient is severely
ill. Such persons have often to be carried home. So' fraud,
in my own experience, occurs very little. I do not think people
should be merely asked whether they have had colic. In my
opinion that invites them to say that they have had colic, and
they do not know what it is. If they are asked to describe
their illness it is possible to determine whether they have had
colic or not. In dealing with the diagnosis of individuals
standards should be laid down before starting exami-
nations. In dealing with individual cases the purpose
of the medical examination should be to determine how
far any individual conforms or does not conform to
these standards. In my opinion, as medical referee on
these cases in New South Wales under the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act, no difficulty is experienced in diagnosing acute
or subacute cases, that is, cases which arise after exposure for
months in an industry. Considerable difficulty arises, however,
in dealing with delayed chronic eases, the difficulty being to
determine whether some other condition may have produced the
wasting, and great difficulty is experienced when you have some
other condition present. It is then necessary to determine
whether that other condition accounts for the whole of the
wasting or not. In acute and subacute cases one’s experience
is that one does not have difficulty, because in laying down stan-
dards one regards colic as being necessary in alimentary cases
to determine lead poisoning, and paresis as necessary in the
nervous eases, and simply because a man is pale and out of
sorts one should not call it lead poisoning.
1763. Do you consider it necessary and practicable that a
general practitioner should in all cases of suspected leal
poisoning take out the electric reactions of the muscles? —
Not unless there is still other evidence of localised paresis.
1764. In any case an electric test apparatus should be a part
of the working gear of practitioners in a lead centre? —I do
not consider that it should.
1765. Will you now deal with the question of susceptibility
and variations of susceptibility in individuals? —Th e recognition
of the fact that of persons exposed to lead, some only suffer
from lead poisoning has lead to the deduction of the existence
of what is known as a group of susceptible persons, and it is
now recognised that the failure of all the early regulations
for the control of lead poisoning to diminish the number of
lead poisoning cases in England during the first 20 years of
control was due to the failure to recognise this fact. The
number of susceptible persons in a general population, as
determined by the Technical Commission at Broken Hill, and
as has also been determined, though not so accurately, in
respect to certain industrial groups in Sydney, is about three
per cent. That is, three per cent, out of a general population
(of occupied males) are likely to' suffer from lead poisoning.
When men enter into a lead industry, most of them lose weight,
frequently for some months, but later they regain their normal
weight; but provided the quantity of lead in the air is about
two milligrammes in five cubic metres, about three per cent,
will show anaemia, pallor, further loss of weight, gastric dis-
turbance, constipation, and sooner or later develop colic or an
attack of paralysis. Whereas medical history in other parts of
the world will show that some people get attacks of paralysis
without any warning attacks of colic, in Australia colic
invariably precedes paresis. Well over 90 per cent, of work-
men exposed to these quantities of lead show no colic and no
tendency to peripheral neuritis. It is on that ground that it
has been recommended that regulation of the conditions of
the industry rather than prohibition of the use of lead should
be the object of hygiene. With respect to tolerance, some
authorities do hold that people exposed to small quantities of
lead can ultimately take larger quantities without ill effect,
but on the question whether toleration takes place, I can offer
no opinion. I have never seen any evidence of that fact. The
term “toleration” should not be used for the fact that lead
is taken into the body without producing symptoms, because
it is a general law in regard to drugs that you must have a
minimum quantity before you get any action in the body.
1766. In your experience, does nationality bear any relation
tc susceptibility?—No. As far as Broken Hill was concerned,
we examined people belonging to many nationalities, but found
no relationship between poisoning and any nationality. There
is some general evidence that certain nationalities are susceptible
to certain oenditions, but I know of no evidence of that kind
in regard to lead.
1767. As we have figures from Port Pirie showing that the
great incidence of lead poisoning occurs among Mediterranean
Europeans, it is possible that their mode of living, especially
during the earlier months of their residence in Australia, may


determine a greater absorption of lead and thereby cause
poisoning. It is possible if you have evidence to that effect,
i know nothing about it.
1767 a. We have evidence that these people are not as cleanly
in their habits or as well fed as they should be?—l do not
think cleanliness or feeding has anything to do with lead
poisoning.
1768. Ignorance and susceptibility in this particular case may
be synonymous terms in their results? —Yes, it may be so. I
am opposed to telling workmen that ordinary cleanliness has
anything to do with the prevention of lead poisoning. I do
not think it does prevent lead poisoning, because lead poison-
ing is due to the inhalation of dust, and whether they wash
their hands or eat with lead on their hands, or roll tobacco
for cigarettes or pipes, does not really enter into the matter.
I do not say that notices urging cleanliness should not be put
up, but it is misleading to suggest to the workmen that that
prevents lead poisoning. I do not suggest you should not ask
workmen to be clean in their habits, but it does not follow that
you are going to lessen lead poisoning one iota.
1769. By Mr. Gepp —Surely in. regard to the cleanliness of
clothes, men working in a plant where there is a certain,
amount of dust floating around should not be encouraged to
wear the same clothing as they wear outside, but should keep
that clothing as free from contact with the dust as possible?
—ln my experience men have worn the same clothes outside
as inside the works, and whether they do or not I have not
found any more lead in the air. I do not think it matters.
1770. The amount of lead in the air and the amount of lead
a man may breathe are possibly very different. Suppose men
have their dusty clothes on outside the works and knock
against timbers and so on, surely there would be more danger
of inhalation of dust than there would be if their clothes were
perfectly clean?—That might occur. I have never been able
to see it and measure what would happen.
1771. We have had evidence in regard to white lead pro-
cesses that there is more danger of inhalation of dust where
splashing has occurred and the splashes have dried on the men’s
clothes? —I might grant that there is danger in that way.
1772. By the Chairman —There is a further point, that these
Mediterranean people, we believe, not only go home from work
without washing or bathing, but sleep in their clothes. A man
with clothing impregnated with lead dust would be in a posi-
tion to inhale considerable quantities?—l think one should
determine the amount of lead they are taking into them. Urine
examination would settle that point, and at the earliest oppor-
tunity of a post-mortem examination an attempt should be
made to measure the actual amount of lead they have taken
into their lungs.
1773. I have read, I think in a French publication, a state-
ment to the effect that 350 m'lligrammes of lead in the body
is regarded as a sufficient minimum dose to determine lead
poisoning. Would you be inclined to agree with that? —I am
of the opinion that much less causes lead poisoning.
1774. What would you consider necessary?—All I can say is
that an amount of about 10 to 12 milligrammes distributed
amongst the viscera generally has been found associated with
typical lead poisoning. I have no figures whatever in regard
to the body as a whole.
1775. Considerable quantities of lead, measured in milli-
grammes, may be stored in the bones? —It is said to be no.
1776. In the event of a debilitating disease a constant or
prolonged demand on the metabolism of the bones or skeletal
parts of the body might liberate lead in a form which would
give rise to lead poisoning? —I do not know that.
1777. Do you think that a constant intake of lead is
necessary to promote poisoning? —Yes, for a long time. I
think sudden changes in nutrition produce lead poisoning.
For instance, if a man goes on a drinking bout; but I have
never seen tubercle produce attacks of lead poisoning. I am
of the opinion that sudden changes in nutrition will undoubt-
edly produce attacks of colic or paralysis, and those types of
lead poisoning.
1778. Will you state your experience as Medical Referee
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act in New South Wales
as to the working of that measure here? —My experience of
this Act is that it would work very well if it were thoroughly
understood. A good many of the difficulties which arise under
it are owing to the fact that its operations are not sufficiently
known. For example, a man thinks he is suffering from lead
poisoning, and is so certified, and his employer just takes it
for granted under the certificate. According to the Act, if he
is not satisfied he ought to appeal within quite a short period
of time. Some months later, after having paid compensa-
tion all that while, he becomes dissatisfied, and begins to think
what he ought to do, only to find that his opportunity for
appeal has passed. No doubt these are disabilities which
depend upon not understanding the Act, and probably such
difficulties will disappear when employers more- accurately know
their liabilities. As a matter of fact, if any satisfactory appeal
or determination is to be made, it should be as soon as possible
after certification; but speaking generally, as far as I know,
the Act works satisfactorily in this State. Some employers
would not think that, because they say it tends to the position
that whenever a person dies while engaged in an industry in
which lead is a possible risk it leads to the possibility—even
if it is not made —of a claim being entered for lead poison-
ing. I further think the Act here could be improved.
1779. Are there any further remarks you would care to make
to this Commission that would be likely to help our inquiry?
—Yes, there are some other statements which I have prepared.
The first is in regard to physique and the question of sus-
ceptibility and toleration. The Broken Hill Commission found
that physique had no influence upon susceptibility. With
regard to inter-current disease, there is quite good evidence, I
think, that certain inter-current dseases increase susceptibility
to lead poisoning, and on that account persons suffering
from certain diseases should be excluded from employment in
industries in which exposure to lead is a risk. I believe that
diseases of the kidneys fall under this heading. It also
probably applies to all forms of heart disease. There are
also certain other well-known diseases, such as gout, and so
forth, constituting a very definite group of inter-current
diseases, which render the lead trades particularly hazardous
to those who are affected by those ailments.
1780. By Mr. Gepp —Would you bring alcoholism definitely
within this category ?—Not specifically. I suppose one could
say acute alcoholism would undoubtedly be within it. Anyone
suffering from alcoholic neuritis would certainly be more
liable to suffer from lead intoxication. With regard to the
quantity of lead dust absorption required to produce the
disease, I have already given you our experience on that point,
namely, that we have not seen any lead poisoning occur when
the amount of lead in the atmosphere falls as low as one
milligramme in 10 cubic metres. We therefore suggested as a
regulation in this State that an amount of .5 of a milligramme
in 10 cubic metres represents a safe limit. On the question
of the rate of absorption of these compounds I have no evidence
to offer. With regard to regulations for the control of con-
ditions, they fall into two groups. Firstly, in respect to dust
prevention, in my opinion the prevention of lead poisoning
in an industry rests with the prevention of dust and the laying
down of regulations for preventing the accumulation of lead
in the air to an extent above the dangerous limit. In prac-
tice these measures really become questions of ventilation, also,
as concerns certain parts of the industry, the proper devising
of machinery so as to prevent the splashing of lead or the
passage of dust from the machinery in various places. In
this connection I would like to point out that very slight cur-
rents of air are sufficient to prevent the accumulation of dust.
In many places there is an idea that the velocity of air re-
quired to prevent the accumulation of dust is high. In our
experience a current of 40ft. per minute passing over places
where lead dust is definitely being produced prevents any
accumulation.
1781. Would it be possible to feel that current on the skin?


—lt is just about perceptible. Currents such as 400 ft. a
minute are totally unnecessary.
1782. How do you define dust? —I mean the weight of lead
estimated in a quantity of air—that which is gravimetrically
ascertainable.
1783. Your point is that anything which remains suspended
in the air will be removed by a current of 40ft? —Yes. You
measure the amount of dust that a person would breathe in,
the amount of dust that is suspended.
1784. By the Chairman —With dust, you would include fumes?
- —Yes; for this purpose fume is dust. I regard the elimination
of dust as being of the greatest inmportance in preventing
lead poisoning in an industry. The second part is connected
with medical control. Where there is a considerable exposure
to lead, and the hazard cannot be reduced below safe limits,
I regard the most important factor in preventing injury to
the workman through this lead—assuming always that the
exposure is there —is proper medical control. This medical
control is carried out with one object, namely, the removal of
the susceptibles. In my opinion, if you still have a risk of
lead in an industry, the whole aim of medical control should
be to remove the whole of the susceptibles. Under those condi-
tions no harm whatever results in the industry from the presence
of the lead. Proper medical control, namely, the presence of a
medical practitioner coming in contact with the work people
and examining them, leads to the detection of possible cases of
lead poisoning at a stage at which no permanent injury to the
employee has taken place. Where there is a large industry
with some thousands of employees it is advisable that the
industry should provide permanent meiical control. In regard
to susceptibles, I am of the opinion that they should be removed
from the industry where the test examination shows there is
any risk. By a susceptible, I mean a person who suffers from
repeated attacks of colic or from any attack of paralysis. By
reason of the fact that a man had a single attack of colic I
would not turn him out of the industry immediately, but would
place him under systematic medical inspection. One other
point I have noted is that I think notices should be placed
prominently over works of this kind drawing the attention of
workmen to the risk and impressing upon them the fact that
their own health rests in their own hands, that the man who
suspects he is suffering from lead poisoning and goes for
medical examination will not be damaged, whereas if he tries to
hide the fact that he is suffering, or does get treatment, he may
become permanently damaged.
1785. By Mr. Pearson —You mean a notice on the lines of
that used at Broken Hill as a result of your Commission’s
recommendation? —Yes, or that sent by the Board of Health in
New South Wales to all industries. I consider that a preferable
arrangement is the reading out to every workman, on appoint-
ment, of regulations, assurance being taken that he understands
them, and further instruction should be given from time to
time.
1786. By the Chairman —Do you consider that an entrance
medical examination prior to appointment, or at the time of
appointment is a necessity?—Absolutely.
1787. Would you consider the appointment in a large
industry of a works dentist likely to be of value? —I think it
would be of value to the industry. Ido not know that it would
be of value in the prevention of lead poisoning. It might be.
1788. By Mr. Gepp —lt would surely raise the average stan-
dard of health in the industry?—Yes. As far as I know there
is nothing to show that lead poisoning is associated with
average health. I do not know that people who are susceptible
are below* average health in other ways. Many weakly persons
work in lead industries without becoming injured.
1789. Have you seen Table L? (Shown to wdtness.) In that
connection I will be glad if you will read the Commission’s
references from the South Australian Government which I hand
to you. You will see from Table L that the number or reported
cases has jumped from practically nil about five years ago
to 234 last year, that is cases reported by the local medical
practitioners. I stress “reported” cases because at the moment
We have not reached the staple of definite accervtation of all the
cases as specifically and definitely being plumbism, and we are
examining possibilities at the works of any other condition that
may be causing symptoms which might be mistaken for lead
poisoning, such as the presence of extremely small quantities of
carbon monoxide in the air? —That raises a very important
point, because if you have one risk in the industry it must
not be thought that all the illness is due to it.
1790. Is there any other industrial condition which you can
suggest to this Commission for investigation, beyond lead anl
carbon monoxide? —I believe that at one time you had quite a.
lot of arsenic at Port Pirie. I went there years ago, and one
of the things I looked at was the possibility of getting arsenic
from the chimneys. Of course, arsenic is one of those sub-
stances which definitely produce chronic poisoning. I do not
know if that possibility should be looked at. I suggest that
one make an examination of the mortality figures at Pert Pirie.
One should look into the respiratory diseases and things of
that sort, and see if there is a greater proportion of them
than usual among these people.
1791. There have been cases of sickness under the Sickness,
and Accident Benefit Fund indicating such things as chronic
bronchitis and gastritis as being among the main ailments?
—Chronic bronchitis raises the possibility of sulphur dioxide,
which I think you get in Port Pirie. It raises the question of
the possible existence of irritant gases if you have much
bronchitis.
1792. The amount you would get around the works in normal
circumstances, according to my experience, would not cause
any irritation? —I am just suggesting this as possible, or a
matter to be borne in mind. If you have much bronchitis it
is well to ascertain the cause of much bronchitis.
1793. The Commission then looked at the question from the
standpoint of general health and that of the condition of the
mouth, also the point of view of the tremendous increase in the
ratio of Mediterranean Europeans to Britishers, and as a small
point which may be of interest, evidence has been adduced
which shows that these foreigners generally live to a great
extent upon tinned fish and other tinned foods, and that they
lived under conditions which are certainly not conducive to
good health, at any rate in a Britisher. Have you any know-
ledge of any soluble lead content in tinned foods? —No.
1794. Sir Thomas Oliver cites a definite case in one of his
books of a lady librarian who developed wrist drop and every
sign of lead poisoning as a sequel to a regular daily diet of
tinned salmon. Have you ever come across any similar cir-
cumstances? —Great care, I know, is taken in the making of
tins in order to prevent the lead from reaching the food. I
have made actually some investigations on this point, and never
found any evidence of the presence of lead in either canned
meats of various kinds or canned fruits.
1795. It is stated that lead compounds in solder are soluble
in olive oil? —That is very likely. The aim in the making of
tins is to keep the solder out of touch with the foodstuff.
1796. There is a feeling at Port Pirie that the use of the
term “lead poisoning’’ affects the minds of a large number of
men seriously, and they feel that they are going to be sick
for a long time. For a time the certificate carried a state-
ment as to the expected period of disability, which again had
a very serious psychological effect upon the men. Do you
know of any other term which might be adopted so as to
obviate that position?—lf you mean a synonym for lead
poisoning you could use plumbism or chronic saturnism.
1797. In your Broken Hill recommendations why did you
recommend the payment of compensation to susceptibles there?
Doubtless this Commission or the South Australian Govern-
ment will have to consider the question of what is to be done
in regard to the men who have been employed in the industry
and w r ho are refused re-employment after having been care-
fully checked over three or four times and determined as sus-
ceptible by a committee, we hope, of three medical men. This
point has already been raised in evidence, and if my memory
serves me rightly the company said their conditions are dif-
PTPTI 'f" "frCTn fIIGQP of TT ill bTi O mvorofitTOC! in fliO'


smelters are laborers mainly, that they often take a man from
the gate and put him straight on to the bottom floor of the
blast furnace. If such a man, then, had to be refused re-em-
ployment after a thorough testing, that fact would not affect
his chance of obtaining employment on the wharves or any-
where else in Australia other than in a lead industry. The
Commission have no specific reference on this matter, but
owing to an indirect communication from the South Aus-
tralian Government, are giving it consideration. We would,
therefore, be very glad if you could tell us why the Technical
Commission, of which you were chairman, at Broken Hill re-
commended the payment of compensation to the Broken Hill
suseeptibles? —In the first place we found from the industrial
history that the majority of the persons who had worked at
Broken Hill had worked as miners for the main part of their
lives. Of course, many had worked at different occupations,
but the employees as a group had worked most of their
lives at the industry. We were, therefore, faced with
the effect of taking people out of the industry and letting
them work in another industry. Further, Broken Hill was
an isolated place, and if a man went out of the mines he would
have to leave Broken Hill and make his way elsewhere. There-
fore it seemed to us that there was an obligation, if you took
a man and said he could not be employed in the industry in
which he had been employed, to give him an opportunity to get
into another industry. Further, suseeptibles, as we understand
them at Broken Hill, fall into various groups, and we treated
them in different groups. We recognised that there were sus-
ceptibles who might soon show some ordinary lead poisoning.
In case there were any of these people we provided a small
amount of compensation for them, but we really did not expect
any. I think wo did not see one case of that kind, and I
understand that up to the present there have been only four
cases of that nature in the whole of Broken Hill since December,
1919. The majority of the suseeptibles, as we understood them,
would be persons who came under medical examination for one
condition or another and showed some traces of that condition,
which I described to you as delayed chronic lead poisoning. If
those persons showed delayed chronic lead poisoning w r e con-
sidered that they should be taken out of the industry and com-
pensated. Those would all be men in middle life or older.
Those men, taken as a group, had been nothing else but miners,
and one felt that if they were to get out and start in a new
occupation they would find it difficult. They had earned good
wages in the mines and probably would not earn good wages in
other industries, and we gave them varying amounts of com-
pensation. These were, in general, the considerations in the
minds of the Technical Commission which led them to suggest
compensation to suseeptibles.
1798. In the unfortunate absence of Mr. Commissioner
Robinette, I would like to submit a question which I feel he
would have asked. Under similar circumstances of an investi-
gation at Port Pirie, with your broad knowledge of this subject,
what would your view be regarding men who have worked for
a period in the industry, who have bought homes there and
settled down, and have their interests there, and who, owing to
this particular condition, would have to be refused re-employment
owing to susceptibility, if it could be shown in their case
by the decision of the medical committee? No doubt they would
have to sacrifice a certain amount of time and money to go
somewhere else in the event of suitable employment not being
available for them at Port Pirie. What would your view of
their particular case have been at Broken Hill?—At Broken
Hill I would have given such a man compensation. Concerning
people of that class I feel that if a man who has been employed
for gome time and who has his home there is. found to be a
susceptible, he is damaged by lead. If it is found at such a stage
one would expect that man already to have been certified for
lead poisoning. If he has not been I do not think you are
going to find him susceptible. If a man has been susceptible
all this time he ought to have been damaged, and so I doubt if
any of that class of man would exist. He ought to have had
attacks of colic if he is a susceptible and has been there for
any length of time.
1799. Take the case of a man who has been employed in some
other industry around Port Pirie, and who, after that industry
has faded away, has gone to the smelters to work. He already
had a home in Port Pirie. Supposing that after working at
the smelters for several months he shows definite signs of lead
poisoning. He is given another period of employment, after
which he again shows the symptoms, and is declared a sus-
ceptible. What would you have done in those circumstances at
Broken Hill?—At Broken Hill we would have given that man
a small amount of compensation. The minimum amount which
I think we recommended in our report was £5O.
1800. Would you care to say what should be the minimum
period of service which should apply to a susceptible for com-
pensation at Port Pirie and not at Broken Hill? —I would not
like to express any opinion at all about Port Pirie.
1801. We looked into the question of the working of the
Medical Board of three at Broken Hill, and the reports were very
satisfactory. The Commission is considering a similar recommen-
dation, namely, perhaps a full-time Government man as chair-
man, a nominee from the company, and a nominee from the men.
Have you any comments, except, possibly, to say you agree
with that system?—l think that system works well.
1802. Would you agree that the Broken Hill method of leav-
ing it optional to the general practitioner to say whether a man
is a definite case or not should also be adopted at Port Pirie?
■ —ln my opinion certification taken widespread has not been
entirely satisfactory, but in places where medical men get a
good many cases it becomes much more satisfactory. I think,
however, there should be both certification and referee. In
places like Port Pirie all cases should go to the Medical Board.
At Port Pirie what should be done is what is done at Broken
Hill, namely, that it should be compulsory to notify all eases
of lead poisoning or suspected leaj poisoning to the Medical
Board.
1803. My own view is that the practitioner should be relieved
of certification, and should refer all cases to the board of three
for decision, and that they should be both the certification and
referee body?—l quite agree with that in those places.
1804. I understand that in New South Wales there are no
statutory regulations in connection with lead manufacturing
in and around Sydney?—There are not any laid down by
Statute, but they are under arbitration awards.
1805. We were informed yesterday that works managers have
no statutory powers to make men take certain precautions?—ln
many industries they certainly have not.
1806. What is your opinion in regard to Port Pirie in view
of the facts as we have given them. Should statutory regu-
lations, binding the company for the removal of dust as far as
possible and the men in the taking of precautions, be issued in
regard to a big industry like that of smelting lead products?—
I do not think that that is absolutely necessary.
1807. Why is that? —I do not think you want to enforce them
necessarily by an Act. All the powers should exist under the
Health Acts, and these should be carried out.
1808. Do you think they should be made statutory regulations
under Health Acts? —I do not believe in statutory regulations.
I think you may get general powers and make regulations under
those powers.
1809. Would you give inspectors power to insist on whatever
is necessary botli in regard to the company and the men?—Yes.
1810. And this disease should be made notifiable?—Yes.
1811. Should such a board of three medical men, as we have
been discussing, have the power to order sufferers to undergo
treatment either privately or in hospital? —Yes; they should
have power to call a man up from time to time to report for
examination.
1812. Should this board have power to call for treatment
reports from doctors and officers concerning cases that are
receiving compensation? —I would not say that that should be
compulsory.


1813. By Air. Pearson —Men engaged on lead processes at
Port Pirie regularly work in seven shifts per week —56 hours.
Would you express any opinion as to whether it is desirable
that there should be a reduction in those working hours?—l
think there should be a reduction.
1814. To six days instead of seven? —To 48 hours.
1815. By the Chairman —Are there any further statements
you would like to make to the Commission? —One point which I
overlooked was in regard to the possibility of carbon monoxide
poison occurring at Port Pirie. Do I understand that from
the information given to you there were places where quite
considerable quantities of carbon monoxide passed into the air?
Before assuming that the cases reported are cases of lead
poisoning, steps should be taken to see to what extent, if any,
carbon monoxide absorption is taking place. In my opinion
it is quite easy to examine persons at work in an industry to
determine whether they are taking in carbon monoxide. If that
were found it might profoundly modify one’s interpretation of
those cases which have been described to me at the commence-
ment of my evidence.
1816. -It is your opinion, then, that continued absorption of
carbon monoxide may be provocative of certain symptoms com-
parable to those of early lead absorption?—l think that some
of those descriptions read by you are typical descriptions of
carbon monoxide poisoning, and those cases in which this
curious tremor and wasting are observed, and no colic, look
extremely like the pictures which have been described by other
persons as cases of carbon monoxide poisoning. lam distinctly
of the opinion that a Medical Board should have power
to certify when persons have recovered from lead poisoning.
1817. By Mr. Pearson —Do you consider that the Medical
Board should decide on the point whether men should be
excluded from the industry? —Yes.
1818. By Mr. Gepp —How far, if it is felt necessary by the
Commission that there should be a further survey in regard
to a number of these cases in order to determine as nearly as
we can definitely the reason for the very large increase, would
it be possible for a consultation between South Australian
medical men, who have been in touch with this subject, and
yourself, and Dr. S. A. Smith, based to a considerable extent
upon the clinical cards of all examinations which have taken
place, presuming that those cards have been framed broadly
on the lines of the cards you have laid down for use at Broken
Hill? —I think we could make use of those cards. Personally,
I would be very loth to form an opinion without seeing some
of the persons, typical cases, before using what is recorded on
the cards. After seeing how the cards are recorded it would
no doubt be possible to make some use of the cards.
1819. How long would that take, provided we had, say, 100
cards, all prepared on a clinical basis, those cards being made
out on the lines which you would ask for? How long would
it take for men of experience, like yourself and Dr. S. A. Smith,
to come to the point at Port Pirie whether you could advise
the Commission as to your definite view in regard to those
typical cases? —One could examine 100 persons in a week
thoroughly.
1820. And as a result tell the Commission your view of what
those cases are? —We would be in a position to give an opinion
at the end of that week.
1821. Failing an arrangement of that kind being made, if
the cards were sent to you here, and some of the men were sent
here, such men being nominated by yourselves from the cards
if you like, would that be a possible method? —I see no reason
why the men should not be examined here as well as at Port
Pirie, though I think it would be much easier for all concerned
for them to be seen at Port Pirie.
The witness withdrew.
STEWART ARTHUR SMITH, medical practitioner, 147,
Macquarie Street, Sydney, was sworn and examined:
1822. By the Chairman —What appointments do you hold?
—I am Hun. Physician at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
and lecturer in Neurology in the University of Sydney.
1823. You were a member of a Technical Commission which
inquired at Broken Hill into miners’ diseases? —Yes.
1824. Will you give the Commission a brief description of
the work and the type of cases you came across at Broken
Hill, and also a statement of your experience among cases of
lead poisoning subsequent to that? —At Broken Hill, for many
months, I was considering the problems of lead poisoning as
it was occurring in metalliferous miners who had been ex-
posed to small doses of dust for long periods. The acute type
of case was not met with in this investigation at the time of
examination. The types of cases met with in Broken Hill
were of a chronic type. In addition to my experience at
Broken Hill, I have investigated for a considerable period of
years several industrial groups in Sydney, namely, potters,
printers, stove enamellers, and carriage painters, with a num-
ber of isolated instances among accumulator workers, gas-
meter solderers, and others.
1825. During the work of that Commission at Broken Hill,
the question of lead poisoning came under your notice?—Yes.
1826. Will you give this Commission your definition of lead
poisoning, dealing with the mode of entry of lead into the
body, and bearing in mind the fact that this Commission deals
with lead in smelters? —Perhaps I might best start by defin-
ing lead absorption. Lead absorption is a term which has a
purely bio-chemical meaning. It connotes the fact that lead
has been absorbed by the tissues. If following this chemical
effect there is evidence that the tissues have been damaged
by the absorption, then lead poisoning has occurred.
1827. Could you give us some figures relating to absorption
and the amount required to produce the poisoning in that
connection? —I will first refer to the accepted standards, which
are based largely upon Puckering’s work, in which it was
laid down that a daily dose of tw'o milligrammes of lead is
the lowest daily dose which, absorbed over a long period, may
ultimately produce lead poisoning. In the case of a man
working at manual work, for a full day’s work, that may be
taken to represent that he has been working for that period
in an atmosphere containing about five milligrammes of lead,
suspended as dust, per 10 cubic metres. At Broken Hill an
estimate was made of the daily intake through inhalation by
an underground work. This, necessarily, was only approxi-
mate. It was arrived at by consideration of the results of the
dust sampling and applying those to the periods of time in
the day when a man w r ould be exposed to the varying condi-
tions. By those means an estimate was made that an under-
ground miner would be exposed in his ordinary work to the
inhalation of a daily dose of somewhat less than two milli-
grammes of lead. Speaking from memory, I think that that
amount was somewhere about 1.5 milligrammes. The inci-
dence of lead poisoning in that large industrial group indi-
cated that the lead hazard there was not a very big one, in
comparison with other industries with which w r e are familiar.
So I take it that the old accepted' standard is somewhere
near the truth. That means that men exposed in their daily
work to the inhalation of an amount of lead as dust between
one and two milligrammes will, if they are susceptible persons,
in only a few instances develop lead poisoning. The
majority of such instances will be lead poisoning of a minor
grade. Industrial lead poisoning is an inhalation disease,
that is, the portal of entry which forms the most and indeed
the only considerable danger is by the respiratory tract. It
is not possible to say that lead poisoning does not occur by
ingestion in industry, but it is possible to say that that is a
very inconsiderable cause. Lead poisoning arising from
absorption through the skin does not occur industrially.
1828. Will you give a statement relating to the diagnosis
of lead poisoning, especially dealing with the differential
diagnosis, and the relative importance of signs and symptoms?
—The signs of lead absorption are the blue line at the gums,
lead in faeces, and lead in urine. The blue line is only a sign
of lead absorption. In that it is dependent on the health of
the tissues of the mouth, it is an irregular and relatively


infrequent sign of lead absorption. Lead in faeces is in the
present state of our knowledge, of little value as a sign of
lead absorption in that it is impossible to differentiate how
much of the lead in faeces is lead which lias been absorbed,
and how much is lead which has passed through the digestive
track without absorption. Lead in urine is the most reliable
sign of absorption. All the lead present in urine has been
absorbed before excretion, and it is a very delicate test of
lead absorption. It isi not necessarily a sign of lead poisoning.
As to changes in the blood, many authorities regard these as
indications of lead absorption, for example, basophilic
degeneration of the red cells. The experience at Broken Hill
of the almost complete absence of basophilic degeneration of
red cells is one of the reasons why I hold the opinion that
this is not a sign always of lead absorption. Since it occurs
in such diseases as pernicious anaemia, malaria, and indeed
in all severe anaemias, its value as a sign of lead absorption is
limited. Also, it is an inconstant phenomenon in cases which
are recognisably cases of lead poisoning. Other changes in
the blood, in the red cells and in the white cells, are not
reliable guides in diagnosis. Therefore, it devolves upon
simple clinical examination and an attentive study of the history
of the individual for a reliable diagnosis.
1829. There are no definite metrical standards at present,
but it is rather a clinical question than anything else? —Yes.
1830. According to what we have just established, then, it
does not require a laboratory for the diagnosis of lead poison-
ing on those lines? —No.
1831. At the same time I take it that a laboratory would
be a very useful aid in diagnosis in many instances? —Cer-
tainly. Perhaps I might say that in the present state of our
knowledge it is a clinical problem, but in my own practice
I invariably make use of the laboratory in dealing with all
cases.
1832. Will you give us a statement dealing with the in-
fluences, if any, of the state of nutrition, physique, nation-
ality of sufferers, also' of intercurrent diseases on the incidence
of lead poisoning?—Of my own knowledge I have no evidence
to show that physique has any influence on determining lead
poisoning, nor have I myself any knowledge as to the affect of
nationality. At Broken Hill the cases of lead poisoning were
not sufficiently numerous to enable us to express an opinion as
to the effect of nationality. The experience that Broken Hill
supplied was that there was no evidence of the effect of inter-
current disease in producing lead poisoning, but my experience
of lead poisoning in general has given me the opinion that
diseases of the vascular and renal systems might determine the
occurrence of lead poisoning to some extent. That is to say,
an individual with chronic degenerative changes in the blood
vessels or in the kidneys is more likely to be damaged by the
absorption of lead than healthy people. I would add to that
that diseases which affect the same organs as lead would
prejudice the health of the individual if exposed to lead, such
of alcoholism (over-indulgence in alcohol) and syphilis.
1833. By Mr. Gepp —Do you also include gout and oral
sepsis? —l would include gout. Ido not know that I would
include oral sepsis.
1834. By the Chairman—Do you subscribe to the teaching
of Hunter that oral sepsis is an influential process in many
cases of pernicious anaemia? —I believe that in many cases of
pernicious anaemia the evidence points to oral sepsis as having
been the starting point.
1835. The clinical picture of pernicious anaemia would not be
likely to be confused with the anaemia due to lead poisoning?
No.
1836. At Port Pirie a large percentage of the employees are
Mediterranean Europeans of recent arrival in Australia. They
live under conditions of filth in many instances. There are
no indications of a great many of them bathing, and the general
opinion of the Commission is that a great many of them live
and sleep in their clothes in barracks during the early months
of their residence in Australia. Their diet consists largely
tinned stuffs, tinned fish in particular, and it is among
-nose people that a very large number of cases of reporte
plumbism are occurring. Do you consider that conditions of
living, cleanliness, and feeding would influence the incidence
of those cases? —In regard to cleanliness, I would say yes,
from two causes: firstly, from the fact that clothing heavily
impregnated with lead dust might easily be an appreciable factor
in exposure to lead, both in and out of working hours.
Secondly, because of the psychological effect of insistence upon
cleanliness. I would qualify this by stating, however, that,
no matter how clean the workmen are, if there is still a noxious
amount of dust in suspension in the air, cases of lead
poisoning will still occur with frequency. As regards diet, I
have no observations of my own on which to base any opinion.
My only knowledge of the effect of diet is from my reading.
1837. At the same time it would sound to be a reasonable
hypothesis that a cheap diet, which would be insufficient almost
to sustain life in an Australian, would not tend to add to the
physique and general state of nutrition of those people, and
there may be some indirect influence of that nature operating?
—Yes. I have no definite evidence of such, but it is a matter
of general knowledge. If the standard of living is too poor,
obviously the general health must suffer.
1838. A medical witness in Port Pirie put forward the sug-
gestion that the drinking of large quantities of acid wine
might have a chemical effect in altering the solubility of lead
within the body. Would you offer any comment on that state-
ment ? —I would not care to do so.
1839. Is it not a common experience for workers in lead to *
experience abdominal discomfiture shortly after their occupation
commences? —Of my own knowledge I do not know that;
according to text books, yes. I have, however, made a habit
of inquiring of all individuals whom I examine—and I see quite
a number every week—who are workers in lead. The general
impression I have gained from them is different from that
gained from text books.
1840. Do you regard it as likely, then, that a tolerance to
lead is established in lead workers during prolonged work?—
I think it likely, but I have no investigations of my own on
which to base that opinion.
1841. If such were the case, the occurrence of large numbers
of cases of reported plumbism with mild symptoms after a short
period of service might possibly be eases who have not estab-
lished that tolerance? —Yes. I might put that in another way.
The occurrence of thele cases with mild symptoms might indicate
a mild degree of susceptibility in those individuals.
1842. Have you had any experience to indicate that that
mild degree of susceptibility would disappear during prolonged
work? —i ] ia ve no experience of my own to guide me.
1843. In view of that, would you recommend that such
individuals should be excluded from working in lead after
recovering from those mild symptoms? —The occurrence of a
single attack of slight or mild gastro-intestinal symptoms
would not, in my opinion, warrant the exclusion of an individual
from the industry. Repeated attacks, even if they be only of a
mild character, would be a sufficient ground to exclude an
individual from the industry. The occurrence of a single
attack of outspoken nervous type of plumbism would, I think,
warrant the exclusion of the individual.
1844. By Mr. Gepp —If that particular attack could be
traced to a possibly accidental overdose, would that modify
that statement? —Yes. I had in mind normal conditions of
exposure when I made that statement.
1845. If a man got an overdose through accident, would you
then say that man should go back and see whether he developed
tolerance? —Yes.
1846. The Chairman —I presume, Mr. Gepp, you are referring
to such a condition as arises, for innstance, when a furnace
1 ‘ blows through ? ’ ’
1847. Mr. Gepp —Yes.
1848. The witness —There is on record, for example, an
experience in white lead works where additions were being made
to the factory. These necessitated the pulling down of some
old buildings, on the rafters of which was the dust accumulation
of years. As a result of the disturbance of this dust a sharp


epidemic of lead poisoning developed among the men working.
1849. By the Chairman —Are there any further points you
would care to embody in a statement relating to the definition
of lead poisoning diagnosis, and the question of susceptibility
and tolerance? —I do not think there is anything very material.
1850. By Mr. Gepp —ls it possible to give an indication of
the time you would expect mild attacks at the beginning of
employment to last, attacks such as we have been talking about ?
—From my experience among workmen in this city these attacks
might be expected to last from two to six weeks, at the end of
which time the man might be expected to go- back into his
employment.
1851. By the Chairman —ln view of what we have heard from
you, do you think it practicable to prescribe a standard form
of medical examination which would ensure uniformity in
diagnoses of lead poisoning? —Yes; with the reservation that
a good deal of experience among lead workers is necessary.
1852. Will you make a brief statement giving such criteria
as should be established in making a diagnosis? —There is no
single criterion by which the presence of lead poisoning can be
determined. An attentive study of the history of the individual
is of great importance. It is necessary to inquire closely into
his industrial history and into the accounts of past illnesses
from w r hich he has suffered. The history given by the patient
of ‘ ‘ colic ’’ is not of itself sufficient. Careful inquiries must be
made as to the type of pain, its duration, and the factors which
affected it. I find from experience that it is usually possible
in such eases to satisfy oneself if the pain complained of by
the individual was the characteristic lead colic. A history of
paralysis or weakness is also insufficient. Careful inquiry must
be made as to the distribution of the paralysis or paresis. One
attaches more importance to a definite history of paralysis of
the extensor muscles than to any other form of paralysis. The
examination of the patient must be carried out wfith extreme
care. The occurrence of that peculiar pallor, which is difficult
to describe, but which experience teaches is a very real thing,
is of great importance.
1853. By Mr. Gepp— Have you had any experience in detect-
ing that particular pallor in men of very dark complexion?—
No.
1854. From your experience with that pallor, would it be
very difficult definitely to diagnose that pallor in men of
very dark complexion, such as Mediterranean Europeans?—l
think would be greater difficulty with them, but I am of
the opinion that it would be a definitely recognisable thing.
1855. It would take some experience, I presume?—l think so.
1856. Is that pallor the result of anaemia? —Only partly. It
is due partly to vaso motor spasm. It is a very striking experi-
ence that men who show profound pallor do not show on
examination of the blood as much diminution in their haemo-
globin value or in their red cell count as one would expect from
their appearance.
1857. It is not in any way a lead pigmentation?—No. The
state of the nutrition is of considerable importance. In indi-
viduals in whom marked changes in nutrition are present, and
in whom careful examination fails to reveal a clearly defined
cause for this, if they have been exposed to a lead hazard, it
is of considerable importance in diagnosis. The occurrence of
peripheral neuritis, especially of a motor type, and more especi-
ally the extensor muscles of the arm, must also be given great
weight. The occurrence of tremors and exaggeration of the
reflexes are also to be noted, but where occurring without other
and more definite evidence of lead intoxication are of limited
value in diagnosis. The occurrence of signs and symptoms of
chronic degeneration in blood vessels and (or) kidneys presents
one of the most difficult problems when one comes to assess its
A-alue in diagnosis. I have made a careful examination of the
incidence of chronic arterio-renal disease in the various occupa-
tional grouph examined at Broken Hill and have compared them
with a similar analysis of over 700 workers in sandstone in
the Sydney district who have not been exposed to a lead hazard.
This supplies evidence which points to the fact that arterio-
renal disease occurs to a greater degree in lead workers whose
past history, or whose present condition, reveals other evidences
of lead poisoning. I am of the opinion that it is possible to
arrive at a conclusion as to the influence lead has had in deter-
mining arterio-renal disease in any individual by searching in
his past history or present condition for other evidences of
the occurrence of lead intoxication. In other words, it is very
doubtful if arterio-renal degeneration occurs in lead workers
as the only evidence of lead intoxication.
1858. In Port Pirie at present the method of notification and
compensation under the Workmen’s Compensation Act is briefly
as follows: —Certificates are made out by any one of the local
practitioners in the town. In the event of the man or his
employers being dissatisfied with the diagnosis the patient is
referred to a medical referee. That throws a good deal of
responsibility on the local practitioner, especially in estimating
incapacity. The Commission has under consideration a recom-
mendation for the formation of a referee board to consist of
three medical officers whose decision would be final. They would
be in the position both of certifying officers and referees. In
your opinion, would that be a preferable procedure, and would
you care to commit upon it? —I feel strongly that some such
system as you suggest would be much preferable to the one at
present in existence. In acute outspoken cases of lead poison-
ing no difficulties of diagnosis present themselves, but there
occur so many doubtful and difficult cases that a more satis-
factory decision will, I am sure, be arrived at by a board who
are continually dealing with cases of this type. It also tends
to ensure a uniform adoption of criteria in diagnosis.
1859. Do you consider it advisable that all applicants for
work in lead processes should undergo a preliminary examina-
tion? —Yes.
1859 a. Do you consider periodical medical examinations, con-
ducted, say, by a medical officer in the employment of the works,
an advisable scheme? —Very.
.1860. That is whether the men are complaining of illness or
not? —Yes; a general medical examination.
1861. In the event of a medical staff being organised in such
works, do you consider its augmentation by a dental service
would be beneficial to the men, especially from the standpoint
of preventing lead poisoning, but also on general lines?—l do
not believe it would have any marked specific effect in prevent-
ing lead poisoning, but it is undeniable that it would have an
admirable effect upon the general level of health of the em-
ployees.
1862. Are there any other remarks that you are in a position
to make which you think would help the Commission with its
problem ? There is, perhaps, the question of the powers of
the Medical Board. I think the Medical Board should bo
charged with the duty not only of determining when individuals
are affected with lead poisoning, but also with the duty of
determining when they have recovered. The board should also
have the power to call up for examination at set periods indi-
viduals whom they have previously certified as suffering from
plumbisra.
1863. By Mr. Pearson I take it that you mean the Board
should also have the duty of determining whether any
susceptibles should be excluded from the industry?—Yes.
1864. By the Chairman—Do you consider that lead poisoning
should be made a notifiable disease in South Australia?—Yes.
1865. By Mr. Gepp —With the permission of the Chairman
f am handing you a translation of an article on lead poisoning
by 1 i ofessor Biondi, of Vienna, which has been forwarded to
Australia for the criticism of the Commonwealth Department
of Health by the International Labor Office of Geneva. With
the agreement of Professor Chapman would you be so good as
to supply m writing to this Commission your general comments
upon this article?—Yes.
1866. As a pure suggestion, and with nothing at the moment
to base it on, 1 would like to mention to you that at Broken
Hdi the conditions underground are approximating to
saturation in moisture whereas the percentage of humidity at
Port Pine is very low. Whilst, of course, it is impossible for
you to make any comment on that at the moment,‘would von
discuss the matter with Professor Chapman and see if you think


it in any way affects the position the Commission has before
it, namely the very large number of mild cases reported by the
local medical practitioners? Will you communicate in regard to
that question with the Commision in writing? Yes
1867. Would you be good enough to look at the references
to the Commission by the South Australian Government.
(Handed to witness.) I also submit to you Table L, which is a
summary of the statistical evidence tendered by the Smelting
Company. (Table L shown.) You will notice that Mediter-
ranean Europeans about 10 per cent., also that cases of the
Nordic races British, Germans, arid Scandinavians—have risen
from 1 to 3 per cent., with some indication of a reduction
oi er a recent period. That is one of the problems we are faced
with. You have had no experience in your work either at
Broken Hill or in Sydney which would throw any light on that
extraordinary state of affairs?—No.
1868. Is it possible that if small quantities of lead were
being taken into the system by an almost invariable diet of
tinned fish it might aggravate a position which might not
otherwise show up in the way of statistics?—That is quite
possible.
1869. What is your opinion of the living conditions in their
effect upon the resistance of men who have come to Australia
within, say, 12 months, and are employed at the smelters? By
living conditions I mean housing, diet, and personal hygiene?
—Unsatisfactory conditions of diet in so far as they effect
nutrition, and of hygiene in so far as they affect cleanliness,
would undoubtedly have an effect upon the general level of
health of any group of men.
1870. In industrial work generally, the man with a know-
ledge of the hazards would be able to protect himself against
a considerable number of the dangers, would he not? —Yes.
1871. Is it, in your opinion, possible for a supplementary
cause, that a number of these men are unable to speak English,
and unable to read notices even in their own language, and
understand the precautions which it is advised should be taken?
I think that is probably a very important cause.
1872. You say that from your general knowledge of indus-
trial hygiene, quite apart from any special lead risk? —Yes.
1873. The main cause of plumbism has been stated to us by
a large number of witnesses, and is also stated in literature
on the subject, as being dust taken in through the respiratory
passages. Do you agree with that? —Yes. There are, of
course, a number of very eminent authorities who hold the
view that it is dust taken by ingestion, but all are agreed that
it is dust.
874. Therefore in all these lead industries, every effort is
made to reduce the amount of dust in the atmosphere? —Yes.
1875. Have you any experience of any special methods for
the removal and prevention of dust in any of the industries
with which you are associated professionally? I mean the
prevention of dust reaching the lungs through getting into
the atmosphere? —Yes.
1876. Could you tell us any that might be applied under the
conditions of a lead smelting works? —I am not familiar
enough with the conditions of a lead smelting works to give
any suggestion.
1877. Do you know of any large scale works with motor
vacuum apparatus or device which would obviate the distribu-
tion of considerable dust whilst dust was being removed, that
is, the dust which has accumulated on the walls, purloins, and
rafters of buildings? —No, not in a lead industry.
1878. Or in any other industry, taking the question generally
of the removal of dust in difficult circumstances in a factory
which is somewhat old?—No, I have not any experience.
1879. In the design of new buildings, I presume that a
recommendation, if you were asked to make one, would be
that the lodgment of dust should be eliminated by all possible
means ? —Yes.
1880. The Commission is considering all other possibilities
apart from lead as being the cause of this large number of
reported cases. If small 'but toxic quantities of carbon mon-
oxide were present in the atmosphere, what effect would that
have at such works as the Port Pirie smelters, first of all
upon the health, and secondly, upon the diagnosis? —It would
produce a lowering of the general level of the health of the
men exposed, and might produce changes in the nutrition, in
the blood, and in the nervous system which might give rise
to difficulties in differentiating between the effects of carbon
monoxide and lead.
1881. The Commission is considering the advisability of
recommending methods of conveying to all employees, includ-
ing new employees, education in regard to the hazards of the
industry, and the methods by which they can protect them-
selves, and for the further purpose of rendering co-operation
between the company and the men and the Government depart-
ments concerned easier. Have you any personal experience as to
details of the methods which might be adopted for that purpose,
for instance, by means of notices, booklets, special lectures, and
so forth? —Yes, I know of the use of notices in Broken Hill
and in other lead industries in this State, where the Board of
Health has caused notices to be exhibited drawing the atten-
tion of workmen to the dangers and the methods of avoiding
them. I believe that these have an excellent effect immedi-
ately, and a further influence of an educational nature, the
effects of which are not seen so immediately, but which go
on increasing with time.
1882. For many years there have been statutory regulations
governing work in the lead industries of a number of coun-
tries, including Austria, Germany, and Great Britain. We
were told yesterday by one of our witnesses, who had had 24
years ’ experience, that the results of statutory regulations
in Great Britain were very definite, very quick, and satisfac-
tory. From your experience, would you feel that regulations
by law would be advisable in such an industry?—Basing my
opinion upon the experience in Great Britain, I would say,
yes.
1883. Are there statutory regulations in Broken Hill? —In
some respects, yes. If a man disobeys certain regulations
underground is he liable to be prosecuted under law?—l believe
so.
1884. From your advices since you left Broken Hill have the
results been satisfactory there? —Very.
1885. From your experience would you favor some workable
ami practicable- scheme of clothing being laundered at regular
intervals wherever lead dust might be flying about? —Yes.
1886. From the content of the lead in the urine can any
indications be drawn for diagnostic [imposes between absorp-
tion and poisoning?—l do not know that there is any definite
work on that yet.
1887. The lead is estimated quantitatively, but conclusions
have not yet been drawn? —On our present knowledge no
definite conclusions on that point are warranted.
1888. From your experience of men in the lead industry
could you tell us whether fat men or lean men are the more
susceptible?—l have been unable to draw any conclusions.
1889. By Mr. Pearson —ln connection with the question of
bringing the dangers of lead poisoning under the notice of
employees exposed to lead hazard, I notice the position at Fort
Pirie is that quite a number of the workmen are illiterate
foreigners. I take it that under conditions such as those you
would consider it useful to have their attention called to the
hazard by interpreters when they are engaged, and make it
one of the conditions of their employment that they are
cognisant of the hazard they are undertaking?—l consider that
it should be driven right home.
1890. The men employed in the lead processes of the smelters
regularly work seven shifts a week, 56 hours; do you consider
that the physical strain of employment under those conditions
would lesson the resistance to lead poisoning? —Yes, it would,
and it increases their exposure.
1891. Are you of the opinion that there should be shorter
hours if it is possible to arrange for them? —I think so.
1892. Would you regard 48 hours as the maximum? —Yes.
1893. By Mr. Gepp —lf the Commission desire your assistance
for a week or a fortnight at Port Pirie, with that of Dr.
Chapman, could that be arranged?—Yes.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.


Saturday, June 6th, at 10 a.m.
[At Town Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W Bobinette
JOHN HERBERT STEPHEN LEAHEY, assistant town
clerk, Port Pirie Corporation, Town Hall, Port Pirie,
was sworn and examined:
1894. By the Chairman —Have you prepared a statement
showing the number of employees of the smelters who own
their own houses in Port Pirie?—Yes. I have prepared a
report, which is as follows:
As directed by the Royal Commission on Plumbism, I have
perused the pay-roll of the B.H.A.S. Proprietary, Limited, with
a view of ascertaining the number of employees engaged at
their works, who occupy houses owned or being purchased by
them. The company submitted their pay-sheets for the fort-
night ended March 11th, 1925, and these covered all men
working on the works, with the exception of officers who are
employed at a salary. I found that 319 of the employees
own their homes. This information has been gathered from
records made available to me by the corporation of Port Pirie,
and I vouch for the correctness of the figures on these
records.
1895. By Mr. Gepp —What was the number of men on the
pay-sheet? —The company were going to supply me with the
number of men on the pay-sheet, but have not done so.
1896. By Mr. Bobinette —You have the pay-sheets in the
office?—Yes, but the names were duplicated on occasions, and
I could not arrive at the correct figure. The company would
have to do that.
The witness withdrew.
JOSHUA BETCHFOBD, stores manager, Broken Hill
Associated Smelters ’ Co-operative Council, Port
Pirie, was recalled and further examined:
1897. By the Chairman —I understand that for the infor-
mation of the Commission you have prepared a statement
setting out the quantities sold of certain of your goods? —Yes.
I have made up the figures, and for the six months, November
Ist, 1924, to May Ist, 1925—this is the fish selling period of
the year—the lines ran as follow: —87 cases of salmon, each
containing 6 dozen tins; 15 cases of herrings, each containing
100 tins; 110 cases of sardines, each containing 100 tins; 75
cases of kippered snacks, each containing 100 tins; 6 cases of
red herrings, each containing 6 dozen tins, with six herrings
to a tin.
1898. By Mr. Bobinette —You do not keep a record of the
number of people who deal at your store? —Not an actual
record. There is no record of the actual number of sales
made over the counter.
1899. Can you form an estimate of the total number of
your customers? —I am afraid I could not give you that. The
comings and goings at such a busy counter would be beyond
my power of making even a rough estimate.
1900. By the Chairman —It is all cash trade? —Yes.
1901. By Mr. Bobinette —Approximately, what is the turn-
over of the store in a year? —Somewhere about £BO,OOO.
1902. Can you form any estimate of the number of em-
ployees who deal at the store? —I would not dare to make a
definite statement, but I should say that we did fully 60 per
cent, of the trade of the smelters.
1903. You have had much experience in storekeeping, have
you not? —A life’s experience.
1904. Would you consider the fish sold in the period you
mentioned an abnormal quantity in an £BO,OOO turnover? —
Not considering the class of men
1905. Would you consider the sales to be abnormal in an
£BO,OOO turnover? —I cannot answer the question unless I do
it in my own way. I said that the sales were not abnormal
according to the class of men who bought the fish. My answer
must be guided by the class of men dealt with.
1906. I shall leave Port Pirie out of it. You have had much
experience outside of Port Pirie. In places, other than Port
Pirie, would you consider such sales as you mentioned
abnormal in an £BO,OOO turnover? —In Bundle Street I should.
1907. Where has your experience in storekeeping been
derived? —In Western Australia and South Australia.
1908. Which part of Western Australia? —Perth.
1909. You have never been a storekeeper in a country town?
—Not until I came here.
1910. So that you are not competent to say whether the
quantity of tinned fish sold here is abnormal for a country
area? —For a country area, no.
1911. What store were you in in Bundle Street? —Foy and.
Gibson’s.
1912. In the grocery department?—No.
1913. You have had no experience in South Australia in
dealing in this class of goods? —Yes. I had six years and eight
months’ wholesale experience With J. W. Grasby & Co., Limited.
1914. Your wholesale experience would not enable you to
know whether this is an abnormal amount of fish to be sold
in a retail business? —It would not.
1915. Were you in the retail business in Western Australia?
•—Yes, with Foy & Gibson’s.
1916. Did you have any idea of the turnover there? —No,
and if I had I would not divulge it.
1917. Are the figures for the sale of tinned fish here out of
proportion to those for the sale of similar goods by Foy and'
Gibson’s Western Australian store? —I could not answer that
question.
1918. How do you know the figures you nave given us are
out of proportion? —I made a statement to you just now. I
can only imagine it.
1919. Do you know or do you not know whether these
figure's are out of proportion with other experience you have
had, in an £BO,OOO turnover? —I cannot say.
1920. By Mr. Gepp —ln answer to a previous question by
Mr. Robinette you expressed the opinion that, from your
general knowledge, the quantity of tinned fish sold here was
greater, in proportion, than in Bundle Street, Adelaide?—l
should think so. If I had been allowed to answer the question
in my own way I should have made the thing plain.
1921. With the permission of the chairman, I should like you
to explain the point of view you desired to make in answer to
the general questions put to you by Mr. Bobinette? —When I
mentioned the class of men and was interrupted, I was about
to say that it stood to reason that in an industrial centre of
this kind, where so many men are single and ‘ * batch, ’ ’ this
class of food would be used much more largely than in a city
centre, where there are wives, restaurants, and so on, and where
men would not be called upon to use tinned food as a quick
expedient.
1922. From your knowledge is fresh fish available in Port
Pirie as well as tinned fish? —From my experience fresh fish
is hard to get, unless you catch it yourself.
1923. Comparing Port Pirie with a country town well inland,
would there be more fresh fish available here than in a towm
like 1 , say, Kalgoorlie?—Without a doubt there is more fresh fish
to be had by the people here.
1924. Is there any other point you would like to make in
order to round off your evidence?—No.
1925. By Mr. Bobinette —Could you give us the retail prices
of the items you mentioned? —Yes. The retail counter price of
the salmon would be Is. sd. a tin, herrings Is. 2d. a tin, sar-
dines 3d. a tin, kippered snacks, 34d. a tin, and the red
herrings Is. Id. a tin.
The witness withdrew.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent
of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie,
was recalled and further examined:
1926. By the Chairman —I understand you have some
further information to supply in response to a request by the
Commission?—Yes. The Commission asked me to prepare a
graph showing the employment and lead poisoning statistics,
having regard to the main plant alterations that had taken
place over the period from the end of 1919 to the end of 1924.
I put in the graph as requested. (Graph put in and marked
Exhibit No. 24. ) In order to get the information on a sheet
of reasonable size we have had to plot the graphs in on two
scales. The Commission will notice that in the extreme left-
hand corner is the startinsr-noint of a eranh relatW tn the


Half-year ended.
1 British.
Greek.
Maltese.
1
J Italian.
German.
Scandina-
vian.
Russian.
Others.
Total No.
f Per cent.
(100-00)
26/12/17
< No.
1
—
—
(100)
[Per cent.
•36
—
—
1
(
—
—
•19
-26/6/18
f Per cent.
(75-00)
No.
3
—
(25-00)
(100)
cent.
1-07
—
1
4
—
4-76
•77
25/12/18
T Per cent.
No.
(100-00)
1
—
—
-
—
—
—
(100)
' Per cent.
•36
—
—
1
—
—
•19
25/6/19
[ Per cent.
i (100-00)
2
I
No.
—
—
(100)
[ Per cent.
•72
—
2
—
•38
f Per cent.
(100-00)
(100)
23/12/19 J No.
3
—
Per cent.
1-07
—
3
—
•57
23/6/20 ■<
Per cent.
(100-00)
(100)
No.
4
Per cent.
1-43
—
4
—
—
■77
r Per cent.
22/12/20
No.
—
—
—
Per cent.
—
—
—
—
—
—
-22/6/21 -<
Per cent.
No.
—
—
—
(100-00)
I
—
—
1100)
cent.
—
—
—
10-00
—
—
1
•19
Per cent.
(100-00)
(100)
21/12/21
No.
2
Per cent.
■72
2
•38
21/6/22 \
Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
(83-33)
20
7-17
(4-17)
1
•82
—
—
(8-33)
2
25-00
(4-17)
1
4-76
(100)
24
4-59
20/12/22
Per cent.
No. '
Per cent.
(87-51)
28
1004
(6-25)
2
1-64
(3-12)
1
3-33
—
(3-12)
1
10-00
(100)
32
6-12
20/6/23 -1
Per cent.
No. !
Per cent. !
(78-93)
30
10-75
(5-27)
2
1-64
(2-63)
1
2-27
(5-27)
2
6-67
—
(5-27)
2
20-00
—
(2-63) !
1
4-76
(100)
38
7-27
19/12/23 -)
Per cent.
No. |
(72-55)
37
(17-65)
9
—
(3-92)
2
(3-92)
2
—
—
(1-96)
]
(100)
51
9-75
i
Per cent.
13-26
7-38 j
—
6-67
22-22
—
4-76
f Per cent.
2/7/24 No.
(55-34)
57
(22-34)
23
(3-88)
4
(9-71)
10
(1-94)
2
(0-97)
1
(1-94)
2
(3-88) |
4
1100)
103
1
Per cent.
20-43
18-85
9-09
33-33
22-22
10-00
25-00
19-05
19-69
31/12/24 <{
Per cent -
No. 1
(40-47)
53
(23-66)
31
(18-32)
24
(9-92)
13
(0-76)
1
(1-53)
2
(3-05)
4
(2-29)
3
(100)
131
Per cent.
1900
25-41
54-55
43-33 |
11-11
20-00
50-00
14-29
25-05
1/1/25 to 31/5/25 (5 /
months ,
Per cent.
No. !
(30-10)
38
(42-86)
.54
(11-90)
15
(1-59)
2
(3-17)
4
(2-38)
3
—
(7-94)
10
(100)
126
Per cent.
13-62
44-26
34-09
6-67
44-45
30-00
- !
47-62
24-09
Per cent.
(53-35)
(23-33)
(8-41)
(5-74)
(1-72)
(1-91)
(1-53) i
(4-01)
(100-00)
No.
279
122
44
30
9
10
8
21
523
Per cent.
100-00 |
100 00
10000
10000
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
10000
tota lead cases The points of the graphs have regard to
half-yearly periods covering the time with which the graph
deals In the half-yearly period ended 23/12/19 there were
very few cases indeed. The graph runs along giving all the
cases for each half-yearly period and from a point in the
period ended 22/6/21 the foreign lead cases graph joins the
mam graph. Furthermore, in the period ended 21/12/21 the
" eg T t 0 rise vei T suddenly. The Commission will see
that the British lead cases, the foreign lead cases, and the
etal lead cases are all shown from then to the final period,
hat section of the graph is self-explanatory after a little
study. The graph shown in the next heavier white line relates
to the foreign labor turnover. In interpreting the graph, if
t e Commission will look at the period ended 23/12/19 they
will see that, approximately, 80 individuals of foreign extrac-
tion were employed on the works during that half-year. Then
the graph explains itself. Going further up the sheet, it will
be seen that the next graph line shows the average number of
employees per day during eacli of the half-yearly periods.
r lhe next line shows the British turnover and the line above
gives the total turnover.
192/. By Mr. Gepp —As I understand it, the lower lighter
lines must be read entirely by themselves? No comparison is
possible between the lower lighter lines and the top lines,
because the former are on a scale five times smaller than the
latter? That is so. The Commission asked me to prepare
certain tables so far as practicable up to date. We have
compiled the information up to May 31. The first table I was
asked to amend was that marked “C” (Exhibit No. 2). I
now put in table “Cl,” showing the number of persons com-
pensated for lead poisoning for the period 28/6/17 to 31/5/25.
(Table put in and marked Exhibit No. 25.)
Table “ CI.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING.
A rf Person* Compensated for Lend Poisoning for the Period 28/6/17 to 31/5/25.
Numbers in parentheses represent percentage of the total numbers in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent
percentages of the totals at the foot of the table.


—
1
p
]
bb
H->
Period.
<D
P
<D
Ph
Ph
O
_o
£
Ph !
O
H
a .
O Ph
t §
PQ Ph
Dwight an
Lloyd.
Huntingto
Heberlein.
cc
Ph
O
Ph"S
Ph c3
O O
Ph Ph
'EP
cS
£ ®
Oft
-g
£
bD
c3
GO
Skinner
Furnaces.
P
c6
£
r3
o
<!
6 .
o rn
•r +■> |
Ph
Ph Jr*
:oft
+-*
o
H
f Per cent.
(5-56)
(22-22)
(11-11)
(27-77)
(5-56)
(5-56)
(ii-ii)
—
—
(11-11)
9
(100)
18
28/6/17 to 21/12/21
No.
cent.
1
•95
4
5-19
2
1-92
5
6-41
—
1
9-09
1
20-00
2
33-33
—
—
2-63
3-44
22/12/21 to 21/6/22
f Per cent.
No.
cent.
(16 67)
4
3-81
(33-33)
8
10-39
(16-67)
4
3-85
(16-67)
4
5-13
(8-33)
2
4-00
v —
—
—
—
(8-33)
2
2-63
(100)
24
4-59
f Per cent.
(12-50)
(31-26)
(9-37)
(25-00)
(6-25)
(9-37)
—
—
—
—
(6-25)
9
(100)
32
22/6/22 to 20/12/22
....-( No.
cent.
4
3-81
10
12-99
3
2-88
8
10-26
2
4-00
3
27-27
—
—
—
—
2-63
6-12
f Per cent.
(13-16)
(7-89)
(28-95)
(15-79)
(2-63)
(2-63)
(2-63)
—
(2-63)
—
(23-69)
9
(100)
38
21/12/22 to 20/6/23
No.
cent.
5
4*76
3
3-90
11
10-58
6
7-69
1
2-00
1
9-09
1
20-00
—
10-00
—
11-84
7-27
*
f Per cent.
(25-49)
(5-88)
(25-49)
(21-57)
(7-84)
(1-96)
—
—
—
—
(11-77)
6
(100)
51
21/6/23 to 19/12/23
■{ No.
cent.
13
12-38
3
3-90
13
12-50
11
14-10
4
8-00
1
9-09
—
—
—
—
7-90
9-75
f Per cent.
(22-33)
(11-65)
(15-54)
(16-50)
(12-62)
(2-91)
(-97)
(•97)
(-97)
—
(15-54)
(100)
103
20/12/23 to 2/7/24
No.
cent.
23
21-91
12
15-58
16
15-39
17
21-79
13
26-00
3
27-28
1
20-00
1
16-67
1
10-00
—
21-05
19-69
3/7/24 to 31/12/24
f Per cent.
No.
cent.
(29-02)
38
36-19
9 92)
13
16-88
(16-79)
22
21-15
(6-87)
9
11-54
(13-74)
18
36-00
(1-53)
2
18-18
—
(3-05)
4
40-00
(•76)
1
100-00
(18-32)
24
31-58
(100)
131
25-05
f Per cent.
(13-49)
(19-05)
(26-19)
(14-29)
(7-94)
—
(1-59)
(2-38)
(3-17)
—
(11-90)
(100)
190
1/1/25 to 31/5/25, 5
ninths -( No.
cent.
17
16-19
24
31-17
33
31-73
18
1 23-08
10
20-00
—
2
4000
3
50 00
4
40-00
1 -
19-74
24-09
Total ...
f Per cent.
4 No.
cent.
(20-08)
105
10000
(14-72)
77
100 00
(19-89
104
100-00
(14-91)
78
100-00
(9-56)
50
10000
(2-10)
11
100-00
(•96)
5
100-00
(MS)
6
100-00
(1-91
10
100-00
I (-19)
1
100-00
(14-53)
76
100-00
(100)
523
100-00
iii order to make the new table as useful as possible we have
repeated table “C,” which appears on page 9, with the neces-
sary additions to bring it up to date. The figures for the five
months ended 31/5/25 show that there were 38 British persons
compensated for lead poisoning. Those 38 represented 30.16
per cent, of all the cases compensated during those five months.
Further, they represent 13.62 per cent, of all the British cases
reported for the whole period of eight and a half years since
1917. The black percentage figures refer to the headings under
which the figures come and the red figures are the percentages
on the whole of the nationalities set out.
1928. It is interesting to note the small number of Italian
and large number of Greek cases? —Yes.
1929. Do the figures indicate that the high percentage of
Maltese is maintained? —Yes.
1930. In our inspection of the town we came across foreigners
who said they were Jugo-Slavs. Under which heading would
they come?—Under the heading “Others.” I put in table
“M 2,” which shows the reported cases of lead poisoning
during the period 28/6/17 to 31/5/25 having relation to the
department of origin of contraction. (Table put in and
marked Exhibit No. 26.)
Table “ M2.”—REPORTED CASES OF LEAD POISONING—2B/6/17 TO 31/5/25.
Department of Origin of Contraction.
Numbers in parentheses represent percentage of the total numbers in the last column. Numbers not in parentheses represent
percentages of the totals at the foot of the table.
All the information given in previous table “M” appears on
this new table, and in addition, at the foot of the table figures
are shown covering the five months from 1/1/25 to 31/5/25.
Take, for example, the refinery section. There were 17 cases
there from 1/1/25 to 31/5/25. Those 17 cases represent 16.19
per cent, of all the cases that have come from the refinery
during the period under consideration. Further, they repre-
sent 13.49 per cent, of all the eases that occurred during that
five-monthly period.
1931. By Mr. Pearson —The figures show that the incidence
of lead poisoning appears to be increasing in the blast furnace
and D. and L. plant sections. Forty-five per cent, of the cases
reported in the last five months are in connection with the
blast furnaces? —Yes.
1932. By the Chairman —For the period ended 31/12/24 the
figure for the top and bottom floors and the D. and L.
plant was 31 per cent., but for this period of five months it is
60 per cent.? —Yes, I cannot understand that, because tin
practice has not changed in any of our sections.
1933. By Mr. Gepp —The refinery figures have dropped more
than 50 per cent.? —Yes.
1934. Is it not very difficult to tie down the origin of con-
traction because of the number of changes that go on? It is
hard to understand why the figures vary so greatly? —Yes.
1935. By Mr. Bobmette —Have there been any alterations in
those departments? —Alterations were going on, but they were
not in operation during the period covered by the latest
figures.
1936. There has been an alteration in the D. and L. plant?
-—No. Less work is being done on the H. and H. plant, but
that comes under a separate heading.
1937. In the D. and L. plant there has been an alteration in
the process?—No.
1938. By Mr. Pearson— With the reduction in the quantity
of material treated by the H. and H. plant I take it that
increased tonnage has been put through the D. and L. plant?
—Yes, but the increased tonnage is treated in precisely the
same way as before. The same number of machines are
working, but they are working in a different w r ay. More men
are not required to work there.
1939. By Mr. Gepp —Has there not been a more intense cam-
paign in settling dust and in watering down during the last
five months? —No.


2 as per cent, of I
2. Daily average strength
1. Labor turnover
Half-year ended
4*
to
4-
Zi
o
4*
23/12/19.
4-
a
05
4*-
23 /fi /?n
6
Cl
7“
*
a
_
o
cb
•*1
CO
o
22/12/20.
00
4-
*
4^
4^
CO
o
22/6/21.
%
Cl
o
05
00
cc
21/12/21.
*
oc
4~
CO
o
o
Cl
4-
21/6/22.
00
4-
Ci
05
■
CO
to
o
-1
4-
20/12/22.
CO
00
05
Ci
to
00
6
cc
04
o
20/6/23.
to
CO
00
05
to
4-
to
19/12/23.
s
o
0w
05
to
Cl
CO
'bi
Ci
2/7/24.
o
Cl
to
05
to
to
05
o
05
31/12/24.
tO
Cl
05
to
1/1/25 to
wC
05
05
31/5/25
6
(5 months)
1940. It is just about the same?—Yes.
1941. From an inspection of the D. and L. plant it seems
very hard to understand the cause of the lead cases there, as
there is plenty of fresh air, the atmosphere is clear, and there
is little dust. Yet here is this rise in the number of cases?
—lt is very hard for me to appreciate, especially in view of
the fact that in the old 1). and L. plant operations the men
were completely boxed in and did not get the benefit of the
fresh air to the degree that they do now.
1942. By Mr. Robinette —Did you not say in your previous
evidence that the advance in the D. and L. plant was due to
the elimination of the H. and H. pots?—Not the elimination; I
said the reduction.
1943. There must be an alteration in the process?—No. There
is only a different bed on the machines. The machines are
working in just the same way.
1944. There must be some alteration in the process to do
away with those pots?—There has been no alteration in the
process. All we have done has been to deepen the charge on
the B section of the D. and L. machines.
1945. By Mr. Pearson —Previously it was so many inches,
thick, now it is thicker? —Yes.
1946. By Mr. Robinette —More heat is required to solidify
that ? —No.
1947. The belts travel more slowly?—Yes.
1948. So there has been an alteration? —Not in the process.
1949. But in the method of treatment? —Yes.
1950. By Mr. Gepp —Can you see how that would make any
difference in the atmosphere?—Taking the combined D. and L.
and H. and H. plants there would be less hazard now than
there was previously.
1951. By Mr. Robimett'e —lt would take more water to damp
down a 9in. bed than a Sin. bed? —Yes.
1952. Are you using more water? —Yes. We damp it down
thoroughly. I propose to put in a further table marked “Q”
showing the labor turnover and employment at the smelters.
(Table put in and marked Exhibit No. 27.)
Table “Q.”—LABOR TURNOVER AND EMPLOYMENT.
* During these periods the rotation scheme was in operation. During the shut-down period from July, 1919, to August, 1921, owing to
the Broken Bill strike and the fire at the D. & L., a labor roster was drawn up, and the available work distributed among the men to minimise
distress.
This table shows the labor turnover in half-yearly periods from
23/6/19 to 31/5/25 and the daily average strength. It also
sets out the daily average strength as a percentage of the
total turnover each half-year. It will be seen nat in line 2
certain of the figures are followed by the letter “a.” That
letter refers to the note at the bottom of the table. It simply
explains why the turnover in some instances was less or greater
than in others.
1953. By Mr. Gepp —Why was the percentage of 69.19 in
the period ended 20/12/22 so much in excess of the other per-
centages? Is there any explanation? —None that I can give.
1954. Was it due to the fact that you nad a period of
partial employment? —With one exception the percentages are
low where the figures are followed by the letter 1- a. Ihe
reason is this. When the plant was shut down the available
work was distributed among our employees in turn. There
was no work for any other people, so that our labor turnover
figure with regard to the number of people on the books
naturally was smaller, because new men could not get on the
books, there being not sufficient work to go round among the
men already on.
1955. By Mr. Pearson —You took no applications for em-
ployment? —We could not.
1956. By Mr. Robinette —I understand you have a doctor
employed at the works now?—lt depends upon the sense in
which you use the word ‘ ‘ employed. ’ ’ He is not a member of
our staff.
1957. In what capacity is he there? —In our behalf he is
examining the men at present receiving compensation for lead
poisoning.
1958. He is employed by the company? —He is employed for
that purpose. He is not on the staff.
1959. The daily paid men are not on tne staff, but they are
employed by the company? —Yes.
1960. What are the doctor’s duties?—To examine the men
and to report to us whether or not they are suffering from
plumbism.
1961. On the works? —Yes.
19(52. Can you tell the Commission who authorised him to go
to the Commonwealth laboratory to examine the beneficiaries?
—I do not know that he has examined any men at the
laboratory.
1963. Who authorised him to be present at Professor Chap-
man’s and Dr. Smith’s examinations of the men. Was that
done at the instigation of the company?—No.
,19(54. Do you approve of the attitude of a doctor employed
by the company in being present at an examination by another
doctor? —I express no opinion on it at all. It has nothing to
do with me.
1965. You will not say whether you approve of it or not? —-
No.
1966. By Mr. Pearson —Can you give us any information
with regard to the dust survey and what is being done in con-
nection with it? —We are still carrying it on. In the first
instance we are making a general dust survey covering the
whole works at all those places where the men are working.
Then we shall, of course, repeat the tests at those places over
and over again until we get figures that we regard as being
somewhere near the average working condition of those places.
It is obvious that one dust test taken in a given place does
not necessarily represent the average working conditions at that
place. We wish to take a number of tests at each place.
When that is done we can definitely assess the hazard at each
place.
1967. What apparatus are you using? —It is an apparatus
that was developed at the South Mine, Broken Hill, and is
regarded by those who have had previous experience as being
the best type to secure. It is known as the ‘‘Read'’ type.
1968. Can you give the Commission any indication as to
when you will be likely to have any definite results or esti-
mate? —From my point of view I think it essential to have
a number of tests made at each place before expressing an
opinion. Conditions vary so much. On one day a strong north
wind may be blowing, on another a strong southerly, while a
third day may be calm. Then on another occasion it may be
raining. I feel very loth indeed to put out any figures as cx-


pressing my belief that they are correct figures until I have
had a number of tests made under varying conditions. You
will see it is quite a long job. We have not finished the first
general survey yet and have two machines working on it
constantly.
1969. By Mr. Robinette —The Commission have not asked
you for these figures?—No.
1970. You are anticipating that they will want them? —I do
not know.
1971. Why are you preparing them?—For our own informa-
tion so that we can assess the hazard in different parts of the
works.
1972. Did anybody suggest the thing to you? —Yes; Mr.
Wainwright made the suggestion in the first instance.
1974. Mr. Pearson —I suggested the making of a dust
survey to members of the company’s staff before the Com-
mission was formed.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Monday, June Bth, at 10 a.m.
[At Town Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present —
Dr. K. R. Moore (chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gdpp.
Mr. J. L Pearson.
Mr, W. Robinette.
Mr. Robinette —l lodge an objection against any evidence
being given by Professor Chapman or Dr. Smith on the
ground that the inquiry they made here was illegal. Further,
if it were essential for them to obtain the clinical and medical
records of the beneficiaries from Dr. Moulden it was also
necessary that they obtain those records from the beneficiaries ’
own doctors. I consider that evidence given by Professor
Chapman and Dr. Smith cannot be complete until such time as
they have consulted with the men’s medical advisers. The
whole procedure is highly improper, and the evidence of Pro-
fessor Chapman and his colleague, in my opinion, will be of
no value.
The Chairman —I think we should hear what evidence Pro-
fessor Chapman and Dr. Smith may give. We can all form
our opinions on that.
Mr. Robinette —I wish my objection to be noted. Do you
rule that the evidence of Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith
is admissible?
The Chairman —Yes. Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith were
asked by the Commission to come here and examine the bene-
ficiaries on lines that were the most expeditious that we could
arrange, and we shall now’ take any evidence they can give.
HENRY GEORGE CHAPMAN, Professor of Physiology
in the University of Sydney, was re-called and
further examined:
Professor Chapman —Before I give evidence I wish to draw'
attention to certain facts. You are aware, Mr. Chairman, that
as chairman of the Commission, you asked Dr. Smith and me
to come to Port Pirie to look at the works and examine certain
persons, whom I think you speak of as the beneficiaries. You
obtained departmental railway tickets for us tq come here, and
in Adelaide I was handed this letter, sign 'd by the secretary
of the Royal Commission on Plumbism: —
am enclosing herewith orders for tickets for your journey
to and from Port Pirie. So far as the return journey is con-
cerned, I am not sure whether you will motor to Snow’town or
come all the way by train from Port Pirie, but the order for
the ticket will be applicable to either case.
I have received from the B.H.A.S. Limited a list of persons
said to be suffering from lead poisoning, and am enclosing
two copies, one for yourself and one for Dr. Smith. The times
mentioned have been suggested by the B.H.A.S. Limited, but
my instructions from the chairman were that you would fix the
times and on that account, I am sending herewith a letter
addressed to each person whose name is on the list, so that you
may Jill in the time and place at which you wish to examine-
him. Mr. Woodward, of the B.H.A.S. Limited, has arranged to-
have the letters delivered. . . . .
I also return the remainder of the letters and envelopes handed
to me.
Mr. Gepp —Would it not be as well for Professor Chapman
to put in his letter of authorisation to complete the story.
Professor Chapman —l have not got the letter of authorisa-
tion here. We came to Port Pirie and made an inspection of
the works before we decided how we were going to examine
these persons. We also examined, as was suggested to us, the
cards and records made by Dr. Moulden at his examination.
You will recollect that the Commission asked us whether we
could give an opinion on the facts recorded on those cards. I
stated that I did not think it possible to give an opinion on
the cards without an examination of the persons. In the light
of what we saw on the works we thought it better to examine
these persons in different order from that set out on the list.
1975. By Mr. Robinette —Did you not comment on the men’s
eonditiou in the presence of Dr. Moulden?-—No.
197(5. You did not comment on the men’s condition at all in
the presence of Dr. Moulden? —We asked Dr. Moulden what
this stood for and what that stood for.
1977. Did not you and Dr. Smith pass remarks on the men’s
condition? —Not on the findings and what was the matter.
1978. On the men’s condition? —If you define “men’s con*
dition, ’ ’ I answer the question in the negative.
1979. You are sure that you did not make any comment on
the men’s condition in the presence of Dr. Moulden? —Not on
their condition.
1980. Did you make any comments at all?- —Yes, but not on
their condition.
1981. What were those comments? —We might have asked Dr.
Moulden who made the blood examinations and how the
results were obtained. We might have asked him why he
wrote words down in a particular way and what that plus or
minus meant.
1982. Did Dr. Moulden make any comments? —He answered
what we asked him.
1983. In examining the men did you not say, in the presence
of Dr. Moulden, that certain symptoms were suggestive of a
certain disease? —I might have said that.
1984. Did you or did you not? —It depends upon what you
mean by the words “certain disease.”
1985. Did you make any comments suggestive of a Certain
disease or any disease? —Yes, undoubtedly. We said, possibly,
that a man looked as though he had kidney trouble.
198(5. Did you not consider that highly improper in the
presence of the company’s doctor, who was deciding whether
these men should receive benefits or not? —No. I did not con-
sider it improper at all.
1987. I do not think you understand the ethics of the medical
profession? —That is a matter of opinion. After looking at the
records, in the light of what we saw at the works, we altered
the order in which the letters were delivered. I return the
list handed to me, and put in a record handed to me by Mr.
Woodward that certain letters were served. (List put in and
marked Exhibit 28.) The next thing we thought of import-
ance was that although we had come in contact with the names
of the beneficiaries, in examining them, as our information was
for the Commission and was not to be made use of in respect
of the persons personally, we must not know their names.
1988. You must have known their names, as it was on the
clinical records? —We did not know their names. We dealt
with them as numbers. We examined a certain number of
people, beginning on Tuesday afternoon last. The examina-
tions were carried out at the Commonwealth laboratory, and I
invited Dr. Moulden to be present at the examinations.
1989. Why did you not invite the men’s doctors to be pre-
sent? 5; ou must have known that they had other medical,
advisers? I simply regarded Dr. Moulden as a medical prac-
titioner from Adelaide, who had been asked to examine certain
persons, whose records were known.


1990. How did you know Dr. Moulden had examined them
if you took them by numbers and did not know their names?
I simpU accepted it as a fact that he had examined them.
We accepted what he had written on the cards as being the
results of his examinations.
1991. ou must have known the men’s names?—No.
1992. How did you know, then, who a man was?—When we
went to the room with Dr. Moulden he took his cards with him.
1993. Those cards bore the names of the men?—l think the
men ’s names were there. The first man called in was No. 1.
1 then said to Dr. Moulden, “What number does this man
bear on your sheet.” He gave me the number, and I then
asked him to read out what was written on the sheet. In that
way we had Dr. Moulden’s record brought before us. We then
questioned the man, asked him about his condition, and made
nn examination. Those results were recorded ourselves and
afterwards we came to our conclusions about those persons.
The conclusions were arrived at in private, not at the begin-
ning, but after we had considered the whole number of persons.
The examinations were begun and went on in a perfectly satis-
factory way, but on Wednesday I received this telegram:—
Consider Commission’s action summoning men appear before
you unlawful. Offer strong protest except under supervision of
men’s representative.—Robinette, Commissioner.
That came to us on Wednesday afternoon.
1994. You continued in the presence of Dr. Moulden after
receiving that telegram? —Yes.
1995. You conducted the Broken Hill inquiry, did you not?
—Y es.
1996. You knew that the men’s representatives were present
at that? —Not at the medical examination.
1997. They were supervising it?—The unions’ representatives
there were the paid servants of the Commission. They were
paid for arranging to select the men and for bringing them
t) the Commission.
1998. And they kept the company from knowing the men
who were being examined? —They did not. I did that.
1999. Why did you not do it here? —Because the company
knew we were examining these men. Their names were sup-
plied to us through tho company. What the company would
not know would be our findings on them. I am only putting
it to you that the fact that Dr. Moulden was there did not
reveal the names. The list of names was given to me by the
Commission. They were known to the company. We did not
tell Dr. Moulden what our findings were.
Mr. Gepp —The point is quite clear —if not, it should be
made so —that the only list available was the list of beneficiaries
supplied by the company, because there is no Government
record.
Mr. Robinette —But there is a union record.
Mr. Gepp —lt may not necessarily have included all the
beneficiaries.
Mr. Riobinette —It would include the biggest part of them.
We do not know that these men are beneficiaries until we go
through our ilst. We should have been able to check the list
to ascertain whether the men on it were beneficiaries. It is
obvious that it was the intention of the company to see that
the whole of the men were examined. I want to know who
authorised the sending of the 50 shrmmonses to summon men
who were not beneficiaries. Was it the company or this Com-
mission?
Mr. Gepp —The point I am bringing out is this. As far as
We as a Commission knew, there was only one complete record
of beneficiaries. We thought that had been previously accepted
by the Commission. If I am wrong I should be glad to know
it. There is no Government record, and we have no evidence,
so far as I can remember, that every beneficiary is an unionist.
That may be so, but I could not say. In any case I think the
point should be brought out that the list supplied by the com-
pany was the only record available.
Mr. Robinette —You do not know that.
2000. By Mr. Gepp —I am expressing my own appreciation
-of the situation. The second point is that the names of the
men were not necessarily known to the Commission’s doctors.
There is no intention on the part of the Commission to bring
out the names in the evidence of the doctors. We propose
definitely and specifically to eliminate the names?—lf I make
any remarks about the findings I have no idea to which persons
those findings apply.
2001. We have been very careful to protect the individual in
regard to this inquiry. We have endeavored in every way to
keep out names and to do everything we could to make it of
general application only?—We continued our examinations of
the men until Thursday, and on that day we found that cer-
tain persons, on whom letters had been served, failed to appear.
I do not know exactly the names of the persons who failed to
appear. I do happen to know the name of one man, because
he came to us and asked to be examined. He said that he
desired to be examined, although his union objected. I then
said, “You refuse to be examined,” and he replied, “I do
not refuse to be examined. I should like to consult the union
so that I may be examined, because I want to be examined.”
I told him to go and to ask. He came back and said that the
union objected, but that he wanted to be examined. I wrote
his words down so that there should be no doubt about what
lie said. He told me he was afraid of the union.
Mr. Robinette —You will be afraid of it before you are done.
2002. Professor Chapman —l then said to him, “Do you
refuse?” He answered, “I do not refuse.” Of course, we
were not going to force a man to be examined. We had little
doubt that he wished us to ask him to come in and lie
examined. However, considering the circumstances, we thought
it better for his sake not to ask him.
2003. Mr. Robinette —How did he fail to appear?—We asked
eight or nine persons to come. I do not know whether they
were served with letters, but the list will determine that. There
was none there to be examined.
2004. By Mr. Robinette —Do you not think the union had the
right to tell the man to refuse to be examined? —I do not know
that.
2005. Why comment on it? You must be biased in your
opinion?—Not at all. I am just recording the facts of the
case. When we came here and looked at the works we thought
that, in order to arrive at an opinion about the persons we
were going to examine, it was very necessary to make some
examinations of persons who were at work. I, therefore, sent
a telegram to Mr. Sincock asking him to send us some blank
forms. Certain blank forms and signed forms were sent to us,
and I now hand them back to the Commission. Further, I
would also like to hand back the remainder of the sum-
monses which were entrusted to me to serve on behalf of the
Commission.
2006. By the Chairman —Will you give the Commission your
conclusions from the examinations you made? —Yes. I have
prepared lists of the results of the individual medical examina-
tions.
2007. By Mr. Robinette —Do you consider your investigations
complete?—On these individuals, yes.
2008. Do you consider them complete without conferring with
the men’s doctors? —Yes.
Mr. Gepp —l do not know how far Professor Chapman appre-
ciates the point we have endeavored all the time to keep in
front of us, namely, that no evidence should connect up with
individuals who could be traced. What I mean by that, Mr.
Chairman, is this. ’I would suggest that you ask Professor
Chapman so to frame his evidence so that, neither by infer-
ence nor in any other way, can any particular case be traced
to a man or a few men. I think that is extremely desirable.
Mr. Robi/nette —Professor Chapman has his instructions on
it, has he not?
Mr. Gepp —l do not know what instructions he has had,
except that Mr. Sincock wrote on behalf of the Commission and
asked Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith to work on numbers.
The Chairman —Further, the numbers have been changed
since the original list was compiled.
2009. By Mr. Robinette —Who supplied the list with tho


hours that the men had to appear?—Mr. Sincock gave me that
list. We did not do the men in the order on the list.
2010. Did Mr. Sincock fix the times and everything? —Yes. I
told you I altered it when I came here.
2011. This Mr. Sincock is a genius if he fixes the times from
Adelaide. You have admitted that you filled in the times. Why
did you alter them? —Because of what we saw when looking at
the cards we decided that we would examine the men in a
certain order as the result of the symptoms they showed.
2012. The company shoved the doctor in on you after you
had decided to examine them in the order already fixed on the
list? —I had nothing to do with the preparation of the list.
It was handed to me in Adelaide.
2013. Who fixed the times on the list? —This sheet of paper,
a copy of which I hand in, was given to me on Sunday in
Adelaide. (List put in and marked Exhibit 29.) It w 7 as the
first time I ever saw it. It came with other documents from
Mr. Sincock and was handed to me by Mr. Smith, who came
down to the train.
2014. So that Mr. Sincock fixed the times and the dates?—
Yes.
Mr. Robinette—lie is a genius. I fail to understand how
Mr. Sincock fixed the times without consulting Professor Chap-
man. It is obvious that there is some underhand work going
on. It is obvious that Mr. Sincock could not fix the times.
The professor admits now that he knew nothing about it until
he reached Adelaide on the Sunday. The whole thing was then
fixed up, with the times and everything. Who fixed it?
Mr. Gepp —What does it matter?
Mr. Robinette —It shows that there was underhand work
going on somewhere.
The Chairman —No.
Mr. Robinette —Who fixed the times and who instructed Mr.
Sincock? He could not fix the times. He did not know how
long the doctors would take to examine these men. They had
never met before.
The Chairman —That is a matter lor Mr. Sincock. The pro-
fessor says that he did not follow the list.
Mr. Robinette —It does not matter whether he followed the
list or not. The times were fixed.
Mr. Gepp —The point I wish to impress upon the witness is
that he should not make any statements which would tie up
with individuals. #
Mr. Robinette —I am not afraid of him doing that.
2015. By Mr. Gepp —The object of the Commission is to
secure the principal results of the examinations? —I have no
principal results. The first person on my list is a young man,
whom we found to be suffering from lead poisoning. In regard
to his occupation, the first point of importance was that,
although he had only worked three years in the smelters, he
had worked on the bin into which the lead dross, which contains
litharge, was thrown. Further, from an examination of the
place where this man worked, I am satisfied that he worked
in the fumes that come up from the slag hoods at the side
of the blast furnace on the bottom floor. When I examined
the place the fumes from the chimneys were passing absolutely
over the man working on that bin. This man undoubtedly is
suffering from lead poisoning, and in our opinion he suffers
from colic, extensor paresis, pallor, and anaemia.
2016. By Mr. Robinette —Did you ascertain how long this
man had been working on the slag-bin?—He had been working-
on the bins most of the time. I went over his industrial history,
but did not record it in detail. The next man had been 27
years in the smelters and is 43 years of age. He had worked
on the bottom floor for 17 years. He has some points of very
great importance in his history, if sheds light on the condi-
tion from which these men suffer in Port Pirie. Firstly, wo
think he is an undoubted case of lead poisoning. He has
suffered from colic for years, and has extensor paresis, pallor,
and tremor. There is neither anaemia nor general wasting,
but on his symptoms we agree that he suffers from lead
poisoning. Dr. Smith and I agreed upon the opinions I am
giving. This man gave us another interesting point in his
history, namely, that, at times, he had to go into the bag-
house for a few weeks before he became ill. The fumes from
the bag-house made him sick, and he had to go without his
food, lie is suffering from lead poisoning, but in, the light of
other eases we think that observation is of great importance..
The third man has been eight years at work, and is 33 years of
age. He worked in what he called the Ropp roasters for five
years, but the point we think of importance is that he worked
on the B.E. furnaces for five months. He suffers from colic,,
general wasting, extensor paresis, pallor, and tremor, and, in
our opinion, is an undoubted case of lead poisoning. The next
man gives an industrial history of four years. This period,
from the point of view of his industrial history, might be
checked. I would not lay great stress on the four years, as he
has worked on and off at the smelters for 14 years. He is a
brickmaker by trade, and is always doing work at the smelters.
His age is 43 years. The point in his occupation of import-
ance, and, we think, it should be put to the Commission, is that
he has been feeding the D. and L. belt for 10 months. He
suffered from colic for years, from general wasting, extensor
paresis, and pallor. In our opinion he is an undoubted case
of lead poisoning. The next man has worked for 12 years,,
and is aged 43 years. He has a varied industrial history,
working on the roasters, the top floor, the zinc plant, and the
pottery. For the last four months that he worked—he has
been ill for six months —he was employed on the bottom floor.
He had colic for years, general wasting, extensor paresis,,
pallor, tremor, and no anaemia. We wish also to give some
facts about him that we think of importance. While at work
on the top and bottom floors he suffered from attacks of dizzi-
ness. He said he became dizzy and felt that as if he had
lost consciousness of his surroundings. Further, we noted
another interesting fact. His blood was examined in the Com-
monwealth laboratory and showed a result, we think, of con-
siderable significance, namely, that his red blood cells had
increased in number. They were high.
2017. By Mr. Robinette —They were above normal? —Yes.
This man is an undoubted case of lead poisoning. The next
man has been 11 years at work and is 47 years of age. In
his industrial history he worked on the zinc plant for five years,
in the refinery for varying periods, and for the last 30 months
he had worked on the Skinner furnaces and the B.R. furnaces.
His history has a significance from another point of view. He
has only had colic since November, 1924, he has no wasting,
no paresis, but he has pallor and anaemia. In our opinion he
is an undoubted case of lead poisoning. The next man has an
industrial history of 15 years and is 37 years of age. He has
worked on roasters and zinc plant. The point we think of sig-
nificance is that for the last three and a half years he has been
on the I), and L. belt.
2018. Is that the belt feeding the D. and L. machine?—Yes.
I refer to the point where they unload the trucks, and shovel
the material on to the belt. This man suffers from colic and
extensor paresis, but he has no general wasting, no pallor, no
tremor, and no anaemia. In our opinion he is an undoubted
case of lead poisoning. He also has some interesting points in
his history. He had a fit of unconsciousness while at work in
1915, and also has an increased number of red blood cells. Now
we come to another list we have prepared relating to the men
examined, whom we do not consider to be suffering from lead
poisoning. Ido not think it necessary to worry the Commission
with their industrial history, seeing that we do not thitik them
cases of lead poisoning.
2019. The men you will now refer to are beneficiaries?—l
do not know. All I know is that they were on the list sup-
plied to me, with the exception of two persons who applied for
compensation while we were here. These two men. brought
certificates and came to us to be examined.
2020. They were men who had applied for compensation?—
I presume they were people who produced certificates from
their doctors while we were here.


2021. By Mr. Gepp We can assume that, with the exception
of two, all the cases you will now refer to were beneficiaries,
because they were on the list supplied by the company?—l
know them only as men who came to us to be examined.
2022. Mr. Bobinette —Your evidence now is in regard to
men who are off from lead poisoning. They may be s.iift bosses,
etc.? They are persons on whom 1 served a subpoena, with
two exceptions. The excepted persons came to us with certi-
ficates from doctors.
2020. With two exceptions the men to whom you are going
to refer are included in the list supplied to you?—Yes. Where
we were able to do it we have determined the medical condition
from which they are suffering. We have put that on the list,
and it is our definite finding. In respect to some cases, I shall
tell you just why we were unable to arrive at a conclusive
medical diagnosis. The first man is 58 years of age, with an
industrial history of 25 years. He has not got colic —I mean
he has not got it at present. W T here men have had colic in the
past I have recorded that fact, because it may mean they were
cases of lead poisoning in the past. This man has no colic,
no paresis, no pallor, but he is suffering from tremor and
anaemia. A medical examination showed that he is suffering
from cardiac hypertrophy and emphysema.
2024. By Mr. Gepp —You do not indicate the cause of your
diagnosis?—lt does not arise from lead and it does not arise
from anything having regard to an industrial condition at the
works. It is a condition to which all people are more or less
liable if the particular circumstances that produce it com©
along.
2025. By Air. Bobinette —I understand that this man had
been certified by one of the local doctors to be suffering from
plumbism?—l take it so. W r e can tell you definitely that ho
is not one of the two exceptions referred to. The next man
is 37 years of age, and had wmrked here for 17 years. He does
not suffer from colic, paresis, pallor, tremor, or anaemia. He
suffers from a condition of epigastric tenderness. This man,
in our opinion, requires a further examination. He should be
placed in hospital and X-rayed and various other examina-
tions should be made of him. We think he requires thorough
investigation. The next man is 40 years of age and has an
industrial history of five years. He has no colic, no paresis,
no pallor, and no tremor, although he suffers from anaemia.
He also had an abdominal condition that requires investiga-
tion. The next man is aged 40 years and has an industrial
history of 12 years. He has no colic, no paresis or pallor, but
is suffering from tremor and anaemia. He also suffers from
pyorrhoea and has a very septic mouth. He requires investiga-
tion of a definite character. His blood wants to be examined
for organisms and things like that.
2026. You took blood tests? —No; there was no time to do
that.
2027. How did you arrive at your previous cases?—-W r e took
Dr. Mathew’s certificates. We have done no blood tests
ourselves.
2028. You have no record of a blood test in this case? —There
had been a blood test made in this case, but not the one
required. I have no doubt the blood cells were counted, but
we thought his blood should be tested for the presence of
bacteria. That has not been done. The next man is 40 years
of age with an industrial history of 15 years. At present he
has no colic, no paresis, no pallor, but he has tremor and
anaemia. This man had undoubted colic in the past. He went
to the war, but says that he has had no colic since he returned.
He has a blood pressure of 150 millimetres.
2029. What is normal? —Normal is lower than that. It
varies in different individuals, but we think this man’s blood
pressure is on the high side. It might be normal, but it might
not be. He has a change in his heart, and aortic sounds are
accentuated. We have recorded the fact that he has no albumen
in his urine. The next man is 61 years of age, with an indus-
trial history of four years. He suffers from tremor, but has
no colic, no paresis, no pallor, and no anaemia. As the result
of our examination we found definitely that he is suffering
from a condition of the gall bladder, namely, cholecystitis*
He has inflammation of the gall bladder. The next man is 30
years of age, with an industrial history of two and a half
years. He has no colic, no paresis, no pallor, no tremor, and
no anaemia. He has pyorrhoea, and I have put in inverted
commas on my list “appendix.’’ He has appendix trouble.
The next man is 33 years of age, with an industrial history of
only seven months. He has no colic, no paresis, is suffering
from pallor, tremor, and anaemia. He is suffering from
myoxdema, which is a well-known complaint due to a defici-
ency of the thyroid gland. The next man is also 33 years
of age, with an industrial history of five and a half years.
He has no colic, no paresis, no anaemia, but has pallor, tremor,
he has distinct albuminuria, and I have marked him with two
queries. He would be required to be watched for some weeks.
He is suffering either from nephritis, which is inflammation of
the kidneys, or a deficiency in the thyroid gland.
2030. What is likely to cause that?—l do not know. Some-
times you get growths in them, sometimes tubercle.
2031. By Mr. Gepp —ls it a disease known in industry?—No.
It is very rare.
2032. He is not suffering from any industrial disease? —It
has nothing to do with that.
2033. By Mr. Bobinette* —Could it be a sequelae of lead
poisoning?—No. The next man is of great interest. He is 32
years of age, with an industrial history of two years. He
has no colic, no paresis, no pallor, no tremor, and no anaemia.
He has worked on the top and bottom floors, and has
5,500,000 red blood cells. This is what I have written about
him —‘ ‘He is not a case of lead poisoning now. He is fit
for work.” By that I mean that at present we think he could
go back to work.
2034. Why did you do that? —That was not part of your
duties? —W T e have used the phrase as emphasising the fact
that, in our opinion, he is now a completely recovered man
from whatever disease he was suffering from. I shall point
out something when dealing with other cases that may show
what was wrong with this man, because we are now incapable
of saying from what he was suffering. He is now a heatlhy
man, and his history is not sufficiently decisive for us to say
that he had lead poisoning or to offer any suggestion.
2035. Do you not think that if you had consulted the man ’s
private doctor it might have assisted you? —We may have
learned something more about him. The next man is 25 years
of age, who has worked here for five months. He has no
colic, no paresis, no pallor or tremor, but he has anaemia.
This man, in our opinion, is suffering from appendicitis. In
confirmation of that, 10 days before we examined him his
appendix was cut out.
2036. By Mr. Gepp —ls he still suffering?-—He still has a
sore stomach.
2037. By Mr. Robinette —It would be sore, naturally, seeing
that only 10 days before his appendix had been, snipped off? —•
He has more tenderness than that. The next man is 27 years
of age and has an industrial history of eight and a half months.
The points in regard to this man are of great importance. He
has no colic, no paresis, and no pallor. He has tremor now
and no anaemia. His blood was examined in the bacteriological
laboratory in Adelaide in April and he had anaemia then. This
man gave a very interesting history of having become dizzy
and losing all sense of his surroundings while at work. Then
he had a fit in the street. He was taken to the hospital, and
was unconscious for many hours. Since coming out of the
hospital he has been a sick man with tremor. In our opinion
it is most likely .that this man suffered from acute carbon
monoxide poisoning.
2038. Where did this man work? —He worked definitely on
either the top or bottom floor. Dr. Smith informs me that he
worked on the top floor. As the result of what we saw on the


wciks we undoubtedly think that carbon monoxide poisoning
might occur on the top floor in the neighborhood of the blast
f hrnal-es, and also on the bottom floor.
2039. Why do you think that? —Because of some of the men’s
histories and from tests done on the works, in addition to
certain observations we actually made. The next man is 49
yekrs of age, with an industrial history of two years. At
present he has neither colic, paresis, pallor, tremor, nor anaemia.
This man we have diagnosed as an undoubted case of carbon
monoxide poisoning. An important point in his examination is
that he has an increased number of red blood cells.
2040. Would they be accentuated by carbon monoxide poison-
ing?—lt is very common in carbon monoxide poisoning. It is
not the only condition that causes increased red cells. In
chronic forms you get it.
2041. The number of red cells would be above normal? —Yes.
2042. Have you known of cases of carbon monoxide poisoning
where the red blood cells were below normal? —Yes. This man
was asked to go into the bag-house. He went there and fell.
He then went outside and recovered. He returned to the bag-
house and fell again, and hurt his leg. He then went to his
doctor. In our opinion this man is a case of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
2043. Is he still incapacitated? —No. I think he has
recovered.
2044. Could you tell us for how long he was incapacitated? —
Sub acute poisoning like that should affect him for about 14
days. We see similar cases in the coal mines. Dr. Smith
has had much experience of them. The next man is 40
years of age, with an industrial history of 15 years. He has
no colic, no paresis, no pallor, and no anaemia. He undoubtedly
had colic years ago, but not recently. He is suffering now
from an enlarged liver, and is passing blood by the bowel. We
could have told you more about this man if we could have
examined him further. It is a question whether he is not
passing blood at present. The next man is 40 years of age,
with an industrial history of four years. He has no colic, no
paresis, but is suffering from pallor and anaemia. He is
suffering at present from nephritis, and we
notice that now he has oedema of the legs. The next man is
38 years of age, with an industrial history of 17 years. He
has no colic, no paresis, but he has pallor. He has neither
tremor nor anaemia. He is suffering from advanced arterio-
sclerosis.
2045. That is unusual in a man of his age?—lt is early, but
there is a cause which produces it early. This man is suffering
also from arthritis. With the single examination we were
unable to decide the exact cause of the arthritis.
,2046. Arterio-sclerosis is a sequelae of lead poisoning?—Yes.
2047. You did not ascertain what was the cause of the
arterio-sclerosis ? —No.
2048. Did you endeavor to do that? —By making what exami-
nation we could at the time, yes, but he would have required
to be before us two or three times for us to decide definitely.
2049. Is arterio-sclerosis also a sequelae of diseases other
than lead poisoning? —Yes.
,2050. Of what other diseases would it be a sequelae?—The
most important would be syphilis, taking his age as a young
man.
2051. Would alcoholism cause it? —Yes; but his early age
makes one think of syphilis.
t 2052. That would need a Wassermann test? —Yes. In our
experience, persons who get arterio-sclerosis from lead poison-
ing are more than 40 years of age, as a rule,
, 2053. A lot would depend on how long they had worked in
had, would it not? —Yes. This man has no history of colic
at any time. He did not give us anything positive on the lead
side.
~2054. By Mr. Gepp—Me has 17 years’ service at the smelters?
—Yes.
3055. A man could suffer from lead poisoning, and show no
signs of colic? —Yes. In our experience here lead poisoning
without colic is very uncommon, but in other parts of the world
they seem to have seen severe lead poisoning without colic. The
next man is 30 years of age, with an industrial history of 14
years. He has no colic, no paresis, no tremor, and no anaemia.
In our opinion this man is fit for work.
2056. By Mr. Bohinette —How long has he been fit?—l cannot
say. I did not record it on this sheet. The next man is 32
years of age, with an industrial history of 17 years. He has
no colic, no paresis, and no anaemia, but has tremor. He had
colic years ago, and in our opinion requires careful investigation.
He wants to be brought into hospital and kept under obser-
vation. From our examination we were unable to say what was
the matter with him. The next man is 27 years of age, with an
industrial history of 16 months. He has no colic, no paresis, no
pallor, no tremor, and no anaemia. In our opinion he is in good
health. Suggesting what may be the matter with him, we have
put down the query influenza. The history of the case was sug-
gestive of influenza. The*next man is 37 years of age, with
an industrial history of 13 months. He has no colic, no paresis,
no pallor, no tremor, and no anaemia. He has gained 141bs.
since leaving work. In our opinion he is fit for work. The
next man is 28 years of age, with an industrial history of seven
months. He lias no colic, but has paresis. He has no pallor
and no anaemia, but has tremor. We think this man has had
encephalitis, and that he requires further examination.
2057. By Mr. Gepp —Are you referring to infective encepha-
litis? —Yes. His history showed that for two weeks he was
off with a medical certificate which stated that he had influenza.
Our experience enables us to know that other cases of encepha-
litis have been diagnosed as influenza. Encephalitis is
inflammation of the brain. It is a condition which, in a general
way, is not unlike that which produces infantile paralysis.
2058. By Mr. Bobinette —Does it cause paresis? —The after
effects may cause that. A man suffering from encephalitis
may recover completely or he may be permanently damaged.
This man should be thoroughly examined and watched. The
next man is 57 years of age, and has an industrial history of
34 years. He has no colic, no paresis, no pallor, no tremor,
but he has anaemia. He is suffering from arterio-sclerosis with
nephritis. I was asked to make a summing up from these
examinations. We feel that we could not do that without
further examining these people, nor could we come to any
general conclusions. We should like, however, very much to
draw attention to certain of our findings. These findings, in our
opinion, make it extremely desirable that an examination should
be made here into the possibility of carbon monoxide poison-
ing, which occurs in two main forms. Men who are exposed to
a very considerable quantity of carbon monoxide—the quantity
of carbon monoxide that produces poisoning is very small, say,
something about 150 cubic centimetres—and breathe that, in a
comparatively short period of time get what is known as acute
carbon monoxide poisoning. They fall, and if they remain
breathing it they die. If they are taken out they make a fairly
rapid recovery. But in some cases, after apparent recovery,
they suffer from injury to their brain, which is very similar to
encephalitis, and which is particularly characterised by a
lesion known as degeneration of the lenticular nucleus. Some
persons who have had acute poisoning of this type develop
sequelae, which may last for months. In addition to acute
carbon monoxide poisoning, there is a chronic form of carbon
monoxide poisoning, which is produced by the inhalation of
small quantities of carbon monoxide. Air containing as little
as one part of carbon monoxide in 10,000, or even less, may give
rise to chronic carbon monoxide poisoning. When inspecting
the works we were shown some results of tests made upon
individuals working around the top and bottom floors. There
were 14 individual tested, and the tests show that all these
men were taking carbon monoxide into their blood.
2059. By Mr. Bohinette —Who conducted these tests? —I


should not like to say. They were conducted under the general
direction of Mr. Hemingway.
2060. Mr. Robinette —Mr. Chairman, is this evidence? In
my opinion it is not. The professor has a sheet of paper
bearing information, but he does not know who compiled it.
The Chairman - —The professor’s conclusions drawn from a
perusal of the information can be taken as his opinion.
Mr. Robinette —We do not know whether his conclusions are
correct. He may not bo taking into consideration all the facts.
He cannot give evidence on that basis.
The Chairman —Professor Chapman is not commenting on the
list.
Mr. Robinette —l object to evidence being given on the infor-
mation on that sheet of paper, unless we know who made the
tests. I certainly object to the list going in, unless the Com-
mission is assured that evidence will be given on it. The bald
statement that an investigation was made should not be
admitted. I want to know who conducted the investigation.
This is hearsay, not evidence. The professor does not knew
who made the tests. Any person could write down something
on a sheet of paper and hand it to the professor.
The Chairman —The professor can use his discretion as to
any statement he may make.
Mr. Robinette —Until evidence is taken regarding the con-
ducting of the tests the professor’s opinion is useless.
Mr. Gepp —Mr. Chairman, with your permission we intend to
call Dr. Moulden in Adelaide on Friday, and shall put the list
in as evidence then.
Mr. Robinette —That is putting the cart before the horse.
The professor’s evidence is useless unless I can cross-examine
him as to the authenticity of his information. The whole
thing is mixed.
Mr. Gepp —May we not go ahead on the basis that we assume
this is Professor Chapman’s opinion on this for what it is
worth. The cross-examination can be made later. Professor
Chapman will give us his opinion on the results of the tests.
If we conclude those tests are sound and well carried out, that
is one position; if we do not conclude that, there is the other
position.
2061. By the Chairman —That is a fair conclusion. Go on,
professor? —Assuming carbon monoxide is found in the blood,
such as is stated here on the list, I think their is great risk,
not only of chronic carbon monoxide poisoning, but of acute
carbon monoxide poisoning, because these quantities can pro-
duce it. These figures in some cases are low, but in other in-
stances 1 consider them quite high.
Mr. Robinette —Until those figures are accepted by the Com-
mission I do not see how the professor can give evidence on
them.
The Chairman—Tie can give us his opinion.
Mr. Robinette —Supposing that list is found to be incorrect,
it will destroy the value of that opinion. I object, Mr. Chair-
man, to evidence being given on that document until such time
as it is sworn to.
2062. By the Chairman —We must take this opportunity of
getting Professor Chapman’s opinion. If, later, the document
is proved to be valueless, it destroys the value of his opinion.
Will you go on, professor? —Assuming that we find that persons
show 2,3, 4, or 5 per cent, of carbon monoxide haemoglobin in
their blood, such persons are likely, if exposed sufficiently long,
to suffer from chronic carbon monoxide poisoning. Assuming
that persons show 23 or 24 per cent, of carbon monoxide
haemoglobin, or, say, 25 or 27 per cent, in their blood, such
persons are liable to suffer from acute carbon monoxide poison-
ing. I might say that with 60 per cent, of the blood converted,
a fatal result, either immediately or within a few days, is very
likely. Further, while going around the plant we noticed slag
being drawn off, and observed the way in which certain flames
burnt on the slag. That suggested to me that carbon monoxide
was being given off, and was being burnt as it came in contact
with the air. That was on the bottom floor.
2063. By Mr. Robinette —It was only suggested to you. You
made no tests ? —1 had nothing there to make a gas analysis,
but my observation suggested to me that tests should be made.
Further, while 1 was on the top floor 1 understand that the
contents of the furnace bubbled up. At any rate, as the result,
large quantities of fumes, smoke, and flames were coming out
at the top. Having had experience of what happens in these
furnaces, 1 recognised that carbon monoxide must be given off
under those conditions. I stayed there quite a time looking at
and observing the color of my own nails and skin. I also
looked at the color of Dr. Smith’s hands. 1 observed the
color of the ears of one or two people walking around there.
I thought they showed the peculiar cherry red color, which -is
found when carbon monoxide is being taken in.
2064. Was that among the workmen? —No. It was among
people walking about the place and who were only in the
vicinity for a few minutes. To me that was evidence that a
quantity of carbon monoxide was being given oif quickly.
2065. By Mr. Gepp— What place are you referring to? —
The blast furnaces.
2066. They were blowing through on to the working floor ?
On to the top floor, yes. In connection with all these obser-
vations it appears to me very essential for the protection of
the men working there that an examination should be made on
two lines. Firstly, there should be a definite analysis of the
air on the top and bottom floors under varying conditions,
until proper samples are secured, to determine the quantity of
carbon monoxide that goes into the air on the top and bottom
floors round about where the lead is tapped and the slag drawn
off. That would give an idea of the time likely to be required
to produce sub-acute or chronic carbon monoxide poisoning.
Secondly, I think that observations should be made of' the
men there to determine how much the people there are actually
taking in. The next point I would make is that with figures
of that kind available it would be possible to protect the men
at work. Such figures would show what changes would have
to be made, and hew long they would have to be continued
before the carbon monoxide was reduced absolutely to safe
limits. Reverting back to my medical lists, we think was have
examined persons who, we are satisfied, suffered from carbon
monoxide poisoning. In regard to some of the men labelled
‘ ‘ fit for work ’ ’ it may be that they also suffered from carbon
monoxide poisoning. I should like to emphasise that at the
time persons become ill it is possible to determine these facts
accurately. If a man is at work and is taken ill, without a
doubt it can be determined definitely whether he is suffering
from carbon monoxide poisoning. If you have to form an
opinion about it after some weeks it becomes difficult. ;•
2067. By Mr. Robinette—You can determine it within a few
hours of a man taking ill? —Yes.
2068. It would depend upon the exposure?—You might be
able to determine that a man was suffering from carbon
monoxide poisoning three or four hours after he was taken ill
at work. You might be able to do it one or two days after-
wards. It depends upon the quantity taken in.
2069. By Mr. Gepp —There would be more positive indications
of the amount taken up by testing the man on the job?—lf you
do it on the job you know who is exposed to it and what As
likely to be taken in. We should not get figures like these
on this list, whether they are correct or not.
2070. Did you ascertain what class of men were tested?—
Yes. There are names on the list.
Mr. Robinette —I think the names should be given privately
to the Commission. I want to know what men were tested and
where they were working. These men may have been located
right over the furnace. i.
Mr. Gepp —Details will be given when Dr. Moulden gives
evidence, but w r e do not press for the names. They are all staff
men, with the exception of one who volunteered.
Mr. Robinette —Put in Dr. Moulden and let us examine him
now. *
Mr. Gepp —We shall put him in when we are ready.
Mr. Robinette-^ 1 ‘ We,” you say. To whom are you referring,?


You are running this Commission, all right! This matter has
not been discussed by the Commission, yet you say ‘ ‘ We shall
put him in when we are ready. ’ ’ If this Commission decides
that the company’s man shall be heard first, he shall be heard
first.
Mr. Gepp —The company is prepared to submit the witness
for evidence when the evidence is ready.
Mr. Robinette — That is only a detail. It is ready now.
Mr. Gepp —lt is only part of the programme the company
advises me it desires to submit.
Mr. Robinette —I submit that you are putting the cart before
the horse. I want to know where the tests were taken. I
object to the professor giving evidence on this without knowing
where the tests were taken. A man could stick his head in the
furnace box for half an hour and produce these results.
The Chairman —Professor Chapman is giving an opinion on
the percentages of carbon monoxide.
Mr. Robinette —I object to the procedure, which is highly
improper.
2071. By the Chairman —l do not think your objection is
valid. Professor Chapman is giving evidence on the results
of certain percentages of carbon monoxide haemoglobin in the
blood. He knew that of his own knowledge before he left
Sydney. Please, proceed, professor?—l formed the opinion
from the cases I have seen, and from direct inspection of certain
parts of the works, that a technical inquiry into the conditions
there is necessary. Blood tests of men working there should be
taken, and analyses of the air are desirable. In my opinion
the conditions disclosed show that they are a menace to the
health of the men, and they should be examined.
2072. By Mr. Robinette —You really do not want that docu-
ment at all?—No.
2073. Why use it, then? —It is a part of various things. I
saw the conditions. I will not say whether the figures supplied
are strictly correct or not, but they show me carbon monoxide
is there undoubtedly, and they help me to say there is great
need for examination on that account.
2074. Carbon monoxide is invisible, is it not? —Yes.
2075. You could not see it, yet you say it was there. How
do you know that? —I am a chemist, and know what happens
in blast furnaces. I know what is put into them and what
■comes out of them. Then I told you that I saw the flames
on the slag dump, and knew that carbon monoxide or zinc gas
was there.
2076. It might have been either? —Yes.
2077. You do not know whether carbon monoxide was there
or not? —I am prepared to say definitely from my general
knowledge that carbon monoxide comes out of the top of those
blast furnaces whenever they blow off, and that carbon monoxide
can be found in the gas coming out of those hoods where they
draw off the slag.
2078. You could not determine the quantity without an
anlysis ?—No.
2079. Carbon monoxide is generated when a person smokes
a cigarette? —A little.
2080. You could not say whether the quantity given off at
the slag hoods was as much as that generated by the smoking
of a cigarette?:—No. I have no idea how much is given off
there, but it is being given off. It is recognised all over the
world as one of the things from which workmen should be pro-
tected. Investigations should be made, so as to protect the
men. I walked around the works a couple of times, and saw
a number of the operations there. I saw the medical results
upon certain individuals. I was shown certain dust counts
that had been made to determine the quantity of lead in the
dust at different places. On the results of those I should like
specially to direct the attention of the Commission to certain
parts of the works, where I think a very distinct risk exists
to the workmen from lead dust. I have already given evidence
that lead dust is harmful if inhaled, and represents a par-
ticular risk of lead poisoning in industries of this kind. I
think that the determination of the quantities of lead in the
air is necessary in regard to certain parts of the works, and
I suggest that it should be a recommendation of this Commis-
sion that sucli changes should be introduced in those places
as would diminish the lead in the air. I suggest that proper
tests should be carried out so that it could be known on the
works continuously that the methods of preventing the accumu-
lation of lead in those places were working satisfactorily. In
other words, there should be a continuous inspection, with the
use of proper methods, to make sure that the lead dust is not
accumulating. Places to which I direct attention are: —The
point where the material is fed on to the D. and L. belt. The
men there should receive instruction from an hygiene officer.
For example, when we were there, the two men shovelling
material on to the belt were within a few feet of each other.
A wind was blowing from one man toward the other. The
material was wet, but we know just what the stuff is like.
The dust produced by one man’s shovelling was blown straight
on to the other man. There is 150 ft. of belt there, and there
was no reason at all why the two men should not have been so
separated that the dust from one’s shovelling did not blow
over the other. I suggest generally that an hygiene officer
should instruct the shift bosses in things of that kind. The
same thing occurs when men unload trucks. Very little care
would ensure that the dust did not blow over other men at
work. Further, it seems to me that it would be readily
possible to arrange sprays. The material is wetted a little
later to go into the pre-roaster, and there is no reason why
sprays should not be arranged over it at the end of the belt
where it begins to ascend. You do not want things like hoses,
that give large drops of water, but fine sprays, from which the
water falls and beats down any dust containing lead. Such
a spray clogs the dust with water, and moulds it into large
lumps so that it falls. Then underneath the belt there is
boarding. There is no reason why that should not be made dust
proof. At present seme of the spillage from the belt falls
through the floor, and is distributed over people working below.
It is quite simple to arrange for a dust-proof floor there. With
these changes I have no doubt that that could be made a safe
operation. That it is a dangerous place is revealed by cases
I examined. One man was actually damaged there from
working in that dust. I wish also to draw attention to the
8.8. furnace. There again is an accumulation of dust, which
could be prevented by the use of proper methods. Further, in
putting those methods into effect systematic dust tests should
be made to prove that the methods introduced were satisfac-
tory. A third place is underneath the pre-roasting section of
the I), and L. machines. We had a good look at the “A”
section, and underneath is a place where there is a distinct
danger of lead poisoning being produced. By the introduction
of suitable means that danger could be alleviated.
2081. By Mr. Robinette —Do you refer to the point where the
tray conveyor is tipped?—Yes. Another thing that obviously
wants correction at once is in connection with the bins that
collect the material that comes from the pre-roasters and other
places, and from which the material is run to the top of the
blast furnaces. Those bins could be arranged, and the tipping
arrangement altered, so that the men would be able to get out
of the dust when tipping the skips. Further, the chimneys
over the slag hoods should be raised, because at present the fume
from them goes right over the men.
2082. They are about on the same level as the top of the
bins? —Yes. I think that quite a lot of things should be done
in the refinery. An attempt should be made to draw off the
fume that comes off the furnace there. Some systematic
designing should be carried out there to do other things. Tests
should be made to determine the amount of lead in different
places.
2083. By Mr. Pearson —You have in mind an exhaust venti-
lation arrangement in connection with the refinery?—No; I do
not like fans, because they stop and can be turned off. I
prefer chimneys, which are there continually and cannot be
turned off.


2084. By Mr. Gepp— When you mention lead, do vou mean
lead and carbon monoxide in all cases where there is' any sug-
gestion of them being combined?—l do not know anything
about carbon monoxide in the refinery. It might be there, but
it might not. I saw nothing that suggested it to me. The
last point I should like to deal with concerns certain figures
that were shown to us in Sydney. We were asked to comment
on them, and when we came here we examined the figures in
detail.
2085. By Mr. Bohinette— To which figures do you refer?—
Those in table “L” particularly, which shows the number of
people of different nationalities, the number of men working,
and the number who had lead poisoning in each six-monthly
period. I expressed the opinion that the figures set out im
table ‘‘ L are not satisfactory for the purpose of compari-
son. In determining the extent to which people are injured,
oui experience tells us that there is only one sound method of
doing it. That method is to get the actual number of persons
who woiked o\er a period and then determine on that number
how many of them have lead poisoning. You get the percent-
age then, or what is generally known as the morbidity rate.
You get, then, the number of persons with 12 months’ service
who acquired lead poisoning. You also secure the percentage
of those men with one to two years’ service who contracted
lead poisoning. In that way you will be able to determine
whether nationality affects the suceptibllity to lead and so on.
On some tables that w r ere shown to me certain conclusions were
drawn as to the susceptibility of people, which I do not think
were justified, and I do not think they can be determined from
those tables. It is very difficult to get these tables out exactly,
but it seems to me that a very valuable indication in regard
to the matter could be got elsewhere. We tried to get the
figures, but they have not been supplied to us in time to
enable us to put them before you. If a representative fort-,
night in a six-monthly period is taken you will have so many
men who work three months, so many a year, so many one to
two years, so many two to three years, four to five years, and
so on. Then you may take it that a given number of men
were employed over that period, and that they were distributed
generally in that way. It is obvious that, except for short
abnormal periods, this method must be quite correct, because
these men in order to work at the smelters for long periods
must be working there during the fortnight. If you do that
for one or two years to see how they lie it is possible to
prepare a morbidity sheet on that assumption., which would be
of value. I think that would enable you to secure an idea of
the amount of load poisoning in this industry compared with
other industries. On the figures supplied to the Commission it
is not possible to do that, and I suggest that the Commission,
obtain figures on the lines indicated to determine how much
lead poisoning is occurring and what period is required to
produce so many cases. The Commission could then distinguish
between the forms of lead poisoning that occur in people at
the work and detect the Aisceptibles, who should be
eliminated from the industry. If you do not do that —the
suhceptibles form, roughly, 3 per cent. —there is the risk of
these men being permanently injured. If, however, in the first
two years you put them out of the industry, they will recover
from any slight injury and will not be damaged. All the
liygiene work done on lead in recent work shows the importance
of educating these men and letting them understand that they
should not work in an industry in which there is a lead ri^k.
2086. By Mr. Gepp —You mentioned the desirability of
making tests for carbon monoxide on the job. There are two
methods of securing definite indications in this regard, the
first being an analysis of the air, and the second an examina-
tion of the men? —Yes.
2087. In industries where carbon monoxide is suspected are
the men examined on the job or after they leave? —Either on
the job or within a few minutes of leaving. You need not
necessarily examine them where they are working. They can
go away and be examined five, ten, or fifteen minutes later.
2088. By Mr. Bohinette —What works are you referring to?
The eoal mining and iron and steel industries and wherever
they use blast furnaces. The place where carbon monoxide
poisoning is most common is in connection with collieries
where you get carbon monoxide gas, and secondly, in connec-
tion with iron and steel manufacture.
2089. By Mr. Gepp —Anywhere where large quantities of coal
are used or burnt? —Yes, or wherever they make producer gas.
2090. How long would an examination take?—You would
only require the presence of the individual for a minute or
two. You only have to draw a sample of his blood.
2091. What amount of blood is necessary? —A drop or a
couple of drops.
2092. Will you briefly explain to the Commission the method
of testing? —The method is to take the blood, dilute it, then
compare it with the standard. Sometimes you treat the blood
by adding, with water, some chemicals. Sometimes you do not
do that. It depends upon the way the standard is prepared.
Then you compare the color of the blood drawn from the
subject with the color of the standard, and from that you can
determine the amount of carbon monoxide.
2093. Does that mean that the absorption of carbon
monoxide by the haemoglobin of the blood alters the color of
the haemoglobin?—Yes. That is the basis of the test.
2094. How long would carbon monoxide take to affect blood
tliht absorbed it?—The effect would be instantaneous. For
example, in Sydney we get the students to breath ordinary gas,
which contains carbon monoxide, and then draw their blood and
examine it to see how much they have got.
2095. Could you give the Commission an indication of the
minimum quantity of carbon monoxide which is toxic over
periods of employment? Would it be .001 or .003? —The
text boks give .01 per cent., but I am inclined to think that
less quantities might do. My opinion on it, however, is not
a very good one. I have not worked much on a very low
quantity. So far, in this country, we have not had very exten-
sive measurements of the quantity in the air around works.
Very little of that has been done.
2096. With an apparatus such as the Weiskoph what is the
percentage that could be estimated with certainty?—You can
estimate quite small percentages. I think .001 could be esti-
mated.
2097. Y’ou told the Commission you are Professor of Physio-
logy at the University of Sydney?—Yes.
2098. Could you give us your career from the time you
graduated?—l graduated in 1899 in the University of Mel-
bourne, and for about a year afterwards was medical superin-
tendent at St. Vincent’s Hospital. In the next year I was
acting Professor of Physiology in the University of Adelaide
in place of Professor Stirling. Then, for a few months, I was
in private practice at Kadina. I then became Demonstrator
of Pathology in the University of Melbourne, and was also
tutor at Ormond College. At the end of 1902 I went to the
Sydney University as Demonstrator of Physiology. I have
remained on the staff of the Physiology Department in Sydney
ever since. I cannot tell you the exact dates from memory,
but I became Chief Lecturer and Demonstrator in Physiology
somewhere about 1909 or 1910. In 1913 I was made Assistant
Professor, and in 1917 was made Professor of Pharmacology.
Upon the death of Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart I was appointed
to the Professorship of Physiology in 1920, the Chair of Phar-
macology being reunited with the Chair of Physiology. In
addition I have done lecturing for the Department of Educa-
tion in New South Wales.
2099. You were Chairman of the Technical Commission at
Broken Hill? —Yes. In 1919 I was appointed Chairman of
the Technical Commission established by the Board of Trade.
In November, 1920, I went back as Chairman of a Technical
Commission, responsible only to the Government.
2100. How long did that investigation continue?—About 24
years. We worked at Broken Hill from December. 1919, to
June, 1920. We then returned to Sydney and prepared our
report, which was published some months later. We went
back to Broken Hill in November, 1920, being then responsible


to the Government, and worked there until the end of 1921.
Our report was presented in 1922.
2101. Is it permissible for you to indicate the cost of the
inquiry carried out at Broken Hill? —1 should not like to say
off-hand, but it was somewhere about £25,000.
2102. What was the constitution of the Commission
responsible to the Government? —I was appointed by the Govern-
ment as Chairman, and the instructions were all issued to me.
1 was asked to associate with myself, as members of the Com-
mission, certain persons 1 might choose to assist me on the
work. 1 associated Dr. Smith and another gentleman with
myself.
2103. On an average, how many did you have on the staff !
About 20.
2104. There you were dealing with two main subjects, namely,
pneumonoconiosis and lead poisoning? —Yes.
2105. For a number of years you have been interested in the
question of industrial hygiene and industrial disease? —Yes.
2106. Have you done any work in that connection apart from
what you did at Broken Hill? —Yes. I did a let of work in
connection with the Board of Trade’s inquiry into the possible
prohibition of white lead. Further, for the information of the
Arbitration Court, I made inquiries into the health of printers
exposed to lead, and also into the health of persons engaged ( in
other industries.
2107. Have you done any work in the way of improving
methods of technical manufacture. For example, I under-
stand you are supervising a bakery? —In 1916 we established
an experimental bakehouse in connection with the work of the
Technical College, and have been making bread there con-
tinuously. We get a subsidy of £SOO from the Com-
monwealth Government with the object of demonstrating that
it is possible to make bread by day. We make bread there,
working from 9 o ’clock in the morning and finishing at 5
o’clock in the evening.
2108. Were you in England last year?—Yes.
2109. Did you attend the Empire Congress on Mining and
Metallurgy, which dealt with industrial hygiene generally?—
Yes.
2110. Could you tell us what occurred at the meeting at
Wembley, when I happened to be present!—Yes. We had
a discussion on mining hygiene following on a general state-
ment on mining hygiene that was opened by Professor Haldane,
who is an authority on mining hygiene, and who might be
regarded as the initiator of mining hygiene in England. His
work on the health of the Cornish miners is a classic in the
history of mining hygiene. I was asked by the officials of
the Congress to open a discussion on mining hygiene, following
on Professor Haldane’s paper.
2111. Pi’ofessor Haldane was also connected with the initial
work on miners’ phthisis in South Africa? —I think that work
was really initiated by Dr. Irvine, who spoke to the Congress
in London, but the carrying out of systematic work designed
to prevent miners’ phthisis was done undoubtedly by Dr.
Haldane.
2112. At the Congress there was also a considerable discus-
sion in regard to the methods of treatment of carbon monoxide
poisoning?—There was some discussion.
2113. Did you have the opportunity of having any further
discussion with Professor Haldane?—-Yes. I discussed mining
hygiene with him.
2114. This question being one of your specialities, did you
have the opportunity of meeting any other leading men in that
particular line while yon were in Europe?—Yes. I had a
commission from the Commonwealth Government to the Minister
of Health, and his Secretary asked me if there were people I
should like to get acquainted with while I was there. I said
I should like to meet Dr. Legge, the great authority on lead
poisoning. I saw Dr. Legge, and had a number of interesting
discussions with him. I told him I wanted to meet other
persons interested in lead poisoning, and Dr. Legge kindly
arranged for a number of those gentlemen to meet me when they
came to London. I had two days with Professor Collis, and
I also met Dr. Bridges. In addition I went out to the labora-
tory of the Ministry of Health, known as the Medical Research
Department, at Hampstead. There I met Dr. Leonard Hill,
who is greatly interested in methods of ventilation. I also met
Bir Kenneth Goadby in London, and Cambridge. I discussed
with him some of the methods by which it is possible to deter-
mine the amount of absorption of lead by persons exposed to
definite quantities of lead.
2115. You mentioned Dr. Legge, who has been knighted since
your visit, and Sir Kenneth Goadby. Are they the authors of
the standard work on lead poisoning!—Yes.
2116. So that while you were in Europe last year you took
the opportunity so far ns possible of bringing yourself up
to date on this question!—Yes.
2117. During the meeting of the Pan-Pacific Congress in
1923 did you meet Dr. Watkins Pitchford, of South Africa? —
Yes.
2118. Will you tell us of the work for which he is noted! —
Yes. He is noted for his w T ork in connection with the mines,
on the Rand in Johannesburg. In that he demonstrated the
conditions to which miners are liable. Particularly he worked
out the actual conditions with regard to the dust in the air
of the mines which produce miners’ diseases. Further, he was
instrumental in having steps taken to diminish that dust. In
addition, he laid down methods to determine the quantity of
dust, so that it became possible to measure what any improve-
ment did to lessen the amount of dust in the air.
2119. Had you a long discussion with Dr. Pitchford! —Yes..
He travelled with a number of us from Sydney to Broken Hill,
thence to Adelaide. We were able to show him conditions,
at Broken Hill, and to have talks with him regarding the diffi-
culties there and in South Africa.
2120. I remember a meeting of the Pan-Pacific Congress held
in the University of Melbourne, which I attended, and Dr.
Pitchford was discussing a summary you gave of the work of
the Commission, of which you were Chairman, in Broken Hill.
Was that so?—Yes.
2121. My recollection is that Dr. Pitchford, who is a very
high authority, expressed admiration of the work your Com-
mission had carried out? —I believe he was kind enough to say
so.
2122. During the same Pan-Pacific Congress did you meet Dr.
Sayers, of America? —Yds. He is the principal medical officer
of the United States Bureau of Mines. I also met his prede-
cessor, Dr. Lanza.
2123. The work in America in the Departments of Industrial
Hygiene and Mining Hygiene has been developed very
thorough ly ? —Y os.
2124. Would you consider Drs. Sayers and Lanza, of high
standing in those matters? —Yes. Dr. Lanza, especially, had
first-hand experience in sulphide of lead mines at Bute and
Joplin. He was connected with the work done at both those
places.
2125. What was Dr. Lanza’s position at the time of the
Congress? —He had been lent to the Commonwealth Government
by the International Health Board of the Rockefeller foundation
of the United Staes of America. He w T as lent for the
purpose of giving advice and assistance in instituting a depart-
ment* of industrial hygiene in the Commonwealth. Such a
department is now operating.
2126. Can you tell us any work that Dr. Sayers has done
which would show his high standing?—There is one thing of
interest in connection with this inquiry. Dr. Sayers has done a
considerable amount of w r ork in regard to carbon monoxide
poisoning. Other work of his has been in connection with
the general problems of ventilation and composition of the air
in factories, as to the conditions which are favorable and those
which are unfavorable.
2127. Are these two bulletins I hand you written by Dr.
Sayers, with other gentlemen?—Yes.
2128. The first one deals with the elimination of carbon
monoxide from the blood by treatment with air, with oxygen,
and with a mixture of carbon monoxide and oxygen. It is
by R. E. Sayers, surgeon, United States Public Health Service,
and Chief Surgeon of the Bureau of Mines, and by W. P-


I ant, Assistant Chemist, Bureau of Mines, Department of the
Interior. The reference number is 865 from the Public Health
Reports, September 7th, 1923, pages 2053-74? Yes.
2129. The other relates to the pyro-tanuic acid method for the
calculation and determination of carbon monoxide in blood and
air, by R. R. Sayers and W. P. Yant and E. W. Jones, the
latter being Assistant Gas Chemist, Bureau of Mines, Depart-
ment of the Interior? —Yes.
2130. \ou had the privilege and opportunity of full discus-
sions on matters of industrial hygiene with Drs. Sayers and
Lanza I —Yes. I had many talks with Dr. Lanza, who was in
Australia for some years. He came to Broken Hill with us,
once when we were at work on the Technical Commission, and
also when we went there in 1923.
2131. Based upon your impressions from the discussions you
had with these gentlemen in Australia, and the men you met
during your visit to Europe, do you feel that you are able to
say that the knowledge of yourself and ycur colleague in
matters of industrial hygiene is thorough and up to date?—
We think so.
2132. By Mr. Pearson —You have had, I understand, con-
siderable experience in connection with the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act of New South Wales. Could you tell the Com-
mission whether carbon monoxide poisoning is a compensable
disease there? —Yes. It is in New South Wales.
2133. By Mr. Robinette —ls it a compensable disease in any
other country ?—I cannot say straight off, but I think it is.
2134. By the Chairman —Probably it is in the United States
on the strength of Dr. Sayers’ work on the subject?—l cannot
say from my own knowledge.
2135. By Mr. Robinette —You are sure it is in New South
Wales?—Yes.
2136. By Mr. Pearson —In connection with the question of
dust, during the Broken Hill inquiry did you fix any standard
of permissible dust intensity?—No.
2137. In the publication of the proceedings of the Inter-
national Congress there is a tentative standard mentioned as
applying to Broken Hill. The quantity mentioned is that the
dust shall not exceed five milligrammes per cubic metre? —I can
say that that was wrong.
2138. You quoted a lower figure in your Sydney evidence? —■
Yes. We did not lay down a standard because there were
many different kinds of working places. In certain working
places it was possible to get a very much greater elimination,
and we did not think we should fix a standard that was high,
and which in certain places could be made much lower. So
that, intsead of fixing a standard that applied to the worst
places which had to be treated, we recommended that dis-
cretion should be given to a Government officer there and that
the dust should be reduced to what he considered a satisfactory
figure in each kind of working place.
2139. In regard to the matter of ventilation in the refinery,
I think you mentioned in your Sydney evidence that a current
of 40ft. per minute passing through places where lead dust
w r as produced would prevent accumulation? —Yes. With a
current of 40ft. per minute passing over places where dust was
being produced, if you collected the air, no appreciable dust
could be measured in it. It w r as all washed away.
2140. The same thing would apply to carbon monoxide? —I
presume so, but I would not say what the figure would be to
dilute it. I should think it would dilute it, but would not
express an opinion without testing. In Broken Hill we actually
moved the dust to places where other people worked, but with
the 40ft. per minute current, the dilution was so great that men
who took it in had no weighable dust.
2141. By the Chairman —I should like to refer to a state-
ment on page 3 of the second report of the Broken Hill Com-
mission. In brief, it is as follows: —
Of a certain number of men examined, 2,491 were normal;
3,018 showed some ill-health, which was not plumbism; 443, or
6.7 per cent., showed no definite history of colic, paresis, or
other signs, but showed evidence of an altered state of the heart
and kidneys; 525, or 8 per cent., gave a past history of colic
or ill-health, but not at the time of the examination; and the
remainder, 61, were classed as lead poisoning cases.
Can you give the Commission the grounds on which the 525
class was removed from the category of lead poisoning? Were
those standards arbitrarily chosen or were they accepted
standards?—The 525 cases consisted of men who said, perhaps,
“We have worked 25 years at Broken Hill.” When asked
whether they had suffered from lead colic they said they had
during the first five years they were at Broken Hill, but had
not had it since. When we examined them there was nothing
whatever the matter with them which could be ascribed to lead.
They were persons who gave a past history of having suffered
with colic years ago. The 61 persons were those who were
suffering from lead poisoning at the time we examined them.
2142. Estimations of carbon monoxide are now being car-
ried out under the supervision of a chemist appointed by this
Commission, and so far a Weiskoph apparatus, which is
intended for small quantities, is being used. Ho you know of
any apparatus you can recommend to the Commission for
larger quantities, say, above 25 per cent.?—Yes. I think such
tests can be made by the Haldane gas analysis apparatus. With
that apparatus one takes a measured quantity of gas and
removes the gases that are soluble in alkali. One then passes
an electric current through a wire so that it incandesces and
leaves the gas exposed to that high temperature for a suf-
ficient time. One then measures the gas which is soluble in
alkali and determines from that the quantity of carbon
monoxide present that has been burnt.
2143. By Mr. Gepp —That is after removing by suitable
means any hydro carbons that may exist? —Yes.
2144. Supposing you had any methane, ethylene, &c., there,
what would you have to do then? —You would remove them
first by suitable means.
2145. You mentioned nephritis, which I understand is inflam-
mation of the kidneys, as well as arterio-sclerosis. You have
said that the latter disease can be caused by lead and also by
other diseases. Can you tell us whether you can differentiate
between the nephritis caused by lead and the nephritis caused
by other diseases? —We think so in our experience. When, lead
is taken so that it produces nephritis it also produces other
injuries in the body which can be recognised.
2146. You can co-relate with those?—Yes.
2147. Is that information published and generally known
for the benefit of the medical profession?—l think that a paper
Dr. Smith has written on it will have it all set out in print.
The paper has not been printed yet, but it is ready.
2148. It will be available shortly for the information of
medical men who have to diagnose cases of lead? —Yes.
2149. By Mr. Pearson —In your experience of industrial
operations do you know of any vacuum apparatus that has
been adopted for the cleaning down of the collection of dust
on buildings?—l know of some things that have been used. In
the United States of America they construct houses with a
whole system fixed in, and the dust from every flat is shot
out. They have a vacuum cleaner with a general system of
collection. I think that, even in Sydney, there are buildings
in which they have installed similar systems to collect the dust
from the buildings.
2150. The point I am concerned about is in regard to the
dust that lodges on the buildings at the smelters. There is
quite an accumulation of dust, and the question has been raised
by a previous witness as to whether it is safe to clear it? —I
think it is quite safe to clear it. Before I leave I should like
to add something to my previous remarks. Considering what
we have observed here regarding the occurrence of cases of lead
poisoning and carbon monoxide poisoning, and considering
what we have seen on the works in regard to the accumulation
of lead dust in the air, and the high probability of carbon
monoxide poisoning in the works, we think that, in the interests
of hygiene, the appointment of a technical committee of inquiry
to determine what the risk is and : dvise how that risk might
be diminished, is desirable.
2151. By Mr. Gepp —To be appointed by whom? —By the
State or this Commission.
2152. What would be your idea of the constitution of that
committee? —It should be purely a technical committee, and


consist entirely of persons of technical training. By that I
mean persons thoroughly conversant with methods of hygiene,
with medical examination, and with the methods of determining
the risk of lead and carbon monoxide. They should be suffi-
ciently acquainted with these things to be able to recommend
conditions that would lead to the .diminution of dust and
carbon monoxide.
2153. Do you think it is possible for an outside committee
like that definitely to recommend the details of the methods
to be adopted, or should they recommend general principles? —
I think such a committee would do well, mainly to lay down
principles and standards and the methods to be empolyed.
Further, such committee should test the proposals for the
eliminations and see how they work, so that they make recom-
mendations in regard to those which are beneficial.
2154. Would that be before even the indication of general
principles by this Commission, and would the recommendation
of such a committee be a matter of departmental action by the
Government, working in conjunction with the company and the
men? —I think that the method I recommend more certainly
ensures that it is done.
2155. For instance, in the explosive industry inspectors are
appointed, and they have such powers that everything is car-
ried out that they even indicate? —Yes. I favor a committee.
Take, for example, the dust in the mines at Broken Hill. Under
the Mining Act the Mines Department of New South Wales had
plenty of power, and also laid down in a regulation that no
dust should be produced in mining. It looked generally at
methods, and said that the dust should be got rid of, but it
never measured to see whether the dust had been eliminated. It
had no idea of the quantities of dust in various places. That
is more likely to be done by a committee, who would see that
the work was properly and efficiently carried out.
2156. By Mr. Robinette —Do you not think that a lot of the
dust in the smelters could be prevented without the aid of a
technical commission ? —Yes.
2157. Quite a lot? —Yes.
2158. By Mr. Gepp —Would your committee consist of tech-
nical men only?—No. I think you must have a person who is
able to form a personal judgment on the methods used to
remove carbon monoxide and lead dust. You would not have
a purely medical man who had had no experience ■ n these
things, ITut a man trained as a hygienist.
2159. If your whole purpose is carried out you would also
have to have men skilled in metallurgy and in engineering
metallurgical work, so that they could indicate practical
methods, would you not? —That might be desirable.
2160. Medical men would not be able to say whether a par-
ticular trouble could be overcome most efficiently and cheaply?
—That is so.
2161. It would depend upon the metallurgical engineer to say
that? —Yes.
The witness withdrew.
STEY ART ARTHUR SMITH, medical practitioner, 147,
Macquarie Street, Sydney, was recalled and further
examined:
2162. By the Chamnan —You have been associated with
Professor Chapman in the work that has been done during the
past rveek? I should be glad if you would give the Commis-
sion your comments on it? —In conjunction with Professor
Chapman I made two visits of inspection to the works, and
also examined 29 men who had been at work here. After the
examination of those men, I came to the conclusion that seven
of the men were suffering from lead poisoning. They have
been indicated by the professor. The remaining 22 men, details
of whose examination were given by Professor Chapman, were,
m my opinion, not suffering from lead poisoning. Two of
them were, in my opinion, fit for work. In the case of others,
the cause of their disability was recognised as not being due
to lead poisoning, being due to some condition not arising out
of the course of their employment, with the exception of in-
stances, in which it seemed probable, that carbon monoxide
poisoning had been the reason for their disability. In some
cases it was not possible to define accurately the exact nature
of the disease from which they were suffering. In these latter
instances further observation and investigation would be neces-
sary before a definite conclusion could be arrived at. I have
no points of difference to make to the evidence given by Pro-
fessor Chapman* which I heard, but would add this. One man,
who is not suffering from lead poisoning, but who, in my
opinion, was buffering from the sequel of carbon monoxide-
poisoning, had worked for eight and a half months at the
smelters. Three and a half months of that period had been
spent in work about the bag-house. The remaining five months
had been spent entirely in feeding the furnaces on the top
floor. Before the actual onset of the illness, which ultimately
disabled him, he had had two attacks which strongly suggested
acute carbon monoxide poisoning. In these attacks lie had
fallen from the staging on which he was working in a sudden
fit of unconsciousness. This fit came on suddenly, and he
recovered quickly in the fresh air.
2163. By Mr. Gepp —You mean that that would be sympto-
matic of carbon monoxide? —Yes. With Professor Chapman I
also made inspections of the works, and I am in agreement
with the opinions he has given in his evidence, but I would
add that our examination and investigation being compara-
tively short, indications for the necessity of precautions in
such places as the feeding belt of the D. and L. machines and
in the B.R. roasters were obvious to us. There are many places,
however, in the works upon which, with the information at my
disposal, I cannot offer an opinion. I feel, however, that
every part of the works in which men might be exposed to lead
or to carbon monoxide hazard, should be considered, especially
in the light of dust counts in the atmosphere and carbon
monoxide estimations of the blood of the men working, so that
these hazards might be removed. Each place should be con-
sidered on its merits, so that the necessary means for rendering
these places less noxious can be determined. Beyond the state-
ment that it is necessary to reduce the dust, there is no general
statement that I can make in regard to the lead hazard. Each
case should be considered almost as a separate problem and
dealt with accordingly.
2164. By the Chairman —Can you give the Commission an
idea of the clinical picture of industrial disease at Port Pirie?
—Yes. In our experience there occurs at Port Pirie lead
poisoning of a definite and recognisable type, which is not
essentially dissimilar to lead poisoning elsewhere. In this
disease, as we have seen it here, colic occurs in all cases.
Among the seven men found to be suffering from lead poison-
ing, all of them had complained of colic, in three cases
extending over some years, in other cases for a less period.
Ihe colic appeared for the most part comparatively early after
exposure to the lead hazard. Signs of definite complete
paralysis, such as produced wrist drop, were not present in
any person examined, but in six of the seven examined there
was definite evidence of weakness of muscles, especially in the
forearm. This is, in reality, a partial paralysis. Definite
pallor was present in six instances, and anaemia, as revealed by
an examination of the blood, in two. Marked nutritional
changes causing xgeneral wasting of the sub-cutaneous and
muscular tissues, were present in three persons. Tremor was
present in three out of the seven. The presence of these signs,
considered after a careful estimation of the statements made
in the history of past health, contributed to the definite picture
of lead poisoning. In reference to these men, in whom no
evidence of present lead poisoning now exists, lead colic was
not present in any case. In one case out of the 22 in this
group, paresis of the forearm muscles was present. This, how-
ever, was accompanied by other signs of a severe nervous
disease, the result of encephalitis. Pallor was present in three
instances in this group. In these persons the presence of such
diseases as myxoedema and arterio-selerosis explained the pres-
ence of the pallor. Tremor was present in 10 individuals.
Anaemia, as revealed by an examination, of the blood, was
found in eight cases. Further, from an examination of the
blood counts in which the number of red cells were estimated,
it appeared that the presence of more than five million red


cells was observed in a higher number of individuals than one
would expect in the sample of an ordinary population.
2165. In that respect do you take five million per cubic
millimetres as the standard ?—Yes. My experience in New
South V ales is that the rod cell count of a normal adult male
lies between four and three-quarter millions and five millions
red blood cells per cubic millimetre. I am aware, however, that
in the opinion of some clinicians the red cell count in Australia
is somewhat higher than that. That is not my opinion. In
considering the histories both of those suffering from lead
poisoning and those who were not suffering from lead poison-
ing, there are two facts which make their appearance. I have
already mentioned one of the conditions, namely, the occur-
rence of acute illness, in which the legs suddenly give way and
momentary unconsciousness occurs, which suggests the proba-
bility of carbon monoxide being responsible. It is impossible
to state definitely in these cases that the cause was carbon
monoxide, because too much time has elapsed since these
attacks for it to be determined. The second group of facts
which emerge are that, in addition to the red cell counts being-
high, a common complaint is that of dizziness at work, head-
ache, and tremulousness. My experience of carbon monoxide
poisoning of the chronic type is not as extensive as that of
acute carbon monoxide poisoning, but I recognise that chronic
carbon monoxide poisoning produces in some individuals a train
of symptoms in which minor nervous disturbances, accompanied
by tremulousness, occur. The occurrence, therefore, of cases
of acute carbon monoxide poisoning, with clinical pictures
which might possibly be due to chronic carbon monoxide
poisoning has led me to the opinion that a thorough survey
of the carbon monoxide hazard is necessary in the industry
here. It is not possible to get more definite evidence on this
point unless such survey is made, which would include as one
of its main features an examination of the blood of the men
at work, or immediately upon cessation of work. Such an
examination would supply valuable evidence in determining if
these minor nervous disturbances were caused by the chronic
inhalation of carbon monoxide or to other conditions of work.
2166. By Mr. Bobinette —Where did you ascertain the history
of the men? —From the men themselves.
2167. You did not take any notice of Dr. Moulden’s
history?—Yes. We looked at his histories, but we obtained the
information for ourselves. Dr. Mouldeu would tell us that
such and such a man had been working for five and a half
years, but we would ask him ourselves.
2168. So you did know who the man was? —We did not
know his name. We knew him as a man who had worked in
the bag-house or on the top floor, and so on.
2169. By Mr. Gepp —You referred to lead colic. That is
quite distinct and distinctive as compared with ordinary colic?
—lt is quite distinct from abdominal pain not caused by lead.
One cannot distinguish in the past history of a man with cer-
tainty between colic caused by lead and colic caused, for
example, by gall stones, but one can distinguish between colic
and abdominal pain that is not colic. In most cases, how r ever,
colic due to causes other than lead is definitely located to one
area of the abdomen, is definitely increased by pressure, and
in most instances is accompanied by vomiting early in the
attack. Lead colic, on the other hand, is not characteristically
definitely located in one area of the abdomen. It is relieved
by pressure and is not associated with early vomiting. Lead
colic, furthermore, is of an exceptionally severe character,
which renders it impossible for a man suffering from it to
continue with his work, it usually producing a disability last-
ing for some days.
2170. Recurring how often in those days? —Recurring
frequently, but in severe cases being almost continuous.
2171. You mean by frequently every few hours?—Every half-
hour.
2172. Is the cause of that known? Is it due to the action of
the lead on the nerve endings, and the action of the nerve
endings on the muscular portions of the intestines?—! do not
suppose we know beyond question what the cause of it is, but
it is presumed to be due to the action of the lead on the nerve
endings and the bowel wall.
2173. With the experience you have had here during the
past week are there any cases which might be carbon monoxide
poisoning, which might be benefited by a treatment with a mix-
ture of oxygen and carbon dioxide!—None that I saw.
2174. By the Chairman —That treatment is really a means to
save life ?—lt is an emergency way of saving life.
2175. With regard to cases of the neurasthenic type, which
may be due, at least partially, to carbon monoxide, is there any
treatment which may prove beneficial? —In the neurasthenic
cases, no. My experience leads me firmly to the belief that
cases of this type, after a reasonable period of rest and fresh
air, are much better off if they return to work, provided they
do not work in an atmosphere in which the same hazard con-
tinues.
217 b. By Mr. Gepp —What were the nationalities of the 29
men you examined? Have you any list of them?—No; but I
remember. Of the 29 men, 27 were Nordics, including Aus-
tralians. The remaining two were Southern Europeans.
21 1 7. Could you briefly give the Commission the story of
what 1 may call the mechanics of carbon monoxide poisoning?
' Carbon monoxide when inhaled is immediately taken up, dis-
placing the oxygen and combining with the haemoglobin of the
red blood cells. The blood is thereby damaged in its oxygen
carrying capacity. If the amount of carbon monoxide in com-
bination with the haemoglobin rises beyond 40 per cent., life
is in immediate danger. If, however, the amount of carbon
monoxide haemoglobin is considerably less than that, life is not
endangered, but there is a risk to the individual of damage to
the tissues of the body, especially of the nervous system. The
amount of damage that results depends not only upon the
amount of carbon monoxide contained in the blood, but also on
the idiosyncrasy of the individual. The amount of the carbon
monoxide content of the blood depends upon the quantity in
the air inhaled and for the time for which it is inhaled. The
opinion is held by some authorities that the damage done by
carbon monoxide is due simply to its interference with the
oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. It is believed, how-
ei ei, that in addition to that, it has a specific, poisonous effect
upon the human tissues. Some cases of carbon monoxide poison-
ing of an acute type recover without damage or disability. Some,
however, reveal its effects after a period of delay, and in some
cases changes are set up some days after the inhalation of the
poison, which has a selective effect upon certain nervous tissues
in the braid. In this way tremor, rigidity of the muscles, as
well as what 1 usually call neurasthenic symptoms, are found
in these cases.
-17‘X In the case of big works where, possibly, you get
small quantities of carbon monoxide in the air, the effects are
very slow in their action ?—I believe so.
2179. The effects would not be permanent if the matter were
taken up and cleaned up?—Quite so.
2180. When you come to the question of a 40 per cent,
saturation, you are indicating a fairly high percentage?—Yes;
one which would immediately become obvious.
2181. You see a large number of lead cases in your practice
in Sydney?—Yes.
2182. Do the insurance companies refer their cases to you?—
Very largely.
2183. They come from all industries? —Yes. They cover
painters, coach painters, gas meter manufacturers, accumulator
manufacturers, potters occasionally, and printers occasionally.
:'lB4. Have you had any cases from automobile body fac-
tories? —Yes.
2185. What would be the cause there?—The dry rubbing
down of the bodies and the inhalation of dust containing lead.
2186. There is no spray painting on them—There is spray
painting in one establishment in Sydney.
2187. Have you had any experience at all in the use of what
are called plus pressure helmets for use in a particularly dan-
gerous spot that may accidentally occur? —Nct.


2188. You were here this morning and heard Professor Chap-
man ’s evidence? —Yes.
2189. In which he indicated that diseases other than lead
poisoning can cause arterio-sclerosis and nephritis? —Yes.
2190. Do you agree with his statement that nephritis from
lead can now, in his opinion, be distinguished from nephritis
caused by other things?—Yes.
2191. By Mr. Pearson —-Would sufferers from carbon
monoxide be more susceptible to lead poisoning? —No. I know
of no connection.
The witness withdrew.
HENRY GEORGE CHAPMAN, Professor of Physiology
in the University of Sydney, was recalled and further
examined:
2192. By Mr. Gepp —Would you tell the Commission the
bio-chemical action of carbon monoxide? —The blood contains a
coloring matter called haemoglobin. That carries oxygen,
which is carried from the lungs, where it is taken out of the
air breathed in, to the tissues where it is used for burning up.
One gramme of haemoglobin carries 1.34 cubic centimetres of
oxygen and, roughly speaking, 100 cubic centimetres of blood
in Australia usually carry 20 cubic centimetres of oxygen.
One gramme of haemoglobin when saturated with carbon
monoxide carries 1.34 cubic centimetres of carbon monoxide.
One hundred cubic centimetres of blood will, therefore, carry,
when saturated, 20 cubic centimetres of carbon monoxide. It
varies with the weight of the individual, but, taking a rough
figure, a person contains 5,000 cubic centimetres of blood, or,
approximately, 9 pints. So that with the blood completely
saturated with carbon monoxide, the blood of such a person
would carry 1,000 cubic centimetres of carbon monoxide. The
figures show' that a person becomes acutely affected by carbon
monoxide, when 30 per cent, of his haemoglobin is saturated,
and it is reckoned that the result is likely to be immediately,
or within a few days, fatal when 60 per cent, of the blood is
saturated with carbon monoxide. That would be 600 cubic
centimetres. When the blood is carrying oxygen as it passes
through the capillaries, and comes to the veins, the oxygen is
diminished, so that the blood contains 8 to 12 centimetres of
oxygen per 100. The blood containing carbon monoxide passes
through the capillaries and reaches the veins containing the
same amount of carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is not
given up in the tissues at all, or if it is, in only extremely small
quantities.
2193. It is mainly the reduction of the oxygen being carried
to the tissues that makes carbon monoxide so serious? —Yes.
2194. By the Chairman —Really the reduction of the oxygen
causes starvation of the tissues? —Yes. It has exactly the same
effect as that caused to a person when he is completely
immersed in water. If you take a bag containing 5 litres of
air and add to it 100 centimetres, or 2 per cent, of carbon
monoxide, and let a person breathe that air in out of the bag,
for practical purposes the whole of the carbon monoxide
disappears in half a dozen breaths, the carbon monoxide being
taken up in preference to the oxygen. If you take a mixture
of 300 parts of oxygen and one of carbon monoxide the blood
takes up equally a quantity of carbon monoxide and oxygen.
That means that in order to wash any of that carbon monoxide
out you must have more oxygen to carbon monoxide. Your
washing-out mixture must contain a larger proportion of oxygen
than 300 to one. That is why it takes such a long time to wash
carbon monoxide out.
The witness withdrew 7.
HENRY ST. JOHN SOMERSET, general superintendent
of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie, was
re-called and further examined:
2195. By Mr. Gepp —You heard the evidence of Professor
Chapman this morning?—Yes.
2196. You heard his references to particular places in the
w'Orks which he thought needed particular consideration?—Yes.
2197. The Commission would be pleased to know what the
company is doing in regard to those places. Those that imme-
diately occur to me are some of the places on the D. and L.,
particularly the mixing belt and mixing bins, the B.R. and
Skinner furnaces, the slag hoods over the slag pots, and the fume
that passes with a north-west wind and similar winds from the
slag pot ventilators across the bins feeding the blast furnaces?
Those are all the points he mentioned.
2198. Will you tell the Commission what the company is doing
in regard to those particular points?—Taking first the mixing
bins at the D. and L. plant, we have received authority from
the managing director to build a completely new set of mixing
bins, and these have already been designed in such a way that
the dust hazard that undoubtedly exists at that point will prac-
tically disappear. The drawings are being got out, and when
Mr. Colin Fraser, the managing director, comes here, probably
next week, he will give his final approval, and the work will
go on. The next point mentioned by Professor Chapman was
in regard to the vacuum chambers underneath the D. and L.
plant on the ‘‘A ’ ’ section. Regarding this, we are continually
experimenting in an endeavor to reduce the quantity of dust
forming in the intermittent operation of the cleaning chambers,
and we hope entirely to overcome the trouble at that point. Just
at present, however, we have not been able completely to do
away with it. However, the matter is still having our earnest
consideration.
2199. I think Professor Chapman was referring to the delivery
from the tray conveyors? —Dr. Smith told me he did not mean
that, but meant underneath the machines themselves. However,
if it were the tray conveyor, the tray conveyor will, in a com-
paratively short space of time, entirely disappear, and the
discharge end of the “A” machines will be so arranged that
I am practically certain that the dust hazard at this point will
disappear also. The next point was the top of the blast furnace
bins. At present, according to Professor Chapman, the plat-
form, on which the man who tips the skips stands, is so placed
that sometimes he cannot get out of the dust that is formed
when tipping the skip. I shall look into this matter at onee,
and see if it is not possible to make a better arrangement, but
I might tell the Commission that some time ago we tried a
different arrangement of platforms on the top of the bin, but
they were so broken by the skips bumping them that we
reverted to the old type of platform. That was some years
ago. We shall, however, attend to that matter.
2200. The smoke from the blast furnace slag hood escape
pipes in certain winds blows over the men who are dumping the
skips?—These hoods take the smoke given off by the slag when
slag tapping is being done, and we are now changing them; in
fact, one furnace, and I think two furnaces, are already
equipped in a different way, so that the smoke which comes off
the slag pots, instead of being delivered through small stacks
into the air, is sucked into the main blast furnace flue, and
goes through the bag-house. The whole of the furnaces will
be equipped in this way in a very few weeks, and then no more
smoke will issue from the little stacks over the slag pots. The
other places mentioned by Professar Chapman were the Skinner
furnaces and the B.R. roaster furnaces. I might inform the
Commission that Mr. Gepp, as general manager of the Electro-
lytic Zinc Company, has authorised the expenditure of a very
considerable sum of money in order to make these two sections
as free as practicable from health hazard. At present he has
some of his own engineers over here assisting with their advice
to do the best practicable with these sections of the plant.
2201. Professor Chapman mentioned also the ventilator
shafts in the refinery?—We are already taking certain steps
in the hope of improving conditions in the refinery, and if these
are not sufficient we shall experiment further until we obtain
some satisfactory method of ventilation.
2202. There is a portion of the refinery building that has no
lantern. That point is worth considering?—l shall do every-
thing I can.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.


Saturday, June 13th, 1925.
[At Parliament House, Adelaide.]
Present—
Dr. K. K. Moore (chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Robinette.
OWEN MEREDITH MOULDEN, medical practitioner, 80,
LTnley Road, Unley, was sworn and examined:—
2204. By the Chairman —What degrees do you hold?—
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery, Adelaide Uni-
versity 1911.
2204 a. By Mr. Gepp— Will you tell the Commission your
career since you graduated?—After graduating 1 did 12 months’
hospital work in Adelaide. 1 then went to England for nine
months, doing hospital work. I returned, and within a few
months went to Broken Hill, where I entered into general
practice. I remained there for 11 years, and .18 months ago
I came, to Adelaide, and have practised here since.
2205. W Mist you were at Broken Hill did you have particular
experiences in regard to industrial diseases? —Yes.
2206. What experiences were they?—For a period of some
years I acted as medical officer to various mining companies in
Broken Hill in connection with lead poisoning as it was dealt
with under the New South Wales 1916 Act. W T hen the Technical
Commission started its operations at Broken Hill I interested
myself in its work, without having any official connec-
tion with it, and particularly in its results. Following that
I was asked and consented to act as representative of the Mine
Managers' Association on the Medical Board of three appointed
under the terms of the Lead Poisoning, 1922, Act. I acted in
that capacity for about 12 months, prior to and up to my
leaving Broken Hill.
2207. You were following the work of the Technical Com-
mission, presided over by Dr. Chapman and Dr. S. A. Smith,
from its inception right through? —I kept in touch with it
purely from the point of view of scientific interest.
2208. And you had a number of cases of your own at
Broken Hill connected with industrial diseases, particularly
lead poisoning?—Yes.
2209. Did you follow the work relating to dust at Broken
Hill in connection with Dr. Chapman’s Commission?—l am
aware that the work was done.
2210. For how many years were you at Broken Hill? —
Eleven.
2211. Since you returned to Adelaide have you had any
special connection with industrial work? —During this year I
was asked by the executive of the South Australian branch of
the Printing Industry Employees ’ Union of Australia to
examine a group of men for the presence of industrial diseases,
for the purpose of supporting, or otherwise, their case before the
Arbitration Court. I agreed to do so, and completed the
work. Within the last week I have been asked to examine
a further group for the same union.
2212. Have you furnished a report giving the results of
your examination to the union? —Yes; it was private.
2213. Have you been doing some work lately at Port Pirie
for the Broken Hill Associated Smelters? —Yes.
2214. Have you conducted an examination of beneficiaries
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act for the company?—
Yes.
2215. How many beneficiaries have you examined so far? —
Ninenty-seven.
2216. For what period have you carried on that work? —
Approximately, four weeks.
2217. Have you made a thorough examination of those
beneficiaries? —Yes; it was what might be called an exhaus-
tive clinical examination, with other examinations as were
thought necessary.
2218. Those examinations were carried out by you for the
company in connection with the powers given to the company
to call men up for examination under the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act? —Yes.
2219. Will you briefly tell the Commission your own story
of plumbism generally as you have developed it from your
own experience and reading?—After a man has been exposed
to lead for varying periods he may show evidences of lead
absorption. This condition is generally evidenced by such
symptoms as loss of weight, pallor, and possibly constipation.
It is rare at this stage to have colic, tremor, or paresis
present. In the majority of cases a man passes on from this
condition, in spite of his still being exposed to lead hazard,
and becomes apparently again in normal health. However, in
a certain proportion of instances his condition becomes pro-
gressively worse, and he is then said to be suffering from lead
poisoning. This condition is most conveniently divided into three
clinical types. The first is gastro intestinal, the second ner-
vous, and the third arterio-renal. The gastro-intestinal type
is commonly caused by the absorption of small quantities of
lead over a short period. The nervous type is commonly caused
by the absorption of larger quantities of lead over a short
period, whereas the arterio-renal type is alwayss the result of
absorption of lead over a prolonged period of years. Symptoms
existing in the gastro-intestinal type are colic and pallor with
or without anemia or tremor. The lead colic is, in the
majority of cases, readily distinguished from any other colic.
The pallor is the result of two processes: firstly, the effect of
lead on the circulating blood causing a reduction of its haemo-
globin percentage, and, secondly, its effect on the capillaries
of the circulation as a constrictor. In the nervous type the
common symptoms are colic and pallor, and, most important
of all, tremor and paresis. The colic and pallor are com-
parable to those in the first type. The paresis usually takes
the form of a weakness of the extensor muscles of the fore-
arm. There are three other less known forms of paresis.
Tremor is practically a constant symptom, and is probably
the early manifestation of the same poisonous process as pro-
duces paresis. Both of them are caused by the effect of lead
circulating in the blood acting on the nerve endings in the
muscles. In the arterio-renal type the evidences of disease
most commonly present are arterio-sclerosis (thickening of
the arteries) and nephritis, that is, inflammation of the
kidneys. They are both the result of long continued circu-
lation of small quantities of lead in the blood, acting on the
tissues.
2220. By the Chairman —In connection with arterio-
sclerosis caused by lead and the attendant nephritis, is it
common to find diminution of the vision comparable to that of
ordinary Bright’s disease?—No. Diminution of vision is more
commonly found in a type of lead poisoning I have not men-
tioned, viz.., an encephalo-pathic condition, which is an acute
manifestation of the nervous type. It is a condition affecting
the brain which is a portion of the nervous system.
2221. With the latter type you find eye changes not common
to the ordinary arterio-renal type? —They are different.
2222. By Mr. llobinette —Does the encephalopathie condi-
tion occur in acute or chronic cases? —In acute cases.
2223. It would not occur in chronic cases? —No.
2224. One of our men died from that condition, and the doctor
certified it was not due to lead poisoning. Would that be
due to lead poisoning or infection?—The two things are com-
pletely different and could be readily diagnosed.
2225. By Mr. Gepp —Encephalopathy can occur from other
causes than lead? —Yes.
2226. By Mr. Ilohinette —Have you known of a man suffers
ing from lead poisoning to die of that type of the disease?—
No.
2227. By Mr. Gepp —Will you explain ‘ ‘ susceptibility, ’ ’
“immunity,” and “tolerance,” having reference to the
disease known as lead poisoning?—Amongst a large group oi
men exposed to lead absorption a certain proportion will pos-
sibly show evidence of lead absorption. The majority of these
regain normal health, but a proportion get progressively worse
and then suffer from lead poisoning.
2228. If still exposed to the same hazard? —Yes. These are
susceptible persons. Again, if a man has already suffered from
lead poisoning and has recovered therefrom, and again exposes


himself to a lead hazard and again contracts lead poisoning,
he is a susceptible person, given that the hazard is an average
one. By immunity in regard to plumbism is meant that a
person can withstand the effects of lead absorption to a com-
paratively great extent, and will not contract lead poisoning
unless exposed to a further and greater hazard. By tolerance is
meant the process of acquiring immunity to lead; that is to
say, a man working and exposed to lead may develop symptoms
of lead absorption as mentioned before. Usually although
still exposed to the same hazard, he will gradually regain normal
health, in which case he has gained his tolerance.
2229. Would you say that the mechanism of the tolerance
is that his elimination equals his absorption? —Yes.
2230. What is your view of the words ‘‘predisposing
causes ’ ’ in plumbism ?—Lead poisoning may result from one of
two processes—one, the absorption of quantities of lead; the
other a decrease in the elimination of lead. Lead is eliminated
by two channels —-the large bowel and the kidneys. Any condi-
tion which reduces the efficiency of either of these two organs
may be called a predisposing cause of lead poisoning. Such
are alcoholism, syphilis, gout, and pyorrhoea by its effect on
the gastro-intestinal tract generally.
2231. Would the predisposing causes include anything which
tends to cause intestinal stasis or constipation? —Yes.
2232. Some authorities say that pyorrhoea, anaemia, and
exposure to lead, when eo-existing, may very easily be wrongly
regarded as lead anaemia. What would be your comment on
that? I speak now of the practitioner who has not been able
to give long intensive study, as a specialist to lead poisoning?
—ln certain cases it would be very difficult to distinguish
between the two causes of anaemia.
2233. With experience and special training can they be dis-
tinguished?—l am not prepared to give a definite answer. In-
vestigations in this direction are not yet completed.
2234. What is your experience with a blue line on the gums
in relation to the diagnosis of cases?—When lead is circu-
lating in the blood stream and reaches the margins of the
gums, if pyorrhoea or any other septic condition of the gums
be present, the lead particles are converted into lead sulphide
and are deposited in the tissues along the edges of the gums.
The condition can be most readily determined by the use of
a magnifying glass, which shows a definite punctate appear-
ance. The condition is easily mistaken for other conditions;
one, that due to deposition of lead under the gums on the teeth,
the other a condition of blueness or cyanosis caused by a chronic
inflammation of the edges of the gums. A blue line is
diagnostic of lead absorption only, not of lead poisoning.
2235. We have had before us in evidence the Burtonian line
and the false lead line. Will you explain those? —The Bur-
tonian lino refers to the true blue line. The false line refers to
the two conditions last mentioned by me.
2236. What is the mechanism of the effect of lead on the
nervous system?—After absorption the lead circulates in the
blood stream, and in certain cases on reaching the capillaries
in the sheaths of the nerve terminals in the muscles, has a
rotting effect on the walls of those capillaries, causing small
haemorrhages to occur. These act by destroying the function
of those nerve endings. As, a consequence, the muscle fibres
supplied by those nerve endings waste, and partial or com-
plete paralysis of the whole muscle belly results. A second
effect of lead on the nervous system is probably one of a direct
protoplasmic poison.
2237. What use do you make of estimations of lead in the
urine? The presence of lead in the urine is diagnostic of lead
absorption only, and not of lead poisoning.
2238. By Mr. Robinette— lrrespective of the quantity?—
That is rather difficult to answer. It may depend entirely on
the efficiency of the kidneys. Small quantities of lead in the
urine of a man with deficient kidneys might indicate severe
lead poisoning, whereas another man might be only a mild ease
because his kidneys are efficient.
2239. By Mr. Gepp —Has there been auy work leading to a
connection of lead in the urine with the diagnosis of lead
absorption as against lead poisoning? —Professor H. G. Chap-
man, of Sydney, has recently evolved a previously unused
electrolytic method of estimating the presence of lead in the
urine.
2240. But from the amount of lead you cannot at the
moment say whether a man is only absorbing lead or is lead
poisoned?—No.
2241. Does the medical profession tind it difficult to diagnose
a nervous type due to lead as compared with a nervous type
due to other causes? —The majority of cases are readily diag-
nosed, but in certain cases there may be some difficulty.
2242. You have made an examination of nearly 100 men.
On the average what time did you spend on each examina-
tion? —For the first, say, 12 or 15 examinations, about two
hours was spent on each case, and as light was thrown on the
position, the time grew shorter and shorter until about an hour
was spent on each of the later cases.
2243. Your report covers specifically the cases you have
examined. Are your conclusions general or specific to these
particular cases in relation to the whole number of employees?
—They refer specifically to the 97 beneficiaries examined, and
to them only. I am not prepared to generalise on the ques-
tion of lead poisoning in Port Pirie.
2244. Will you explain the results you have obtained by
reason of your four or five weeks’ work at Port Pirie, and
give us any conclusions you feel justified in giving?—Yes. I
read the following report: —
LEAD POISONING IN THE SMELTING WORKS OF
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS PRO-
PRIETARY LIMITED, PORT PIRIE.
Adelaide, June 11th, 1925.
An exhaustive examination of 97 men receiving compensa-
tion for lead poisoning has been made, constituting the whole
of those men at the present time receiving compensation. The
examination comprised a close investigation into each man’s
industrial history, social history, history of past health, history
of previous lead poisoning, and history of present illness,
besides a subjective and objective clinical examination, supple-
mented by a detailed examination of the blood.
It was decided that the most convenient way of grouping
the undoubted lead poisoning cases clinically was as follows:
1, gastro intestinal; 2, nervous; 3, arterio-renal.
I urther, for the purposes of this report it was found con-
venient to divide the cases into two broad nationality groups
as follows: —1. Northern Europeans. These include (a)
British, (b) German, (c) Scandinavian. 2. Southern Euro-
peans. These include (a) Greeks, (b) Maltese, (c) Jugoslavs.
The above grouping has been proved accurate bv certain
data available.
After the clinical examination of the whole of the bene-
ficiaries had been completed it was found that there was a
group constituting a large proportion of the cases in which the
symptoms and physical signs were of an indefinite nature, and
■which constituted essentially the picture of neurasthenia, with
or without digestive disturbances. The men comprising this
latter group were undoubtedly suffering from some disability
of greater or lesser degree, and it was only after mature con-
sideration, and later by an investigation into the possibility of
chronic carbon monoxide poisoning existing amongst them,
that it was possible to more or less satisfactorily account for
the causation of these men’s condition. It is as'well to state
heie tliat before the whole of the cases in this group can be
satisfactorily explained it will be necessary to conduct further
investigations into the question of the existence of carbon
monoxide in the air breathed by the workmen in the different
sections of the works.
Of the 97 men examined, 26 were found to be suffering from
undoubted lead poisoning; 71 were found not to be suffering
from lead poisoning. °
Undoubted Lead Poisoning Cases.
Of 26 definite lead poisoning cases, 14 were Northern
Europeans—s 3.9 per cent.; 12 were Southern Europeans=46 1
per cent.
. T h e 14 Northern Europeans represent 1.2 per cent, of the
total Northern Europeans employed on the works. The 1°
Son r n v ° peanS r ? resent 2 ' 5 cent, of the total
Southern Europeans employed on the works. The total number
f ( ' ,r '|! lo - vees m each ?f these two nationality groups is taken
Dorn figures representing the average daily number employed
during the fortnight ending 24/4/1925. * *


Gastro-
Arterio-
intestinal
Nervous
Renal
(3 cases).
(20 cases).
(3 cases) .
Per cent.
Per cent.
Per cent.
Northern
Europeans
. . 33.3
50
100
Southern
Europeans
.. 66.6
50
following is disclosed
No. of
Percentage of
employees in
each section
No. of
Lead
affected with
Section.
Employees.
Cases.
lead poisoning.
Bottom floor . . ..
. . 129
5
3.87
Top floor
78
3
3.84
Refinery
. . 271
3
1.1
D. and L. .... ..
. . 132
4
3.1
H. and H
48
5
10.41
B.R. and S. furnaces
82
2
2.43
Northern
Southern
Europeans.
Europeans.
Average height ..
66.2 inches
65.9 inches
Average weight . .
143.8 lbs.
136.6 lbs.
This shows that the
average weight per
inch of height is ..
2.172 lbs.
2.073 lbs.
Total
Healthy
lead
lead
Office
Towns-
cases.
workers.
workers.
people.
26 cases.
16 cases.
5 eases.
3 cases.
Haemoglobin
percentage
82.6
84.9
95
97
B.B.Cs
5,108,000
5,090,000
5,680,000
5,733,333
Punctate baso-
philia per
million R.B.Cs.
761.5
583.1
8
—
Lymphocytes
32.5
31.9
29.6
28.7
There is the possibility that variation in the intensity in
relation to the period of exposure to lead exists in the two
nationality groups, and consequently conclusions drawn from
this and certain ensuing tables may be slightly affected; but,
in my opinion, based on my observations and knowledge, this
is not serious.
If we now divide the cases into their three clinical groups
we have: —
From these figures it will be seen that the percentage of
Northern European cases increases in direct ratio to the
severity of the clinical type. The gastro-intestinal type is
usually due to the absorption of small quantities of lead over
a comparatively short period; the nervous cases are generally
due to the absorption of larger quantities of lead over a
comparatively short period; whilst the arterio-renal cases
are usually the resplt of the absorption of lead over a pro-
longed period of years. Consequently, it will be seen tnat in
the above cases, broadly speaking, the Southern Europeans
contract lead poisoning to a comparatively greater extent than
Northern Europeans after a short period of exposure. In the
arterio-renal type all the three cases are Northern Europeans,
because there are no Southern Europeans who have been ex-
posed to lead absorption over a sufficiently long period to cause
this type.
Age.
As there are no Southern European cases in this latter
arterio-renal type, it will be better in comparing the ages
at which lead poisoning is contracted to limit the figures to
the gastro-intestinal and nervous cases, which together can be
called cases of sub-acute lead poisoning, whereas the arterio-
renal cases can be called chronic lead poisoning.
Of the 23 cases the average Northern European age is 39.3
years; Southern European age is 34 years.
These 1 figures show that in the above cases Southern Euro-
peans contract lead poisoning at an earlier age than Northern
Europeans.
Period op Service prior to Contraction of Lead
Poisoning.
The average period of exposure before infection in the total
26 cases is 8.97 years.
The average period of exposure before infection in the 23
sub-acute cases is:—Northern Europeans, 13.4 years; Southern
Europeans, 2.2 years. These figures show the increase of sus-
ceptibility to lead poisoning in the Southern Europeans.
The average period of exposure before infection in the three
chronic cases is 18.1 years. As mentioned before, all three
cases are Northern Europeans, and these figures show that very
many years of exposure* to lead are necessary before chronic
lead poisoning occurs.
Toxicity op the Different Sections op the Works.
The following figures relate to the number of sub-acute cases
of lead poisoning found during the present investigation in the
different sections of the works shown below.
It is as well to point out here that of the total 23 sub-acute
cases, three were from the service department, but by careful
investigation it could be shown that the contraction of lead
poisoning in these! cases took place in one of the under-taen-
tioned sections. . ...
The total number of men employed in each section is taken
from figures covering the fortnight ending 24/4/25, so that
the percentages must be taken relatively to one another only.
Of the 23 sub-acute cases: —5=21.3 per cent., are from the
bottom floor; 3=13.1 per cent., are from the top floor; 3=13.1
per cent., are from the refinery; 4=17.4 per cent., are from
the D. and L. plant; 5=21.3 per cent., are from the H. and H.
plant- 2=8.7 per cent., are from the B.R. and Skinner fur-
naces’and acid plant; 1 case occurred in a man who had been
working in the slag pit for three months.
Taking the number of lead cases as a percentage of the
number of employees in each of the sections used above, the
following is disclosed: —
From these figures it will be seen that the H. and H. plant
is by far the most toxic, whilst the refinery is the least toxic.
Comparison op Physical Standard between the two Broad
Nationality Groups.
Clinical Picture.
The appended Table B is a condensed account of the 26 un-
doubted cases of lead poisoning.
To take the three clinical type groups separately:—
1. GastPo-intestinal Type. —ln the cases of this group,
colic, pallor, blue line, and tremor existed, with or
without anaemia.
2. Nervo-us Type. —ln the cases of this group, tremor and
paresis are constant. The paresis most commonly
takes the form of a weakness of the extensor
muscles of the forearms. These two prominent
symptoms may or may not be accompanied by colic,
pallor, blue line_ anaemia.
3. Arterio-renal Type.—W ith this type the outstanding
features are arterio sclerosis with high blood pres-
sure and albuminuria, denoting a nephritis or
Bright’s disease.
Pyorrhea.
Of the total 26 cases of lead poisoning, 18 have pyorrhea.
This is a fact of the very greatest importance, and suggests
that pyorrhea may be a pre-disposing cause of lead poisoning.
The causal relationship between pyorrhea and the onset of lead
poisoning can only be definitely decided by a complete medical
survey of the whole of the employees of the works. It could
then be determined whether the incidence of lead poisoning
was greater in those men with pyorrhea than in those without
it. The necessity for a dental clinic is tnus evident.
Table Showing Comparative Blood Picture in
1. Total lead cases.
2. Control lead workers.
3. Control office workers.
4. Control townspeople.
The haemoglobin percentage, red blood corpuscle count,
number of red cells showing punctate basophilia in each million
R.B.C.’s will be shown, and number of lymphocytes.
The outstanding feature of this table is the presence of 583.1
cells in every million red blood corpuscles, showing punctate baso-
philia in the average healthy lead worker as against 761.5 in
the average undoubted case of lead poisoning, whereas in
average office workers or townspeople it is practically nil.
These figures definitely prove that the presence of punctate
basophilia in the blood, even in a high degree ( e.g ., 3,000 per
million R.B.Cs. in one healthy lead worker) is not a diagnostic
sign of lead poisoning, but is a diagnostic sign of lead absorp-
tion. It occupies the same position in summing up a lead case
as do the presence of a blue line on the gums or a definite
history of exposure to lead; that is to say, it is evidence of
lead absorption. The fact that the average number of these
punctate cells is higher in the definite lead cases than in the
healthy lead workers suggests that after further prolonged
investigation in this matter it may be possible to definitely
establish a standard whereby a doubtful case could be deter-
mined to be either suffering from lead poisoning or from lead
absorption. This would be most readily accomplished by the
estimation of these punctate cells at frequent intervals in any
case which showed signs of lead absorption and which was be-
coming progressively worse; that is, leading on to lead poison-
ing.
Another point of importance to be noted in the above table
is that only four cases out of the total 26 cases of undoubted
lead poisoning failed to show the presence of punctate baso-
philia, so that it is demonstrated that 84.6 per cent, of the
total undoubted lead cases show this sign. In the case of
healthy lead workers eight out of 19 tailed to show this cone
dition of these cells, thus 57.9 per cent, of these healthy lead
workers have this blood condition present.


CO
CO X tO
W
X po
QQ
*
Total Months,
Exposure.
Last Section
Worked in.
lO tO 4^
Months in
Last Section.
1 1 + o
History Previous
Lead Attacks.
+ + + 1
td
Colic.
o
+++ £
Pallor.
w
+ + + g
Blue Line.
++ + £
Tremor.
H3
JIM
w
Paresis.
11 + '
Anaemia.
X OC -I
X o o
H.B. %
C( Or
CO — 1 X
4^
to CO 'h— *
0(0 0
O O O
R.B.Cs.
Punctate
Basophilia per
mil. P.B.Cs.
144
D
48
+
—
+
+
+
+
76
50
300
276
O.(H)
276
+
—
+
—
+
_
—
90
52
300
87
B.R.S.
5
+
+
4-
+
+
+
—
84
47
140
34
0 (T)
34
—
+
+
+
+
+
+
70
46
900
180
R
22
+
—
+
—
+
+
+
74
47
2,000
210
H
7
—
+
+
+
+
+
—
84
53
500
183
D
30
+
—
—
—
+
+
—
83
58
0
150
B
3
—
—
—
+
+
—
85
53
70
324
B
24
+
+
+
—
+
+
—
90
47
600
48
D
10
—
+
+
+
+
+
—
88
46
3.200
126
D
42
+
+
+
—
+
+
—
86
49
400
56
R
26
+
+
+
+
~r
+
+
78
53
30
24
R
22
+
—
+
+
+
—
90
56
0
19
B
16
—
• +
+
+
+
+
+
72
56
1,700
15
H
15
—
—
+
+
-1-
+
—
95
53
70
12
T
12
—
—
—
+
4-
+
—
88
49
2,300
8
0 (T)
6
—
—
+
—
+
+
—
90
51
140
13
H
11
—
—
—
—
+
+
—
82
50
1,400
7
S.P.
3
—
—
+
—
+
+
—
93
52
0
30
B
24
— '
—
+
+
+
+
—
88
60
400
207 R 180 +
—
+
— i —
—
+
67 j 45
0
204 0 30 +
+
+
+ +
—
—
82 53
200
300 B 45
—
+ | +
+
+
64 44
500
However, another most interesting fact has been noted from
a study of the figures. The average number of punctate ceils
present in the healthy lead workers who do show the presence
of this condition at all, is as high or higher than tnat of the
total lead cases. This is a fact, to my mind, of very con-
siderable importance, as it suggests that certain persons are
undoubtedly more susceptible to the effects of lead on the cir-
culating blood than are others. Further work on this point
should be carried out. It may yield most important results.
Cases found not Suffering from Lead Poisoning.
Of the 71 cases found to be not suffering from lead poisoning
a large number were found to present a symptom complex of
neurasthenia. It was a large group, and constituted 53 of the
71 cases. The whole of the men in this group were un-
doubtedly suffering from some disability of greater or lesser
degree. In 25 of them dizziness whilst at work, with occa-
sional nausea, was a prominent feature of the history. This
suggested that the inhalation of carbon monoxide in small
quantities may have been the causative factor (see appended
Table C). From the industrial histories of these cases it was
gathered that most of them came from the top floor, the
bottom floor or the refinery. When this fact had been estab-
lished investigations were made. The blood of fourteen men
working on the top floor, bottom floor, D. and L. plant, and
refinery was examined. In only one of these cases was carbon
monoxide absent from the blood, and that was in a man on the
bottom floor. Of the others, the highest amount of carbon
monoxide haemoglobin found in the blood, viz., 27 per cent.,
was discovered in a man after working in the bag-house. The
next highest, viz., 24 per cent. C.0.H.8., was found in the blood
of a man working near No. 5 furnace on the top floor which
had been down for barring and was ready for starting. The
appended Table D gives a complete record of these tests for
the presence of carbon monoxide in the blood.
I think it highly advisable that further work be done in
this direction. I have little doubt that such investigation will
result in the elucidation of the problem of this large group of
cases of neurasthenia.
The other 28 cases of neurasthenia in which dizziness whilst
at work was not a particularly prominent feature will possibly
be explained when the above recommendation is carried into
effect.
At the present stage I should prefer not to draw any
definite conclusions on the subject of chronic carbon monoxide
poisoning. it appears to me significant that in the
above two groups Southern Europeans preponderate greatly.
Of the remaining 18 cases, six were found to be in good
health and to have recovered from any disability which they
may have had. The remaining 12 had other pathological con-
ditions, viz., four cases of nephritis, one each of arterio sclerosis,
arthritis, lumbago, appendicitis, myxoedema, whilst there were
three cases of an indefinite nature —gastric ulcer (f), enlarge-
ment of the liver (7), neuritis (?).
Recommendations for Prevention op 111-health amongst
Workers.
1. The institution of a medical service at the works is neces-
sary. Its specific functions, apart from all other matters con-
cerning industrial hygiene, should be: —
(a) A rigorous examination of all men before employment.
(b) A regular periodic examination of all employees for
the detection and prevention of lead poisoning.
( c ) Close observation of all men who have been suffering
from lead poisoning and who have been certified as
fit and have returned to work. If any of these cases
again contract lead poisoning, it will be detected
early, and these cases should be eliminated at once,
being susceptible persons.
2. Further investigations should be carried out for the pur-
poses of determining the lead and carbon monoxide hazards
in every part of the works.
3. According to the results of the above investigations
further steps should be taken to diminish the amount of dust
and noxious gases in the air which is breathed by the men.
4. The institution of a dental clinic.
Recommendation as Regards the Method of Dealing with
Supposed Cases of Lead Poisoning.
Legislation different from that at present existing for dealing
with persons suffering from lead poisoning is indicated. The
new legislation should be on the lines of that existing in
Broken Hill, adapted to local conditions. It should specifically
cover this point—that all cases certified by the authority under
the Act, whether it be a medical referei or a medical board,
should be liable to re-examination at any time by the said
medical referee or medical board at their discretion. In this
way those men suffering from lead poisoning would have more
intensive treatment for the cure of their disability than exists
at present.
Summary.
1. Lead poisoning exists to a greater extent in Southern
Europeans than in Northern Europeans.
2. Lead poisoning occurs at an earlier age in Southern
Europeans than in Northern Europeans.
3. Southern Europeans are more susceptible to lead poisoning
than Northern Europeans.
4. Southern Europeans are physically inferior to Northern
Europeans.
5. The H. and H. plant is the most toxic; the refinery the
least toxic.
6. The nervous type of lead poisoning is the predominating
one.
7. Pyorrhea is present in a high proportion of all lead poison-
ing eases and may be a pre-disposing cause.
8. Punctate basophilia is diagnostic of lead absorption only,
and not of lead poisoning.
9. Further investigations into the question of the presence of
punctate basophilia should be carried out.
10. A large number of cases certified as suffering from lead
poisoning are suffering from neurasthenia, possibly the result
of repeated exposure' to small quantities of carbon monoxide.
11. Carbon monoxide has been found in the blood of men
in the top floor, bottom floor, refinery, D. and L. plant and
bag-house.
12. Further investigations into the presence of carbon mon-
oxide in the air breathed in different sections of the works
is indicated.
13. Twelve cases were found suffering from other diseases.
14. Six cases were found to be in normal health.
15. Recommendations for prevention of industrial illnesses.
16. Recommendation as regards legislation.
[Signed]
OWEN M. MOULDEN.
Table B.— DEFINITE LEAD POISONING CASES.
Nervous Type.
Northern European*.
Southern Europeans.
Arterio -Renal Type.
Each of these three cases has Arterio-sclerosis and high blood
pressure—two have Albuminuria.
* B represents bottom fl oor ; T, top floor; R, refinery, D, Dwight
and Lloyd plant ; H, Huntington Heberlein plant; 8.R.5., Barrier
roaster and Skinner furnaces; S.P., slag pit; O, service depart-
ments.


Last Sec-
tion.
Months in
Last Section.
General
Weakness.
Dizziness.
Pyorrhoea.
H.B.
0/
/o ■
R.B.Cs.
Punctate
Basphiles
per mil.
R. B.Cs.
1 i i
Southern Europeans.
*T
16
+
+
+
72
54
2,500
D
16
+
+
—
83
48
2.600
R
37
+
+
+
92
—
—
R
120
+
+
+
88
58
15
B
6
+
+
+
72
43
900
T
12
+
+
+
77
50
100
B
4
+
+
+
80
49
—
B
30
-f
+
+
75
46
700
T
g
+
+
+
80
51
140
R
7
+
+
—
90
56
140
R
8
+
+
—
80
51
700
R
16
+
+
+
108
60
600
T
3
+
+
+
92
53
700
B
17
+
+
—
80
54
70
R
—
+
+
+
86
56
800
B
16
+
+
+.
93
55
400
B
8
4“
+
—
83
54
500
B
28
4-
+
■ —
90
53
— '
R
24
+
+
+
78
60
70
Northern Europeans.
D
16
+
+
—
so
43
1,140
T
9
+
+
+
86
49
300
B
4
+
+
+
79
48
—
R
10
+
+
+
88
55
—
T ..
6
+
+ .
+ ,
88
52
200
T
12
+
+
+
82
53
500
Date.
Location where
Sample was
taken.
C.O.
H.B.
C.O.
Remarks.
0/
Of
/O
Shift boss. Sample
12/5/25
Bottom floor
10
•0077
smelters
12
•0095
taken at bungalow Jhr.
after leaving work,
where he had been for
7f hrs.
12/5/25
Top floor smel-
ters
3
4
•0021
•0029
Shift boss. Sample
taken at bungalow Jhr.
after leaving work,
where he had been for
8 hours.
27/5/25
Bottom floor
smelters
4
6
3
•0029
■0044
•0021
Shift boss. Sample
taken from man after
standing for lOmins.
in path of fumes
coming away from bul-
lion mould and slag
tap hole. This mar
had been working
6|hrs. when samph
taken.
27/5/25
Bottom floor
smelters
10
11
8
•0077
•0086
•0061
Foreman. Same con
ditions as last man
except this man hac
been working for 7hrs
Date.
Location where
Sample was
taken.
C.O.
H.B.
C.O.
Remarks.
27/5/25
Smelter Office
0/
/o
2
0
%
•0014
Nil
Smelter Supt. Same
conditions as above,
but sample taken 5min.
after leaving furnace.
28/5/25 Top floor smel-
ters
15
13
•0123
•0104
Shift boss. Sample
taken near No. 2 Fee.,
which was down for
barring. This man
had been working
about the furnaces
2ihrs., then stood by
No. 5 furnace for
15 minutes before sam-
ple was taken
28/5/25 1
Top floor smel-
ters
24
23
•022
•0208
Asst, shift boss. Sample
taken near No. 5 Fee.
which had been down
for barring, and was
ready for starting up.
This man had been
working for 3 hours
about the furnaces,
then stood by No. 5
Fee. for 15 minutes
before sample was
taken.
28/5/25
*
Smelter bag-
house
27
25
•0258
•0232
Baghouse Attendant.
Sample taken from
man in . attendants’
change house 4 minutes
after leaving the bag-
house. This man had
been working for 3|
hours. The last 20
minutes were spent
inside No. 5 chamber,
before the sample was
taken.
28/5/25
“ A ” section
D. L. plant
4
5
•0029 Shift boss. Sample
•0036 taken after standing
near No. 4 firebox for
15 minutes. This man
had been working for
6J hours before sample
was taken.
28/5/25
“ A ” section
D. L. plant
4
4
•0029
•0029
Asst. Supt. Sample
taken under same con-
ditions as previous
test.
29/5/25
Near gas pro-
ducers at re-
tort furnace
refinery
8
4
•006
■0029
Supt. Sample taken
after standing near
producer for 15
minutes.
29/5/25
Near gas pro-
ducer refinery
10
8
•0077
•006
Foreman. Sample taken
after standing near
producer for 15
minutes. No coal
smoke about. This
man had been working
2 hours before sample
taken.
29/5/25
Near No. 8 re-
fining furnace
refinery
11
9
•0086
•0069
Shift boss. Sample
taken after standing
near furnace for J
hour. Fair amount of
coal smoke about.
This man had been
working 2| hours prior
to the sample being
taken.
29/5/25
Near antimony
dross refinery
i
i 10
1 io
•0077
■0077
Shift boss. Sample
taken after standing
near furnace for 15
minutes. The at-
mosphere was fairly
i free from smoke. This
man had been working
;U hours before the
sample was taken.
[Table C. —SEQUELAE OF CHRONIC CARBON MONOXIDE
POISONING.
This table deals with those cases suffering from the sequelae of
repeated inhalations of smail quantities of Carbon Monoxide. The
history of their present illness shows that in every one of these
cases dizziness whilst at work was a prominent feature. The other
most prominent symptoms are those of neurasthenia, viz. General
weakness, indigestion, headaches, insomnia, pains in the limbs.
* B represents bottom floor; T, top floor ; R. refinery ; D,
Dwight & Lloyd plant; H. Huntington Heberlein plant; 8.R.5.,
Barrier roaster and Skinner furnaces; S.P., slag pit; 0, service
departments.
Table 1).— BLOOD TESTS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE
Pyro-Tannic Acid Method.
Table D.— Blood Tests for Carbon Monoxide, .continued.
Pyro-Tannic Acid Method.


2245. By Mr. Gepp —Do you mean that in one of the men 27
per cent, of the haemoglobin of the blood was useless —that
one-quarter of the blood was out of action? —Yes.
2246. By Mr. Robinette —What is the exact meaning of
neurasthenia? —Weakness of the nervous system. Roughly, the
symptoms are general weakness, indigestion of an indefinite
character, headaches of an indefinite type, inability to sleep,
irritability of temper, and indefinite pains in the limbs. The
most graphic description of neurasthenia I get is that they
feel ‘ ‘ crook ’ ’ without knowing exactly where.
2247. By Mr. Gepp —Will you describe briefly the operation
covering the tests for carbon monoxide in the men on the
job, as previously mentioned by you? —The technique consists of
pricking a man’s finger with a haemospast, which is a mechani-
cal pricker, and which is absolutely painless. You do not
know that it is being done. It is a thing that looks like a
cigarette-holder. It is put on the finger, and a little trigger is
pulled. I had it done on and did not know when it
was done. I shut my eyes. That causes about one or two
minims of blood to appear at the site of the puncture, which is
sucked up into a small glass tube, with a piece of rubber
attached, blown into a small test tube, and mixed with a certain
amount of distilled water, and a pyro-tannic acid reagent is
added. These are then shaken together, and allowed to stand
for 15 minutes, and then compared with a series of tubes repre-
senting such and such a percentage of carbon monoxide
haemoglobin in the blood.
2248. That is a colorimetric estimation? —Yes.
2249. And the difference in the color is due to what? —To
the varying amounts of carbon monoxide which have combined
with the haemoglobin in the blood.
2250. When the carbon monoxide so combines what effect
has it on the color of the blood in the presence of the pyro-
tannic reagent?—lt causes an increase of a certain shade of
redness —cherry redness almost.
2251. And the amount of change in the color is indicative oi;
the percentage of haemoglobin combined with carbon mon-
oxide ?—Yes.
2252. You said “two or three minims.” What is a minim?
—A small drop.
2253. The amount used is how many drops? —Not more than
two.
2254. This table D shows the results of these tests for carbon
monoxide, and covers shift bosses, foremen, assistant shift
bosses, and other men on the staff. I have one here mentioned
who is apparently the only person not a staff man. He is
marked “bag-house attendant.” Please explain that particular
case? —During the course of these examinations the man in
question offered himself for a blood test, saying that he wished
to help the investigation. The test was done, and it was after-
wards found that he was not a staff man.
2255. How long was this man actually in the bag-house
before the sample of his blood was taken? —He had been 20
minutes inside No. 5 chamber.
2256. The report mentions that he had been working for
three and three-quarter hours. You cannot say for how much
of that period he had actually been inside the chamber? —
Only 20 minutes.
2257. What was he doing for the rest of the time? —He was
in charge of the bag-house.
2258. So that exposure for only 20 minutes to the atmo-
sphere of a chamber of the bag-house, shut off from the other
chambers, gave him 27 per cent, of saturation? —Yes.
2259. By the Chairman —The presence of carbon monoxide
haemoglobin in the blood requires a considerable time to
entirely disappear?—Yes.
2260. So that in the case of this man, if he had been em-
ployed intermittently, or if his employment required his enter-
ing the. bag-house at intervals, a gradual accumulation of
carbon monoxide haemoglobin would probably result? —Yes.
2261. You did not mean to infer that one single exposure of
20 minutes in the bag-house would produce 27 per cent, of
carbon monoxide haemoglobin in the man’s blood? —Without
knowing his actual employment I should say it is probable that
that was only one of other exposures during the shift. It may
be of interest to say that carbon monoxide haemoglobin dis-
appears from the blood in a person removed from exposure to
carbon monoxide at the ratj of approximately 30 per cent, per
hour.
2262. Of its total, or actually 30 per cent.? —Thirty per cent,
of the carbon monoxide haemoglobin formed disappears each
hour roughly.
2263. By Mr. Pearson —It takes three hours for a man to
be free from its effects? —Yes.
2264. By Mr. Gepp —Please explain the general conditions
under which you took the samples?—The primary object in
taking them was to establish, or otherwise, the fact of the exist-
ence of carbon monoxide in the air which may be breathed
by the workmen. Consequently many of the tests were taken
in such places as w r ere thought to be the most likely where
carbon monoxide would be found.
2265. Were the staff men stood there for periods to get the
effect on them? —Certain cases were deliberately stood for a
period of some minutes in a particular spot.
2266. It is, of course, undesirable that this Commission’s
work should cause alarm in regard to the general conditions.
Is it your opinion that there is probably chronic carbon mon-
oxide poisoning, but not acute carbon monoxide poisoning, at
Port Pirie?—Yes.
2267. Will you explain wdiat you mean by chronic as com-
pared with acute carbon monoxide poisoning?—lt will be better
to describe the effects of carbon monoxide poisoning under
three headings: —1, acute carbon monoxide poisoning; 2 f
chronic; and 3, the sequelae of chronic carbon monoxide
poisoning. In acute carbon monoxide poisoning it is usual for
a person to fall down unconscious. He may die w'hile un-
conscious, or he may recover and gradually get well, or he may
get well temporarily and then within 48 hours suddenly die
from delayed poisoning. In chronic carbon monoxide poisoning
dizziness is a common symptom with headache and nausea; on
cessation of exposure to carbon monoxide the symptoms dis-
appear. In the sequelae of carbon monoxide poisoning a con-
dition exists which is apparently the result of the absorption of
small quantities of carbon monoxide repeatedly over a com-
paratively long period. The pathology of this condition is not
at present clearly understood.
2268. For the purpose of further investigation by the Com-
mission would you define the minimum time that a man should
be on shift before a test is made? —I think half a shift should
have elapsed before a test is taken.
2269. You were not able to make any progressive tests over
a shift? —No.
2270. Is it necessary that samples should be taken whilst a
man is at work or immediately he knocks off? —For preference,
within a minute or two after he leaves the position in which
he works.
2271. Are there any other places than those you mentioned
in table I) where you think tests might be taken? —The table
includes the top floor, bottom floor, D. and L. plant, refinery,
and bag-house. I think every section should be tested where
the combustion of carbon containing materials is proceeding.
2272. Can you give the Commission any references to
literature which might help us to consider for ourselves this
subject of carbon monoxide poisoning?—Yes, 1 would refer
you to the following:—Kober and Hayhurst’s “Industrial
Health ’ ’ and Kober and Hanson on * 1 Industrial Hygiene. ’ ’
Then there is the Journal of Industrial Hygiene, vol. 3, No. 1
May, 1921, pages 11 to 15; vol. 3, No. 7, November, 1921,
page 213; vol. 4, No. 11, March, page 463; vol. 5, No. 4
August, page 109; vol. 5, No. 7, November, page 255; vol. 6,
No. 3, July, page 102.
2273. By Mr. Pearson —In describing a phase of lead
poisoning you mentioned the words “over a long period.”
What period do you mean? —By the term “over a long period”
I infer a minimum of 17 years in the cases which I examined.
2274. In earlier evidence given before the Commission it was


.stated that the men employed in the lead processes are em-
ployed seven shifts, equal to 56 hours, per week. Do you
consider the strain of continuous employment under the con-
ditions as you know them would have a tendency to increase
the risk of lead poisoning?— All other things being equal it
would.
2275. We can take it that you consider that shorter hours
would be advisable?—You cannot infer that from what I say,
because I modified my statement by saying “All other things
being equal. ’ ’ The susceptibility of each individual comes
into the picture. It is only after long investigation that you
• could get any definite knowledge on this question.
2276. There would be extra exposure to the hazard with the
.seven shifts as compared with the six? —Yes.
2277. And harm would result to the susceptible person?—
Yes.
2278. In an industry of this description do you consider six
or seven shifts per week preferable from the standpoint of
the health of the workmen? —I cannot say.
2279. By Mr. Bobinette —You stated that you were associated
with the Technical Commission in Broken Hill, and followed
the results closely. Were the results you followed interim
reports?—There was one interim report published.
2280. It was on that that you followed the results? —Yes.
2281. During the 11 years you were in Broken Hill how
many cases of lead poisoning did you examine? —Roughly, be-
tween 150 and 200 of suspected lead poisoning.
2282. You stated that you examined 97 men at Port Pirie
who were beneficiaries under the Act. Hiow did you know
they were beneficiaries? —By a statement from the company
which employed me. A number of men were compounded
within a week or two after I examined them.
2283. You did not examine any men other than beneficiaries
under the Act? —Yes, I did.
2284. Were they working men or staff men? —Staff men.
2285. Did you find any of them showing symptoms of lead
poisoning? —No.
2286. Do you attach any importance to a blood test in deter-
mining lead poisoning ?—As a result of my investigations, no.
2287. Some of the men you examined were suffering from
gout. Does not lead cause gout in some cases? —No.
2288. Have you heard of men’s disabilities being diagnosed
as lead gout? —Yes.
2289. What does that term mean? —Gout is a metabolic
disease; that is, it is due to certain foreign substances existing
in the blood-stream. These substances commonly attack the
joints. They also frequently attack the kidneys. In a lead
worker, who is excreting lead by the kidneys, if he gets gout
his excretion of lead by the kidneys may be lessened, and symp-
toms of lead poisoning could be precipitated. If he, at the same
time, had gout in his joints, that would constitute what is called
lead gout.
2290. By the Chairman —Do you recognise a condition of
arthritis caused directly by lead which may simulate gout?
—No. I do not think there is such a condition.
2291. By Mr. Bobinette —Who conducted the blood tests for
carbon monoxide? —I was responsible.
2292. You had some assistance? —Yes.
2293. Did you go through the whole process yourself? —I
ffid not personally supervise every result.
2294. Then you do not know whether all those tests are
correct? —I am satisfied that they are.
2295. How do you know they are? —Because I have sufficient
knowledge of my assistant to place complete confidence in his
findings.
2296. Apart from that confidence you do not know whether
they were correct? —No.
2297. You said the tests should be taken within one or two
minutes after leaving work. Why should they, in the face of
your evidence that the rate of diminution in the blood was 30
per cent, per hour? —So that none of it would be lost.
2298. Not much would be lost in five or ten minutes, and
the amount could l>e calculated? —No. The colorimetric test is
not sufficiently delicate to differentiate between small varia-
tions.
2299. You assisted Drs. Chapman and Smith at the labora-
tory in examining the beneficiaries? —I was present during
their examination.
2300. Did you consider that it was proper to be there while
the men were being examined, seeing that you were employed
by the company?—Yes, decidedly.
2301. Who invited you to be present?—Professor Chapman.
2302. By Mr. Gepp —Who was your assistant in carrying out
the carbon monoxide tests? —Mr. Hemingway and Mr.
McDonald.
2303. What are their positions at the works?—Mr. Heming-
way is the chief chemist and Mr. McDonald head assistant.
2304. Mr. Hemingway carried the tests out first in your
presence to satisfy you as to his manipulative methods? —Yes.
2305. You carried out a certain. number of tests yourself?
■ —Yes.
2306. It was only after you were satisfied with the testa
carried out in your presence that you left the remainder to
Mr. Hemingway? —Yes.
2307. Did you do any manipulation yourself in particular
cases? —I did the assessing of the result myself in some cases.
2308. You made the judgment from the colorimetric test
instead of Mr. Hemingway or Mr. McDonald? —Yes. To test
the correctness of their color vision I checked their results
and found them to be correct. That is a very important point.
A person’s color vision must be found to be no’mal before he
is of any use in colorimetric estimations.
2309. When you say you are satisfied with the results from
the tests of Mr. Hemingway and Mr. McDonald you mean that
it was only after doing some of the tests yourself and seeing
them do some that you left the rest to them? —Yes.
2310. Mr. Hemingway is a man of high calibre in his pro-
fession?—Yes.
2311. In connection with the cases dealt with by Professor
Chapman, has your decision in regard to beneficiaries any
statutory effect? —No.
2312. You are not the certifying officer under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act? —No.
2313. Therefore any decision you may make and any state-
ment you may make to the company as the examining officer
for the company does not affect the payment of compensation
to the beneficiary? —No.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Wednesday, Jane 17th, 1925, at 3 p.m.
[At the Town Hall, Port Pirie.]
Present—
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman).
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Robinette.
LESLIE GEMMEL TASSIE, medical practitioner, Port
Pirie, was recalled and further examined:
2314. By the Chairman —ln accordance with a proposal of
Mr. Robinette, he and myself, as medical representative on
the Commission, have, on behalf of the Commission, supervised
a series of tests to estimate the presence or otherwise of carbon
monoxide in the blood of men working at the smelters. These
tests were made on volunteers under conditions which prevented
the individual results from being known to any person, and I
have no knowledge of the names of the persons tested. The


tests were made in accordance with the method described by
Dr. Sayer, of the United States Health Service, and with his
apparatus loaned by the Broken Hill South Company. This
apparatus is believed to be the only one of its kind in Australia.
During the test each of the local medical practitioners was
present at some time, and checked certain readings of the
results by Mr. McDonald, of the B.H.A.S. chemical staff. Other-
readings were checked by myself in their absence. The results
are summarised in the following tabulation: —
Top floor —In 3 hours’ work, 4 to 11 p.c.; in 7\ hours, 9 to
11 p.c.
Bottom floor — hours, 2to 8 p.c.; 8 hours, 3to 8 p.c.
Barrier roaster—4 hours, nil.
Skinner process —4 hours, 3 p.c.
Bag-house —7 hours, Bto 9 p.c. After 10 minutes inside a
chamber of the bag-house, 15 p.c.
Refinery—2 hours, 3 p.c.; 7 hours, nil to 2 p.c.
H. and H. pots—3 hours, 1 to 12 p.c.; 1\ hours, 3 p.c.
(Showed 12 p.c. in morning. There -was south wind blowing in
afternoon.)
Dwight and Lloyd “A” plant —3 hours, 4 to 6 p.c.; 7 hours,
10 p.c.
Dwight and Lloyd “B” plant—3 hours, 1 p.c.; 7\ hours,
5 p.c.
Power house—4 hours, nil.
Blacksmith’s shop—4 hours, nil.
Sample plant—4 hours, 4 p.c.
Coke heap-—4 hours, 4 p.c.
I may add that these results do not represent a survey of
the work, but simply indicate to some, degree the co-hazard
under present weather conditions in certain places. With
varying weather conditions and changes in working operations,
variations in results would doubtless be obtained. You, I
understand, have read the evidence of Professor Chapman and
Dr. Smith recently, and you saw therein the reference or
recommendation to the effect that a survey should be made in
respect of carbon monoxide at the works?—Yes.
2315. You were present the other day, and checked the read-
ings of certain results obtained by the Sayer method? —Yes.
2316. Can you make a statement as to an}' conclusions you
draw from those results? —From my observation of those tests
I am satisfied that certain men working at the smelters in
certain places, which are unknown to me, as I am not aware
where the tests were taken, are being exposed to the absorption
of carbon monoxide gas, and are absorbing carbon monoxide gas.
2317. You are satisfied on that point?—Quite satisfied.
2318. Have you any further statement to make to the Com-
mission in that connection?—l consider it emphasises what I
have already indicated to this Commission, that is the necessity
for compulsory notification of all industrial diseases, compulsory
notification of suspected cases, and the examination of those
cases, not by the general practitioner, who has neither the time
nor the appliances to carry out research, but by men expert in
matters of industrial hygiene.
2319. By Mr. Bohinette —Have you had any experience of
carbon monoxide poisoning? —No.
2320. Have you read much on that point?—l have read all
the available literature I have on the subject; but, as I have
remarked, we have had no professional experience of it up here,
and no indication that it has been occurring. We have had
suspicions that things other than lead poisoning were occurring,
but we could not trace to what they were due, as we are only
general practitioners, not chemists, nor have we had oppor-
tunities to go about the work and make investigations in such
a direction. I have had no experience of carbon monoxide
poisoning up to the present.
2321. Dr. O. M. Moulden made a statement that where a
person has absorbed carbon and has removed to the
fresh air, the diminution of carbon monoxide in the blood
was at the rate of 30 per cent, per hour. Have you any com-
ment to make on that? —I am not prepared to offer any opinion.
I presume that it could be worked out by tests.
2322. Do you consider that the eyes of a man making those
tests should be thoroughly tested before doing so?—I think
he ought to have normal and efficient eyesight.
2323. Would it be necessary for his eyesight to be tested? —
It would certainly be necessary to ascertain that the man is
not suffering from color blindness.
2324. Would it be possible for there to be a variation in
rospect of those tests in men of normal eyesight?—ln tests
where you have to compare with color standards, the personal
factor would have to come in, and in the case of men of
normal eyesight there might be a variation of 1 or 2 per cent.,
but not a great amount.
The witness withdrew.
CARL EMIL DORSCH, medical practitioner, Norman
Street, Port Pirie, was recalled and further examined:
2325. By the Chairman —You have just heard the statement
which I made concerning the result of tests as to the presence
or otherwise of carbon monoxide in the blood of men working
at the smelters, and I take it that you have read the evidence
of Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith, in which they made
certain statements relating to carbon monoxide? —‘Yes.
2326. You have been present at the smelters recently, and
nave seen some results of the Carbon monoxide tests taken?—•
Yes.
2327. Will you give the Commission your opinion in relation
to the presence or otherwise of carbon monoxide at the works,
as a result of what you have seen and hoard? —As a result
of what I have seen I cannot very well offer an opinion, but
as a result of what I have heard from you as to how r the tests
worked out it would appear that there must be a hazard there.
The tests which I saw were not at all conclusive, but the figures
you have read out are suggestive.
2328. You would say they represent a carbon monoxide
hazard? —Yes.
2329. Do you desire to make any further statements to the
Commission in that regard?—No.
2330. By Mr. Bohinette —You say the tests you saw were not
conclusive?—No; I only spent about an hour at the works.
However, the figures read out seem to be conclusive.
2331. Were you satisfied with the tests?—lt is my opinion
that when made by men with strong color vision they would be
very good. My own vision is not good enough in respect to
slight variations in color to enable me to quibble over per-
centages.
2332. By Mr . Gepp —Dr. Tassie, in his evidence a few minutes
ago, emphasised that this work seemed to him to support his
previous contention that all cases of suspected industrial disease
should be referred by the general practitioners to experts for
final decision. Do you agree with that? —Yes; most emphati-
cally.
2333. As a general practitioner you would prefer that?—Yes.
The witness withdrew.
CHARLETON YEATMAN, medical practitioner, Port
Pirie, was recalled and further examined:
2334. By the Chairman —You have just heard the statement
which I read out of results of tests at the works for carbon
monoxide by the Sayer method. You have read the evidence
of Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith, as given at Port Pirie
recently, in which there were certain references to carbon
monoxide as a possible hazard in connection with th e smelters?
Yes.
2335. In addition, you were present and read certain of the
tests taken at the smelters? —Yes.
2336. What is your opinion now in relation ,to carbon
monoxide as a hazard at the smelters?——l can merely say that
there would seem to be a hazard in respect to carbon monoxide
poisoning. I would not like to indicate its degree or prevalence.
2337. Is there any further statement you would care to make
to the Commission in that respect?—No.
2338. By Mr. Gepp —Do you agree with Dr. Tassie in regard
to the necessity of cases of industrial disease being compulsorily
notifiable, and that suspected cases should be referred to experts
for examination, as the general practitioner has neither the time


nor appliances to carry out research in respect to such diseases'?
I quite agree that suspected cases of industrial disease should
be notifiable, and that we should have the greatest assistance
possible in coming to a correct diagnosis through the aid of
special laboratory methods and so on.
i. 309. By Mr. Robinette —You have not had any experience in
regard to carbon monoxide poisoning industrially?— I did not
recognise it as such.
2340. You have read something of carbon monoxide poison-
ing?—Yes.
2341. Would you consider that a man, subject to 5 per cent,
saturation over the bigger part of eight hours each day, would
be likely to become incapacitated?—l could not answer that
question with certainty.
2342. From your reading on the subject, what percentage
would there have to be for a man to absorb before it would
be likely to be injurious?—l cannot remember the actual
figures.
2343. On the figures which have been indicated by the Chair-
man, do you think there would be a hazard? —Those figures
certainly show 7 that there is free carbon monoxide in the vicinity
of the work those men are doing. Whether that particular
saturation is sufficient to cause ill-health I have not the
experience to say.
2344. By Mr. Gepp —You would except, of course, such a
figure as 15 per cent, in the case of the bag-house I —From my
very limited experience and limited reading I do no think I
can answer that question definitely. I recognise there must
be a carbon monoxide hazard. Beyond that Idb not care to
make any further remarks.
2345. By the Chairman —It would seem a logical deduction
from the standpoint of physiology that a man who each day has
15 per cent, of his haemoglobin put out of commission by carbon
monoxide over a long period, would get ill results from it? —
Yes; I think he must, reasoning on physiological grounds.
2346. By Mr. Robinette —Are you satisfied from wdiat you
saw of those tests that they were carried out as nearly accu-
rately as it was possible to get them? —They were, as far as
I could tell.
2347. By the Chairman —Apart from actual color blindness,
or loss of the faculty of distinguishing greens or reds, do you
consider that individuals show variations in the power of dis-
criminating between fine shades of the same color? —I know
they do. I think it w r ould need special training to take accurate
readings by colorimetric methods.
2348. A part of the training in chemistry is color estimation?
—Yes.
2349. By Mr. Robinette —Have you read Sayer’s work on the
testing of the blood? —I have read his small pamphlet.
2350. We had certain tests in which there was variation in
the amount of pyrotannic acid used, and we were unable to
read them. Do you think it is necessary that the amount of
pyrotannic acid used should be strictly accurate, and that a
slight variation would alter the tests?—There is a brown color
developed by blood under pyrotannic acid, and when it contains
carbon monoxide also a cherry red color is given to the mixture.
It seems to me that the cherry color w 7 ould still develop ""cp
there w 7 ere still slight variations in the amount of pyrotannic
acid. No doubt it is advisable that the tests should be carried
out with strict accuracy.
2351. There would be no great variation between the amount
you w T ould get in the small spoon used and what you would
get on the end of the blade of a pocket knife? I have so nttl"
experience of the tests that I could not say what the vaiiaLcr.
•would be.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Wednesday, June 2±th, 1925, at 10 a.rn.
[At Parliament House, Adelaide.]
Present—
Dr. K. R. Moore (Chairman.)
Mr. H. W. Gepp,
Mr. J. L. Pearson
Mr. W. Robinette.
BEDLINGTON HOWEL MORRIS, Inspector General of
Hospitals, Adelaide, and a Medical Referee under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, was recalled and
further examined.
2352. By Mr. Gepp —Since you were previously before the
Commission as a witness, the Commission has taken a con-
siderable amount of evident e in New South Wales and later
at Port Pirie, and has developed, as the result of its inquiries,
a number of important and interesting facts. The evidence of
the works ’ medical officers at the white lead manufacturing
plants in New South Wales was, firstly, strongly in favor of
careful entrance examinations; secondly, strongly in support
of regular periodical examinations; and thirdly indicated the
difficulty in many cases of correct diagnosis owing to the absence
of specific criteria. Professor H. G. Chpaman and Dr. S. A.
Smith of Sydney, who were the principal experts in charge of
the Broken Hill investigation, gave much valuable evidence
before the Commission in Sydney, and they both particularly
emphasized their views that the clinical picture placed before
them by the Commission, gathered from previous evidence, was
not to them convincing that the industrial cases at Port Pirie
were specifically caused by lead. When questioned regarding
the possibility of carbon monoxide, they said that in the absence
of lead colic in many cases as a predominant symptom and the
presence in a large number of cases of symptoms and signs
of neurasthenia, the cases might possibly be carbon monoxide
instead of lead. They .indicated that they could give no
definite finding unless they were able, preferably on the spot,
to examine a sufficient number of cases, and to make examina-
tions also of the conditions under which the men worked. These
two gentlemen who, I think, can be regarded as two of the
leading experts on these matters in Australia, and who also
have a world-wide reputation in connection with their know-
ledge of industrial diseases, had the opportunity of examining
29 men at Port Pirie, and of closely investigating conditions
of work. Their evidence given at Port Pirie after the examina-
tions had been made, was, firstly, that, in their opinion, only
seven eases were undoubted cases of lead poisoning, that three
were carbon monoxide poisoning cases, that three were doubt-
ful and should be referred to hospital for further observation,
that four were then free of any disease from which they might
have been suffering, and that a number were suffering from
diseases unconnected with their employment. Dr. O. M. Moulden,
who has been examining all, or nearly all, the cases at present
receiving compensation, and who has been doing this on behalf
of the B.H.A.S. Proprietary, Limited, reported in his evidence
given last week that of 97 cases 27 only were un-
doubted eases of lead poisoning, 53 cases were of neurasthenic
type, of which the causation was, in his opinion, carbon
monoxide, six were now well, having recovered from any disease
from which they may have been suffering, and 12 were suffering
from diseases unconnected with their employment. On the
suggestion of Mr. Commissioner Robinette, agreed to
unanimously by the other members of the Commission, further
tests were carried out last week at Port Pirie by the Chairman
as a medical man under the oversight of Mr. Commissioner
Robinette, representing the employees, and in the presence of
one or more of the local medical men, all of them being present
at one time or another, and as the result of these tests, which
were made in order to ascertain the percentage saturation of
carbon monoxide in the blood of men working on the plant,
evidence was educed of the presence of carbon monoxide in a
number of working places, supporting the evidence of a similar
character given by Dr. Moulden as the result of earlier tests.
It seems to me that now we have an explanation, namely, carbon
monoxide poisoning, for a considerable number of cases amongst


the men of comparatively short periods of employment, and
further an explanation, at least partial, of the large number
of cases occurring amongst foreigners, particularly Southern
Europeans, of short periods of employment, which may be
caused by the fact that they have not become in any way
tolerant to the inhalation of small quantities of carbon monoxide
during their eight hours of work each day. I would now like to
read to you a very clear summing up of the clinical picture
at Port Pirie as given by Dr. S. A. Smith in his evidence.
[Dr. Smith’s evidence read, qs. 2164—2168.]? —The clinical
picture drawn in what you have read is one which might be got
in any factory or institution where owing to defective ventila-
tion the quantity of oxygen necessary for health is not provided.
There is nothing specific, although there can be no doubt that
carbon monoxide must occur where there is incomplete com-
bustion; but according to such an authority as Sir Thomas
Oliver very little is known of the effects of the inhalation of
carbon monoxide in minute doses over a long period, and much
more investigation is required before anything definite can be
pronounced in that matter.
2353. I will read further extracts from the evidence of Dr.
Smith. [Questions and answers 2169—2175 read.] That was
the general clinical picture given by Dr. Smith. It would, of
course, be possible to elaborate this brief summary of the
investigations of the Commission since you gave your previous
evidence, and perhaps my fellow Commissioners will later
bring out other points which I may have missed or have not
mentioned. The importance of the Commission’s work to the
future both of health of the employees at Port Pirie, and
to the health of the industry itself is so great and so evident
that it is unnecessary for me to more than mention it, but I
have gone to some length in placing before you some of the
facts which we have educed recently in order to enable me to
ask you if you would give the Commission the benefit of your
comments and views and suggestions. I should have mentioned
earlier that after the recent examinations last week of men
in their working places at the smelters local medical men were
recalled. They all agreed that the evidence was clear proof
of the presence of carbon monoxide in a number of working
places, and that this undoubtedly, in their opinion, would have
x definite influence upon the character of industrial disease
being incurred at Port Pirie. Further, they were unanimously
of opinion that expert assistance was most desirable to assist
them as general practitioners in the diagnosis of the cases
of industrial disease in such a centre as Port Pirie. Indeed,
one of the senior men gave it as his strong opinion that the
decision should be made by an expert body of medical men
on all cases of suspected industrial disease in such a centre. It
has occurred to me to be possibly better to have made a con-
nected statement of this sort for your information, and I hand
you herewith, a copy of this statement and should be glad if
you would comment on it for the information of the Commis-
sion, or if you so wish I am prepared to ask specific questions
on the subject matter of this statement. Realising, as the
Commission does, the extipme importance of the subject to all
concerned, and the responsibility resting upon yourself as the
Medical Referee in many cases sent from Port Pirie, we are
most anxious to have your further assistance in this matter,
and would be glad if you will give us your views? —Prom the
fact that carbon monoxide is one of the best known and most
prolific sources of industrial poisoning, more particularly in
mines and where blast furnaces are in operation, it is reasonable
to assume that carbon monoxide in certain proportions would
be present in the air of the smelting works at Port Pirie.
It is difficult, however, to realise that if for many years cases
of carbon monoxide poisoning have occurred there that they do
not appear to have been recognised. I make that statement only
on what is before me. I do not know whether cases of carbon
monoxide poisoning have been recognised there or not.
2354. You may take it definitely that they have not been
recognised or reported?—ln regard to the diagnosis of carbon
monoxide poisoning in acute cases there should be no difficulty
whatever with a knowledge of the location. Such poisoning is
very sudden in onset as a rule and the victim of it is rendered
powerless. He falls down and he is not in many cases even
able to call out. In sub-acute cases, if I may use a very loose ■
term, one probably gets symptoms of lack of oxygen, such as
dizziness, headache, vomiting, and possibly epigastric pain.
These symptoms, however, are common to a great many other
diseases and would not be pathognomonic of carbon monoxide
poisoning. As to chronic cases, that is the absorption of very
minute quantities of carbon monoxide over a long period,
opinions amongst medical men differ very considerably in regard:
to the recognition of symptoms. Sir Thomas Oliver, as I
already remarked, goes so far as to say very little is known,
and much more investigation is required before anything
definite can be pronounced in the matter. The 1923 edition
of ‘ ‘ Industrial Hygiene and Medicine, ’ ’ by Hope, Hanna, and
Stallybrass, quotes him as saying “We are not yet sufficiently
familiar with the effects of inhalation of carbon monoxide in
minute doses carried on over a long period. ’ ’
2355. From that would one gather that Sir Thomas Oliver
considers there are probably some sequelae or that there are
no sequelae?—l do not think Sir Thomas Oliver would hold
that there are no sequelae, but that they are not definitely
and absolutely pathognomonic. The picture of carbon monoxide
poisoning which has been presented to you is really a picture
of ill health. It is not like a case of lead poisoning. There
you have a lead industry and the occurrence of lead colic and
a lead line, which it would be very difficult to mistake. There is
nothing in relation to chronic carbon monoxide poisoning from
what you can say there are fixed symptoms by which you can-
not mistake the general malaise and muscular weakness. They
would apply to anybody living under unhygi-nic conditions.
2356. By the Chairman —With evidence of the repeated
absorption of carbon monoxide the deduction would be more
or less pointed?—Yes, though it is rather begging the question.
What would be equally important would be evidence as to the
condition of the men before they were exposed to carbon
monoxide. In my opinion, medical examination is most essen-
tial where there is suspicion of carbon monoxide poisoning.
From the authorities I have read, I could not state the signs
and symptoms of poisoning by minute doses of carbon monoxide
spread over a long period definitely enough to be sure that they
are pathognomonic of carbon monoxide poisoning, because the
picture presented by such poisoning is common to a great many
other diseases.
2357. Are they also indicative of lead as well as of carbon
monoxide?—Some of them. The picture as between lead and
carbon monoxide, however, is like the difference between, for
example, a water color and an oil painting. In lead you have
colic, which you do not get as a result of carbon monoxide, as
far as I know, nor do you get the blue line; but if a person’s
vital energy or power of resistance was lowered by the long
breathing of impure air, more particularly carbon monoxide,
he would be more susceptible in my opinion to the absorption of
lead. In other words, if a person’s vital energy generally and
power of resistance to disease are lowered, he would be more
likely to absorb lead.
2358. By Mr. Pearson —That means, broadly, that his tolera-
tion would be lessened by hi s condition of health?—l would
have no hesitation in saying that.
2359. By Mr. Gepp —lf there are definite places on the plant
where, by regular observation, it is found that for eight hours
there is up to 10 and more per cent, of saturation of the blood
with carbon monoxide, if a man subject to that saturation
came before you for examination and there is no specific
evidence of lead poisoning, or the blood picture is not helpful,
but you found a very definite neurasthenic type of case, knowing
the man’s history and having his blood picture before you,
would you go so far as to say there is perhaps more proof of
carbon monoxide poisoning than anything else you know?—
I would not like to express an opinion on a supposititious case.
The symptoms of chronic carbon monoxide poisoning are very
vague, and would apply to a great many other diseases. There
is one other observation I would like to make. It is that
from experiments made on the lower animals in regard to
carbon monoxide poisoning, it is clear that they become •


tolerant after a while. Naismith and Graham experimented on
guinea pigs and it was shown that after absorbing carbon
monoxi e tie guinea pig, after a long period, was able to
produce more red blood cells for oxygen carying purposes, and
so increased its power of carrying oxygen. The Chief Inspector
of Factories in England in 1923 had reported to him 56 cases
of carbon monoxide poisoning, of which 18 were fatal. It
would help very materially in giving evidence if one had
statistics showing definitely what has happened at Port Pirie.
It is reasonable to assume there is carbon monoxide there, as it
is to be found in practically every factory which uses carbona-
ceous material for combustion. Colorimetric tests from a purely
scientific standpoint are rough, as you are depending on the
comparison of colors in various grades.
2360. Recent literature on the subject seems to show that the
effects of small quantities of carbon monoxide over long periods
may be worse than the effects of large quantities over a short
period?—l would not agree with that, as the effect of large
quantities over a short period is fatal. The first question which
occurs to me in relation to Port Pirie is, why has carbon
monoxide poisoning not been recognised in works that have been
in existence so long, seeing that for so many years it has been
recognised as such a prolific source of poisoning in different
industries? The importance of inter-current disease on the
question of carbon monoxide is very significant. If the vital
energy and resistance of a workman is lowered he is more liable
to inter-current diseases and toxaemias of various kinds, includ-
ing lead; but because a particular patient, who may be suffering
from lead, has unmistakably a picture of another disease, that
is no evidence that he has not got lead poisoning or has not
had it. A man might go before a referee who has more or
less recovered from whatever he was suffering from, and the
picture as got from his clinical history might be an un-
mistakable picture of lead. Further examination might show
that he has not only got lead, but something else besides,
but from the presence of the other symptoms it is not to be
held in any shape or form that hef was not suffering from lead.
It is possible to be suffering from a multitude of ailments
and to have lead as well. The .greater the number of things
a man is suffering from the more liability there is of his having
lead as his resistance is lowered. If a man is suffering from
some disease which lowers his vitality and he becomes leaded,
it might be said that that man has never had lead, but that
the symptoms are due to the other disease. In other words,
a man might be leaded and suffering from other diseases at
the same time.
2361. Supposing a man had had lead and did not have
it when he came before you, what would you say about it? —
If the workman has suffered from the effects of lead and is
suffering from the sequelae I would uphold his appeal. If he
has not suffered from the effects of lead I would turn him down.
2362. By the Chairman —In your opinion the effects of lead
can be treated and cured without leaving permanent damage
to the body?—Yes, provided that is has not gone too far.
2363. By Mr. Gepp —lf in your opinion there is chronic
carbon monoxide poisoning at the works, should it or should
it not be a disease under the Workmen’s Compensation Act? —
If it is shown clearly to be a hazard, it should undoubtedly
be made a disease under the Act.
2364. In that case what criteria would you define? Would
you make it necessary before a certificate for carbon monoxide
poisoning of the chronic type is given that some proof, such
as a blood test, should be necessary?—l doubt whether any
criteria could be made for the chronic type. It would be
very loose. It might be opening the 'door. The difficulties
at Port Pirie are apparently fairly great.
2365. By Mr. Eohinette —By opening the door do you mean
opening the door to the employers to dodge their responsibilities
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act? —No; opening the i
door to all kinds of difficulties.
2366. What I mentioned would be one of the difficulties? —
The difficulty of definite and positive diagnosis is what I was <
referring to. *
2367. By Mr. Gepp —ls it your opinion that, theoretically, 1
there is no argument that chronic carbon monoxide poisoning 1
should be a compensable disease? —Before that could be said, i
i I think it is necessary to show first of all that there is a risk
and a good deal of risk. If it can be shown that there is
» a certain quantity of carbon monoxide in the air the men
breathe, and that as a result there have been a number of cases
of carbon monoxide poisoning, then I think it should be a
compensable disease. In the absence of those two factors Ido
not think that that could be said.
2368. Theoretically, if there is proof that carbon monoxide
is inevitably there, the difficulty I foresee is the criteria by
which these cases are going to be judged. How could the
position possibly be protected from the point of view of the
Company? Supposing this Commission says that in our opinion,
chronic carbon monoxide poisoning should, under proper pre-
cautions, be compensable, what precautions would you suggest
should be taken? lam inclined to believe that more investiga-
tion on proper lines is necesary before there could be obtained
definite criteria by which it could be certified beyond doubt
that a man has suffered from chronic carbon monoxide poison-
ing.
2369. If it could be tied up specifically to a clear and logical
statement by medical men that a person has suffered from
chronic carbon monoxide poisoning, that should be acceptable
both to the company and to the men? —It should be, but there
would be a great many cases in which there would be doubt,
2370. Are there any other comments you wish to make?—
I have been given to understand that the average service of
foreigners at the Port Pirie smelters is somewhere about 12
months. The fact that a large percentage of the reported cases
are foreigners is, to my mind, strong evidence that men do be-
come tolerant, and in the first 12 months they probably have not
become tolerant either to lead or carbon monoxide. In the case
of lead they have not learned to take precautions which other
men have, and in the ease of carbon monoxide they have not
become tolerant. If there has been carbon monoxide
present in lethal quantities there should be evidence of gassing,
of men falling off stages, and so on, as has taken place all
over the world. If there have been acute cases and they have
not been recognised it is rather extraordinary.
2371. Would it not be rather dangerous to look for such
signs and symptoms in chronic cases —say after the effects of
the gas have been going on for 12 months—a s are diagnostic
of acute cases of carbon monoxide poisoning?—The acute case
is absolutely unmistakable.
2372. And the others may not be even of the same symptoms?
—That is so, and in saying exactly what are the sequelae of
carbon monoxide poisoning is where the medical profession
generally comes, as it were, to the parting of the ways. A
great deal more of experimental and research -work must take
place before a definite opinion can be given,
2373. We have consistent evidence from Professor H. G.
Chapman, Dr. S. A. Smith, and Dr. O. M. Moulden, which
indicates the unreliability of the results of blood tests as
applied to lead diagnosis. They point out as a result of their
experiments that the pictures are plus and minus all the time,
and they feel that the blood tests are unreliable?—l think
everyone would agree on that, but they are of great and distinct
advantage if you come to making a- comparison or differential
diagnosis between carbon monoxide and lead. There is evidence
that there are no basophiles in the ease of carbon monoxide
poisoning. If you have basophilia it is reasonable to assume
in the absence of other symptoms- that you have not got carbon
monoxide poisoning.
2374. The Workmen’s Compensation Act at present is
‘designed to provide monetary compensation for persons injured
in the ordinary course of their employment. In your opinion,
would it be a good thing if the law took cognisance of the
matter of supervising the treatment of people injured as well
as of their compensation?—l should say it would be a distinct
advantage in the interests of the men and the industry to make
treatment compulsory.
2375. At Broken Hill the Medical Board has the power of
calling up men who are being compensated from time to time
for examination, also the power of supervising the treatment
they are obtaining. There is at present no organisation of
that kind at Port Pirie. Do you thnk it would be advisable
if it could be arranged?—ln principle, yes; but in detail it


would be difficult. I do not know what the relations are be-
tween the various medical men there, or who specialises in any
particular thing. There might difficulty in a practitioner
being supervised in his treatment of a patient by somebody
else. If a medical man is recognised as qualified he is expected
to have reasonable knowledge of his profession and to be able
to treat an ordinary case, such as a case of lead poisoning,
which is not difficult to treat. Intervention by somebody who
would go there and say, “Do this, that, or the other,” would
have a tendency to create strained relations between the super-
vised and the supervisor.
2376. Personally I believe that the Broken Hill method of
having an independent Government man, who is an expert in
industrial hygiene and indstrial diseases, together with two
others, one of whom is the representative of the employers
and the other the representative of the workmen, who all become
expert in the particular type or types of disease wdiich may
be incurred in a particular area, is undoubtedly a sound and
good method of helping to fight against these troubles. When
you previously gave evidence before this Commission you felt
that there were certain difficulties in regard to that. We have
since then asked quite a number of people, and I think they
almost without exception favor an expert board. Have you
had any further thought on that matter and do you think such
a method at Port Pirie would be definitely an advantage to
both sides in view 7 of the unanimous statement of the medical
men?—l would not care to express an opinion on the question.
I have no knowledge of it, but if you have evidence that it is
beneficial in other parts one w'ould have to accept that in the
absence of any evidence to the contrary.
2377. By Mr. Robinette —You have read the evidence of
Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith? —I scanned it.
2378. Do you think they were competent to give diagnosis
such as those produced as a result of spending only a few days
at Port Pirie and having only the clinical histories obtained
from the company’s doctor, and not the histories from the
patient’s private doctors? —That is a difficult thing on wdiich
to express an opinion, yes, or no, without knowing the eases
and the nature of them. I prefer not to crticise the work of
other professional men, and it would not be of much help to
you one w 7 ay or the other.
2379. If you were sent up there do you think it would be
competent for you to diagnose 29 cases in about two days on
receiving only the clinical histories from the company s doctor
and not from the men’s doctors, who had probably treated
them for five or six monhts? —Personally I do not work very
quickly, and would probably take longer than very rapid experts
to go through 29 cases, and there may be people who would
take longer than I w r ould.
2380. By Mr. Gepp —Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith have
had most extensive experience in regard to industrial diseases?
—I do not know how long they spent per man and various other
details.
2381. By Mr. Robinette —In diagnosing cases are you guided
to a large extent by the clinical histories you receive from
other medical practitioners?—Yes, I always get all the informa-
tion I can in the way of notes from the certifying practitioner,
the man’s medical attendant, and all the evidence I can from
the man who has refused to give a certificate. I get evidence
from the patient himself in the presence of a representative of
the company and in the presence of a representative of the
man, sometimes a lawyer and sometimes a union representathe,
in regard to wdiere he has worked, how long, the nature of
the occupation, and so on. After I have all that information,
I make an independent examination and give an independent
opinion as a result of -such examination, and of urine tests
and blood tests, made by an independent expert in such matters.
2382. If you had been conducting an examination such as
that made by Professor Chapman and Dr. Smith at Port Pirie,
would you have deemed it advisable to consult the private
practitioners? —I would like to get all the information I could
bearing on any case.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
Tuesday, June 30 th, 1925, at 2.15 p.m.
[At Parliament House, Adelaide.J
Present —
Dr. K. E. Moore (Chairman.)
Mr. H. W. Gepp.
Mr. J. L. Pearson.
Mr. W. Eobinette.
HENEY ST. JOHN SOMEESET was recalled and further
examined.
2383. By Mr. Gepp—ln committee this morning the question
of the suppression or elimination of dust and methods in con-
nection therewith were being discussed, and mention was made
of the roads within the smelters. Will you tell the Commission
the position with regard to those roads? —Some two or three
years ago we considered the question of concreting the main
arteries of traffic throughout the works. Owing to the nature
of the traffic it would be necessary to heavily reinforce any
concrete put in on the roads, and estimates made by Mr. Dibdin
showed that the cost would be so excessively heavy that we
gave up all idea at that time of doing it. Since then, in the
endeavour to keep down dust, we have been going in for a
regular system of watering down, and although I know the roads
within the works, particularly in wet weather, look very bad,
I am not, however, sure that from the dust point of view
absolutely they are not equal w r hen kept wetted to what concrete
roads would be. In the summer time we have hot dry winds and
it would be necessary, in the case of a concrete road, with
carts constantly passing over it, to wet the road continually if
dust suppression were to be obtained in respect to it. A smooth
hard surface like concrete would dry under Port Pirie summer
conditions in a few minutes, and on a windy day any dust
which had fallen from the drays passing over would be im-
mediately taken into the air. If the roads are wetted in the
condition in which they are now they certainly hold the water,
and with many fewer wettings it is possible to keep dust from
rising badly. Ido not think it is possible to keep it from rising
entirely under our present system of transport. The condition
of the roads at present is due to the exceedingly heavy dray
traffic, particularly in the carriage of Eisdon residues and coal,
mainly the latter, from the wdiarf front to the reserve at the far
side of the works. We are altering the wharf front at present,
and in a comparatively short space of time we hope to do
aw r ay entirely with the heavy carting of those materials from
the wharf front, making our stock heaps on the wharf front
rather than behind the works. When that happens we will be able
to get much cleaner surfaces on the roads than we have now,
and they hold the water sufficiently long to make it practicable
to keep them w r etted in summer time.
2384. Would it be possible to do a certain amount of road
construction of an arterial nature, or is that not of much use on
account of the amount of diversion of traffic which you have?
-—The main part of our traffic is along definite lines, but im-
mediately alongside those main lines we have spaces that need
watering down just as much as the roads need it. These
spaces we do water down at present. If w r e w 7 ere to con-
crete the roads and these open spaces the cost would be heavy
indeed, so heavy, I think, as to put the idea out of court
altogether. The roads at present do get metalled, but dray
traffic is about the worst for cutting up metal roads, because
of the slight movement of wheels from one piece of stone to
another, which shakes the road as the dray goes along and
gradually disintegrates it.
2385. By Mr. Robinette —Have you considered the question
of macadamised roads? —Yes.
2386. Have you considered tarred macadamised roads? —No.
I would be quite willing to consider tarring a section.
2387. Have you any estimate of the cost of procuring stone
from Mount Ferguson? —No. Y T ou would probably know that
from the town council’s operations.
2388. It is 6s. Bd. a yard. Would you consider that expensive
for roadmaking?—No.
2389. Would it be practicable to improve your roads con-
siderably if it could be procured at ss. a yard, which I think


it could be? —I think so. I have not had experience of Mount
Ferguson stone on roads, but from its appearance it should be
quite good stuff.
2390. You knoAV some of the roads in Port Pirie are
constructed of Mount Ferguson stone. From your obserA T ation
are they better roads than those previously made in Pirie? —
I believe they are comparatively new yet.
2391. The piece of road from the Y.M.C.A. in David Street
has been down for 10 years to my knoAvledge, and has never
been repaired? —l knoAV it is quite good. I think you Avill
recognise that our traffic Avithin the works is really more intense
and much harder on road surfaces than what you Avould get
outside.
2392. Do you not think there Avould be less likelihood of dust
from macadam roads that are Avell made and tax paved?—
There should be if the tar would stand all right. I am willing
to put a trial section down.
2393. By the Chairman— Do you think a macadamised road
without tar Avould be better than a macadam road with tar, if
tar would present the same surface as concrete and dry more
rapidly?—As a rule, in summer time tar gets almost sticky
and Avould probably hold dust better than a concrete surface.
2394. By Mr. Robinette — In summer your roads require
Avatering down three or four times in the middle of the day.
Do you not think it would be easier to Avater down tarred
macadamised roads and that it Avould be more effective?—lt
Avould take less water. If a road were tarred I think it would
hold the dust better, but any surface AA-hich dries very rapidly
would, in the Avinds Ave get up there, release dust immediately
the surface dried. As a matter of fact our roads cost us a
good deal in upkeep noAV owing to continual patching Avith metal,
and if we could get a satisfactory road at a reasonable cost
it Avould be worth our while to consider it. Our most difficult
places are the narroAV necks in the main route; for
past the corner of the refinery and through between the offices.
If Ave had to shut up these in order to put a high class road
doAvn it Avould be extremely difficult to carry on operations
while it Avas being done, as good roads take a considerable time
to put down properly.
2395. By Mr. Gepp —With regard to the question of allowing
men to relieve one another, say, 10 or 15 minutes before shifts, so
as to relieve change house congestion, have you had any ex-
perience? —That system was followed at the smelters years ago, I
am told, by Mr. Robertson, but the company had to put a stop to
it because where so large a number of men are concerned it was
impossible to see whether they observed the rules properly, and
men used to leave their work before their reliefs came. What
finally brought the matter to a head, I understand, was that dur-
ing the last few minutes of a shift there was trouble at the blast
furnaces due to a breakaway, and no men being there to cope
with it. They had all gone irrespective of the fact that their
reliefs had not turned up to take on their work. I understand
also that the experiment w r as tried in the mills of Broken Hill
companies and Avas given up for the same reason. At Cobar, on
the other hand, where we had very few men on the smelters,
it Avorked quite satisfactorily.
2396. By the Chairman —Whether it would work satisfactorily
would depend to a great extent to the nature of the job the men
Avere working on?—A thing like that is very difficult unless it
applies universally to everybody, for as soon as you giAe a
priA T ilege to one section others quite naturally ask for it, and
the fact that you point out the difficulty in the way of giving
it to them does not affect the position from their point of
vieAV at all, so it means certain dissatisfaction if a rule like
that is applied to one or several sections of the work and not
universally.
2397. By Mr. Gepp —That might not be an insuperable
difficulty if it were clearly understood betAveen the company,
the inspector, and the men’s representatives that the system
was being tried tentatively with the right of the company to
■withdraw it if there Avas any abuse? —From my experience
of the men I am absolutely certain they would not be satisfied
if one section had this privilege and they had not. They would
not lie down under what they considered a disadvantage. They
would demand the same privilege and it would lead to trouble.
In the case of the power house, where there is a regular number
of employees who are readily under observation at the change
of shifts, it might work quite well, but if I were to give it to
the power house men, and perhaps some other small section
like the underfloor of the blast furnaces, the top floor of the
blast furnaces, the Dwight & Lloyd plant, and the refinery
sections would ask for it, and point out with a certain amount
of justice that they had as much right to get the concession as
others, and it would put us in a very difficult position. It is
hardly practicable to do a thing like that unless it is done
universally, and previous experience, both at Port Pirie and
Broken Hill, has shown that it had to be stopped because it
w r as so much abused.
23'98. By Mr. Robinette —Supposing at the lead ring relief
came along, there would be no objection to men going to
change?—Theoretically there would not be, and we used to
do it at Cobar, but where there a large number of men it is
much more difficult to control. The shift bosses go towards
the end of the shift to write up their records. The shift boss
in charge of the lead ring would be away writing up his
records during the last few minutes of the shift and there would
be no direct control over the men. It would be necesary to
trust to them to observe the rules, and while I think a great
number of them would do it, there would be always some one
who would not, and would take advantage of the opportunity to
‘ ‘ duck off. ’ ’
2399. If a man let his lead ring get cold before relief you
would have your remedy, and that man would know what to
expect?—lt might not be necessary for them all to stay, and
the watchman woul d not know who was legitimately leaving
his work and who was illegitimately leaving it.
2400. But the position is not quite the same as before the
advent of the change house. Now, if a man is clocked off for
*4 o’clock he has. naturally to stay on the job, whereas if there ■
Avas no clock house it might be possible for him to knock off
at any time and get away?—There are some Avho Avould stay in
the change house if on the job. The experience at two mills
at Broken Hill and at Port Pirie some years ago when it
was tried, having shown that the system failed, would make
me very careful indeed before introducing it again.
2401. If bathing and changing \A r ere made compulsory, I pre-
sume you will agree that the men should be allowed a certain
amount of time, and not have to do it in their oivn time? —I
presume that every man when he leaves his work washes either
at the Avorks or at home, and it avouM simply be Avashing in one
specific place instead of at home or after work at one of the
taps. It does not really call for any more time out of a man’s
day, presuming that lie washes.
2402. With reference to the compensation of men who are*
eliminated from the industry on the ground that they are
susceptible, you are aware of the conditions operating
at Broken Hill?—Yes.
2403. Do you regard AAdiat is done there as unjust? —I think
it would be unjust if applied to Port Pirie, because, as I have
previously said, it is practically compensation for loss of em-
ployment, and in many cases men who have left our industry
after lead poisoning have not actually lost employment, because
they took work in other sections of industry at Port Pirie.
2404. Would not your point of view in regard to Port Pirie
apply equally to Broken Hill in the case of the surface men, Avho
would be in the same category as that in Avhich you place
smelter employees? —I had no experience of Broken Hill.
There would not be at Broken Hill the same avenues of em-
ployment Avhich there are outside the lead business in and
around Port Pirie.
2405. Have you read the Broken Hill legislation dealing
with the matter? —Yes.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.


Benefit.
Act
Permanent
and Total
Incapacity.
Death.
Weekly Rate during Total Incapacity.
1911
£
300
£
300
50% of average weekly earnings, with minimum of £1.
1918
400
400
50% of average weekly earnings with minimum of £1 10/- in the case of
a married man, and £1 in the case of a single man.
1919
500
400
50% of average weekly earnings, with minimum of £2 in the case of a
married man, and £1 10/- in the case of a single man.
1924
(15/1/25)
700
600
50% of average weekly earnings, plus 7/6 per week for each dependant
child under the age of 14 years —Maximum payment, £5.
APPENDICES.
APPENDIX A.
AUTHORITIES CONSULTED BY THE COMMISSION.
“ Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption,” Legge and Goadby.
Industrial Health,” Kober and Hayhurst.
‘ Lead Poisoning, Medico-legal Aspect,” Knocker.
Reports of the Technical Commission appointed to inquire into Industrial Diseases at Broken Hill, 1921 and 1922.
Report of New South Wales Board of Trade on use of White Lead, 1921.
Report of British Departmental Committee on Danger Attendant on Use of Lead Compounds, 1920.
Report on Methods of Dust Determination and Elimination in South African Mines, Western Australian Department
of Mines, 1924.
Reports of Chief Inspector of Factories, England, 1914-1919.
Report into Causes and Occurrences of Lead Poisoning at Port Pirie, 1910, by W. Ramsay Smith, D.Se., M. 8., F.R.S.,
1910.
Report of Royal Commission on Ventilation and Sanitation of Mines, Western Australia, 1905.
Report of British Departmental Commission on Use of Lead Paints, 1915.
“ Laws and Regulations relating to Lead Poisoning,” Stone, 1922.
Internationa] Labor Office Bulletins, Legislative series, 1923 —Austria 1., “ Lead and Lead Compounds.”
“ Recent Practice in Use of Self-contained Breathing Apparatus,” Smart, 1921.
“ Mine Gases and Ventilation,” Beard, 1916.
Report of Miners’ Phthisis Prevention Committee, South Africa, 1916.
Report of Inquiry into the Prevalence and Prevention of Lead Poisoning at Broken Hill Silver Lead Mines, 1903.
United States Bureau of Mines Bulletin 84, “ Metallurgical Smoke.”
United States Bureau of Mines Bulletin 150, “ The Pryro tannic acid Method for the Prevention of Carbon Monoxide
in the Blood and Air.”
Monograph on Industrial Chemistry, “ Lead,” Smythe, 1923.
Mining Review No. 41, South Australian Department of Mines, Description of Broken Hill Associated Smelters
Proprietary, Limited, Plant, 1924.
United States Public Health Bulletin No. 150, “Carbon Monoxide Literature.”
United States Department of Labor, Monthly Labor Review, “ Earliest Positive Signs of Lead Absorption.”
United States Bureau of Labor, Bulletin 141, ‘ Industrial Diseasease in Lead Smelting Plants”
Journal of Indv?inal Hyqienc : Vol. 1., Number 10, “ Blood Changes in Lead Workers.” Vol. 11., Number I, “ Carbon
Monoxide Poisoning in American Steel Works, &c.” Vol. 111., Numbers 3 and 4, “ Physiological Effects ot Automobile
Gas, &c.” Vol. VL, Number 3, “ Carbon Monoxide Hazard in Public Garages.” Vol. VI., Number 4, “ Lead Studies.”
Vol. 111., Number 3, “ Industrial Poisoning by Inhalation.” Vol. VII., Number 4. ‘ The Study of Punctate Basophilia in
Lead Workers.” t
Proceedings of Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Vols. 42 and 43.
APPENDIX B.
[Referred to as Exhibit 1, q. 307.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS PTY., LTD., PORT PIRIE.
Notice to Employees.
For the information and guidance of those employees whose work brings them into contact with lead, or lead bearing
materials, the following notes are set out: —
Lead does not enter the system through the pores of the skin. It can, in a great measure, be prevented by—
(lq Faying attention to cleanliness of hands, face, and teeth. The hands and face should be well cleaned before
food is eaten, and it is a wise practice to wash out the mouth.
(2) Never roll cigarettes or tobacco with hands contaminated with lead bearing materia'.,’
(3) Taking once or twice per week an aperient medicine, such as is available to all employees at the various
departmental shift bosses’ offices and the first-aid room.
(4) Making full use of the bathing facilities provided in the change house, where hot and cold water systems are
installed and lockers for storage of clothes.
H. St. J. SOMERSET, General Superintendent.
Port Pirie, May 16th, 1924.
Note. —This notice was also printed in Italian, Greek, and Maltese.
APPENDIX C.
[Referred to as Exhibit 3, q. 452.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS PROPRIETARY LIMITED, PORT PIRIE.
Workmen's Compensation Acts (South Australia),
Scale of Compensation.


Bgokoi HiLL Associated 3ouLtlrs Pty Ltd •PtArie. sft.
Lead 5(vi£LTe.RV fLow sheet




Six day a week men—
Men employed 12 months
11 “
Not Absent
MoreThan
(Days).
Holidays
on Full Pay
(Days).
12
“ 10 “
“ 9 “
1U
“ 8 “
“ 7 “
8
“ 6 “
under 6 months
Shiftmen employed 7 days per week—
Men employed 12 months
“ 11 “
Nil
14
“ 10 “
“ 9 “
“ 8 “
“ 7 “
“ 6 “
under 6 months
Nil
APPENDIX E.
[Referred to as Exhibit 5, q. 605.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS PROPRIETARY LIMITED, PORT PIRIE.
Attendance Bonus—Annual Holidays Granted on Full Pay.
September*'Std/’^^^^and^thereafter’/^f 11^110 * b ° nUSe ‘ h “ b “ n ado I ,te<i *° to the 12 ”»"«■»
Employees failing to reach the above standard will be granted holiday leave on the above scale, less two days leave
for every day s absence in addition to the number of days allowed by the above standards.
Employees discharged through no fault of their own will be paid attendance bonus for the period worked if such period
is six months or over. If only part of a month is worked, it will not be counted.
Employees wishing to get time off must apply for leave of absence. All time taken off by employees without asking
leave will be counted as time and a half —for the purposes only of the attendance bonus.
The holiday leave on full pay will not count as “ absence.”
Where overtime is worked the employee will be credited with the overtime hours worked, and the total overtime so
worked by the employee during the bonus period will be divided by eight, and the resulting number of shifts credited to his
attendance. All time worked by six day a week men on Sundays will be also credited in the same way. Absence through
sickness or accident, if doctor’s certificate is produced, is not counted against Attendance Bonus.
Men absent through sickness or accident must produce to the Time Office a doctor’s certificate for the time aw'ay
Dr. Leitch, where required, will supply the necessary certificate to employees free of charge. The duty rests upon the
employee to produce these certificates, otherwise the time he is away will be counted against him as lf absence.” Absence
representing Union or Arbitration Court or Compulsory Conference in any matter in which the Company has a direct interest
is not counted against Attendance Bonus.
When leave is given in payment of the Attendance Bonus the employees must take his leave at a time arranged to suit
the requirements of the works, but every effort w r ill be made to suit his convenience. Any employee who fails to earn the
Attendance Bonus, but thinks the special circumstances of his case iustify granting him a concession, has the right to place
the facts before the Superintendent of his department, and the Superintendent will submit the ease to the General Manager
for his personal decision.
APPENDIX F.
[Referred to as Exhibit 6, q. 829.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS ACCIDENT FUND, PORT PIRIE.
General Information.
The Fund was established at the end of September, 1917, and from that date until the 11th June, 1919, only accident
claims were paid, the rate being £2 per week, and the subscription 6d. per member per week, with a pound for pound subsidy
by the company.
In June, 1919. the trustees decided to recognise claims for disability due to sickness (including lead cases), and the
first claims under this heading were passed for payment on 30/6/19, the rate of benefit being £1 per week.
The followin'! sets out the various alterations made in benefits. &c., since the above date ;
3(1/3/20 —Sick benefit raised to £1 ss. per week for 13 weeks’ incapacity.
16/7/20 —Sick benefit increased to 30s. per week.
21/3/21 —-Accident pay reduced to £l.
9/3/22 —Sick benefit increased to £2 per week for 13 Meeks and £1 per week for a further 13 M r eeks.
19/3/23 —Payment of lead cases as a special section at £1 per week for total period of 52 weeks approved. If
man compounded by com pan/ 7 before 52 weeks expires, the remainder, which would have been paid
to him if he -were off 52 weeks, to be paid as a lump sum.
Payment to Port Pirie Hospital of 30s. per week for maintenance of members whilst in that institution.
9/7/23 —-Contributions increased to 9d. per member per week, with pound for pound subsidy by the company.
26/3/24 —Probationary period fixed so that members cannot receive sick benefit in respect of an illness, the
commencing date of m Inch is less than three months from the date of mining the Sick Fund.
Lump sum payments to lead cases cancelled, so that no further payment is made after a man is
compounded by the company.
14/8/24 —Payments to Port Pirie Hospital discontinued.
28/8/24 —Accident pay reduced to 15s. per week. Sick pay (other than lead) reduced to £1 15s. per week:
2/10/24 —Members’ contributions raised to Is. per M-eek, the company's subscription remaining at 9d. per member
per week.
Industrial sickness benefit reduced to 15s. per week.
11/3/25 —The present contributions to the Fund by employees and the company are Is. and 9d. per member per
week respectively.


APPENDIX G.
[Referred to as Exhibit 8, q. 961.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS CO-OPERATIVE COUNCIL.
Important Notice.
To all Employees of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, and the Co-operative Store.
DENTAL CLINIC.
Ballot to be undertaken throughout the Works on sth May, 1925, on proposal to establish here a Clinic to give Dental Treatment
to Employees, etc., at extremely Low Rates as set out below.
Good or bad teeth frequently spell the difference between good or bad health respectively, and investigation has shown
that a very large proportion of human ailments are due to neglect of the teeth. The importance of dental treatment has
long been recognised by the Electrolytic Zinc. Co’s Co-operative Council, and that Council now controls a modern Dental
Clinic which provides treatment at a minimum cost to the E. Z. Coy. employees. Our delegates (Messrs. D. R. Gummow
and D M Brackenridge) who visited Risdon, speak in the highest terms of the work done there by the Dental Clinic, and
have strongly recommended that a similar institution should be established here for the B.H.A.S. employees.
Following upon the adoption of the delegates’ report and recommendations, the matter was placed by the Council
before the Company, which has now expressed its willingness to co-operate in establishing a Dental Clinic on the Works,
and has signified its interest in the health of employees by readily responding to the requests made by the Council as
under :
The Company is agreeable to —
(a) Provide, at the Company’s expense, all initial equipment.
( b) Provide, at the Company’s expense, accommodation on the Works for the Dental Surgery.
(c) Subsidise pound for pound the suggested employees’ contribution of threepence per member per week.
A thorough investigation of the matter by the Council reveals the fact that the contributions of employees and the
Company would probably cover only the cost of staff, and in order that any extra expenses for material, etc., might be met,
the following small charges for service would be made :
Plates —Full upper and lower .. .. • • 10/0
Upper or lower .. .. • • • • 0/0
Part plate .. ■ • • • • • 2/6
Fillings —Gold .. .. .. .. 7/6
Enamel or amalgam . .. 1/3
Extractions .. .. .. .. Free
Members having an appointment with the Dentist would have no difficulty in obtaining leave from their Foreman, but
the time lost would, of course, be borne by the member himself. However, the loss would be so small as to be almost
nCgl The'successful conduct and maintenance of a Dental Clinic is mainly a matter of finance. It is not possible to provide
a cheap and adequate service unless at least 50 per cent, of the B.H.A.S. and Co-operative Store employees agree, on a
ballot to join the Clinic and undertake to contribute thereto during the term of their employment with the Company. In
connection with the running of the Clinic, the Council requires sufficient revenue to meet the cost of Dentists, Nurses, &c.,
and with a membership of not less than half the present employees, an excellent Dental Clinic, providing a cheap service,
can be maintained Every employee at Risdon is a member of the Clinic, with the result that treatment is
given at exceptionally low rates. Every employee there is able to have dental attention whenever he requires it, as the
charges are easily within the region of his income. .
The Co-operative Council is unanimous in recommending this proposed new activity to employees, and trusts that a
vote overwhelmingly in support of its establishment here will be recorded. The need for an institution of this kind has
been completely proved at Risdon, and there is every reason to believe that the need is just as great here It is a fact that,
since the Risdon Clinic has been operating, the general health of E.Z. Coy. workers has vastly improved .
On the sth May next, when the ballot will be conducted, employees will have an opportunity of obtaining for them-
selves and all future workers cheap and efficient dental treatment by signing an authority as follows .
“ I hereby agree to join the B.H.A.S. Dental Clinic, and to be bound by the rules thereof, and I authorise rhe
“ Company to deduct from my wages each fortnight my contribution to the Clinic at the rate of 3d. per week or part
“fflof" Thisauthority is irrevocable during the term of my employment with the B.H.A.S. Pty. Ltd.”
Signature
No
If the Dental Clinic is formed, those who sign the foregoing will, if still in the Company’s employment, become
automatically members of the Dental CLINIC, and entitled to Dental treatment as soon as the initial steps have been taken
to engage the necessary staff. Employees who do not signify agreement to join when the ballot is taken, but who join
subsequently, will lose thereby precedence, and from the treatment point of view will be regarded ap new employees If
an employee is absent sick, or on leave, at the time the ballot is taken, he will be admitted as an original member provided
he signs an authority within two days from returning to work. It is optional whether or not you join and there is no
preliminary medical examination for membership as exists with your Sickness and Accident Fund, but if you do not join
till after its establishment, it will still be necessary to pay your contribution as from the date of formation, or an amount
equivalent to 12 months’ subscription, whichever is the lesser. Wives and children of employees are at present treated at
Risdon on Saturday mornings, and if at all possible, your Council will make a similar arrangement here when the bulk of
the urgent work has been overtaken. .
If you avree with the wisdom of the establishment of a Dental Clinic, and you have before you the remarkable results
achieved at Risdon, then you will support it, not only by your vote, but by your influence. The affirmative vote of not
less than half the employees is required to justify its establishment, and every man who is prepared to make some little
sacrifice for himself and for the benefit of his colleagues, will vote in its favor at the ba lot on sth May Do not forget
that, by voting against the establishment of the Clinic, you may be helping to deprive other men of benefit of which they
The B.H.A.S. Co-operative Council will be extremely disappointed if a substantial vote in favor of the Clinic is not
recorded
For The B.H.A.S. Co-operative Council,
R. A. BURGOYNE (Chairman).
J. L. POLMEAR (Vice-Chairman).
W. H. JUDE (Secretary).
APPENDIX H.
[Referred to as Exhibit 11, q. 1114.]
THE BROKEN HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS ACCIDENT FUND, PORT PIRTE, 1/5/25.
Statement showing total number of claims in respect of lead poisoning, for which compensation has been paid, and
which have been admitted, for period of six years and two months ended 11/3/25, also the average absence per beneficiary
and benefits paid :
Number of claims • • ‘
Total time lost 25,545 days
Average time lost by each beneficiary Relays
Weekly benefits paid during the period (total) £3,b75 Bs. 9d.


100 %
and over.
90 % to
100 %
80 % to
90%
70 % to
80 %.
60 % to
70 %.
50 % to
60 %.
40 % to
50 %.
Average.
British (90 examined) ....
11
41
20
13
4
1
0/
/o
77-8
Greeks (138 examined) . ..
5
17
69
34
12
1
—
79-7
Maltese (21 examined) ....
—
4
10
3
3
1
—
80-3
Italians (19 examined) ....
—
1
8
6
3
1
—
79-3
Others (24 examined)
3
9
9
2
1
79-1
5
36
137
72
33
8
1
79-4
Nationality.
6,000,000
and over.
5,500,000 to
6,000,000.
5,000,000 to
5,500,000.
4,500,000 to
5,000,000.
4,000,000 to
4,500,000.
Average.
British
—
7
9
6
4,700,000
1
7
15
23
3
5,000,000
—
—
1
3
2
4,700,000
—
—
—
1
1
4,500,000
Other Nationalities
—
—
1
3
1
4,600,000
%
1
7
24
39
13
Nationality.
6,000,000
and over.
5,500,000 to
6,000,000.
5,000,000 to
5,500,000.
4,500,000 to
5,000,000.
4,000,000 to
4,500,000.
Average.
2
8
32
20
7
5,200,000
4
18
38
20
6
5,500,000
—
6
4
6
—
5,100,000
—
3
5
6
2
5,000,000
Other Nationalities
1
4
6
3
1
5,200,000
7
39
85
55
.6
—
Nationality.
Basophilic Degeneration.
Changes
other than
Basophilic
No
Abnormalities
Slight.
Moderate.
Extreme.
Degeneration
(Note I .
Observed.
12
7
5 (Note 2)
22
46
33
10
7
28
65
2
4
0
4
11
1
1
0
5
12
5
2
0
5
13
Ot/h.Gr IS a/tioii&litiGs
53
24
12
64
147
appendix j.
[Referred to as Exhibit 12, q. 1124.]
RECORDS OF 300 BLOOD EXAMINATIONS OF MEN WHO ARE OR WERE EMPLOYEES OF THE BROKEN
HILL ASSOCIATED SMELTERS.
The men were referred by their respective medical attendants to the Commonwealth Health Laboratory, Port Pirie,
where the examinations were performed.
Of examinations performed—
-92 were British
143 “ Greeks.
21 “ Maltese.
19 “ Italians.
25 “ of other nationalities.
Examinations performed were—
Estimation of haemoglobin percentage.
Red cell count. •
Examination of stained film.
Table I. —Haemoglobin.
Table 11. Red Cell Count of those in whose Blood Film Evidence of Basophilic Degeneration was
Observed.
Tablk lla. Red Cell Count of those in whose Blood Films no Evidence of Basophilic Degeneration was
Observed.
Table lll.—Examination of Stained Film.
Note i .—This includes polychromatophilia, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis, also proportional and morphological
variation of leucocytes. _ , j
Note 2. In one case numerous normoblasts were observed.


Industrial
History.
Sooial History.
Past Illnesses
Locality
From
Year
To
Year
No.
Mining Work.
Non-Mining
Work.
M.S.W.
Children alive dead
Wife died of
Father “
Mother “
Brothers “
Sisters “
Exposure to T.B.
Average tobacco
“ " C 2 H 5 OH
employed
in.
of
Years.
Metal Mined.
Surface Job.
Undergrd. Job.
appendix k.
[Referred to as Exhibit 16, qs. 1463 to 1554.]
CLINICAL CARD USED AT GOVERNMENT MEDICAL BUREAU, BROKEN HILL, N.S.W.
N° Date Age Birthplace Signature
Distinguishing Marks—
PRESENT Health—Symptoms and Duration—
General —-
Working cap. affected
Loss of weight
Night Sweats
“ Rheumatism ”
Frequent “Colds”
Respiratory —
Cough
Sputum
Dyspnoea
Blood
Haemoptysis
Pain in chest
Husky voice
Circulatory —
Palpitation
Prsccordial pain
Giddiness
Fainting
Swelling of legs
A Umentary —
Constipation
Indigestion
Vomiting
Colic
Diarrhoea
Appetite poor
Urinary —■
Frequency
Blood
Pain
Nturo Muscular —
Headache
Pareses
Fits
CLINICAL EXAMINATION-
General—
Unhealthy appear.
Alcoholic “
Pallor
Bad nutrition
“ hearing
“ sight
Pulse
Resp.
B.P. S. D.
Weight
Height
Expansion
Full inspir’n
Ciroul. and Alim.
Systems—
Thick’d vessels
Cyanosis
(Edema face
legs
Card, hypert.
“ dilation
“ arryth.
Bad teeth
Gingivitis
Pyorrhoea
Burton’s line
False line
Nasoph. unhealthy
Liver
Spleen enlarged
Nervous System—■
Pupils
L. reflex absent
A.
Pat. “
“ exaggd.
Elbow ” “
Sup. “ “
Babinski
Rhomberg
Abn. gait
Type of paresis
Type of paralysis
Type of wasting
Tremor
Abnormal Shape Thorax—
X-RAY EXAMINATION— Hilar fib. Hilar glds. L.M. P.B.M. Diaph. irreg. Thick’d pleura. Consol. Cav
Abnormal Pneumoconiosis T.B. Other conditions
Heart enlarged Central Aorta dilated
PATHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION — Sputum Wasserman
Blood— R.B.C.’s. Hb. C.I. W.B.C.’s.
Urine — Appearance Reaction S.G Alb. Sugar Pus Blood
FURTHER EXAMS.—
CLASS’N. DIAGNOSIS


appendix l.
[Referred to as Exhibit 18 (n 1619 I
INSTRUCTION ISSUED TOWORKMEN LTD.. WHITE LEAD.
_ Notice to Factory Operatives.
All employees niust am^e'atthe^krmTrnt^'r 8 cha " g " into a sait of overalls Provided by the company,
wiil, in future be required to stand aside for 15 minutes Me “ &rrivin g late
provided shall no't [“worn [ntside Cha “ 8e clothi " g . l>etorc startill -’ work, »" J <*o overalls
vide“for B t™p^‘i mMt be P ‘ aCed “ lOokerS d "*B working hours. The overalls must be hung outside on hooks pro-
'(‘n 111 US f >e % ' orn "'here there is dust, as in drawing stacks and in handling drv lead
Sl-BefoTenSnhl tenth room **** "° rk * ni S ht - antl the company will allow time lor this.
Fat in s- of mv • t i H room employees must scrub their hands, and particularly the finger nails
on the premises. " or bidden on any part of the factory except the lunch room, and alcoholic fiquor is‘forbidden
Smoking is forbidden during working hours.
TeXand ™ Zh~h “ if/ 'T® co , nditio [ lB are ca ™d out, there is no danger whatever,
leeth and mouth should be cleaned regularly night and morning
Av'oFdTe' ü b rotaSh„T * “ °' diffiCuity> to the W ” ks corrective, supplied free of charge.
who tn d elS k col b cf^rdT“.t g "° rk " re “ mrae " dad - “ d “Sht food, such a. milk, eggs, onions, is better for those
Above all —keep clean.
LEWIS BERGER & SONS (AUST ) LTD
Rhodes, November 27th, 1917. H. J. SuLOvaK. Works Superintendent.
APPENDIX M.
[Referred to as Exhibit 12, q. 1612.]
LEAD-POISONING.
Hints on the Prevention of Lead-poisoning fob those who Work with Lead.
The following advice is issued for the information and guidance of workmen at Lead-works Silver lead
Mines, and in trades and occupations which involve risk of lead-poisoning. Proprietors are requested
to be good enough to exhibit copies at conspicuous parts of their works. 4
Department of Public Health, W. G. ARMSTRONG, M. 8., D.Ph.,
T i , Sydney ’ * 923- . Director-General of Public Health.
,o h “ l,h unie “ 6reat care is tik “ by those wh ° are “p— *• of
How Lead Enters the Body.
r f h n e m^ al gains entry into the body through the air passages and the digestive canal and very occasionally through
j ,nT lead ' laden dust or eald fumes, the handling of food, cutting up tobacco or cigarette-making
with hands soiled by lead, are the commonest ways by which the poison enters the system. 6 8
Signs and Symptoms of Lead-poisoning.
Workers in lead may show a blue line along the edges of the gums. This serves as a sign that the person is or has been
exposed to the absorption of this metal, but is not a proof of lead-poisoning. The usual first symptoms which point to lead
acting injuriously on the system are constipation, colicky pains in the stomach, headache, and definite paleness of the skin
In a certain number of persons nervous derangements occur, and in chronic cases of poisoning serious organic diseases and
various forms of paralysis may appear. 6
Preventive Measures.
1. Lead fumes and lead-laden dust should be carriid away from the point where they are produced and not allowed
to get into the air breathed by the work people.
2. Scrub the hands thoroughly and rinse the mouth before eating; rinse the mouth before drinking; keep the teeth
clean and regularly brushed. & : p
3. All food, including drinking water, as well as the utensils used for food or drinking, should be carefully protected
from dust and fumes. A bubbling fountain is the safest method for supplying drinking water. ~ 1
4. Food should never be eaten at the work bench, or in any other place where lead dust or fumes are present.
5. Never begin work on an empty stomach.
6. No workman should smoke whilst working with lead.
7. Workmen should change into overalls before beginning work. The home clothes should be kept where they will
be protected from dust and fumes. A bath or shower should be taken after work to cleanse the hair and skin before putting
on the home clothes again. g
8. Experience has proved that persons who take alcohol are specially liable to be affected by lead.
9. Attention to general cleanliness of the body is very necessary. A bath should be taken daily.
10. The bowels should be regulated—use Epsom salts for this purpose. Take as much of it every day as will cause a
single daily action of the bowels. The following is a good wa*y to make up the medicine, and more or less of it should be
taken daily as may be found necessary :
Epsom salts 2 ounces.
Water a wine-bottle full.
Red pepper as much as is agreeable.
Take a wineglass full (or more or less as may be necessary to cause a single action of the bowels) in a tumbler of water on
getting up after sleeping, once every day.
11. There are some people who get rid of any lead which is absorbed into the body and who do not suffer harm from
it. There are others who feel ill or actually fall ill very soon after beginning to work with lead, and workmen who show
this personal susceptibility to the poison should not continue to work with lead, but should seek some other occupation.
12. If any signs or symptoms of lead-poisoning appear medical advice should be sought at once.


Industrial
History.
Occupation.
Age.
Duration
of Illness.
Colic.
General
Wasting.
! Extensor
Paresis
Pallor.
| Tremor.
.
eS
a
SB
S3
Remarks.
Years
33
Handling and
stacking; on
bin containing
lead dross on
top floor
21
3
months
+
+
+
+
Worked in fumes from “ slag
hoods.”
27
Bottom floor, 17
years
43
3
months
+
for years
+
+
+
Fumes from bag house made him
sick and had to go without
“ crib ” for few weeks before
sickness.
8
Ropp roasters, 5
years ; B & R
furnaces last 5
months
33
2
months
+
for 5 years
+
+
+
+
4
Feeding D & L
belt 10 months
43
4
weeks
* +
for years
+
+
+
—
—
Worked on and off since 14 years
of age. By trade brickmaker.
12
Roasters, zinc
plant, top floor;
pottery bottom
floor, 4 months
43
6
months
+
for years
+
+
+
+
5,300,000 red cells. Dizziness
while at work on top and
bottom floors.
11
Zinc plant, 5
years; refinery
Skinner furnace,
16 months ;
B & R furnaces,
14 months
47
6
weeks
+
since Nov.
1924
+
+
15
Roasters, zinc
plant; last 31
years D.L. belt
37
2
months
+
+
5,800,000 red cells. Had fit
unconsciousness when at work
1915. Off 14 days working
Hegler roasters.
Age.
1
Paresis.
Pallor.
Tremor.
Anaemia.
Industrial
History.
Remarks.
4
Years
58
+
+
25 years
Cardiac hypertrophy and emphysema
37
—
—
—
—
—
17 years
Epigastric tenderness; requires investigation
42
—
—
—
—
+
5 years
Abdominal tenderness ; requires investigation
40
—
—
—
+
+
12 years
Septic mouth, pyorrhoea ; requires investigation
40
_
—
—
+
+
15 years
Colic, but not since back from the war; B.P. 150 mm. Hy. ; no
61
_
_
+
4 vears
albumen ; aortic sound accentuated.
Cholecystitis
30
—
—
—
—
2} years
Py orrhoea and appendix.
33
—
—
+
+
+
7 months
Myx oedema.
33
—
—
+
+
—
5|- years
Albuminuria!?); hypothyroidism (?); nephritis.
52
—
—
—
—
—
2 years
5,500,000 red ; bottom and top floors ; not lead poisoning now ;
25
_
+
5 months
lit for work.
Appendicitis, appendectomy, 10 days ago.
27
—
—
+
—
8| months
Anaemia + (April); possibly acute CO poisoning.
49
—
—
—
—
2 years
5,300,000 red cells ; CO poisoning; fell in baghouse.
40
—
—
—
—
15 years
Colic years ago ; enlarged liver; blood per anum.
40
—
—
+
+
4 years
Subacute nephritis; oedema.
38
—
—
+
—
—
17 years
Advanced arterio sclerosis ; arthritis.
30
—
—
—
—
—
14 years
Fit for work.
32
. —
—
—
+
—
17 years
Colic years ago ; requires investigation.
27
—
—
—
—
—
16 months
Quite healthy; (?) influenza.
37
—
—
—
—
—
13 months
Gained weight since no work ; fit for work.
28
—
+
—
+
—
7 months
Encephalitis ; further investigation needed.
57
—
—
—
+
34 years
■
Arterio sclerosis with nephritis.
APPENDIX N.
[Referred to as Exhibit 21, q. 1692.]
NOTICE.
Men feeling unwell, having reason to believe that the indisposition is connected with their employment, must at once
report to the Foreman and also to the Medical Officer on his next visit.
The Medical Officer attends at the works. Any report made to the M.O. is confidential, will be treated as such, and
right treatment prescribed.
Failure to Speak Helps No One.
[Note. —The above notice is that issued to employees at the Works of the British Australian Lead Manufacturers
Proprietary, Cobarila, New South Wales].
APPENDIX 0.
Professor H. G. Chapman’s Notes of Clinical Examinations at Port Pirie.
POSITIVE CASES OP PLUMBISM.
NEGATIVE


Date of
Analysis.
Number and Location of Sample.
Carbon
Monoxide.
15/6/25
No. 1. Top floor of blast furnaces. Very little movement in the air. Sample taken over the
fender of blast furnace No. 5, which was down for barring. Charge about 7ft. down. CO
burning with blue flame—S0 2 coming off ; also white fumes, probably ZnO and PbO. Galvan-
ised iron covering removed from both sides of furnace.
Of
/o
Nil.
16/6/25
No. 2. Middle of top floor of blast furnaces, between No. 3 and No. 4 furnaces. Very littlemove-
ment in air.
Nil.
17/6/25
No. 3. Bottom floor of blast furnaces between slag tap hole and bullion moulding platform.
Nil.
South end of No. 1 furnace. Sample taken on platform over slag launders. Air still.
No. 2 furnace also working.
Nil.
18/6/25
No. 4. Floor of refinery between No. 1 and No. 2 retort furnaces. No. 1 working, and No. 2 down
for repairs. Wind, south-east. Air where sample taken, still.
Nil.
19/6/25
No. 5. Underneath shaking gear, north side of baghouse. South to south-east wind. Air still
where sample taken.
Nil-
2/7/25
No. 6. Fourth floor of Skinner Roasting furnace above the firebox. Air still where sample taken.
Nil.
2/7/25
No. 7. On floor near zinc pans opposite No. 3 refiner. Light N.W. wind, slight movement in air
Nil.
of refinery. Practically no fumes from refiner.
Nil.
2/7/25
No. 8. 110 feet south of eastern end of baghouse. Wind little west of south. S0 2 gas fairly
strong where sample taken.
Nil.
6/7/25
No. 9. Smelter baghouse. 50 feet north of baghouse opposite No. 6 chamber, the door of which
was opened at the commencement of collecting the sample, and remained open for two hours.
A south wind carried the gases from the open baghouse towards the sample bottle.
0-004
6/7/25
No. 10. Refinery. South of antimony dross furnaces. Between No. 5 copper softening furnace
and No. 5 antimony softening furnace. • South wind. Note. —Sample collected in 1 hour 40
minutes.
0-006
7/7/25
No. 11. Refinery. Same place as No. 10. No wind.
0-015
7/7/25
No. 12. Blast furnaces. On the bottom floor behind No. 3 furnace, i.e., between the furnace and
the main flue. No wind.
0-006
8/7/26
No. 13. H. & H. platform. Between No. 4 and No. 5 pots, both of which were working. North
wind.
Nil.
8/7/25
No. 14. D. & L. “A ” machine floor. Between No. 2 and No. 3 machines. North-north-west
wind.
Nil.
9/7/25
No. 15. Between D. & L. crib house and H. & H. platform in front of door of crib house. North
wind.
Nil.
appendix p.
REPORT BY Mb. C. E. CHAPMAN, F.1.C., F.A.C.1., ON TESTS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE GAS AT THE
b.h.a. smelters, port pirie.
Mr. Chapman s services were made available to the Commission by the Director of the Department of Chemistry, Adelaide.
Department of Chemistry,
Smelte^Pt^^td 16 PortPirie ° f whicl } were collected at the works of muAssociated
B“i.ir‘ i': d°s ci ß r 168 ,”'
out this investigation
work The oS sft inL General Manager also rendered great assistance by providing a chemist to assist me withthe
displacement of mercn^ P n 7 s< f leCted ** the Commission, and they were collected by
arranged so that theS S H t ot * C , of about 1.000 c.cs, the intake of air into the sample bottle being
arranged so that the time of taking the sample approximated to two hours.
/ bod ’ as described by E. H Weiskopf, Ph. D., in a paper entitled “ The Estimation of Carbon
used°to*estimatp 1 thTn a ntit & 7 J< T nal °/ Chemical, Metallurgical, and Mining Society of South Africa, page 258), was
most accurate f^rtL 9 77'° Ca / bon monoxide in the samples of air examined. This method is recognised as being the
most accurate for the estimation of exceedingly small quantities of carbon monoxide in air.
whether the ™h P experience with Weiskopf’s method, preliminary experiments were first undertaken to ascertain
he method yielded correct results when air containing known quantities of carbon monoxide were submitted to
monoxide 7 0U ah Sy t t^ e Ao C n mlXtUre f °- carbon monoxide were prepared by adding known volumes of pure carbon
about 1,000 c.cs. of air. The synthetic mixtures thus prepared were analysed, and the following table
represents the recovery of carbon monoxide obtained by the method of analysis :
C.c. of Carbon Monoxide
(N.T.P.) Taken.
I ’ B l l
3 ‘ol
0-40
0-308
C.c. Carbon Monoxide (N.T.P.)
Obtained by Analysis.
7 ' 83
3-86
0-41
0-302
Recover.
%
100-2
98-7
102-5
98-05
e above experiments showed that the method is capable of yielding satisfactory results. It was found that the best
emperature to keep the iodine pentoxide tube was between 100-110°C., as lower blank determinations were obtained at
this temperature than at 150°C., the temperature recommended by Weiskopf. Low blank determinations are essential
when traces of carbon monoxide are being estimated, and the blank determinations should not exceed 0-1 c.c. of N/500
sodium thiosulphate solution. If blank determinations as low as 0-1 c.c. can be relied upon, the method is capable of showing
as little as 0-002 per cent, carbon monoxide when using a sample of about 1,000 c.cs. At times the blank determinations
rose from nil to 0-6 c.cs. N/500 sodium thiosulphate solution and sometimes as high as 0-9 c.c. of the latter solution. If
a blank yielded a titration of over 0-1 c.c. of N/500 sodium thiosulphate solution it was found advisable to run two blank
determinations, one being done immediately before and the other immediately after the sample of air that was being
submitted to analysis. 6
I he air of the laboratory at Port Pirie was at times very heavily charged with sulphur dioxide gas, and it was thought
that possibly the high blank determinations were being caused by minute quantities of sulphur dioxide gas getting through
the purification train and acting upon the iodine pentoxide and yielding free iodine according to the equation :
I 2 0 5 + SSO = SSO s + I 2
Means were adopted to prevent the sulphur dioxide from reaching the iodine pentoxide tube by introducing two addi-
tional caustic potash bulbs into the train, and also one absorption bulb containing a solution of iodine but no diminution
in the blank resulted. Contamination with sulphur dioxide may have taken place from the other side of the iodine
pentoxide tube, i.e., on the side of the aspirator, as each time the potassium iodine absorption tube was removed in order
to titrate the free iodine some air always ran back through the iodine pentoxide tube into the purification train.
The method, however, if precautions are taken to do blank determinations on air containing no carbon monoxide is
capable of furnishing accurate results.
Official Samples.


Date of
Analysis.
Number and Location of Sample.
Carbon
Monoxide
16/6/25
No. 1. Over top of No. 3 blast furnace working under normal conditions. Sample taken where
0/
/o
0-056
fumes were rising.
17/6/25
No. 2. Over slag tap hole of No. 2 furnace, working under normal conditions. North end of
0-004
furnace. No wind.
18/6/25
No. 3. Top of Producer plant, about the height of a man above coal feed hopper on west side of
0-008
18/6/25
No. 1 producer, a minute or two after charging with coal. Wind, south-east.
No. 4. H. & H. plarform. Just after blast connected up to pot.
0-025
19/6/25
No. 5. Inside baghouse. Sample taken 9.30 a.m.—two hours after opening—at the extreme
Nil.
29/6/25
northern end, with fairly strong south-east wind blowing into the open door.
hyo. 6. South side of antimony dross furnace in the refinery, close to fire door of melting pot in
0-007
front of the furnace.
29/6/25
No. 7. D. & L. “ A ” machine floor. No. 1 machine working under normal conditions. Sample
0-014
3/7/25
taken close to firebox. Smoke issuing from burning coke.
No. 8. Refinery. About 6in. above flue on the top of No. 4 antimony furnace. Smoke issuing
from top of furnace.
0-002
4/7/25
No. 9. In baghouse. Man took sample at north end of baghouse 15 minutes after No. 6 chamber
0-014
8/7/25
opened. South-west wind blowing into open door.
No. 10. Flue leading to smelter baghouse.
1-24
9/7/25 j
No. 11. Flue leading to smelter baghouse.
1-40
“Edition a Official ” samples, eleven (11) grab samples of air were taken at various parts of the works. The
Grab samples yielded the following results :—
“Grab” Samples.
In my opinion one of the places on the works where men are likely to breathe air containing carbon monoxide is on the
feeding platform, immediately above the blast furnaces. It was intended to analyse the air taken on the platform above
one of the blast furnaces, but time did not permit of this being done.
In conclusion, I desire to thank the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary Limited, which rendered
every assistance and facilitated my investigation, and in particular I wish to thank the Chief Chemist, Mr. A. J. Hemingway,
and Mr. .1. E. 1. Murrie, for their assistance and valuable suggestions during the time I was engaged on this investigation
I have, &c..
C. E. CHAPMAN, F.I.C., F.A.C.I.
The Chairman, Royal Commission on Plumbism,
Parliament House, Adelaide.
APPENDIX Q.
nt- Port P ir i e » July 17th, 1925.
1, u alter Robinette, a member of the Royal Commission on Plumbism, and of the Committee of the Port Pirie
Hospital, certify that I have from personal investigation of the records of the Port Pirie Hospital ascertained that the
information supplied by the Secretary of that institution and published in paragraph 16, page viii., of the report of the
Commission, is accurate.
(Signed)
W. 0. ROBINETTE.
GRAPH


Appendix R.
/Referred to as Exhibit 24.Q.1926J
f>P.fi/P57
r.&n?\\ c7ypnisTiCs
pLftnf ixjranc HALftifißS. '
Average strenqtn a turnover
Leaat cases
P/ant rate w/tt exception minor operations
P/ant rots ojitt exception m/nor operations
Atony operating ana/ hygiene improvement
rnsta/teat.
ten. operations resumed Jon. 7927. Del tire
tan /9Z7 c/oseat the plant otourn except tor
Timor operations, u/rther improvements
nstot/ect. tty, tth/nner turnace started op.
Pen. operat/ons resumed Pep /S. ®
tixfra Stost tee tw/tp put into operation. 2./3opjt
/chastens rn operation roast/nj Sthc. Cons.
3 extra Da I machines msta/teafg star teat up
tt°D Stunner tee starteot up.
5 Dou/ndratt tiati pots putinto operations
Chanpe house camphted
3arrner Rooster section opera t/nrjr
it" 5 Stosf tee /n commission
H. E. POWELL, GOVERNMENT PHOTOLITHOGRAPHER, ADELAIDE.
