

HEPOf^T
OF THE INTERCOLONIAL
Protectionisi Gonfergnce
HELD IN SYDNEY, N.S.W,
APRIL 18th to 26th, 1900.
OFFICERS AND DELEGATES.
PRESIDENT;
Thomas Rose, M.L.A, (N.S.W.).
VICE-PRESIDENTS:
W. D, Beazley, M.L.A. (Vic.) James Duncan, J.P, (S.A.)
John Crase, J.P. (Q.)
lIOET. SECRETARIES:
Samuel Mauger, M.L.A. (Vic.)
W. F. Schey, J.P. (N.S.W)
DELEGATES:
N.S. WADES.
Thos. Rose, M.L.A.
Jno. McFarlane, M.L.A.
Aid. I. R, Cohen, J.P.
Geo. Raffan, J.P.
Hy, Stuart
D. J. Sullivan
W. F. Schey, J.P.
QUEENSLAND.
John Crase, J.P.
W. G. Higgs, M.L.A,
M. Rooney
Jas. Fairlie
P. Frankel
E. Doctor
W, Moss
VICTORIA.
W. D. Beazley, M.L.A.
E. H. Poulter
S. Mauger, M.L.A.
Benj. Hoare
W. T, C. Kelly
James Cook
W. J. Lormer
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
James Duncan, J.P.
Hon. Gregor McGregor,M.L.C
E, W. Matthias
A. S, Ford
Chas. Allen
F. Gum
W. Humphries




The Presidential Address.
When the delegates met at 9 o’clock on the morning of Thursday,
19th April, there was a full attendance to hear the opening address
of the President, Mr. T. Rose, M.L.A.
Mr. Rose said he thought he expressed the opinion of all present
if he construed the conferences of protectionists and free-traders to
indicate that the fiscal issue would be the main question at the forth-
coming Federal elections. Allowing that to be so, then a duty
devolved on both parties—the duty of placing before Australian
electors a definite outline of their respective policies. He now made
bold to say that their political opponents had deliberately neglected
this important part of the programme. As yet they had never told
the electors whether they as a body were going to advocate free-trade,
with its corollary, direct taxation, or a revenue tariff pure and simple.
They styled themselves the Australian Liberal Free-trade Association,
and at once contradicted the title of their association by advocating
Customs taxation on trade amounting to £6,300,000 per year. They
talked about making their appeal to free-traders, and in the next breath
proposed to add £BOO,OOO per annum on to the Hew South Wales free-
trade tariff. They complained about Customs taxation being a heavy
burden on the poorer classes, and yet their scheme was to increase
New South Wales Customs taxation by 60 per cent. To designate
their position as illogical was too mild a phrase.
It was Simply Lamentable
that a great political party had so little respect for honesty of purpose
that it stooped to use the cloak of free-trade to sneak in a high range
of revenue duties, combined with direct taxation. He appealed to
every conscientious free-trader to say first if a tariff of £6,300,000 per
annum was a legitimate, free-trade tariff. Secondly, he asked the
same body of electors, how the requirements of the State Treasurers
could be met by such an amount when, without the expenses of a
Federal Government, and with the existence of inter-State duties, it
required to-day £6,400,000 per year from the Customs for the States
to pay their way. But he (the speaker) would make one admission.
There was one point on which the free-trader and the revenue tariff
WS3Ss/r/0795
/QSOq


advocate were united, and, consequently, presented an intelligent front.
Their opponents were united on a policy of destruction and pulling
down. They were pledged to kill all present protectionist industries
in Australia, either by the instantaneous method of sudden death, or
the slow process of a fifteen years’ torture. They were pledged, on the
death of these industries, to create an army of unemployed men, with
wives and children dependent on them. They were also pledged not
to put on a penny tax at the Customs which might directly, or even
indirectly, give Australia another new industry. He characterised
such a policy as inhuman, and felt confident there would come no
response from the hallot-box to such
A Cold-Blooded Doctrine.
Turning to the protectionist party of Australia, they made no secret
of their intentions. Their platform was a definite one. It was
simply to use the Customs House as a medium to protect the industries
of Australia, and the workmen of Australia, from the industrial
competition of the outside world. "With the foundation of protection
laid at the Customs House, their humanitarian policy took them to the
workshop and factory. The minimum wage, the regulation of the
hours of labour, conciliation and arbitration, sanitary condition of
workshops, old age pensions, alien labour exclusion, State assistance
to land holders, would be all adjuncts of a developed Australian
protectionist policy. Their principle could be stated in a few words—
protection against foreign competition, to establish local industries,
and then protection against internal competition, to carry on local
industries under the best conditions to the wage-earners. It was not
expected that he should reply to the past or anticipated criticism
against their platform, but in self defence he was bound to make a
few remarks of a general nature. Two other English speaking
peoples had founded a Federation where the civilisation, resources,
industrial and natural, where somewhat similar to our own. Both
nations, America and Canada, repudiated free-trade, and adopted and
maintained ever since protection as their national policy. Here, then,
we had two precedents in favour of protection. Where was there one
in favour of free-trade in its application to a young nation ? History
furnished none. But history strengthened our position by showing
the special conditions which permitted free-trade for Great Britain. He
referred to the dependence of England on other nations for her food
supply, and for the raw material of her manufactures, also the lead she
had over the world in manufactures and commerce. These were the
conditions that justified an application of Oobden’s and Bright’s
theory, and as such were


Totally Reversed in Australia,
One would think a reversal of England’s fiscal policy should follow as
a matter of course. It had been said, and would be said again, that
free-trade had given New South Wales her present prominent position;
and, therefore, the Commonwealth should take this colony for its fiscal
example. One might as well claim that free-trade has given us the
bubonic plague as to contend that that policy was the cause of our
progress. We had lived under partial free-trade because we had a
great public estate, which permitted us to sell land and use capital as
revenue; because we had free access to the London market for borrowed
money; and because we had great natural resources. To quote a few
figures with the ten years ending with 1899 New South Wales had
received £19,370,842 from land revenue, against £4,797,107 by Victoria.
For the same period New South Wales had expended from loan moneys
£20,417,142 as againstYictoria expending £10,753,677 from the same
source. Turning to our natural advantages, for the past nine years
New South Wales got £82,062,602 from her wool, as against Victoria
securing £24,140,544. Eor the same period New South Wales obtained
from minerals £44,572,445, while Victoria received £26,303,222.
According to these returns, from loans and land revenue, we had
expended £24,237,200 in excess of Victoria for the past ten years,
and for a nine years period we had received from wool and mines
£76,191,281 more than the sister colony. It was hardly necessary to
point out that the wool and the mines were not free-trade industries,
but they were great props to keep the policy going. He ventured the
opinion that our past free-trade would not have lasted 24 hours were it
not for the artificial feeders of loans and land revenue. They gave
employment to thousands, and acted as a bonus to all other industries.
Give the Federal Government £2,000,000 per year from land revenue,
let it have full recourse to the London market for borrowed money,
grant it permission to spend that money to a considerable extent in
non-productive works and finding work for the unemployed at trades
union rates, and he admitted, without any reservation, that free-trade
would be possible to a Federated Australia. Coming to a few of the
more important details of the controversy, the electors would be asked
to vote against
A Protective Tariff,
because of the heavy burden of taxation imposed. But as Customs
taxation had to be raised, and as Mr. Pulsford, the mouthpiece of the
free-trade party, asked for £6,300,000, so far as obtaining Customs
revenue was concerned there was only a difference in degree between


free-trader and protectionist. Assuming a protectionist tariff to yield
£7,000,000 then, a few shillings ahead, oneway or the other, would make
us either free-trade or protection. The protectionist tariff would not
cost one penny per head per week more than the free-trade one. The
only difference in principle was in the incidence of the tax. One was
a free-trader, it appeared, if he taxed the article we could not produce,
and a protectionist if the tax were levied on what we could produce.
Our crime was that we might create a new industry and a monopoly
at the cost of the taxpayers. But suppose the taxpayers did pay for
protectionist industries, they got good value for their money. Each
new industry enriched the country with another wealth-producing
asset, with another medium for diffusing knowledge and raising a
self-supporting population. On the same lines that it paid a father to
incur the expense of educating his family, so it would always remu-
nerate a nation to educate its people in the science of manufactures.
In both instances present wealth was sacrificed for future gain. Even
if manufactures did bring monopolies, it was better to have them
in Australia, where we could deal with them, than support them
abroad, where we had no legislative sanction. Now, no one knew
better than their opponents that a protected industry was not for the
few, but it was open to the labour and capital of any citizen in
Australia. They were also aware that the price of a locally manufac-
tured article was not increased in proportion to the duty imposed.
High duties in America and Canada had not increased prices. The
protectionist colonies of Australasia could also show numerous in-
stances of an increase in the Customs duty and a decrease in the selling
price of the local article. As a case in point, despite high protective
duties, Victoria and the United States respectively sold us £32,000 and
£71,000 worth of boots last year. "We sold Victoria £525 worth of
boots. As would be known, there was a heavy duty on wearing
apparel in Victoria, yet she sold us in 1898 goods to the value of
£65,864. We sold her £724 worth of our manufactures. Of course,
this was very wrong theoretically. According to theory the protec-
tionist countries should sell us nothing on account of their duties. In
this respect practice overturned the free-trade theory. To judge by
recent speeches, the free-trade party are sure to
Capture the Farmers’ Vote.
They argue that our landed class prefer a land tax to protective
Customs duties, and only supported protection in the past out of a
spirit of retaliation. This was certainly paying the farmers a poor
compliment from a national and intelligent point of view. The chief


asset of the farmers of Australia is their land, and land-owners know
that the effect and object of a Federal land tax would be to reduce the
value of their asset or their capital. Now, a tariff any way approxi-
mating the English free-trade one, which was the ideal aimed at by
their opponents, demanded a stiff land tax, and perhaps an income
tax, to make up the shortage in revenue, and consequently the
writing down of their capital (their landed asset) by hundreds of
thousands of pounds. And this vyas the policy the agricultural class
was going to vote for to oblige free-traders ! It was not true that the
farmers’ protective proclivities were bounded by retaliation. As
intelligent men, they saw that colony never should have been protected
against colony in the past. That was always an inverted order,
because the conditions of life in Australia were on an equality. With
Federation they see the true spirit of protection, which gives a free
market to 4,000,000'0f our own people; which abolishes border
Customs Houses, and gives us one Customs House only for Australia.
The farmer knew that under protection he could exert his intelligence
in regulating prices in the Australian market, even in good seasons,
with a surplus. Under free-trade shipments from the outside world at
any moment would cause his local plans to collapse. As he had to have
competition he preferred that of Australia to the outside world. Under
a protective policy he was entitled to claim bonuses on certain
products, and in many different ways to receive State assistance.
With free-trade, leaving things to nature, no such claims could be
enforced. Beyond the agricultural product the farmer knew the
value of protecting manufactures. He had an object lesson every day
on his own farm. Was it not a fact that in this free-trade colony the
farmers were using machinery made under a protective policy ?
Figures showed that in 1898 New South Wales imported ploughs to
the value of £32,000 from Victoria, as against only £3OOO worth from
the United Kingdom. In all other agricultural implements Victoria
sold us for 1898 £27,000 worth, while our purchases from the United
Kingdom stood at £5700. Of course this was very wrong. But the
farmer here preferred the protectionist article.
Another great factor to he considered was that
History and Common Observation
showed that the success of agriculture largely depended on the pros-
perity of manufactures. The farmers in America and Canada were
never so well off as when a high tariff was on manufactures. With
industrial classes regularly employed at high wages their purchasing
power at once enriched the agriculturist. Our farmers recognised the


home market paid the best, and wanted to feed a population of
millions in Australia, instead of producing for the outside world.
Coming to the business part of their programme, their labours were
more arduous, because of the number of objects they had to keep in
view. All had to admit that to some extent we had to subordinate
our efforts to the need for Customs revenue. Then they had to
recognise that they were dealing with State inequalities; that no two
States were alike in their financial and industrial requirements. Thus,
while New South Wales could do with a scientific tariff, and a very
large free list, Queensland had to draw heavily on the Customs for
revenue. Again, they had to recognise that with the introduction of
Federation two entirely new obligations would start into existence.
The first would be the cost of the new Federal machinery, which
would be extravagant or economical, according to the disposition of
the Parliament. The second was, what he might term a nega-
tive liability, arising from the loss of £691,000 in intercolonial
duties when a common tariff was established. Against these two
nerv financial calls we should have a solid set-off in enforced State
economy. Another consoling outlook was the elasticity of the
revenues as we neared the union. Taking the nine months’ figures for
1899-1900, and assuming the next quarter to be an average one, we
have this result: —The five federating colonies have gained £2,330,000
in their revenues in three years. On top of all was little Tasmania
with
A Clear Gain of 25 per cent.
But perhaps their most difficult position was they had to recognise that
their efforts could not be consummated in the immediate present, and
so were partly of a speculative nature. The Federal Bill was not
going through the Imperial Parliament without delay, and delay
meant more changes in our industrial relationships, which no body of
men could anticipate. They also had to remember that they were
attempting to provide for the cost of a piece of machinery before we
had any actual experience of its work. As a body they could estimate,
but it was only a Federal Executive, when months in office, who could
approximate the revenues required. Almost a jocular side of their
labours was a cry now being raised by the importers. Because they
had taken the various tariffs into consideration in committee they
were accused of acting in secret, as if the free-traders and all other
deliberative bodies did not deliberate in committee without the press.
This objection meant that the importer wanted us to publish the details
of the tariff, so they could lay in stocks and defraud the Commonwealth


revenue. With this one free-trade port prior to Federation there
would be great encouragement given to smuggling now dutiable goods
over the border ; but if a political party published their tariff, and it
were taken seriously, they would confer an everlasting blessing on the
importing fraternity at the cost of the manufacturer. Where could
the free-traders point to any Colonial Treasurer publishing his tariff
before imposing it? There was no case on record. The general
principles were made public, but the details were always kept private.
He thought the Dingley tariff was made known to some extent, and
such publicity cost the United States exchequer some millions, of
pounds for the first half-year.
The Revenue Problem
was bad enough as it was in its conjectural aspect. He hoped it would
not be made ten times worse by playing into the importers’ hands. In
his opinion the protectionist aim was to be in a position to help the
Federal Treasurer. To be able to say to him, “Here is a range of
duties that we have carefully compiled at various conferences. We
guarantee them as meeting the industrial requirements of the various
colonies.” Such a policy of co-operation would give strength to both
sides. He would say a few words about the outlook. Conferences
were good, but we should not leave off with conferences. We had to
do platform work, and press work. We had to get our views to the
people. We wanted the wage-earner to know that his real friends are
the protectionist party, and not the fiscal sinkers or free-traders. Two
sets of conditions were operating largely in their favour. The pulling
down of intercolonial barriers should bring thousands of free-traders
to us, who saw a compromise in having free-trade throughout Austra-
lia and protection only against the outside world. The other point of
advantage was the Federal boom that must come if Federation was
going to do any good for Australia. Now, this boom must rest on an
industrial basis. It could only come with millions of money passing
into Australia to start new manufactures. Wide-awake people and
commercial men knew that a free-trade Federation could never bring
a boom. There would be no inducements for capitalists to leave the
old world or invest their capital in Australia. Under free-trade they
could command the federated Australian market without shifting their
plant or spending a penny here. With a thorough organisation that
would expose the free-trade fallacies and let the people know the truth
about protection he predicted that the middle of next year should see
another English-speaking people and another Federation following in
the industrial footsteps of the United States and Canada.


The Unemployed Problem and “The New Protection.”
Mr. Mauoee (Victoria) was confident he was voicing the feelings
of the entire Conference when he complimented the president upon the
forcible and masterly address just delivered. The facts, figures, and
excellent logic contained therein must bear fruit. Victoria, he
proceeded, was at this juncture a place of more than ordinary interest.
Recently there has been several striking events. One was the attempt
made to mislead the working men of New South "Wales that the
working men of Victoria were tired of protection. But that attempt
had failed. Another event had been the formation of a new free-trade
organisation. But they could rest assured that as far as Victoria was
concerned, it was to the core as strongly protectionist to-day as ever
in its history. More than that, Victoria was truer protectionist now
than ever, for her people had long since felt, and deeply felt, that no
nation could be great unless it had a large number of happy and
contented human beings, and that, unless protection went further than
the Customs House, and protected the wages, the homes, and the lives
of the people who built up that nation, it was not worth the name.
(Applause). Victoria, not liking to be behind New South Wales, had
appointed a board to make inquiries as to the unemployed difficulty.
Twenty-one persons were appointed to that board. Some prominent
public men who had taken part in the Conference had publicly expressed
the opinion that the unemployed were being used by leading free-traders
and others to further their own objects, and to propagate their own
theories. Some of those who attended the Conference left the room as
a protest, and absolutely refused to take part in the movement for the
appointment of such a board. Sir George Turner appointed the
board, consisting of 21 members, with power to call witnesses, and
fully enquire into the problem of the unemployed. Sir John Madden,
Chief Justice of Victoria, took the presidency of the board on the
distinct understanding that no party political questions would be
introduced. The Government never for one moment thought that
when they appointed the board they were constituting a body to
inquire into the effect of the tariff on industry. The members of the
board had never been regarded as experts industrially, socially, or
commercially. They had no special knowledge in those particular-
lines, and they never made pretensions to such knowledge. The
misgivings of the leading members of the Conference were fully borne
out as time went on. The board never ascertained the number of
the unemployed in Victoria, and the statement in the report that there
were 8,000 unemployed in New South Wales and 20,000 in Victoria
was founded simply upon conjecture. Witnesses who had given
evidence before the committee had admitted that the statistics they
supplied were the outcome of conjecture purely. Representative
work people who were called to give evidence before the board all
stated that protection had benefitted them largely, and that they
wanted it extended. At the stage when it was proposed to enquire
into the protection question he had entered his protest. Mr. Mauger
went on to state that in Victoria, they had just succeeded in passing a
very far-reaching Shops and Factories Act —the most far-reaching
Act of its kind in the world. There were certain powers g'ven under
that Act, and it was found that work was better, wages higher, work


people more contented, and employers largely benefited. This was
not his statement, it was the statement made by Mr. Grimwade, and
also by Sir Frederick Sargood. Protection existed for the people, and
not the people for protection. (Applause.) Unless protection was
going to be associated with a fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work,
with reasonable hours and proper sanitation, he would no longer
associate himself with the cause. The eyes of thousands of workers,
not in this colony alone, but throughout the length and breadth of
these colonies, were upon the Conference in regard to this proceeding;
and the Conference must do its best to produce a tariff which would be
scientific in its incidence. They must keep before them the interests
of the farmer, the pastoralist, and the average man in the street, and
endeavour, as Buskin had said, “to produce a happy, united people.”
If that ideal were kept in mind during their deliberations, great good
would follow. (Applause.) Mr. Mauger said he regretted greatly
the tendency which existed for replacing male by female labour. He
knew large firms in Melbourne which had discharged their leading
accountants and male clerks, and had replaced them by females. And
why ? Because, in the words of the employers, ‘‘ it pays better, and
is cheaper in the long run.” He considered if females were employed
to do the same work as men, then they should work the same hours
and receive the same wages. (Cheers.) This changing of male for
female labour was not going on here alone; it was the same in
England. Mr. Manger quoted from a communication recently re-
ceived from Lady Dilke, who was perplexed by the female labour
question ; and concluded by saying that all who were true protec-
tionists, and above all, true patriots who loved their country, and were
anxious there should be established beneath these sunny si iss of a
Greater Britain—greater in all that tended to develop life in the
highest degree—were determined to protect themselves from the
poorly-paid labour of foreign countries, and the workmen from the
cruel, competitive struggle for wealth. (Loud applause.)
Laying the Foundations.
Mr. John Cease (Queensland) said after what he had heard he
was very much afraid that there was not much chance for his colony,
but there was not the slightest doubt that the Conference had under-
taken one of the grandest movements and labours that could be imagined
—that was in laying the foundation of the future life of United
Australia. There was a good deal of satisfaction in the knowledge
that they were following the example of Great Britain. They all
knew that her marvellous growth, her industry and trade, and her
greatness were built upon the very principles which the Conference
wanted to see established for the Commonwealth. v Applause) In
favouring a policy of protection for the Federation, the chief object of
the protectionists was to build up, not to pull down, any of the great
industries already existing, whether they happened to be pastoral,
agricultural, or manufacturing. The industrial history of Great
Britain showed that her greatness was the outcome of protection; the
United States did not become a great manufacturing country till
protection was the policy of the Federation. (Cheers.) At various
times attempts had been made to stifle her industries, and it was not


till the advent of protection that she was able to make any show against
the manufactures of other countries. (Hear, Hear.) But after
adopting that policy she was enabled to build up her industries on a
firm basis, with the result that to-day Victoria stands as one of the
great manufacturing and producing nations of the world. (Applause.)
At the close of the Franco-Prussian war Bismark saw that Germany
would never rise and take her proper position in the world unless she
adopted protection to her people and her industries. (Cheers.) With
all these great examples before them the protectionists could feel
assured that in the present movement they were proceeding on so and
lines. (Applause.) In Queensland protectionists were often twitted
with the remark that New South Wales had made as great strides
under free-trade as Victoria had under protection. Of course these
statements were the outcome of ignorance, because the persons making
them knew nothing about the conditions of the two countries. He had
been struck by the statements of the chairman with reference to the
illustration that the prosperity of New South Wales was attributable
to a large extent to extensive borrowing and a big land revenue.
When he came to New South Wales in 1878, after a residence of 20
years in Victoria, he found the public debt of New South Wales was
under £12,000,000. Last year—after a lapse of about 21 years—the
public debt had risen to £63,000,000. Fancy a Government spending
about £5,000,000 a year from loans and land sales. That had nothing
to do with the industrial basis of a country. The industrial stability
of a country rested on those elements arising out of diversified
industries. A well-known authority had stated that a country could
have no more wealth than it produced. A resident of Queensland,
who visited the old country, had a two hours’ interview with Mr.
Gladstone. During the course of the conversation the question of
free-trade and protection cropped up, and Mr. Gladstone, after ex-
pressing himself in favor of free-trade, added : “ I do not say that if I
was in a new community like you are going to I would carry that
belief with me. Great Britain, now the great benefiter of the world,
the country which had laid the world under tribute to her, owed her
greatness and her power to a policy of protection.” (Cheers).
Mr. McGeegoe, M.L.O. (South Australia), having expressed
regret at the absence of the President of the Council in the colony he
hailed from, proceeded to review briefly the duties lying before the
Conference. First they had to study the interests of all classes of the
great Australian nation, and in the second place they had to, as far as
possible, protect the interests of the States from which they came.
(Hear, hear.) But they had to consider what they had to protect
themselves against. Every delegate to the Conference was an inter-
colonial free-trader. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Chamberlain himself had
said, a little while ago, that there would have to be established in the
Empire free-trade, with protection against the outside world. And
it would be their duty, Mr. McGregor proceeded, to protect their
women and children from such a state of things as was revealed in the
communication from Lady Ditke referred to by the previous speaker.
They had to secure protection against subsidised ships, and against
unfair competition. Every protectionist was in a position to defend


his attitude with respect to the national policy with any free-trader
anywhere. Then there were free-traders in the different colonies who
held up thedisaster which overtook Victoria as an example of what was
to overtake every other protectionist country. Though protection had
something to do with bringing people to Victoria, it was a blessing to
the other colonies at the same time. He did not want to be too hard
on New South Wales, but for a certain length of time that colony had
been a commercial blackleg—(laughter)—and had been reaping the
benefit of the protection which existed in Victoria. As regarded the
population question, it was not sought to draw from one colony to
another, but from the older countries of Europe, where the conditions
were not so good as here. And as to the protection to be established,
he sought to protect what was natural to Australia, and what could
be produced here as well as anywhere else in the world. And he
thought that was the policy of every protectionist. In Queensland
there were resources which were not found in other colonies, and he
felt that, as a Conference, they were prepared to give that colony
every fair consideration. New South Wales, too, had advantages
which the delegates would consider honestly and fairly. And the
same would be the case with the other colonies. All would be dealt
with fairly. The great difficulty which had to be dealt with in South
Australia had been the bringing of the working classes to see the
advantages of protection. Every free-trader in Adelaide was an
energetic missionary. As to the tariff, Mr. McGregor said he hoped
a good deal of it would be adopted without discussion, and that where
there was discussion it would be carried on with an honest feeling,
and a desire to do good to the individual colonies, and the whole of
Australia. (Applause.)
Mr. W. G. Higgs, M.L.A. (Queensland), was of opinion that
every candidate would have to announce his fiscal views at the forth-
coming Federal campaign. The Federal Labour Party had decided
to make the question of protection or free-trade an open one, so that
the candidates of that party wfluld not be debarred from advocating
whatever fiscal views they chose. Personally he was of opinion that
protection should be the policy of united Australia, for he could not
see how Australian employers could pay a fair day’s wage for a fair
day’s work, and at the same time compete Avith Chinese and Japanese
employers, who were able to obtain labour at the rate of one shilling
per day and less. The unemployed had been quoted against protec-
tionist Victoria, but they had the unemployed in free-trade and
protectionist countries alike, and would have unemployed so long as
the genius of the human race produced labour saving inventions which
displaced human labour ; that was a problem which required special
legislation —special legislation which would be more easily obtainable
in protectionist Australia. He was proud to represent Queensland,
which must not be regarded as the “poor relation” of the coming
Commonwealth, for Queensland was very large and very rich.
England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales might be placed in a corner of
Queensland, and then there would be an area of some three hundred
millions of acres to spare. Queensland could produce all that was
required to sustain and perfect human life, and need not be dependent


on any outside country. He was glad to observe the new features of
the “ New Protection.” The declaration that it was the intention of
the National Protection Union to protect the workman as well as his
work was one which was distinctly new in New South Wales at any
rate, and would commend itself to the working classes. So also were
the proposals to advocate the maintenance and extension of the eight
hour system, fair wages, and just conditions of labour. No common-
wealth could prosper unless it was seen to that the working classes
were prosperous. If the wage workers were prosperous, so also were
all other classes. All the professions (Art, Law and Literature) were
all dependent on the working classes, and they could not have a safe
and durable superstructure if the foundations were weak and ill cared
for.
The “New Protection.”
Mr. I. It. Cohen had a couple of small objections to place on record.
He first of all declared that the duties of the protectionists required
very little stimulation. Their aim was to better the conditions of the
people, and protect the interests of the nation. Protection had already
accomplished much in the way of alleviating the condition of the
masses, and for doing that humanity was deeply indebted to the cause,
and for those who fought for it. (Hear. Hear.) He took grave objec-
tion to two remarks. One was with reference to the expressions of
opinion relative to the expediency of not publishing the tariff proposals
of the Conference. He asked every member of the Conference to re-
serve his judgment on that point. Personally, he was with those who
thought that a strong case could be made out for publication. He also
took exception to the term “the new protection, ” which rather grated
on his ears. Surely there was no “ new ” protection; surely their aims
and aspirations were the same as they had been years ago. The
protection was the protection that it had always been. (Hear. Hear.)
The conditions of life were not the same as they were years ago, but
the change which had taken place had made protection more practic-
able. They should tell the working classes that they desired to give
them what had always been dear to their hearts—that full and ample
protection to labour with which the name of protection had always
been identified. (Hear, hear.)
Diversity of Employment.
Mr. Hoaeb (Victoria) said— l desire to say just a few words on
what I call the Philosophy of Protection. The economic and the
ethical aspects are in themselves irrefutable; but, apart from these,
there was an immense importance in every nation cultivating for its
people the widest possible variety in industrial avocations. The bent
of human genius is so varied that anything which prescribes for these
differing talents a uniformity of occupation places a fetter on human
faculties. Guyot, in his book “ Earth and Man,” says—“Thegreater
the variety of individualities and relations in a society of individuals,
the greater also is the sum of life, the more universal is the develop-
ment of life, the more complete, and of a more elevated order. But it
is necessary, not only that life should unfold itself in all its richness
by diversify-, but that it exhibits itself in its utility, in its beauty, in


its goodness, by harmony. Thus we recognise the proof of the old
proverb, ‘ Variety in unity is perfection.’ ” But the root principle of
free-trade strikes vitally at this truth. It seeks to confine each
country to a few of the leading lines of industry to which it is
naturally the best adapted. For all the rest, each State is to exchange
with the others. This doctrine would for generations confine Australia
to the production of wool, meat, wheat, fruit and gold. It would
convert all our people into miners, shepherds, and vignerons. Now,
even if those occupations could adequately employ the people, they
would cramp the sphere of human activity, limit the inventive faculties,
and rear a nation with stunted intellects and dwarfed intelligence. To
shackle, as free-trade does, for the sake of buying ever in the cheapest
market, the aspirations of embryo talents, is to stifle the better part of
man by depriving him of the opportunities for mental expansion. If I had
no other charge to bring against free-frado than this —that its tendency
is to cramp the human intellect and place an extinguisher on invention—
I should be its perpetual enemy. On the other hand, I see in the
protective principle the same operation that guards the tender plant
alike from the attacks of storm and sun, that rears and educates the
infant; that trains the artist, the engineer, the lawyer, the doctor, the
soldier, so that each may play his part, and all this without a close
reckoning of what commercially is to come out of the expenditure. I
may say that protection and free-trade have both a world-wide
history. It is a history replete with instruction. I venture to say that
no one who studies that history apart from any preconception will fail
to find* the results of ancient and modern history alike condemning
freedom of international exchange. In Athens, Sparta, Carthage.
Rome, Venice and Genoa, in earlier times, Free-trade invariably led
to national declension. In England, Ireland, France, Germany,
Russia, Holland, Turkey, India, in modem times, it produced the same
result. Free-trade has always been the precursor of deeds that doom
empires. The chairman had dealt in an admirable manner with the
statistical portions of the different colonies. (Hear, hear.) The
figures Mr. Rose had submitted as to the revenue resources of New
South Wales were simply convincing. He (Mr. Hoare) had given a
deep study to that phase of the question, and yet the manner in which
Mr. Rose had put the matter had presented a new light even to his mind.
(Hear, hear.) The insistence of the free-trader, who was always
prating about the necessity of relieving the producer of the burdens of
taxation, was amusing, because side by side with that statement he was
always saying, “ Give us a tariff that will produce the most revenue
with the least duties.” (Hear, hear.) What could there be in the
shape of an additional burden to the farmer, or anyone else, if the
people had to pay £8,000,000 through the Customs House, either
under free-trade or under protection P (Applause.) The burden was
all under free-trade, because under protection it was removed just as
far as industries were established to provide work for the people who
had to pay the duties. The “burden” cry was an absolute fallacy.
(Cheers.) He regarded protection as the most philosophical and
scientific policy that could be invented for a country. If the free-trade
policy of buying where goods could be bought at the greatest advan-
tage, and producing only what the natural conditions of a country


favoured, were carried into effect, each country would be confined to
four or five lines of production, and everyone would be compelled to
fall into those avenues of employment. As soon as that was done the
human mind and ingenuity would be subjected to a process of cramp-
ing, and in time there would be only hewers of wood and drawers of
water. (Applause.) Looking at the economic history of the world,
both in ancient and modern times alike, there could not be cited a
single instance in which free-trade had built up the prosperity of a
nation, but there could be cited many instances in which this had been
achieved by protection. There were historical proofs that free-trade
was the prelude to the decline of a nation. It could be shown that,
other things being equal, and there being no absolute facts tending
against prosperity, the system of protection had always been that
which built up the prosperity of a nation. They might look at the
history of Athens, Rome, France, England and Ireland—wherever the
system of free-trade came into existence prominently that nation
declined. In modem times they found that protection had built up
prosperity. In England, in Ireland, while it lasted ; in France, Ger-
many, Russia, Holland, Turkey, and, to some extent, even in India.
He made this statement concerning the effects of free-trade and pro-
tection because he would like to provoke some free-trader to take it
up. He repeated that in all the history of the world protection had
been synonymous—other things being equal—with prosperity ; while
free-trade had been synonymous with a nation’s decline. In 1846
England stood supremely at the head of the world, and was put there
by her protective policy. But other protected nations had come up,
and had very largely overtaken her in her prosperity. (Applause.)
Mr. Hoare concluded with an expression of the honour he felt it to be
included in the conference, whose labours, he was sure, would land
them nearer the goal they sought. (Loud applause.)
Producers and Consumers.
Mr. Gum (South Australia) said he had given a close study to
protection in all its phases, and he was satisfied that it was the policy for
the people. He dealt with the statement that protection increased
prices, and admitting that, for the sake of argument, pointed out that
to purchase locally made goods meant to encourage the employment of
our own workmen, and keep the money in the country to pay the
grocer and the landlord; whereas to buy from abroad was to pay
foreign workmen and support foreign tradesmen. (Hear, hear). He
denied that protection created monopolies; on the other hand, he
contended that it was the only method of preventing monopolies. The
system of free-trade enabled importers to control the local markets,
and by flooding them to crush out local production, and so establish
the monopolies that were laid to the charge of protection. The policy
of fostering local industries was merely to put the producers on an
equal footing with the foreign manufacturer. He believed that there
were many good reasons for advocating a protective policy; and he
also believed that there were no good reasons for advocating free-trade
for Australia. (Cheers). It was absolutely necessary that every man
in a community should become a producer before he can become a
consumer. (Hear, hear). If he was a producer he had no trouble in


becoming a consumer; and if the wealth was available, the man
earning wages was in a position to purchase that wealth ; whereas the
idle man had no means with which to command the wealth.
(Hear, hear). What the protectionists wanted was first that every
man should become a successful producer, then he must be a successful
consumer. The free-traders put the cart before the horse. They
said: ‘ ‘ Fill your markets with wealth and goods, and you will have
prosperity.” The protectionists reversed that order by desiring first
to give the people the means of availing themselves of the supplies on
the market.
Why Queensland wants Protection.
Mr. M. Rooney (Queensland) said our great aim is to build up
the industries of the Commonwealth. We have many natural products
in the different colonies which we, must develop, and to do so
successfully we must have protection against the outside world and
intercolonial free-trade. Look at America, what protection has done
for that country. It has built up great industries which can supply
not only their local requirements, but which can compete successfully
with the manufacturers of Europe—while paying the highest wages.
In Queensland we have been enjoying the benefit of protection, which
we find a very great benefit. The farmers for instance on the Darling
Downs, who some years ago found it hard to make a living, are now
producing large quantities of butter, cheese and bacon. This was
brought about by protection, and the Government sending experts
among the people. We have also some very successful foundries
which give a large amount of employment. Take for instance
Walkers Limited, of Maryborough, which can turn out a first-class
locomotive engine in a fortnight. They now hold large contracts for the
supply of locomotives and other machinery. We want to build up great
industries which cap teach our sons trades and give a fair living wage
to the workman. I am an employer of labour myself, carrying on
sawmilling and steam joinery works in Townsville, North Queensland.
We have paid for the past year about £14,000 in wages. We give
employment to a large number of men and boys. We pay the highest
wages, and the men are perfectly satisfied with their lot, and without
protection our industry would not have afforded this employment. I
hope the tariff we will now frame will be one that will benefit the
Commonwealth, not to build up big monopolies, but sufficient to pay
good wages to the workers, and to leave a fair margin of profit to the
manufacturer, and we hope to see the Commonwealth of Australia as
great a manufacturing country in the future as America is at the
present. Our natural resources in coal, iron, copper, silver, and gold
are quite equal, if not superior, to America. All that is required
is development, and this can be brought about by protection.
Protection and Industry.
Mr. Sohey (one of the Hon. Secretaries) commenced a vigorous
address by an allusion to the anti-protectionist activity of the free-
trade press at the present juncture. Referring to the recent Free-
trade Conference, he said it was conspicuous that the free-trade press
did not agree with the determinations of the Conference, and it was


only when the Conference sank every vestige of principle that they
came into line with the papers. (Hear, hear.) Since the Conference
there had been repeated attacks in the Sydney press upon the protec-
tionists’ policy. (Hear, hear.) He referred to the trouble in the coal
trade. The newspapers had been full during some weeks previously of
the great difficulty of getting rid of the New South Wales coal, and it
had been pointed out that the coal was being sold at prices which,
while being unremunerative to the colliery owners, did not permit the
miners to earn fair wages. (Hear, hear.) All authorities admitted
that it was not possible to raise the selling price because the major
portion of our coal was exported, and had to compete with similar
products of other countries. The result was that the price of New
South Wales coal was controlled by the world’s market prices, what-
ever they may be at any given time. (Hear, hear.) Consequently,
the press had been taking a very pessimistic view indeed of the coal
industry. Quoting from a recent article in one of the morning papers,
he pointed out that Newcastle coal had to compete with Japanese,
Chilian and other coal, and that with those conditions it was impos-
sible to raise the price of coal in the foreign markets. Figures avail-
able showed that whereas last year New South Wales raised 3,000,000
tons of coal, only 750,000 tons was consumed in the country, and that
2,250,000 tons was exported. The major portion of the coal used in
Victoria was supplied from Newcastle, but the quantity was decreas-
ing, because of the development of the local collieries, and there was a
danger that a very large amount of that trade would be lost to
this colony in the near future. We exported to the other parts
of Australia nearly twice as much coal as was used in New South
Wales, and the bulk of it went to Victoria. With protection the
trouble about the coal trade would largely disappear. (Applause.)
Instead of this colony using only three-quarters of a million tons,
the manufacture of iron and steel, and of woollens, would
create an enormous market within the colony for coal, which would
not be affected to any extent by the market prices of the world.
(Hear, hear.) This would enable the coal-owner to secure a remuner-
ative return for his commodity, and the miner would be permitted
to earn fair wages for his labour. (Cheers.) That was the answer to
the whole situation. Let them have protection for Australia, and it
would be found that the trouble about the Australian coal market
would disappear. (Hear, hear.) Our own market would be pre-
served to the local producer, and there need be no anxiety regarding
the export trade. Referring to the unemployed he expressed the
pleasure he felt at disclosures made respecting the report framed by
the Victorian Board, which showed that some of the statements
embodied in that document were merely baseless assumptions.
(Hear, hear.) Something had already been said as to the state
of the working classes in Great Britain. Nowhere in Australia
was there anything like the state of destitution existing in
Great Britain; there was nothing here to compare with the slum
life of London, and he sincerely hoped that there never would
be. (Hear, hear.) At the same time he was not going to
contend that free-trade was solely responsible for the condition of
tilings in England; but he would say that protection in America had


prevented a similar state of things. He quoted largely from an
American paper to show that after the success* of Cleveland for the
Presidency the anti-protection policy embodied in the Wilson-G-orman
Act had brought widespread distress, and that a very large percentage
of the working classes had been thrown out of employment in con-
sequence. The recovery following on the restoration of protection, as
comprehended in the Dingley Act, had been marvellous, and in a few
months the percentage of unemployed was reduced from something
like 50 to about 2 per cent. (Cheers.) Free-traders declared that
protection meant monoply, but he dared to say that numerically there
were more monoplies, combines, and trusts in Great Britain than in
America. (Hear, Hear.) After referring to the assumption that
protection favoured the formation of huge trusts and combines, and
enormous monopolies, such as were seen in America, Mr. Schey said,
speaking as one man, that he had no* fear of trusts, as trusts, which
were engineered for the purpose of keeping a decent price on the
products sold, and also a decent wage for the employees engaged in
making these products. At any rate, in many oases these trusts had
largely operated for good. They were not peculiar to any one fiscal
policy, and flourished under free-trade as well as under protection. In
Great Britain there were many of these combines, which controlled
large avenues of trade. Not long ago, in America, the home of con-
ferences and conventions, a “trust conference ” was held in Chicago.
The third day was given to the representatives of labour, leaders elected
by their fellow-workmen, and the voices of those men were worth more
than all the writing in the “ Daily Telegraph ” here or the “ Argus ”
in Melbourne. The free-trade publications here said their hearts were
bleeding for the sorrows of the poor working men, who, they said,
were being exploited by the trusts. But these labour leaders, who had
attended the conference referred to, had no objection to any innovation,
simply because it was new, so long as there were benefits to the working
men. Indeed, Mr. Schey pointed out all that was done at that con-
ference went to show that the working men in America were not
suffering, were not impoverished, were not having their wages cut
down by these combinations, as was stated by the free-trade publi-
cations here. (Applause.) Mr. Schey passed on to say that there was
at the present too much inclination to the belief that protection was
bound to come about, and that therefore there was no necessity for any
extra labour in its behalf. Most people here had not yet settled their
ideas as to the real fiscal policy. If there was to be success they must
take nothing for granted. British manufacturers kept a fund of
£IOO,OOO, always at that sum, for the avowed purpose of keeping the
market in any particular country open to the British manufacturers.
And the Australian market would be worth much more than that. It
was found that their free-trade friends were going to be active here.
In America the free-traders subsidised 130 newspapers to pour out a
flood of special matter in order to secure the return of Mr. Bryan. And
if there, where the fiscal question was so keenly felt and fought, we
might be assured that they would fight here with all the sinews of war
they could command against the protectionists. And it behoved the
protectionists to he well alive to what was going on, and to so bend
their energies to the task that they would ultimately bring about a


proper fiscal system, which would reflect credit upon the statesmen of
the country, and which would result in a great and mighty nation;
a happy and contented people. (Loud applause.)
The Development of the Colonies.
Mr. W. T. C. Kelly (Victoria) said —The purport of his utterance
would be the importance of developing the resources of every one of
the Australian Colonies. Victorians would have a dual relation, that of
producers and consumers, with the other colonies, and both as pro-
ducers and consumers it would be advantageous to them to have the
other colonies as prosperous as possible, producing as much as possible,
and becoming as wealthy as possible. For, as it was well said, the
wealth of a nation was equal to the value of its products-. Victorians
had the benefit of protection for sometime past, and they knew by
experience that the internal competition in all protected industries was
sufficient to bring down prices to a fair and reasonable limit; and no
protectionist desired that articles should go below such a price as
would enable the producers to pay fair wages and make fair profits.
But the people wanted prices to be moderate and stationary, so that
they would not be at the mercy of speculators. Looking at the matter
from the producers point of view, they must remember that the
wealthier our customers are the more producers can get from them.
Therefore it was to the advantage of Victorians to do all in their power
to make the other colonies as wealthy as possible. In every community
there are two classes of workers : the producers, called primary
workers, and those who produce nothing themselves but who ad-
minister to the wants of these primary workers. The collective
earnings of these secondary workers depend entirely on the amount
of money the producers receive in wages and profits. It is to the
interests of those not directly engaged in production or manufacturing
that the profits and wages of those so engaged should be as large as
possible. Oar Queensland friends need fie under no apprehension that
their interests will be dealt adversely with. A glance at the proposed
schedule will show them that all their productions from arrowroot to
peanuts, and of course including sugar, had received every considera-
tion. In regard to sugar, a higher tariff had been proposed than the
Queensland Parliament had placed on that commodity. About half
the sugar now consumed in Victoria came from Queensland, Under
the new order of affairs the consumption of Queensland sugar would
be greatly increased throughout the whole of Australia. The term
“new protection” might nominally appear a misnomer; it was new
to this extent that it secured to the workman the benefits of protection,
and carried into effect such measures as would practically protect him
against unfair competition both internal and external. The men who
produced the raw material were justly protected, as laying the founda-
tion of the manufacturing industry. The manufacturers who con-
verted the raw material into the finished article, and thereby increased
the wealth and prosperity of the country, were also justly protected.
And what the new protection proposed was that the same protection
should be extended to the workman.


The Need for Preparation.
Mr. W. D. Bhazley, M.L.A. (Victoria), complimented the
president upon his very able opening address, which he considered was
in itself a great work, and would be of very great assistance
to the work which the conference had in hand. What they were most
anxious to do, the speaker pointed out, was to get the people through-
out the country to agree when they were at the ballot box. (Hear,
hear). He considered that the other colonies might very well follow
in the footsteps of Victoria, and circulate a quantity of literature. For
their desire was to let the people know the truth, and then there was
no fear but that they would know what to do. Free-traders did not
state all the facts when talking to people whom they desired to convert;
protectionists, on the other hand, stated everything, and had no fear of
the result. (Applause). It was the duty of the Conference to prepare
a tariff in order to show the electors, when the time came, that they
could obtain a certain revenue to carry on the government of the
colonies on protectionist lines. But it was just as important—possibly
more important—that they should be prepared at the right time to
send the right men along. (Applause). Though they might have a
well-prepared tariff, it would be of no use whatever unless they had a
well-prepared Parliament to carry it out. (Hear, hear). Some of the
men who would offer themselves for the suffrages of the people would
be persons not strong in their protectionist belief, who would, if they
found that protection was the popular policy, become sudden converts.
They would have to provide against such a contingency. They would
have to see that sound men were returned to the Federal Parliament—
men capable of rendering sincere assistance in forming the Common-
wealth tariff. (Hear, hear). In Victoria the protectionists claimed
that after the great financial failure of a few years ago, protection
enabled the colony to come out of the fire. (Applause). They kept
thousands of families from starving during that dire period, and
carried on the Government of the country, and effected a speedy
recovery, with the return of financial stability. They claimed that
when the recovery had been completed they would be in a stronger
position than ever. (Cheers). If they had been living under a free-
trade policy they would never have recovered from the blow. As to
the Federal elections they would have to take every opportunity of
impressing upon the people the necessity of learning all that they can,
and then judge for themselves as to the best policy for the Common-
wealth. (Hear, hear). Then the electors must be given an opportunity
of selecting the best candidates that the party could put forward.
South Australia’s Experience.
Mr. Duncan (S.A.) dealt with the “ new protection,” which, he
said, was no doubt a difficult matter to settle on a fair and equitable
basis. He contended that protection, as it had been known, had done
a great deal to advance the interests of his colony. The developments,
the increase of manufactures, and the expansion of business in South
Australia under protection were such as could never have taken place
under free-trade. (Hear, hear.) Protection had enabled them during
bad seasons, with a low wheat yield, to retain the people on the land.


Fortunately, a corner of New South Wales, which had been of no use
to any one, had turned out a valuable silver field, and the engineers of
South Australia had opened up communication between the Barrier
and Adelaide, with the result that the field had been made accessible,
and the trade had been secured to South Australia. (Hear, hear.)
Then, West Australia, at a later stage, gave a large market for all
kinds of commodities. By reason of her protective policy South
Australia, avith her industries well established, had been enabled
to compete successfully with the other colonies for the supply of
the articles, including machinery, required in the western gold-
fields. (Hear, hear.) By reason of the benefits of protection the
South Australians had been able to operate on a much larger scale,
and consequently succeeded in competition with the world. There
were practically no imported vehicles in South Australia, the whole of
the local requirements being met locally. (Cheers.) What was
perhaps more interesting was that the prices for vehicles has been much
lower to the user since protection than it ever was before. (Cheers.)
He thought it just as necessary that the workmen should be protected
as that the employer should be. (Hear, hear.) During the life of the
Kingston Government in South Australia a measure was introduced
time after time, legislating for the workers, which had proved a
failure in its operation. A Conciliatory Act was amongst the
measures passed, but the first time it was required it proved a
failure, because there was no power under it to compel witnesses to
attend. If the Conference could succeed in having workable legisla-
tion passed in the interest of the workers it would be a great triumph
for protection. (Hear, hear.)
Queensland Needs Protection.
Mr. William J. Moss (Queensland) said— l am very pleased to
have been selected as one of the Queensland delegates, to a conference
that is made up of a body of gentlemen who so thoroughly represent
the interests of the manufacturers and workers of the federating
colonies. I know something of the benefits our Queensland industries
have received through the operations (imperfect as it is) of our pro-
tectionist tariff. Previous to our Government adopting a protective
system many of our industries were languishing, and our mechanics
and artisans were unable to find employment. This was not because
they were wanting in ability. Neither was it that our manufacturers
were wanting in enterprise. But under the conditions then existing,
with open ports, it was found impossible to compete against the
imported article made with low-priced foreign labour. We saw our
foundries and other workshops fast becoming mere repairing shops,
giving very irregular work to tradesmen, and very few chances to our
children of learning trades and arts that should fit them to take their
place in life with a fair chance of competing in its struggles. I am
glad to say that since the protectionist party in Queensland has
obtained the assistance of an import duty, we have had a gradual
improvement in our various manufactures. I trust that one result of
this conference will be to give us a more perfect system of protection,
one that will enable the Australian Commonwealth to use her own
materials, and take her place as a large manufacturing country. Our


colony is so greatly interested in the sugar industry, we in Queensland
have had reluctantly to come to the conclusion that climatic conditions
make black labour a necessity in some of the field work. I am not
here to advocate either black or cheap labour for the conduct of the
sugar industry of Queensland, but I trust this conference to deal fairly
with the question.
Victoria’s Scientific Tariff.
Mr. W. J. Foemee (Victoria) said he had found during his travels
that the Victorian tariff was looked upon as being the most scientific
in the colonies. Again he had heard it described as a very prohibitory
one. That was an erroneous statement. The tariff of the United
States might be regarded as one fitted to carry out the object desired.
In Victoria the tariff on woollens was ?—On a piece of goods value
Is 8d per lb. the duty would be 5d ; in the United States 2s 2d duty
would have to be paid. For a suit of clothes valued at, say, 30s
wholesale, the tariff in Victoria would be 10s 6d, and in the United
States 275. Cigars, with 6s Victorian duty, paid in the United States
18s 3d. Blankets valued at 2s 6d, imported into Victoria at lOd, would
carry 3s 8d a lb. in the United States! He called the attention of the
Queenslanders to the fact, as he understood it, that some 900,000 tons of
bounty-fed sugar found its way into the United States. German and
French boats, he pointed out, were subsidised and able to carry cargo
here very cheaply. That became a source of danger to Queensland
sugar growers. It would not be allowed in the United States, where
they were jealous of conserving their own trade. Mr. Former quoted
from some recent remarks by Mr. G. H. Reid, M.L.A. That gentle-
man had remarked on a certain occasion:—Free-trader as I am, were!
ixx Victoria to-morrow, I would not be a party to touch the tariff save
with generous and most humane hands. (A delegate: “Yes No!’’and
laughter.) Mr. Reid had gone further, and had said, with regard to
the American people, that they were a mighty and intelligent people,
and would become the mightiest people on earth. Now, in view of the
past political performances of Mr. Reid, Mr. Former said he would
not be surprised, bearing in mind that gentleman’s peculiar lightning
changes, to find him, when the time came round to produce £8,000,000
of revenue for the Commonwealth on the side of the protectionists.
(A delegate: “ He’s welcome. ” Hear, hear.)
Another Trades Unionist Views.
Mr. D. J. Sullivan (Trades Unionist, New South Wales) said
trades unionists and protectionists were one, to his mind, at all events.
Mr. Sullivan traced the history of the labour party here from the time
when it came into the political field during the great maritime strike.
Proceeding, he said, that by the term “new protection” he thought they
embraced a great deal. The speaker contended that the protectionist
party in this colony had done more for the labour party than had been
done in any other colony; and the present Minister for Works had
gone further in the way of carrying out the protectionist idea than had
been the case elsewhere. The Minister had been taught in a protec-
tionist school. The speaker also made complimentary reference
to the labours of Mr. W. J. Fyne, the Premier of this colony, and


concluded by remarking that if protection had gained so much for the
people the protectionists were the ones who deserved the praise.
(Applause.)
Comparing Nev/ South Wales and Yietoria.
Mr. J. Cook (Victoria) said a number of contrasts had been made
between New South Wales and Victoria, with the view of showing
why these colonies were in their relative positions. He would men-
tion a point not yet touched upon. He had looked round this city and
had seen what had been done during the last 20 years, and he was sur-
prised at the gigantic strides made. In 1879, when he was present at the
Exhibition, he had taken particular interest in, and had made inquiry
concerning certain things which he saw at that time, and had made a
comparison with the conditions prevailing in Victoria. He had had
considerable experience in many branches of the trade, and had made
inquiry as to the relative prices paid for articles of consumption in the
two colonies. Looking round this city to-day, and seeing the magnifi-
cent buildings and the great advances made, he asked himself how it
had come about, and why it was that Victoria, having protection, and
about the same population, had not been able to erect such colossal
buildings as were to be seen in this cityp But, looking at the prices paid
in New South Wales, he said without hesitation that they ranged from
5 to 15 per cent, more than was the case in regard to goods in protected
Victoria. Hence, he said, that Sydney had been largely built up by the
importers exploiting not only the workers, but the general community at
large. There was a great deal in favour of protection, because it was
not desirable to have a city built on the blood and sinew of the
population. If in Victoria foods could be purchased at, say, 15 per
cent, cheaper than in New South Wales, the people of Victoria had
benefited to that extent over the people in this colony. (Hear, hear.)
If Victoria could produce an article 15 per cent, cheaper under protection,
then it proved that protection was the best for people. The protec-
tionists all hoped to see the workers better looked after with wise
legislation that would safeguard their interests.
A Manufacturer Advocates the “New Protection” for the
Workers.
Mr. H. Stuart (N.S.W.) —After so many excellent speeches made
by the different delegates there remains little for me to say, but there
are two or three matters I would like to impress upon the conference,
more especially the visiting delegates from Queensland and South
Australia. A great deal of the heavy part of the work was done by
the New South Wales and Victorian delegates at Melbourne last
November, and in each and every case where the duties have been
fixed, they were calculated in this manner. Before the New South
Wales delegates left Sydney we had several meetings between the
executive and delegates of the New South Wales Protection Union
and the leaders of the different trades unions in this colony, and we
went to the Melbourne conference furnished with lists or schedules of
wages considered fair and reasonable both by the trades unionists and
this protectionist executive. And whenever duties have been fixed,
they are absolutely baaed upon that wages list, and the requirements


of employers so as to make everything fair and just for both parties ;
and if this tariff is adopts d, and I think it will be, there will then be
no reasons for any future disputes, either on the part oi individual
employers, who are protected by this proposed tariff, nor their
employees. Leaving this subject for a moment, I wish to say that
this protectionist union, as far as New South Wales is concerned, and
I know now with the approval of Victoria also, we are almost unani-
mously in favour of such measures as the Shops and Factories Act, the
Early Closing Act, the Establishment of Wages Boards, and our
Premier (Mr. Lyne) has definitely promised to pass a Compulsory
Arbitration Act this coming session. I believe that, in connection
with our protective policy, that compulsory arbitration is absolutely
necessary, or very nearly so. A conciliation board has proved useless,
and unless there is some method of compulsion introduced into the act,
arbitration will prove unworkable. Why, onr whole modern civilisa_ ;
tion has been built up on compulsion. What would be the use of onr
laws, of onr courts, our judges or magistrates, unless they had com-
pulsion behind them in the shape of a policeman or police ? Compul-
sory arbitration may sound harsh, hut British speaking peoples thrive
on compulsion so long as they have their voice in giving assent to each
step as it is passed into law. Now, I claim that, having a tariff based
on a standard of wages assented to by trades unionists themselves
without any reservation, then with compulsory arbitration the arbi-
trator, in the case of any strike or lockout, would naturally ask—
“ What is the standard wage fixed upon in this particular trade?”
Having this known, the arbitrator could certainly settle the question
in nearly one act. I consider, therefore, that there will be a clear cut
and dry way of settling all trade disputes once these two matters are
made law. ” Another matter is, and that I believe all manufacturers
who wish to be fair employers, and the majority of them do, would
welcome a straight out standard of wages, and like to have such
standard enforced against themselves, and more particularly against
unfair employers, for we must always remember that manufacturers
often want protection against other manufacturers in their own line of
trade. Speaking from personal experience as an employer for about
18 years, I have always found it to my advantage to pay slightly
higher wages than my competitors; by doing so I can get the best
and most reliable class of workers anxious to come to me. Of course
this could not he universally carried out, for if all of us compete
against each other there would soon come a limit when such competi-
tion for best hands must cease. But I hope, gentlemen, and I am
quite sure yon will all consider the employee as well as the employers,
for that is one great difficulty we have to face, for so many of out-
working people have been raised in the old countries, and are imbued
with free-trade principles, and will not see that what policy may he
suitable in Great Britain will not suit in Australia. It is not our duty
to offer advice to working men, in fact the leaders of the labour unions
are quite capable of looking out for their own Interests and those they
act for. But I would like to see legislation carried in favour of giving
further powers to registered trade unions in much the same manner
as medical men, solicitors and barristers are allowed by law to regulate
their own class interests, and I hope that our party, after the first
federal election, will he in a position to carry these reforms into law.


THE REPORT OP THE INTERCOLONIAL
PROTECTIONIST CONFERENCE,
ADOPTED in SYDNEY on 26th APRIL, shows
I.—That the completion of a Draft Federal Tariff, suitable to the
needs of the five federating colonies of New South Wales,
Queensland, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania, was the
first business of the conference.
2.—The various delegates, having fully set forth their views and the
prominent requirements of the several colonies, have agreed
to the Draft Tariff which forms the schedule to this report,
and which is certified to by the signatures of the President and
the Joint Secretaries.
3. —In the opinion of the Conference the principle of a scientific pro-
tection has been embodied in the tariff as drafted, the
following principles having been kept constantly in view:—
RAW MATERIALS.
That raw materials, for the production of which Australia is
unsuitable, should be admitted free, or at a low rate of duty.
RATES OF DUTIES : HOW FIXED.
That the amount of import duty imposed for protective purposes
on any article should be based on the difference between the cost of
production of such article in the country of its cheapest production, and
its estimated cost of production in the Australian Commonwealth,
having particular regard to the differences of w r ages paid, hours
worked and social conditition in each case. But in every case the
duty shall be such as to favor the domestic production against th
foreign.
REVENUE DUTIES MUST NOT PREJUDICE PROTECTION.
That the Federal Treasurer should, in framing his tariff, add to
the amount of any proposed duty imposed for protective purposes an
amount equivalent to any amount that may be imposed for revenue
purposes or any article entering into the composition of the protected
article.
REVENUE DUTIES MUST FALL ON LUXURIES.
That, in the levying of duties for revenue purposes, luxuries should
be taxed rather than the common necessaries of life.
PREVENTION OF MONOPOLY.
That, in determining the rate of duty on any article, consideration
should be had to the facility or otherwise of local competition in its
production. That where abundant local competition is assured thor-
oughly effective duties are essential, while in cases where great organ-


isation and large capital are required, and the nature of the output is
likely to restrict the production to a few competitors, the duty should
be moderate, so that, while affording adequate protection to the pro-
ducer, it shall not subject the consumer to the dangers of monopoly.
SUBSTITUTION MUST NOT DESTROY PROTECTION.
That all goods which compete with protected productions, or
which may be used in substitution for protected productions, should be
subjected to duties sufficient to place them on level terms with such
protected articles, notwithstanding the fact that they may be impossible
of Australian production.
PROHIBITION OF PRISON MADE IMPORTS.
That a clause to the following effect should be inserted in the
Federal Tariff Act; —“ That all goods, wares, articles and merchandise,
manufactured or produced, wholly or in part, in any foreign country
by convict or prison labour, shall not be admitted to entry at any
Custom House of the Australian Commonwealth, and the importation
thereof is hereby prohibited; and the Minister for Finance and Trade
for the time being is authorised and directed to prescribe such regula-
tions as may be necessary for the enforcement of this provision.”
PROHIBITION OF FRAUDULENT IMITATIONS.
That a clause to the following effect should be inserted in the
Federal Tariff Act“ That no article of imported merchandise which
shall copy or simulate the name or any trade mark of any domestic
manufacture or manufacturer, or which shall bear a name or mark
which is calculated to induce the public to believe that the article is
manufactured in the Australian Commonwealth, shall be admitted to
entry at any Custom House of the Commonwealth.”
GOVERNMENT IMPORTS TO PAY DUTY.
That all goods imported for the use of any State Government, or
any department thereof, should pay duty to the Commonwealth as if
they had been imported by private persons.
ENCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND MANUFACTURES BY
BONUSES.
That bonuses should be granted by the Australian Commonwealth
for the initiation of new industries, agricultural and manufacturing,
which may appear to be suitable to any portion of its territory, and
that the manufacture of iron and steel from native ores and fluxes
should be thus assisted; as also the manufacture of essential oils,
vegetable oils, perfumes, and similar products from native plants,
flowers and fruits, hemp, flax, cotton, and other fibres, and the growth
of raw silk.
ENCOURAGEMENT OF MANUFACTURES BY REBATES, &o.
That this Conference records its opinion:—
[a) That the Federal Tariff Act should encourage manufacturing
enterprise by making provision under efficient safeguards


for the manufacture of commodities in bond from articles
not readily producible in Australia, but subject to import
duties; and, upon proof that such materials have been
used for such purpose, no duties should be paid on such
dutiable raw materials.
(6) That upon proof that dutiable materials as aforesaid have
been used in the production of manufactured articles, a
rebate should be allowed on the amount of duty paid on
the dutiable materials so used.
(c) That the materials, of which manufacturing in bond shall
be permitted, and on which rebates may be allowed,
together with the amounts of such rebates, should be
fixed by resolution of the Federal Parliament, and be
scheduled to the Federal Tariff Act.
That, in case of materials subject to excise duties being used in the
manufacture of commodities, there should be allowed a rebate of
similar proportion to any rebates allowed on import duties in the like
circumstances.
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE IRON INDUSTRY.
(a) That in view of the enormous benefits which may reasonably
be expected to accrue to the Australian Commonwealth from the
establishment of the iron and steel industries within its borders, this
Conference recommends that such industries be encouraged by bonuses
from the Federal Government, for a stated period to be fixed thereby,
of 12s. 6d. per ton for every ton of pig iron or steel ingots, and bars, rods,
and sheets (whether of iron or steel), the produce of native ores and
fluxes.
( h ) That in order to encourage the manufacture of iron and steel
goods, for two years after the imposition of the federal tariff, and no
longer, a rebate equal to the amount of duty paid should be allowed
on all pig iron and steel ingots, puddled bar, and steel blooms and
billets imported and actually used within that period in the manufac-
ture of iron and steel goods of any class or character.
EXCISE DUTIES.
( a ) That unless necessary for revenue purposes no excise duties of
any kind should be levied on internal productions and manufactures,
excepting narcotics and spirits and beers.
( b) That if excise duties are deemed to be neeessarj'-, import
duties, now or hereafter imposed on imported goods of a similar
nature to those on which excise is to be levied, should be increased by
an amount equivalent to the amount of any such excise duty as may be
imposed.


ENCOURAGEMENT TO NAVIGATION.
(ff) That it be a recommendation from this Conference that all
ships, unless owned in Great Britain or Australia, he prohibited from
carrying passengers or cargo between one port and another of the
Australian Commonwealth.
(b) That in all intercolonial trading vessels a minimum rate of
wages, and maximum period of work and proper sanitary arrange-
ments should be enforced.
4,—For reasons which are manifest the details of the Draft Tariff
cannot be promulgated, without defeating the ends and aims
of all tariffs, which are to prevent undue importation and to
conserve revenue. This was quite understood in the Federal
Convention debates, when the danger was pointed out that
the New South Wales importers might half destroy the Federal
Customs revenue of the first year of the Commonwealth by
indenting under a free tariff, and thus evading the duties
which would otherwise go to the Federal Treasury. The
free-traders are fully alive to this, And are endeavouring to
gain a knowledge of the protectionist proposals with this
object of making an illicit scoop from the Federal Customs
revenue.
5.—-There are, however, a few leading lines that may be mentioned,
because they affect enormous interests, and also for the reason
that they illustrate the principle on which the Conference has
acted all through. It is held that Australia, when well in-
structed, can grow and manufacture tobacco equal to the best
in the world ; and for that reason the import duties on manu-
factured and unmanufactured tobacco, and on cigars and snuff
will be made more effective. On wines, too, both still and
sparkling, an increase is proposed, and the same may bo said of
spirits. All tools of trade and reapers and binders (patents), for
farmers are recommended to be admitted free. Iron is to be
adequately protected as a means of developing the immense
riches of the Commonwealth.
6.—Sugar deserves special mention, because it is at present the staple
industry of Queensland. Colored labour forms one of the
difficulties of the situation ; but the Conference is hopeful that
a full solution has been found for the problem. The Conference
believes that for purposes of revenue an excise duty of probably
£3 per ton may be found necessary on sugar, and if that should
be imposed, they recommend an added import duty of £6 per
ton, making the import duty on cane sugar £9 per ton, and that
on beet sugar £l4 per ton. It must be understood that it is
only the exigency of the high revenue demanded by the financial
arrangements of the Commonwealth that can induce us as
protectionists to submit to such an impost on internal production.
But on the facts at present before them they are reluctantly
forced to the conclusion that it is inevitable. They find the
consumption of sugar to have been almost the same in New


South Wales, where the import duty has been £3, as in Victoria,
where it has been £6. Moreover, the retail selling price has
been almost the same in Sydney and Melbourne, notwithstanding
the difference of duty. The amount of Sugar consumed in the
six federating colonies is at present about 160,000 tons per
annum, which, at a £3 excise duty, would yield a revenue of
£480,000. The normal increase of population will probably
increase this to £500,000 by the time the tariff comes into force.
The amount of sugar grown in Queensland and New South
Wales last year has been estimated roughly at about 190,000 or
200,000 tons, showing that Australia is even now capable of
producing more sugar than she can consume; and that sugar is
consequently an item on which even a prohibitive duty might
fitly be imposed.
-The item of tea is an important one to the general consumer. At
present there is a tea duty of 3d. per lb. in Victoria, South
Australia, and Tasmania, 6d. per lb. in Queensland, and Id.
in New South Wales. The Conference believes that as the tea
duty is not a protective one, it should be made as low as
possible, and therefore recommends a reduction to Id. per lb.
with 10 per cent, added, so that it may fall in due proportion
on the high-priced teas consumed by the wealthy. This would
make the duty on the low-priced teas about l-l,d. per lb., and
on the higher-priced teas from 3|d. to 4|d. per lb. according to
value. The Conference strongly recommends this settlement of
the tea duty as one that will serve two useful ends—first, to
conserve the revenue by an impost bn an article of universal
consumption, and secondly, to make the poor and rich pay more
equitably in the respective values they consume.
The Conference is quite satisfied that it has discovered in the
present draft tariff, herewith scheduled, the high water mark
of scientific protection as applicable up to the present date to
the whole Federal Commonwealth. There has been a special
endeavour to preserve as far as possible the extensive free list
that is embodied in the Victorian Protective Tariff. In fact
this course has been deviated from only when the industrial
requirements of other colonies made protective duties necessary.
-The social side of protection has been kept steadily in view, the
Conference being thoroughly imbued with the desire already
expressed in the constitutions of their associations, that the
worker must be protected as well as his work. It is submitted
that protection is a system of philosophy and a matter of social
condition, rather than a mere question of trade preference or
commercial supremacy. Ethics and morals must therefore have
a prominent place in what has been happily termed “ the new
protection,” although it is after all but a new expression of
truths always recognised, but gradually overlaid and obscured
by human selfishness, and the feverish rush of unhealthy
competition. We submit under this head the following
recommendations:— i*


FACTORY AND SHOP LEGISLATION.
{a) That legislation should be enacted for the due protection of all
workers in factories and shops by means of boards for individual trades,
whereon an equal number of employers and employees shall determine
all questions and hours, wages, piece work and overtime rates, trade
customs, &c., having regard to the interests of both employers and
employees; and by which the Government would enforce the decisions
of such hoards, and penalise any infraction thereof.
( b ) That the various parent protectionist associations in the
federating colonies should require from protectionist candidates for the
Federal Parliament a pledge to adopt the principle of wages boards for
individual trades.
CHINESE, &c., PRODUCTIONS MUST BE STAMPED.
That as a means of protection to oup workmen against the debasing
and demoralising competition of Chinese and other Asiatics now
manufacturing in our midst, all furniture and other productions of
such Asiatics should be prominently and indelibly stamped with a
brand indicating the fact that they were so manufactured.
WAGES OE FEMALE WORKERS.
That while having no objection to the employment of women in
occupations suitable to their physical capacity and circumstances, the
Conference is of opinion that in all cases where women perform the
same work as men, and do the same amount of it, they should be paid
exactly similar wages.
COLOURED LABOUR ON SUGAR PLANTATIONS.
That this Conference, in fixing the duty on sugar, does so with a
view to enabling the Federal Government to take such steps as will
ensure, within two years, the entire abolition of coloured labour.
10.—The question of revenue is not one that immediately concerns an
intercolonial protectionist conference. It does so only indirectly,
in so far as revenue will be one of the inevitable factors that
go to shape the federal tariff. There must be a provision, how-
ever, for the financial solvency of the States. In addition to that,
the Conference feels that the system of bonuses it recommends
may very profitably entail an annual expenditure of a consider-
able amount. We believe the tariff we have framed has made
provision for all these requirements; but should it be found that
less revenue is necessary than that provided for, the Australian
National Protection Union will be quite prepared to suggest
revenue duties that may be further remitted.
11.—The Conference has gone to much pains and some expense in
making a minute enquiry as to how much revenue would be
yielded by its draft tariff. This is all the more difficult because
in some instances increases of duties are followed by decreases and
not increases in the revenue. This is generally the case where


the duty gtimulates local production and checks importation.
For example, iron wire, unbarbed, is free in all the colonies. An
import duty of, say, 15 per cent, on federal importations valued
at £300,000, instead of yielding its percentage of £45,000,
would probably not give more than £36,000 in revenue, owing
to a probable increase in domestic manufacture and a slightly
decreased demand.
12.— The Conference has given some attention to organisation, and has
drafted a constitution, under which it is hoped the whole of the
protectionists of Australia will be consolidated into a homogen-
eous but flexible union, governed by a supreme council,
consisting of delegates from each of the protectionist head
quarters of the respective states forming the Commonwealth.
In concluding this brief resume of their proceedings, the Conference
desires to urge upon protectionists everywhere the necessity for imme-
diate action. A campaign of education must be undertaken, in which
every part of the Commonwealth must be made to understand that its
interests are bound up with the progress of the nation, and that interests,
apparently diverse, are in reality identical; that no section of the com-
munity can be injured without a corresponding injury to every other
portion ; that Australians must stand together as a whole, and work
unitedly and strenuously, not only to found a great and mighty nation,
but to establish within our borders a prosperous, a happy and a
contented people,
Thos. Hose, M.L.A., (N.S.W.), President.
¥m. D. Beazlet, M.L.A.
(Victoria),
G. McGeegoe, M.L.C.
- Vice-Presidents,
i
(South Australia),
John Cease, J.P.
(Queensland), per
Philip Feankel,
Samuel Maugee, M.L.A.
(Victoria),
Wm. F. Sohey, J.P.(N.S.W.),
Joint Secretaries.
W. E. Smith Ltd., Bridge Street, Sydney.
