

1858-9.
VICTORIA.
REPORT
OF THE
SELECT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
ON
THE ABORIGINES;
TOGETHER WITH THE
PROCEEDINGS OF COMMITTEE, MINUTES OF EVIDENCE,
AND APPENDICES.
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED 3RD FEBRUARY. 1859
BY Authority:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
D 8.


EXTRACTED FROM THE MINUTES.
TUESDAY, 26th OCTOBER, 1858.
Aborigines. —The Honorable T. McCombie, in accordance with amended notice, moved, That a Select
Committee be appointed to enquire into the present condition of the Aborigines of this Colony, and the
best means of alleviating their absolute wants; such Committee to consist of the Honorables Messrs.
H. Miller, J. Henty, G. Urquhart, M. Hervey, J. H. Patterson, and the Honorables Drs. Hope and
Tierney, and the Mover.
Debate ensued.
Question —put and passed.
The Honorable T. McCombie moved, That the Select Committee have power to take evidence.
Question —put and passed.
WEDNESDAY, 19th JANUARY, 1859.
Aborigines. —The Honorable T. McCombie, as Chairman of the Select Committee appointed on the 26th
October last, “to enquire into the present condition of the Aborigines of this Colony, and the best
means of alleviating their absolute wants,” brought up the Report of the Committee.
THURSDAY, 27th JANUARY, 1859.
Aborigines. — Retort of Select Committee. —The Honorable T. McCombie moved, in accordance with
notice. That the Report of the Select Committee on the Aborigines be received.
Question —put and passed.
THURSDAY, 3rd FEBRUARY, 1859.
Aborigines.—Report of Select Committee.— Tlie Honorable T. McCombie moved, That the Report of the
Select Committee on the Aborigines (brought up on the 19th ultimo) be printed.
Question —put and passed.


REPORT.
The Select Committee of the Legislative Council appointed to
enquire into the present condition of the Aborigines of this
Colony, and the best means of alleviating their absolute wants,
have agreed to the following report; —
Your Committee have found that the subject was brought before the
Legislature of New South Wales, previous to the separation of Victoria, on
five different occasions ; but in no case were any effectual measures adopted
for the amelioration of the Aborigines.*
From the evidence which the Committee have obtained, it appears that
at the first settlement of the Colony in 1836 there were from six to seven
thousand Aborigines distributed over its area. So great has been the
mortality amongst them, however, that so far as can be ascertained, there
are not more than a few hundreds remaining, who are in a state of
abject want, with the exception of the Yarra and Western Port tribes,
under the immediate charge of the Guardian of Aborigines and a few who
settled on or near the old Aboriginal Station at Mount Franklin.
The only Government assistance which has been given to the other
tribes has been in the shape of a few blankets, supplied by Mr. Moore when
President of the Land Board, and some casual supplies by Mr. Duffy, who
succeeded him.
Indeed, the Blacks have been in a worse position than if the Protec-
torate had never been called into existence ; for under that establishment they
received assistance and protection, but were left to their own resources again,
when it was abolished.
The great and almost unprecedented reduction in the number of the
Aborigines is to be attributed to the general occupation of the Country by the
white population ; to vices acquired by contact with a civilized race, more
particularly the indulgence in ardent spirits; and hunger, in consequence of the
scarcity of game since the settlement of the Colony ; and, also in some cases,
to cruelty and ill-treatment. The great cause, however, is apparently the
inveterate propensity of the race to excessive indulgence in spirits, which
it seems utterly impossible to eradicate. This vice is not only fatal, but
leads to other causes which tend to shorten life.
* The first was in 1838. Aboriginal Select Committee at Sydney. The late Lord Bishop, chairman ;
Report printed, and no further notice of the matter.
2nd. In 1843, Dr. Thomson, of Geelong. Returns ordered, from which it was supposed extensive mea-
sures would result; but no further notice taken of the matter.
3rd. In 1845, another Committee, under the late Mr. Windeyer as chairman, to resume again. Mr.
Windeyer died, and no further notice of the matter.
4th. In 1849, another Committee, under Mr. Foster. This report was cruel in the extreme, recom-
mending all asylums for the Blacks to he done away with, and to expend the amount on educating the Whites.
sth. In 1850, recommendations from the Governor and Executive of New South Wales, which contain
some humane considerations ; nevertheless, they were never acted upon.


Mr. Thomas, the Guardian of Aborigines, states in evidence, that one
morning lie found five drunken blacks lying buried in the mud at the Merri
Creek, which being followed by pulmonary attack, death, as is invariably the
case, ensued. It may be remarked, that consumption forms a fruitful cause
of mortality amongst them, in addition to the other causes enumerated.
It would appear that they have materially degenerated since the
advent of the whites, as Mr. Thomas has said “ the young die two to one in
proportion to the old; I have some old people yet.” The rapid settlement
necessary upon the country being occupied by flocks and herds was more
unfavorable to the Aborigines than if it had only been gradually taken
up for agricultural purposes.
Your Committee are of opinion that great injustice has been per-
petrated upon the Aborigines—that, when the Government of the Colony
found it necessary to take from them their hunting grounds and their means
of living, proper provision should have been made for them. Had they been
a strong race, like the New Zealanders, they would have forced the new
occupiers of their country to provide for them ; but being weak and ignorant,
even for savages, they have been treated with almost utter neglect.
With the exception of the Protectorate, which was an emanation of
the Imperial Government, and which seemed to have been only partially
successful, little or nothing has been done for the black denizens of the
country. Victoria is now entirely occupied by a superior race, and there is
scarcely a spot, excepting in the remote mountain ranges, or dense scrubs,
on which the Aborigine can rest his weary feet. To allow this to con-
tinue would be to tolerate and perpetuate a great moral wrong ; and your
Committee are of opinion that, even at this late period, a vigorous effort
should be made to provide for the remnants of the various tribes, so that
they may be maintained in comparative plenty. This is a duty incumbent
upon the community, and clearly in accordance with the principles of
advanced civilization and Christianity. The Committee regret that it has
been so long neglected. They trust that your Honorable House will
vigorously strive for some permanent provision for the poor oppressed
and wandering natives, who have been so long left in abject want and
misery; and that endeavors will be made, in the language of the Society
for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge in Foreign Parts, “ for the
conversion of the blacks, whose country God’s Providence has given to the
British Crown, and whose amelioration and happiness he has confided to
British Christian benevolence.”
I lie responsibility of the condition to which the Aborigines have been
reduced rests with the colonists, as the Home Authorities have endeavored to
ameliorate their condition, but without much success. The present Earl of
Derby, when Secretary of State for the Colonies, thus expressed himself in a
despatch to the then Governor of New South Wales, of which this Colony
at that time formed a portion;—“ I should not, without the most extreme
reluctance, admit that nothing can be done—that with respect to them alone
the doctrines of Christianity must be inoperative, and the advantages of
civilization incommunicable. I cannot acquiesce in the theory, that they are
incapable of improvement, and that their extinction before the advance of the
white settler is a necessity, which it is impossible to control. I recommend
them to your protection and favorable consideration, with the greatest
earnestness, but at the same time with perfect confidence; and I assure you
that I shall be willing and anxious to co-operate with you in any arrange-
ment for their civilization which may hold out a fair prospect of success. It is
impossible to contemplate the condition and the prospects of that unfortunate
race, without the deepest commiseration.” Lord Glenelg was quite as
anxious about the welfare of the Aborigines.
In addition to the examination of such witnesses as were at hand, your
Committee framed a list of queries on the subject, which they forwarded to
IV


such gentlemen as they thought competent to reply to any of them, and
who were either living at too great a distance, or were too much occupied to
attend and give evidence. The information thus received is of a very
important character, and it is hoped that it will collectively form one of the
most valuable historical documents extant connected with Victoria, and be
prized by the learned societies of Europe, which have been very anxious to
obtain replies to many of the queries.
The only practical method of accomplishing the desired object, and the
one most likely under all the circumstances of the case to succeed, would, in
the opinion of your Committee, be to form reserves for the various tribes, on
their own hunting grounds. Those ought to be of such a size as would enable
each tribe to combine agricultural and gardening operations with the depas-
turing of a moderate number of cattle and sheep (such reserves in agricultural
districts not to exceed 500 acres ; but wdiere the land is not capable of being
used for agriculture, then the reserve to be materially extended, in order that
it might unite pastoral with agricultural pursuits) ; and every effort should be
made to induce the Aborigines to take an interest in the occupations of civilized
life and give their aid in carrying out the various branches of industry. Those
establishments ought to be under the charge of missionaries, clerical or lay,
whose duty it would be to endeavor to teach the Aborigines the great
principles of Christianity, as well as the elemental branches of secular
education; and it is the opinion of the Committee, that ample supplies of
provisions and blankets should be provided for these establishments until
they could be made self-supporting, which your Committee trust might
ultimately be the case.
In cases where grants for this object are made, the sites should be
chosen in retired localities, and no licensed taverns should be permitted in
their vicinity.
It was hoped that it might have been practicable to have settled the
whole of the remnants of the tribes in one locality, and the first two witnesses,
Mr. Thomas, Guardian of Aborigines, and the Rev. Mr. Spieseke, Moravian
Missionary to the Aborigines, were examined at great length on the subject.
The former gentleman expressed a decided opinion against the practicability
of such a plan. The blacks would not leave their own hunting grounds, and
would pine away at once if removed from them. The various tribes would
never agree to go there ; consequently the idea of settling them together
was reluctantly abandoned by your Committee, in favor of the plan that all
the witnesses appeared to agree in thinking the most likely to succeed.
Your Committee hope that, in some measure, under the plan which
they have suggested, the remnants of the Aborigines may be both
civilized and christianized. They find, upon a thorough investigation of this
part of the subject, that the Aborigines are possessed of mental power
on a par with their brethren of the other races of man; and that they are
perhaps superior to the Negro, and some of the more inferior divisions of the
great human family. They are supported in this opinion by Dr. Pickering,
the only writer on the subject who personally inspected the races whom he
described, and who therefore stands high as an authority on the subject. He
says —“ I would refer to an Australian as the finest model of the human pro-
portions I have ever met with in muscular development —his head might
compare with an antique bust of a philosopher.” * Their perceptive faculties
are peculiarly acute, they are apt learners, and possess the most intense
desire to imitate their more civilized brethren in almost everything. Mr.
Archibald Campbell has given most important evidence in reference to their
diligence and faithfulness as servants, and Messrs. Chase, Spieseke, and
Parker, to their quickness and capacity for acquiring the rudiments of
education, which is corroborated by various public documents written by
* “ The Races of Men.”—By Dr. Pickering.
D S.—a.
V


G. A. Robinson, Esq., for many years Chief Protector of Aborigines in this
country.
The general tenor of the evidence will bear out the conclusion which
your Committee have arrived at —that, while the Aborigines are endued with
keen perceptive faculties, there is a considerable deficiency in their reflective
faculties, and a certain want of steadiness of purpose in their characters,
which appears the great obstacle to be overcome in reclaiming them, and
bringing them within the pale of civilization and Christianity.
THOS. McCOMBIE,
Chairman.
VI


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.
WEDNESDAY, 27th OCTOBEE, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables Dr. Tierney, J. H. Patterson, M. Hervey.
The committee deliberated. The chairman was authorised to prepare a list of queries, the
game to be printed and distributed to the members of committee prior to next meeting.
The committee adjourned until twelve o’clock on Monday, Ist November.
MONDAY, Ist NOVEMBEE, 1858.
Members present :
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables J. H. Patterson, J. Henty, Dr. Tierney.
List of Queries submitted by the chairman, read, considered, amended, and adopted.
Mr. William Thomas, Guardian of Aborigines, was examined. The witness handed in certain
documents.
Eev. E. W. Spieseke, Moravian Missionary, was examined.
Eev. F. A. Hagenauer, Moravian Missionary, was examined.
Eev. F. W. Spieseke was further examined.
The committee adjourned until half-past two p.m. on Tuesday, 2nd November.
TUESDAY, 2nd NOYEMBEE, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables Dr. Tierney, M. Hervey, J. Henty, J. H. Patterson.
The committee deliberated.
Ordered—That the queries be circulated amongst the police magistrates, settlers, and others
supposed to he in a position to afford information upon the subject ; also, that an envelope bearing the
address of the chairman (and Is. stamp affixed) be enclosed in each circular transmitted by post.
The committee adjourned until one o’clock on Tuesday, 9th November.
TUESDAY, 9th NOYEMBEE, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables G. Urquhart, J. H. Patterson, Dr. Hope, Dr. Tierney, J. Henty. -
Mr. William Hull, J.P., was examined. .
Eev. S. L. Chase was examined, and handed in certain documents, {fide Appendix A.)
Committee deliberated. ...
Ordered—That the Queries be transmitted to the heads of the several religious denominations.
The committee adjourned until one o’clock on Wednesday, 17th November.
WEDNESDAY, 17th NOVEMBEE, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables J. H. Patterson, G. Urquhart, Dr. Hope.
Mr. Archibald Campbell was examined.
Ordered—That Mr. E. S. Parker be written to, and requested to bring in his replies to the
queries on the 24th instant, and furnish such additional information as he may wish.
The committee adjourned until one o’clock on Wednesday, 24th November.
WEDNESDAY, 24th NOVEMBEE, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables J. H. Patterson, Dr. Hope.
Mr. E. S. Parker was examined.
Committee adjourned until one o’clock on Wednesday, Ist December.


WEDNESDAY, Ist DECEMBER, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorables T. McCombie, Dr. Hope.
A quorum not being present, no business was transacted.
WEDNESDAY. 15th DECEMBER, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables J. H, Patterson, Dr. Tierney.
Committee deliberated.
Ordered—That circulars be addressed to the persons to whom queries had been transmitted,
requesting the favor of an early reply, to enable the committee to report soon after the re-assembling
of Parliament, and intimating that any replies not received by the 10th January, 1859, cannot be
appended to the Report.
Committee adjourned until two o’clock on Tuesday, 18th January.
TUESDAY, 18th JANUARY, 1859.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables J. H. Patterson, J. Henty, M. Hervey.
Committee deliberated.
Draft Report read paragraph by paragraph—part considered.
The committee adjourned until two p.m. on the 19th January.
WEDNESDAY, 19th JANUARY, 1859.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair.
The Honorables M. Hervey, J. H, Patterson.
Draft Report further considered—agreed to.
Ordered—That the Chairman do report the same to the House.
MINUTES
VIII


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
MONDAY, Ist NOVEMBER, 1858.
Members present ;
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair ;
The Honorable J. Henty
„ J. 11. Patterson
The Honorable Dr. Tierney.
William Thomas, Esq., examined.
1. By the Chairman. —I believe you are guardian of aborigines ?-—I am.
2. How long have you been connected with the aboriginal establishment ?—I received
my appointment in December, 1837, in the first instance. I received my appointment from the
Home Government as assistant protector of aborigines on the 21st December, 1837.
3. You were appointed by the Home Government?— Yes, by Lord Glenelg, Colonial
Secretary of State. I was ordered by Sir George Grey to go to Sydney, where I arrived on
the 3rd of August, 1838.
4. How long did you hold the office of assistant protector to the aborigines ?—From the
year 1837 to the close of 1849.
5. At which period you were appointed guardian?—On Ist January, 1850, I was
appointed guardian.
6. To the aborigines generally, or a portion of them ?—Confined to the counties of Bourke
and Mornington ; but subsequently, by an arrangement between myself and Mr. La Trobe,
Evelyn was added to it.
7. Were you appointed guardian of the aborigines with a view to protect the aborigines,
or simply to keep them from coming into the towns and annoying the whites ? —My instructions,
on being appointed guardian, were in fact almost verbatim, the same as Lord Glenelg gave me
as protector ; but Mr. La Trobe stated that I was to take cognizance of all information I
could get respecting the aborigines, and take cognizance of everything that occurred in
Melbourne and in those three counties, and to keep the blacks out of Melbourne.
8. So that you had a general and a special instruction ?—I had ; and if I could not
keep the blacks from Melbourne, I had liberty, as a last extremity, to apply to the Commissioner
of Crown Lands to assist me with the police.
9. Can you give the committee any idea as to what the number of aborigines were on the
settling of Port Phillip in 1837 ? —I have made a calculation, but it is calculated upon the
number of acres in the whole of the colony, and the advantages upon coast and river tribes.
My calculation, which I have not with me, is, that there were 6000 aborigines at the least.
I have calculated by the square miles; taking my own three counties as a datum to go from, and
knowing that many of the other tribes were far superior to my own, 1 have calculated upon a
very low calculation that there were at least 6000.
10. Have yon any idea as to what the number has been reduced to at the present
moment ?—I have not, only as far as regards my own tribes.
11. In what proportion have they been reduced ?—I have only thirty-one now in the two
tribes, and had 300 at the time I came to Port Phillip. I have taken a regular register of
every birth and death since.
12. Do you think that would be a tolerably fair average of the decrease throughout the
Colony ?—My impression is, that it has been greater amongst other tribes, especially to the
westward.
13. What do you attribute that great mortality to ?—There have been various collisions
in other parts of the country, but not in the counties that I have been connected with, and I
attribute it to that, when added to the amount that die annually from intoxicating liquors. At the
Merri Creek, one morning at daybreak, there were four or five lying bedded in the mud, drunk,
not dead; cold comes on, and as soon as disease touches a black’s chest you cannot save him.
14. Is there any disease acquired from the whites which has tended to increase the
mortality ?—There was when I first came amongst them, but they know how to manage that as
well as Europeans do, and they never get it to that excess now that they used to formerly.
15. Do they ever injure one another in your tribes—have you had any cases of blacks
murdering blacks, or aggressions between one portion of a tribe and another ?—There have been
cases of murder.
16. Have they been numerous ?—No.
17. Or have there been collisions between neighboring tribes? —1 have seen many in the
cases of neighboring tribes, but in the same tribe I think I have only known one instance.
18. Have the cases of murder within the tribe been frequent ? —No.
19. Have there been many cases of murder perpetrated by your tribe upon other tribes,
or vice versa ? —Many.
Aborigines.— a.


, 20. Have they been numerous ?—The murder that I allude to between one and another in
the same tribe was occasioned by drunkenness—one friend cut another’s head almost off with a
butcher’s knife. That was an isolated case.
21. In fact, a case of insanity from intoxication ?—Yes.
22. And that is the only case in your own tribe ?—Yes, the only one.
23. Have there been frequent cases of murders in collisions between your own tribe and
other tribes ?—Yes; very many.
24. Is that propensity to aggression wearing out amongst them ?—Decidedly so. The
Gipps Land blacks and the Western Port blacks, who have been continually at enmity, according
to what I can learn, from time immemorial, are now the most friendly blacks with each other;
more so than their old friends.
25. Has the Government rendered your tribe any assistance in the shape of supplies,
such as blankets and provisions ? —For many years we were without any supplies, until the
stations were formed in the year 1842.
26. After they were formed, were you then supplied ?—Regularly supplied.
27. Up to what time was your tribe regularly supplied —has your tribe been regularly
supplied up to the presenttime ? —No; it ceased on the breaking up of the stations in 1843.
The Government would not suffer anything to be given to the blacks, unless they would stop at
the station, and they deserting it for six or eight months, the station was broken up and made
a police station of.
28. Which station do you allude to?—Nerree Nerree Warreen.
29. Then, after that year, were any supplies given? —Not till 1853.
30. And since 1853 what supplies have been given ?—Regular supplies to the two
tribes, the Yarra tribe and the Western Port tribe. The Yarra tribe is from Melbourne up to
the end of Evelyn, and the other in Mornington and down to the coast.
31. Have those supplies been attended with good results?—Decidedly so ;we have had
very few deaths, comparatively, since then.
32. Then that has prolonged the lives of the remaining portion of the tribe?—Yes, in
two ways. Mr. La Trobe and myself were often displeased with each other. Mr. La Trobe
was displeased with me ; he insisted upon the blacks being kept out of Melbourne. 1 could not
keep them out, and the result of it was, that I told Mr. La Trobe that, if he would permit me to
have supplies for my own blacks, I would guarantee to keep my own blacks out, and then I
knew the others would not come ; that is how it was arranged ; and ever since then my
blacks have not wanted anything.
33. I believe none of the other tribes but yours have had any regular supplies from the
Government? —Not till this present ministry came into office, at least till Mr. Moore’s Government.
Wo were under the Survey Department, and the Gipps Land blacks said that they had had no
blankets or anything of the kind for four years, they came down this time last year. 1 wrote to
Mr. Moore saying that they were on the road and I would meet them at the Inlets —they came as
near as Brighton. Mr. Moore asked me what was the best plan to pursue. I told him to give
them all a pair of blankets and provisions for the journey, and I would see them back to their
own country. Recently, a very respectable gentleman has arrived from Gipps Land, Mr.
McMillan, who told me that the first time the blankets went down there were about fifty, and
there were about 600 blacks, and Mr. McCrae was obliged to tear the blankets in two to pacify
the blacks.
34. What supplies have been given since this Ministry came in ?—Whatever requisition
I have asked for has always been granted.
35. How many tribes have received assistance since this Ministry came in—have any
other tribes but the tribes you have alluded to been assisted ?—Yes, at Bacchus Marsh. Mr.
Pohlman wrote to me about the distress of the blacks there, recommending a very kind lady
there who had taken a great interest in the blacks, I wrote back that, if she submitted a requi-
sition to the Government, I was confident the Government would supply them. Mr. Duffy
referred it to me, and all the requisition that she made was supplied ; also at Swan Hill, and
the aboriginal station under the clergy of the Church of England.
36. Still, it has only been casual ?—Only casual.
37. Have you an impression that, if a regular system of supplying the wants of the
aborigines were carried out, it would prolong their lives and ameliorate their condition?—
Decidedly so.
38. Do you think it would be possible to do that by employing a staff under you to look
after the aborigines and leaving the distribution of the supplies to magistrates and gentlemen of
standing throughout the bush, or would it be necessary to have persons to look after the depots
and give out the supplies ?—I think the safest and best plan would be for magistrates in the
different districts to have the blankets there at a police station, the same as they do on the
Sydney side. There is one advantage, that the police stations are studded all over the country
and mostly have sixty or seventy acres of land attached to them by a creek or river, and there
would be a place for the blacks to camp on; it would familiarise the blacks with the police,
so that they would become friendly with one another.
39. Then you think the police stations are the proper places to have the supplies at ?
Yea, anywhere where there is a stipendiary magistrate.
40. By Mr. Patterson. —ls there any unfriendly feeling existing between the police and
the natives ?—Not that I know of. In my district they hail each other.
41. You said it would make them more friendly ?—We have two blacks come in now for
murder. I submitted inter sc cases to the Government this morning; really it is a painful
2


thing. These blacks came from beyond Mount Souse a great way ; one is as stupid as the
blacks were when we first came into the colony'.
42. 11;/ the Chairman. —ls there any other plan that you could suggest for ameliorating
the condition of the blacks —such as providing a tract of country where they could all be settled
and kept as much as possible from contact with the Europeans ? —I am sorry to state that my
experience, so far as it has gone, in all previous exertions that have been made is, that they have
proved totally fruitless.
43. That applies to small isolated attempts, that is to say, such as Peacock’s school and
Barrabool school; but do you think that, if a large tract of country sufficient for the purpose were
appropriated to themselves under proper restrictions, and care were taken to keep them from any
communication with the whites or the civilized race, that it would be likely to extend the term
of their existence, and that they would be likely to settle into fixed habits and become a settled
and permanent people ?—I do not think they would settle into fixed habits very readily, but at
all events population might go on. But there should be no tract of land in any shape whatever
behind the station that should ever be let for the squatting interest- —it is a thing utterly impos-
sible—there could not be a Averse plan of civilizing blacks than having them in a squatting
country. There was not a place so avcll secured round as Nerree Nerree Warreen ; Ave had the
Rev. Mr. Cloav on one side, and Mr. Foster on the other, and religious people all round us, and yet
the contamination that got upon that station from the men on the different farms was very great.
44. Supposing a tract of country such as Gipps Land could be set apart entirely for the
whole of the aborigines of the colony Avithout being interfered with by squatting or farming,
would they be likely to settle doAvn upon it and become a fixed people ?—I think it Avould
be impossible to get blacks from the Wimmera or any other part to come to Gipps Land.
Supposing, for the sake of argument, that Avere the spot fixed upon, you might kidnap the
children ; but I do not think it is at all practicable to settle the blacks in that way.
45. If each tribe had a special place set apart on their own hunting grounds, and reserved
from squatting and farming and every thing else, Avould they be likely to settle down into more
fixed habits ? —I doubt it. There Avould be some encouragement if they were not interfered
with by any one else but missionaries or those intended to benefit them. If there Avas a tract
of land of 120 square miles and five or six tribes only in it, it might answer, because the people
Avould be still upon their oavh grounds. I think in Africa that answered well, but it would be a
cruel thing and a hard ease to bring them away from their own hunting grounds—to entice them
away.
46. They do not live so long hoav as they did when you first kneAv them, do they —they
are getting more effeminate ?—The young die two to one in proportion to the old. I have some
old people left still.
47. Have most of those avlio Avere born about the time you came into the colony died
since ?—Yes ; avc have only one child left, and she is a fine girl five years of age.
48. Then you consider that the physical constitution has degenerated very much ?—I do
not say they have not had children, but they have been made away with.
49. Ho you think the children could be got away from their parents and preserved—do
you think they would give them up ?—No ; I tried to get that girl, but the mother would not
give her up. The only AAmy Avould be to get them from a very far distance to a central school.
50. By Dr. Tierney. —Would they be more likely to give them to you Avhen they Avere
infants? —We have had very few born since I have been amongst them.’ I do not think we
have had six children born since I have been amongst them.
51. By Mr. Patterson. —Since you have been protector?—l do not think there have been
more than six or eight born. lam talking of my tAvo tribes. I have had as many as fifty
children in Melbourne, but they have been belonging to other tribes Avhich have congregated in
Melbourne.
52. By Dr. Tierney. —Are you aware of there being any idea amongst them as to their
destroying one of tAvins ? —I never kneAv them to have tAvins.
53. By the Chairman. —Under existing circumstances, Avhat practicable plan would you
suggest for ameliorating the condition of the blacks on their own hunting grounds?—l would
have depots all over the country for provisions; at all oA'cnts, a pair of blankets every year, and
if stations are formed, they should be formed upon their own territory, and four or five stations
of that kind in a circuit, Avherever a spot can be found ; and that is the only thing that i
consider Avill preserve the aboriginal race.
54. What do you mean by stations—do you mean small reserves of ground with provisions,
or simply putting the provisions on a police station ?— Depots here and there, and after tAvclve
months or so it might be seen where they most frequented, or that might be ascertained from
information gained by the local magistrates. I have never been further than Lake Colac myself,
so that I can say very little about the westward.
55. And Avhen you found where they most frequented, Avould you have stations for
them?—Yes, the magistrates could ascertain where they Avould like to be.
56. Could any attempt be made to civilize them and bring them more into our habits
upon those stations wdien once located ?—There ought to be some system of education carried
out in some shape or other, for they are not deficient in abilities for learning, excepting in
arithmetic. I have a boy who reads and Avrites well, who has been, from an infant under my
charge, one of the Gipps Land blacks.
57. Would you propose having missionaries sent to them? —I should say missionaries
to teach and to educate and look after them. There used to be some German missionaries,
that used to work as well as teach.
3


58. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you think, if there was a kind of agricultural or industrial
school instituted, so as to teach them habits of gardening, it would be desirable to teach them
industry, together with reading and writing, upon their own ground, and let them have the result
of that garden ?—Yes, let them have the result and consider it their own.
59. Let them grow their own potatoes and eat them, and grow their own fruit and eat
it ?—I have not the least doubt that, if they were separated from the whites, it would answer in
a great measure. We carried that on pretty well at Nerree Nerree Warreen, but another tribe
of blacks came down and wo had to cut all our own corn, and there were about four cart loads
of cabbages forced to be thrown away, because the blacks all went away and would not eat them.
There was going to be a tight at Lake Colae, and they wanted to go to see the fight. Now it
would be quite different, if they were settled in the way proposed; those missionaries would be
peace-makers ; for though the different tribes are fighting, they are friendly. They never
marry in their own tribes. They used to be always fighting and always intermarrying, so that
they kept up a sort of confederacy amongst themselves.
60. Is this fighting a sort of fighting for love ?—lt is more about the lubras than any-
thing else. I never knew but one instance of a black being killed in a fight.
61. By Mr. Patterson. —ls there not a tendency for them to fight and commit murder
when different tribes meet together ? —They exchange lubras and settle all manner of differences
when they meet. That is the cause of their fighting.
62. Is there not a tendency for them to fight and commit murder when different tribes
meet ? —1 have never known much murder committed ; there has been a good deal of fighting.
63. Did you not know of a murder in Melbourne, about 1840, when several tribes were
congregated here ?—Yes ; one man speared another in a corroboree. In that case that young
man’s father had killed the other man’s father.
64. By Mr. Plenty. —They meet to settle encroachments ? —No ; but for example, in the
course of six months there will be a death here and a death there, and when they come together,
it is all settled how they died ; and then the parties who have lost a brother or relative get
angry and throw spears, and there is a fight. There is nothing material, unless there is life and
death on the carpet; and then, if he has been killed by another tribe, there is a fight.
65. By Mr. Patterson. —Is there not some superstitious idea, that when one black dies
his kidney fat has been stolen by another tribe, and then the tribe of the man who has died go
and commit murder in the other tribe ?—Yes ; but they seldom come amongst their friends.
66. Is there any cannibalism amongst them ?—No. I have often watched that, and the
only extent to which it goes is, that, when they have a victim, they take the kidney fat out and
rub themselves over with it.
67. By. Dr. Tierney. —Do you think, if there was some law to keep the blacks out of
all towns, it would be attended with some good result ?—Decidedly so ; and that could soon be
carried out if they were provided with provisions.
68. How is it that you say so many die from intoxicating liquor, and still there is a law
to prevent those unfortunate beings from receiving it ? how is it that they get the drink ?—I
have tried in every direction to find out, and I have had a conversation with the blacks in the
morning, at Brighton, and, perhaps, at dinner time I have found them drunk —the very same
blacks. I have gone about from one public house to another, and they have not served
them. There was a poor woman called me into her hut as I was passing, and said, “ Sir, my
little girl brought me in a sixpence, and she said some blacks outside had got her to fetch them
some bottles of rum ; ” that is how they get it. Ido not think it is the publicans serve them.
69. Do you think the Europeans ever buy their blankets by giving them drink ? —I do
not think they would.
70. You think the blacks retain their blankets ?—Yes,
71. By Mr. Patterson. —But you have known them to sell their opossum skin rugs, have
you not ?—Yes, but they can make another of those ; they cannot make a blanket. I have tried
several times to endeavor to get a brand upon them, to detect anything of the kind.
72. Do you believe they would sell their blankets, if any one would buy them ?—Yes, but
it must be a very low character that would take a blanket away from a black. I think some
drunken black such as Derrimut would sell his blanket for drink.
73. Would they sell them if any one would purchase them ?—lf a black was half drunk
and a man was to say, “ I will give you a couple of shillings for that blanket,” he would sell it.
74. Or for a fig of tobacco ?—I doubt that.
75. By the Chairman. —Do you think they have any superstitious horror of a white man ?
do you think, if they could get an opportunity, they would assassinate him ?—No.
76. That is not their habit, you think 'i —No, as soon as I came amongst them I endeavored
to make them sensible of the English law, and I do not think they have killed a white man in
those three counties.
77. By Dr. Tierney. —But they do conceal murders amongst themselves?—Yes ; you
might find them out accidentally.
78. Then they are aware that they are doing wrong in killing each other ?■—They are
aware that the white people do not like it ; they never disguise it among themselves.
79. By Mr. Patterson. —How many of the tribes you were looking after went into the
black police ?—I think about eighteen out of the thirty-two.
80. When that system was broken up, did you find those better conducted men than the
others ?—No, worse ; and they are all dead ; there is not one of them alive now.
81. By the Chairman. —Had they acquired a taste for dissipated habits ?—Yes, most
awful drunkenness. In fact, in the case of Gellibrand, I was with him in Melbourne, and he
4


actually died and was buried in going back to his station. They laid him in the cart. He was 1
one of the troopers going out of the town, and he was dead and buried before I knew it.
82. By Mr. Patterson. —Were any measures taken to educate the police in any way ?
None whatever, beyond their exercise.
83. By the Chairman. —Or to prevent them from getting drunk ?—No.
84. By Mr. Patterson. —There was no drink given them ? —Certainly not.
85. Did they get pay ?—Yes, three pence a day.
86. Flow was that spent ? as they thought proper themselves, or was there any control
exercised over them ?—I have had many complaints made to me that they never did get their
money ; they would get 2s. 6d. or 3s. at the end of the quarter —the officers got it; but the
officers and men too are all dead. There is not one left of that force.
87. Neither officers nor men ?—Not one.
88. Captain Dana was in it, and he is left ?—No, he was not in it then ; he was brought
in afterwards. When they got rid of the only good man that was in it—Mr. Bennett ;he died,
and the present Captain Dana was brought in. t
89. By Mr. Henty. —Have you had any experience of the blacks on the Goulburn .
Yes, I know most of them on the Goulburn ; I have been travelling with them.
90. Are they in considerable numbers there ?—They were a very powerful tribe ; the
Goulburn tribe amounted to 600 some years ago.
91. They are still numerous, are they not ?■—A great number of them have died ; taey
mostly come down to Kilmore ; that is, they hang about the public-houses there. _
92. Do you know in what state the natives of that district are now, as to their habits or
means of living ?—They must be very destitute. There was a station at the Goulburn under
Mr. Le Souef, which has been done away with for some years. _
93. You are not aware whether there are many children in that district ?—No ; by what
I learn occasionally from the blacks, most of the Goulburn blacks are dead ; there are very few
of them left; they are mostly hanging about Seymour and Kilmore and those towns ; occasionally
they draw as nigh as Bacchus Marsh.
The witness withdrew.
The Rev. F. W. Spioseke examined.
94. By the Chairman. —You are a missionary ?—Yes, of the Moravian Church. 1
93. How long have you been in the Colony ?—I first came out here in February, 1850.
96. Where have you been settled in the Colony ?—On the banks of the Murray. I may
just mention that, in July, 1856, I left the Colony and went back to Germany. I was from 1850
to 1856 in the Colony.
97. You were one of the missionaries at Lake Boga ?—Yes.
98. Had your mission special reference to the aborigines of the Colony ?—Yes.
99. Did you form a mission station at Lake Boga ? —We had one, hut it was abolished.
100. How many of the aborigines were under your control there ? —We averaged about
twenty-five or thirty; at one time we had 100 about our place. They would just come and
stay for a little while, and then travel about, as their habits are.
101. Had you a grant of land for the purpose ?—There was a piece of land reserved.
102. You had land under your control at the time ? —-Yes, to some degree we had.
103. What extent of land ? —There was a reserve set apart of twenty-live square miles ;
and, for our special purpose, wo had somewhere about 1000 acres for the private use of the
mission. The reserve of twenty-five square miles was for the use of the aborigines.
104. That has been lost to you now, has it not ?—Yes.
105. And has the 1000 acres been lost ? —Yes.
106. Then you have no land nor station there ? —No, not now.
107. Had you any difficulty with the aborigines who were upon the station —did you find
it easy to communicate literary and religious instruction to them?—Their moral condition is so
depraved and low, it is rather difficult to get at them.
108. Do you consider it practicable?—l have been among them for about four or five
years, and, knowing all the difficulties I had to contend with, lam still in hope. I rest upon
the command of God. Success, of course, must come from Him, and I may say lam still in hope.
109. Do you think that the system of forming stations, such as that at Lake Boga, and
locating the natives upon them, could be carried out advantageously? —That is only my own
opinion, I do not give it as the opinion of the board ; I think it could he advantageously done.
110. By Dr. Tierney. —lf you had been allowed to remain there, do you think you would
have been able to bring them into habits of industry?—l am confident that it would have been
successful ultimately, but to what extent I cannot say. At the latter part of the time we were
there it looked very favorable.
111. How long was the station there? —About five years.
112. By Mr. Patterson. —What was the greatest number of aborigines you ever had on
the station? —We staid there for more than two years before one of the blacks ventured to come
near us.
113. And when they did come, what was the greatest number you had? —At first oniy
one family came, and by degrees more and more, and at one time we had about a hundred.
The average would be between twenty and thirty.
114. When you left the station, how many were there? —I think about forty, and when
we left they were all anxious for us to remain.
5
Aborigines— b.


115. What became of the other sixty?—The natives are not settled there, they roam
about from one station to another. There may be more at the station at one time than at another.
116. By the Chairman. —Do you think it would be possible to instil anything like
industrious habits into them, so that they would learn to cultivate the soil ?—Yes, I think so,
because we tried it and it succeeded. We commenced to have a small garden, and they took a
great fancy to it. Sometimes they left, but they generally came back again, and attended and
looked after their own cultivated plot of ground.
117. Could you give the committee any suggestions for their practical improvement.
You heard the examination of the last witness, Mr. Thomas, and heard the questions put to him,
in reference to a general grant of land for the whole of them and special grants for each tribe on
its own hunting ground. Do you agree with what Mr. Thomas stated generally in reference to
that point?—ln the first instance, I must say that the rudiment and foundation of all plans to
ameliorate their condition must be the Gospel.
118. But still the means must be used?—l think a block of land would be good.
119. For each tribe?—l would not say to each family, but to each of the large tribes.
I fully agree with Mr. Thomas, that it would not do to take them away from their hunting-
grounds; they are too much attached to them, and they would pine away, I am sure.
120. What extent of land do you think would be necessary for each large tribe ? —That
is a difficult point for me to say anything upon, that rests with the Government; but where the
land is poor, of course the block of land should be larger than where the land is better; because
where the land is poor, agricultural pursuits cannot be followed.
121. Then your recommendation would be, that the size of the blocks should be governed
with reference to the quality of the land, and the number of the tribe located upon it ?—Just so.
122. Is there any other suggestion which you could make to the committee with reference
to the amelioration of the natives ?—Besides giving a piece of land for their use, of course other
assistance might be very welcome too, as clothing and food, because they are destitute, and
in fact, being deprived of their soil and not being now well accustomed to their aboriginal habits,
they are dependent upon what they can get, and they travel about, and in some degree they may
be treated kindly; but they often are sent about from one place to another and get that food to
which they are now accustomed in a manner that we should not like to see ; so that it is always
necessary to have them provided in the first start with clothing and food.
123. By Dr. Tierney. —Do you think that, if you built habitations for them, you would
get them to live in them ?—I think they would prefer to be in the open air at first, because they
are not accustomed to habitations, but I am confident they would get used to it by degrees and
would like it by and bye. In cold or rainy weather they are glad to get shelter in a hut or
house belonging to whites, and often told me, on those occasions, they should like to have one of
their own.
124. Have you known many infants born in your time ?—Very few.
125. Do you think their parents would give them up for educational purposes ?—That
depends upon circumstances.
126. Supposing you had an establishment such as has been spoken of on their hunting
ground, would they allow the children to be reared there ?—Yes, on their hunting grounds; but
they would not like to part with them altogether, because they are affectionate and like them.
On these conditions they would be pleased to have them educated.
127. Then do you think that the next generation might be civilized by that means ?
Yes, by the grace of God I hope so, and I think so.
128. If they were taken gradually in place of forcing them into education, letting them
come on into habits of industry gradually, by getting an hour’s work at first and increasing it as
they went on, do you think that could be advantageously done ?—Yes ; in that I fully agree. I
think it can only be done by degrees.
129. By Mr. Patterson. —Supposing you had small reserves in different parts of the
districts of, say a square mile each, and give the natives food and clothes, would you consider it
advisable that they should take the clothes away with them when they went hunting, or that
they should leave them, and when they returned get the clothing again ? —Sometimes they do not
stick much to clothing and put it off, but then they will take it on again if they come back.
130. Did you feed them at the station you were at ?—Yes, if they worked for it.
131. Would you suggest their being fed without working for it?—No, except the old and
infirm and children, who are not able to work.
132. How long have you known them to remain at the station at any one time, when you
have ]J)een feeding them?—l recollect one family staid for three months.
133. Did they do much work during that period?—Yes; every day. Sometimes more,
sometimes less.
134. By Dr. Tierney. —They did every day work, more or less?—Yes; you must always
consider that they are people not accustomed to work. You must not expect them to go on like
white people; it is impossible.
135. Did you feed them at the station, or did they go out to get their natural food ?
Those who worked were fed.
136. And those that were worked and fed did not wish to go out after their kangaroo
hunting?—Occasionally they would take a fancy to go, and we would let them go.
137. By Mr. Patterson. —When you speak of feeding them, what sort of rations did you
give them?—They got a regular scale.
138. What did it consist of?—Flour, sugar, and tea; that was the principal food; and
tobacco.
6


139. Did you give them meat?—Yes.
140. Then you had sheep there?—We bought them.
141. Had you none belonging to the mission?—No.
142. By the Chairman. And you grew vegetables ?—Yes ;we had a nice garden.
143. By Dr. Tierney.— Used they to eat vegetables ?—Yes; they like vegetables.
144. And fruit?—Yes.
145. By Mr. Patterson. —Were you ever at Jim Crow?—Yes; I saw Mr. Parker’s
station there.
146. Y hat did you think of that establishment?—T think Mr. Parker did all he could,
considering he was only a protector. He was only appointed to be a protector, but he also took
care of their spiritual affairs.
HD By the Chairman. Do you think that those reserves or stations that you propose
for the aborigines should be under the care of missionaries ?—At least, as long as the missionaries
are there, they should be under their superintendence, and they should have the right to exercise
their discipline so long as that does not interfere with the law of the country. °
148. By Dr. Tierney.— Would you not think the missionary would be more in his own
sphere if he was placed to afford spiritual consolation, and if the temporal affairs were kept
distinct ?—I do not know how you mean.
149. Supposing there was an establishment formed by the Government and a superin-
tendent placed over it to see to the blacks in point of industry, and then a clergyman to see to them
m point of mind, and religion, and education, the one to take care of the mind and the soul, and
the other of the body, and to see that the blacks learned some habits of industry and occupation,
would not that be the more desirable course to pursue ?—Of course it depends upon how the
Government thinks; but I think they can be well combined together, especially as these mission
stations are carried on. Some missionaries are appointed for spiritual affairs, and some are
appointed for secular temporal affairs.
150. By the Chairman. —Have you any other suggestions you could give to the
committee with reference to the subject ?—I do not exactly remember at present.
The Rev. F. August Hagenauer examined.
151. By the Chairman.—C;m you offer any .suggestions to the committee as to the best
means of ameliorating the condition of the aborigines of this Colony ?—I think the best thin"
won id be to have a large reserve of twenty or thirty square miles on each hunting ground under
the care of the missionaries. Our missionaries have been located in every part of the world with
great success, and we have instructions to follow the same system here.
162. In fact, your society finds that to be the best mode?—Yes. When we came to
Australia, the Government promised us a piece of land up near Lake Hindmarsh, that would lie
a new part altogether. We want to preach the gospel and begin a school there for the children
and settle the blacks on our place and teach them and educate them in every point, and the
children are going on and learning very nicely, Mrs. taught some of the children, and
they learned very well indeed. The place is very far from the white population. Where there
are public houses, we hear that the blacks go to them; but this station is thirty-five miles from
any public house, and there are no settlers near the place. The land is not so very good, but it
is well situated, because it is far from the white population.
153. Would this grant interfere with any squatting station at present in existence ?
ie.', and therefore it takes a longtime to settle. The Government promised us apiece of
ground last year ; and when we came out last May we looked about the country and found this
to io a place well suited for the purpose, and very nice ; and then we asked to have out station
there, but the Government seem a little backward in the matter.
154. Have you any documentary evidence to prove that you wore promised it ?—lt was
only proposed.
vi i r'*'*' ea, U- pl an that you propose, is it the intention to draw the
blacks from the various hunting grounds to within this area that you seek to have ?—We hope
they will come by and bye. ‘ 1
156. lou propose to draw them from their own hunting grounds into this area ?—Yes
they will come by and bye.
157. By Dr. Tierney.—How many blacks are there in the neighborhood of this
proposed reserve i —Four hundred and sixty-eight.
158. Are there many young blacks among them ?—Not many young children.
159. Are there more males than females ?—I do not know.
160. And you do not know the proportion of children ?—No.
161. Have you any further suggestion to offer to the committee ?—1 should think
assistance from the Government, for the mission station, would be very beneficial to the blacks
indeed ; that is, in the way of food and clothing, not only land.
The Rev. F. W. Spieseke further examined.
162. By the Chairman.—lime you any observations to offer to the committee with
reference to this proposed station at Lake Hindmarsh ?—We seek nothing by it, because we "et
no salary from the Government, and our mission board gets nothing from the Government ; and
m asking for a block of land, it is certainly only for the blacks ; because, if we go away the
land will remain behind, and our pockets will be as empty as when we came.
7


163. By Dr. Tierney. —Can you ascertain the number of young blacks that there are in
the tribe in that neighborhood ? —We shall be most happy, if we can give that information, by
and bye to do so, but at present we cannot tell.
164. Do you think the establishment which you contemplate would in any measure
prevent the present race of blacks from becoming extinct ?—I really think, however feeble we
are, that it will, for it has been proved among other heathen tribes.
165. Do you think that it is possible to prevent the present race of blacks from becoming-
extinct in this country ?—lf they could be, I would not exactly say, separated from the whites
altogether ; but, taken from the evil influences of some of the whites, I am sure it would be
salutary. _
166. Is there much venereal disease amongst them ?—There is a sort of disease ot that kind..
167. Do you think medical men might be advantageously appointed in the various
localities to examine them and cure them of any disease, whether syphilitia or otherwise ? It
would be a mercy, I am sure.
168. Do you think it would be possible ?—Yes.
■ 169. Do you think the blacks would consent to vaccination? —I think so, if it were
explained to them.
170. Do you think that the law is stringent enough at present, or could you suggest how
it could be made more stringent for the purpose of keeping them from intoxicating drinks ?—-I
know a good deal about that, and I think the law is stringent enough and good enough, but it
is difficult to carry it out.
171. Would you suggest that the police of the country should have their attention more
particularly called to carrying out that portion of the law ?—No doubt it would have a good
influence. ,
172. At present, the law is a dead letter, and you think it would bean advantage to have
it better carried out ?—I think it would be.
The witness withdrew.
TUESDAY, 9th NOVEMBER, 1858.
Members present :
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair ;
The Honorable J. H. Patterson The Honorable Dr. Hope
„ G. Urquhart Dr. Tierney.
William Hull, Esq., J.P., examined.
173. Bi/ the Chairman. —How long have you been acquainted with the aborigines of
this colony ?—Nearly seventeen years. I have been seventeen years in this colony, and during
fifteen of those a magistrate. .
174. You have always taken a considerable amount of interest in their weltare, have you
not ?—I have, from the earliest period. . .
175. Have you any idea of your own knowledge, of numbers that were m V ictona
when you first became acquainted with them ? —I had at one time, but I have forgotten now.
I know that, where there were thousands then, they are reduced to scores now. lam speaking
now of the Yarra Yarra and the coast tribes.
176. And the other tribes are reduced more in proportion than those ? Yes.
177. To what do you attribute the great mortality amongst them?—lt is impossible to
give in a short answer all that I have to say upon that subject. _ I believe that those tribes
were decreasing before the white man arrived here. Ido not believe that the vices that t.ie
white men are said to have implanted on them have been the cause of it, that is to say,
not those particular vices, excepting the vice of drunkenness. I think that an opinion,
which has been very current, that the white men communicated to them certain loathsome
diseases is altogether wrong. That they have communicated it to them, and that they have
communicated it to the whites, I have no doubt ; but I believe that the particular disease to
which I refer, the venereal, existed among them before ever we came here, or at all events a
disease so similar to it, that it would be impossible, except from practical experience, to say
whether it is the same or not. I recollect that Dr. Wilmott and Dr. Cousens many years ago
were called in to one or two most horrid aboriginal cases, and it was declared that the men
would die, but they did not die, to the great astonishment of the medical men and therefore it
was satisfactorily proved to their minds that it must have been a disease, which, although veiy
much resembling the venereal, was indigenous to the people. _
178. Then you think that syphilis existed previously to the introduction ot the white
population amongst them? —I have not the least doubt ot it, and I believe that 1 shall he
corroborated by one or two practical men in saying that syphilis exists in all savage nations.
It is one of the incidents of that promiscuous intercourse and filth which exists amongst ihem.
The vice of drunkenness has caused many to die, no doubt.
179. Do you think the want of proper food and clothing, consequent upon their hunting
grounds being taken up by civilization, has been the cause of the great mortality prev ail.ng


amongst them I— l do not think their hunting grounds were ever of that importance that the
public have thought; I believe that they subsist mostly on the opossum, and the muruong
root, and one or two kinds of fish.
180. Is there no other cause that you would attribute their quick extermination to,
besides what you have stated ?—Of course, lam now speaking hypothetically, and speaking
with great caution, and am perhaps speaking that which I ought not to speak ; but il I must
answer, I believe that it is the design of Providence that the inferior races should pass away
before the superior races, and that independently of all other causes, since we have occupied the
country, the aborigines must cease to occupy it.
181. Then, in fact, you would not recommend any steps to be taken to try to prevent the
inferior races being swept away before the advance of civilization ?—lf I were a minister of the
Government, the only steps I should take with respect to the aborigines would be to have.
stations at certain places in connection with the police, or there are some very humane settlers
who would undertake the care of a supply of stores, and on application of any of the aborigines
for relief they should be furnished with blankets, flour, sugar, tea, and _ such little ordinary
medicines as a man can administer to himself. I believe (and I speak with much deference)
that all attempts to Christianise them will prove ineffectual. I speak that from my own
knowledge of them and from conversation with them, but I also refer it to a much higher
authority than mine, namely, the authority of some very great and eminent men of all classes of
missionaries, from the first Roman Catholic missionaries down to Mr. Dredge, and I believe Mr.
Thomas, the present guardian, is of the same opinion.
182. That opinion is not held by the Moravians ?—They may probably be an exception,
but Mr. Dredge, one of the most clear headed men amongst the missionaries, was of that opinion,
and he was so conscientious a man that he abandoned his office after about eighteen months
trial. . ,
183. He had a quarrel with the head of the department, had he not? —1 do not think
it was so much owing to that that he abandoned it; but Mr. Darker, the ex-protector and
guardian, and the present guardian might, it he were asked, either corroborate or differ from my
opinion.
184. By Mr. Urquhart. —Do you think that the blacks do not believe in dying Dorn
natural causes? —I am confident they do not, so far as the authorities I can quote, Billy
Hamilton, Billy Lonsdale, and a man Robert Yang Yang Cunningham, who was a very superior
man indeed and a highly intellectual man, and spoke English fluently. In consequence of my
not bringing Derimot to justice for spearing at me they had great confidence in me. That
was at a corroboree somewhere near where the new military barracks arc now building, and his
people flew upon him and threw him down upon the earth, and I walked off and escaped with
my life. They knew that I was a magistrate and expected that I should bring him up, but I
did not do so, because it was my own fault; I did not know that he was the chief of the tribe
and the head of the corroboree that was going on, and he was drunk, and I called him a
drunken fellow, and he immediately took up a bundle of spears, one of which he threw at me,
and it went into a tree close to me. ' My not taking any steps against him caused them to have
jrj-eat confidence in trie, and they used to come to my store at the corner of Little Flinders-street
by the Queen’s Head public house, and look at me and say, “ Good fellow you, and I found
that I had their confidence. Yang Yang became very confident and I could get almost
anything out of him, but always with a strict injunction to secrecy; in particular, 1 was not to let
his uncle, Mr. Murray, know anything he told me. By that means I attained a knowledge of
their superstitions, and their traditions, and their astronomical notions. My idea, in the book
which I had time unfortunately to publish on the subject, goes to attempt to trace these people
up to the ancient heathen nations of the highest antiquit) r , and in that I am borne out by
Mr. Miles, the late police magistrate of Sydney, a very clever, though eccentric man, who has
devoted great attention to this subject, and by Dr. Leichardt, with whom I corresponded : for
instance, the worship of the pleiades. Their great eorroborees are only held in the spring, when
the pleiades are generally most distinct, and their corroboree is a worship of the pleiades, as a
constellation which announces spring. Their monthly corroboree is of the moon. Hie whole of
the ceremonies and the custom of the lubras doing up of the opossum rug and beating- it, is
precisely that of the Greeks and of the ancient nations, which observances the Israelites were
warned to avoid. You may notice the frantic gestures of the men. I have observed them, not
as many do just to look at the dance, but I have observed them with somewhat of a philosophic
mind. The last corroboree I ever saw was on the old punt bridge, which was one I got up
myself for a friend from London. 1 got fifteen or twenty men there and then particularly noticed
that, after so many genuflexions, they looked at the moon and bowed, clasping their hands.
185. Then, do you think that the same description of worship as you now describe is
inherent to the savage state all over the world ?—No. The North American Indians do
not worship the constellations ; they understand something about them, but they are a much
higher class of savage, they have a notion of a Great Spirit,, and a very high and elevated notion
of the Great Spirit in one sense. Our aborigines have no notion of God or of a priest, and
no word to signify anything of the kind ; and the only fear they have is of some imaginary
being they call Coen ; and formerly a black would not move from Ids lire at night lest Coen
should take him away. Now they are getting better accustomed to it; they see that white
people move at night and they do not mind it so much, but they are not fond of moving at night,
even now, if they can possibly help it.
186. Upon the sea-shore I have found that they have a very indistinct idea of the
transmigration of souls ; when they have seen the quail about, they have described them as
9
Aborigines.— c.


' Ilave r ™ th that idea at all “S st tliem ?—Robert Cunningham
old me Whi to fellow come from Pmdye ; black fellow, when he die, go to Pindye one way west,
• tnen come back again east, jump up white fellow.” J J
187. By Mr. Patterson.—ls not that what they have been taught by the whites. My
brother ‘made one woman believe that he was her son, and that he died and went to Van
Piemans Land and came back a white fellow ?-The tradition can be traced far back. They
nnnnWWin °fl ll6re 1 am tres P a ssing upon ground I ought not to touch
upon) that the first man who was created killed Ins brother, or rather that he wounded him, but
that .to did not die ; that the man who wounded his brother flew away to the west, and that his
brother has ever since been searching for him ; that a good being named Karakarock who knew
11 rT f nd ° l ffeml . to be , an atonement for the death of this brother, and they believe
that this Karakarock is the mother of those women who carry the fire stick upon the occasion
ot all their ceremonies. Ihey always have the fire stick upon all their ceremonies. There is a
ques ion asked amongst the printed questions put by the committee, as to whether the boys are
capable of bearing pain with fortitude ; as to that, I would say that, when the boys are about
twelve or thirteen, they are admitted to the society of men with certain ceremonies, which have
taken place to my knowledge, on the hill here, just by where the Prince’s Bridge barracks are.
A certain number of boys who are to be admitted to the society of men are thrown in a heap and
die earth is thrown over them. Old women are admitted who heap the earth upon them, then
h ® °} d m ® n fall u P on them an( f put them to as much torture as they can without killing them;
and then they are supposed to be born again. Any fellow who squeals or makes a noise is
put back for another trial.
. 188> B y Mr. Urquhart. —l presume you only refer to a particular tribe?—My obser-
vations now apply only to the tribes in the neighborhood, the Yarra tribe and the coast tribe.
, . 189 ’ In some tribes they knock a tooth out ?—Yes ; I believe the Goulburn do. lam
speaking now as to the aborigines in this particular neighborhood.
190. By the Chairman. —ls there any further information you can give in answer to the
printed questions ?—With respect to death, they do not believe that any man dies naturally,
it a man dies, they believe that some enemy has inflicted death upon him ; and in old days they
would not rest till they found out who was the cause of the death. Young men were sent out
to seek the supposed destroyer of life, and they travelled in a certain direction, which was
indicated by some grub, which they put on the ground, and as it went they went. There were
generally three of them. I have seen them sometimes, and you can always tell them by their
agitated way of walking, and the perfect state of arms that they have ; and the first man they
meet of another tribe, who is young and good looking, they kill, and take out his kidney fat. I
am now speakmg of what has occurred before me in my own position as a magistrate at the old
police office, in Market-square. A man was brought there charged with killing another, and
we got nd of it as being “inter se.” I asked him afterwards, “Would you do it again?”
Yes, he said “plenty kill him again ; why not take his kidney fet.” He had killed the other,
bin not taken his Lidney fat out, and consequently the thing was not complete. At Major
Davidson s station at the river Acheron, some of the blacks went up from this place to seek
revenge and they killed one of Major Davidson’s Calcutta coolies. My ’son went out armed
to defend the poor coolie, but they had “kidney fatted him,” that is, stunned him—taken away
the fat by an incision—and left him lingering in death.
191. By Mr. Patterson.— They took his kidney fat out before he was killed, did they
not .—Y es, and that is absolutely necessary, according to their idea. The blow that is struck is
generally struck behind on the poll; and when the man falls, the kidney fat is taken out whilst
ho is still living, otherwise the thing is not complete. I saw, in the year 1842, a procession of
twenty or thirty blacks walking the boundaries of this town, and I walked with them up Bourke-
street from about the junction of what is now Swanston-street, to where the Government offices
now are, until I got tired of walking with them. They were evidently bewailing the occupa-
tion ot this place by the white man. They were singing low and plaintive songs. Referring
again to the subject of their corroberees, and their worship of the stars, I may mention that one
night 1 showed Robert Cunningham the pleiades, and he said they were the children of the
moon moon—moondick, and very good to black fellows. The name of the moon with our tribe
here is Memyan ; and it is a very remarkable thing, that in the early periods of the world the
earliest children of Noah were called the children of the moon, and called Minoei or Minye. I
believe that, if the aborigines arc treated well, they are almost incapable of being treacherous.
.1 believe, to show kindness to the blacks is to secure kindness to yourself. I never had, and
never should have, any hesitation in going alone with any number of blacks, provided I could
be certain that I was not mistaken for any one that had injured them.
192. By the Chairman. Sir Phomas Mitchell’s experience is very different from that ?
Yes ; they saw Sir Thomas with horses, and mules, and men, and all armed. Ignorant and low
as Ihey are in their minds, they know well enough when their land-is going to be taken away
from them. on j
19ffi l,y Dr. Hope. —They would not revenge themselves upon one white man for
another white man, who had acted cruelly towards them, would they ?—No ;it is always a black
that they seek, not one .of their own tribe, but one of some other tribe.
1 94. Supposing one of them had been murdered by some other white man, and he escaped,
would they keep up a bad feeling towards all the white men in consequence of that ?—I do not
believe they would, and I have no reason on earth to believe it, for the blacks have pointed out
to me, all round Swanston-street and that part when it was all bush, particular settlers, and said
V ery bad fellow that; no good that fellow and, on the contrary, they have pointed to others
and said “Very good man that.”
10


195. You mentioned that the blacks do not travel at night ; but is it not the case that, by
late accounts from Morpton Bay, there have been several of the settlers and shepherds there
murdered in the middle of the night by the natives ? Probably you will recollect the case of a
family of the name of Fraser ? —Yes, I recollect that ; but I would observe that I followed up
my observation as to that by my remark that they imitate, as all savage nations do, the superior
races. They find that white men are in the habit of travelling by night, and they have got rid
of a great deal of that dread which they formerly had.
196. By Dr. Tierney. —Have you ever had any of the aborigines working for you ?
Yes ; you cannot depend upon them, they commence with an earnest desire and intention of
working steadily, but their habits are so erratic that the slightest thing makes them go off, unless
by some weeks or months intercourse you have got well grounded with them, and then you may
to a certain extent depend upon them. You cannot -well depend upon them in taking a letter
for instance. They have an idea, if you send them with a letter, that it is something to be done
to them. On my station at Holcombe, my son-in-law had a black of the name of Colon, who
■was picked up on the Keilor plains by Mr. Protector Parker about eighteen years ago. He had
been deserted, and he was brought up by Mr. Parker ; he could read and write, and was perhaps
as intelligent as some of our bullock drivers, or of that class of people. He was at Holcombe
for some time, and it was impossible to have a more faithful servant, excepting when he got
drunk. When he got drunk he was a perfect madman.
197. Is there not a very general habit among the whites, when they get any little
service performed for them by the blacks, of giving them drink ?—There is, and a very
scandalous habit it is. For years past I have always made it a point, if there was not a baker’s
shop or a butcher’s shop near at hand where I could lay out the sixpence, I gave them nothing.
198. Do you believe that, very often, when the blacks get in a state of inebriety, they get
the drink from persons who are not publicans ? —I am sure of it.
199. Would you recommend a more stringent law to be brought in to prevent persons
giving drink to the blacks, especially in the interior ?—I would; and I really think that to give
a black money ought almost to be made a misdemeanor.
200. Or to give him drink ?—To give him drink most decidedly should; there can be no
mistake about it. The publicans have been blamed, and it is but fair to relieve them of some
of the blame that has been attached to them. Ido not believe that the publicans sell the liquor
to the blacks themselves. The blacks are knowing enough ; when they have a sixpence or a
shilling they give it to some fellow, or get some little child to go and get the drink for them; and
if they give it to some low man of the lower class of people, then they all drink it together.
201. You have described a case where a chief attempted to kill you when he was in a
state of inebriety; in that instance, do you think that it was from a public house or from a
private individual that he got the drink ?—I think in that case it was from a publican. When
I came back over the old punt-bridge, I said to the punt-keeper, “ I have had a very narrow
escape and he said, “I was very sorry to see you going over that way; I thought you would
come to some harm, for that man Derimut is a very dangerous man when he is drunk.”
202. Would you recommend that the aborigines should be kept out of the townships
altogether by some enactment ?—I would, most decidedly.
203. Do you think that, if that were carried out, they would be bettered in their own
condition ?—Yes. What I would recommend would be, that there should be stations here and
there, as might be most convenient. There are police stations all through the country at certain
distances, and I do not see why gentlemen throughout the country should be burdened with the
stores; it would be no burden or any increase of expense to the Government, if every police
station was made a depot for the necessaries of life.
204. As you have been yourself so much in the confidence of the blacks, did you ever
endeavor to get a child to take under your protection for the purpose of educating and nurturing
it ?—-Never ; but I saved a child’s life from the attack of a savage dog in 1843.
205. Do you think it is possible to get the children given up in any instances ; do you
think there are blacks who would give up their children for the purpose of education ?—Not
one, except with a mental reservation that they were to derive something from it, and that
after a certain time the child was to return and visit them ; and they invariably go away when
they get to a certain age.
206. What time would that be ?—Just about the time when they are old enough to
enter the tribe, about twelve or thirteen.
207. Supposing a child were educated and taught European habits of industry up to
that time, do you think that would be any advantage ? —No.
208. Have you never heard of instances where children have been given up by their
parents ?—Yes, but the result has been that they have gone back again.
209. Some have not, and some have ?—You may recollect a man of the name of Tommy
Walker, of Sydney ; that man was supposed to be a converted man, and he could deal with the
Scriptures almost like a priest. There was a place called the Devil’s Hole somewhere near
Sydney, where no white man would go at all, it was so dangerous ; but this man, Walker, was
so firm in his religious convictions, that ho would go there when no one else would. But what
was the end of it; lie at last broke out and became one of the most abandoned and wretched
blacks amongst all his tribe.
210. By Dr. Hope. —Where was he a native of?—Somewhere in the neighborhood of
Sydney. Dr. Tierney will also, perhaps, recollect that there was an aboriginal black who took
all the prizes in one of the schools in Sydney. Ido not know of that myself, but I have heard
of it.
11


211. By the Chairman. —Have you seen Mr. Thomas’s black boy ?—Yes.
212. He appears to be quite weaned from his tribe?—There was a black boy named
Jemmy, who went with Mr. Bunce in all his excursions ; he has turned out as bad as any.
213. He was a Sydney black, was not he?—Yes, I believe he was. With regard to
traditions, I may say it is not generally known that the blacks, —Cunningham, Murray, and
Old Bembo, say that their grandfather, “ My uncle,” as they call him—they do not know the
word grandfather, my uncle is the term they use for all progenitors—recollected when Hobson’s
Bay was a kangaroo ground ; they say, “ Plenty catch kangaroo, and plenty catch opossum
there and Murray assured me that the passage up the bay, through which the ships came,
is the River Yarra, and that the river once went out at the heads, but that the sea broke in,
and that Hobson’s Bay, which was once hunting ground, became what it is.
214. Would not an observation of the ground lead you to believe that the water in the
bay had been higher than it is at present, rather than that the soil of the bay had been higher?—
I only state what their tradition was.
215. But observation would lead you to believe that the sea had been far higher at one
time, and had been receding instead of encroaching, would it not ?—That might be, I only state
what their tradition was.
216. By Dr. Tierney. —l)o you think there ought to be some law to compel the European
population to pay the blacks for their services by some means or other in the way of clothes or
food, and not in drink or money ? —I would not employ a black at all, if I was a settler.
217. But they are employed ? —They are employed, but I would not employ them ; I would
give them the necessaries of life and let them seek their own mode of passing their life away,
giving them food and clothing and medicine.
218. If the committee had evidence before them, to show that they could be made to till
the ground and grow their own produce, if a station were made for them, would you not think it
advisable that that should be done ?—I am only speaking as far as my knowledge of them goes.
As far as my knowledge of them goes, and so far as my information from others goes, I know
that they cannot be depended upon ; that they will dig, there is no doubt. I recollect about
eighteen months ago going upon an excursion with Mr. Thomas, the guardian of aborigines,
to see some of his children (as he called them) up beyond the Yan Yean reservoir, and we
found five or six blacks digging a potaio field. Mr. Thomas expressed himself very glad to
see them occupied in that way, and one of the old men said, “Yes, me never go away from
here now, me tumble down very soonthat is, he should die, and potato digging suited him,
ho knew lie had not long to live, as he expressed it that he should “tumble down soon.”
219. By Dr. Hope. —Have you had any experience or knowledge of any aboriginal ever
continuing faithfully attached to a family where he was brought up? Supposing any family had
taken a black from his tribe and brought him up as a member of the family and educated him,
has he broke loose at some time or other?-—Yes, his tribe would come for him, and if he did not
go at their command, they would kill him.
220. Would he not have a sort of inherent desire himself to go away at that time ?—■
Yes, no doubt.
221. And that is the experience of almost every person you are acquainted with, who has
tried the thing ? —Yes, of every one that I am acquainted with ; but that the aborigines are
capable of strong attachments, and have more virtues than people generally give them credit for,
I am certain.
222. Is there any further information you could afford to the committee relative to the
subject under consideration ?—ln the select committee which sat in Sydney many years ago, a
black, who was supposed to be civilized and christianised, was examined before the committee,
and if this committee could get Derimut and examine him, I think he would give the committee
a great deal of valuable information with respect to himself and his tribe, which would be
very interesting ; he speaks moderately good English, and I was told by a black a few days
ago that he was still alive, and that he “ lay about in St. Kilda.” The last time I saw him was
nearly opposite the Bank of Victoria, he stopped me and said “ You give me shilling, Mr. Hull.”
“No,” I said, “I will not give you a shilling, 1 will go and give you some bread,” and he held his
hand out to me and he said “Me plenty sulky you long time ago, you plenty sulky me; no sulky now,
Derimut soon die,” and then he pointed with a plaintive manner, which they can affect, to the
Bank of Victoria, he said, “You see, Mr. Hull, Bank of Victoria, all this mine, all along here
Dcrimut’s once ; no matter now, me soon tumble down.” I said, “Have you no children ?” and
he flew into a passion immediately, “Why me have lubra? why me have picanninny ? You have
all this place, no good have children, no good have lubra, me tumble down and die very soon
now.” They are very sensitive, and they are all destroying their children now. 1 was at
Seymour about twelve months ago, and I walked out very early in the morning as the sun was
rising, and I saw a black fellow and his lubra, she had just got up to light the embers of the fire.
There was a baby there, and he went and kicked the baby as far as he could kick it, evidently
with the intention of kicking it into the fire, but he saw me and turned round and was as polite
as possible immediately. The poor lubra took up the child, and two such hideous objects I never
saw, they were a perfect mass of sores, both of them. I said to the man “ You very cruel.” He
said “ Nc, me no cruel at all, me want to die.” In the words of Sfizelecki, 1 would say :
“ Leave them to their habits and customs ; do not embitter the few days in store for them by
constraining them to obey our’s, nor reproach them with apathy to that civilization which is not
destined for them. ’
The ivitness withdrew.
12


The Rev. Septimus Lloyd Chase examined.
223. By the Chairman. —The committee understand that you have given a great deal of
attention to the subject of the aborigines of this colony ?—I have taken a great interest in it,
but I have resided in Melbourne principally.
224. But still you have been connected with missions ?—Yes.
225. The committee would wish to hear your opinion, whether you think it is possible
to civilise them by missionary enterprise?—! have with me a paper giving an account of the
station Poonindie —[ The witness delivered in the same. — Vide Appendix A.j 3 hey have had the
same difficulties to contend with in the colony of South Australia, and they have fairly overcome
them, and it has been upon information derived from that colony, principally, (hat 1 nave built
my hopes of success, as far as experience goes. Though lam quite persuaded that success would
follow from Divine promises, yet, as regards experience, I have derived encouragement
principally from the effort made there with so much success.
226. Had yon not a mission station for aborigines? —We have one now.
227. Where is that situated? —On the Murray, at the junction of the Darling.
228. That is not connected with the Moravian missions at all ? —No.
229. Have you succeeded with your mission ?—May I give you a report of our mission :
the third and fourth years are completed and I brought with me the report. —[ The witness
delivered in the same.'] This is the history of a little boy I had —[handing in a hook ] —and I
have brought with me his copy book, to show how a boy of that race may improve. 1 may
mention that he was only under training for about eleven months.
230. Yon took him in from the tribe ?—He was neglected in the streets of Melbourne—
no one owned him, and some poor children got their mother to attend to him ; she afterwards
communicated with me about him and then I clothed him ; and when I was about going to
England, thought perhaps ho would go with me, and might be educated and trained as a
missionary. He had every advantage when he was in England—he was treated not as a servant
but as a son, and educated in the highest point of view at an excellent school for a short time,
and he improved wonderfully.
231. What was his ultimate fate ?—He had a cough, it gradually increased; 3 could not
at that time bring him back. I had to wait and it resulted in his death.
232. By Dr. Tierney. —Was his death very rapid ?—He was ill for a few weeks, ido
not know but what his cough lasted some little time, but it was rather rapid at last.
233. Was any medical man attending him ? —Yes.
234. Did ho say the disease was more rapid than it would have been in a white person ?--
Ido not recollect asking the question : the principal doctor of the place attended him. 1
do not know that I could give any very satisfactory answer to the question.
235. By the Chairman. —Then, upon the whole, your mission has succeeded ?—So, it
has not succeeded, excepting so far as gaining the confidence of the blacks, and the missionaries
are acquiring something of their language, but we fully anticipated that it would take some time.
236. You have hopes of their ultimate success ? —I have great hopes of its ultimate
success. At Poonindie they have a magnificent station. They have had the greatest advan-
tages, and those that are there are married, many of them. There is a village consisting of I
forget how many huts, but the natives there are so superior to the wild blacks that they rather
look down upon them, and the wild ones really look up to these men.
237. By Dr. Hope.- —They have given up their nomadic habits entirely ? —Yes.
238. And become fixed settlers ?—Yes, they are self-supporting; they cultivate the
soil, and cultivate sheep and cattle. They have the same advantages the settlers have, and
under those great advantages they are living and self-supporting.
239. How long has this been in operation ?•—I think five years. When I was in Ade-
laide, in 1849, I made particular inquiries as to the school there. They were doing everything
they could for them, but those who had charge of them were perfectly hopeless ; assigning as the
reason for it, that they no sooner got good but they got harm again. Children left for their own
tribes, and got a great deal of harm, and, eventually, when they grew up to be young men and
young women they were taken away and went back into their own habits. The remedy of tins
station at Poonindie arose out of this state of things. Seeing the children would be lost alto-
gether if they were not separated from contact with their own people, a clergyman in Adelaide
undertook to separate himself and them altogether, and he has succeeded. That clergyman is
the present Bishop of Perth ; he was taken from the station and made Bishop of Perth.
240. By Dr. Hope. —Then was this exclusively an educational establishment ?—The
institution at Adelaide was an educational establishment ; it was a school where they were fed
and clothed, and they were taken to church on Sundays, and so on.
241. By the Chairman. —ls this establishment you allude to at Port Lincoln ?•—The
first I mentioned is. The establishment at Adelaide was a failure, because they had no means of
following it up. At the time when those persons might be married, then, all was lost ; and to
remedy this state of things they were taken away to the station and gradually increased in
numbers.
242. By Dr. Hope. —Had any of those arrived at that age spoken of by the last witness,
when it would be necessary to give them the rights of manhood, to go to their own tribes ; had
they come to mature age—twelve or fourteen years of age?—lt is not a school at Poonindie.
13
Abokioines. — d.


Originally I think they were couples that were taken there ; at all events, there are now about
sixty blacks, and out of that number there are at least twelve married couples.
243. It is, in fact, an industrial farm ?—lt is altogether so. The men are engaged all
day in operations out in the fields, and in the evening they have an adult school. In the day-
time the girls and little children have a school.
244. Then, you would reason from that case, that we could do the same here, and settle
them in that manner here ?—All the objections that the public raise here I found there ; and,
also, that there was no remedy; just the same as the feeling is here. And, if it had not been
for this particular scheme, I think they might have been hopeless there still ; but now it is
decidedly proved that they can be recovered.
245. Then you would suggest the establishment of industrial farms, on the same principle,
to a great extent, subsidized of course by the Government, and ultimately to be made as much
self-supporting as possible?—The station is not only an industrial institution, but it is a
missionary station ; and what I would suggest would be, the greatest encouragement to
Christian missions, giving Christian missionaries the opportunity of carrying out their mission in
the same manner that that gentleman at Poonindie, partially by private means, was enabled to do.
246. In the absence of Christian missions, while the blacks are being cut off so fast
as they are, do not you think the Government might try to settle the blacks on industrial farms
under the charge of a missionary ? —What I would suggest should be, that the best sites which
they look upon as rendezvous should be chosen, and the Christian missionaries should be per-
mitted and helped to carry on missions on such sites ; then I think all would be done that the
Government should be called upon to do.
247. And in the absence of their taking them up ?—Then the Government should provide
an industrial home.
248. And that would require to be on their own hunting grounds, or else the tribes would
not come to them ; each tribe would want a separate ground for themselves ?—1 think they are
so mingled now, that that would be unnecessary.
249. I believe it is a prejudice that they would not overcome, and it would be necessary
to have each industrial farm or mission on their own hunting ground. There is a superstition, or
rather a custom amongst them, that if they go off their own hunting ground they will bo
murdered by the tribe to which the ground belonged ; therefore such a mission should, if possible,
be started for each tribe ?—That may be so.
250. Could you give the committee any information with reference to the great mortality
amongst them—what you think causes it?—l have not been amongst them myself to judge from
experience, but all the inquiries I have made lead me to suppose that it is owing to drunkenness
and vices that have been prevalent among them, more especially since the whites have been
in the land I have asked in a great many quarters, and have found that that has been the
evidence on the subject.
251. Is there any other information that you could afford the committee on the subject?—
. 1 would say, that I think that the lad 1 had under mo was not at all a bright specimen of a youth
originally, but that the improvement he made showed that they were capable of equal improve-
ment with white children. I have had a good deal of experience of white children, and I
should judge that it is very much the same thing to teach the natives as the white people. On
the whole, 1 would give the preference to such a boy as that.
252. The mental power is quite upon an equality ?—Yes ;upto a certain point. lie
could not continue long upon a subject.
253. But ho was naturally a boy of bright parts ? —Of quick perceptive parts.
254. My own observation is, that they are quick, but of very little perseverance?—Yes ;
they are very sensitive in their feelings ; and it struck me that the very best treatment that can
be given to them is what they require ; that we are justified in bestowing upon them the very
best treatment. I believe their feelings are very acute, and anything in the shape of ridicule or
feeling in one’s own mind that they are inferior, indicating mistrust at all, would be perceived
by them, and it tends to degrade them very much ; and if we wish merely to do them good,
they ought to have the very best of every thing in regard to the best instruction, and to be
treated in the kindest manner, and I believe they are worthy of it. This boy was very sensitive
to ridicule. Any unkindness would be immediately seen, and kindness won upon him. I have
noticed that they are looked down upon. I did not expect myself to find him so forward when
I saw the child was looked down upon and despised. I felt it was very much against him, and
1 think they improve very much in proportion to the kind of superior treatment which they
receive. Great stress has been laid upon their leaving after receiving instruction. Ido not
think they lose their instruction. It is only natural that, unless some provision is made for
them in regard to marriage, they should leave and return to their tribe.
The witness withdrew.
14


WEDNESDAY, 17th NOVEMBER, 1858.
Members 'present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair ;
The Honorable J. H. Patterson The Honorable Dr. Hope.
~ G. Urquhart
Archibald McArthur Campbell, Esq., examined.
255. By the Chairman. —You resided for many years in the Wimmera district?—l have .
resided for about four years in the Wimmera district.
256. And previously to that you resided on the Murray ?—Yes.
257. During that time have you had many opportunities of becoming acquainted with
the aborigines?—Particularly during the time that I lived on the Murray.
208, Do you think, from what you have seen of them, they are capable of being civilised,
or christianised?—l think that they are capable of being civilised; and I suppose all men in
the image of our Maker are capable of being christianised. If we believe the Scriptures, we
should think so.
259. Are you aware that there has been a great mortality amongst them generally ?—I am.
260. To what do you attribute that particularly ?—Drink principally.
261. And vices contracted from the whites?—Yes; diseases contracted from the whites.
262. What means would you suggest for preventing that mortality from going on in
future, and for saving the remnant of the blacks ? —The law, if it was enforced "at present,
would have a great effect in stopping the supply of drink at the inns. They supply the drink at
the public houses throughout the country. The law is very good in that respect at present, but
it is not enforced.
263. Do you think that, by establishing reserves for them on their own hunting grounds,
and supplying them with food and rations, they would be preserved?—l think so. For the food
and rations, however, I would expect them to do some work.
264. To try to imbue them with industrious habits on the station at the same time ?—Yes.
265. Is there any better means which suggests itself to you, for the object of preserving
them, than by having reserves in their own hunting grounds, and supplying them with food and
rations, and endeavouring to give them industrious habits, and train them to industrious pursuits
at the same time?—Yes ;to endeavour to get them to work for their living—the able-bodied men.
266. Have you employed them frequently?—Yes.
267. And have yon found them faithful servants ?—I have found them faithful and useful
servants. For about ten years they washed my sheep on the Murray very well, without the
assistance of white men.
268. And you found them honest, generally speaking ?—Yes.
269. What is your opinion of their capacity generally —their literary or moral capacity ?
—They are very acute, and learn anything very quickly ; they arc quick in perception.
270. Are they quite upon an equality with other races ?■—There is a certain want about
them which it is very difficult to explain. They are very acute and quick.
271. That is, perhaps, more a want of steadiness and firmness of purpose than a want of
ability ?—-Not a want of ability.
272. Is there any other information of your own personal knowledge that you can give
the committee with reference to them ?—They are accused of being treacherous very often, and
I would mention that there was a black fellow up on the Murray, for whom there was a warrant
out for twelve months for murdering another black fellow. When I was up there I sent to him
to come and see me, and 1 would guarantee that he should get back again without being
interfered with by the police, and he came without any apparent fear ; and I fancy that is a proof
that they are not a very treacherous race themselves. He came to see me, and I took him to the
Wimmera, and had him there for three or four years with me. There was not sufficient evidence
to convict him, and I consulted the present chief justice, upon the subject, and we thought it
was the best way to remove him from that district, and I found him a very useful man after that.
273. By Mr. Patterson. —What do you suppose were the numbers that used to assemble
about your place when you first went upon the Murray ?—-About fifty or sixty.
274. When you first went up there? —That depends upon what part of the country you
take ; there are tribes and families.
275. The tribe ?—That is, all those that are friendly ?
276. Yes ?—Perhaps 150, those who were friendly and spoke the same dialect.
277. What number would you suppose there are now ? —They have decreased loss in that
locality than in any place that I know.
278. Are you speaking of the Wimmera now ?—No, lam speaking of the Murray. lam
not so well acquainted with the blacks on the Wimmera ; I have only been there recently.
279. What do you suppose they number now—what has been the decrease since then ?
I should suppose there are perhaps 100 now.
280. By Dr. Hope. —Within what area —that does not comprehend all the blacks on the
Murray?—No, for about twenty-five miles below me and fifty miles above me.
281. That is seventy-five miles of river frontage?-—-Yes, of friendly blacks.
282. \ou mentioned that it would probably be a good plan to make reserves: what
proportion of land do you think should be made a reserve—would you reserve it for agricultural


purposes, or would you reserve it as a hunting ground ? Would it be with the view to keep up
their hunting habits, or to embrace that with agricultural and grazing pursuits?—l would
recommend that they should have land for agricultural and pastoral purposes. They would much
more readily attend to a flock of sheep than go and labor in the field all day; they do not like
hard work, generally speaking.
283. What supervision would you have over those stations —should each station be
entrusted to a Government officer to go and superintend the station and live there, or would you
leave it to their own direction ?—lt would' be no use to leave it to their own direction ; it would
require some person to superintend it, but I am unable to say who that person should be. It
should be some person who took an interest in the natives, and who would inspire them with
confidence.
284. By the Chairman.—Have you seen the Lake Boga mission station ? —Yes.
285. Do you think that was successful? —I think the missionaries had obtained the-
confidence of the natives. At the time they left they had acquired the language ; I think it was
so far successful. I was down there shortly before they left. I was there twice in a fortnight,
shortly before they left. They had on one occasion twenty-eight blacks, and on the other
occasion thirty blacks. I was told they had very few blacks with them : but this was what I
noticed, and they seemed very sorry to hear that the missionaries were going. They not only
said so, but felt it, for I have a good knowledge of the natives.
286. By Mr. Urquhart. —From your own knowledge what number of blacks have really
fallen under your observation that you could really say were civilized ?—That is very difficult to
say. Ido not know that you could say that any of them were civilized. I have known them to
be so far civilized as to be several years with myself without joining the tribe, and to associate
with the white people and dress like the white people, but they have since gone back to the
tribes.
287. They have not followed the laws of civilization in any way ?—’Not at all times since.
If they have gone back to the tribe, they have, for a time at least, adopted the habits of the
natives.
288. Are you aware that the Murray tribe have a law of extermination among them-
selves ; that if one man dies, it is supposed by the tribe that the death has been caused by
another tribe, and they proceed immediately to shed blood or to revenge his death ?—There is a
superstition of that sort amongst them—that is their belief.
289. Do not you think that that law is a very exterminating law amongst themselves ?
I think so, but I think they are very much afraid of being punished for killing one another on
the Murray now, and they have given up that in a great measure.
290. After the trial, and after the experience which we had of setting apart certain grounds
for hunting grounds, which, I believe, cost this country upwards of £70,000 for the management
of the blacks, would you not think, if a bonus were given to the settlers to employ a certain number
and protect them, it would answer the same purpose ?—I think it might be beneficial; but if
there was a person appointed specially to look after the blacks, I fancy they would be more
likely to inform against the innkeepers who give those blacks intoxicating drinks. I have
not known the settlers as yet take much interest in punishing the innkeepers or others who
supply the aborigines with drink.
291. If there were an inducement held out to them, and some encouragement shown, for
instance, the Government would entrust them with the protection of a certain district, to super-
vise and feed the blacks, and protect them—do not you think that would be desirable? —I have
no doubt there are individuals amongst the settlers who are well adapted for that.
292. And who would feel an interest in the blacks ?—I have no doubt of it.
293. Bi/ Mr. Patterson. —Do you think that the blacks get the drink from the public
houses, or buy it from those parties who buy it from the public houses? —That may be; but
any man is punishable for supplying drink to the blacks.
294. For selling the drink, not for giving it them ?—Yes, for giving it to them. I have
myself fined persons for giving the blacks drink.
295. There has been no very great mortality in the district that you have been in, if
there are now 130 out of 150?—That is the Murray district; but near the head of the
Wimmera, where I have been for the last four years, there has been a great mortality, and the
natives are in a most deplorable state —most abject and drunken.
296. By Dr. Hope.— A good deal has been said about their getting drink and con-
tracting disease from the whites. Do not you think their adopting partially civilised habits,
and then reverting to their usual habits, has been the means of cutting them oft, as being less
able to endure the hardships of barbarian life ?—No doubt. I have lived near Ararat and
Pleasant Creek, and that neighborhood, for the last four years, and the state of the natives there
is very deplorable.
297. By Mr. Urquhart. —Do not you think the blankets which are given to the natives,
when they are allowed to have them for twelve months without being washed, are very
destructive to life—that they have cutaneous disease, and that those blankets arc most injurious
to them ?—I suppose that is injurious, but I fancy that they wash their blankets sometimes.
298. By the Chairman. —Are they accustomed to wash any of their clothes ? The
natives who have been much with whites are. As to blacks, I would say that individuals have
given them blankets, but they have not been supplied with blankets generally by the
Government. I once applied to Mr. La Trobo for blankets for the old women and children, and
obtained them.
299. By Mr. Urquhart. —But you generally find the natives with blankets ? —Very often.
16


300. By Mr. Patterson. —I suppose, when they sell their opossum skin rugs, they buy
blankets ?—-Yes, they do very often.
301. What do you think of having small reserves for them—say 200 or 300 acres —in
localities that they frequent, and fencing them in, and giving the natives all the advantages
of them and having such reserves here and there in different parts of the country ? —I would
think they would be of very much service, but I certainly think 1000 acres each would not be
too much. I would recommend larger reserves.
302. And forming a depot and supplying them with rations and necessary clothing ?—I
would recommend that the old women and the children should be clothed without getting any
money for it, but the able bodied men and women I would recommend being made to do some-
thing for what they received, in order to teach them habits of industry.
303. By Dr. Hope. —Have you seen many children amongst them ?—Yes.
304. They are not guilty of infanticide ?—Not in the neighborhood that I have been in.
30.5. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you think such establishments as you speak of could be
made self supporting ?—I think there is no doubt about it.
306. How many Europeans would you consider it necessary to have at one of those
establishments to manage them ?-—One European would be better than more, I should say.
307. One would scarcely be sufficient; would it not bo advisable to have a married couple ?
—Yes, a married couple. I think one person can obtain the confidence of the natives better
than two or three.
308. Could you form any idea of what would be the expense of such an establishment ?
In order to make the thing self supporting, I should think the reserve should be sufficiently large
to run a flock of sheep in addition to the pursuit of agriculture.
309. Sheep and some cattle ?—Sheep, or an equivalent of cattle.
310. Would you prefer sheep to cattle ?—The natives are very well able to attend to
either : they probably make better stock-keepers than shepherds, but I got them to do both very
well indeed. The great matter is, if a person obtains their confidence. I think that white people
at all times are too apt to jest with the blacks.
311. By the Chairman. —They form too low an estimate of them? —They form a low
estimate of white men if they find them telling lies ; they cannot distinguish between a wilful
falsehood and what is a jest; and white people have been very often in the habit of telling them
what is not true, partly in jest and partly with a worse motive.
312. By Dr. Hope. —Do you think there would be any difficulty in getting the tribes
located at places of the kind you have mentioned? Would you have a distinct settlement for
each tribe, or would one or two tribes associate together at the same settlement ?—I think
that it would not be well to associate two tribes at first ; it might be done by degrees as they
become more civilised, but the different families comprising one tribe might be associated very well.
313. By Mr. Urquhart. —Would it not be almost impracticable to form reserves for those
families, and would it not be very expensive ? —I think the families might meet with safety,
without any danger of injuring each other, forming one tribe, and speaking the same language.
314. By Mr. Patterson. —Did you ever know any instance of the blacks cultivating
land, and living in a civilised state in the country ? —I have heard of it at Mr. Parker’s; that is
the only place.
315. That is at Mount Franklyn ?—Yes.
316. You never saw it yourself?—No.
317. By Dr. Hope. —You never heard of any doing that of their own mere motion,
settling down and cultivating a piece of land of their own ?—Never.
318. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you think it would be possible to get them to locate on a
small piece of land and cultivate it ?—I think so ; but, I think they must be allowed to move off
occasionally, to make it their head quarters, and be allowed to move about and sec their friends.
319. How could they do that without some person to take charge of the premises?—
There would require to be some person. Ido not think you could get them all at once to settle
down in a particular place.
320. Do you think Mr. Parker could give any valuable information on this subject ?•—I
think so.
321. By the Chairman. —Do not you think the printed questions supply a source for any
person to give any information they may have to afford to the committee ? —I think so.
322. Quite as good as giving evidence ; in fact, better, because there is more time to
write it down carefully? —I think he will be able to give a great deal of information ; lie is a
very competent man to do so.
323. By Mr. Patterson. —Have you ever had any conversation with Mr. Parker, or
any party with regard to these blacks, who are settled on small farms up at Mount Franklyn ?
I do not recollect who I had my information from, but I have heard that there are blacks, or
have been blacks, settled down there upon small farms.
324. Have they the direction of those farms themselves, and the whole management of
them ?—I presume, under the direction of Mr. Parker.
325. Would not that give you hope of being able to do the same with the tribes generally ?
—I have not doubted but what the blacks would cultivate, but 1 have doubted whether, by
cultivation, they would make the establishment self-supporting ; for that reason I have said that
I think it would be well to have pasturage joined with it.
326. By the Chairman. —ls there anything further you wish to communicate to the
committee ?—I am not aware that there is anything else. I think the most material questions
I have answered.
The witness withdrew.
17
Aborigines.— e.


WEDNESDAY, 24th NOVEMBER, 1858.
Members present:
The Honorable T. McCombie, in the chair ;
The Honorable Dr. Hope | The Honorable J. H. Patterson.
Edward Stone Parker, Esq., examined.
327. By the Chairman. —l believe you have been assistant protector of aborigines ?—I
arrived in this colony in July, 1839, having the appointment of assistant protector of aborigines,
and relinquished the appointment March the Ist, 1850.
328. Did you resign it ?—The department was abolished.
329. You have never held any other position in reference to the aborigines ?—I have, since
the last-mentioned date, held the honorary appointment of visiting magistrate of the aboriginal
school, and have virtually acted as guardian of the aborigines.
330. Do you think it possible to reclaim the remnant of aborigines ?—1 am quite ol
opinion that it is possible to reclaim the aborigines ; that their civilisation is practicable ; and
that opinion is not founded upon theory, but practical experience.
331. What plan would you suggest for carrying out that ?—The first point is to bring
them under the influence, more or less, of Christianity, as alone supplying adequate motives
to induce them to forego their erratic habits. I have found, in my own experience, that any
improvement in civilisation was invariably the result of a more marked attention to Christian
instruction, and the adoption of the principles of Christianity.
332. Before that can be done there must be some practical means adopted, such as
settling them in reserves within their own hunting grounds (say that 1000 acres were set apart
for them, and a missionary and storekeeper were appointed), what plan would you suggest for
civilising and christianising them ? —I think the establishment of homesteads for the benefit ot
the natives in various localities in the olony is of great consequence. lam not, however,
of opinion that, in the present state of theecolony, or of the aboriginal population, it is necessary
to maintain hunting grounds for them. Their habits of life have undergone very material
changes within the last fifteen years. It must be understood, however, that my replies will
have particular reference to those tribes of natives with which I am most intimately acquainted;
—the natives occupying the country from the Campaspe to the Pyrenees, and from the
coast ranges, northward towards the Murray. I need scarcely point out to the committee, that
the aboriginal population of that district must have been materially affected by the gold workings
during the last seven years. I may state, at once, that I see some practical difficulties in the
establishment of these homesteads, if they are to be maintained exclusively as Government
establishments. From past experience I should fear that they would be objects of suspicion,
and possibly of obloquy, on the part of portions of the community ; and in the present social
and commercial state of the community, 1 think it very difficult to meet with suitable
agents to carry on such institutions. The only course which suggests itself to my mind
to overcome these difficulties, would be to look for suitable agency to the different religious
bodies in the community, the Government giving to each adequate support. The institution
of schools for the young is a question of vital importance, and giving facilities to benevolently
disposed persons in various parts of the colony to place aboriginal children in the different
schools throughout the country where an aboriginal school may not be in existence. As another
measure of great importance to the well being of the aborigines, I recommend strongly the
appointment of honorary guardians of aborigines, who should have certain legal powers in
reference to any property they may acquire, facilities for placing children out as apprentices with
suitable persons, and, in general, lending any assistance in protecting them from injury, in their
persons or interests. I may illustrate the necessity for such appointments from circumstances
which have passed under my own observation within the last two or three years. It has been
my practice to accede to the request of benevolent and religiously disposed persons, in whom I
have had confidence, to adopt native children for the purpose of education, and bringing them
up in civilization and Christianity. Within the last five years I have placed out three under
such circumstances. In one case, a youth who had been educated by a well disposed farmer s
wife at Kyneton, when he grew up to be useful and capable of taking employment, was decoyed
away from his adopted mother by a carrier. My interference was called for ; but I found that
I had no legal power to interfere, and the lad, instead of being brought up in a decent and
Christian-like manner, has since been the associate of drunken bullock drivers.
333. By Mr. Patterson. —Could not those parties have been brought up under the
Master and Servants Act ?—No ; the lad went of his own accord, and he was old enough to
form a decision for himself. They had persuaded him that he would be better off with them.
334. If you were looked upon as the guardian of the blacks, could not you interfere . In
my present situation I have no other power than any other magistrate, the office of protector
having ceased ; and as it existed formerly, there was no legislative enactment which gave
us power to interfere in such a case. Another illustrative instance I can give in reference to the
children of a deceased native now in my charge, who had a small amount of property in cattle,
which I wish to secure for their benefit. I found myself surrounded with legal disabilities
in reference to the preservation and appropriation of this property. I have met with many
worthy persons who were anxious to adopt either half-caste, or full blood native children.
18


for the purpose of bringing them up. There is no law at present available by which an
official guardian could secure to these children the benefits proposed by apprenticing them to
the persons I refer to. I may state to the committee that I brought this question under
the notice of a member of the late Government, Mr. Michie, the attorney-general, when he had
introduced in a former session—l think a Bill under the title of the “ Orphans Bill; ”(I forget
the exact title of the Bill) —a bill for the protection of orphans. I received a reply from that
gentleman stating that my suggestions should be embodied in )he Bill ; but that Bill was
not proceeded with during that session, and at present there is an entire absence of legislation in
reference to these points. Another important question in reference to the humane treatment
of the natives is the necessity for adequate provision for their medical treatment. At present
no such provision exists within my district. I have been in the habit, during the whole period
of my acquaintance with the natives, of administering medicine to them in ordinary cases
of sickness; but many cases of acute and occult disease occur, which I do not feel myself adequate
to treat. I have had the pain of seeing, in two or three instances, life sacrificed for the
want of this medical treatment, and in some instances, in apprehension of such a result, I have
procured it at my own expense ; and I would strongly recommend to the committee, whatever
arrangements may be made for the benefit of the aborigines, that this point should not be over-
looked. I now wish to make a statement as to my experience in civilizing the aborigines :
There are at present settled, immediately in sight of my residence, two families who hold
land under the authority of the Government; they have been farming on their own account
since the year 1852 : they are two married men with their families. They were the first youths
that I induced to stay with me in the earliest periods of my experience as assistant protector of
aborigines. From the period I have just indicated—the year 1852—they have lived in the full
practice of civilized habits.
335. From what tribe were they ?—One was of the Wornbulluk tribe, the other of the
Galgalbulluk tribe. Their tribal connection, I may state, gave them no particular advantages over
any other natives. They hold twenty-one acres of land conjointly, under the authority of a letter
from the late Lieut.-Governor Mr. La Trobe. They have erected decent residences for themselves ;
have cultivated the soil; have taken several crops; and, in the entire habits and associations of
their lives, are in no respect different from our ordinary peasants. Two other families have been
located in like manner during the last four years; but the heads of these families are dead : one
perishing by accident, through falling down a digger’s hole ; the other, the most promising indivi-
dual I ever had under my care among the aborigines, died from severe pulmonary disease
last May. An allotment of land was authorised by Mr. Home, when ho held the office of
Commissioner of Land and Works, for the benefit of the last-named individual, and I am
anxious to secure the benefit arising from this land for the widow and infant child of the
deceased. I would add to that statement, that the men who are thus civilised form a portion of
the young men and boys who were especially the objects of my care and attention whilst I held
the office of assistant protector of the aborigines. There were several others who had
the same advantages, and the same opportunities of personal improvement; but habits of
intemperance, mostly contracted on the diggings, have, for the present, destroyed any hope of
permanent improvement in their case. I have always been of opinion that, if the natives are
taken at an early period of life, before their habits become decisively formed, they arc just as
capable of improvement as our own population. The great obstacle to their civilization is to be
traced to moral causes, and not to any physical disabilities. I may add, that the members of
these families are receiving instruction, either in the aboriginal school, or, in the case of the
young men themselves, by availing themselves of the opportunity of getting evening instruction
at a denominational school in the neighborhood. They regularly attend Divine service every
Sabbath ; and are always seen in European clothing, the women making their own entirely.
336. By the Chairman. —ln reference to that aboriginal school, is it a school kept up by
voluntary subscription or by government aid ?—lt is solely a government establishment. I had
perhaps better state the history of that school. Prior to the abolition of the protectorate
establishment I instituted, under the authority of Mr. La Trobe, ah aboriginal school, which is
maintained to the present day, on the premises originally belonging to the protectorate, and
entirely at the cost of the Government.
337. Is that school well attended ?—I produce, for the information of the committee, a
return drawn up yesterday of the number of children then in the school, the time they have
been at school, and their present educational progress.—[ The ivitness delivered in the same.
Vide Appendix B.]
338. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you consider the results satisfactory ? —To a certain extent
they are satisfactory. I have not always been satisfied with the mode in which the children
have been treated. The native mind is so constituted that it requires peculiar treatment to
promote its educational progress. The system that would be most suited to the younger portion
of the native children is that known as the infant school system ; and in any system of
scholastic instruction to which the natives are subjected, they should be made to feel as little
under the influence of restraint as possible. The instruction should be given to them in the
most attractive form. I have found it difficult, in practice, to meet with suitable persons to carry
out these views. Any stiffness, any rigidity in the regulations of the establishment, any apparent
severity in the teachers, is calculated to deter the children from continuing at school, and retard
their progress. I would further state, for the information of the committee, as to this school,
that its operations would have been of a much more extended character had there been any
opportunity of collecting the children from the surrounding district; but the establishment
consisting only of the teacher and his wife as matron, and the institution never having been
19


, without children, there has been no opportunity for any suitable agent to travel through the-
district to collect the number of children that might otherwise have been brought too-ether to
that school.
339. By the Chairman. —Are they supplied with rations during the time they are there ?
—Yes, it is a boarding school, and a regular supply of provisions is given.
340. Is not that some inducement to them to come ?—lt is an inducement to the children
they are glad to attend the school. There would be no difficulty on the part of the children in
increasing the number ; the only difficulty would be in the habits of the parents.
341. It was found in the case of Mr. Peacock’s school that, whenever the tribes came and
camped near the school, the children went away?—l am aware of the history of the school, and
I am aware also, that in every other institution for the benefit of the natives, where they were
collected in any number, hostile proceedings have taken place at different periods, rendering the
natives timid and unwilling to leave their children, from the anticipation of their being killed by
their foes ; but the simple circumstance that, in the entire history of the Loddon establishment,
from its first institution in 1840, as a protectorate establishment, to the present day, when it
exists as an aboriginal school, no life has ever been sacrificed, though at times as many as 250
natives have been congregated on the spot, has given to the natives of the district a feeling of
security in reference to the protection of their children. That circumstance— i. e.. hostility by
neighboring tribes—broke up the Bunting Dale mission in some respect; there was loss of life there.
342. Do you think it is a good motive that prevents the blacks allowing the children to
go to those schools—that they are really afraid of their lives being sacrificed ?—That is the
alleged reason. lam quite aware that it is not the sole reason : that, more particularly with
reference to the female children, worse motives prevail, as among the uncivilized natives they
are the subjects of barter.
343. Have you read, or are you acquainted with, the particulars that have recently been
published with reference to the Poonindie establishment in South Australia ?—I have not read
any late report from the institution, but I am aware that it has been successful.
344. Is there any tract of country near you now set apart for aborigines ?—ln addition
to the twenty-one acres occupied by the native farmers I have referred to, there is a portion of the
original aboriginal reserve, about 113 acres.
345. That is all that remains of it? —That is the sole remains of the aboriginal reserve
at Mount Franklin.
346. Is there any unsold land adjoining it, by which it could be extended, if thought
necessary ? —The portion of land to which I refer is entirely surrounded by cultivated ground
in private occupation. In the ranges forming part of the old aboriginal reserve, tracts may be
found which are not likely to be required for agricultural purposes ; but, inasmuch as the entire
district is unquestionably auriferous, there could be no certainty in the preservation of a tract
of land for the purpose of the aborigines in that locality. In fact, the great practical difficulty
in my view in connection with the establishment of reserves for the benefit of the aborigines, is
found in the increasing value of the land, both for agricultural requirements, and on account of
the general diffusion of the auriferous deposits.
347. What means have the poor aborigines of procuring support, when the land is all
getting occupied by farming, and squatting, and gold digging, and so on?—The remnants of the
native tribes on the Loddon, those tribes with which I have been for a lengthened period in
communication, pick up a scanty subsistence on the gold-fields, and occasionally among the
settlers to the northward. Their present condition, however, is most disastrous, from the general
prevalence of habits of intoxication, and the total absence of any restriction on giving ardent
spirits to the natives.
348. That is, as against private parties, because there is a restriction as regards pub-
licans ?—There is a restriction as against publicans, and the same restriction can be applied to
private individuals ; but in practice it is wholly inoperative ; no notice whatever appears to be
taken of that law, and it is exceedingly difficult to enforce a conviction under it.
349. If the Government could be induced to provide reserves, with a sufficient amount
of supplies for the aborigines, and a missionary to take charge of them, do you think they could
be induced to settle down as agricultural laborers on those reserves, and help to support them-
selves ?—I think many of the younger portion of the natives might be so.
350. If you allowed the older to go into their erratic habits occasionally, and come away
as they liked, would they not be gradually weaned from those habits, and ultimately take a
pleasure even in tilling the ground, or in looking after a flock of sheep, if country could be got
to support a flock of sheep ?—I think it very desirable that some portion of the territory should
bo preserved, on which the foot of the aborigine may rest, with a conviction that he has a right
to be there ; but, looking at the fact that the Moravian missionaries have been unable to obtain,
for several months past, an allotment of land for the purpose of their benevolent project, 1 fear
there will be great practical difficulties in carrying out this measure.
351. Are those difficulties on the part of the Government in giving the land, or other
difficulties inherent in the proposal itself?—There could be no difficulty on the part of the
Government, if the Government of the day were willing so to appropriate the land.
352. Is not the difficulty with regard to the Moravian mission a difficulty in the
the Government actually giving them possession of the tract of land at Hindmarsh, that they
claim ? —The difficulty has always been in connection with aboriginal reserves, that they inter-
fered with the claims of private individuals.
353. That is, that the land was under squatting tenure ?—Either the land being held
under a squatting tenure or being required for sale.
20


354. By Dr. Hope. —Have you any idea as to the number of aborigines now in the J
country ?—My estimate is that there may be at present about 2000 left.
355. And how are they dispersed, do you think—are they pretty equally dispersed over
the colony ?—I do not think they are equally dispersed ; I think the aboriginal population of
the western district is very small, life having been sacrificed there in former years to a great
extent. I think the largest population will be found along the line of the Murray. I may state,
for the information of the committee, that I have this morning referred to a document attached
to a report of mine in the year 1843, which was in fact an aboriginal census of the district
which was under my charge, and 1 have examined the returns of ten tribes. At the time that
return was made, in January, 1843, those tribes numbered 179 individuals, whose names and
families are given in detail in the New South Wales Legislative Council papers of 1843.
Examining these details, I find of that number eighty-eight have died since that period, and
there have been about twenty-five births in that interval of time. I estimate the number in
those tribes now at 116. I may state in reference to these tribes that it is my belief there has
been less mortality in proportion among them than among any other tribes in the colony, from
the circumstance that they have lived peaceably with the European settlers, and that there have
been few deaths by violence.
356. lias not one of the causes of the great mortality of the natives been attributed
to their partially adopting civilised habits, and going away and residing in the bush at times ;
so that if, in their connection with the whites they have adopted those habits more than any
others, that cause would have operated to a greater extent ?—Unquestionably, where there has
only been the occasional adoption of the habits of civilised life, alternating with a recurrence
to their own wild habits, disease has been engendered, more especially of a pulmonary character ;
and I have invariably found that natives of a half civilised character have been more delicate
and susceptible to disease than others.
357. By the Chairman. —ls pulmonary disease the principal cause of death amongst
them ?—lt is one of the most frequent causes of death. Diseases of the respiratory organs, or
rather, if I were to make the statement more definite, I should say diseases of the chest and
respiratory organs; and the liver is an organ very frequently attacked amongst them. A case
occurred yesterday necessitating medical assistance.—[This case, one of internal abscess,
terminated fatally soon after this evidence was given.]
358. Are they subject to complaints in the stomach ?—Not much.
359. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you find drunkenness very prevalent amongst the tribes you
allude to ?—lt is very prevalent amongst those natives wandering about the country ; those
who are settled about my place are mostly free from that vice.
360. You have alluded to the case of one of the blacks who killed himself by falling
down a digger’s hole. How did that occur ?—He was out late at night, and had been selling his
farm produce at the neighboring diggings. I have reason to fear that he was induced to take
some liquor to which he was not usually accustomed.
361. Then it really was caused by drunkenness ?—Yes. I was not informed that he was
actually drunk, but that he had been induced to take liquor: and I may state that there are many
persons on the diggings who seem to take a pleasure in compelling even those who are disposed
to be sober to take liquor, in spite of their reluctance.
362. By the Chairman. —There was no suspicion of foul play ?—None whatever. An
inquest was held on the body.
363. Is there any disposition on the part of the whites to annoy the natives, or treat
them unfairly ?—No, there is no hostility between the races within my knowledge at all.
364. Nor ever has been ? —Not within the last twelve or fourteen years.
365. By Mr. Patterson. —With reference to these establishments that you propose for
the aborigines, do you think those establishments could be made self-supporting ? —I am
perfectly satisfied they could be made self-supporting, if liberally endowed in the first instance,
and in the hands of competent persons. By the aid of native labor, they should raise sufficient
provisions for the support of the natives congregated about the place, and there are many ways
of making money through aboriginal agency, which, in the hands of a prudent and well disposed
person, might be made available in the way of making such institutions self-supporting.
366. Would you recommend that cattle, or sheep, or both, should be placed on those
establishments ?—Yes. I recommend that, if a suitable tract of country can be obtained; but
my doubt of success arises from the difficulty of obtaining pastoral land, or even agricultural
land, for the benefit of the natives.
367. Was not this system partly adopted at Jim Crow ?—lt was adopted some time after
the commencement of the protectorate establishment there, and most thoroughly carried out
under my own superintendence at the Loddon establishment, and at the Goulburn.
368. Was it found to be self-supporting ?—Not entirely, but most of the animal food,
and all the flour required at the aboriginal establishment on the Loddon was raised on the
ground.
369. How many years was that system in existence ?—I went up on the Loddon to form
the establishment in the month of November, 1840. The locality was changed the following
June to the vicinity of my present residence, and the protectorate establishment was maintained
there until the abolition of the department in March, 1850. At that time there were on the
Loddon establishment, and on the Goulburn establishment, between 3000 and 4000 sheep, which
were subsequently sold, and the proceeds applied to the general revenue. The original stock
consisted of 500 breeding ewes, purchased in 1844 at five shillings per head.
370. How did you find the natives act as shepherds ?—I never had any difficulty in
21
Aborigines.—^


„ getting shepherds, they generally made very good shepherds. And it is a fact I should like to
. state; well known to me, that, at the time when the country was in a state of universal excite-
ment on the outbreak of the gold mining, there were several stations where no shepherds were
left but aboriginal shepherds.
371. Would the aborigines manage the whole establishment, both as to agriculture and
stock ?—Under suitable superintendence.
372. Did they do so at Mount Franklin?—There was a certain number of white persons
employed, but the labor was furnished by aborigines.
373. Do you know why that establishment was broken up ?—lt is a well known fact that
the protectorate establishment was always the object of great obloquy and opposition from the
period of its first institution, and that its dissolution as a department was the act of the Sydney
Government. At the same time lam not prepared to say that it was necessary for it, to have
been continued in the form in which it then existed.
374. By Dr. Hope. —With regard to those establishments of homesteads, you say that, in
those tribes you have enumerated, there were eight or nine tribes with 160 inhabitants?—lf
members of the committee would refer to the document, they will find that the tribes are given
in detail, even where there are only two individuals, as in the case of one called the Beal-bulluk
tribe,, where there were only a father and son, but it is stated in my return that they were the
remains of a numerous tribe.
375. What number of aborigines would you erect homesteads for? what would be the
number that you would set apart for each location? how many homesteads would you recommend
to be formed, and what proportion of inhabitants for each location ?—I think the question of the
number of the locations should not be made dependent upon the number of inhabitants, but upon
their previous associations and alliances. If natives who have been in the habit of living in
friendly relations could be collected together in a certain district, such a homestead might be
conducted with benefit; but great mistakes have been made in former years, in placing such
institutions in situations whore the natives, who might be disposed to settle down on them, were
exposed to the hostile incursions of neighboring tribes ; that remark espescially applies to the
Wesleyan mission at Bunting Dale. I have always thought that it was prematurely given up.
I, as a Wesleyan, had that opinion, and still entertain it. I have considered the question of
suitable localities for such reserves, and it has occurred to me that the following localities might
be adopted : the vicinity of Melbourne, or Western Port, Gipps Land, the Loddon, the junction
ol the Goulburn with the Murray, the Upper Murray, the junction of the Darling and the
Murray where there is at present a Church Mission establishment, the Wimmera, and some well
selected spot in the western district.
376. On an average, what quantity of laud do you think would be necessary to set apart
for each of those ?—lf the institution was to be wholly agricultural, a single section for each
would be adequate; but if it was proposed to endow them with a portion of stock it would be
necessary to extend the quantity, but in no case is it desirable that it should be larger than the
actual necessities of the case demanded. The dependence of the natives upon food acquired by
hunting has now nearly ceased, excepting in the remote interior, and on the Murray, where they
live chiefly on fish.
3/7. Does the dread of interference from other tribes still exist amongst them to any
extent ?—Those hostilities amongst themselves have in a great measure ceased of late years ; in
fact the tribes or petty nations are so broken up, and so subdivided amongst the whites, that they
are losing all their national distinctions.
378. By Mr. Patterson. —You stated some time ago that the protectorate was abolished
by the Legislature in Sydney?—Yes.
379. Was not Mr. John Leslie Fitzgerald Foster, the member for this district, the
chairman of the committee who recommended its abolition ?—I do not recollect whether that
committee recommended the abolition of the protectorate establishment. There were some very
angry debates in the Council at the time, and statements were made by members of the Sydney
Legislature hostile to the protectorate establishment which had no sound basis, inasmuch as they
had reference to scenes and incidents which had taken place on the New South Wales side,
where the protectorate establishment had no existence. I may further state that it was a matter
of deep regret to me, in reference to the proceedings of that committee, and of serious complaint,
that, in the circular inquiries that were made in reference to the state of the aborigines, and their
prospects and treatment, at the time, no documents of that kind were sent to the officers of
the protectorate establishment; they were thus precluded by the committee from giving any
evidence on the subject.
380. By the Chairman. —Did not Dr. Thomson make some motion in reference to the
abolition of the protectorate ?—That was some time prior.
381. But that did not succeed?—lt was announced in October, 1843, by Dr. Thomson
himself, returning hastily from Sydney, that the protectorate was to be abolished.
382. And it turned out not to be true ?—The Executive Government in Sydney appeared
to have recalled its decision, and maintained the establishment for six years longer.
383. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you know whether Mr. Foster was chairman of that com-
mittee or not ?—I do not recollect, t had at the time some conversation with Mr. Foster on
the subject ; of course we differed in opinion, and 1 did complain to him that no inquiries had
been made of the officers of the protectorate. His reply was, that he understood that those
documents had been sent to them, and that they had nothing to answer.
384. By the Chairman. —He was then at any rate a member of the committee ?—Ho
certainly was a member of the committee.
22


385. Then it is your opinion that, instead of having been abolished, it ought to have
been modified ?—Yes.
386. By Mr. Patterson. —Do you recollect what year it was in which that committee
sat ?—The decision of the Executive Government in Sydney to abolish the protectorate was
announced in the month of July, 1849. The events that I have referred to took place in
June, 1849.
387. Are you aware whether there was not some complaint made by the Sydney
Government that the correspondence connected with the aborigines was of such a voluminous
nature, that they could not go into it at all: and was it not the fact that the bulk of the letters
from the officers of the department here were found to be unopened ?—That has reference to a
period anterior to 1849 : that took place in 1843. I heard the circumstance from Dr. Thomson
himself. I may state to the committee plainly that the conduct of the protectorate department
was not generally approved by the Executive Government, and that it was always my opinion
there was too much formality, too much of what has been termed “ red tapeism,” and too little
regard to practical measures for the benefit of the natives. In reference to my individual
experience as an assistant protector of the aborigines, I always found,when indirect communi-
cation with Ills Honor the Superintendent, that the Executive Government was prepared to
sustain and carry out any suitable measures for the benefit of the natives; but, when the
execution of those measures depended upon a circuitous and often long-delayed correspondence,
I found almost insuperable obstacles in the conduct of my portion of the department. 1 may
state also, in reference to the course I pursued as assistant protector of aborigines, that 1 took
a certain course at the outset, on my own responsibility, and had no benefit whatever from
any instructions from the head of my department, or any code of instructions from the Executive
Government. I have had the satisfaction of knowing that the measures I adopted, and my
mode of conducting the establishment in former days, met with the approbation of the Executive
Government, and generally with the approbation of the settlers.
388. Will you furnish to the committee a statement in detail of the expenditure which
you think would be involved in the establishment of each homestead ?—I will furnish the com-
mittee with all the practical information that I think it possible to give. There was another
return which I should submit to the committee in connection with the school, of children who
have been lately in the school and have been away from it. The object of that return is to
show that there are other children in the district who have had the benefit of instruction at that
school. —[ The witness delivered in the same. Vide Appendix C.]
The witness withdrew.
23


Wawoorong or Tarra Tribe
Boonoorong or Coast Tribe
Males.
13
9
Females.
8
5
Children.
0
1 girl 5 years old.
22
13
1 = 36
REPLIES TO A CIRCULAR LETTER, WITH LIST OF
QUERIES.
To obviate the inconvenience of the attendance of persons as witnesses from various parts of the colony, the
Committee ordered the following circular, enclosing a list of queries, to be extensively circulated
amongst such persons as were believed to be in a position to afford information upon the subject
under inquiry:—
“ [Circular,]]
“ Committee Booms, Legislative Council,
“ 27th October, 1858.
“ Sir,
“ The Select Committee of the Legislative Council of Victoria, appointed to enquire into the present
condition of the aborigines, solicit your attention to the accompanying queries, and will be much obliged by
your replying tf> the same at your earliest convenience.
“ They are put forward with the view of endeavoring to ameliorate their present condition, and of
obtaining as much information as possible in reference to their past history and present condition.
“ The questions which have reference to the second portion of the inquiry have been taken from
queries which were, some time ago, forwarded to the Chairman of the Committee by the British Association
for the Promotion of Science, and may not all be deemed applicable to a race deemed so low in the scale of
civilization as the aborigines of this colony.
“ A great similarity exists between these queries and a list of questions on the same subject which
have been drawn up by the Ethnographical Society of Paris, thus showing that men of learning in Europe
are most anxious about information regarding races likely to become extinct. At the meeting of the British
Association, at Birmingham, Dr. Pritchard, well known as the author of a work on the various races of men,
pointed out instances in which this extinction had already taken place to a great extent, and showed that
many races now existing are likely at no distant period to be annihilated. He pointed out the irretrievable
loss which science must sustain if so large a portion of the human race, counting by tribes instead of
individuals, is suffered to perish before many interesting questions of a psychological, physiological, and
philological character, as well as many historical facts in relation to them, have been investigated ; whence
he argued that science, as well as humanity, is interested in the efforts which are made to rescue them,
and to preserve from oblivion many important details connected with them.
“ If you are in a position to afford the Members of the Committee any information on the subject, they
will be obliged by an answer to this circular at your earliest convenience.*
“ By order of the Committee,
“ THOMAS MoCOMBIE,
“ Chairman.”
“ * Note.—The questions are numbered in order to afford every facility for replying without unnecessary trouble. Ton will be pleased to be
particular in stating the number of the question to which yon are replying.”
Appended are the queries and replies; and, for the convenience of having the information supplied in a
connected form, they have been classified, and the replies to each query arc grouped under the same.
DIVISION I.
General Questions.
1. Can you give the committee any information of the number of aborigines in your district, the names of the
tribes, numbers belonging to each tribe?
William Thomas, Esq., Guardian of Aborigines. —ln the counties of Bourke, Mornington, and Evelyn
there are only thirty-six aborigines left; these arc divided, as in their primitive state on the foundation of the
colony, into two tribes, commonly termed the Yarra and the Coast Tribe, viz •
John Orr, Esq. —l cannot give the number of the aboriginals, but can state they are very much reduced
since the diggings commenced.
Henry B. Lane, Esq., Police Magistrate, Yachandandah. —There are two tribes in this district, one on the
Murray river (inhabiting both banks), and they appear to occupy the country from Howlong, twenty miles
below Albury to Doroda, thirty or forty miles above it. Their native name is “Werogery." A few years ago
they numbered about 100, but are probably much reduced now. The name of the tribe is “Thar-a-mirttong-”
they live on the banks of the “Kiewa” or Little river, distant from fifteen to fifty miles. They do not now
number more than twelve or fourteen, but a few years ago there were at least fifty. There must be some
aborigines however, inhabiting the almost unsettled country on the Upper Hume, Mitta Mitta, and Inomurgee
(or bnowy) rivers, as I have seen their traces when on an expedition to Omeo.
Aborigines.— g.


George Harrison, R.N., Police Magistrate, Castlemaine. —There exists no regular tribe in the Castlemaino
district. Some few natives hang about the diggings and are employed by dairymen and slaughtermen, and
occasionally a straggler comes in from beyond the Loddon.
William Templeton, Esq., Resident Warden, Avoca. —I think there are not at present more than 100 of
these people remaining in this (the mining district of Maryborough) district. They are, properly speaking,
divided into three tribes ; —the Loddon, Avoca, and Richardson ; but they frequently join together when it suits
their convenience.
G. W. Rusden, Esq., ./. P. —Questions 1 to 4 will be answered by the guardian of the aborigines in
whose district I reside at Brighton.
C. IT. Sherard, Esq., Resident Warden, Ballaarat. —Between Creswick, Burrumbeet, and Climes, about
forty ; say ten men, fifteen women, and fifteen children.
Charles Shuter, Esq., Police Magistrate, Bacchus Marsh. —About twenty-nine adults, and perhaps twelve
children.
Hugh Murray, Esq., Culac. —l will confine myself to the tribe in the Colac district, with which I am
well acquainted:—Name “The Colac Tribe” ; number of tribe, nineteen.
Albert Synnol, Esq., Cope Cope, Wimmera. —Without having any certain data, I would say that there
may be 150 aborigines, young and old, living in this part of the Wimmera district, who wander over a tract
from the Pyrenees north about 100 miles, and from forty to fifty miles in width. Ido not think the tribes
originally inhabiting this tract are still distinct from each other, but that they live now rather in families,
without other distinctive appellation than that of the creek, mountain, &c., near which they generally live.
James Wilson, Esq., St. Kilda. —There are very few aborigines in the Mitta Mitta district, probably not
more than twelve (12). The Talangatta creek was the hunting ground of the Ginning-matong tribe. There
are only three of this tribe now alive.
A. Fishen, Esq., Lai Lai —Number, fifteen. Names of the tribes; —Lai Lai, Balkan, Merimu, Baronighurk.
./. N. McLeod, Esq., J.P., Castle Maddic, Portland. —l never could make out any distinct tribe, but the
usual number about my station on Darlott’s creek is, I think, about fifty in all.
F. Ormond, jun., Esq., Bowiyallock. —There are about forty aborigines in this neighborhood:—The Mount
Emu tribe, seventeen ; Friendly Creek tribe, ten ; Wardy Yallock tribe, thirteen.
A. French, Esq., J.P. Moonvea, Hamilton. —Questions 1 to 3. —The number of aborigines must have very
much diminished since my arrival in this part of the country, eighteen years ago, as I seldom see any now,
though I used constantly to employ them formerly.
Edward Croohe. Esq., Holey Plain, Gipps Land. —No.
John C. Aitken, Esq., Thornton, Upper Goulburn. —So far as I can ascertain, the number of the aborigines
in the Upper Goulburn tribe is about fifty. There is another small tribe on the Delatite or Devil’s river, num-
bering about thirty, with which there is constant communication.
William Skene, Esq., Warrumbeech, Hamilton. —l have taken the numbers of four different tribes, as
told over by one of themselves, viz.:—Wannon tribe, near Cavendish, nine ; Lake Condon, fifty ; Elerick or
Portland, twenty-five ; Lower Wannon, about Merino Downs, thirty-four.
Peter Beveridge, Esq., Swan Hill. —There are seven tribes of aborigines in this district, commencing at
Swan Hill and ending at the Moornpal Lakes, inclusive. Beginning at Swan Hill and going on in consecutive
order, the tribes are named as follows:—Boora Boora, Watty Watty, Mutty Mutty, Waiky Waiky, Sitchy
Sitchy, Tarry Tarry, and Darthy Darthy. Each name is the negative of the language spoken by the respective
tribes. These tribes will average about fifty-five, old and young. Of course some of them exceed that number,
and others again do not number nearly so many.
William O. Allan, Esq., J.P., Allandale —(per Lewis Gilles, Esq., P.M., Warrnambool). —There are only
nine aborigines in the two parishes of Mepunga and Talangatta.
J. H. Craig, Esq., J.P., Warrnambool —(per X. Gilles, Esq., P.M. ) —Lady Bay tribe, or “Pertobe.” The
present number of this tribe will not probably exceed forty.
Police Serjeant Archibald, Warrnambool —(per X. Gilles, Esq. P.M.') —About thirty-four (34).
Charles E. Strutt, Esq., P.M., Echuca. —The aborigines in this district belong to the Echuca tribe ;
Echuca being the native name for this part of the Murray. The number of aborigines is difficult to ascertain
with exactness, as they are always wandering about ; but it is considered that about 500 may bo at present
living in or near Lake Moira, the Murray, and its lakes and tributaries on this side of a line drawn half way
between Echuca and Swan Hill.
J. M. Allan, Esq., J.P., Looram, Warrnambool.—The Villicrs tribe contains forty-four males and twenty-
eight females. The Heytesbury tribe, nine men, three women, and six children, including both sexes.
Henry Godfrey, Esq., Brighton.—A bout forty blacks are all that remain of the tribe known as the
“ Lower Loddon.”
Henry Gottreux, Esq., the Gums, Caramut. —In the district or county of Yilliers, from 160 to 200, divided
into five or six tribes ; viz., Port Fairy, Spring creek, Maston’s creek, Hopkin’s river, and Mount Bouse,
numbering from thirty to forty each.
John X. Currie, Esq., Wardy Yallock. —l do not think there are more than from twelve to twenty, and
principally the remnants of the Emu creek and Wardy Tallock tribes.
C. j. P. Lydiard, Esq., Superintendent of Police, Belfast.— Somewhere about 300 in the county of Villiers,
all of the same tribe, although divided into parties, each party claiming a separate portion of the county as
their country.
George Stewart, Esq., P.M., Belfast— So far as I can ascertain, the Belfast tribe now consists of ten
men, four women, and three children (two boys and one girl).
Patrick Mitchell, Esq., Kangatong. —The number of aborigines in this district may be computed at from
120 to 150. They consist of the Mount Rouse tribe, together with a few others, whose former tribal distinctions
are now obliterated.
Daniel Bunce, Esq., Botanical Gardens, Geelong. —l was informed yesterday by one of the tribe (Billy
Gore) that there are nine males and five females.
Cecil Pybus Cooke, Esq. —There are several tribes near me, but none are known here by their native
names ; the three principal ones are the Harlot creek, Lake Condah, and Eumerella. I should consider that
they numbered no more than forty in each.
William Huon, Esq., Woodonga. —About thirty-five. Names of tribes—Tliaramattay and Wooradgery.
'fhis is an approximation as to number, but I think 1 may safely state that both tribes do not exceed forty.
Alfred Currie Wills, Esq., P. 31, and Warden, Omeo. —Name of tribe —Gundanora. Numbers—ln May,
1835, there were about 500 or GOO men, women, and children, resident during a few months of each year, at
their head quarters on the elevated plain of Omeo. In 1842 they frequently assembled there in large numbers,
and often killed many cattle belonging to squatters, whose stockmen, it is said, retaliated by firing on them.
Their hunting and fishing grounds extended northward to the Cobboras hills, southward and eastward to the
river Tambo, and westward to the Bogong mountain range, via the Gibbo and Mitta Mitta rivers. In 1843
a great diminution in their numbers was first observed, and at this present date there are only two men and
three women of the tribe living. These arc distributed between Maneroo (N.S.W.), Snowy creek, and the
River Murray.
Cathhert Fetherstonhaugh, Esq., P.M., Hamilton. —Between eighty and one hundred, named Mount Bouse
and Wannon tribes, nearly equal in number.
William Piper, Esq., PAL, Benalla. —Probable number of Aborigines in the Murray district, 146. Their
arrangements into tribes no longer distinguishable.
26


Henry L. Lewis, Esq., Moira, River Murray. —The tribe belonging to this immediate neighborhood is
‘Called the Panggarang tribe. It numbers about forty. The next tribe on the north (Edward river)
is called the Arramouro tribe, and numbers about thirty. The tribe on the opposite bank of the Murray and
Lower Goulburn is called Owanguttha tribe, numbering perhaps eighty. There is a small tribe on the
Murray, at and below Moama, “ Woollathara,” perhaps not more than twenty or twenty-four in number.
2. Will you state the ages and the proportion of the sexes of the aborigines in your district, as nearly as you
can; their general condition, bodily health, and any other particulars you have it in your power to communicate ?
Mr. Thomas. —The Wawoorong or Yarra tribe have more middle-aged and old than young men in
proportion ; in fact, generally speaking, it is not the aged who die, but the young, male and female, since the
last ten or twelve years that they have taken to ardent spirits. In the Wawoorong or Yarra tribe are four
aged, I should say of the age of sixty and seventy ; the youngest is about nineteen.
The Boonoorong or Coast tribe. —The oldest among them cannot be more than forty ; the rest are
young, say from twenty-two years to thirty years. There is one fine girl, about five years of age, the
offspring of a connection between a Coast black with a Gipps Land black lubra.
Their general condition, as far as the necessaries of life are concerned (if I understand the question
right), they want for nothing, or need not want. They are fond of their reserve, and when inclined, return to
it, where are always tea, sugar, flour, tobacco, and soap, and have had from 1852 an annual distribution of a
pair of good ordinance blankets. Their health, when they keep in the bush and are working with respectable
farmers, their bodily health is as good as regular living Europeans. It is only when they stop for a week or
two near a public inn, or with low characters, that their enervated constitutions arc materially affected,
which I have known so rapid that a few days have ended their career. Pulmonary disorders are what they
are most liable to, and when drinking to excess, and not able to reach the encampment, down they lay,
perhaps on a cold wet night, and throw themselves literally into the arms of death.
Mr. Orr. —General condition, same as in 1839, bad. Bodily health bad from ardent spirits and diseases,
such as influenza and venereal.
Mr. Lane. —I have no means of learning the relative proportions of age or sex. The natives of this
part (Murray) appear to me to be physically superior to those I have seen in the western districts.
Captain Harrison. —No information.
Mr. Templeton. —l cannot give any idea.
Mr. Shcrard. —General health good.
Mr. Shuter.—l cannot speak as to their age. The proportion of sexes appears to be about equal.
Their health seems to be good, with a few exceptions.
Mr. Murray. —There are twelve men, six women, and one boy six years old, a half-caste ; their ages are
from twenty-four to fifty ; their bodily health and general condition is good. The men are generally employed
by the settlers. The tribe (Colac) was originally a powerful one, but in consequence of their possessing a
rich hunting country, they were subjected to constant warfare with the surrounding tribes, which, at the
time of the settlement of their country by Europeans (1837) had reduced them to about thirty in number.
Mr. Synnot. —They are chiefly adults, and generally healthy.
Mr. Wilson. —The Ginning-matong tribe comprehends two males and one half-caste female, viz. : Prank,
about twenty-seven years of age, a very intelligent, quiet, and obliging creature. His home is at the station of
Mr. Chas. Moore, Wagra, Mitta Mitta. He is generally employed breaking in young horses. Habits of
intemperance begin to tell on his system,—formerly robust, he is now sickly and delicate in appearance.
Neddy, aged twenty-one, a stout, muscular, young man, rambling and unsettled in his habits ; generally
resides with white people, and is employed droving and horsebreaking. Mary Ann, a half-caste uneducated
girl of fifteen, was lately living near Yackandandah.
Mr. Fisken. —Nine males, five females, one half-caste child (male) aged five years.
Mr. McLeod. —There are only nine children under ten years of age. Not many women ; some of them
very old, also five of the men. There are four boys about fourteen years of age, and the rest are men from
twenty to forty.
Mr. Ormond. —The sexes are about equal, perhaps more males than females ; their ages from twenty to
about fifty years. In the Mount Emu tribe there are two children, a girl and boy ; the girl about thirteen
years of ago, the boy eleven—half-castes.
B. W. Shadforth, Esq., P.M., Wangaratta. — l cannot.
Mr. Aitken. —The proportion of the sexes would appear to be nearly equal. Their bodily health
generally good.
Mr. Shene. —There is a very large projjortion of males. These seem to be, most of them, about from
twenty to forty years of age. There are very few children, almost none. They do not look healthy.
Mr. Beveridge. —The males preponderate very considerably. The only reason I can assign for this
excess is, because of the number of women that die yearly from their ill-treatment, or from diseases
contracted by their own profligacy. There arc very few under the age of fifteen, and the preponderance of
those under that age are half-breeds.
Mr. Allan. —Eight men and one woman, age from about sixteen to twenty-four years. All in good
bodily health at the present time.
Mr. Craig. —Ages from about fifteen to thirty-five years. The females appear to be slightly under the
proportion of males ; they certainly show decrepitude earlier than the males.
Sergeant Archibald ( Warrnambool'). —Eighteen men, ten women, and six children.
Mr. Strutt.— The aborigines seen in this district (Echuca) arc mostly middle-aged, or in the prime
of life ; few youths, and scarcely any children. The proportions of the sexes appear to be about equal.
Mr. J. M. Allan. — Ages from two to thirty years. Generally unhealthy, caused by the use of ardent
spirits, the w r ant, when sick, of medical attendance, medical and other comforts, as blankets, clothing, &c.
Mr. Godfrey. —The lubras, or women, constitute a rather larger proportion of the sexes ; their con-
dition is filthy and miserable. Bodily health indifferent.
Mr. Gottreux. — From twenty to forty years of age. Sexes about equal. Health tolerably good.
Mr. Currie. —Ages from twenty to forty. About equal proportions male and female. Condition—
depraved and degraded.
Mr. Lydiard. —There are very few children, and these are, for the most part, half-caste.
Mr. Stewart. —2 and 6. —They are generally healthy, but much given to indulging in ardent spirits,
which is supplied to them by the publicans, who infringe the Publicans Act in this respect, although it is
seldom possible to procure a conviction.
Mr. Mitchell. —Only an approximation to their ages can be arrived at. The majority appear to be of
twenty to thirty-five or forty years of age. Some few are apparently much older than these limits, and there
is also a fair proportion younger. There are, however, few of unmixed parentage under ten years of age. Many
of both sexes are very robust in appearance, and are capable of considerable exertion ; but. generally, they are
of enfeebled constitutions, and easily succumb to attacks of those disorders incident to their exposed, unsettled,
and improvident way of life.
Mr. Bunce. —Nine males, five females, apparently healthy ; but much abused, through an over indul-
gence in strong drinks.


Mr. Cooke. —ln the Lake Condah tribe there are about ten females, and as many males, above thirty
years of age ; fifteen males and females from fifteen years of age to twenty-five ; and the remainder, children
from one year to five years old. These last are all, I think, half-castes.
Mr. Hum. —Ages, from sixteen to forty years. Sexes, nearly equal. Bodily health, good. The tribes
for the last few years have been in the habit of frequenting the various diggings and other townships ; and
intemperance has carried off any members of the tribe that were sickly, or suffering from any disease. I may
here state that one of their principal characteristics is indolence, and a total disregard for the future, so that
their immediate wants are supplied.
Wills. —The proportion was about two males to one female. The remnant of the Gundauora tribe
is now two men and three women.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —Varying from five years to old age ; exact age cannot be ascertained, as they
have no correct idea of time. Condition, very miserable. Bodily health amongst the younger portion generally
good. The aged appear very infirm.
Mr. Piper, Murray district. —Their condition seems to be contented and happy, their bodily health good.
Mr. Lewis. —The ages are from infancy to perhaps sixty years. The proportion of the sexes, equal, or
nearly so. Physical powers, not great. Their health varies frequently, and is often affected by low fever,
resulting from the low marshy grounds upon which they from preference usually encamp. They are very
subject to rheumatism,
3. Has the mortality during the last ten years been very remarkable, and what are the diseases to which they
have mostly fallen victims ? Does any particular disease which is likely to be propagated amongst the white population
exist to any extent amongst them ?
Mr. Thomas.— During the last ten years the mortality has been fifty-six out of a population in 1848 of
ninety-two ; viz.—
Males. Females.
In the Wawoorong or Yarra Tribe ... ... ... ... 21 15
In the Boonoorong or Coast Tribe ... ... ... ...14 6
N.B. —There has been but one birth preserved during these ten years, the girl noticed in the first
question. “Diseases fallen victims to.”—Diseases of the lungs, accelerated through the effect of ardent
spirituous liquors, which operate more powerfully upon them than upon European constitutions. The
venereal disease, under which they formerly grievously suffered, introduced by the white population, does not
now exist to any material extent. If they contract it, they apply to me for bluestone, and quickly cure them-
selves ; but for the last three years I do not think it has been among them.
Mr. Orr. —Very great mortality from being clad at times, and same causes as No. 2. Venereal is
greatly propagated from them amongst the whites.
Mr. Lane.— The mortality must have been very great of late years. A settler near this place
(Yackandandah), assures me that twenty years ago the natives were very formidable and troublesome. I
understand scorbutic diseases are most common.
Captain Harrison. —No information.
Mr. Templeton. —The mortality during the last sevdh years must have been very remarkable, as I am
told there is not now one of these people for ten formerly. Diseases induced by intemperance and venereal
disorders improperly treated are, I think, those to which the greatest number have fallen victims.
Mr. Sherard. —The mortality has been very geat during the last ten years, more especially since the
discovery of gold. Intemperance, and exposure to the weather consequent thereon, seems to be the principal
cause.
Mr. Shuter— Not very. The cause of death in most instances is consumption or decline. No.
Mr. Murray. —The mortality during the last ten years has not been great, there is no disease among
them.
Mr. Synnot. —There has been a great decrease in their numbers during the last ten years. I do not
believe that they have any disease peculiar to themselves, or which does not also prevail among the white
population.
Mr. Wilson. —Yes. Intemperance and exposure to cold damp air, sleeping at the camp without clothes
after having been accustomed to live in the huts and wear the clothing of white people. A feud exists between
this tribe and another tribe on the Murrumbidgee, and a good many lives were thus sacrificed.
Mr. Fisken. —Mortality remarkable. Bronchitis, rheumatic pericarditis, psoriasis, intemperance.
Particular disease. —No.
Mr. McLeod. —All their diseases, I may say, are brought on from colds caught in the miserable and
careless way they live. There is no disease among them likely to be propagated among the whites.
Mr. Ormond. —The mortality, on the -whole, does not strike me as being very remarkable, In.the years
1853-54 and 1855 there were a good many deaths from venereal disease, and accidents by fire whilst in a state
of intoxication. Within the last three years several have died from pulmonary consumption.
Mr. Crooke. —Mortality has been very remarkable. Syphilis exists.
Mr. Aitken.— The mortality during the last ten years has been remarkable. Rheumatism, liver
complaint, and intemperance are the principal causes. lam not aware that any disease exists amongst the
aborigines likely to be propagated amongst the white population.
Mr. Skene. —There have been a good many deaths from rheumatism, consumption, syphilis, and killing
one another.
Mr. Beveridge.—The mortality during the last ten years has been very great. The diseases to which
they have chiefly fallen victims have been of a pulmonary or venereal nature, or a combination of both. Ido
not think any of the aboriginal diseases can be contracted or propagated amongst the European population,
unless by inoculation.
Mr. Allan—lt has. Ten years ago this tribe (Mepunga and Talangatta) mustered full fifty, and
seventeen years ago they amounted to full 100. Some have died from old age, others killed by neighboring
tribes, and a number have died from influenza. I am not aware of any disease which is likely to be propagated
amongst the white population.
Mr. Craig. —Eleven years ago, I am of opinion, this tribe would number nearly 200, and very many
have died from influenza and consumptive affections. The then continual warfare with other tribes, and
injuries sustained amongst themselves, old age accelerated by intemperance (wherever spirits were obtainable),
and the few children now reared, may account for their decrease.
Lewis Gilles, Esq., P.M., Warrnambool. —l consider the answers of Sergeant Archibald to be very
correct, and I require only to supply answers to some queries omitted by him. The mortality has been
considerable within the last few years, and, I fear, chiefly arising from habits of intemperance, which, notwith-
standing the exertions of the police and care of the bench, it has been found next to impossible to check ; so
difficult is it to procure evidence on which to convict the parties who supply the aborigines with spirits.


EXPENDITURE for the Aboeigines of the Colon
y of Victoria during the following Periods.
: 1st July to
Service.
31st Dec.,
1851.
1852.
1853
1854.
1855.
1856.
1857.
1858.
Salary of Protector
£ s.
107 0
d.
0
£ s.
424 1
d.
8
£
625
s.
0
d.
0
£
687
s.
10
d.
0
£
649
s. d.
3 4
£ s.
600 0
d.
0
£ s.
600 0
d.
0
£
600
s.
0
d.
Salaries of Teachers and Over-
h
i seers
66 13
4
\
178
15
3
161
12
10
169
11 11
150 0
150 0
150
0
Salary of Medical Officer
51 13
4
>461 14
°<
Wages of Laborers, Shepherds,
)
Hutkeepers, and others
139 18
1
)
334
2
11
21
10 6
Provisions and Forage..
300 19
8
447 2
0
763
11
6
45
16
8
291
10 10
117 5
6
Clothing and Bedding ..
14 18
0
75 8
6
157
13
3
44
9 9
56 7
307 11
90
1
Medicines and Medical Attend-
ance
2
3
7
7 0
1 19
Utensils, Tomahawks, Tobacco,
Pipes, Stationery, and other
Stores
17 13
1
70 12
4
14
7-
11
39
10 4
1 16
11 13
10
Repairing and Furnishing
Buildings
98 16
2
2
18
4
Materials for Fencing ..
32 16
0
Carriage of Stores from Mel-
bourne..
3 1
3
41 9
9
168
14
1
157
17 3
Expense of Shearing and Car-
riage of the Wool to Mel-
bourne..
40 18
6
89 9
10
30
14
6
Education and Maintenance
of two Aboriginal Orphans ..
20 3
4
35 17
6
62
8
0
46
16
0
77
19 11
31 4
0
31 4
Shoeing and Saddlery ..
4 7
0
10 17
0
24
3
0
Funerals and other Incidentals
12 15
4
35 5
8
13
15
0
10
0
0
2
0 0
15 16
Grant to the Moravian Mission
1
to the Aborigines
500
0 0
Totals
911 13 1
1,691 18
3
2,378
7
4
951
15
6
1,931
0 10
974 8
6
1,528 2
1
956
5
0
+1 TT The , G ' barker, M.L.A.— -The annexed Return was furnished to the Committee by direction of
me Honorable the Treasurer. It gives the amount of expenditure incurred by the Government of Victoria
on behalf of the aborigines since 1851.
5, In the event of the Government being disposed to assist them with supplies, is there any police bench,
stipendiary or other magistrate or settler, who would be willing to take charge of such supplies and see to their
distribution amongst the aborigines ?
Wm. Hull Esq., Melbourne. —No doubt.
Mr. Thomas. There is every facility in the counties of Bourke, Mornington, and Evelyn viz.:
Mr. Gastello, J.P., at the Yarra Ranges; Mrs. McDonald, on the Reserve, Moody Yallock ; and Mr. David
Johnson, at the foot of Mount Disappointment. The two last mentioned have for years gratuitously performed
this humane offi'oe.
Mr. Orr. —There is no great use in giving supplies ; neither do I know of any one to take charge
of such. A doctor to cure their diseases is most wanted.
Mr. Lane. —There is a police bench at Belvoir (near Albury) ; but there is no nearer bench than this to
all those natives who may be roaming east of Yackandandah.
Captain Harrison. —lf assistance became requisite, the police magistrate would willingly act.
Mr. Templeton. The police Magistrate, “ Kerang.”
Mr. Rusden. —l think it would be well that, as the miseries to which the occupation of their country by
the whites subjects the blacks are caused by a public and common act, so any alleviations which can
bo resorted to should be managed under public control, and that petty sessions courts should he the medium
of distribution of such gifts as can be received with advantage by the blacks in each district. Where no
court of petty sessions exists, some benevolent person in whom the aborigines confide (there are many such)
might be appropriately applied to, to assist in the distribution.
Mr. Shuter. —The clerk of the bench (Mr. Cooper) has expressed his willingness to take charge of and
distribute any supplies that may be provided by the Government.
Mr. Murray. —Either the bench, or magistrates individually, and many settlers, would gladly take
charge of supplies from Government and distribute them amongst the aborigines, and I would strongly
recommend such a course.
Mr. Synnot. —Settlers might perhaps he found willing to undertake the duty of dispensing Government
supplies ; hut to employ a regular officer of the Government would prove, I think, a better plan. Stores
might be sent, from time to time, for distribution in each, locality, from the Government establishment, at such
places as Avoca, Maryborough, Korong, St. Arnaud, or the police stations at Swan Hill or Crowlands.
Mr. Wilson. —Not necessary.
Mr. Fisken. —Yes.
Mr. McLeod. —l shall be happy to receive supplies for them, of flour, tea, sugar, and tobacco, also
of blankets and clothes, which I would advise to be of some uncommon kind, and well marked over, say with
the broad arrow, and have any white punished, if any are ever found in his possession, as they will sell
anything for spirits ; and, Xam sorry to say, they easily find purchasers. If a depot is made at my station, I
will have the names, ages, See., taken in a book, of all aborigines, who come for clothes or supplies, with
the dates of receiving.
Mr. Ormond. —lf Government was disposed to assist them with supplies, there are magistrates and
settlers who would be most willing to see as to their distribution.
Mr. French. —In my neighborhood is the township of Hamilton, with police bench, stipendiary magis-
trate, stores, and every appliance for distributing supplies to the aborigines, if the Government thought
it expedient to do so.
Mr, Shadforth. —The stipendiary magistrate would be willing to take charge of supplies.
Mr. Aiiken. —There is no police bench or stipendiary magistrate in the district (Upper Goulbnrn), but I
believe a magistrate or settler could be found willing to take charge of and distribute supplies to the natives.
Mr. Skene. —Yes.
Mr. Beveridge. —There are both a stipendiary magistrate and staff of police in the district, but whether
they would undertake the distribution of any supplies the Government may be pleased to furnish for the use
of the aborigines, or the contrary, I cannot say.
Mr. Allan. —There is a police bench and a stipendiary magistrate in the district.
Mr. Craig. —There is a police bench and stipendiary magistrate here.
Mr. Gilles.— The stipendiary magistrate and local bench would afford every assistance.
Mr. Strutt.— Yes ; the police magistrate.


Mr. J. M. Allan. —l would gladly take charge of, and see to the proper distribution of, such supplies ;
and from my intimate acquaintance with the blacks, with their language, habits, and customs, would possess
peculiar facilities for so doing.
Mr. Godfrey. —Such could doubtless be found, if the Government supplied the means.
Mr. Gottreux. —There are several police benches and magistrates. Supplies could be distributed.
Mr. Currie. —The clerk of the district bench at Camperdown would, I think, be the proper officer
to entrust with the distribution of supplies ; and X may state, that it is highly desirable that there was some
depot where they could obtain lodging and the common necessaries of life ; as I believe they frequently
suffer from hunger, and in winter from cold, having lost the energy and the habits that enabled them
to supply themselves.
Mr. Lydiard. —Where there is no stipendiary magistrate, the clerk of petty sessions could act as
curator for any supplies granted them.
Mr. Mitchell. —There is no stipendiary magistrate in the district ; but there can be no doubt that
the other magistrates would see to the distribution of supplies to the aborigines, if Government should so
assist them.
Mr. Cooke.— lf clothing were given to them, I fear they would pawn them for drink. I would recom-
mend blankets for the winter season ; and flour, tea, and sugar, for food.
Mr. Huoti. —-There is a police bench here ; but I do not think, if the Government assisted them with
supplies, it would benefit them much, as they would be more likely to indulge in the use of ardent spirits,
being more about the town, and of course the temptation would be greater.
Mr. Wills, Omeo. —The tribe being extinct, no reply is necessary.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —The police magistrate at Hamilton.
Mr. Piper. —lt would be my duty to obey the orders of the Government in this respect.
Mr. Lewis. —Any Government supplies would be readily distributed in this district by either the
stipendiary or any other magistrate, or by persons of known respectability. Blankets, at the commencement
of winter, would be more useful to the natives than any other article of clothing.
6. Are the aborigines addicted to intemperance, and do the publicans of your district generally infringe the law
which prohibits them from selling ardent spirits, Sgc., to the natives ?
Mr. Hull. —The aborigines give money to white people, who get the liquor, and drink it with them.
Mr. Thomas. —The aborigines are not only addicted to intemperance, but slaves to it when they can
obtain it, which lam sorry to state they readily do when they come within the precincts of a public inn. I
do not believe that the publicans willingly infringe the law, but the aborigines are too crafty for the publicans.
I have it from various authorities, that they will give an idle lounging fellow a sixpence to purchase them a
bottle of rum. They have been known at Brighton to give a boy or girl playing about a few pence to procure
rum for them.
Mr. Orr. —Very much addicted to drunkenness, which is supplied to them by publicans and others.
Mr. Lane. —The aborigines, on their occasional visits here (Yackandandah), are frequently intoxicated.
I have seen them throwing the boomerang for the amusement of the miners, &c., and this, no doubt, caused
them to be treated.
Capt. Harrison. —Eight cases of drunkenness against aborigines have been heard at this bench (Castle-
maine) in the past three years. In each case I tried to obtain information as to where the spirits had been
obtained, but without effect. I have warned the publicans of the district that the penalty would be exacted
in each case, and cautioned the police to be on the alert; but no proof of sale has ever been established before
the bench. I have little doubt in my mind that, the money being forthcoming, the sale would follow.
Mr. Templeton. —They are addicted to intemperance, but I cannot say whether they buy the liquor or not.
Mr. llusden. —The aborigines soon become addicted to intemperance after contact with the whites. How
could it be otherwise ? Their hunting grounds are taken up by the whites ; they themselves become inter-
lopers in their native places ; their presence in large bodies is incompatible with the occupation of their
country by the whites ; they have usually only the lowest classes (in point of morality) of the whites to
associate with. They have no intellectual pursuits, no room for manly exercise in providing themselves with
game, as wans their wont ; and they speedily adopt the vicious habits with which they are made acquainted by
their invaders. They have no moral checks to appeal to, and the craving for the excitement of drink becomes
a physical disease, controlling their wills as it does in many cases the civilized man, who has had better
advantages, less excuse for yielding, and less temptation.
Mr. Sherard. —They are very much addicted to intemperance, and appear to have no difficulty in pro-
curing spirits at either public houses or refreshment tents.
Mr. Shuler.— The aborigines are much addicted to intemperance, and frequently obtain liquor through
means of the Europeans, who purchase it from the publicans. Ido not think that many publicans would
knowingly infringe the law by selling to them in the first instance.
Mr. Murray. —They are addicted to intemperance. The publicans in the district are not conspicuous as
infringing the law prohibiting them from selling spirits to the aborigines.
Mr. Synnot. —The aborigines are addicted to drunkenness, and the publicans and others do supply them
with ardent spirits.
Mr. Wilson. —They are much addicted to intemperance. It was always difficult (at least for some
years past) to prohibit the publicans from supplying ardent spirits, and in many cases it was supplied by
the frequenters of the tap-room.
Mr. Fis/ten. —Yes.
Mr. McLeod. —The publicans do supply them with spirits when they have money, as the fine of £5 is
not sufficient to prevent them running the risk, the proof being uncertain, there only being the testimony of
the blacks themselves, and they are unwilling to inform, although on examination they will speak the truth.
I’ublicans are allowed to give them beer, which is wrong, and they ought not to be allowed to employ them
about their premises.
Mr. Ormond. — The aborigines are very much addicted to intemperance. I believe the publicans of this
district do sell spirits to the natives.
Mr. French. —They are doubtless addicted to intemperance, but I cannot say whether the means of
gratifying it are derived from the publicans themselves, or from those who frequent public houses. Most
probably both.
Mr. Crooke. —Yes.
Mr. Shadforth. —I do not think the publicans generally infringe the law by selling spirits to the natives.
Mr. Aitken. —Most aborigines are intemperate, if the temptation is thrown in their way. I believe
publicans infringe the law which prohibits them from selling ardent spirits to the aborigines.
Mr. Skene. —Yes.
Mr. Beveridge. —They are not addicted to intemperance in this (Murray) district.
Mr. Allan.— Every man and woman of the aborigines is addicted to intemperance. The publicans
cannot well prevent them from obtaining spirits ; because, if he refuses to give it them, they hand their money
over to some white man, who obtains the spirits from the publican, and then gets his share from the blacks
for doing so.


Mr. Strutt. —Yes. Great numbers have died from disorders arising from cold during the winter months
A considerable number have perished through violence ; and latterly many have died through intemperance.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Have been reduced to one-fourth their number since the period specified, influenza
and inflammation of the lungs. Many also from venereal disease. No.
Mr. Godfrey. —Mortality during the last five years (or since the gold discoveries) has been far greater
than in the previous five years. Victims of drunkenness and debauchery. A sort of consumption also has
lately thinned their numbers. The venereal diseases are much propagated amongst the whites.
Mr. Gottreux. —Mortality not very remarkable, although, perhaps, above the average of that of the
white population. Bronchitis and affections of the chest, resulting from exposure at all seasons and scanty
clothing. No contagious disease.
Mr. Currie. —The mortality in proportion to the numbers has been very great, principally from
pulmonary complaints, venereal, and the effects of intemperance. No disease amongst them likely to be
propagated amongst the whites, as far as I am aware.
Mr. Lydiard. —Several have died during the last two years from rheumatic fever, caused by lying
exposed, while drunk, to wet and cold. Fearful ravages have also been made among them from syphilis
contracted from the whites.
Mr. Stewart. —Ten years since the tribe is said to have been eighty in number. The cause of death
appears principally to arise from consumption, accelerated by intemperate habits, and adoption of the vices
of the Europeans.
Mr. Mitchell. —During the last ten years, the mortality among them has been very great, chiefly caused
by pulmonary, and also by venereal complaints. They do not seem to be subject to any particular disease
which seems likely to be propagated among the white population.
Mr. Bunce. —3, 4, and 5 would be better answered by the police magistrate.
Mr. Cooke. —Mortality during the last eight years, not very great ; they die principally from old age
and consumption.
Mr. Huon. —Very much so, and I believe in a few more years they will be nearly, if not totally, extinct.
Influenza ; but I should say that intemperance, and the diseases resulting therefrom, is the principal cause of
death. There is no disease lam aware of likely to be propagated amongst the white population ; but every
epidemic from which the white people may be suffering attacks them, and the deaths are now numerous,
in proportion to their number.
Mr. Wills, Omeo. —The mortality has been very remarkable, caused by intoxicating drinks and the worst
form of venereal disease, and last though not least, by gunshot wounds inflicted by stockmen.
Mr. Fether stonhaugh. —Mortality has been remarkable within the last ten years (from the statements of
the early settlers). Pulmonary and venereal.
Mr. Piper, Murray District. —Their disappearance during the past ten years has been remarkable, but I
do not think any civilized inhabitant of the district can say how, when, where, or from what diseases the
aborigines have died.
Mr. Lewes. —l have not observed the rate of mortality greater during the last ten years than before.
The diseases which appear most fatal to the natives in this district are influenza and atrophy, which is
frequently a consequence of the former. They are not at present afflicted by any disease likely to be
propagated amongst the whites ; although such has formerly been the case.
4. Has assistance in the form of clothing , food , or medical attendance , been bestowed on the aborigines of your
district by the Government ? What means have they of living ? Are there any aboriginal reserves near you, or
places well fitted for being granted as such ?
Mr. Thomas. —Liberal assistance in blankets, food, and medicines has been bestowed upon the aborigines
in my district, and that by Government from the year 1852 ; but from 1843 to that period, none, save a blanket
occasionally. They have ample means of living, as farm laborers : as such they are apt and ready, and
welcomed at all times at the farms on the Liver Plenty, and wherever they go. When straightened, they fall
back on the depot (which is seldom), where there is always on hand flour, tea, sugar, tobacco, and soap, and
they have had since 1852 a pair of blankets each annually. They have tw T o aboriginal reserves, viz.:—one in
the county of South Bourke and Mornington, for the Boonoorong or Coast tribe, containing 832 acres. Another
in the county of Evelyn and parish of Warrandyte, for the Wawoorong or Yarra tribe, containing on both
banks of the Yarra, viz.:—on the south bank, 1103 acres ; on the north bank, 805 acres—l9oB acres.
Mr. Orr. —No assistance has been given by the Government; and when it was given by the Government
it did no good, from the erratic propensities of the tribes. They get plenty to eat by killing animals and
digging for grubs, roots, &c., See., and working a little for the whites. There are no reserves, neither are
they wanted; for no power or inducement can locate them in one spot for any length of time.
Mr. Lane. —No assistance of any kind has been given them by the Government. They live by hunting
opossums, &c. There are no reserves, but there are plenty of places well calculated for such.
Captain Harrison. —No information.
Mr. Templeton. —l am not aware of any ; I have not heard of any. Principally on charity and prosti-
tution. I am not aware of any (reserves), but think “Kerang,” on the Loddon, as being entirely removed
from the gold fields, might be selected.
Mr. Sherard. —Not lately. Their original food, with the addition of clothing and food from the settlers.
No. No.
Mr. Shuter. —A small supply of blankets, rugs, flour, tea, sugar, and tobacco was obtained from the
Government last year at the request of Mrs. McLeod, an inhabitant of Bacchus Marsh, and distributed by the
clerk of the bench. They appear to obtain their means of living principally by begging from place to place.
Occasionally they will do a day’s work, for which they general!}" require to be paid in cash. They also obtain
opossums easily, which is much used by them as an article of food. There are no aboriginal reserves in this
district, but there are some places very well adapted for the purpose.
Mr. Murray. —No assistance has been afforded them by Government. They (the Colac tribe) buy food
with their earnings, and hunt. There are no aboriginal reserves here. There are places fit for such reserves.
Mr. Synnot. —They have had no assistance from Government, to my knowledge. They live by catching
opossums and other game, and from what they get at the different stations. There are no reserves for them in
this part of the country (Wimmera). Almost any place would answer for that purpose where there was plenty
of wood and water.
Mr. Wilson. — No clothing, food, nor medical attendance, so far as I am aware, has ever been bestowed
by the Victorian Government. Prior to separation from New South Wales, a few blankets were once or twice
distributed by the late Mr. Bingham, Commissioner of Crown Lands, Tumut district. They generally live
with and are supported by the white people. Both game and fish are abundant. There are no reserves, and
none required.
Mr. Fisken. —Government assistance—yes. No aboriginal reserves.
Aborigines.— h.


Mr McLeod. Noth mg has been done for them by the Government. X always empioy them when I
can, but they are very unsatisfactory and expensive workpeople ; for if you employ one you have to feed ten
I have been obliged, tins last winter, to feed, clothe, and nurse many invalids. One man S S week at the
station of consumption, and there are three there still verv ill. There is abundance of flsb and
there, but they will sooner beg about the stations for flour than catch them. There is no reserve for them
nor do I think they would settle on one, if there was. e icr tnem,
T , y lr - Ormond.—So assistance has been afforded by the Government to the aborigines in this district
makenle settlers. They catch fish and shoot wild fowl; they seldom, however
rthlsTstricS t S irfitte 0 d f fo "ueh 0r t 0 bUyrUm ' ThCTe are aboriginal ”
distric^HamiUton^toreTh^abolftion^f^th™ Mount Rous I <Taborigimil^reserve? m Tlmre le is^noßeserve hereout
wUh n i° r ’ t( f! J - U ? ge *T° m ex P ori .™ ce of former reserves, would the establishment of one be attended
with any beneficial results. The aborigines have much greater facilities for living now than when we took
possession of the country first. Their game does not appear to me to have diminished relatively with
CSUI alwayS pro ° Ur ° sugar - tobacco > Nothing, at the township and
Mr. Crooke— As to assistance in the form of clothing—yes. As to food—no, nor medical attendance
Tieir means of hying are hunting and fishing. There are no aboriginal reserves near me, but plenty of
places fitted for being granted as such With reference to this and the following question, I would remark
that helping the aborigines makes them mendicants and idle The bush is overrun with opossums, &c in
consequence. They will he about a township and starve sooner than hunt for food as formerly. They look
miserable then compared _ to what they do when they come in from the mountains, where they have lived
them* 180 ' Medlcal ald 18 aU that can reall 7 be of service to them, and it is really a pity not to afford
Mr. Shadforth.— None whatever. There are no aboriginal reserves near here.
Goulbum) ass * stance i n an 7 form has been bestowed on the aborigines in this district (Upper
Mr Skene.— There has been no assistance rendered by Government for a number of years. They live
amongst the settlers throughout the country ; get a meal occasionally as they travel through the country
There are no reserves here ; plenty of places fit for them, but I fear they would be a failure as in former
at temp t s.
Mr. Beveridge.— The Government have not supplied the aborigines with clothing of any kind, unless
upon the occasion of the retirement of the Moravian missionaries from their station at Lake Boga, when
Mr superintendent Cobham distributed (I believe by order of the Government) some few blankets left at
that station by the reverend gentlemen. The food of those not employed by the settlers consists of fish
c iiefly, but they have many other kinds of food in the shape of kangaroo, opossums, and wild fowl of the
aquatic species, myriads of which inhabit the lakes and lagoons about the Murray. They have also a
farinaceous root which grows abundantly on the Murray marshes. There is a large aboriginal reserve at
habfts Ji ° Sa ’ but reserves for the use ot the aborigines are utterly useless, in consequence of their itinerating
.... The Government have never given the slightest assistance to the aborigines of this
district ; they live m every respect the same as the other servants on the farm.
Mr. Craig. Occasional labor from the farmers and settlers, with eleemosynary aid from the inhabitants
generally. J have not heard of any assistance being given by Government to this tribe, nor are there any
reserves or unsold land suited for such purpose in the immediate neighborhood.
Sergeant Archibald. —Means of living—begging and performing occasional labor for the settlers.
Mr. Strutt. Not as a general rule; the only assistance, as far as lam aware, has been in clothing and
blankets to a few. Several of the aborigines hang about the different stations, townships, and public-houses
and thus pick up a living, given chiefly as a charity. The native articles of food are not so easily procured as
formerly; the fish have been disturbed by the steamers, and the snag-boat in particular has removed many old
logs which were favorite spots, both with the fish and the fishermen. Wild fowl are more shy since guns have
been used. Snakes and all reptiles are much scarcer, fortunately. Neither kangaroo nor emu is to be seen
within many miles.
■ • 4 . ffa,i -- None whatever. For the past eighteen years medical attendance and comforts, when
required, and clothing and bedding, have been almost altogether supplied to the blacks of this neighborhood
(V uliers and Ileytesbury) from my own private resources, having applied to the Government in vain for
assistance. The aborigines support themselves alternately by working for the settlers and by hunting and
fishing, hio aboriginal reserves near. Many places well suited for such.
. Mr. Godfrey —S one. Their means of living are, occasionally working, but more generally begging for
their food (as a rule, they are too lazy to work continuously) and have become too inactive to hunt for game
as was their wont. There is no reserve near my station, nor any place fit for such, owing to the unfitness of
the soil and climate for agriculture, and unpermanency of water.
Mr. Gotti eux, IN o assistance from Government since the abolition of the aboriginal reserve at Mount
Rouse, in 1850. No means, save at the expense of the settlers. No reserves in the district.
Mr. Currie. No assistance has been rendered by Government, They depend upon a precarious
charity, hanging about stations and public houses. No aboriginal reserves.
M /. Lydiard, None, or very few work regularly for wages ; others only for a week or two, when they
dub their earnings to buy grog. There are many places in the district adapted for reserves, but they would
be useless, as it would be impossible to keep the aboriginals from roving.
Mr. Stewart, 4 and 5. No aid of any sort is bestowed upon the aborigines by the Government The
police magistrate would undertake the distribution of any supplies to them.
Mr. Mitchell. Since the abolition of the aboriginal protectorate no assistance whatever has, within my
knowledge, been bestowed upon them by the Government. At the present time they arc maintained chiefly
by settlers and others. Their former means of support—hunting, fishing, &c.—are still open to them, but
thej have almost quite abandoned them. There is no aboriginal reserve in the district, and I am not aware
of any place especially suitable for one.
Mr. Cooke.— No assistance from Government in food, clotv mg, or medical assistance. Many live by
working at (afferent peoples places; otherwise they live on opossums, bandicoots, and kangaroos. No
reserves ; but I allow them to remain on a certain part of my purchased land.
Mr. Huon..— They have never received any assistance from the Government, medical or otherwise, that
lam aware of. Generally speaking, they obtain their food and clothing from the settlers and the residents in
the various townships. There are no aboriginal reserves near hero.
Mr. Wills.— No clothing, food, nor medical attendance has ever been bestowed at Omeo on the aborigines
by the Government.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —Not within the last four years.
Mr. Piper. None since my entrance into office here in 1853. They are bountifully fed and clothed by
the settlers. There are no aboriginal reserves near me, nor places adapted to the purpose.
Mr. Lewis. No clothing nor food has been supplied by the Government to the natives in this vicinity.
They can obtain an abundance of food by fishing and occasional hunting. lam not aware of any aboriginal
reserve in this district. The natives have the unconstrained use of any part of it they may choose to frequent.
30


Mr. Craig. —\V iVii very few exceptions the whole are addicted to intemperance. As a body the publi-
cans do not generally infringe upon the law prohibiting the supply of spirits to the natives ; but this is evaded
by third parties (the whites) purchasing for, then handing to, the aborigines.
Sergeant Archibald.— They are addicted to intemperance. The publicans do not generally infringe the
law by selling spirits to the natives.
Mr. Strutt.— The aborigines are very intemperate; and the law prohibiting spirits is very frequently
infringed.
Mr. J. M. Allan.— They are intemperate in the use of ardent spirits, which the publicans never refuse
to sell to them, though they do it in such a way that the law cannot touch them. We (the bench of
magistrates) do all in our power to check this, but hitherto without effect.
Mr. Godfrey. —Very much. The publicans almost universally are guilty on this head.
Mr. Gotireux.— Yes; and although much is done to prevent the publicans from supplying drink, the law
is easily and continually evaded. . .
Mr. Currie. —Greatly addicted to intemperance. They find means of being supplied with spirits without
being so directly by the publicans. A stricter surveillance by the police might be enjoined.
Mr. Lydiard: —They are very prone to inebriety; and until there is some stringent law in force to punish
publicans for allowing the aborigines to frequent their premises, it is utterly impossible to prevent their
surreptitiously obtaining grog.
Mr. Mitchell— Generally speaking, the aborigines are given to intemperance, whenever they have an
opportunity of indulgence. Although but few instances are within my own knowledge, lam satisfied that the
publicans habitually violate the law which prohibits them from selling spirits to the natives.
Mr. Bunce. —They are all addicted to drink; and from their ready manner of obtaining it, leaves but
little doubt that they are supplied by the publicans.
Mr. Cooke. —The aborigines are much addicted to drink, and have frequent quarrels from the effects ot it.
Mr. Muon, —They are very much addicted to intemperaiice, and manage to get spirits in some way;
although the publicans profess not to sell it them, but they can easily evade the law.
Mr. Wills. —Both sexes are very much addicted to intemperance. There were no licensed publicans at
the time the Gundanora tribe were resident here (Omeo). . .
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —They are; but are not supplied, to the knowledge of the authorities, by the
licensed publicans with liquor. ...
Mr. Piper. —The aborigines emulate their civilized brethren in this. 1 am not aware that publicans
infringe the law; the natives can always procure liquor indirectly.
Mr. Lewis—Only the natives near or about public houses, in this district, are addicted to intemperance.
I do not know how they obtain intoxicating liquors, but few having the means of purchasing them.
7. Would it be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from coming within a certain radius of the towns of the
colony , and could the police force be intrusted to see such a law {if enacted') carried into operation?
Mr. Hull. —l think not.
Mr. Thomas.—lt would be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from coming within the precincts of a
town. If the aborigines are supplied at the depots with provisions and other necessaries (although a guardian
of them), I should have no hesitation of advocating the vagrant laws in operation against them, on attempting
to enter a town, and this should be strenuously enforced; having experienced the dire effects of drunkenness
when visiting Melbourne—deaths and murders resulting therefrom—that I recommend this step for their good.
Mr. Orr. —They are better away from towns; but no police force could prevent them, unless such as
would entail an immense expenditure.
Mr. Lane.— It might, certainly, be beneficial to the aborigines, to prevent them from coming within a
certain radius of towns; but it would require an addition to the police force to carry a law of this nature into
effect.
Capt. Harrison. —l do not consider such a step would be of use in Castlemame.
Mr. Templeton. —l do not think such a law could be carried out,
Mr. Itusden. —lt is a melancholy fact, that the number of the aborigines remaining in all the populous
districts of Australia has dwindled down in such a manner, that to supply them with drink can be no longer
lucrative. It was commonly believed, and was 1 think the fact, that many publicans unscrupulously supplied
drink to the blacks who could take grist in quantities to their mills. Drink and disease have now done their
work so effectually, that gain cannot be the object in supplying drink to the unfortunate remnant. Yet,
mistaken kindness in some instances, and the idle brutality which, in others, supplies the means of intoxication
in order to obtain amusement, too frequently contribute to the repulsive scenes to which pecuniary profit is
no longer the temptation.
Mr. Sherard. —It would be beneficial to them to be kept from the different diggings, if it was possible.
Mr. Shutcr. —l think it would be most beneficial both to the natives and Europeans if such a law could
be introduced, and I think the police, as they are at present constituted, might be entrusted witli the duty of
carrying it into effect. I would, however, prefer seeing large aboriginal reserves established, presided over by
competent persons, who, entering into their duties with spirit, would endeavor to reclaim them from their
savage state, lam inclined to believe that, although the moral state of the aboriginal in this colony is low, he
might with proper treatment be improved.
Mr. Murray.— l do not think it would be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from going within a certain
radius of towns, but I think it would be well to restrict their remaining in towns to a very limited period, and
I consider the police force could be intrusted to carry out such a law.
Mr. Synnot.— l think they would derive the greatest benefit from being excluded from the towns, more
especially those on the gold fields; and if such a law was enacted, the police are, or ought to be quite com-
petent to carry it into effect.
Mr. Wilson. —It would be better to prohibit the aborigines from living in any of the towns or near a
public-house. The police might be entrusted to enforce a law to this effect,
Mr. Fishen. —No.
Mr. McLeod.—l do not think they would be benefited by keeping them out of the towns.
Ml. Ormond.—lt would be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from coming to within a certain radius
of the towns of the colony. The police could be entrusted to see such a law carried into operation.
Mr. French. —lf they were prevented frequenting the towns, whence they derive their principal support,
they would resort to the country public-houses, if they wished to gratify their love of drink.
Mr Crooke. —It would be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from coming within a certain radius of the
towns of the colony, but the police could not be entrusted to see such a law (if enacted) carried into operation.
Mr. Shadforth. —I certainly think it would be beneficial.
Mr. Aitken. —I cannot see any advantage in preventing the aborigines from coming within certain
radius of the towns of the colony, there being now so many villages and public-houses scattered in the interior.
The difficulty of obtaining their usual food is so great within a certain distance of the towns, from the amount
of enclosed and cultivated land, that it has the effect of keeping them back in the less populous districts.
]V[t Skene. !No
Mr. Beveridge. —Preventing the aborigines from coming within a certain radius of the towns in this
district would not benefit them in any one way.
Aborigines. — i.


Mr. Allan. —l think not; in fact it would amount to cruelty to do so.
Mr. Craig, —-But little advantage would accrue to the natives by such prevention, the facilities for
obtaining spirits being equally available at the bush inns; and the clothes, broken victuals, &c., occasionally
obtained by chopping fire-wood, &c., would be lost to them.
Sergeant Archibald. —The amount of benefit to be derived from any such enactment is questionable, as far
as Warrnambool is concerned. The police could be entrusted to see such a law carried into operation.
Mr. Strutt. —ln some respects it would be beneficial, in other respects it would be a hardship, as the
aborigines have acquired a taste for tobacco, sugar, tea, flour, and other articles used by Europeans, and which
can only be procured in the townships or at the stations. The police might be entrusted to apprehend every
aboriginal found within a certain distance of the towns.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No. It would be unjust.
Mr. Godfrey. —Most desirable. The police could enforce it, if such became law.
Mr. Gottreux. —Not in my opinion, in this district.
Mr. Currie. —Enforcing the law might, and I think would, be attended with a hardship, that would defeat
the object sought.
Mr. Lydiard. —lt would be very desirable to keep them from the townships, with the exception of those
who might be induced to work regularly as servants.
Mr. Stewart. —lt power was given to the police to prevent the aborigines coming within a certain
distance of town, it could be accomplished, but the condition of the aborigines would not be ameliorated, as
they could procure drink at the bush inns.
Mr. Mitchell. —In this (Mount House) district, such an enactment would not produce any great benefit.
Mr. Bunce. —l believe that much might be done by settling them in a locality congenial to their former
habits, allowing them to strip bark, dig for myrnong, burrow for porcupines and "wombats, and other
occupations which may be considered as a part of their nature, without the fear of legal enactments or coercion
of any kind. The overseer or commandant of the community should be conversant with their habits and
customs, and thoroughly understand their language. The latter qualification is of the highest importance.
Mr. Cooke. —No benefit would be derived from excluding the natives from the towns, as public houses
are so numerous in the country that they think nothing of going from twelve to fourteen miles to get grog.
Mr. Huon. —If a law was enacted to prevent them from coming within a certain radius of "the town, I
think it would be very difficult to carry it into effect.
Mr. Wills. —l am decidedly of opinion, now, that it would, as habits of intemperance and mischievous
intercourse between aboriginal women and the lower orders of white men are so prevalent. (See passim
report of recent murder of a European man at Sale, at Gipp’s Land, by Tarra Bobby.) As to the general
principle, 1 am not in favor of locating aborigines in blocks of land entirely apart from European settlers,
having, during a seven years’ residence in New Zealand, witnessed with much pleasure the general success of
the plan originated by the New Zealand company of intermingling the “ native reserves” with the lands of
settlers, and of encouraging the natives to mix freely, and to combine in executing farming, road, and other
work with European settlers. It must, however, be admitted, that the New Zealanders (Malay origin) are
intellectually a far superior race to the Australians. The old American system of locating aborigines in
blocks by themselves seems to me likely to retard their moral, intellectual, and social position. Certainly the
police force could be entrusted.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —l think not.
Mr. Piper. —No.
Mr. Lewis. —lt would be impossible to prevent the natives from visiting the towns, unless through
threats of personal violence or actual restraint.
8. Is there any paid medical officer in your district , and could the services of such he procured for the aborigines
by providing a proper compensation for the performance of the duties of medical attendant on them ?
Mr. Thomas. —There is no paid medical officer for the aborigines ; but Dr. McCrea has ever attended
to aboriginal cases when I have brought them under his notice when near the town. I may add here, that
the Melbourne Hospital has kindly occasionally given advice and medicines. The services of a medical
officer would be useless. The only way in which the aborigines could receive medical attendance (they being
so erratic) would be in cases of emergency ; the medical gentleman in the neighborhood where they are
encamped attend them, and upon ray certificate, or a magistrate near the place, to be paid for his attendance.
Mr. Orr. —Very desirable to have medical officers all through the colony to attend them.
Mr. Lane. —There is no paid medical officer in the district, but there would be no difficulty in procuring
professional attendance for them, if properly remunerated.
Captain Harrison. —The only paid medical officer in this district is the surgeon of the gaol, the salary
£lOO per annum, including the supply of medicines. The office is open to public competition by tender, and
could readily be enlarged to include attendance on the aborigines.
Mr. Templeton. —No. No doubt a medical man would attend them if paid.
Mr. liusden. —l should think medical advice would be given in most instances by members of the pro-
fession ; but a gentleman who may be most willing to give advice may be quite unable to provide hospital
accommodation for a sick or wounded black. I think a fund should be placed at the disposal of every Petty
Sessions, out of which payment might be made for the cost of medical treatment (in the district) of any of
the aborigines. While retaining any of their natural independence of bearing and habits of livelihood, the
aborigines will not submit to amputation, nor will the tribe to which a man belongs permit any limb to be
amputated if they can prevent it by any means ; therefore, if possible, a medical man should be chosen in
whom they have confidence,
Mr. Shuter. —There is no paid medical officer in the district (Bacchus Marsh).
Mr. Murray. —There is no paid medical officer in this (Colac) district. The services of one of the
resident medical men could be procured for the aborigines by payment.
Mr. Synnot. —There is no medical man in this (Wimmera) district, paid or otherwise, who attends in
the least to the blacks, nor do I think it could be much use to appoint one, unless to travel constantly through
the country.
M . Wilson. — None, and none are required.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. McLeod. —lt would be well to give a magistrate power to call in a medical man when required, to
be paid as in the case of a white man.
Mr. Ormond. —There is no paid medical officer in this district, but medical attendance could easily be
procured, if there were a fund for that purpose.
Mr. French. —Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Crooke. —There is a paid medical officer in my district. With regard to the remainder of the
queries, I do not know, but I think a travelling one alone would be of use.
Mr. Aitken. —There is no paid medical officer in the district, but I think medical attendance could be
procured.
Mr. Skene. —No paid officer. I believe that medical men could easily be got to take the duties of
medical attendants on them.


Mr. Beveridge. —There is not and never has been any paid medical officer in this district. I believe the
coroner would gladly give them advice and medicine if he was properly compensated.
Mr. Allan. —l do not know.
Mr. Craig. —l am not aware of any paid officer in this district whose services could be so procured,
though there are many medical men here who would do so for a consideration.
Mr. Gilles. —Yes ; the medical officer who attends the prisoners and police force.
Mr. Strutt. —There is no paid medical officer, but medical attendance could be procured on providing a
proper compensation.
Mr. J. M. Allan. — The coroner, Dr. Clarke.
Mr. Godfrey. —None that lam aware of. I think so.
Mr. Gottreux. —There is a coroner for the district ; no other paid medical officer.
Mr. Carrie. —The medical services of the coroner of the district residing at Campcrdown might be
made available.
Mr. Lydiard. —None.
Mr. Stewart. —There is a medical officer attending the gaols, and doubtless his services could be
procured if required.
Mr. Mitchell. —Excepting the coroner, there is no public medical officer in the district. Ido not doubt
that the services of the coroner or any other medical practitioner could be procured for them, on the terms
expressed in the question.
Mr. Coo/ie. —There 'is no medical officer nearer than thirty miles of this place. The natives here
(Darlot Creek) are generally healthy.
Mr. Hum. —There is no paid medical officer in the district, but I have no doubt one could be procured,
by being properly compensated.
Mr. Wills. —Tribe (Gundanora) extinct. No reply necessary.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —No; but there are two medical gentlemen who would undertake the duty, if
remunerated.
Mr. Piper. —No. The medical gentlemen in the district are ever ready to display their benevolence.
Mr. Lewis. —There is no paid medical officer in this district. Medicines are often supplied by the
settlers with good effect. It would prevent much sickness and suffering amongst the natives, were there a
place in each district to which they could apply for medical assistance, which they would do most readily.
9. Are the aborigines in your district quiet ; have they ever committed any depredations against life and
property ? Are the services of the blacks made available by the settlers, farmers, and others—the payment or equivalent
as wages for such services ?
Mr. Hull. —ln some cases.
Mr. Thomas. —Perfectly harmless; they have never committed any depredation upon property worth
naming ; and none against life. I have the satisfaction to state that they have never shed white man’s blood,
nor has white man shed theirs.
Mr On-.— Always were quiet during my twenty years’ residence here. They work very little now, and
are paid in wages as the whites. They demand cash, and then drink spirits with the proceeds, mostly.
Mr. Lane. —The aborigines here are perfectly quiet and inoffensive. I have never heard of any
depredations. I believe the settlers are generally kind to them, and when they are willing to work give them
some equivalent.
Captain Harrison. —No offence, save drunkenness, has come before this bench (Castlemaine) since
3rd October, 1855.
Mr. Templeton. —They are. I have not heard of any. They are, for stripping bark occasionally,
Mr. Busden. —Will be answered by the Guardian of Aborigines.
Mr. Sherard. —Yes; in the early days of the colony, against both. At one time their services were
made available to some extent by the settlers ; the payment consisting of food, tobacco, clothing, and money.
Mr. Shu ter. —The aborigines are very quiet. They visit this place about once a year ; and some of
them are occasionally employed by the settlers, and in return receive cash or stores. I have been in this
district three years, and the only instance of stealing I remember was by a very intelligent aboriginal, who
spoke English fluently ; he was convicted and imprisoned for petty larceny twice within the year. I think
that he learned this habit from the Europeans. Ido not think it was in his nature to steal.
Mr. Murray. —They (Colae) are perfectly quiet ; they have not for fifteen years committed any
depredations against property ; never against life. Most of the men are employed by settlers and farmers
at a rate of wages about half the current wages of Englishmen.
Mr. Synnot.- —The aborigines here (Wimmera) are perfectly quiet. They have committed depredations,
but not for several years back. They are employed occasionally by the settlers, and paid in clothing, rations,
and sometimes in cash at the rate of 7s, to 10s. per week.
Mr. Wilson. —During the time I resided on the Mitta Mitta, viz,, from 1840 till 1854, the aborigines
were peaceable and well-disposed. Prior to 1840, they murdered two men—servants of Mr. Tooth, who held
the squatting licence for Talangatta. A good many cattle have from time to time been speared, or otherwise
destroyed; but these depredations were generally committed by strangers, especially when on hostile excur-
sions. _ The settlers have always been desirous of availing themselves of the services of the aborigines, paying
them in rations, tobacco, money, and clothes.
Mr. Fisken. —Yes. There have been no depredations.
Mr. McLeod. —They are perfectly harmless. They are often employed, but are unsatisfactory and
expensive work people, even for their food and clothing.
Mr. Ormond. —The aborigines in this district (Mount Emu, &c.) are quiet and have never committed
any depredations against life or property. They are employed for sheep-washing, harvesting, and cutting
wood ; and are paid in money for such services.
Mr. French. —They are at present quiet; though in former years they often committed depredations both
against life and property, as I can testify when police magistrate at the Grange, in the early days of the
colony.
Mr. Crooke. —The aborigines of my district are now quiet; but they have committed depredations
against life and property. Their services are made available by the settlers, farmers, and others ; their
wages are various, by week and lump.
Mr. Shadforth.— As far as I can learn, within the last few years, no depredations have been committed by
the aborigines ; and in some instances their services are made available by the settlors, for food and clothing.
Mr. Ailken. —They are perfectly quiet; and lam not aware of any depredations having been committed
against life or property for many years back. The services of the aborigines are made available partially. In
this (Upper Goulburn) tribe there are two or three stockkeepers; five or six can shear, and nearly all
can reap and assist in harvest and other work on a station. Those employed as shearers and reapers are paid,
in most instances, at the same rate as the white man ; but it is seldom that they do as much work.
Mr. T. Skene. —They are now quiet; hut in the early days of the colony they were very outrageous, and
killed many white people. The services of the blacks are made available by settlers, fanners, and others, when
they will work, but they are very indolent. Wages are generally paid in food and clothing, and they will,
see that they are well paid for their work.


Mr. Beveridge. —The aborigines have been perfectly quiet for the last eight years. Prior to the com-
mencement of that period they committed many depredations against both life and property. Their services
are made available as stockmen and shepherds by the settlers.. They receive as payment, clothes, blankets
tobacco, and money ; the latter they convert into flour at the nearest store.
Mr. Allan. —They are quiet, and have never committed any depredations for a number of years. They
are very useful as stockriders, and also are good reapers. We paid them in clothing, and give them money
when they ask for it; but there is no such thing as a set wage, because they cannot understand it.
Mr. Craig. —Of late years they have been very quiet, nor have they latterly been known to commit
depredations, either in the town or the neighborhood. Their services are generally valued as stockriders.
Some farmers find the young men very useful as reapers, planting and gathering potatoes, and other farm
work—some being tolerably good bullock drivers.
Sergeant Archibald. —The aborigines of this district (Warrnambool) are very quiet, and have not, to the
knowledge of the police, committed any depredations against the life or property of the inhabitants. There
have been one or two cases of trials for attempted murder within the last five years—but amongst themselves.
The services of the blacks are frequently made available, particularly in the outskirts of Warrnombool,
the equivalent being generally food and clothing, with occasionally a trifling sum of money.
Mr. Strutt. —They arc quiet at present. Formerly constant feuds existed between the aborigines and
the whites, with much violence on either side. The services of the aborigines are made available occasionally,
at busy seasons, the payment for which is in rations, clothes, tobacco, and too frequently, in spirits. Some-
times a little money is added, which is also generally spent in procuring liquor.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Yes, at present. Formerly, especially amongst each other, murders have sometimes
been committed by them.
Mr. Godfrey. —Yes. Not in their own beat ; but they are believed to have committed depredations
in the adjoining districts. Their services are made available whenever they are disposed to work—payment in
money, or clothes and food, for labor done. 1 have generally preferred to give the latter, as the money is sure
to reach the publican. In my experience, the condition of these blacks has much deteriorated since their
frequent visits to the nearest diggings ; and the farther from such townships and public houses, the better the
condition of the blacks generally, and the more willing are they to engage in any work —in some places,
even, hiring for a term of labor. Not so, however, in this tribe (Lower Loddon).
Mr. Gottreux. —Quiet. No depredations committed for many years. Almost all the settlors employ the
blacks, from time to time ; the men being generally good riders and useful ; the women are also employed in
various ways. Wages to men are paid, in many instances, as high as 10s. weekly, besides food.
Mr. Currie They are quiet. No depredations against life or property, since they became acquainted
with and had intercourse with the whites. Their services are partially made available as stockkeepers, assisting
in sheep washing, and other services connected with sheep shearing, for which they are paid in money.
Mr. Lydiard. —Several arc nominally engaged in the district, at wages averaging from ss. to 10s. per
week.
Mr. Stewart. — They arc quiet, so far as the whites are concerned ; but arc dangerous to each other. A
few of them are made available by the settlers and farmers.
Mr. Mitchell. —They have been perfectly quiet for many years, and within my knowledge' have com-
mitted no depredations on the white population. They are employed by settlers and farmers to as great an
extent as their habits will permit. The scale of remuneration for their services ranges from £25 per annum
for the few useful and domestic lads amongst them, to merely nominal wages, or occasional reward.
Mr. Cooke. —No disturbance is ever committed by them in any way except when in drink. They are
frequently employed by myself and others, and are generally repaid in food, clothing, or money, say ss. to 6s.
per week.
Mr. Huon. —They are perfectly quiet, and have not committed any depredations against life or
property for some years past. Their services are made available by the settlers in some instances, but only for
short periods, as they have no idea of settling to anything. They are generally given an equivalent in the
shape of money and clothes for their services.
Mr. Wills (Omeo). —The aborigines wore not quiet. They frequently endeavored to kill stockmen and
cattle; and the former (being well armed) in their turn retaliated with fatal effect. Their services were
occasionally made available by the few squatters, and “ amongst stock” were valuable. Generally speaking
they were paid with clothing and tobacco ; but some squatters, much to their credit, made a point of paying
them equally well as white men employed on the station.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —Perfectly so ; and have never been amenable to the law for such offences during
the last seven years. A few are employed by the settlers, and remunerated as other servants, but at a lesser
rate of wages.
Mr. Piper. —The aborigines are perfectly harmless. Young men are employed on several stations as
stockmen or shepherds. Their wages are seldom in money j generally in food and clothes.
Mr. Lewis. —The natives in the district have long been quiet and harmless. They were, at first, very
hostile and dangerous to the whites. The youths are frequently employed by the settlers to assist as stock-
keepers. They are sometimes paid for their services in money, but generally in clothing, tobacco, powder and
shot, fowling pieces, &c. The native men and women casually employed are usually paid in food, tea, sugar,
tobacco, or clothes.
. 10. Have they been impelled by their necessities to steal from the settlers, or have they been actuated by a
desire to perpetrate mischief ivantonly or revengefully, without any benefit to themselves.
Mr. Hull. —The former, except from revenge of injuries, with them a duty.
Mr. Thomas. —They have never been impelled to steal from the settlers. In their wild state I ever
travelled with them through the bush, watching their movements, and settling as I went many differences
that might arise between them and the settlers, invariably to the satisfaction of the squatter, so that they and
the settlers have ever been on friendly terms.
Mr. Orr. —They have never been compelled to steal, neither are they inclined to do so.
Mr. Lane. —l have never heard any complaints from settlers during the two and a half years I have been
in this district.
Captain Harrison. —Answered by reply to No. 9.
Mr. Templeton. —l do not think they do steal from the settlers.
Mr. Rusden. —The primary causes of disagreement between the races are forced upon the blacks. They
could scarcely avoid giving offence, if even they could know what conduct on their part would give offence.
Their presence on a cattle run scares the cattle ; the stock-keepers (who are only two or three in number
even on a large station) are well aware that they can only maintain a superiority in conflict by means of fire-
arms. Fire-arms are (I speak of the first occupation of a country) constantly carried, and often resorted to
without provocation, and thus a deadly feud is created before either party knows a word of the language of the
other.
Common sense shows that such a feud must be disastrous. No explanation can be given, although the
first shot may have been fired merely as a demonstration (and shots are frequently fired thus by explorers and
others) and a war of extermination ensues, which can have but one result.


The few whites possessed of fire-arms are placed far beyond the scrutiny of law, arid have no moral
compunctions which outweigh their idea that they have a rihgt to secure their position as they best can. The
most warlike of the aborigines are soon shot down. Occasionally it has happened that a hut has been attacked,
and the white inmates have been slaughtered ; hut these instances have not arrested the general course
of events, and have usually led immediately to a combined raid by associated stock-keepers and residents,
in which speedy revenge has been taken.
Eleven men were convicted in Sydney on evidence, which was (at a sec, nd trial) held sufficient to
prove cne of these raids in which women and children w ere indiscriminately slaughtered. Seven ot the men
were hung.
After a tribe is reduced in numbers by the above causes, and the remnant is rendered abject by
their means, quarrels have been numerous between the whites and blacks in individual cases, on account
of the black women, whom their husbands, or those to whom they are affianced, in accordance with the native
customs, do not like to see permanently estranged from a tribe, and whom some white man induces to remain
with him by persuasion alone, or by persuasion accompanied by threats.
Theft was utterly unknown amongst the aborigines before their country was taken from them ; but
thieving and telling lies were vices which they soon became acquainted with, and learnt from their
conquerors.
That they would kill a beast in the bush, when they could, I do not deny, and it can scarcely bo said
that, in doing so, they committed a theft, when they were at open war with the whites, and could not
comprehend that cattle were absolutely the property of the whites, as they afterwards found them to be.
Long before they learned the relations of property in the stock roving on the grass, they learnt the vice of
thieving.
Mr. Sherard. —ln the early days of the colony they ttsed to steal sheep and other things from the
settlers, but more from a spirit of revenge than from being compelled by their necessities.
Mr. Synnot. —From my general knowledge of the natives and their habits, I do not think their depre-
dations have at any time been the effect of necessity, but rather of their ignorance, and the natural antipathy
they must have felt towards the first intruders.
Mr. Wilson. —Theft is of rare occurrence ; they are never impelled to it by necessity. I have known
few instances of wanton mischief. Cattle may have been speared in revenge for some wrong, real or imaginary.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. McLeod. —They do not steal to my knowledge.
Mr. Ormond. —l have seen a good deal of the blacks for the last thirteen years, and I never knew them
to be guilty of stealing. They are very cunning. I have known them to go to out station huts (particularly
where new chums lived) and bo so importunate in their demands, as to frighten the hut keeper into giving
them tea, sugar, and flour.
Mr. Croohe. —They have not been impelled by their necessities to steal. Yes, as to the remainder
of the question. Killing cattle is unaccountable, as they will do it for no apparent cause, at times when
they have plenty of food. I have seen nineteen head of cattle lying dead, killed by them, and only one eaten
or removed.
Mr. Ailken. —l know of no instance of a theft having been committed ; neither do I know of mischief
done wanton]}' or negligently.
Mr. Shene. —They can have no need to steal from settlers, were they to live on the food they lived
on before the settlement of the colony. Kangaroos and opossums have increased a thousand fold ; I therefore
conclude that their depredations must have been of a wanton and mischievous character.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have been induced by covetousness and by a savage love of mischief to perpetrate
their many wicked acts.
Mr. Allan. —Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Craig. —l have heard of but few cases of theft, or wanton or revengeful injury, sustained by
the farmers or others here, for many years.
Sergeant Archibald. —No instances of outrages of these kinds have been reported to the police. Any
instance to the contrary has been to procure drink.
Mr. Strutt. —Not since hostilities have ceased.
Mr. ./. M. Allan. —No ; theft by them is unknown. They will steal from each other, however —stealing
even the wives and daughters of their enemies, which frequently led to bloodshed. At first the desire to possess
the peculiar property of the settlers was the cause of much thieving.
Mr. Godfrey. —l do not consider them thieves, either from necessity, mischief, or other cause.
Mr. Gottreux. —Neither.
Mr. Currie. —If they have committed a theft of late years, it has been from necessity. lam not aware of
a single instance, where mischief has been committed wantonly, or through a spirit of revenge.
Mr. Lydiard. —Generally speaking, they are honest ; and although revengeful towards each other, are
never so towards the white population, even in cases of aggression, such as poisoning and shooting their dogs.
Mr. Stewart. —No.
Mr. Mitchell. —lt cannot be said, that they have ever been driven to theft by their necessities ; nor have
they been guilty of any depredations or wanton mischief for very many years—in fact, since the first few
years of the occupation of the country by the settlers.
Mr. Coolie. —I find them generally honest.
Mr. Huon. — I have not heard any instance of their stealing from the settlers.
Mr. Wills. —Not impelled by their necessities. Game was formerly so abundant in this district, that by
half a day’s hunting, a native could support himself for four days together. The natives perpetrated mischief,
perhaps, wantonly; but, 1 fear, too frequently, in retaliation for injuries done to them by remorseless stockmen.
Many of them were very revengeful, never forgiving an injury, and biding their time till a favorable
opportunity for revenge should present itself.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —No cases of this nature reported.
Mr. Lewis. —The natives in this district have never been compelled by necessity to steal from the
settlers. They have frequently killed live stock out of mere wantonness, and far beyond the quantity
they could by any means consume as food.
11. Have any efforts been made in your neighbourhood to educate the aborigines , or to impart to them religious
instruction ?
Mr. Thomas.— There have been three attempts in my district to educate the aborigines, viz.:—The first
was established by Sir Richard Bourkc, in the year 1830, on the south bank of the i arra, where the Botanic
Gardens are now, under the superintendence of Mr. George Langhorne, now a clergyman in the _ Sydney
colony. This school was broken up in the year 1839. The greatest number of scholars was twenty-eight and
the lowest number was two. The second school established was at the Aboriginal Reserve, Nerrce Nerree
Aborigines.— l.\


Warreen, on tlie east and west banks of Dandenong Creek, near Dandenong, in the year 1841, and broken up
in the year 1843; the greatest number of scholars was twenty-three, and the lowest, none. The third school
established was by the banks of the Yarra, at the junction of the Merri Merri Creek. This was established
principally by the Baptists, open to all tribes, in December, 1845, and, after a considerable degree of success,
was totally deserted in 1850. Two young children were left deserted by their unnatural mother, but were taken
care of by Government, and by me placed under training at the National School, Moonie Moonie Ponds.
Mr. Thomas Hinkins, master. The greatest number of scholars at the Merri Creek School was thirty-two,
and the lowest number the two orphans.
Mr. Orr. —Mr. Parker, of Mount Franklin, taught them a little, but I believe he never could keep them
long in one place. t .
Mr. Lane. —l am not aware that any efforts have been made for their instruction, religious or otherwise.
Captain Harrison. —Not that lam aware of. The numbers are too few and too scattered.
Mr. Templeton. —l think not.
Mr. Rusden (11, 12). —Numerous efforts have been made in Victoria, as in New South Wales, to educate
the natives, and to impart religious education to them, but they have been uniformly made in such a manner
as, in the opinion of those most acquainted with the habits of the aborigines, have ensured failure in the large
majority of the experiments.
I have been cognizant of many cases in various parts of the colony of New South Wales, showing
that with proper care the native mind may be trained in such a manner as to exhibit a by no means
unfavorable contrast with that of the European. But the sine qua non in any attempt to influence the
aborigines is to separate them from the control of the tribe to which the native sought to be influenced
belongs. .... ~
The instances in which any natives have been permanently civilized, without separation from their tribes,
are so rare and peculiar as to make unreasonable, to the extent of folly, to aim at civilizing the aborigines,
without first bringing about their separation (during infancy if possible) from their native haunts.
The aborigines are affectionate and simple-minded, and a close attention to their wants by an intelligent
person, who will treat them almost as he would his own children, may prove effectual in weaning them, in special
cases, from their habits, and in imbuing them with the feelings of civilized Christians. There are but one or
two such instances recorded, however, and they have been subsequent to the almost complete annihilation of
the tribe to which the reclaimed savage has belonged ; so that, in fact, the isolation which I speak ot has
been, in effect, produced, though in a manner which one must shudder to contemplate. Such individuals have
been isolated from their countrymen, because their countrymen have been destroyed around them. They have
sympathized with the kindness they have met, and instead of lounging from public-house to public-house,
until the powers of nature have given way to debauchery and disease, as is the rule in most cases, they have
clung to the protection afforded. They have been, how few soever in number, living rebukes to the brutality
or apathy which would cheaply escape from the duty of civilizing their race, by pronouncing them to be
irreclaimable. . .
In reply to the 73rd question put by the committee, I propose to show, in continuation ot this
subject, that the missions which have existed in Australia have failed to civilize and convert the
aborigines, not because the aborigines were irreclaimable, but because the missions were established on
erroneous principles.
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Shuter. —Not within my knowledge.
Mr. Murray. —No efforts have been made to educate them (Colac tribe), or to impart religious instruction,
for the last ten years. Previously a Wesleyan mission made the attempt, but not in such a way as to secure
success —but little good was done. _
Mr. Synnot. —l am not aware that any effort has ever been made to educate the aborigines of this
district (Wimmera). In 1853 or 1854 some of the young boys were taken to a protectorate station (or
something of the kind) at Jim Crow, who of course took the first opportunity of getting back to their own
country.
Mr. Wilson. —None.
Mr. Fisken. —Yes.
Mr. McLeod. —None.
Mr. Ormond. —No efforts have been made (in this neighborhood) to educate the aborigines, or to impart
religious instruction.
Mr. French. —l cannot say.
Mr. Crooke. —No.
Mr. Shad forth. —None whatever.
Mr. Aitken. —No effort has been made in my neighborhood to educate or impart religious instruction to
the aborigines.
Mr. Skene. —Not of late years. There were many attempts made in the early years of the colony, but
in every case it was almost a failure.
Mr. Beveridge. —The only attempt at education and religious instruction made in this district was by
the Moravian missionaries, and I am sorry to say the attempt was abortive.
Mr. Allan. —No.
Mr. Craig. —No systematic effort has been made here to test their capacity to receive literary or moral
instruction. 1 have little doubt the young are capable of attaining a much higher standard of morals. With
reference to literary instruction, I have found some aboriginals whose English would bear comparison with
eight-tenths of the laboring whites. These have been more isolated from their tribes. Their aptitude in
acquiring outdoor avocations is generally admitted, though they want the perseverance and endurance ot their
white fellow-workmen.
Sergeant Archibald. —I believe none.
Mr. Strutt. —None whatever.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —On one occasion three boys were sent from Warrnambool to the Melbourne blacks
school, but after a few weeks they returned to their tribe.
Mr. Godfrey. —lndividual efforts have repeatedly been made to ameliorate their condition, but in vain.
Mr. Gottreux. —Yes ; but in all cases that have come to my knowledge they have failed.
Mr. Currie. —None ; so far as I am aware.
Mr. Lydiard. —None.
Mr. Mitchell. —No effort has been made to educate them generally, nor to impart to them religious
instruction.
Mr. Cooke. —No efforts made to educate or impart religious knowledge.
Mr. lluon. —There have not been any efforts made in this neighborhood to educate or impart religious
instruction to them.
Mr. Wills. —None.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —None that I am aware of.
Mr. Viper —No ;in former times religious instruction was attempted at the protectorate’s, and I once
heard the Lord’s Prayer treated by a party of scholars in a way which would deter me from ever attempting
religious instruction.
Mr. Lewis. —No systematic effort has been made near to this station (upon this side of the Murray) to
educate the aborigines, or to impart to them religious instruction.


12. What is ycur opinion of their general intelligence , and of their capacity to receive literary or moral instruction?
Mr. Hull. —Utterly low. A few instances of superior intellect occasionally.
Mr. Thomas. —As to their “ general intelligence”—they are not without a degree of intelligence when
carefully watched ; but there is such a degree of listlessness in their character, that it is truly trying to those
who have to teach them; more so, as they will not suffer any coertion. The female children are not so quick
as the male children in learning ; both sexes can learn to read and write, but make no figure in arithmetic.
They soon learn to sing and get by heart poetry, and repeat pieces; but in arithmetic, as before stated,
they are very far behind European children. They like oral instruction, and in geography by mapping are
very quick. ’ An aboriginal boy at the Normal school, Sydney, got the prize for geography two succeeding
years, but his master told me “he was stupidly dull in arithmetic.” The females are soon taught needlework
and other domestic work ; the males as shepherds, sheep washing, farming operations, reaping, splitting, and
even fencing. When the gold was discovered, almost all blacks, males and females, were engaged, and rendered
valuable assistance to the farmers at the Plenty Eiver. By Mount Eliza, the blacks, with the assistance
of the master, got safely in the whole of the crop.
Mr. On\— l think them capable of receiving religious and moral instructions, as they have a good deal
of intelligence.
Mr. Lane. —They are not wanting in intelligence, and might perhaps, if trained from early youth,
acquire civilized habits and modes of thought ; but it has always appeared to me that in mental capacity they
are far inferior to the North American Indians.
Captain Harrison. —l have had no opportunity of judging.
Mr. Templeton. —l think as children their intelligence is equal to that of Europeans ; but they are very
deficient in application to any kind of learning. There are, however, scarcely any children in the tribes
1 am referring to, and any attempt to teach the adults would, I fear, be quite hopeless.
Mr, Sherard. —General capacity and intelligence good.
Mr. Shuter. I think it low; but to say, as is generally said, that they are incapable of receiving instruc-
tion, I consider is too sweeping. Ido not consider that the aboriginal population has received the attention it
is entitled to at our hands. lam convinced that much good might yet be done at a very moderate cost.
Mr. Murray. —l consider their general intelligence very limited, but their capacity to receive literary
and moral instruction is by no means deficient.
Mr. Synnot. —Their natural intelligence and capacity I believe to be good, but without an entire change
in their mode of life it would be hardly possible to communicate to them much literary or religious instruction.
Mr. Wilson. —Of quick and lively parts, learning readily any description of farm work and rough car-
pentry; good mimics, with a keen perception of the ludicrous. In one or two instances 1 have known boys
anxious to be taught to read; in one a natural taste for drawing and caricature; and one boy learned nearly all
the letters of the alphabet from an old newspaper. I think they were capable of receiving moral instruction.
Mr. Fisken. —Very mediocre.
Mr. McLeod. —l consider them capable of receiving moral instruction.
Mr. Ormond. —The natives are very shrewd, quick, and clever at imitating, but their excessive laziness
would be a bar to their receiving religious instruction.
Mr. French. —The general intelligence of the adults seems little, if at all inferior to that of the average
of white men. I cannot say as to their capacity to receive literary instruction ; and as to their capacity to
receive moral instruction or having a moral sense, I cannot take upon myself to answer so difficult a subject,
and about which so many philosophers have differed. Hobbes taught that the laws which the civil magistrate
enjoins are the ultimate standards of morality. Cudworth endeavored to show that the origin of our notions of
right and wrong is to be found in a particular faculty of the mind, which distinguishes truth from falsehood.
Mandeville declares that the moral virtues are mere sacrifices of self-interest, made for the sake of public ap-
probation; and calls virtue the “ political offspring which flattery begot upon pride.” Dr. Clarke supposes
virtue to consist in acting according to the fitnesses of things. Mr. Hume endeavored to prove that “ utility
is the constituent or measure of virtue.” Dr. Hutcheson maintains that it originates in the dictates of a moral
sense. Dr. Taley does not admit such a faculty, but declares virtue to consist “in doing good to mankind, in
obedience to the will of God and for the sake of everlasting happiness.” Dr. Adam Smith endeavors to show
that sympathy is the source of moral approbation. Dr. Reid, Mr. Stewart, and Dr. T. Brown maintain the
existence of a moral faculty. Sir James Mackintosh describes conscience to be compounded and made up of
associations. Dr. Ralph Wardlaw can see nothing in conscience, except judgment. How then, amidst all this
conflict of opinion, as to the foundation and possibility of the existence of moral science, is any approach to
certainty to be obtained in answer to this portion of the queries.
Mr, Croolce. —Moderate, but their immutable laws compel the members of tribes to join at certain times;
hence the futility of it.
Mr. Aitken. —I think them intelligent and quick, but I cannot judge of their capacity to receive literary
or moral instruction.
Mr, Skene. —Very inferior.
Mr. Beveridge. —They do not lack general intelligence, but they have not the remotest capacity for
literary or moral instruction.
Mr. Allan. —Their capacity does not, in my opinion, extend past the present moment. I have known
them taught to read, but after being awhile with their tribe, they have forgotten it all again.
Sergeant Archibald. —The general intelligence of the pure natives appears low, but their seems no doubt
of their capacity to receive moral instruction if commenced in early years.
Air. Strutt. —In many respects as intelligent as the white race. If their education commenced at a
proper age, a fair share of instruction, both literary and moral, might be imparted to them.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They have an excellent memory, can copy and mimic well. They have little or no
feelings of emulation. I believe them capable of receiving moral and religious instruction, but 1 think all such
attempts should be preceded by teaching them to depend on the regular and systematic labor of their hands for
sustenance, and placing them in such a situation that they would have no alternative but ask regular labor,
or want.
Mr. Godfrey. —A very moderate standard of intelligence, except when the faculties are brought to bear
on any method for pursuing game, sports, &c. On these subjects they are quick ; but their capacity to
receive literary or moral instruction is small. They seem to possess a strong prejudice against any attempt
at improving them, and fancy it very stupid to try and do so. Our best chance is with the children, the half-
castes more especially.
Mr. Gottreux. —Very low, incapable of mental instruction.
Mr. Currie. —Their general intelligence is good, and their natural capacity, if cultivated before their
wandering and wild habits had been confirmed, is, or was, sufficient to enable them to receive literary or moral
instruction.
Mr. Lydiard. —Although an intelligent race, they repel any attempt to teach them either reading or
writing. I only know of three aboriginal natives who can read and write.
Mr. Mitchell. —On the whole they arc of limited capacity. Amongst those educated by the settlers are
a few who have exhibited some quickness of apprehension, which, however, is usually marred by their consti-
tutional apathy, and a dislike of a continued effort. It is difficult to impress them with a due regard for any
system of morals.


Mr. Bunce. —Their reasoning powers are of no mean order ; they have great capacity for learning ; but
the teacher should be able to speak their language.
Mr. Cooke. —The old people are generally very stupid in understanding what is said to them, bat the
younger ones arc much more apt and quick in picking up any suggestion you may make to them.
Mr. Huon. —Many of them possess a good deal of shrewdness and intelligence ; but as indolence is their
principal characteristic, it would be necessary to commence whilst they are very young to impart any Jit crapy
instructions, and I think the same may be said with regard to moral culture.
Mr. Wills. —I have myself seen so few of them, that it is not in my power to give an opinion. Old
stockmen here say, that many were very quiet in doing different kinds of manual work ; but almost invariably,
after submitting to the restraints of a life among Europeans for a few months, it appeared to be a relief to
them to return to the “ opossum rug,” and to a nomadic life.
Mr. Fdherstonhaugh. —l consider them generally intelligent, and very capable of receiving literary and
moral instruction.
Mr. Piper. —Their instinct is remarkable ; general intelligence and literary or moral instruction are
merely terms unknown in relation to the aborigines.
Mr. Lewis. —The natives are, in many instances, very intelligent and are capable of receiving instruc-
tion. Their dispositions are naturally good, though soft and indolent. They evince a strong affection for
their own kindred and their immediate friends. They are treacherous, cruel, and vindictive towards natives
of distant tribes, whom it appears to be the custom to* kill, whenever within their power.
13. Can you suggest any plan to the Committee by which they could be saved from ultimate extinction ?
Mr. Thomas.— My firm conviction is, that in the settled districts the aborigines will, in a very few
years, become extinct ; in the intermediate district they may hold out a few years longer ; but my impression
is, that they also will become extinct. Extinction must be the sequel of this hapless race. In the settled and
intermediate districts few, if any, births to fill up the ranks of the dead, coupled with their drunken
propensities, points too unerringly their speedy exit.
(2.) To preserve the race from ultimate extinction, a commencement must be made in the far distant
tribes, where they have not much diminished in number through intemperance, or deteriorated through bad
connexions—tribes who have offspring, and in some tribes numerous, who have suffered no diminution from
contact with the whites. A block of one hundred square miles, sacredly reserved for the aborigines, and on
no pretence whatever a squatting station within its limits or beyond it, nor any squatter to employ or harbor
any of the tribes within the limits of their country under pain of fine or forfeiture of licence.
(3.) In suitable localities in this aboriginal country agricultural operations, on an extensive scale,
should he carried on, schools established, with religious instructors. In these schools the English language
only taught, and their native tongue discouraged to its utter extinction.
(4.) I would suggest a school upon a larger scale, in or near Melbourne, for each sex, the children at the
district schools, as early as practicable, removed to the large establishment. This school receiving children
from various tribes will amalgamate the tribes unconsciously ; being young, they cannot have the prejudices.
This head school, if conducted upon the plan of the philanthropic schools in London, where simple trades are
taught, would infuse industry with education.
(5.) My suggestion to remove the children early from their tribe and parents may, at first glance,
appear relentless, and emanating from a breast void of feeling ; but whoever will take the trouble to reflect
seriously upon the result of the many previous efforts in this Colony, and our sister Colonies throughout New
Holland, to retain the aboriginal rising generation, after they have been educated, from returning and
mingling with their race and off to the wilderness, must be convinced that nothing short of removing them
a considerable distance from their tribe can permanently improve their condition and avert (which it is a
national duty to do, if possible) the extinction of the aboriginal race.
(G.) However harsh it may appear, the separation of the children from their parents and their native
haunts. Yet when eve reflect upon the wretched way these children are brought up, the obstinate degradation
of the parents, humanity for the offspring should guide the philanthropist. Removing the children early
cannot be materially felt by the children, who will still be among their race •, and to remove them from the lap
of their degraded parents would be a deed of mercy, keeping in view their future destiny.
(7.) We have, on unquestionable evidence, instances of aborigines being taken young and educated ;
even trades—blacksmith, tailor, shoemaker, ignorant of a syllable of their native tongue, amalgamating
with the civilized ; but these have always been to me objects of commiseration rather than congratulation.
Isolate beings, one or two hundred miles apart, in fact know not where their next of civilized race are. I ask,
can ever any good result to the mass of aborigines from these solitary ones ? and further, it is quite out of the
question increasing, or even keeping up their number. The result is, they drop down to the vices and
dissipation of the dregs of society, and find an early tomb.
(8.) But by a simultaneous move by the authorities in all the distant tribes, to endeavor by purchase,
pursuasion, and preparatory kind treatment, to get the permission of the tribe to take care of their children ;
and a few years will show the result—that the educated aborigines are not isolated beings, but have their own
race as their companions, and in progress of time a regular aboriginal community. My impression is,
if the parents and chiefs of the aborigines were more studiously considered, the difficulty of obtaining the
children would not be so great.
(9.) In each tribe of this aboriginal country should be a school and a depot for provisions, blankets, and
other necessaries. None of the aborigines should be turned empty away, on the plea that they have not
worked —if so, a failure will be the result : convince them that their bread and water is sure unto them,
and labor will gradually follow. A black cannot be incessantly idle no more than the white, and knowing for
a certainty that his wants are supplied, he will diverge less and less from where his wants are supplied,
till we may anticipate he or his offspring may become stationary.
(10.) As near central as possible in this aboriginal country should be the principal depot and head
quarters where the chief guardian (or what term may be given him) should reside ; this depot or head
quarters, should be of that extent as to be able to supply the whole of the depots throughout the country,
which after the first or second year might become self-providing.
(11.) The officers in the aboriginal country, as suggested, should consist of a chief or head guardian, who
should be a gentleman of trust and irreproachable character, at a liberal salary, and sub-guardians under
him, who would be stationed at the branch depots. Their salaries should be fixed, so as to avoid changes ;
these sub-guardians also should be of good moral character. Each establishment should have a medical
dispenser, who might (as his duties would not be great) keep an account of the stores as storekeeper.
(12.) The chief guardian should at least once in six months visit each of the aboriginal establishments
throughout the country, make his report to the Honorable the President of the Board of Land and Works, and
for the information of the colony, annually be laid before the Parliament. The chief guardian’s report will be
a succinct account of all the establishments, and should, as an appendix, contain a schedule with a wide margin
for remarks of rations issued, work done, diseases, deaths, births, &c., &c. The sub-guardians should report
monthly to the chief guardian in detail, the working of the establishment, keeping a regular daily journal, and
in the strictest sense of the word, be under the sole direction of the chief guardian.


(13.) Unlimited discretionary power in supplying provisions, &c„ should be vested in each ot the
sub-guardians on their establishments. I urge this from experience. The Sydney government issued an
official that the protectors of Port Phillip were not, on any consideration whatever, to give away the
least ration for a black who had not worked. This was further backed by Lord Stanley, the Colonial Secretary.
On this hinge the protectorate broke down, and all other attempts by benevolent societies and individuals
to ameliorate the condition of the aborigines, being totally ignorant of their daily avocation in a wild state, and
their general character. Suffice it to state (to urge this discretionary power to the sub-protectors or guardians)
that the aborigines in their native state do not work daily ; a portion of their number go out by direction of their
chief, and by prying, searching, and intuitive habit procure what a kind providence has meted out to them,
which (before the squatters located on their soil) was in abundance ; so that those (to bring it to our calendar)
who go out on the Monday lay basking about on the Tuesday. I would press this affecting subject still further,
but trust that what I have stated will be a guide to your honorable committee upon this head. The
aborigines must be kindly treated, and decoyed feelingly into European labor—secure their children, and
the Government has, to their credit, preserved the aboriginal race from extinction, which is their unbounden
duty. I have dwelt much upon this brief question, for which I would apologise to your honorable com-
mittee, unless 1 had found it the main outlet for a plan I suggested to the chief protector in the early part
of 1839.
Mr. Orr. —Get the youths away from their parents into some seminary.
Mr. Lane. —The only plan I can think of, by which their total extinction might be prevented, would be
to form settlements which they might be gradually taught to cultivate, and where they might be tempted
to live during the winter months. There are villages of this description in Canada, formed on the Indian
reserves on the Grand River, Manitonlin Islands, Lake Huron, &c., and it is the custom of the Government
to distribute presents of blankets, &c., periodically, which has the effect of collecting the scattered and
distant tribes.
Captain Harrison. —Hone.
Mr. Templeton. —As mentioned above, there are scarcely any aboriginal children growing up to supply
the places of those who are now dying, and their extinction, therefore, ere long, must be inevitable.
Mr. Beveridge. —l cannot.
Mr. Busden. —I was chairman of a committee appointed by an assembly of the Church of England in
Victoria, in 1856, to consider the condition of the aborigines, and I beg to append, as my answer to this question,
the report recommended by that committee, and adopted by the Church of England Assembly, together with
a petition to both Houses of Parliament, based on the recommendations of the report. 1 may mention that
the Church of England Assembly comprises nearly a hundred persons, viz., the clergymen in the diocese, and
lay representatives elected in each parish or district throughout the Colony. The petition was entrusted to a
member of each House of Parliament for presentation.—
“ Rebort
“ Of the Committee appointed at the first Meeting of the Assembly of the United Church of England and
Ireland in Victoria, to report to the Assembly on the Condition of the Aborigines, and to recommend such
measures to be taken by the Church of England as they may deem best suited to enable the Church to
perform its duty to the Aborigines.
“Your Committee have the honor to bring up the following Report:—•
“ They have called for no viva voce evidence, but they have resorted to published documents relative to
the history of the efforts which have hitherto been made to civilize and evangelize the Australian aborigines.
“Those documents seem to warrant the following conclusions:
“ That all missionary enterprise is admitted to have failed to produce the desired effect, viz., when under-
taken by means of the settlement of missionaries amongst the tribes in their own localities.
“That the condition of the aborigines amidst the white population may be described as one in which
their natural wild and simple habits are in general supplanted by the most grovelling debauchery, the results
of which are destructive alike to their physical and mental powers.
“ That Lord Stanley’s Despatch, 20th December, 1842, (Votes and Proceedings, New South Wales Legis-
lative Council, 1843), enumerating many failures, under the protectorate in Port Phillip, at Wellington Valley,
at Moreton Bay, at Lake Macquarie, and at the Wesleyan Mission on the Barwon River, gives a fair picture
of the failures themselves, and of the lamentable results then extant.
“ That, as contrasted with missionary enterprise conducted as above mentioned, the history of the
Poonindie Training Establishment in South Australia, organised by the Venerable Archdeacon Hale (the
most gratifying experiment yet made on the Australian continent), seems to show that the establishment of
schools for gathering together the young, where they may become estranged from their own customs, affords
the greatest likelihood of success, and is the system most worthy of approval, and most desirable to be pressed
upon the consideration of the Church and of the Legislature.
“ That the diminution of the numbers in each tribe exposed to contact with Europeans, and the decadence
of dialects one by one, depriving missionaries of opportunities of obtaining converts, and destroying the value
of their acquisitions in the native language, combine to show how hopeless is the endeavor to convert the
numerous remnants of tribes by an establishment at any one place, unless members of different tribes can be
congregated at it, and trained to the use of one common language.
“ That, on the contrary, a central establishment, gathering individuals from every tribe, and affording
facilities for instruction in the English tongue, would give the teachers the use of a more efficient instrument
in teaching (namely, a superior language) would elevate the mental condition of the pupils, and would be as
applicable to an individual of any one tribe as to an individual of any other.
“ That the separation of the aborigines from their native haunts was urged or suggested by , the following
colonists, all magistrates in different parts of the Colony in 1849, as the only efficacious means of arresting the
downward progress of the race. (Some persons, who admit the fact, express doubts whether it would be just
to resort to the means.)—A. Goldsmith, Esq., Pyrenees ;R. Hamilton, Esq., Polkimont; A. Irvine, Esq.,
Pyrenees; H. C. Jeffreys, Esq., Mount Macedon; J. F. Palmer, Esq., Melbourne; G. Russell, Esq., River
Leigh; W. Rutledge, Esq., Port Fairy; A. T. Thomson, Esq., Fiery Creek; J. Wilson, Esq., Hume River; 11.
Murray, Esq., Colae; G. S. Airey, Esq., Goulburn River; E. Grimes, Esq., Broken River; J. Webster, Esq.,
Mount Shadwell; J. C. Riddell, Esq., Mount Macedon; D. S. Stodart, Esq., Colac; C. Macknight, Esq., Port
Fairy; R. Burke, Esq., Mount Shadwell. Separation from the whites was urged by the Superintendent of
the Wesleyan Mission (at the Barwon River) as absolutely essential to the success of any efforts to ameliorate
the moral condition of the blacks.
“ That the guardian of the aborigines in Victoria urged in 1852 that the only chance left was the for-
mation of an establishment in which to educate the children apart from the influence of their unreclaimed
parents and of the corruptions of civilization.
“ That the success which has attended the efforts of Archdeacon Hale, at Adelaide, is a favorable
guarantee for the results of such isolation, and that well authenticated instances (some of which are recorded
in the Church of England Messenger'), in which, under favorable circumstances individual natives have been
weaned from their habits by kindly disposed persons who have had ample means at command, prove that the
aboriginal mind, if properly attracted and directed, is capable of appreciating civilization and embracing
Christianity.
Aborigines. —l


“ That the present number of the aborigines, supposed in 1845 to have amounted to about 0000, and now
to be diminished to less than 1000 (irrespective of those who frequent both banks of the Murray liiver, and
consequently belong to New South Wales as much as to Victoria) is a solemn warning of the rapid
progress towards annihilation which the native tribes are undergoing, and of the futility of the attempts
hitherto made to avert their destruction.
“ Your Committee would therefore recommend that, in order that the aborigines may receive Christian
instruction, a central establishment for the reception of the native children from all tribes in the colony should
be formed. That the ordinary expenditure should be defrayed out of the public revenue; that the Church
should provide the expenditure requisite for teaching the truths of the Gospel; that for this purpose a
missionary or missionaries unsalaried by the Government (but provided on the spot with accommodation and
sustenance) should be appointed by the Church to exercise control. That in order to give a guarantee to the
public for the proper outlay of funds secularly devoted, the accounts of the establishment should be audited as
the Government may direct.
“ That the use of the aboriginal language be discouraged in the establishment, and that industrial and
mechanical occupations be taught there.
“ That all aboriginal children, whose parents may be willing, for any consideration, to yield them up,
be taken into the establishment.
“ That half-caste male children, hitherto almost invariably destroyed by the aborigines, be in all cases
taken charge of in the establishment.
“ That to provide for and supplement the usefulness of the central station, there be sought out in every
district a person of high social position amongst the whites, and affectionately regarded by the aborigines,
wiio will undertake to keep an accurate record of the numbers of the aborigines, to win from them inmates
for the institution, and to distribute such gifts as the Legislature may be willing to appropriate for the
benefit of the adults.
“ That such agents or trustees should be empowered to place, at the public cost, in any public school in
the district, children whose parents might refuse to permit them to be taken to the central station for instruc-
tion, and the premiums be given to successful teachers in sucli cases.
“That each such agent or trustee on behalf of the aborigines should correspond with the missionary in
charge at the institution.
“ That the Legislature be urged to consider whether, as all evidence of persons conversant with the habits
of the aborigines points to the inefficacy of the moans hitherto adopted in New South Wales or Victoria to
reclaim tire aborigines, and to the necessity to isolate from their native habits those whom we would civilize,
it would not be less cruel, and more just, to bring about that isolation, even by compulsion, in the case of
infants, rather than suffer the unrestrained operation of causes which now destroy the old and young alike,
and which must, if not speedily arrested, end in the utter destruction of the race.
“Your Committee recommend that a petition from the Church Assembly to the Houses of Legislature,
embodying the foregoing proposition, be prepared, and be presented without delay, praying that such proposition
may be carried into effect.
“ Your Committee would by no means recommend the discontinuance of Missionary efforts, although
hitherto the results have been unsatisfactory. They suggest fresh means, but not with the view to discourage
the spirit which has prompted the means hitherto found ineffectual, and they look forward to the efforts of the
district guardians or trustees as likely, under the blessing of Divine Providence, to win to a knowledge of
the truths of Christianity those who are now perishing in ignorance ; or at the least, if this result be denied,
to alleviate the sufferings of our fellow-creatures, and to bring to their aid in hours of affliction and distress a
trifling pittance of that material wealth which lias been so largely extracted from the land whose original
inhabitants have been displaced with such startling rapidity by European colonization.
“ G. W. EUSDEN, Chairman.”
“ To the Honorable the President and Members of the Legislative Council, the Speaker and Members of the Legislative
Assembly of the Colony of Victoria.
“The Memorial of the Assembly of the United Church of England and Ireland humbly sheweth, —
“That your memorialists have taken under their earnest consideration the present condition of the
aborigines of the Colony, with the desire to communicate to them the blessings of the Gospel.
“ That your memorialists, on a calm review of the circumstances, are unable to perceive that the efforts
of missionaries can produce any beneficial effect upon the aborigines in general, and are of opinion that the
fostering care of the State is needed to concentrate together the scattered remnants of the tribes in Victoria.
“ That your memorialists are impelled to put forward this memorial by reflecting that, if something be
not soon done on behalf of the aborigines, they will in a few years be blotted out from the face of the country
of their fathers ; and if they be so blotted out, your memorialists will not be justified if they have shrunk from
any effort for which success could be hoped in ameliorating the moral condition of the aborigines.
“ That an experiment, such as your memorialists would press upon your honorable Council, has been of
late years proved in South Australia with marked success, and that the signal success of that experiment, as
compared with all previous efforts on the Australian continent, urges upon your memorialists the duty of their
present appeal to those constituted authorities by whose aid alone, humanly speaking, success may be hoped
for in Victoria.
“ That the principle upon which the successful establishment in South Australia has been conducted,
has been the isolation of the aborigines from their native haunts, and kind treatment and tuition of them in
a central station, where they have gradually acquired a knowledge of European arts, simultaneously with
instruction in Christianity, considerable expenditure having been borne by the State, while the control of
the mission station has been left to the Eev. gentlenman whose well-directed zeal originated the experiment.
“ That your memorialists are of opinion that similar provision, control, and supervision are essential to
the success of any attempts to civilize and convert the aborigines, and while they would deprecate the lodgment
of monies in the hands of the missionary in charge, they think it manifest that, unless he is placed in a
position of apparent control, ho would not be able to command that unqualified respect which is essential in
guiding the minds of those whom he would convert.
“ That the foregoing proposition is borne out by reference to all instances of success in evangelizing the
aborigines, inasmuch as though moving from station to station and town to town, they in all cases acquire
considerable knowledge of European employments, there is no recorded instance of permanent civilization
or conversion, except where, in private families or in a, public establishment, they have been weaned from
their wild pursuits by the kindness of those whom, as masters or managers, they have learned to respect
and love.
“ That your memorialists would humbly recommend that the following steps be immediately taken with
a view to teach the aborigines.
“That a central establishment be formed for the reception of all aboriginal children or adults who can
be induced to enter it.
“That all due safeguards be taken to prevent the possibility of any diversion to other ends than for the
benefit of the aborigines, of the materials in use at the central establishment.
“ That accommodation and sustenance be provided for any resident missionary or missionaries.
“That secular instruction and agricultural and mechanical tuition be provided by the State.
“ That the use of the aboriginal dialects bo discouraged in the establishment.


“ That in every large district of the colony there be sought some person and affectionately regarded by
the aborigines, who shall be designated to keep records of the condition of the aborigines, and to win from
them inmates for the central station by such gifts as the Legislature may think fit to place at his disposal,
and that such district guardians or agents be authorized to place, at the expense of the state, in public district
schools, such children as may be yielded up for the purpose by parents who may refuse to let their children
depart from their native place to jthe central station.
“ That correspondence be kept up periodically between the resident missionary and each district
guardian.
“ That, in support of the foregoing recommendation, your memorialists would point out that the
guardian of the aborigines urged upon the Government of the Colony in 1852 the necessity of forming some
central establishment, such as has been suggested above, and that the rapidly diminishing number of
aborigines in the colony shows, that whatever steps can be taken ought to be taken quickly, to prevent the
complete destruction of the native race.
“ That your memorialists would place before your honorable house one important fact which demands
serious consideration, namely, that half-caste male children, borne by aboriginal women, are usually destroyed ;
and that your memorialists would urge that, in order to prevent their destruction, the removal of half-caste
children to the central establishment might be specially encouraged.
“ That your memorialists would point out that the foregoing fact alone shows that missionary enterprise,
under the circumstances of the Colony, cannot cope with the causes which are operating to remove the race
from their native soil.
“ That your memorialists would further suggest, as a reason why the central mission establishment
should be formed, the fact that the native tribes are disappearing so rapidly that, in the course of little more
than twenty years whole tribes have died away, making it plain that, even had missionaries obtained a
perfect knowledge of a dialect, their labors would have to be renewed in another sphere, which would
eventually prove equally unfavorable.
“ Finally, your memorialists would represent, that, upon an enquiry instituted by the late Legislature of
New South Wales and Fort Phillip, many leading persons settled in Port Phillip pointed out that, only by
some such means as those now recommended, could any success be achieved in civilizing or instructing the
aborigines, as will be seen in the votes and proceedings of the New South Wales Legislative Council.
“ Your memorialists are emboldened to make their present appeal by reflecting, that previous Legis-
latures have made grants for the benefit of the aborigines when claims, reasonably supported, have been put
forward in their behalf.
“Your memorialists would therefore entreat your honorable house to take the premises into consi-
deration, and to take such steps to ameliorate the moral condition of the aborigines as may, to your honorable
house seem meet.
“ And your memorialists, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.”
Mr. Shuter. —The establishment of reserves seems to me the only practicable method.
Mr. Murray. —l consider it too late to attempt any plan for preventing their total extinction, as in all
the populated districts there are few or no births ; and I consider that it is only with the young that any such
attempt would be successful.
Mr. Synnot. - I can suggest no plan of saving them from extinction, which seems more likely to succeed
than that of keeping them out of the gold fields and other townships, where they are drunk from morning till
night.
Mr. Wilson. —lt is too late now in the Mitta Mitta, as the race is nearly extinct. Imbuing the minds of
the young with sound moral and religious instruction, so as to unfetter them from the thraldom of superstition.
This could best be accomplished by isolating them when young for a time from their parents and others.
Native teachers might thus be trained up.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. McLeod. —l cannot.
Mr. Ormond. —l cannot.
Mr. French. —Notwithstanding what I have said as to their general intelligence, as a race they are
inferior to what is termed the Caucasian, or white race ; and as the tendency of nature appears to be a pro-
gression from the inferior to the superior, it is more than possible, almost certain, that, notwithstanding all
well meant efforts to the # contrary, the aboriginal must disappear, and give place to the superior race.
Mr. Crooke. —None. They appear to die off' from sheer idleness when introduced into towns. If they
could be driven into the mountains they would thrive, if they did not destroy one another, which they would
then do by territorial quarrels.
M'. Aitken. —l can suggest no plan by which they could be saved from ultimate extinction.
Mr. Skene. —By keeping them outside the circle of civilization.
Mr. Beveridge. —l cannot.
Mr. Craig (13 and 14). —AYere a reserve, containing some good land, established, a few might be induced
to attempt farming (the seeds, implements, tScc., being found them) ; but it is very questionable if the older
natives could be brought to settled habits.
Mr. Gilles. — Possibly by forming district schools and carrying out the 14th question.
Mr. Strutt. — l do not consider that any plan will prove successful, unless some arrangement is made to
restrain them from wandering about. So long as they are left in full liberty to do exactly as they choose,
they will perhaps stay a few days in one xfiace, and then on the slightest whim or disagreement “ pull away,”
as they call it, to another place many miles distant ; and not return for several months. Whatever measures
may be taken are likely to be useful with the young only ; the middle-aged aborigines appear to be altogether
irreclaimable.
Mr. J. M. Allan.— Money will do wonders. If sufficient funds were placed in the hands of proper men,
under a wise and economical Government, it can be done. My plan is too voluminous to insert here. Should
your honorable committee really entertain the idea, I will be happy to enter more fully into my views.
Mr. Godfrey. —None. 1 think that, while their final extinction seems the inevitable law of nature,
many of the young might be civilized and reclaimed, but not without removal pretty far from their former
haunts. Then arises the difficulty—how are we to get the children ? The parents will scarcely, even under
the most liberal offers, be induced to part with them. They say, invariably, “ AYhen jump up, you man him,”
—when the child is grown up, you may then have him. This is too late ; he is then rooted to his wild life,
and lam sure it is a hopeless task to attempt any real reform of adults. Although many enthusiastic people
will be found to differ with me in this opinion, I still hold it from strong conviction, —manifold attempts with
the most shrewd and apparently thinking blacks having failed. They are too confirmed in, and by natural
capacity adapted for, their wild, roving life of freedom,
Mr. Gottreux. —There is no rising generation, and, of course, their extinction is inevitable.
Mr. Currie. —The habits they have acquired from the first whites with whom they came in contact —
these being, generally, of the most depraved class, the indiscriminate intercourse of the females with this
class, led to unfaithfulness ; and the now total absence of children amongst them—surely points to their
ultimate and speedy extinction.
Mr. Mitchell. —l can suggest no plan likely to be successful.
Mr. Bunce. —l3 and 14. See reply to No. 7.
Mr. Cooke. —None, unless they are kept from drink.
Mr. lluon. —l cannot.


Mr. Wills. —No ; I fear it is too late. A proper commencement should have been made twenty-five
years ago. Systematic training, agricultural, mechanical, religious, and moral, should, in my humble opinion,
have been commenced immediately, or soon after the arrival of Europeans amongst them (as in the case of
the New Zealanders).
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —l can conceive none.
Mr. I’iper. None whatever. I have witnessed their gradual extinction during the last twenty years,
and lam convinced no interference of our’s can prevent it. Ido not think they have died by our diseases,
but by the change in their mode of life, brought about by our occupation of the country, and their dependence
upon us for food and clothing. Unless the world can be turned backwards, the normal condition of the
aborigines can never be restored. The favorite project of many of their well-wishers is, the establishment of
a vast reserve, and their compulsory restriction within its limits. Years of beef, mutton, and tobacco have
totally incapacitated these poor creatures for a return to kangaroo, opossums, and a state of nature ; whilst
their imprisonment within a reserve, however extensive, would speedily break their hearts. The aborigines
throughout the length and breadth of this land are most kindly treated. I fear any attempt to improve their
present condition will hasten the final catastrophe.
Mr. Lewis. —l feel confident that the aborigines of this district will, in the course of a very few years,
become extinct. That must be the inevitable result of their intercourse with the whites. No attempt to
preserve the aborigines from extinction can possibly succeed, where that intercourse exists.
14. l)o you think, if a grant of land sufficient for their support were reserved for them, that they would be induced
to settle upon it ? Would they be likely to be reclaimed by such means to more civilised and fixed habits ?
Mr. Hull. —My opinion is, they are doomed to utter extinction. Our duty is to provide blankets, sugar ,
tea, flour, and medicals, to be given out on application, and to punish those who illtreat them most severely.
Mr. Thomas. —Small grants of land for a single tribe would, as previous grants, be a failure. Extensive
grants, with an agricultural station at the nearest creek or river to the centre, with depot for provisions, &c.,
and settlers prohibited, as recommended in question 13, aborigines having no encouragement at the
neighboring settlers, would gradually find the reserves the only certain spots for support, which must
eventually tend to their partial civilization.
Mr. Orr. —The attempts that have been were so badly carried out, it is difficult to say—if properly-
carried out, establishments would not be useful. The chief difficulty is from their migratory habits. As far
as I see, the attempt would be futile as a general rule, but there are many of the aborigines who would be
civilized. A few are to be seen now at Mr. Parker’s, of Mount Franklin. Mr. Parker ought to be able to give
a good opinion on the subject.
Mr. Lane. —l consider the only chance of ameliorating their present condition is by the adoption of some
such plan as that proposed. It must be borne in mind, however, that great hostility exists between the
different tribes.
Captain Harrison. —Same reply as to No. 12.
Mr. Templeton. —l do not think they could be induced to settle any where; but if such a grant were made,
there is no doubt they would visit the locality frequently, and avail themselves of the support offered to them.
Their condition would thus be ameliorated ; but my experience of these people in New South Wales, and on
the Murray (before the period I have before referred to) leads me to think they will never learn anything but
the vices of civilization.
Mr. Rusden. —I think reserves of land quite useless as a means of supporting the blacks, and preserving
them from the evil influences with which our civilization overwhelms them. Grants of land to all aborigines
who maybe reclaimed would be righteous appropriations, not entitled to the designation of being “liberal.”
It is only the civilized man who can benefit by the use of land in small quantities ; and no reserve, however
large in Victoria, would now preserve the blacks from further deterioration as a race, inasmuch as every tribe in
the colony has been long thoroughly tainted by the vices which the whites have taught. Even if the whites
were expelled from any given district of (say) twenty miles square, the blacks would not remain in it, but
would hover round the nearest white settlements ; and as no blacks, except those in the immediate neighbor-
hood, could resort to such a reserve, many similar reserves would be required, if even the blacks -would make
them their homes, which they would not.
Mr. Shuter. —A certain amount of compulsion, which I would consider justifiable, would be required
to carry the plan of a settlement into effect. If left to their own devices, their wandering nature would prompt
them to take to the bush, however comfortable they might be.
Mr. Murray. —Their entire habits are I think too confirmed ; they could not change them for a settled
life. I think, as a matter of course, that they would be reclaimed to more civilized habits, if they could
be induced to settle upon land of their own.
Mr. t ynnot. —I do not think they could be induced to remain at any fixed place—it is their habit,
and I believe their nature, to roam about; and that the sense of confinement, if they were forced to remain,
would prove more speedily fatal to them than even the injurious influences to which they are at present
subject.
Mr. Wilson.—l do not think they could be induced to give up their wandering habits and settle on
a grant of land, or be reclaimed by this means. Even half-caste children, on attaining the age of puberty, leave
the homes where they have been brought up.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. McLeod.—l fear not; but I do feel that the Government ought to try something of the kind,
and if so I should use my endeavors to induce those near me to settle on a farm.
Mr. Ormond. —No.
Mr. French. —Certainly not.
Mr. Crooke. —No. Perhaps the last remnant might.
Mr. Shadforth.— l do not think they would be induced to settle down.
Mr. Aitken. I do not think they -would be induced to settle on a grant of land sufficient for their
support. I think it impossible that such means would reclaim them to more civilized and fixed habits.
Mr. Skene. —I do not think that a grant of land would be of any service to them, unless it were cultivated
for them. There has been no inducement held out to any of them that would make them leave off their
roaming life.
Mr. Beveridge. —No ; they could not be induced to settle down to fixed and civilized habits.
Sergeant Archibald. —I think they would not be induced to settle upon land under any circumstances, and
that they would not be likely to be reclaimed to fixed habits.
Mr. Stru'.t.— No, but they might be compelled ; the younger aborigines would thus acquire more
civilized and fixed habits. Under the firm rule of a kindly disposed family, they might gradually be taught
every ordinary description of labor. The hours of work should, however, be short ; and due regard should be
paid to their fondness for amusement, by permitting music, dancing, and corroberees in the evenings. But
I believe that no system will answer, without a certain amount of compulsion at first. The aborigines would
freely remain a long time in any place where they had nothing to do, were well fed, and supplied with tobacco
and drink ; but such treatment could not be deemed conducive to their improvement.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —l think that by kindness and judicious treatment, they could. They would certainly ;
for I do not believe that God, in creating man, intended them to live and die like brutes.


Name.
Daniel
Weight,
stone, lbs.
10 0
Height,
feet, inches
5 7A
Measures round
the Chest,
feet, inches.
2 10
Johnny Johnny
10
0
5
5
2
10
Billy
8
0
5
*2
2
8
Jack
9
4
5
4
2
8 2
Larry
10
10
5
8i
3
Of
Billy Toole...
10
0
5
4i
3
0*
Murray
10
0
5
6i
2
m
King John ...
11
12
5
9|
3
1
Flora
9
0
4
10i
3
2
No other woman could be persuaded to be weighed or measured.
Mr. Godfrey. —l think no grant of land, or any other inducement, would so reverse their nature as
to compel them to adopt any fixed abode. AVhen tired of being at a station, under the most favorable
circumstances, no offer, however golden, will tempt them to delay their departure to some new spot ; they
must he ever on the move.
Mr. Gottreux. —No ; it has been tried, and failed. I believe no inducement would be likely to fix them to
one spot.
Mr. Currie. —The small remnant left makes an answer to this almost unnecessary. I do not think,
however, that any means short of compulsion would ivave induced them to settle and confine themselves
to any particular locality, unless they had been removed when young beyond the influence of those whose
habits had become so confirmed, as to be a part of their nature.
Mr. Lydiard. —l do not think so.
Mr. Fetherstonhaugh. —l do not.
Mr. Mitchell— l am of opinion that they will not, for very many years, be reclaimed from their
w r andering habits. It is impossible to prevent the eiders of the tribe, to whom these habits are natural, and
who know r or appreciate no other mode of life, from encouraging or enforcing them on the young men employed
by the settlers. w r ho are thus, at the instance of the tribe, compelled to leave their employers for many months
in each year. Thus, a passion for rambling grows up in these young men, and, in many instances, quite unfits
them for steady employment; while the good effects we might expect from their partial civilization is entirely
lost.
I would beg leave, however, to represent to the committee the present condition and prospects of the
half-breed children who are now to be found with every tribe. It is very distressing to contemplate the
inevitable fate of the female portion of these unfortunates, and which can only be averted by a separation from
the tribes. They are held in more than common esteem by the tribes, and by their mothers they are cherished
with a more than common affection. A voluntary resignation of them cannot be expected from a people of
darkened and untutored minds and undisciplined passions. In one or two instances, I have found them
violently opposed to giving up their children to tire whites. Under your authority, however, some means of
attaining that end might be adopted, and thus of averting the ruin to which these young girls are otherwise
surely doomed.
Mr. Cooke. —l doubt, if they got any land for their support, that they would be induced to work for
any length of time ; for they are mostly very lazy, and like a wandering life.
Mr. Huon. —I think not; as from their wandering disposition and dislike to any settled occupation, they
could not be induced to remain long in one place, although they might be perfectly aware they were consulting
their own interest by so doing.
Mr. Wills. —Those best acquainted with the present habits of the remnants of Australian aboriginal
tribes are of opinion that they would not “ settle down.” If they would do so, and commence farming, gardening,
and any simple mechanical work, their reclamation would be tolerably certain. The New Zealanders afford
sufficient proof of tire correctness of this hypothesis.
Mr. Lewis. —l do not think that anything in the power of the Government to provide for the natives
would induce them to settle upon any one portion of the lands they handed over. The love of change appears
engrained into their very nature, and I have never known an instance of its successful eradication.
DIVISION II.
Physical Characters.
1. State the general stature of the people, and confirm this by some actual measurements. Measurement may be
applied to absolute height, and also to proportions, to be referred to in subsequent queries. The weight of individuals when
ascertainable, and in extreme cases, as well as the average, will be interesting. What may be the relative differences in
stature and dimensions, between males and females ?
Mr. liusden. —Questions 1 to 12 will be answered by those who have some scientific acquaintance with
anatomy.
Speaking generally, I may say that the aboriginal race, though smaller than the British, is muscular and
well made. The tribes which frequent ttie coast and large rivers where fish is abundant are of larger stature
than those which inhabit mountainous and barren districts.
Mr. Murray. —Tlie stature of the men (Colac tribe), is from 5 feet 5 inches to 5 feet 8 inches; that of the
women about 5 feet 3 inches.
Mr. Wilson. —Average height about 5 feet 6 inches, males. I have no actual measurements. The females
were considerably under the stature of the men; slender and well formed —hands and feet small.
Mr. Fisken. —Average stature, 5 feet 6 inches.
Mr. Skene. —I give you the measurement of three Portland blacks. I think they are rather under the
sizes of some tribes. Jemmy; round shoulders, 44 inches; from shoulder to palm of hand, 33 inches; leg, 32
inches; girth of thigh, above trousers, 19 inches; girth of waist, 32 inches; height, 5 feet 7) inches; age, about
25 to 30. Tommy: round shoulders, 41 inches; from shoulder to palm of hand, 31 inches; leg, 28) inches;
girth of thigh, 19 inches; waist, 30) inches; height 5 feet 6 inches; age, about 50 years. Billy; round
shoulders ; from shoulder to palm of hand, 29) inches; leg, 29 inches; girth of thigh, 20 inches ; waist,
33) inches; height, 5 feet 3 inches; age, about 25 years.
Mr. Beveridge. —The first twelve questions in this division are of an “ anatomical ” character, and
can therefore only be replied to by an anatomist.
Mr. Strutt (Echuca). —
Mr. J.M. Allan. (Villiers and Heytesbury tribes.) —Men, 5 feet 3 inches; women, 4 feet 11 inches. On
the whole, they are a pretty fairly proportioned race.
Mr. Gottreux. (Villiers.) —Average, 5 feet 8 inches.
Aborigines.— m.


Mr. Currie —1 can only state in general terms, in reference to the questions contained in this division,
that physically they (Emu Creek and Wardy Yallook) are generally well formed, particularly about the chest
and upper part of the body. The lower extremities are frequently, but not invariably, imperfectly developed.
When walking, they turn the toes in; and so marked is this, and so generally amongst the grown and aged,
that it must have been brought about by artificial means.
Mr. Burce. —A perusal of the accompanying works—“ Language of the Aborigines,” and “Australasiatic
Reminiscences,” will give information in respect to the second as well as the first division. The first work was
written from a practical knowledge of many years with the natives, and one of whom (Jemmy) has accom-
panied me in many a long expedition from the years 1841 to 1850, and who may be occasionally seen in
the streets of Melbourne, but unhappily in a state of drunken intoxication. The second work, or “ Travels,”
will meet many of the queries, more particularly from page 64 to 79. I shall be at all times happy to
assist the committee in carrying out an object so worthy ; and from my long acquaintance and intercourse
with these people, my efforts may be of some avail in ameliorating their condition. I cannot help remarking,
that all previous attempts have failed, owing to the parties engaged in the mission being destitute of the
qualifications I have already alluded to. [Some extracts from Mr. Bunce’s “ Reminiscences ” will be found
printed as Appendix F.]
2. Is there any prevailing disproportion between different parts of the body ? as for example, in the size of the head,
the deficient or excessive development of upper or lower extremities.
Mr. Wilson. —None.
Mr. Fisken. —Deficient muscular development of the lower extreraeties.
Mr. Strutt. —No. They are a well proportioned race.
Mr. Gottreux. —No.
3. What is the prevailing complexion ? This should be accurately defined, if possible, by illustrative and intelligent
example , such as by comparison with those whose color is well known. The color of the hair should he staled, and its
character, whether fine or coarse, straight, curled, or woolly. The color and character of the eyes should likewise be
described. Is there, independently of want of cleanliness, any perceptible peculiarity of odor I
Mr. Sherard. —Sun-burnt, black ; hair, black, rather coarse and wavy ; eyes, black, or dark brown
(Ballaarat).
Mr, Murray. —The complexion (Colac tribe ) is nearly black ; hair, jet black, fine, and straight ; eyes,
dark hazel. They have, independently of a want of cleanliness, a peculiar odor.
Mr. Wilson. —Hair, black, fine, and curled ; eyes, black. No remarkable odor when clean (Mitta Mitta
tribe).
Mr. Fisketi (Lai Lai). —Dark chocolate ; hair, coarse, black, and straight ; eyes, dark. No peculiarity
of odor.
Mr, Skene (Portland). —Black ; straight black hair, rather coarse. Very strong odor from grease and
filth.
Mr. Strutt (Echuca). —A dark chocolate brown, approaching to black ; hair black, rather coarse and
curling, not woolly ; black eyes ; thick nose, rather rounded ; lips rather thick, but not projecting. Several
of the natives have no peculiar odor, when well washed and clean ; others, however, in hot weather, have a
very perceptible odor.
Mr. J. M. Allan (Villiers and Heytesbury).—Tawny black ; hair jet black, coarse and curly, and very
luxuriant ; eyes black, deep sunk in the head, glance very penetrating. There is a strong natural odor.
Mr. Gottreux (Villiers). —Very dark olive brown ; hair black, glossy, coarse, and inclined to curl ; eyes
dark. There is a perceptible odor.
4. The head is so important as distinctive of race, that particular attention must be paid to it. Is it round or
elongated in either direction, and what is the shape of the face — broad, oval, lozenge-shaped, or of any other marked
form ? It will contribute to facilitate the understanding of other descriptions, to have sketches of several typical
specimens. A profile, and also a front vine should tie given. In the profile particularly notice the height and angle of
the forehead, the situation of the meatus auditorius, and the form of the posterior part of the head. It will also be
desirable to depict the external ear, so as to convey the form and proportion of its several parts. The form of the.
head may be minutely and accurately described by employing the divisions and terms introduced by craniologists, and
the corresponding development of moral and intellectual character should, in conjunction, be faithfully stated. So
much of the neck should he given with the profile as to show the setting on of the head. The advance or recession of
the chin, and the character of the lips and raise may likewise be given in profile. The front view should exhibit the
width of forehead, temples, and cheek bones, the direction of the eyes, and the width between them : the dimensions of
the mouth. When skulls can be collected or examined, it would be desirable to give a view in another direction, which
may even be done, though with less accuracy, from the living subject. It should be taken by looking down upon the
head from above, so as to give an idea of the counter of the forehead, and the width of the skull across from one
parietal protuberance to the other.
Mr. Fisken. —Head round ; face broad.
M,-. Skene. —The head is round ; face, high check bones and broad nose.
Mr. Strutt. —Some of the natives’ heads arc as well formed as the Europeans. The usual shape is rather
rounded. The face is generally round, rather broad, chin round and well formed, mouth large, teeth sound
and good. The old people have lost one or two teeth in the front of the upper jaw, apparently removed on
purpose. The younger people do not observe this custom ; they have the usual raised scars on different parts
of their bodies, chiefly on the shoulders, chest, and back, generally in parallel lines from two to three inches
long.
■ Mr, J. M. Allan. —Head long from back to front, set well on the shoulders ; broad faced, with high
cheek bones.
Mr. P. Sohier (Bourke-street, Melbourne. Answers to 4 and 5.) —
Temperament,* bilious lymphatic ; size of head, 2 ; instincts, 6 ; sympathies, 4 to 5 and 6 ; morals, 2 ;
pereeptives, 7 ; reflectives, 2 to” 1 ; greatest horizontal circumference, 20 inches ; circumference over the head
to hole of each ear, Il| inches ; circumference over the pereeptives to hole of each ear, Ilf.
Definitions. —l, or very small, means almost wholly wanting; 2, or small, feeble and inactive; 3, or
moderate, signifies rather below mediocrity ; active only in a subordinate degree, and having only a limited
influence upon the mind and character ; 4, or average, means fair or between moderate and full, and includes
* Temperaments. —There are four temperaments, or constitutional states of the body, accompanied with different degrees of activity
of the brain. The Lymphatic or phlegmatic temperament produces dulness and laziness. The Sanguine or arterial, love of physical action
with powerful passions and brilliancy. The Bilious or fibrous gives great strength and endurance. The Nervous, intense feelings, delicate
sensibilities and intellectuality. These temperaments are always combined, each existing in a greater or less degree in every individual.


the general analysis of the faculties ; 5, or full, signifies respectable, though not marked or controlling ; 6, or
large, applied to an organ, shows, that its corresponding faculty has a powerful and energetic influence upon
the capabilities and feelings, if not conduct ; 7, or very large, means predominant, especially over the less
energetic faculties—constituting and giving tone and direction to the character and talents—easily excited,
and powerful in action, and quite liable to perversion and abuse.
The sign + (plus or more), placed before or after a figure, shows that it is larger than it is marked, yot
not enough so to require the next larger figure ; the (minus or less), that is, not quite as much as it is
marked. These signs add and diminish nearly one-half of a degree.
Observations. —Tile Temperament is low. The hones of the skull generally thick and spongy. The brain
small. The perceptive and observing intellect (residing in the lobes of brain immediately between and above
the eyes) is the only region of the head which is largely developed. As they reflect and reason very little
indeed, kind nature thus endowed them with a quick and accurate perception, which, in some measure,
compensates them for their utter want of the power of learning from experience and providing for the future.
The great bar to their ever being permanently improved, lies not only in their inferior temperament, and the
■small size of their brain, but chiefly in the peculiar combination of—
Very large—“ Veneration ”
Large—“ Secretiveness ” and “Cautiousness ”
Small—“ Firmness ”
Small—“ Hope ”
Small—“ Acquisitiveness ” and “ Constructiveness ” and —
No “ Ideality ” or love for or idea of beauty and improvement, or comparative
perfection.
This general combination renders them extremely superstitious for and tenacious to old traditions and
habits, with no idea of, or rather an instinctive horror of, change and improvement—(in this feature they represent
the extreme type of the thorough conservative). It also'renders tliem rather deceitful, suspicious, slippery,
and time-servers, or dissemblers. They are comparatively quiet and inoffensive as long as their own traditions
or habits arc not attacked; then they are cruel, as moral and intellectual weakness ever will be. The sides
of the forehead offer the greatest possible contrast with the Grecian or artistic skull. Arts, manufactures,
constructive emulation, hopeful and striving, looking to a better future, and so forth, hardly exist in their
mind. Judging from the number of these skulls in my possession, and others, I should say that permanent
improvement with grown individuals, if not an impossible, is a very difficult achievement. The only possible
way of doing them good is to catch hold of the few strong points in their character, such as “veneration,”
“ love of approbation,” and the large perceptive faculties, and through these combined, act upon the defective
faculties. Thus, in skilful hands, they might be taught some dexterous and mechanical accomplishment, in
which they might take pride, and therefore pleasure. If the young children could be entirely separated from
their parents, they might, of course, be more readily and permanently acted upon ; for, I repeat, in those men,
habit is a supreme law which they blindly obey. These Interesting experiments, I feel assured, could be fairly
made only by phrenological (or craniological, I care not for names,) philosophers, and the great inferiority of
the race, combined with the small brain, will cause the whole race to be extinct before learned men, as a body,
have the moral courage, or honest common sense of taking the subject of practical phrenology in their always
august but not often unprejudiced consideration.
Affective Faculties or Feelings.
DOMESTIC PROFENS I TIES.
4. Amativeness I—lieciprocal attachment and love of the sexes.
G. F hiloprogenitiveness 2—Love of offspring, of children generally—pets, &c.
6 to 5. Adhesiveness 4 —Affection, friendship, attachment.
5 to 6. Inhabitativeness 3—Love of place, of home, of country ; tendency to dwell in one place.
sto 4. Concentrativeness 3a— Attention, concentration, continuity; tendency to dwell on one thought or
feeling.
SELFISH PROPENSITIES.
sto 6. Combativeness s —Opposiveness, courage; contradiction. Abuse —Love of fighting, of quarreling.
sto-f 6. Destructiveness 6 —lmpulse to destroy, bj r word or deed, energy. Abuse —Sarcasm, swearing,
passion, murder. The meatus auditorius is low ; thus giving a certain degree of cool cruelty.
5. Alimentativeness -\ Desire for aliment. Abuse —Gluttony—Deficiency, dyspepsia.
3. Acquisitiveness B—Desire for property of any description. Abuse —Greediness, theft.
G. Secrctiveness 7 —Tendency to conceal, prudence, caution, reserve. Abuse —Slyness, lying, cunning.
SELFISH SENTIMENTS.
6. Fear or Cautiousness 12—From timidity to terror, improperly named prudence, hut may produce it—
fear —anxiety.
6to 7. Love of Approbation 11—Of praise, of distinction. Abuse —Bashfulness, vanity, conceit.
4. Seif-esteem 10 —Self-respect, self-confidence, independence, self-complacency. Abuse —Pride, dogmatism,
arrogance, reserve, selfishness, obstinacy, sulkiness.
2. Firmness 15—Moral courage, fortitude, decision, fixedness of character. Abuse —Obstinacy.
HUMAN, MORAL, AND RELIGIOUS SENTIMENTS.
2. Conscientiousness 16 —Sense (not idea) of right and wrong, the “still small voice,” love of justice,
regard for duty.
1. 2 to 3 and 4. Hope 17 —Cheerful looking to the future, sanguine expectation, anticipation of success.
3. Wander 18—Faith, love of the wonderful, of romance, affected in vision, credulity. Abuse —Fanaticism.
7. Veneration 14 —Devotion, reverence, piety, respect for superiors. Abuse —Superstition, bigotry, idolatry.
4. Benevolence 13 —Kindness, charity, pity, amiability, sympathy. Abuse Profusion, prodigality,
softness of temper.
SEMI-INTELLECTUAL SENTIMENTS.
2. Oonstrucliveness 9 —Propensity to build, compose, contrive, mechanical ingenuity and taient.
1. Ideality 19 —Love-of the beautiful in nature and art, imagination, intellectual, sentimental, and
conception of the sublime.
3. Imitation 21—Tendency to imitate, to mimic, ability to represent, copy, describe.
2. Mirthfulness or “ Wit" 20—Sense of the ludicrous, quick perception of the ridiculous, pleasantry,
wit, fun. facetiousness.
Intellectual Faculties.
PERCEPTIVE OR OBSERVING AND KNOWING FACULTIES.
7. Individuality 22—Memory of facts, of persons, details, curiosity to see things, examine objects, power
of observation, asks what ?
6. Form 23 —Perception of outline, shape or configuration of objects.
6. Size 24 Perception of magnitude, ability to judge of length, breadth, height, depth, distance, &c.
G. Weight 25 —Sense of the resistance, and force of bodies, and of equilibrium—the centre of grai’ity.
3. Color 26 —Appreciation of colors, of their different shades, their harmony, See.
2, 3 to 4. Order 29 Perception of arrangement, desire to have things in their place.
2. Number 28 —Perception of the relation of numbers, arithmetic, calculation.
7. Locality 27—Sense of the relative position of places and objects, roving desire, memory of places.


SEMI-PERCEPTIVE FACULTIES.
4. Eventuality 30—Called by Gall the organ of educatibility, especial function, memory of events.
3. Time 31—Sense of duration, and the relative distance of time.
2. Tune 32—Sense of melody, harmony of sounds, ability to learn tunes.
3. Language 33—Articulate and inarticulate, —proper function, —memory of words.
REFLECTIVE OR REASONING ORGANS.
1 to 2. Causality 35—Which traces and connects cause and effect—asks why ? —key-stone of common-
sense.
2 to 3. Comparison 34—Which detects resemblances, differences, analogies,—power of classification and
analysis,—critical acumen.
[Photographs of the skulls of several of the native tribes, furnished by Mr. Sohier, have been lithographed,
and will be found appended to the Queries.]
5. State whether the bones of the skull are thick, thin, heavy, or light. Is it common to find the frontal
hone divided by amiddle suture or not? Note the form of the outer orbitar process, which sometimes forms part of a
broad scalene triangle, with the vertex downwards. How are the frontal sinuses developed ? Observe whether
the ossa triquetra are frequent, or otherwise; whether there be frequent separation of the upper part of the os occipitis;
the relative situation of the foramen magnum. In regard to the bones of the face, notice the position of the ossa nasi
and unguis; the former sometimes meet nearly or quite on the same plane; whilst, in others, they meet at an angle. The
former character is strongly marked in many African Skulls. /State the form of the jaw bone, shape of the chin ,
and observe the angle of the jaw, the position and character of the teeth, and their mode of wear ; and if they have any
practice of modifying their form or appearance, let this also be stated. The malar bones have already been noticed,
but they may require a more minute description.
Mr. Charles Pardoe, surgeon-dentist, Bourke-street east.—The teeth of the aborigines of Australia are
of the same structure, namely:—large crowns, thickly covered with enamel, more so than European ; the
fangs not so deeply seated in alreolar, nor does the epiphysis of maxilliary bone come as high as in European.
The gums are much thicker, which makes up this loss ; yet their lengthened durability is undoubtedly
shortened for want of this support. The accumulation of tartar is most destructive to their teeth, having
no idea of how to clean, save by reeds, &c. The many skulls I have examined and the opportunities of being
amongst them when in South Australia, prove their peculiar mode of triturium to be zig-zag, or like
herbivorous animals, grinding flatly down the surface to a nervous painfulness. The jaw to most skulls is
larger than European and comes sweeping round, producing a flat face and a wide mouth. The chin is small
and effeminate. The tribes of different parts of Australia have various modes of marking their bodies and
teeth. On Victoria side they break out one large upper incisor to give them knowledge they are ready to take
a wife ; yet in South Australia I never heard of such a procedure. They are rather vain of a good set
of teeth.
Mr. Fisken. —The frontal bone is not generally divided by a suture. Frontal sinuses largely developed.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Skull bones very thick.
6. When the opportunity can be found, observe the number of lumber vertebrae, since an additional one is said
to be common in some tribes ?
(No replies.)
7. Give the length of the sternum as compared with the ivhole trunk; and also some idea of the relative
proportion between the chest and abdomen.
(No replies.)
8. What is the character of the pelvis in both sexes, and what is the form of the foot.
Mr. Sherard. —Feet naturally small.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Pelvis narrower then in whites ; foot, small and flat.
9. The form of the scapula will also deserve attention, more especially as regards its breadth and strength ;
and the strength or weakness of the clavicle should be noticed in connection with it.
(No replies received.)
10. The internal organs and blood-vessels will with greater difficulty be subject to examination ; but it may be
well here to remark, that varieties in these may prevail locally in connection with race.
N.B—Peculiarities may exist, which cannot be anticipated in queries, but which the observer will do well to
notice amongst his answers to anatomical questions.
(No replies received.)
11. Where a district obviously possesses two or more varieties of the human race, notice the typical characters
qf each in their most distinct form, and indicate to what known groups or families they may belong: give some idea of
the proportion of each, and state the residt of their intermixture on physical and moral character. When it can be
ascertained, state how long intermixture has existed, and of which the physical characters tend to predominate. It is to
be observed, that this question does not so much refer to the numerical strength or political ascendency of any of the type,
but to the greater or less physical resemblance which the offspring may bear to the parents, and what are the characters
which they may appear to derive from each : whether there is a marked difference arising from the father or the mother
belonging to one of the types of reference to another; also whether the mixed form resulting from such intermarriage
is known to possess a permanent character , or after a certain number of generations to incline to one or other of its
component types.
Mr. Fisken. —There is only one variety.
12. Any observations connected with these intermarriages, relating to health, longevity, physical and intellectual
character, will be particularly interesting, as bringing light on a field hitherto but little systematically investigated.
Even when the people appear to be nearly or quite free from intermixture, their habits, in respect of intermarriage
within larger or smaller circles, and the corresponding physical characters of the people, will be very interesting.
Mr. Hull. —lntercourse with white men produces sterility.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They intermarry within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity, as nieces with
uncles.


Language.
13. Do the natives speak a language already known to philologists, and if so, stale what it is; and notice
whether it exhibit any dialectic peculiarities, as well as the modifications of pronunciation and accentuation which it
may offer. State also the extent to which this dialect may he used, if its limits can he a certained.
Mr. Hull. — Upon questions 13, 14, 15, 16, I refer to my remarks, &c., published in 1846 ; and Mr. Miles’s
correspondence ; also to Bunce’s Language of the Aborigines.
Mr. Rusden. — l3, 14, 15, 16.
The same roots exist in dialects which have diverged so far from the primitive language as to be quite
unintelligible to blacks of different tribes who meet one another. Great similarity pervades the dialects
spoken tor several hundred miles on the east coast of New South Wales, while the language spoken on
the table land (only eighty or ninety miles from the coast) is totally distinct from that spoken by the
coast tribe. This fact leads to the inference that the country was settled by the gradual migration of families
along the coasts, and by following the river systems upwards from their junction with the sea. Thus the
natives of Moreton Ilay can converse with tolerable ease with those of the Clarence Iliver, and of Port
Macquarie ; while those in New England (on the heads of the Nammoi and the Gwydir) though intelligible to
one another throughout a vast tract of inland country, speak a totally different language from the one
which prevails on the coast.
Mr. Parker (late assistant protector of the aborigines) has brought to notice the fact that several tribes,
speaking one dialect with variations of more or less importance, are designated collectively by means of the
word which they use for the word “ no,” just as in France the inhabitants were designated as those
of Langue d’oe. The same remarkable characteristic in classifying numerous tribes prevails throughout New
South Wales.
The use of the dual number is well known to be an attribute of the Australian languages.
The songs in use amongst the natives are usually composed of two or three short sentences, repeated
over and over with the necessary cadences and elevation of the voice so as to conform to the air.
Much difficulty is felt by persons who question the blacks about their songs, and the blacks are
set down as extremely stupid sometimes, because they cannot explain the meaning of the words of songs.
The fact is, that a popular song is carried from tribe to tribe, until it is soon transported far beyond the
range of the dialect in which it was composed.
It is then sung merely by rote, and not a word of it is understood by the singer. I once traced a song
which X knew to have been composed at a particular time near Port Stephens, and found that in the
course of about three years it had been brought down through Bathurst, Vass, the Murrumbidgee, and
the Murray, to Melbourne.
At Bathurst hardly a word would convey any meaning to the tribe residing there (and that meaning
only, because probably a Bathurst black may have mixed with members of the tribes frequenting the Hunter);
at the Murrumbidgee not one word could possibly be intelligible to the singer ; but no sooner did the
song reach the confines of each tribe (by means of corrobberees, &c.) than each man, woman, and child
committed it to memory and hummed the air on all occasions.
I need not enlarge upon the characteristics of the native language, as in Threlkeld’s Vocabulary (New
South Wales), and Mr. Parker’s Lectures, they have heen treated more fully than would be convenient hero ;
but I thought it not improper to allude to the fact I have above stated.
Mr. Beveridge. —The language spoken by the aborigines in this (Murray) district, is not known to
philologists, nor do I consider it possible to obtain a proper knowledge of it, in consequence of the multifarious
pronunciations and accentuations made use of. For example, see the negatives of the seven “ tribes,” in
reply to question lof division 1. It is a meagre language, and very limited.
Mr. Strutt. —The aborigines are stated to speak a language or a dialect not understood by the tribes on
the Murrumbidgee. It is deficient in many points, having no series for numerals, nor are there terms to
express distances. A few words have been collected, and are accented as nearly as possible to the aboriginal
pronunciation.
Man yonbeu
Woman pyabea
Dog bokka
Emu pekeromdia
Opossum ponna
Crow waagare
White cockatoo jarring
Kangaroo kyema
Duck toma
Pigeon mungoobra
Snake kona
Water wollah
Fire pitja
Tree Pyala
The Murray Tongula
The Campaspe Yakoa
The Goulburn Kyal
Head boko
Eye maa
Nose kow
Mouth worm
Teeth tirra
Tongue saleng
Chiu yaring
Beard mindering
Hand peean
Finger taypa
Finger nail [could not be ascertained]
Foot jenna
Leg towl
Knee yong
Thigh monno
Toe taypa
To swim yarrabok
To run yambok
Good thoma
Bad ahjemot
Wait a little karahah
A spear kaama
A throwing stick for the yova, or wammara
spear
Boomerang wanya
The sun yonga
Moon yongadya
The stars toota
Bain kokora
A flood tongadya wollah
Numerals.
One enea
Two petcheval
Three petcheval snea
Four petcheval petcheval
Five petcheval petcheval enea
and so on ; in fact, they appear to have hut two numerals, by combining which they express a few more
numerals. But the usual method is to show on the fingers the numbers to be expressed. High numbers are
indicated by showing the fingers of both hands several times in succession.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Not known to philologists before the discovery and settlement of New South Wales.
[Printed in the Appendices will he found a contribution on the language of the aborigines by
Mr. Thomas.]
Aborigines.— n.


14. If the language be little if at all known, endeavour to obtain a vocabulary as entensive as circumstances
will allow, and at least consisting of the numerals, the most common and important substantive (the names of moun-
tains, lakes, rivers, islands, Sfc.), the pronouns in all persons and numbers, adjectives expressive oj the commonest
qualities, and, if possible, a few verbs varied in time and person. The vocabulary should be tested by the interrogation
of different natives, and more than one person should be engaged in taking it down from their mouths, to avoid, as far
as may be, errors arising from peculiarities oj utterance or defect oj hearing. It is likewise of importance that the
system of orthography be duly indicated and strictly adhered to.
Mr. Beveridge. —Their numerals are very few, consisting merely of two, viz.:—Polight, ky up; the
former signifying two, and the latter one.
Milloo, The Murray or other large
river.
Pannoo Milloo, Small river.
Barnawar, A creek.
X’annoo Barnawar, Small creek.
Kay annie, W ater.
Koorong Kayannie, A large water or lake.
Poorp, Mountain or hill.
The pronouns are identical, whether relative to persons or things, masculine or feminine gender. Thus
“ Nunthy ” for instance, means—he, she, it, him, that, them. Other pronouns are used in the same manner.
Their adjectives are used much the same as in English, thus —“Talko” (good) is often made use of alone, the
noun being understood; the other adjectives are applied in the same manner. The verbs are very imperfect;
for example:—
Cullo yetty wirwy, I went.
Cullomitha yetty wirwy, I went a long while ago.
Yetty wirwy, I go or am going.
Daetty yetty wirwy, I will go.
Birba yetty wirwy, I will go to morrow.
Uigin birba yetty wirwy, I will go the day after
to-morrow.
Mr. J. M. Allan.—ln my opinion, there are a variety of distinct languages in New Holland.
15. lindenror to take down some piece of native composition, such as the ordinary phrases employed in conver-
sation, and any other piece of prose which may he attainable; and specimens of metrical composition, if such exist.
Though these would be of comparatively little use without translation, yet independently of this, some importance is to
he attached to the metrical compositions if they have a national character and are widely diffused; and in this case,
it might he possible to express some of their airs in musical characters. A specimen of known composition translated
into their language may also be given, such as the first chapter of Genesis, the fifteenth chapter of Luke’s Gospel, and
the Lord’s Prayer.
Mr. Beveridge. I have translated the Xiord’s Prayer as perfectly as it is possible to do into the aboriginal
language ; it is as follows—•
Gueletcho Mamook gena Tyrrilly, talko Guinma Guinigan, Guinma wery ka ky, Guinina quaiyan
Our Father living in Heaven, good Thy Name, Thy smile come here, Thy wishes
burka kimma thungy, gnooly Tyrrilly. Woga gueletcho bunimy keely quaky, qua yakna gueletcho waiknoo
be done on this earth, as in Heaven. Give us bread this day, and take away our evil
warra, gnooly gnally yakna waiknoo warra niaida, qua tinda gueletcho watty guunthy barry waiknoo warra,
deeds, as we take away evil deeds of others, and lead us not in the road (of) evil deeds,
qua yakna yethung dubimin tolkyne, guinma kirtowel kirtowel wonkeroo, janemoonyary quaky. Guay.
and take away evil thoughts altogether, You (are) thousand thousand sti-ojig, a million days. Amen.
Mr. Strutt. —No piece of native composition can at present be procured.
16. Endeavor to ascertain whether the language is extensively spoken or understood, and whether there are
different languages spoken by men having similar physical characters obviously connecting them as a race, or if
differing somewhat in this respect, inhabiting a particular geographical tract. When such groups are said to possess
different languages, endeavor as far as possible to ascertain their number, the sources whence each is derived, and the
languages to which it is allied; and also the circumstances, geographical or political, which may account for these
distinctions.
j < ... [,For further in formation connected with the investigation of languages, reference is made to a short essay on
this subject read to the Fhilological Society of London .]
Mr. Sherard. —Different languages are spoken by different tribes of the same physical character and
habits.
Mr. Beveridge.—The language spoken at one end of the district is not understood by the aborigines at
the other end; but there are one or two men in each tribe who can speak the whole of the languages in the
district, and for many miles beyond it. These men are termed “ guala watton,” which signifies “ postman.”
They can travel with impunity from one hostile tribe to another, their persons being held sacred.
Individual and Family X.ife.
17. Are there any ceremonies connected with the birth of a child? Is there any difference whether the child
be male or female ?
Mr. Hull— None. I have seen a woman suckling a puppy, her coolie having waddied the new-born
child. Yes.
Mr. Busden. —None, that I have heard of.
Mr. Shuter . —l do not know.
Mr. Croo/te.— No.
Mr. Beveridge.— There are not any ceremonies connected with the birth of children.
Mr. Strutt. —None ; except tying a small strip of opossum fur round the infant's wrists.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No ceremonies.
Mr, Godfrey. —X think not.
Mr. Goitreux. —Two births only, to my knowledge, have taken place in this neighborhood (Caramut),
during the last eight years. Children are never seen.
Mr. Cooke. —There are no ceremonies to my knowledge at the birth of a child.
Mr. Thomas. —Unless it be a male child of a chief, there is none whatever. In that case there is a
grand corrobcrey; the infant is rubbed over with emu oil or fat, afterwards a thin rubbing of (wheerup) red
ochre. The infant is held carefully in the palm of tlxc right hand, and exposed to the tribe while corroberying.
Those of less note seldom do more than rub all over the child with charcoal dust.
50


18. Does infanticide occur to any considerable extent, and if it do, to what cause is it to he referred — want
of affection, deficient subsistence , or superstition ? In the case oj twins being born, is the youngest destroyed ? Would
they have any objection to give up those, or their other children, to be nursed and educated by the whites.
Mr. Hull —With regard to the destruction of the youngest, in the case of the birth of twins, no doubt.
As to the latter part of the question,—Yes.
Mr. JRusden. —lB, 19.—Infanticide is known to have been resorted to amongst the blacks ; they have
no law or custom to forbid it ; but while their food was abundant, and their habits were simple, the blacks
allege that it was uncommon. Many of them are too affectionate to think of it for a moment in the case of
their own children. Many of them, feeling the pangs of want and hunger would readily give up their children,
when young, to be nursed and educated by the whites.
Mr. Sherard. —No. No.
Mr. Shuter. —lnfanticide occurs frequently, principally from want of affection arising from the depraved
state of the mother. They do not in general like to give up their children to the whites, although they
sometimes do so.
Mr. Wilson. —lnfanticide practised, if they have a young child not able to walk when an infant was
born. The goods, gear, and chattels were carried about by the females, and they were sufficiently burdened
with these and one child. 1 never knew of twins being born. They were very fond and affectionate and
unwilling to part with their children.
Mr. Crooke. —lnfanticide does occur, and is to be referred to causes various and immutable. Perhaps
there would not be any objection to give up their children, but they would afterward kill or take them away.
Mr. Skene. —Yes ; I believe superstition. I do not think they would give up their children in many
cases.
Mr. Beveridge. —lnfanticide is practised to a very great extent. The cause of this wicked practice is
indolence alone. I never heard of twins being born. They would decidedly object to part with any of their
children for nursing or educational purposes.
Sergeant Archibald. —The natives w'ould object to give up their children to be nursed or educated, as
they appear, generally, fond of them.
Mr. Strutt. —Yes ; some of the women have destroyed all their children. The cause appears to be owing
to the mother considering it too much trouble to rear them. Half-caste children, especially boys, are frequently
killed, from an idea that they would prove superior to the aborigines ; but at present very few infants are
born. .
Mr. J. M. Allan. —lnfanticide does not prevail. No particular objection to twins. No objection to
proper parties.
Mr. Godfrey. —Yes ; to some extent. From want of affection in some cases ; where such exists the
mother is generally found to be a thorough prostitute. Others, again, appear to be very much attached to
their offspring. I have reason to think that any deformed children are not permitted to live. They can very
rarely be induced to give up their children to the whites.
Mr. Gottreux. —My answer to 17 will apply to queries 18 to 24.
Mr. Cooke. —Infanticide does not occur at all now among them (Darlot Creek, &c.) ; on the contrary,
they are very anxious to preserve the lives of their children, and are very fond of them. I scarcely think
they would be induced to give them up to be educated.
Mr. Lewis. —lnfanticide does exist in these tribes, to avoid the trouble of rearing the children. Half-
caste infants are generally killed, though these are not a few exceptions. Twins are not frequent, and neither
infant is killed. The natives are most unwilling to give up their children.
Mr. Thomas. —It does, and that to an almost universal extent. It is not want of affection, for they
appear fond of their children ; nor want of sufficient subsistence ; nor from superstition. I never heard of
twins being born among them. They would have a decided objection to give up their children ; nothing
short of great bribery or kidnapping would procure them.
19. Are children exposed , and from what causes, whether superstition, want of subsistence, or other difficulties;
or from deformity, general infirmity, or other causes of aversion ?
Mr Hull.— No, but killed.
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Shuter. —I cannot say, but Ido not think so.
Mr. Crooke. —No.
Mr. Aitken. —Children are not exposed now, although it was formerly practised, principally from want
of subsistence, or deformity. At this time there is a greater number of young children in the Upper Goul-
burn tribe than has been known for many years.
Mr. Beveridge. —The children that are not destroyed at their birth are tended as carefully as European
children are. I never heard of or saw a deformed child.
Mr. Strutt. —No ; they would be killed instead.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Children are not exposed.
Mr. Lewis. —Infants are not exposed ; they are destroyed by strangulation.
Mr. Thomas. —Children are not particularly exposed ; are carefully wrapped in an opossum skin, and
have the free use of their limbs.
20. What is the practice as to dressing and cradling children, and are there any circumstances connected with
it calculated to modify their form ; for example, to compress the forehead, as amongst the western Americans; to flatten
the occiput , as amongst most Americans, by the flat straight hoard to which the child is attached; to occasion the
lateral distortion of the head, by allowing it to remain too long in one position on the hand of the nurse, as amongst the
inhabitants of the South Seas ?
Mr. JRusden. —20 and 21.—1 have heard of no such practices on this continent.
Mr. Shuter. —They do not seem to have an}" particular method of dressing, or otherwise caring for their
children.
Mr. Wilson. —No dress; generally carried about in a bag or net at the back of the mothers. No attempt
to modify or alter the form.
Mr. Crooke. —There is no practice as to dressing and cradling children, &c. ; also, none as to the lateral
distortion of the head, &c.
Mr. Beveridge. Their system of dressing and cradling children is very primitive indeed. When born,
they merely wash the infant and place it in a corner of its mother’s opossum rug. They do not attempt to
modify the form in any way.
Mr. Strutt. —Infants are carried by the mother in a fold of the opossum rug or blanket under the arm ;
or sometimes at their camps, rolled in a piece of opossum fur, and laid in some warm spot near the fire.
Older children are carried on their mother's backs. They do not attempt to produce any artificial deformities.


ni ' Allan. —No particular practice as to dressing: Allowed id grow as God made them.
. - "*r. Cooke. —Tlie children are allowed to grow up without any tortures being inflicted, either on their
todies or their limbs ; but when grown to puberty, both males and females make an orifice in the septum of
their nose, and insert a large piece of kangaroo bone into it, and keep it there until the wound heals. This is
done to extend their nostrils ; they also tattoo their arms and bodies.
Mr. Lewis. —lnfants are not clothed ; they are wrapped in the opossum cloak.
Mr. Thomas. —No particular practice in dressing or cradling—the only cradle is its mother’s arms. The
nose of the infant is occasionally flattened and nostrils opened, to make flat noses and wide nostrils. No
other method is used to distort the body or limbs.
21. Are there any methods adopted by which other parts of the body may be affected, such as the turning in of
the toes, as amongst the North Americans; the modification of the whole foot, as amongst the Chinese ?
Mr, Sherard. —No.
Mr. Skuter. —No.
Mr. Wilson. —None.
Mr. Fishen. —No.
Mr. Croohe. —No.
Mr. Skene. —No.
Mr. Beveridge. —No.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No methods.
Mr. Cooke. —Their feet are left entirely to nature ; they had no covering for them until the white man
came to the country.
Mr. Thomas. —None whatever ; the infant is as free as the air.
22. How are the children educated, what are they taught, and are any methods adopted to modify their character,
such as to implant courage, impatience of control, endurance of pain and privation ? or, on the contrary, submission,
and to what authorities, cowardice, artifice ?
Mr. Hull. —Endurance of pain, on being admitted to the society of men.
Mr. Busden.—22 and 23. —Fathers are fond of encouraging activity and skilfulness in their children.
To have the reputation of being the fastest runner, the best spear-thrower, boomerang-thrower, tree-climber,
&c., is the object of each boy’s ambition.
Mr. Skater. —They do not seem to be taught anything.
Mr. Crooke. —By imitating the elder ones.
Mr. Skene. —They get no instruction.
Mr, Beveridge. —The children are not educated in the slightest degree. As soon as they are able to run
about, they do just whatever they like. Their parents have not the slightest control over them. There is no
system of implanting courage, patience, endurance of pain, and privation. In fact, the whole of this poor
people are woefully deficient in everything that is good or virtuous.
Mr. Strutt. —They do not appear to receive any education whatever.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Taught the use of the simple native weapons and implements.
Mr. Godfrey. —There is no kind of education of children, except in games—the corroboree dance—or
throwing or using their offensive and defensive weapons.
Mr. Cooke. —22, 23, 24.—N0 education is implanted in the children ; but they are early taught to throw
the boomerang and spear, and as they grow up, they get very fond of marbles and cards. They come to
puberty much earlier than in Europe.
Mr. Thomas. —The children are under no regular tuition, instinct is their only schoolmaster ; are
seldom checked if in ever so great a passion; are under little, if any, submission. They are, however, under
great terror of being alone, their bugbear is wild blacks, which keeps them close following their parents.
Although under no regular tuition, they dexterously in their games learn to hurl the spear and wonguim,
corroberry, tight, See. I have seen some exact exhibitions of corroberries and fights got up by twelve or
more boys and girls.
23. Is there anything remarkable amongst the sports and amusements of children, or in their infantile songs or
tales ?
Mr. Shuter, —Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Wilson. —Throwing the spear and boomerang, and practising sham fights, singing, and the corrobery.
Mr, Skene, —No.
Mr. Beveridge. —The sports of the children are just the every day occupations of their parents in
miniature.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Nothing remarkable.
Mr. Lewis. —The children amuse themselves by throwing small spears, by throwing bomarangs, playing
with hand balls and skipping-ropes. They are expert swimmers ; and, in hot weather, are frequently in the
water,
Mr. Thomas. —Their sports and amusements all tend to prepare them for the bush and chase. They
are very quick at sound and motion, and will go accurately through a new dance or song seen but once or
twice.
24. At what age does puberty take place ? Is it earlier in the female than the male ? — and what is the
youngest age at which the female brings forth a child f
Mr. Busden. —24, 32, 33, 34 will be answered by Mr. Parker (late Assistant Protector).
Mr. Shuter. —Very early; from twelve to thirteen years old in the female, which seems to be earlier
than in the males.
Mr. Wilson. —ln females about twelve, in males fourteen or fifteen years of age.
Mr. Beveridge.— Puberty takes place in the female about the age of twelve, and in the male about the
age of fourteen. I have known a girl become a mother at twelve years of age.
Mr. Strutt. —Occasionally, in the females, at eleven or twelve years of age. They have been mothers
at thirteen or fourteen, though not generally so early.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Twelve to fourteen years.
Mr. Thomas. —Puberty, I should say, takes place at about the age of fourteen years in the females,
and seventeen years in the males. I knew a chief’s daughter, who could not hare been more than a few
months over fourteen years, have an infant.
**********


32. Is chastity cultivated, or is it remarkably deficient, and are there any classes amongst the people of either
sex by whom it is remarkably cultivated, or the reverse, either generally or on particular occasions ?
Mr. Sherard. —Not cultivated, and rather deficient.
Mr. Shuter. —Chastity is remarkably deficient.
Mr. Murray. —Chastity is remarkably deficient.
Mr. Wilson. —Yes ; young females remained in the same gunyah or camp with their parents, till given
away in marriage. The young men had their own gunyah or camp.
Mr. Crooke. —Not as regards whites. Otherwise, yes.
Mr. Aithen. —Chastity is deficient amongst the females.
Mr. Skene. —In many cases, not.
Mr. Beveridge. —Chastity is altogether unknown.
Mr. Strutt. —No. Still less regard has been paid to this quality since the whites have settled in the
district.
Mr. J. M. Allan.—Remarkably deficient.
Mr. Godfrey. —Chastity is remarkably deficient. No classes.
Mr. Currie. —Chastity is remarkably deficient.
Mr. Cooke. —Chastity certainly is not cultivated amongst them, and I consider they have been greatly
demoralized since the white man came amongst them.
Mr. Thomas. —Chastity is, to a certain extent cultivated, especially among females, who are closely
watched by their parents till given in marriage ; till that period male and female are compelled to wear an
apron, which is made of the thongs of an opossum skin.
33. Are there any superstitions connected with this subject ?
Mr. Shuter. —I do not think so.
Mr. Beveridge. —No.
Mr. Thomas. —There is a certain superstition or custom called “ Euletbeeoorung ” —when certain females
dare not behold the faces of certain males, nor certain males behold the faces of certain females. Thus, if a
black betroths his daughter in childhood to another, the daughter’s mother must not behold the face of her
future son-in-law, nor the son-in-law the face of the mother-in-law, till they are married, when that restraint
is removed.
34. What are the ceremonies and practices connected with marriage ?
Mr. Hull. —Coolie catches his lubra as he best can.
Mr. Shuter. —I do not know what ceremonies there are ; but I think it doubtful whether there are any.
Mr. Wilson. —A young female arriving at the age of puberty was given away in marriage to some old
or elderly man of a neighboring or friendly tribe. Young men get wives in various ways ; viz.—by arrange-
ment, a bargaining with another young man who was tired of his wife. By picking a quarrel with one who
had a wife ; they fought and the conqueror carried off the prize. Sometimes a plot was laid by two or more
young men who attacked the camp of another, who had several wives ; they seized and carried off one by
force. They had no marriage ceremony so far as I know, but I observed some disgusting practices.
Mr. Crooke. —None.
Mr. Aitken.— The men exchange their female relatives for wives, so that he who has the greater number
obtains most wives.
Mr. Beveridge. —There are no ceremonies connected with marriage.
Mr. Strutt. —Mutual consent appears to bo all that is necessary at present.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Generally a gift of the parents, frequently a theft.
Mr. Godfrey. —The bride elect is taken by force from another tribe, carried into the bush, and if resisting,
beaten into submission, when she is subjected to the embraces of her “ cooly ” first, and after him, some of
his young friends in succession.
Mr. Cooke. —I believe that there are some ceremonies and practices performed before marriage ; but I
am not aware of what they arc.
Mr. Thomas. —If ever there was a marked difference between the civilized and the savage, it is in the
marriage ceremony. The -wedding day of the civilized is joy and mirth ; not so with the aborigines. To the
bride it is a day of grief and pain, and to the bridegroom a day of battle. To be brief, the females have no
voice in the matter ; the males engross the privilege of disposing of the females ; mother nor daughter has any
power. So tenacious are the males of this prerogative, that if the father be dead the brother has the power; if
no brother, the uncle, and so on. The result of this unnatural course is, that a girl of fourteen years of age
is often given to a man of sixty. The girl is brought forth by the father, who has a spear in one hand, and a
tomahawk in the other ; holding down her head, yabbering and crying, is forced to her intended husband to
whom she is given. She shows reluctance, a blow from the father is given ; the girl screams, the mother’s yell
is next heard. A second blow is given, and the girl is dragged by the husband to his miam ; she resists, the
husband gives a blow. At this stage of the ceremony a cabal is in the encampment, wonguims flying about
from some young men who perhaps had been in treaty for her or had been promised her. The husband rushes
from his miam to see who arc his rivals ; a general fight ensues, and very often the husband gets a spear
wound. The old men, who alone can quell a disturbance, take the command. During this cabal the young
girl may be seen going back to her mother, but is soon dragged by her arms, or the hair of her head, by her
father, to the husband’s miam again ; and after a few more blows, or if she is determined, the father will spear
her in her leg to prevent her going away. Thus the poor creature is at last subdued, and often, after all,
makes a very domestic wife or slave.
35. Is polygamy permitted and practised, and to what extent ?— ls there respect paid to consanguinity, and to
what extent ?
Mr. Busden. —Polygamy is practised : it is permitted to any extent; but Ido not remember an instance
of any man having more than three wives.
Hunting for food for a large family is felt to be an irksome duty ; and though a man able to fight for
his wives is proud of having them, he does not like to have too much trouble in procuring food for them and
their children. There are distinctions of families, which are respected in the making of marriages, almost
like those of caste. Parents affiance their children when quite young, and it would be, as it always has been,
utterly hopeless to attempt to prevent the marriage of a betrothed girl, if she were near her tribe, at the age
of puberty, so long as she or her affianced lover retain any knowledge of and respect for their national
language and customs. The whole tribe would be indignant at any abandonment of the native customs, and
while the tribe exists in any numbers it will compel obedience.
Mr. Sherard. —Permitted to any extent.
Mr. Shuter. —Polygamy is permitted and practised, but I think only in the case of the king or head
of the tribe.
Mr. Murray. —Polygamy is permitted.
Aborigines.— o.


Mr. "Wilson, Poly gamy practised and permitted. I never heard of one man having more than three
(3) wives, but more frequently only two.
Mr. Fisken. —Yes.
Mr. Crooke. —Yes ; that of prowess to take, and ability to maintain.
Mr. Aitken. —Polygamy is permitted and practised. I know of one man having four wives ; the others
have either one or two.
Air. Skene. —Yes ; some of the chiefs will have three lubras.
Mr. Beveridge. —Polygamy is usual. Three is the greatest number of wives I have ever known one
man to have, but that number is frequent. In taking wives they pay great attention to consanguinity. They
carry this so far, that they will not even take a cousin for a wife. This respect to relationship is not displayed,
I am sorry to say, in their sexual intercourse; in fact, in this commerce they are little above the brute creation.
Mr. Strutt. —Polygamy is permitted, though most of the blacks have but one wife. Respect is paid to
consanguinity ; but it is difficult to say to what extent—probably to first cousins.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —To any extent, consistent with the supply of opossums and kangaroos.
Mr. Godfrey. —Yes. I have known three “ lubras ”to one “ cooly,” frequently two. The married men
being too lazy to work, are supported by the traffic of their lubras in illicit intercourse with the whites—
shepherds, diggers, and laborers generally."
Mr. Cooke. —Polygamy was very frequent amongst them, but now very few of the men have more than
one wife, as the deaths have been more numerous amongst the females than males.
Mr. Lewis. —Polygamy is permitted, but is not frequent There is great respect paid to consanguinity;
marriage with a cousin is not permitted; and not between two individuals born in the same tribe.
Mr. Thomas. —Polygamy is permitted to any extent. I have known some old men to have five wives,
and often two or three. They are more particular than civilized; not only avoiding their own blood, but do
not mingle in the blood of their own tribe; but like European, royal blood marry from other countries.
36. Is divorce tolerated, or frequent?
Mr. Rusden. —Separation is frequent. Members of neighboring tribes frequently carry off women by
force They are not always reclaimed by their husbands ; and when regained, are sometimes given away to
a friend.
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Shuter. —l do not know.
Mr. Crooke. —Yes.
Mr. Aitken. —Divorce is tolerated.
Mr. Skene. —Yes.
Mr. Beveridge.— Divorce is altogether unknown, unless in this way ; —if the father or brother of a wife
have a disagreement (as is often the case) with the husband, they will take the wife away, even after she
may have had a child ; but they have to make restitution by returning the woman that the father or brother
had received in exchange. Wives are always got by exchange ; and a man not having a sister, cousin, or
ward to exchange for a wife, must needs remain a bachelor ; and if a man have two or three sisters, he, of
course, will get a like number of wives.
Mr. Strutt. —Divorce seldom occurs.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No form of divorce ; but the thing itself frequently takes place.
Mr. Godfrey. —Divorce is frequent ; a mutual exchange of wives too, not unfrequent.
Mr. Cooke. —l know of no divorce among them, but males from the different tribes frequently take
away women from others.
Mr. Lewis. —The natives sometimes give their wives away to other men.
Mr. Thomas. —Divorce is not tolerated ; if it takes place, it is by elopement. I, however, knew an
instance of divorce agreed upon by the two tribes, the Goulburn and the Yarra. Two influential blacks,
well known to the settlers on the Goulburn and the Yarra, had both been promised a fine young lubra,
named Eliza. These expectants were—Billy Hamilton, a knowing black of the Goulburn tribe, and
Gillibrand, of equal fame, of the Yarra tribe. The girl’s father (of the Devil’s River tribe) gave the girl to
Billy Hamilton. Whenever the tribes met at Melbourne she eloped to Gillibrand. but was as often recaptured.
Thus, for two years, was continued fighting. The poor girl, between love for Gillibrand, and spearing and
tomahawking, was oft near killed. At length it was agreed, if the Yarra and Western Port tribes would meet
the other tribes on the Goulburn, to settle the affair by single combat in the presence of the five tribes. I
accompanied the Melbourne tribes, who met the other tribes, on a beautiful rise, near Colonel Whyte’s
station, on Sandy Creek. They fought desperately; Gillibrand was acknowledged the conqueror. Grand
corrobereys for nights followed, and Gillibrand brought back his treasure, who had in due time a child like him.
37. How are the widows treated ?
Mr. Rusden. —They become wives, if not old ; and if old, they follow the tribe in its wanderings,
receiving food from some particular family to which they belong by blood relationship.
Mr. Sherard. —Treated well.
Mr. Shuter. —Widows are not ill-treated, so far as I am aware.
Mr. Wilson. —Widows kindly treated, and consigned to the especial care of some one.
Mr. Crooke. —Taken possession of by the first comer.
Mr. Aitken. —A widow is given to the nearest kinsman of the deceased husband, often with compulsion.
Mr. Beveridge. —When a woman becomes a widow, she falls back again to the guardianship of her
father or brother, as the case may be ; and he exchanges her again for a wife, the first convenient
opportunity.
Mr. Strutt. —Widows frequently marry again.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Given to husbands as soon as possible.
Mr. Godfrey. —Old widows are treated with some consideration by their own kin ; but young widows
principally support themselves and a few of their family by prostitution.
Mr. Cooke. —Widows are generally well taken care of.
Mr. Lewis. —Widows frequently re-marry in their husband’s tribe.
Mr. Thomas. —Very kindly.
38. What is the prevailing food of the people ? Is it chiefly animal or vegetable, and whence is it derived in
the two kingdoms ? Do they trust to what the bounty of nature provides, or have they means of modifying or controlling
production , either in the cultivation of vegetables, or the rearing of animals ? Describe their modes of cooking, and
state the kind of condiment that may be employed. Do they reject any kinds of aliment from scruple or an idea of
uncleanness? Have they in use any kind of fermented or other exhilarating liquor, and, if so, how it is obtained?
What number of meals do they makef and what their capacity for temporary or sustained 1 exertion ? Is the possession
of fire-arms attended with good or evil, and should they be restrained the use of them ? Should the fire-arms in their
possession be registered ?
Mr. Rusden. —The “prevailing food” is animal. Vegetable food fit for man’s use does not abound in
Australia. There is no cultivation of vegetables, nor are animals domesticated to be used for food.


The different animals are not allowed to be oaten indiscriminately by the young blacks. As boys
advance in years, they are allowed to partake of animals of one kind after another, until no food is forbidden.
Mr. Sherard. —Both. They trust considerably to the bounty of nature. Baking and boiling. In some
parts of the country they contrive a fermented liquor from the cones of the honeysuckle. Their capacity for
both kinds of exertion is very great.
Mr. Shuter. —They are fond of opossums, which they partiaily roast when about to eat them. They
do not object to any kind of food, with the exception of pork. They prefer the food that gives them the least
trouble in acquiring.
Mr. Murray. —The prevailing food was, originally, chiefly animal, for which they trusted entirely to
nature for supply. They now use bread largely, and other vegetable food. Their mode of cooking is,
invariably, roasting in the ashes. No condiment used. No fermented liquor of their own manufacture in use.
Their meals are very irregular. Their capacity for sustained exertion lias always been considerable. The
possession of fire-arms is now necessary to them to obtain food in their altered mode of life. It might be
useful to register them.
Mr. Wilson. —The men subsisted chiefly on opossums, &c., fish, and emeu, roasted in the ashes. The
women shared the same fare. Sometimes the men went ofi' on expeditions, leaving the women and children
behind, often under the care of an old man. On these occasions they subsisted on roots, grass tree, grubs, &c.
The principal meal was in the evening, after they returned from hunting, but they ate at any time when
tempted by hunger. The men could undergo great fatigue on extraordinary occasions, but not sustained.
Better without fire-arms.
Mr. Fisken. —Hoots and animal production. They trust to natural productions for subsistence. They
make no fermented liquor.
Mr. Crooke. —They have no means of modifying or controlling production, either in cultivation of
vegetables, or rearing of animals. They use gum leaves as a condiment. They have no kind of fermented
liquor. They have no number of meals, but eat as they please. They possess great capacity for exertion.
They should be restrained in the use of fire-arms, and registry would be of no use. Everything that the chase
in the bush affords, and also roots and herbs, fish and fowl. All the blacks frequenting the Snowy Mountains
use a moth or fly called a “ booyong,” which seems to swarm on the face of bare rocks after the snow has molted
off them in the spring. They spread their cloaks under them, and smoke them down. Large quantities of
food are thus procured, and it is easily had ; it is very nutritious, and the blacks seem in better condition
at that season, if they have been booyonging, than at any other time; They scorch the booyongs before using.
Mr. Aitken. —When they cannot get bread and meat, which they much prefer, they live principally
upon the flesh of the opossum and kangaroo.
Mr. Skene. —Kangaroo, opossums, bandicoots, and a root called “ mooranong.” They are now too lazy to
look after these, and depend on what mutton, tea, sugar (which they are very fond of), and flour they can
get or buy from the settlers, with the money they get for their labor. They use no means for producing.
Fire-arms may be given now.
Mr. Beveridge. —For the prevailing food, see reply to question 4, Division I. They cook their food by
means of red-hot bricks, placed over the bottom and round the sides of a hole dug for the purpose. Over the
bricks they place damp grass, and then lay the food in, strewing damp grass over it ; upon which they place
more hot bricks ; then they cover the whole up with clay. It is a very first-rate way of preparing food. They
use for food everything having life. They have no fermented or other exhilarating drinks. They cat morning
and night. Their capacity for lengthened physical exertion is very small. Fire-arms are of very great
benefit to them, in facilitating the procuring of game. Ido not think the registration of their fire-arms
would be of any service.
Mr. Strutt. —The natives depend principally on the whites for their food. They eat everything, except
bacon and ham, which they do not much like. Their own dietary is principally animal, consisting of fish,
wild fowls, pigeons, parrots, opossum, kangaroo rats, and kangaroo, wild turkey, and emu, when obtainable;
but the three latter are now seldom seen and are difficult to catch. They also eat snakes, shell-fish from the
Murray, large white grubs about four or five inches in length, and generally whatever they can catch. Their
vegetable food consists of a small root about the size of a turnip radish, which they find on the plains; but
they are fond of flour, potatoes, and other vegetables. They have no method of cultivation, nor of rearing
animals. Their cookery is simply by broiling on the fire ; though occasionally they will boil a piece of beef or
vegetables in the tinned vessels they procure from the Europeans. They have no vessels of native construction
capable of resisting fire. They have no condiments. They are very fond of spirits, which they procure
clandestinely from the whites. They have no regular number of meals, but eat when they have the oppor-
tunity ; principally, however, in the morning and evening. But few have fire-arms, generally used for
shooting wild fowl. No inconvenience arises from their use in this district.
Mr. ./. M. Allan. —Botli animal and vegetable, ehielly the former. They do entirely. None whatever.
They cat everything they can get. No condiment. One continuous meal from morning till night. Unregistered
fire-arms may be allowed. The native dress is kangaroo or opossum skin. They do not tattoo, but cut
themselves round the chest and back. They paint to express grief or rage.
Mr. Godfrey. —Their food was formerly both animal and vegetable ; they now purchase flour, tea,
sugar, and meat from whites. They only eat opossum when they cannot get beef or mutton ; they say now
“it too much burn belly.” They will not eat pig, as making them sick. They never attempted cultivation
of vegetables, or rearing of animals.' They have no stated number or times for meals, trusting to what, by
chance, they can pick up. I think they possess a power of endurance without food longer than whites ; but
not any capacity or inclination for sustained exertion. I think the possession of fire-arms is undesirable ; it
emboldens them to attack a lone'traveller in any solitary spot, or near the. Mallee, and to threaten, by display
of a gun, the timid hat keeper into giving them food. I have good reason to know the latter has been effected,
and am sure fire-arms are more desired by them as objects of terror and weapons of death to hostile tribes,
than for any purposes of killing game. If supplied with food by the Government, there would be no reasonable
excuse for their possession of guns.
Mr, Gottreux. —Their food is chiefly animal, when procured by themselves ; but they are continually
obtaining meat, flour, tea, sugar, and vegetables from the settlers ; without which supplies, they could not live.
They neither produce nor cultivate ; nor do they roar any animal. They roast meat over a fire made on the
ground. They reject no kind of aliment. They make no fermented or other liquor. Their meals are irregular.
Fire-arms are useful to them, and attended with no danger.
Mr. Currie. —Food—animal and vegetable ; principally the former. They trust wholly to what the
bounty of nature provides. The only description of animal food in use I have known them reject, is pork;
they seem to have an instinctive distaste to it. The possession of fire-arms enables them now to get their food
more easily, and, I think, is therefore attended with good.
Mr. Cooke. —Their food is both animal and vegetable ; they are too idle to cultivate for themselves, and
the animals that they feed on are much more numerous than when the white man first came into the country.
They put the smaller animal into the fire, just as it is caught, without drawing out the entrails, or even skinning
it. They have no regular time for their meals, but seem to be always eating and sleeping, except when they
are out hunting. They have some fire-arms, bat they do no mischief with them ; there would be no occasion
to have them registered.
Mr. Lewis.- —The food of the tribes in this district is chiefly fish, wild fowl, and eggs; roots and
vegetables are little used. Opossums are chiefly sought for their skins. The natives receive frequent
supplies of food from the whites. Their drink is water.
55


Mr. Thomas. —Animal and vegetable, both, were in abundance before white people came among them
and long after I came. Both have diminished through enclosures, &c.; but the aborigines have diminished in
a greater ratio. They trust to the bounty of a Providence they do not appreciate. All are indigenous, animal
and vegetable. They do not rear animals for consumption, nor cultivate vegetables. Cooking is either baking
or roasting. They have no indigenous herb to procure exhilarating liquor; if so, have never sought it. Simple
water was ever their beverage, till white man introduced cursed rum, which has caused double their number
to die by the visitation of the devil, to those who die by the visitation of God. They seldom take more than
two regular meals in the day, breakfast and supper ; but I have often known them take a scanty feed in the
middle of the day, and even in the night, if they awoke. Pire-arms have not been attended with any mischief
as personal property, nor should they be debarred from possessing them; in fact, a gun is a black’s livelihood!
As for danger (when an attempt was made by the Council, twenty years back, in Sydney, to prohibit the
aborigines having fire-arms, Sir George Gipps said, «I would rather meet a black in the bush with a <mn
than a spear ”), I newer knew any harm to arise from their possession. The native police, however (using
them officially and under orders), have lamentably thinned their race in Port Phillip and Gipps Land through
their possession of them.
39. Describe the kind of dress worn by the people, and the material employed in its formation. What are the
differences in the usages of the sexes in this respect ? Are there special dresses used for great occasions ? and, if so,
describe these, and their modes of ornament. Does any mode of tattooing, piercing, or otherwise modifying the person
for the sake of ornament, prevail amongst the people f N.D. Such modifications not to be blended with other modifi-
cations used as signs of mourning, Sfc.
Mr. Hull. —The adoption of European clothes is a sign of degradation. There are special dresses and
modes of ornament for great occasions, such as corroborees, &c. They daub clay on their foreheads.
Mr. Rusden. —Skins of opossums, flying squirrels, &c., neatly stitched together, were the only dress or
clothing worn by the blacks when the whites arrived. Belts of fur, neatly twisted into a sort of twine, and
wound round the body many times, are worn by the men, with tassels : a netted band is often worn round
the temples. The body is scarred so as to produce ridges and seams, by way of ornament.
Mr. Shuter They are fond of European clothing, when they can obtain it; but, in the absence of it,
they are contented with a blanket.
Mr. Murray. —The dress now worn is that of the European. Formerly it consisted of a mantle of skins.
On great occasions the mantle was discarded, and the body painted. Thy pierce the nostrils, raise ridges in'
parallel lines on the breast and arms, by lacerating with a flint or shell.
Mr. Wilson. —The opossum cloak, and the blanket got from white people. The males wore a necklace
formed of small pieces of reed strung like beads, and a girdle round the loins, having a tassel in front, of
strips of skins. This was always worn at the corroberry ; and on these occasions they were fancifully painted
with white chalk or clay. Occasionally they wore feathers in the hair. The females wore a necklace similar
to that worn by the men. A band or bracelet of opossum or other hair bound tight round the upper part of
the arm ; and, a bone stuck through the nose. Also an opossum cloak similar to that worn by the men.
Both sexes were tatooed on the breast, shoulders, and arms. After a death or murder, they painted red, and
plastered their heads with clay. The women cut and maimed themselves on the death of a husband or relation.
Mr. Fisken. —A blanket of opossum skins is used by both sexes. Tatooing does not now prevail.
Mr. Croolte. —Skins. The difference in the usages of the sexes is trifling. A mode of tatooing prevails.
Mr. Skene. —Their original dress was a kangaroo rug, sewed together with the sinews of the tail. No
difference between sexes. They tattoo for ornament.
Mr. Beveridge. —The males and females dress exactly alike. The dress is made of skins. They have
no holiday attire for special occasions. They raise large oblong lumps, equidistant across the back and round
the arms, and across the chest, by way of ornament. They also pierce the centre cartilage of the nose, through
which they place a small reed, by way of ornament.
Sergeant Archibald. —l have noticed one instance of an old woman with a hole through the septum of
the nose ; also a young man with several parallel lines of scars on both sides of the chest, and on the front
of both thighs.
Mr. Strutt. —Both sexes wear an opossum cloak or a blanket. Sometimes they wear European clothing,
and sometimes they are naked, especially in the evening by their camp fires. They have a hole pierced through'
the cartilage of the nose, and long scars raised in regular rows above the skin on the shoulders, arms, and breast.
Mr. Godfrey. —Opossum rugs, blankets, and the cast-off clothes of whites, more especially shirts. There
is a mode of tatooing pursued on the bosoms and upper part of the arms of women, and on the chests,
shoulders, and arms of the men. ,
Mr. Gottreux. —The usual dress is, for both sexes, a blanket or opossum rug, worn and fastened over the
shoulders. They will gladly wear any cast-off clothes that may be given to them. No tatooing is practised.
Mr. Currie. —Their dress is a rug, formed of opossum or kangaroo skins, held together by threads made
from the inner bark of the stringy bark.
Mr. Cooke. —Their dresses consisted formerly of rugs formed from the skins of opossums, sewed together
with the sinews of animals. Their ornaments were generally the teeth of kangaroos, strung together, and
fastened round their necks and wrists ; and also emu feathers.
Mr. Thomas. —Their dresses are all from manufacture of the bush, with teeth and shells, feathers, &c.,
for the head dress, all from nature. There are special dresses for particular occasions. When females dance
in a corroberree, (which is rare and only to please a chief or some great one of another tribe), they wear (after
being rubbed over with emu oil and red ochre), a fine apron made of emu feathers. They dance perfectly
naked, save the apron, which goes all round the waist. The motion and sound of the leader is maintained in
a wonderful manner by the flapping of the female breasts, which are much larger and more flabby than white
females. Tatooing, or incision, is used for an ornament on the females and males; on the females it is slightly
raised on the shoulders, breasts, and arms ; on the males very large on the back, arms, and breasts ; the males
deep and wide, thus— 0 00000 0 and sometimes in form of stars, thus— . This is done by a
bone or flint lancet, cutting the length, depth, and device intended ; then the doctor opens the flesh, and for
some time spirts water in the wound ; opened again next day; not suffered to close. When expanded as
they wish, then suffered to heal, which causes the ridges.
40. Have the people any prevailing characteristic or remarkable modes of amusement, such as dances and
games exhibiting agility, strength, or skill f
Mr. Rusden. —The corrobberee, or native dance, is the most remarkable mode of amusement in vogue
amongst the aborigines ; and as it is an exercise requiring great muscular activity, there are various degrees
of excellence attained in it.
Mr. Sherard. —Yes ; many.


Mr. Shuter. —At a corroboree they paint their faces and bodies, and dance. They are also very skilful
at throwing the boomerang and the spear.
Mr. Murray. —Their only amusement or game is the corroberee, or war-dance.
Mr. Wilson. —The corroberry, throwing the spear and the boomerang, and feasting with the Nulla
Nulla.
Mr. Fisken. —They dance a corroberee religiously, martially, and for amusement.
Mr. Aitken. —Their principal amusements are dancing a corroberee and singing.
Mr. Skene. —A dance they call “ corrobra.”
Mr. Beveridge. —They excel in wrestling. Oftentimes 150 or 200 will come together for that purpose.
Their dances are just so many grotesque jumps, and not worthy the name dances.
Mr. Strutt. —The corroboree, a kind of native dance, of various feats of agility. There are several
varieties of the corroboree, but they are all performed at evening, by their camp fires. The men are the
active performers, painted and decorated with white, or white and red. The women beat time with sticks,
or on their opossum rugs tightly folded, and accompany the time with a song in chorus.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Yes.
Mr. Godfrey. —Their corroboree, which is a war or love dance, as the case may be ; throwing the
boomerang, whit-whit, &c., are practised by them.
Mr. Gottreux. —4o & 41. They have no games of any kind.
Mr. Cooker —They have a peculiar dance amongst them, in which the men only participate, being
entirely naked, and their bodies, arms, legs, &c., painted in all sorts of grotesque ways, in chalk or pipe-clay,
in order that it may show more in the dark night, being only dimly lit up by fire. The women perform the
musical part by striking two sticks together, which they beat together in admirable time.
Mr. Thomas. —They have games which, while they act as amusements, are well adapted to strengthen
and give agility to the frame.
41. Are games of chance known to the people , and is there a strong passion for them ?
Mr. Rusden. —l have heard of no games of chance among them ; but they soon learn games at cards
from the whites.
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Shuter. —l do not think so.
Mr. Murray. —They have no games of chance.
Mr, Wilson. —None.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. Crooke. —There were no games of chance till the whites came; now there is a strong passion for
them.
Mr. Skene. —l do not think they are known.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have not any games of chance.
Mr. Strutt. —Games of chance appear to be unknown.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No.
Mr. Godfrey. —No.
Mr. Cooke. —The only game of chance they have is cards, which, of course, they have learned from the
whites.
Mr. Thomas. —Gaines of chance were never played among them. I have, however, for the last four
years observed that they understand cards. The Gipps Land blacks are great players. I have seen them
deal out a pack of cards, pronounce trumps, separate their trumps, and go'accurately through the game, and
play for sticks of tobacco.
42. Do the people appear to be long or short-lived? If any cases of extreme old age can be ascertained, please
to state them. Such cases may sometimes be successfully ascertained by reference to known events , as the previous
visits of Europeans to the country. Is there a marked difference between the sexes in respect to longevity ?
Mr. Busden. —I have no data to enable me to speak definitely. It was difficult to glean sufficient
facts as to the past, when the country was first colonized ; and since that period the extraneous causes which
have produced death have taken away all chance of ascertaining the normal condition of the race.
Mr. Sherard. —Short-lived.
Mr. Shuter . —They are a short-lived race. Ido not think there is any difference in the longevity of
the sexes.
Mr. Murray. —They do not appear to be long-lived.
Mr. Wilson .- —No data upon which to form an opinion. I have seen a greater number of aged men
than women. This arose from the practice of deserting females when infirm and not able to follow the tribe,
while the old men were cared for and carried about.
Mr. Crooke. — Short, from exposure. There is no difference between the sexes in respect to longevity.
Mr. Skene. —l do not think they live long. Lubras seem very short-lived.
Mr. Beveridge.—They are a very short-lived people, being old and grey at about twenty-five or thirty.
Very few of the women live to more than that age.
Mr. Strutt. —lt is difficult to ascertain the age of the aborigines, as they cannot say how old they are.
Some few of the men are grey-headed. The oldest (Echuca tribe) appears to be about seventy years. Scarcely
any women are to be seen of advanced age.
Mr. JM. Allan. —Short-lived. Oldest native I have known, between forty and fifty. No difference.
Mr. Godfrey. —Short-lived. A black, I should say, very rarely reached fifty years.
Mr. Gottreux. —The people appear to be short-lived. No cases of old age known in this neighborhood.
The oldest black can hardly be more than fifty.
Mr. Thomas. — Generally not so long lived as Europeans. I have, however, seen many aged aborigines,
and have invariably observed that they have been very corpulent, and of extra stature ; especially one of the
Moogolurabeek tribe, who must have been eighty or ninety years of age. He was the fattest man I ever saw,
black or white ; his face was regularly wrinkled, like a pleated shirt, from his bald head to his eyebrows, and
his furrowed in like manner ; he had nevertheless a full show of teeth. The blacks of all the tribes
idolized him. There were seven tribes at that time in the Government paddock. In the morning at day-
break might be seen in a crescent form, thirty or more old blacks, in five or more semi-circles before him, in
profound silence, while he gave them advice or instructions. Near 900 blacks were present in the Government
paddock (where the Lunatic Asylum now is) at that time. I never knew an extra-lived female.
Aborigines.— p.


43. What is the general treatment of the sick ? Are they cared for or neglected? Are any diseases dreaded
us contagious, and how are such treated ? Is there any medical treatment adopted ? Are there any superstitions or
magical practices connected with the treatment of the sick? What are the most prevailing forms of disease, whence
derived, and to what extent? Is there any endemic affection, such as goitre,pelagra, plica, or the like ? With what
circumstances, situations, habits do they appear to be connected, and to what are they referred by the people themselves ?
Mr. Rusden .—The sick are kindly treated in general. Illness is often believed to have been caused by
the evil eye of an enemy ; and a power to cure is also believed to reside in certain individuals ot a tribe. I
think the quack himself is a believer in the efficacy of his cures, which are attempted with great seriousness ;
and are not (in some cases) very different from the phenomena of electro-biology.
The loss of an eye is not uncommon on the flat country near the Murray, Murrumbidgee, and Lachlan,
and may be attributed to the heat, I imagine. I have heard of no other endemic scourge.
Small pox, many years ago, carried off* large numbers of the natives : that disease was of course
imported.
Mr. Sherard. —Cared for—they have their own medical men. Yes. Venereal and consumption.
Mr. Shuter. —The sick are not altogether neglected, though by no means well attended to.
Mr. Murray. —The sick are well cared for. There are no diseases dreaded as infectious. They formerly
used herbs as medicine, and bleeding ; but now invariably seek assistance in sickness from our medical men.
Mr. Wilson. —The women watch over the sick. The crodgie (doctor or priest) pronounces some spell
to break the influence of the Evil Eye. They cover over wounds and bruises with a plaster of leaves. I
have seen a wound on the head covered with green leaves and plastered over with clay ; and a broken arm set
with splints.
Mr. Fisken. —Yes. There is a medical treatment. There are superstitions. There is no endemic.
Mr. Crooke. —The sick are neglected generally.
Mr. Aitkin. —They are kind to their sick and aged. They are superstitious, and imagine that they
cure diseases by charms.
Mr. Beveridge. —The sick are very carefully attended. They do not believe that any diseases are
infectious, therefore have no fear that way. They make hot baths for fever and rheumatic patients, upon the
same principle as their ovens, and very effectual they are. They blame the hostile tribes, in every instance,
for making them ill.
Mr. Strutt. —The sick are attended by their relatives as well as their circumstances will permit, by
nursing, supplying with food, &c. Medicines are usually procured from the Europeans. If a medical prac-
titioner be near, they apply for his advice. Some of the blacks have the reputation of being “ doctors ” but
they seem to be useless, and do but little for the sick, except, perhaps, in wounds or injuries from their
native weapons. The natives do not seem liable to any peculiar disease ; they suffer principally from
disorders of the chest and other complaints arising from exposure.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Eevers, by steaming ; rheumatism, by lacerating the part ; cutaneous diseases, treated
with two sticks ; fractures, by splints ; wounds, by cauterizing ; snake-bite by sucking and bleeding. There
is a variety of superstitious practices. Influenza, causing inflammation of the lungs. Many also have died
from the venereal disease. They have also a disease much similar to the itch, which they call “ werrynitch.”
Many die from it. No.
Mr. Godfrey. —lf young, the sick are much cared for : if very old, they generally appear left quietly to
die. There are very great superstitions and magical practices connected with the treatment of their sick.
The “doctor” (so styled) of the tribe, is the oldest imposter in it. Venereal is certainly the most prevailing
disease. They possess some very strange methods of curing their sick occasionally.
Mr. Gottreux. —The sick are taken care of by their relatives or friends. No medical treatment adopted.
Rheumatisms, coughs, and affections of the chest are the most prevailing forms of disease. There is no
endemic affection.
Mr. Currie. —lnstances have come under my observation where the sick have been carried on a sort of
litter formed of branches, from one camping place to another, —a distance of probably eight or ten miles ; and
this day after day.
Mr. Thomas. —The sick are treated kindly, not neglected ; though I have seen lamentable deviation from
this, but know the cause. I have known their sick to be left, their relatives weeping and cutting their heads,
yet nevertheless leaving them. I have known them to leave their dead unburied ; but these unnatural
instances I attribute to a pre-arranged movement of the tribe, which births, deaths, nor any other incident can
alter. On the other hand I have known husbands to attend their wives so assiduously, and wives their
husbands, as only to leave to procure necessaries ; and two instances have come under my notice where the
survivors refused food and died shortly after. The doctors have remedies for certain diseases. Enction,
blowing or mesmerism, and incantation, in dangerous cases, is resorted to. Their diseases are generally
constipation of the bowels, and pulmonary. They have the endemic influenza; and, by traditions handed down,
have had ravaging plagues, which they attribute to an imaginary animal called “ Myndye.” I do not understand
“ pelagra, plica.”—Medical gentlemen can answer this portion of query.
44. Where there are inferior animals associated with man, do they exhibit any corresponding liability to, or
exemption from disease ?
Mr. Rusden. —44 and 45 will be answered by scientific respondents.
Mr. Beveridge. —No.
Mr. Strutt.— The aborigines are generally followed by a number of half-starved curs, which are the only
animals they possess. These dogs are in a most pitiable condition from starvation, mange, and skin diseases.
A healthy dog is not to be seen.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —In the case of the werrynitch, it is, I think, taken from the dog.
Mr. Thomas. —There is a kind of leprosy or itch called “ bubburum,” which blacks, more or less, have
ever upon them. I scarce ever knew one above twelve years of age but was affected with it. All animals—dogs,
cats, and even opossums, if kept by the blacks as pets, are soon affected with it; the animals lose all their hair,
even to become bareskin.
45. Does entozoaprevail, and of what kind?
Mr. Murray.- Entozoa does not exist.
Mr. Strutt. —They do not appear to prevail.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They have entozoa.
Mr. Thomas. Ido not understand the term “ entozoa.”—Refer to medical men.
46. What is the method adopted for the disposal of the dead ? Is it generally adhered to, or subject to variation ?
Mr. Hull. —Various.
Mr. Lane. —I have been informed that formerly it was the custom of the natives to expose their dead in
trees ; now, however, they bury them a few inches, placing a pole to mark the spot.


Mr. Rusden.— It varies throughout the continent. Interment is most common, I believe ; but, in some
districts, the body is placed athwart boughs of a tree flattened to receive it ; in others, the body is -wrapped up
and concealed in a hollow tree.
Mr. Sherard. —Buried in a stooping position.
Mr. Shuter. —They dispose of their dead by interment, and generally fence the grave or hole round with
saplings, which they fix into the ground in a cross position.
Mr. Murray. —The method of disposing of the dead has always been by burial, the legs being fastened
with cords, so that the knees are under the chin.
ilfr. Wilson. —lnterred in a sitting posture, the earth filled in and covered over, rather heaped up with
pieces of bark and dead timber.
Mr. Fisken. —lnterment.
Mr. Crooke. —Some tribes bury ; some put up into trees.
Mr. Skene. —Sometimes they burn them; sometimes bury; and sometimes put them in hollow trees.
Mr. Beveridge. —They wrap their dead up in the clothes that belonged to and were usually worn by the
deceased, and place them in a grave four or five feet deep. If a man of note in the tribe, they build a hut over
the grave ; if a person of no note, or a woman, they merely place a few pieces of bark over the grave. Each
grave is placed in the centre of a diamond-shaped piece of ground, which the relatives of the deceased sweep
and make neat from time to time, for about two years; after that time, they are allowed to grow up with grass
and weeds, and in the course of a few years the very locality is forgotten.
Mr. Strutt. —ln this neighborhood (Echuca) the dead are buried in graves, sunk to a depth of four or
five feet, and undermined on one side sufficiently to receive the corpse. The grave is then filled up with earth,
covered with a piece of bark, and surrounded with a rough fence of boughs. When a black is killed by
another tribe, his body is frequently deposited in a water-hole, or in the bed of a stream, to elude detection.
With this object, the body is prevented from rising to the surface, either by driving a spear through it into
the bottom, or by placing it under a heavj' log of timber.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They dispose of the dead in four ways, viz.—by incremation ; by burial in the earth ;
by eating them ; by placing them on the top of cherry trees.
Mr. Godfrey. —The dead infant I have known to be carried about by a fond mother for many weeks,
adding wrap over wrap to stifle the increase of putrid odor, until the infant bundle of rottenness and ragged
covering has assumed such an unmanageable size, that the mother is reluctantly compelled to bury it, —this is,
however, rare. The older dead are buried in their opossum rugs, or blankets, and everything belonging to them;
and have, of later years, been treated to a rough sort of enclosure like a fence (adopted from us, of course).
The surface of the earth within this enclosure is well swept, and a fire lighted at the grave, whenever any near
relatives re-visit the spot. Sundry sheets of bark are placed in lieu of a tomb, to prevent, I think, dogs from
getting at the dead. They never mention, or like to hear mentioned, the name of the departed ; but will say,
pointing to the spot, “ that one poor fellow,” or, “ my brother,” &c.
Mr. Gottreu.v. —The dead body is placed in the fork of a tree for two or three weeks or more, and is then
buried —the natives of the tribe being mostly all assembled.
Mr. Currie. —The general method of disposing of the dead is, by putting the body in the cleft of a tree,
where they allow it to remain until the process of decomposition has left the bones clean. These are then taken
down and put into the ground, and frequently a small heap of stones raised above them.
Mr. Cooke. —They in general cover up their dead in old miamies, hollow trees; and sometimes expose them
in the open air or honeysuckle trees, the top branches of which have been previously broken off, and laid
flat, so as the body could lie upon it ; and now, they bury their dead, coming always for a spade to dig the ground.
Their belief formerly was that, when they are dead, after some time, they would “jump up white man ” ; but I
do not know if at present they have that idea. They believe in an evil spirit, which they call “ Weering,” and
are very much frightened when they think he is coming, and run away for protection. They have no
buildings, but temporary break-winds, constructed of bark, grass, limbs of trees, and sods of earth, which they
generally make to a round form, with the opening nearly always towards the east. Their dwellings are
mostly scattered about, but always within a short distance of each other. They have no monuments or mounds
for the dead. Animals they have none, but dogs, which they have procured from the European ; which they
are very fond of, but keep so many, that they are mostly miserable mangy looking creatures. I know of no
laws amongst them, except that it was prohibited to any but old men and chiefs to eat the emu egg ; any that
transgressed this law was immediately put to death. The number of natives has diminished at least to one-
fourth the number they were when I came into the colony twenty years ago.
Mr. Thomas. —The five tribes who frequented the early settlement invariably interred their dead. A
tribe between Mount Macedon and the Loddon used to entomb infants and young children in the hollow of
trees. The bodies are carefully interred, and all property owned by the defunct is emptied into the tomb.
The Gipps Land blacks mangle their dead, cutting off their hands, lower jaw, &c., burying only the bowels and
offal, —hands, &c. cured and retained as sacred relic. (See my “ Burial of Dead.”)
47. Are any implements, articles of clothing, or food, deposited with the dead? In cases of murder , does
concealment of the crime take place ? Is it from intimidation, or from other cause ?
Mr. Hull. —Usually revenge or atonement.
Mr. Rusden. —47, 48. All implements the property of a warrior were interred with his body by the
Hunter Elver tribes ; indeed every inanimate piece of property he had possessed. More care was taken to
attend to this rite in proportion to the general affection entertained by the tribe for the deceased. Great
show of grief, passionate exclamations, cutting of the head with tomahawks were resorted to also. The name
of a dead person is never mentioned after his decease; and when a white man carelessly or recklessly has spoken
of a dead man by name, I have seen several blacks hang their heads sorrowfully, while one of their number
would remonstrate, if they had any respect for the speaker: otherwise, they would endeavor to turn the
conversation. There was no subsequent visitation, amongst the tribes with whose customs I was familiar, in
which interment of the dead was practised. Murder, in our sense of the word, could not take place amongst the
blacks. Open quarrelling resulting in death merely subjected the victor to the open revenge of the friends of the
deceased ; whose duty it was to obtain satisfaction, either by killing the offender or by making him undergo
the ordeal of being speared at in front of the tribe.
49. There are no definite ideas as to a future state. The vague apprehensions about some evil powers
extant amongst the blacks appear to be the floating rack of nearly worn-out traditions, gradually dwindling from
the theory which was once complete, until the traditions, like the language, are so broken up and modified that
the original texture cannot be discovered.
Mr. Sherard. —The war implements are buried with them, and food left for future expected con-
sumption.
Mr. Shuter. —l understand that implements and clothing are deposited with the dead.
Mr. Fisken. —War implements and clothing of the deceased are interred with him.
Mr. Crooke. —Yes.
Mr. Beveridge. —All the clothes and implements belonging to a person who dies are buried with him.
I never knew a case of murder to be concealed.


Mr. Strutt. —Generally, every article the .deceased possessed is buried with the corpse in the grave. In
cases of murder, the body is concealed as stated above (No. 4G.), to avoid detection and the retaliation which
would certainly be attempted by the friends of the murdered person.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They bury the clothes, or dispose of them by shoving them up the trunks of trees.
They seldom conceal the murders they commit, looking upon them as bold and gallant actions. Concealment
is sometimes attempted for fear of consequences.
Mr. Godfrey. —Murder is kept very-quiet, and is rarely committed inter se, except under the influence
of drink. Two cases of this painful nature have lately occurred in the tribe (Lower Loddon), where a husband
killed his wife, and a young man his friend and companion. Murders are more frequently committed by them
on hostile tribes, in order to equalize the fighting number of each. If a youth die a natural death, the earth
plastered on the head as mourning is not washed off until some unoffending black has been slain by them.
From fear of the law, they conceal the deed now, where formerly the hands and other parts of victims were
■worn and carried about openly, a token of retribution; and lam sure, from human bones I have dug out of
their so-called ovens, evidently subjected once to fire, that they used to cook and eat their foes in whole or in
part. A blackfellow owned to me the old lubras used to do so; but refuted such a charge now. The kidney fat,
however, is at this present time taken and eaten by the young men of this tribe from a slaughtered foe. I
have been given a full account of the process. They imagine that a charm exists in this unctuous morceau,
and that they thereby get a large share of the strength of the dead one infused into their system.
Mr. Gottreux. —Nothing is deposited with the dead.
Mr. Lewis. —The clothes of the deceased are placed in the grave round the body. Some bodies are
consumed by fire.
Mr. Thomas. —All implements, clothing, and all that belongs to the dead are consigned to the tomb. I
have known money to be consigned in like manner. I think it is from intimidation; as the greatest search and
inquiry are made, before the earth is put in, to know if anything else can be found belonging to him.
48. Is there any subsequent visitation of the dead? whether they are disposed of separately or in conjunction
with other bodies ?
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Shuter.— They frequently visit the graves of the departed.
Mr. Wilson. —l do not think the graves of the dead were ever visited. The name of the dead was never
pronounced. The place where any died, or where a murder took place, was deserted.
Mr. Crooke. —No.
Mr. Skene. —They are generally buried where they die.
Mr. Strutt. —The dead are placed in separate graves, but near each other, and within the same fence,
if the tribe happened to be near such a place when the death occurred. If at a considerable distance, a
fresh grave would be made. The locality generally selected in this neighborhood (Echuca) is the top of a
sandy hillock.. The grave is subsequently visited by the friends of the deceased, to examine whether any
snake has passed over it. Should a snake-track be discovered, an expedition is undertaken in the direction in
which the snake has passed ; and it is considered necessary to kill a person of the tribe in that quarter.
In fact, this superstitious propensity to homicide is frequently shown when one of the tribe dies; but the
reason for so doing is not known, at least by Europeans. The victims are selected by preference amongst those
aborigines who live under the protection of the whites, as when employed on a station. An attempt was
made a few months ago, without any assignable cause, by two blacks to kill one of their countrymen, who was
living on a station near Echuca as a stockman. Fortunately the attempt failed, owing to the unexpected
presence of the owner of the station ; but it was judged expedient to send the black stockman to a distance, to
prevent similar attacks. The aborigines, therefore, are always in some degree apprehensive of being attacked,
especially at night ; and an alarm of “ wild blackfellows ” having been seen in the neighborhood puts them
at once on the qui vine. Eor this reason friendly blacks always cooey on approaching a camp, to give due
notice of their coming,
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They visit the graves of their departed friends, to lament over them ; and in
case of murder, to endeavor by a barbarous and superstitious practice to obtain traces of the murderers.
They bury separately.
Mr. Godfrey. —Graves are visited and a low moaning or howling kept up from time to time. They are
disposed of separately.
Mr. Lewis. — The graves are revisited for a short time after burial, in order to see whether they
have been disturbed by dogs.
Mr. Thomas. —There is a diurnal visitation to the dead and fire kept up, never quite out during
the time.
49. What is the received idea respecting a future state ? Does this bear the character of transmigration ,
invisible existence about their future haunts , or removal to a distant abode ?
Mr. Hull. —Transmigration and removal.
Mr. Shuter. —Being altogether ignorant of their language, I cannot tell. It appears to me to bear the
character of transmigration.
Mr. Murray. —During twenty years’ knowledge of the aborigines, I never could discover that they had
any original idea of a future state. They have received various notions from Europeans ; the one most fixed
is, that they will return to the world white men.,
Mr. Wilson. —They believed in transmigration.
Mr. Fisken. —They believe they go to Tasmania and return white men.
Mr. Aitken. —Their idea of a future state has the character of transmigration.
Mr. Skene. —They say “ Come hack like white man,” and in some instances have claimed relationship
with Englishmen.
Mr. Beveridge. —They imagine, when they die, that they become birds or beasts, and inhabit the same
localities that they did when human beings.
Mr. Strutt. —They appear to believe in a future state ; but I have not been able to ascertain their exact
views on this subject.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They believe in it, conceiving that, after death, they are changed into a white man,
and live again on earth.
Mr. Godfrey. —No idea at all. They used to think, when we first took up the country and came
amongst them, that, from our knowledge of it, we must have been there as blacks ; and I was even told
my former name and cause of death (a fish bone having stuck in my throat !). They, however, seem to know
it is not so now, and appear quite incredulous or mystified, when spoken to about a future state.
Mr. Gottreux. —They seem to have no idea of a future state.
Mr. Currie. —l doubt if they have any defined idea of a future state. They have an idea of punishment,
or rather fear of an evil spirit ; but I have never been able to ascertain that they had any idea of reward,
or of a good spirit.


Mr. Lewis. —There is no idea of a future state entertained in this tribe (Panggarang).
Mr. Thomas. —They have an idea of a future state ; think they will be happy ; and that there is a world
above, with all the requisites for subsistence without trouble or chasing. They have a notion of transmigration.
Some stars, they affirm, were once black fellows on this earth.
BUILDINGS AND MONUMENTS.
50. T That are the kinds of habitation in use among the people ? Are they permanent or fixed? Do they consist of a
single apartment or several ? Are the dwellings collected into villages or towns, or are they scattered, and nearly or quite
single? If the former, describe any arrangement of them into streets or otherwise which may be employed.
Mr. Hull. —Miserable mi-mis.
Mr. Eusden. —I know of no buildings other than boughs of trees and sheets of bark, propped up
so as to afford shelter.
Mr. Sherard. —Temporary, being primitive and scattered.
Mr. Shuter. —Sheets of bark supported by sticks and sometimes thatched with grass or boughs usually
form their habitations, which are never fixed. They are called mia mia, and are collected into villages.
Mr. Murray. —The only habitation ever erected is merely a breakwind of boughs, one for each family,
used perhaps for a week.
Mr. Wilson. —Sheets of bark stuck up to shelter them from the weather, open at one side, irregularly
grouped; the young men’s gunyah a little distance apart from the married people.
Mr. Fisken. —Miamias of bark and boughs. They are not permanent.
Mr. Crooke. —Plying camps that they shift on to clean ground frequently, if not travelling. One
apartment.
Mr. Skene. —A few sheets of bark stuck up for a few nights, called mia mias.
Mr. Beveridge. —Their huts are merely sheds thrown up (on the windward side) of bark, if the weather
be wet; and of boughs only, if fine. One might call an assemblage of these huts a village; but they are
thrown up without reference to order, and according to the whim of the intending occupant.
Mr. Strutt. —In summer they have merely a few boughs arranged in a semicircular form, with the
convex side towards the wind, and a fire is lighted to leeward. This construction is about two feet high,
and eight or nine feet in diameter. Generally, one of these semicircles accommodates one family. If the
weather be rainy, they strip off some sheets of bark, which they prop up with sticks, in a similar shape,
hut higher. When completed it resembles half a cone, four or five feet high, with the convex side towards the
weather. The aborigines have no permanent buildings of any kind, and are constantly shifting about, seldom
remaining longer than three or four days in the same spot.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Mimis, or properly speaking, warns, are oven-shaped structures about four feet high,
composed of sticks, thatched with grass, and covered with sods. They reside, seldom longer than four days at
a time, in these.
.1/r. Godfrey. —A shelter from wind and rain, composed of bark stripped off adjacent trees, and boughs.
This building, however, is only used during one visit; they invariably choose a fresh spot and materials on a
future occasion, fearing, 1 think, the insects and vermin that are apt to collect under old rubbish or bark ; but
this is only my own surmise. The young men form a sort of crescent shaped protection from the weather,
of boughs, and sit apart from the married; but have owned to me occasional clandestine trips in the dark
to the mimis of the married women.
Mr. Gottreux. —A kind of low hut of circular shape, made of branches, and generally covered with sods
of earth, open on the side opposite to that on which the prevailing wind blows. These huts are not
permanent—consist of one apartment only, and are not collected to the number of more than four or five.
Mr. Thomas. —They are frail, but well adapted for their purpose, as an erratic race ; they shift them
often from day to day to the forest before them. I have seen in half an hour a village comfortably housed,
from the bounty of Providence in the forest around. A few sheets of bark with a sapling, and two forked
sticks make at once an habitation; the sheets of bark six or seven feet long, laid obliquely to the angle of about
ninety degrees. Every alternate sheet of bark is reversed, so that no rain can enter; foliage and pieces of bark
enclose the sides and top. Their raiams are rudely formed, and are made according to the proportion
of their families, and formerly held two adults and three or four children. These habitations are not
permanent; are knocked down or burnt on breaking up of the encampment. They contain one apartment
only. A large encampment is divided into hamlets of six or eight miams each ; an influential black
has charge of each hamlet. In a large encampment when most of the tribe are present, there may be
five or more hamlets. The miams are not more than three or four yards apart, but one hamlet from
another is not less than forty or fifty yards ; but this depends much upon the lay of country. The head
of each hamlet keeps order; in fact as a magistrate, settles all quarrels ; but invariably the chief of the
tribe governs and directs all their diurnal moves. I should have stated that, in wet weather, they, with
a tomahawk, make a.trench round their miams to keep off the rain.
51. Have any monuments been raised by the present inhabitants or their predecessors, and more especially such as
relate to religion or war ? State their character, materials, and construction. If they are still in use amongst the people,
state their object, even if they should be of the simplest construction, and be little more than mounds or tumuli. If these
monuments arena longer in use, collect, as far as possible, the ideas and traditions of the natives regarding them ; and, if
possible, have them examined by excavation or otherwise, taking care to deface, and disturb them as little as possible.
Mr. Hull. —Refer to Captain Grey’s work, to my pamphlet, and to Miles’s papers.
Mr. Eusden. —(sl and 52). I know of nothing like monuments.
Mr. Sherard. —No.
Mr. Murray. —No monuments of any kind exist.
Mr. Fisken. —No.
Mr. Crooke. —None.
Mr. Beveridge. —There have not been any monuments raised in commemoration of any given thing.
Mr. Strutt. —There are no monuments of any kind in this neighborhood. The graves mentioned above,
in reply to question 46, appear to be the only memorials of the aborigines ; unless some large heaps of ashes,
burnt earth and hones, be considered as such. These heaps are to be seen in different parts of the country,
near permanent water. They are three or four feet high, and from ten to fifteen feet in diameter. These heaps
arc the result of long-continued cooking operations of the aborigines, and are known as “ Native Ovens.” In
one near the Campaspe, a human skull, with a severe fracture on the forehead, was found at a depth of about
three feet.
Mr. J. If. Allan.— No monuments whatever.
Mr. Godfrey. —None relating to religion or war.
Mr. Gottreux. —No monuments.
Aborigines.— q.


Mr. Currie. —Tn this neighborhood, (Emu Creek and Wardy there are some remarkable
mounds, eight in number, and in close proximity to each other. The largest is about twenty feet in height,
and some hundreds of feet in circumference. The_soil of which they are composed is entirely different from
the soil around them, and has apparently been produced by an accumulation of ashes. There is no timber or
rather fuel now, nor apparently has there been at any former period within some miles of them. The present
race of aborigines, so far as I have been able to ascertain, are not acquainted with their use, and they have
certainly shown no habits in the mode of cooking or in religious rites since the whites became acquainted with
them, that could lead to the formation of such mounds. From this I infer that they have been formed by a
race possessing different habits from the present, and who, from the size of the mounds, must have been very
much more numerous.
Mr. Thomas. —They have devices on trees where some great calamity has transpired, but no monumental
erections. On Mr. McMillan’s estate, at Little Brighton, was a large gum tree, having carved on the trunk
for a yard or two high, a host of blacks lying prostrate as dead. Near this spot, in 1833-4, the Gipps
Land blacks at midnight stole upon the Western Port or Coast tribe and made sad havoc, killing sixty or
seventy of them. The spot was named Worrowen, or, a place of sorrow. The tree mentioned, lam sorry to
say, was shattered by lightning many years back. Although they have no monuments, they have occasionally
religious or commemorating corroberries, when are introduced devices, painted on large sheets of bark,
representing what has occasioned the corroberry, or commemorating some tradition. My esteemed friend,
Mr. Hull, of Melbourne, J.P., in his pamphlet published in 1846, gives some specimens of devices found in
. a cave. Near the junction of the Kiver Plenty with the Yarra, were for ten nights continued corroberries, all
commemorating religious or traditionary events, when huge and strange figures were placed and borne in the
corroberries. I have seen many since then, but have not the materials. I was anxious to preserve those of the
Plenty, but while in Melbourne, one day, parties came with two drays and took the huge sheets of bark away
for roofing purposes. I may here remark, that they do not seem to hold them with much veneration after
their dances are over, as they do not seem to preserve them, or take pains to destroy them.
52. In these researches, he on the look-out for the remains of the skeletons of man or other animals; and, if
discovered, let them be preserved for comparison with those still in existence,
Mr. Godfrey.— Mounds exist of ashes, which have been used for a long period as ovens, in which I have
fbund thigh and arm bones of human beings, and skulls also.
Mr, Thomas. —l know where are many bodies of the aborigines, buried from time to time, especially at a
spot in Brighton; twelve at least are buried there. But though often importuned by medical gentlemen,
I never would gratify them, that the bones of the poor aborigines might slumber as secure as the whites.
WORKS OF ART.
53. Let works of art, in metal, bone, or other materials, be likewise sought and preserved, and their similarity to
or difference from implements at present in use amongst the people of the district, or elsewhere, be noted.
Mr. Rusden. —s3, 54.—N0 artificers existed amongst the blacks I have known, except with regard to the
construction of warlike or hunting weapons, or implements. The boomerang is an implement well known
to every one who has heard of Australia ; but it is not sufficiently well known that the formation of the
boomerang is effected with much care, and that according to the bendings given to each end of the boomerang,
irrespective of the elliptic curve of the wood, so is the weapon successfully made, or otherwise. The war
boomerang is a much heavier implement than the one which is thrown into the air as a plaything; and a
massive war boomerang, instead of being made to return through the air to the thrower, is made so as
to bound violently straight onward with sufficient force to break a man’s arm at a long distance from
the thrower. The boomerang is made much more skilfully by some tribes than by others.
The spear throwing stick is also an ingeniously contrived implement, by means of which a black
can throw a light spear more than two hundred yards.
The stone tomahawk was an implement which a black occupied much time in fashioning, and which,
when he had made it. he highly prized.
Mr. Croohe. —No.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have no works of art, unless such as consist in the fashioning the implements used
in war, or in the chase ; and these implements are common to all the aborigines of "Australia.
Mr. Strutt. —The only works of art which the aborigines produce, are their spears, boomerangs, shields,
waddies, and similar weapons ; fur rugs, bags, and fishing nets. The weapons are made of various kinds
of hard wood. The fur rugs are made of opossum skins, sewn together, and decorated with various devices, on
the inside, in black and red. The skins are prepared by being stretched on a piece of bark, and slowly dried
by the fire. The bags and nets are very well made, of the outer fibre of a sort of rush ; but European twine is
used instead, when procurable. The aborigines have no idea, nor any tools, for working in metal, bone, or
other materials.
Mr. J. M. Allan. — Stone tomahawk (mumgill), -wooden spear (toolawarn), boomerang (lidilidi), waddy
(murchwararong), and other instruments. They used a sharp edged split reed for cutting their food. The
dual of the spear was made formerly with a splint of flint, -which they also use for cutting up and skinning
kangaroo or koonie.
Mr. Goltreux. —s3, 54. —No works of art.
Mr. Thomas. —Their weapons are their principal works of art, which are much below the New
Zealanders or natives of the South Seas ; but are, nevertheless, all that is requisite for them, but they do
not represent much extra work. In fact, the natives of New Holland generally appear to give themselves little
or no trouble beyond mere necessity. They however have some ingenuity in working of bones for lancets and
other purposes. Their baskets and net work also are not inferior to savage nations. From conversation with
a gentleman, lately from Port Curtis, he states that their miams and war implements are as near as can
be similar to the Port Phillip tribes, and show no greater ingenuity.
54. When a people display their ingenuity by the extent or variety of their works of art, it will not only
be desirable to describe what these are, but also the materials of ivhich they are constructed, the mode in which these
materials are obtained, the preparation which they undergo when any is required, and the instruments by which they
are ivrought. Such particulars will not only throw light on the character and origin of the people, but will, directly
or indirectly, influence the commercial relations which may be profitably entered into when commerce alone is
looked to. When colonization is contemplated, the facts contained in the replies to these queries will point out the
mutual advantages which might he obtained by preserving, instead of annihilating, the aboriginal population.
Mr. Hull. —Many years ago I obtained from a youth a beam upon which he was dressing an opossum
skin, exactly as furriers do to this day in Europe.
Mr. Sherard. —They have dogs for hunting.


Mr. Shufer. —They are skilful at making baskets from rushes and net work for catching fish. These
are rather works of utility than art.
Mr. Fisken. —Hude carvings are made upon war Implements and rugs.
Mr. Thomas. —The materials which they use are all from the forest ; their implements of war and use
are made from different trees. Their broad shields, which are used to ward off distant spears, are made
from bark only ; which, when formed, is forced into a certain curved shape by the action of fire, viz: a fire is
made coned to the shape intended, when the bark pared to one-eighth or a quarter thick is laid upon it,
hot ashes and a mound of sods at the top, with stones here and there kept in a certain shape all night. Their
baskets are made from a flag called “ brab,” which is with the nail split like straws. Their nets and net
works are from string made from the opossum and other small animals’ furs. The opossum rug or cloak,
when I came first among them, was much ornamented with rude representations of rivers, creeks, ranges,
animals, &c., &e., scratched on the skin by a muscle shell made sharp. Their skins are well cured, and sown,
different to females’ sewing, with the sinews of a kangaroo’s tail.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS. »
Are there any domestic animals in the possession of the people? Of what species are they? Whence do they
appear to have been derived, and tojvhat variety do they belong ? Have they degenerated or become otherwise modified ?
To what uses are they applied ?
Mr. Rusden. —Only the dog was domesticated. The native dog is more like the common dog in China
than any other kind of dog I have met with.
Mr. Shuter. —They are generally accompanied by the common domestic dog.
Mr. Wilson. —The dingo.
Mr. Crooke. —Dogs, native and crosses with European. They have degenerated by starvation, as they
keep too many, never killing pups. They arc used for hunting.
Mr. Beveridge. —The only domestic animal they have is the aboriginal dog, which they find young in
the bush. They use them for the procuring of game.
Mr. Strutt. —The aborigines have a considerable number of mongrel curs, of different kinds, originally
obtained from the Europeans ; but greatly deteriorated, as already stated in reply to question 44.
Mr. ./. M. Allan. —Dogs. Before the advent of the whites, they had domesticated the purnong, or
native dog, of New Holland, which they used for hunting.
Mr. Godfrey. —They are very fond of dogs, and usually have a large number of the starved, mangy-
mongrels about them, keeping them warm by nestling with them under the shelter of the bark gunya. They
were originally of the species of dingo, or wild dog of the country; but now, are a cross of every sort of
animal imported by us, sadly degenerated, and kept avowedly for the purpose of hunting kangaroo rats,
bandicoots, wallaby, &c., which, from their meagre condition, they rarely succeed in doing, The blackfellow
himself does the work by finding the poor animal in a hollow log, or stump of a burnt tree, and pulling it out
by the tail, when a blow against the stump kills it.
Mr. Gottreux. —The women alone seem to have a liking for dogs, of which they have usually a large
number of a very degenerate and mongrel breed.
Mr. Thomas. —When I first came among them, they had a few native dogs, but of no service to them,
and soon dispensed with them on getting European dogs. They are good trainers of dogs; train them to a
quick scent. They will stop at a tree where an opossum is up, and are so trained, that if they seize an animal
they will not injure the fur; if they do, they are severely beat. There is one strange feature, although so
wretchedly kept, if an European’s favorite dog but one night sleeps in a black encampment, it will do all it can
to get back to them.
GOVERNMENT AND LAWS.
55. What is the form of government ? Hoes it assume a monarchial or democratic character, or does it rest with
the priests ?
Mr. Jiusden. —A chief was looked up to as a sort of king in the tribe, whose customs I was acquainted
with. He had no defined authority, nor could he originate any fresh laws or customs, nor even issue mandates,
except with the view to carry out existing laws, or preserve old customs. He was a sort of president of the
tribe, the whole body* of which could be collected to pronounce an opinion, if need be; though only the men
of mature years or noted intelligence ever interfered or were consulted on any emergency.
Mr. Shuter. —The questions (55 to 67) are not applicable to the aborigines of this district (Bacchus
Marsh).
Mr. Murray.— Their form of government, if anything, is monarchial. They have no priests.
Mr. Wilson. —The aborigines always show great reluctance to give any information about their laws
or customs. Patriarchal. They acknowledge a chief; how elected, 1 cannot say. Probably the greatest
warrior became chief, as the young men fought for the championship. Their chuncils were held at night.
The different tribes had their own hunting ground. When several tribes were assembled they were all
subject to the control of the chief of the district, who appeared to direct their movements, the period of their
sojourn, and the place of encampments. No tribe, not even a single blackfellow, could visit the hunting
ground of another tribe without permission, or approach the place where they were encamped. When a
stranger, or messenger, from another tribe arrived, he always sat down at some distance with his back turned
towards the camp ; a fire-stick was sent to him ; a few words or brief sentences were spoken : bye and bye
he drew near and joined them at the camp. When hostile tribes wished to be reconciled, a gift in the shape
of some trifling present was sent, and the tribe who received it was invited to meet at the hunting ground of the
party who made the advance. The only men privileged were the crodgie (doctor or priest) who might travel
and visit wherever they pleased, and frequent the camp of other tribes. ( Vide answer to 84.) They strangled
certain victims. The instrument used was a small piece of wood with a cord and noose attached. They stole
up behind, passed the cord round the neck, and tightened it till they produced strangulation ; the stick
pressed against the back part of the neck. 1 have seen the instrument, and its use was explained to me as
above.
Mr. Fisken. —Democratic.
Mr. Crooke. — Democratic. No priests.
Mr. Aitken. — Their government, if any, would appear to be patriarchal.
Mr. Skene. —Monarchial.
Mr. Beveridge. —Democratic.
Mr. Strutt. —Hardly any government can be said to exist ; but what little there is may be termed
democratic. On important occasions the whole tribe is assembled at a given locality, and the discussion of
the matter in question takes place in a general council. When once a course of action is determined, all the
members of the tribe are expected to observe it. On these occasions care is taken to convene all the tribe.
Messengers, therefore, are sent by those on the spot to the absent members. A messenger will travel fifty
miles to apprise a single individual of the meeting about to be held. A stick, notched and marked in a
particular manner, is the messenger’s credential.


Mr. J. M. Allan —None whatever.
Mr. Oottreux.—&s to 67. No government or laws, apparently, of any kind.
Mr. Thomas. —Their government is patriarchal They have, however, a chief to each tribe. Priests,
doctors, enchanters, dreamers, warriors, and councillors form a kind of aristocracy; the aristocracy, however,
is no burden to the community—all, from the chief downward, ply for their daily food. Their chief governs;
priests, doctors, enchanters, dreamers, warriors, and councillors serve the community, without even the least
burden to the state. The only remuneration they get is after their death, viz., extra lamentations and
sacrifice.
56. Are the chiefs, whether of limited or absolute power, elective or hereditary f
Mr. Rusden. —The chieftainship was hereditary ; but incompetency to lead or guide would without
doubt lead to a speedy change in the headship.
Mr. Murray.—The chiefs are hereditary.
Mr. Crooke. —No chiefs.
Mr. Skene. —Hereditary.
Mr. Beveridge —The power of the chiefs is very limited. The chieftainship goes by seniority; i.e., the
oldest man in the tribe is generally chief. .
Mr. Strutt. —The aborigines are reported to have chiefs, but of very limited authority. The old men
have the principal influence; but, under ordinary circumstances, every man does as he thinks proper. The
women, as amongst other barbarous people, are entirely subject to the men.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —The greatest murderer is the greatest among the tribe, which is the only approach to
chieftaincy known. Particular individuals had particular hunting and fishing grounds, but no power over
the rest of the tribe.
Mr. Godfrey. —There is a so-called chief, I think, hereditary ; but not always devolving on the eldest
son, if there be more than one. The former chief of the Lower Loddon, old “ Jerribung,” seemed to have more
authority and weight amongst the tribe, in the early days of settlement, than his son or sons now possess,
for they have degenerated into nobbier drinkers. Their old father knew not of spirit.
Mr. Thomas.— Chiefs are not hereditary—elected.
67. Is there any division of clans or castes ?
Mr. Rusden. —There were family distinctions somewhat similar to that of caste.
Mr. Sherard. —They are divided into tribes.
Mr. Murray. —No division of clans or castes.
Mr. Crooke. —None.
Mr. Beveridge. —There are neither clans nor castes.
Mr. Strutt. —The tribe may be considered as a sort of clan; but there are no castes.
Mr. J. M. Allan.—By tribes and families, which are kept distinct by the fear and enmity they entertain
for each other.
Mr. Godfrey. —Questions from 57 to 67 do not seem to apply to so low a race as I treat of.
Mr. Lewis. —The boys at seven or eight years of age are called “Wankums,” and go through the
operation of having the front tooth knocked out. Several kinds of food are prohibited to them in this
stage. At about sixteen the youths are made “jibbon.” There are many ceremonies observed on this
occasion—marching in figures, shouting, and beating the ground with boughs. The “jibbon”is not allowed to
eat some kinds of food until about twenty to twenty-four years of age, when he may eat any food without
restriction.
Mr. Thomas. —No division, further than what is noticed in answer to question 55.
58. What are the privileges enjoyed by or withheld from these 9
Mr. Rusden. —No particular privileges existed with regard to the two family distinctions. Every body
in the tribe was of one or the other of two family connotations ; and betrothals were regularly made so
as to keep in view the family caste to which the betrothed belonged.
Mr. Crooke. —None.
Air. Strutt. —None. All fare much alike.
Mr. Thomas. —There are no privileges, further than that some animals and birds may be eaten by
the aristocracy and aged, which the young are not permitted to participate, though they may have procured
them.
59. What care is taken to keep them distinct, and with what effect on the physical and moral character of each ?
Mr. Rusden. —They were kept distinct, as a matter of course and of duty by all.
Mr. Strutt. —The tribes occasionally intermarry.
Mr. Thomas. —Laws well understood among them—restraining the young, who feel the import of them.
60. What laws exist among the people? How are they preserved ? Are they generally known, or confided to
the memory of a chosen set of persons ? What are their opinions and regulations in reference to property, and
especially the occupation and possession of the soil? Does the practice of hiring laborers exist among them ?
Mr. Rusden. —Laws of satisfaction for injury done, by means of submitting to an ordeal in which
the offender exposed himself to danger, were the principal social restraints in vogue. They did not assume the
form of the Saxon Were-gild, by which an injury could be compounded for; but they required that the offender
should run the risk of a similar injury to the one he had done. According to the magnitude of his offence
ho had to receive one or more spears from one or more of the relatives of a deceased person; or where the
injured person had recovered strength, he might himself discharge the spears at the offender.
No one endeavored to evadfe the law. It was preserved traditionally in the memories of all :—the
old men being authorities in case of doubt.
No property in soil was recognized, nor were laborers employed ; but each tribe defended its own
territory, and each individual was willing to do a kindness without fee or reward.
Mr. Crooke. —Their laws are generally known. There is no practice of hiring laborers. Their laws are
something like those of the gipsies, but all are on a perfect equality, except that of prowess. Some of their
laws, such as initiating young men, are unnatural, and too disgusting to relate.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have no existing laws. They never hire labor.


Mr. Strutt.— The only rule the aborigines appear to possess, is to retaliate for injuries received, as
in cases of murder. These matters are determined at a council, as stated above. They have no property in,
nor do they occupy the soil. Their only property is the food they catch, their clothing, and the articles
they carry with them in their bags, with their weapons,
Mr. Thomas.— Their laws are well known ; summary and simple, relating to property and persons.
They hold that summary punishments, as they have no settled abode, are preferable. They, however,
have been known to keep prisoners for sacrifice to their dead, if within forty or fifty miles from their tribe, till
they have arrived. I may remark, that when corporeal punishment has been inflicted, the culprit is again
received into the community as though he had never offended—in fact, before he undergo* his punishment,
he is in nowise dis-esteemed.
61. Have they any knowledge or tradition of a legislator, to whom the formation of laws is ascribed?
Mr. Rusden. —They had no knowledge of a legislator.
Mr. Fisken. —They have no knowledge of a legislator.
Mr. Crooke. —None.
Mr. Beveridge. —None whatever.
Mr. Strutt. —No.
Mr. Thomas.— Their law-s and form of government, they have a notion, were given them by Kurukurook,
a deity of whom they speak with veneration.
62. Do they rescind, add to, or modify their laws, and how ?
Mr. Rusden. —They did not rescind their laws, but implicitly obeyed them.
Mr. Crooke. —No.
Mr. Strutt. —No.
Mr. Lewis. —Murder is always retaliated upon either the murderer, or one or more of his tribe.
Mr. Thomas. —They never rescind or extenunate their laws, nor add to them ; as they are natural laws,
like the Medes and Persians.
63. Are they careful in the observance of them ?
Mr. Rusden. —See reply to 62.
Mr. Crooke.— Yes.
Mr. Skene. — I believe them to be careful in the observance of their laws.
Mr. Strutt. —They observe the determination of a general council.
Mr. Thomas. —Most tenaciously, and in their execution.
64. What are their modes of enforcing obedience, and of proving and punishing delinquency?
Mr. Rusden. —Obedience was never withheld; but would have been enforced without doubt, if necessary,
by the assembled tribe.
Mr. Crooke. —By quietly sending word, which is sullenly obeyed sooner or later.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have none. The strongest steals from the weak at times, and laughs at the
victim. In general they are very honest amongst themselves.
Mr. Strutt. —If a native disobey the general resolution, he wmuld be killed by his own tribe ;or perhaps
be handed over to another tribe for immolation, in settlement of some feud. The natives have some super-
stitious use for human kidney fat; but they are reluctant to talk on the subject.
Mr. Thomas. —Corporeal punishment for minor offences, on the head ; for more grave, hurling spears at
the offender. They take little trouble in proving the case, but are invariably correct.
65. How are judges constituted ? Do their trials take place at stated periods, and in public ?
Mr. Rusden. —The old men were looked up to as expounders of what should be done.
Mr. Crooke. —All hands are judges. Trials take place in public.
Mr. Beveridge.— They never have any judges, and the only trials they ever have are upon the occasion
of a murder having been committed ; then, the culprit has to stand up as a'target, to be speared at by about
twenty of the tribe. If he escape (as is generally the case) he is received by the tribe upon the same footing
as he was before the murder.
Mr. Strutt. —There are no judges. Councils are held when another tribe is concerned ; but quarrels and
disputes amongst members of the same tribe are usually settled at once by those who are present. Should
these attempts fail, the quarrel is decided by a fight on the spot, in which the strongest of course is the victor.
Mr. Thomas. —Their judges are the ancient or old men. Their trials and punishments are in public.
66. How do they keep prisoners in custody, and treat them ?
Mr. Rusden.— There were no prisoners in custody at any time.
Mr, Crooke. —By force of arms.
Mr. Beveridge.— They never keep any prisoners incarcerated, as no offence is deemed worthy of punish-
ment, unless murder ; and the punishment of this crime follow's immediately’upon the commission thereof.
Mr. Strutt. — They have no prisoners.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Female prisoners are made the wives of their conquerors—male, generally killed and
eaten.
Mr. Thomas. —By watching them night and day till arriving at the encampment, when they are at once
summarily dealt with.
67. What are the crimes taken cognizance of by the laws? Is there gradation or commutation of punishment?
Mr. Hull. —Running the gauntlet of spears, usually.
Mr. Rusden. —Offences against individuals were crimes. Blabbing about the secret rites of a tribe was
a crime. All breaches of custom were visited with some punishment.
Mr. Wilson. —A quarrelsome treacherous fellow was compelled to fight till he was crippled and disabled
from fighting. One who betrayed the tribe was compelled to stand up and receive a certain number of blows
with the nulla nulla.
65
Aborigines.— r.


Mr. Crooke Chiefly abduction. Strangers are killed in the bush, when found, without trial. There
is very little crime against one another, but it is capital to be found to be a stranger. There is a commutation
of punishment.
Mr. Skene. —They are generally, a beating with a waddy, one of their instruments of war. Are killed
on the spot.
Mr. Beveridge. —Murder is the only offence taken notice of.
Mr. Strutt. —Principally murders, and taking away the women. In the former case the tribe would
endeavor to kill the murderer ; in the latter they would take away other women in their revenge. Every
tribe, however, i$ expected to remain within its own territory, and an aborigine found by another tribe within
their district, without good cause, is liable to be at once killed.
Mr. Thomas. —Adultery, theft, and murder. Theft and murder is of rare occurrence ; adultery very
common. There are grades and commutation, according to circumstances.
GEOGRAPHY AND STATISTICS.
68. Briefly state the geographical limits and character of the region inhabited by the people to whom the replies
relate.
Mr. Rusden. —My remarks principally apply to the Hunter River blacks.
Mr. Wilson. —The Mitta Mitta and Upper Murray Rivers, and surrounding country, a mountainous
region, is the district referred to in the above remarks, under the heading “ Government and Laws.”
Mr. Fisken. —The region (Lai Lai, &c.) begins thirty-five miles, and extends sixty-five miles, N.W. from
Melbourne, and laterally about twenty miles. The country is timbered and well watered.
Mr. Aitken. —The district is generally mountainous, wooded, and well watered. The limits difficult to
define.
Mr. Beveridge. —The country inhabited by the aborigines herein described extends from Swan Hill on
the Murray River, along said river northerly about 120 miles, to the Moornpal Lakes, inclusive, and
including about twenty miles of country on each side of the river. The country is of a sandy, saline, arid
nature ; a great portion of it is covered with mallee scrub. In close proximity to the Murray there are
numerous lakes, lagoons, and reed-beds.
Mr. Strutt. —The aborigines in this (Echuca) district are to be found chiefly by the banks of the
Murray, Goulburn, Campaspe, and Lake Moira, and sometimes at the homesteads on the various stations.
The vicinity of the rivers is generally well timbered. The whole region is very flat, consisting of immense
plains, intersected by belts of timber. Some of these plains extend for many miles, and are without water.
The natives at present rarely frequent the plains. Formerly they would hunt the turkey and emu, as the long
grass afforded them the means of approaching unperceived ; but since the lands have been occupied by sheep
and cattle, the same facilities no longer exist ; the game also has become more scarce.
Mr. Godfrey. —The Lower Loddon country consists of a series of plains, studded here and there with
the salt bush, with occasional box tree forests and gum swamps ; these latter caused by the over-flowing of
the banks of the river during the winter months generally. It is naturally a parched arid district ; I have
known eight months, consecutively, without rain. Then again, in a wet winter, the greater part of this level
country is under water, especially the frontage of the river, which is unapproachable at such times, and
remains so boggy that a horse will scarcely be got into the plains until the return of dry weather has hardened
this flooded soil ; it then cakes as hard as any brick, and would defy the best plough. Mosquitoes swarm
during September and October, but November’s heat dispels them. Their (the blacks) usual beat commences
about Newbridge on the Loddon, and they seldom go lower than Kerang or Farmers Public House, for they
then verge on a hostile tribe—the Murray blacks of Reedy Lake and Swan Hill. They range about fifteen
miles on the east and west bank of that river, fearing the Campaspe tribe on the east, and the Avoca blacks
on the west, if they exceeded that distance.
Mr. Gottreux. —That part of the county of Yilliers, north of the 38th degree of latitude, comprising
plains and slightly timbered and forest lands.
Mr. Thomas. —The geographical limits of the two Melbourne tribes arc from the source of the Yarra
eastward, S.E, by the river Tarwin ; dividing range between the Yarra and the Goulburn river, north ;
south by the sea coast; the river Exe to the west. Aboriginal boundaries are judiciously defined, by rivers,
creeks, and mountains ; which, by what I have learnt, is universal. For example, the Yarra tribe claim all
country south and north of the river to dividing range; on this ground, that all the waters flow into the Yarra.
The Western Port or coast tribe claim all the country from ranges, creeks, &c., that fall into the sea, to the
Tarwin. The Goulburn tribe, in like manner, claim north of dividing range all the country where creeks
and waters fall into the Goulburn River. This water and range boundary is as judicious as among civilized,
if not preferable. The character of the country is diversified, containing rivers, swamps, creeks, ranges,
abundance of roots, game, and all the necessaries of life.
69. State approximatively the number of inhabitants. As this is an important , but very difficult question ,
it may not be amiss to point out the modes in which the numbers may be ascertained. The people themselves may state
their numbers with more or less accuracy , but it should be known whether they refer to all ranks and, ages , or merelji
comprehend adult males , who may be mustered for war , or other general purposes requiring their combination. In this
case state the apparent proportion between adult males and other members of families. The number of habitations in a
particular settlement may be counted , and some idea of the average numbers of a family be given. Where the
people inhabit the water-side , the number and dimensions of their craft may be taken , and some idea of the proportion
between the number of these and of the individuals belonging to them may be formed. In drawing conclusions
from observations of this kind , it will be necessary to have due regard to the different degrees of density or rarity
in which, from various causes . population may be placed.
Mr. Jtusden. —69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, are partially answered ; but it may be necessary to add
to what I have said in reply to questions 11 and 12, which bear to some extent on the point involved in
question 73.
Missionaries have gone amongst the aborigines, as they would have gone to any savages living
apart from European influences. With a laudable reliance on the efficacy of their doctrines they have looked
forward to obtaining the same results as might have been possible if the aboriginal tribes had not been
decaying under the influence of causes over which neither the missionaries nor the blacks had any control.
When a whole tribe disappears in the course of one generation, how can the teacher look forward with hope ?
No long time elapsed before it became plain to all who were intimately acquainted with the habits of the
blacks, that such missions must necessarily fail—that the missionaries were powerless to avert the evil effects
of contamination of the blacks by the whites, —that those effects entailed the speedy destruction of every
tribe —and that the only possible result would be failure after failure repeated at the borders of civizilation,
which the missionaries are step by step compelled to betake themselves to in order to find materials for
their experiments. But whatever might be the convictions of those who had had practical experience on
the subject (and that experience led many unsuccessful missionaries to the conclusion that the laity


were right in asserting that success could only be hoped for by means of removing the blacks from their
native haunts while young, and rearing them apart from the evil effects of indiscriminate association with the
whites), there have always been found missionaries of laudable zeal but of insufficient reasoning powers,
who have determined to prosecute their labors on the same footing as those which have already signally failed.
Indeed, some of them seem so wedded to their zeal as to prefer failure on the beaten path to success
obtained by any method which men of the world may recommend. Thus it is that, though one such
experiment ought to have decided the matter, failure after failure is pointed to, to prove that the blacks
are irreclaimable; when really the only thing proved is that certain Europeans are illogical and obstinate.
The committee will perceive, in the document which forms a portion of my reply to questions 11 and 12,
that no sooner did Archdeacon Hale, at Adelaide, apply a more practical mind to the question, accompanied
by no less religious zeal than had distinguished previous missionaries, he effected great results.
One civilized Christian black, even though he die at an immature age, in the Poonindie station, is
an object which, when compared with the debauched relics of the tribes in Victoria, may well awake a
desire to see in this colony a station set apart like the one at Poonindie.
Mr. Beveridge. —The only craft used by the aborigines are made of the bark of the gum tree. Each
adult (male) has one.
Mr. Strutt. —The number of the aborigines is estimated at about five hundred individuals, including
women and children, as stated in reply to the first question. The natives themselves cannot give any
information as to their numbers, except in their own immediate vicinity,
Mr. J. M. Allan. —See statistical returns of last census compiled under my superintendence, as chairman
of the Warrnambool Koad Board. No boats of any description. A ship seen at sea was considered a monster
of the deep, and named a “ Koorong.” When seen, the natives fled the coast.
Mr. Gottreux. —About one hundred.
Mr. Thomas. —Generally answered in questions 1 and 2. In large congregating tribes in years past, I
usually calculated the number of houses or miams in each separate hamlet, also the tribe ; and took note
generally of the extending encampments ; marking the distinction between each tribe, and by calculating at
the rate of five or more blacks to each miara, gave the gross amount ; which was generally correct, a few
blacks more or less.
70. Has the number of inhabitants sensibly varied , and within what period ?
Mr. Shuter. —The number of inhabitants has sensibly decreased since the settlemant of the Europeans
in the colony.
Mr. Strutt. —They have decreased considerably, as stated also in reply to question 3.
Mr. Gottreux. —The numbers have decreased at least one-half, during the last eight years.
Mr. Lewis. —The number of the aborigines has not yet very perceptibly decreased ; but there is a great
and visible decrease in the number of births ; a majority of the infants of the young native women being
half-castes. No instance has been seen among the natives of this tribe where the mother of a half-caste child
has afterwards had a black one.
Mr. Thomas. —Awfully diminished within the last ten years. See question 3.
71. If it have diminished , state the causes; such as sickness , starvation , war , and emigration. When these
causes require explanation , please to give it. If the inhabitants are on the increase , is this the result of the easy
and favorable circumstances of the people causing an excess of births over deaths; or is it to be assigned to any
cause tending to bring accessions from other quarters? State whether such causes are of long standing or recent.
Mr. Hull. —Destruction of infants, sickness, disease, loss of country, and consequent desire to die—
“ Tumble down and jump up white fellow.”
Mr. Shuter.— Sickness I think has been the cause of the decrease of the inhabitants.
Mr. Murray. —The numbers have diminished in consequence of there not being any births. During
twelve years there have been only two births in the Colac tribe. This I consider to be attributable entirely to
the extent of prostitution amongst the women.
Mr. Strutt. —The causes are stated in reply to question 3.
Mr. Gottreux. —No births have taken place to make up for the numbers that have died.
Mr. Thomas. —Habitual drunkenness, bringing on pulmonary diseases, and the absence of their natural
exercise, the chase ; living a kind of half and half life between savage and civilized, without a progressive
tuition for the difference. They have had occasional increase to their number, by females from Gipps Land,
yet are unable to keep up their number. Their introduction of Gipps Land lubras have been within the
last seven or eight years.
72. Is the population generally living in a manner they have been long accustomed to , or have new relations with
other people , and consequently new customs and practices , been introduced.
Mr. Shuter. —l think so. Many bad customs and practices, but few good ones, have been introduced.
Mr. Murray. —New customs and practices introduced by their relations with other people have almost
entirely superseded their original manner of living.
Mr. Crooke. —Yes. No new customs and practices have been introduced.
Mr. Beveridge. —Very nearly so. They have a few innovations upon old customs, such as wearing
European clothes, smoking, &c., &c.
Mr. Strutt. —The aboriginal population is not living in the manner of their forefathers, owing to
the new customs and practices the} r ha ve learned from the Europeans.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Mode of living modified by residence among the whites. Males generally live about
among the farmers. Females and children are left to shift for themselves in the forest, and are actually worse
off than before the advent of the whites.
Mr. Gottreux. —They live generally as they used, with regard to their habitations and wandering
propensities ; but their food and clothing have improved in consequence of their working for and intercourse
with, the white population.
Mr. 'Thomas. —ln ihe bush they live as in their primitive state, without the least inclination to depart
from it. If in the precincts of Melbourne or a village, the males will clothe themselves as civilized; but on
returning to the encampment, off go their clothes, and they have done with civilization for that day.
They have no new custom, but are awfully degraded from their first state.


73. If the people, being uncivilized, have come under the influence of the civilized, state to what people
the latter belong, how they are regarded, and what is the kind of influence they are producing * State the points
of their good influence, if any, and those of an opposite character, as the introduction of diseases, vices, wars,
want of independence, Sfc.
Mr. Hull. —The venereal was not introduced by the colonists ; it existed before, as it does with all
savage tribes. All the missions, from the original catholic mission, through almost every denomination of
protestant missions, have failed, it would be too severe perhaps to say, in any case, from want of proper
zeal or conduct in the missionaries ; but rather from a total inability in the aboriginal to comprehend
anything of the nature of the Deity.
Mr. Beveridge.-—The people under the influence of whom they have come are British. They are
regarded by the aborigines as being one of a very superior order. I am sorry to say that the influence
exercised by the British is the opposite of good, because the aborigines are prone to (like their more civilized
brethren) imbibe the vices of those with whom they associate, instead of their virtues.
Mr. Strutt. —The intercourse with Europeans has had a good influence in producing a greater regard for
human life, and for the advantages of peace and order amongst the aborigines. In some instances they
have applied to the local authorities for redress, in cases of assault, and of course have obtained it. The
prejudicial results of European intercourse have been the introduction of syphilis, intoxication, and the
inordinate use of tobacco ; and the diminished feeling of independence, owing to many of their new wants
being supplied by the Europeans, without any adequate return.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —The advent of the whites has been injurious to them on the whole. Your committee
is itself an evidence of this. The whites have brought with them their diseases and vices, and destroyed
the feeling of independence among the blacks.
Mr. Thomas. —Many have come under the civilized influence, who have been brought, or kidnapped from
their own country, and have, by constraint, entered into all the forms and habits of civilized life; but when
opportunity offered have returned to their old habits. The native police, as a body, was perhaps the
most likely to retain their civilized habits ; but such was not the case. When equipped and on duty, from
their personal appearance, one would argue that civilization had taken root, and that moral improvement
had commenced,—it was lamentably otherwise. The corps were notorious swearers and drunkards. Those at
the Barwon mission^ turned out in a like manner, though the worthy ministers who conducted that mission felt
confident, and published to the world “that six or seven might faithfully be reported as being converted.”
Some have had trades; but after all have wrenched themselves from civilization; and, in endeavoring to find out
their own tribes, have been murdered by other blacks on their way. Two fine girls and a boy were rescued
from King’s Island some years back, and humanely taken charge of by two pious maiden squatters to the
westward. The boy, after a short time bolted. One of the girls turned out bad, and no one knows what
became of her ; the other is now a fashionably dressed profligate, in fine furnished apartments in La Trobe-
street. r l hese last three were educated, and with care. I have seen the two girls often at the Wesleyan
Chapel, Geelong, with their pious guardians.
74. Is there any tendency to the union of the races? how is it exhibited, and to what extent?
Mr. Shuier. —There are a few instances of the union of the races.
Mr. Crooke. —Occasionally. By each tribe knocking a tooth out of the young men, —also initiation.
Very little. J &
Mr. Beveridge. —The way in which the union of the white and aboriginal races is displayed, is by
the numbers of half-breeds running about.
Mr. Strutt. —Half-caste children are occasionally born and reared, but their number is only small.
Mr. Gottreux. —No tendency to the union of races.
Mr. Thomas. —-None whatever. There was, however, a shepherd to the westward ? some years back, who
was desirous of having an aboriginal girl, whom he had had for his hutkeeper for eighteen months, for
his wife ; the girl was from the Wimmera. The overseer bringing a quantity of sheep to Melbourne, the
white shepherd and black lubra accompanied ; and the different clergymen on the road were entreated
to marry them, but to no effect. The overseer eventually tried the Lord Bishop of Melbourne. This is
the only case I ever heard of. After eighteen months I found this black lubra among a tribe of blacks;
she said her white husband was dead, and she returned to the first tribe of blacks she found.
SOCIAL RELATIONS.
75. What kind of relationship, by written treaty or otherwise, subsists between the nation and other nations,
civilized or not? Have they any intercourse by sea with other countries? Do any of them understand any European
language ? Or are there interpreters, by whom they can communicate with them.
Mr. Shuter. —Questions 75 and 76 are not applicable to the aborigines of this district.
Mr. Crooke. There is no sea intercourse with other countries. They communicate by sending
messengers.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have no intercourse by sea or otherwise with other countries. Most of the
aborigines speak sufficient English to make themselves understood.
Mr. Strutt, —The natives have no relationship nor intercourse with other nations. Most of them under-
stand a little English.
Mr. Gottreux. —7s and 76. —They have no social relations. Their mode of fighting amongst themselves
in their drunken brawls cannot be called warfare.
Mr. Thomas.— Between the five nearest tribes to Melbourne there is a kind of confederacy or relationship,
which, I apprehend, is followed out through the length and breadth of Victoria. Thus the Yarra, Western
Port, Geelong, Goulburn, and Devil’s Eiver tribes, though continually quarrelling, nevertheless are in a
degree united ; and to accomplish (or force) this united interest, according to their laws, marriages are
not contracted in their own tribe for instance, a Yarra black must get himself a wife, not out of his own
tribe, but either of the other tribes. In like manner a Goulburn must get his lubra from the Yarra, Devil’s
Eiver, Western Port, or Geelong tribe. Thus a kind of social compact is formed against any distant tribe who
might intrude upon their country, when all unite to expel the intruder. They have no intercourse by sea with
other tribes. Formerly the Western Port blacks used to make very large barques and cross over Western
Port to French Island at a certain season of the year after eggs. They need no interpreters; all the adults
under thirty years of age speak English well; pronounce it far better than half the Scotch or Irish emigrants.
* This question will comprise the existence of missions—the success or the want of it from causes connected with missionaries
themselves or others.


76. Are they peaceable or addicted to war? Have they any forme of declaring war or malting peace? What {s'
their mode of warfare, either by sea or land, their weapons and strategy ? What do they do with the slain and with
prisoners 9 Have they any mode of commemorating victories by monuments, hieroglyphics, or preservation of individual
trophies, and of what kind? Have they any national poems, sagas, or traditions respecting their origin and history ?
Where Europeans have introduced fire-arms, ascertain the modes of warfare which have given place to them.
State whatever particulars respecting their origin and history are derived, either from traditions among
themselves or from other sources.
Mr. Hull —See my pamphlet and refer to Messrs. Thomas, Bunce, Parker, and Mr. Miles’s papers. The
same reference is given for queries 77 to 88 inclusive.
Mr. Rusden. —ln many tribes I have known the hands of enemies slain in a foray to he carried as
trophies for weeks. I have known cannibalism imputed to a tribe (quite guiltless of it) on the ground of
these hands being found at a camp.
Mr. Eishen. —Peaceable.
Mr. Crooke. —War. They kill their prisoners and eat them.
Mr. Beveridge .• —They arc peaceable. They have no forms of declaring war or making peace. Their only
mode of warfare is by surprize—they creep into their enemies’ camp at night, when the camp is hushed in sleep,
and slay all that cannot escape ; which, in most instances, are women and children, or invalids. What they do
not make use of for food, of those slain, they leave exposed for the crows, or until such time as the vanquished
people return to bury them : they never take any prisoners. They have no method of commemorating
victories or preservation of personal trophies. Tiiey do not possess any poems, but have some oral traditions
of their origin. They never make use of fire-arms in their warfare. In their traditions respecting their
origin, they say;—at one time they were all birds and beasts, and there was no sun, but darkness dwelt upon
the land ; but in a dispute between an emu and native companion, the latter threw an egg of the former up
to the sky, when it broke and became the sun, and the world was flooded with light, and thousands of the
birds and beasts became men.
Mr. Strutt.— They are peaceable at present. They do not appear to have any form of declaring war,
as it is usual to surprize the enemy ; but peace is generally celebrated by a great corrobery. Their weapons
are chiefly the spear and waddy, or club. They have hut few fire-arms, and these are used for shooting wild-
fowl by the steadiest and most trustworthy natives. They do not make prisoners. They are strongly
suspected of having been in the habit of eating the bodies of the enemies they had slain—but on this point
they will not afford any information. They have no trophies, monuments, or records of any kind.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Their main tactic in war is to effect a surprize. They keep the kidney fat as a
trophy, concealing it in their hair ; also portions of the hair. So traditions as to origin, &c. In their wars
they do not use fire-arms.
Mr. Thomas. —In their present diminished state, they would be totally unfit for war. Ido not think that
a complete muster of tire five confederate tribes would amount to anything like the number of one of them
nineteen years ago. They were formerly much addicted to fighting. They have forms of declaring war: ambas-
sadors are sent who are furnished with regular diplomas,—two small sticks, devices on them purporting their
mission for peace or war. These messengers, or ambassadors’ persons are held sacred, however repugnant their
instructions ; and, after transacting their business and receiving the reply, they are safely conducted out of the
district to the borders of their own country. 1 should have stated, that the returned ambassadors receive
the replies on two pieces of stick or thick bark. They fight on land. Their weapons are spears, wonguims,
shields, and bludgeons. They do not take prisoners. If any are killed, their own tribe bury them. I never
knew but one killed on the assembling of the tribes, which was not in a fight, but a corrobery. However
determined and obstinate a fight may be, when over, all are friends ; and it is affecting to see parties, who, an
hour before were enemies, sucking each other’s wounds. There are no means of commemorating fights further
than talking about them over their night fires. They have particular songs for sacred and traditional dances ;
have traditions of the creation, cause of wind, and other tilings. Although scarcely an influential black but
has a gun, yet they never use them in battle ; they consider guns a cowardly means of defence. What
traditions they have have been handed down to them through many generations.
RELIGION, SUPERSTITIONS, ETC.
77. Are the people addicted to religious observances, or generally regardless of them ?
Mr. Rusden. —So far as the rites or customs extant amongst the blacks may he deemed the remains of
any form of religion, it may be said that the blacks arc rigidly observant of their duties. As lam not
intimately acquainted with the traditions of the tribes in Victoria, I shall not dwell on this and tiie succeeding
questions, which will no doubt be accurately answered by Mr. Parker, Mr. Thomas, and other persons; but I
may mention that, in the ceremonial by which youths are inducted into manhood—in the respect for the
secrecy attached to that ceremonial, —in the songs sung and the implements used thereat, I have found a
remarkable similarity pervading the customs of all the blacks with whom I have conversed on the Australian
continent, at Moreton Bay in the north, and at the Goulburn River in Victoria, no less than at the Murrum-
hidgee. Without doubt these customs are remnants of religious observances, and they are rigidly adhered to.
No woman can he present at these ceremonies, nor can any child. Great solemnity is observed in preparing
youths for the ordeal; the ground around is marked and the hark of trees is carved in certain well known
manner and shape ; and the neophyte must not, under fear of death, mention the particulars of the ceremony.
A vague idea of superior power of some spirit is associated with these ceremonies, but it is flickering, and
scarcely enables one to pronounce whether the being contemplated is beneficent or malign. The order of the
ceremony is distinct, however, and no native would deviate from it in any particular. Many Europeans, who
have gained the confidence of the aborigines, have at different times and in different tribes been permitted to
he present at the ceremonies ; and a knowledge of them would be a safe passport for a traveller in a strange
tribe, if by any means he could communicate the fact of his initiation. The wonder and the readiness to
fraternize shown by strange blacks to an initiated white man, seen by them for the first time, are very great ;
accompanied with earnest entreaties not to reveal anything unlawfully. But with the gradual extinction of
a tribe, carelessness about their ceremonies creeps in, and they lose all national feelings, without acquiring
from the whites any substitute but the craving for spirits and tobacco. I allude to ceremonies formerly
extant in New' South Wales.
Mr. Shuter. —Generally regardless.
Mr. Murray. —They appear to have no religious observances whatever.
Mr. Fislcen. —Regardless of religions observances.
Mr. Crooke. —No. Yes.
Mr. Beveridge. —They are utterly regardless of religious observances.
Mr. Strutt. —The aborigines have no religious observances, so far as Europeans can ascertain.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —No idea of religion.
Mr. Godfrey. —Totally unenlightened.
Mr. Gottreux. —77, &c.—There seems to be no idea of religion amongst this people ; consequently, no
priests, no rites, no superstitions.
Aborigines.—s.


Mr. Thomas. —Totally regardless of them. They pay great attention to me while lam addressing them,
and give ready assent ; hut you hear no observations from them afterwards. I have, however, often been
requested not to speak to them in their own language, because it made them frightened—evident proof that
they are not destitute of reflection.
78. Do they adopt the idea of one great and presiding Spirit, or are they polytheists ?
Mr. Rusden. —78 to 89. —For reasons given in reply to 77,1 leave unanswered.
Mr. Shuter. —They are not polytheists.
Mr. Crooke. —Uncertain and varying.
Mr. Aitken. —They believe in an evil spirit.
Mr. Beveridge. —They believe in one all-presiding Good Spirit.
Mr. Strutt. —What ideas they appear to possess on this subject tend towards unity, in the existence of a
spirit, to whom they ascribe a had rather than a beneficent character.
Mr. Godfrey. —They believe in one great presiding spirit, but onlj- know him in his attributes of
terror or vengeance ; not of mercy. They speak of him as “ Big One Sulky,” when thunder is heard.
Mr. Thomas. —They have a notion of one Superior Being, but no way adore or worship him. If they
have any passion towards him, it is fear. They, however, have other minor personages to whom they attribute
control over portions of the universe.
79. If polytheism exist, what are the names, attributes, and tables connected with their deities, and what are
the modes in which devotion is paid to each ? Are any parts of the body held sacred, or the reverse ? Do they offer
sacrifices, and are they of an expiatory character, or mere gifts ?
Mr. Shuter.— They offer no sacrifices, so far as known to me.
Mr. Crooke. —They do not offer any sacrifices.
Mr. Beveridge—The name of the Good Spirit is “Gnowdenont.” They have tablets relative to tins
Spirit, nor have they any method of paying devotion to it, Ho part of the human frame is held sacred,
nor do they offer any sacrifices.
Mr. Strutt. —They offer no sacrifices, nor gifts.
Mr. Godfrey. —Questions to 83 totally inapplicable.
Mr. Thomas. —Principally answered in my article upon superstitions, &c. They offer no sacrifices to
any deity ; but invariably offer a sacrifice as a peace offering to their dead. This sacrifice is no less than the
reins of a fellow creature.
80. Have they any sacred days or periods, fixed or moveable feasts, or religious ceremonies of any hind, or any
form of thanksgiving, or other observance connected with seasons ?
Mr. Shuter. —l do not think they have.
CdvooJtc —No.
Mr Beveridge —They have no sacred days or feasts or religious ceremonies of any kind.
Mr Strutt —They have certain general meetings, at which all the members of the tribe are expected
to attend • but these meetings are at irregular intervals, and their object is not always known to Europeans.
Mr Thomas —They have no sacred days, or moveable feasts, unless it be when the reins are procured
from a fellow creature ; when after three days continued dancing and rejoicing, their bodies are cleared from
all appearance of mourning, and there is rejoicing in its stead.
81. Have they any order of priests ? and if so, are they hereditary, elective, or determined by any particular
circumstances ?
Mr. Shuter. —They have no priests, so far as I know.
Mr. Crooke. —No.
Mr. Beveridge.— They have no priests whatever.
Mr. Strutt.—So. Some of the older men have some influence, but only of a personal character.
Mr. Thomas.—They have doctors or priests, dreamers, enchanters, &c., who are consulted upon all
difficult dreams, supposed apparitions, and such like. The decision they come to is at once credited and
believed.
82. Is the religion of the people similar to that of any other people, neighboring or remote ?■ If different, are
they widely so, or dependent on particular modifications, and of what kind ?
Mr. Crooks.— None. . „ . ,
Mr. Thomas.—] do not think that there is the least difference ; in fact, they have no conception of
worship. In continued plagues, such as myndee, &c., they have fear.
83. In what light do they regard the religion and deities of neighboring tribes ?
Mr. Crooke.—Do not care. „ ,
Mr Thomas. —With total indifference. Even the worship of Europeans does not strike them further than
they see all clean. They have, however, often been struck with the white man building so large a place tor
God, and making no other use of it; and this I have often endeavored to take advantage of, by trying to
impress on their minds, that the place is sacred and must not be used for any other purpose.
84. Is there any idea of an inferior order of spirits and imaginary beings, such as ghosts, fairies, brownies, and
goblins; and how are they described f
Sherard — Ygs.
Mr. Shuter.— l think they have ; hut I cannot describe them. They are afraid to move about in the
Mr. Murray.— They appear to dread some unseen power that may injure or destroy them.


Mr. Wilson. —They had a superstitious dread of the Buckeen, a spirit who was supposed to steal the
kidney fat from a blackfellow, while he slept A blackfellow who imagined his kidney fat had been taken
away in this way generally pined away, refused to eat, and died. They sent out parties, generally two young
men, to Buckeen. These fellows stole about during the night, watching and tracking their victim. They
observed great secrecy and vigilance. When they had made sure of their quarry, they waited till the dead
of night, stole noiselessly up, speared their victim, and dispatched him with the nulla nulla. They then cut
off portions of his flesh, which they eat, and took out the kidney fat. This fat was much prized among them;
they preserved it in a piece of dried skin of a blackfellow, rolled up like a tobacco pouch; and in a case of
sudden alarm, I have seen a blackfellow, pale with fear, rush to his net (a bag), take out this pouch, open
it, and smear his face with the fat. When a blackfellow died suddenly, being drowned, or died from some
accidental cause, they sent out a Buckeen party to take the life of one belonging to another tribe, in order to
propitiate the Evil Eye. These in turn made reprisal, and thus, life after life was taken. The ceremony
of knocking out the tooth of the young men took place about the age of eleven to fourteen ; this was always
performed by an old man, who used for the purpose a sharp instrument, and a stone. They believed the
Morgigong (a spirit) was present during this ceremony. The women were present, but sat apart from the
men. After the tooth was knocked out (one of the incisors of the upper jaw) the boys, now young men, were
consigned to the care of an old man, who provided food for them for a few days ; they were left then to hunt
for themselves, and were not allowed to encamp with or go near their mothers, or any females for several
months. The women raised pyramidal mounds of earth at the place where the ceremony was held. They
placed sticks or wands upright on these mounds, with feathers tied to the top.
Mr, Crooke. —They are superstitious, but it is not defined.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have an idea of a very wicked spirit, named “ Gnambucootchaly,” of which they
are very much afraid, more especially at night.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They believe in the existence of evil spirits, whom they seek to propitiate by offerings.
Water spirits are called “ Turong ; ” land spirits “ Potkoorok ; ” another is “ Tambora,” inhabiting eaves.
These they suppose to be females without heads.
Mr. Godfrey. —There is a vague notion of a goblin, called by a corruption of our word Devil. They say
“ Dibble, Dibble,” and they are greatly afraid of this imaginary ghost. They also are in great terror of
“ wild blackfellows,” and can scarcely be persuaded to go far away from a station alone, unless on horseback,
or with a gun, when they feel more plucky. This “ wild blackfellow ” is, no doubt, the ever-expected seeker
of retribution for the deatli of one of their tribe. These blacks go away themselves on such a mission, to seek
some unprotected lone blackfellow, and they well know others are seeking them in a similar way, and for a
like reason. This great never-ceasing murder, added to their child-murder, drunkenness, and promiscuous
connection with whites, is a sufficient reasonable ground for concluding that their extinction is only a matter
of time.
Mr. Thomas. —They have an idea of ghosts, spirits, and other imaginary beings.—[See ray vocabulary.]
85. Have they any notions of magic, witchcraft, 01 second sight?
Mr. Shuler. —l think not.
Mr. Crooke. —All kinds.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have no idea of magic.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —Yes, a great many.
Mr. Thomas.— None whatever ; unless one of their priests is sulky, when they have their fears of some-
thing dreadful coming upon them.
86. What ideas are entertained respecting the heavenly bodies? Have they any distinction of stars, or constellations?
and if so, what names do they give them, and what do these names signify ?
Mr. Shuler.—l cannot tell.
Mr. Beveridge. —They have a name and legend belonging to every planet and constellation visible in
the heavens, but it would take too much time and space to transcribe them here.
Mr. J. M. Allan.— They have. The sun (yarh yar,) and moon (unnung,) they suppose to he spirits.
“ Whychurl ”is their name for a star. They are much afraid of thunder and lightning ; calling the former
“ murndell.”
Mr. Thomas. —They have names for the heavenly bodies. They have distinction of stars. Some of
them they maintain were once blackfellows, but for certain good acts were taken to heaven and made stars of.
87. Are they in any manner observed with reference to the division of the year, and how '?
Mr. Sherard. —Yes ; the moon.
Mr. Beveridge. —They are not connected in any way with the division of the year.
Mr. Thomas. —They have accurate notions, and have terms for the four seasons, which they determine
by the motion of the heavenly bodies.
88. If time is not divided by observations of those bodies, what other mode is adopted? and do observancies
connected with them rest with the priests or chiefs ?
Mr. Crooke. —Seasons.
Mr. Beveridge. —The only method they have of dividing the year is by heat and cold, or summer and
winter.
Mr. J. M. Allan. —They divide time by the seasons.
Mr. Godfrey. —Their only mode of computing time appears to be by the moon ; its full especially is
noted : and now, they have the advantage of dating from the “ Nip nip,” or settlers’ yearly regular shearing
time. This seems to supply them with a mode of stating years, which before they hail not; months or moons
then satisfied them.
Mr. Thomas. —Time is divided by the motion of the heavenly bodies. They have also other modes, such
as the blossoming of trees and shrubs. They can accurately define the very month by this method ; for in
Australia there is not a month but some tree, shrub, or flower is in blossom ; and for exact assembling they
calculate and arrange time in the latter way.


89. When the traveller, by personal acquaintance with the language, or by means of competent assistance from
interpreters, can freely converse with the people, it will be desirable that he should form some idea of their amount of
intelligence, their tone of mind with regard to social relations, as respects freedom, independence, or subserviency, and
their recognition of moral obligations, and any other psychological character which observation may detect; and more
especially such as may contribute to an estimation of the probable results of efforts to develop and improve the character.
Mr. Crooke. —They have no notions and care not.
Mr. Godfrey. —From fifteen years’ experience and intercourse with tribes in various parts of the colony,
I think I may state, that the Lower Loddon tribe are below the average standard of blacks generally, both
imorally and physically. They are the laziest I have ever seen, and fearfully addicted to drunkenness. Those
frequenting the banks of large rivers, such as the Murray, &c., appear a much finer race altogether.
Mr. Thomas. —This query is principally answered in the foregoing. I may briefly state that Providence
has endowed them with sufficient intelligence for their present state ; in fact, their intelligence may be said to
be instinct. Tenacious of social relationship—tenacious of freedom—two blacks (aged) brought into the
Melbourne -gaol many years back, fretted so, that they both died, and on the same day. They are by no
means ungrateful, and -well remember any previous kindness. The preservation of Buckley for two-and-thirty
years, without in the whole period ever ill-using him, ought ever to indelibly rank them as a humane race ;
more so, as Buckley was more ignorant than the blacks, and perfectly useless to them ; quite a different
man to Rutherforde, who lived many years among the New Zealanders, and who was a shrewd active fellow.
ADDITIONAL REPLIES TO LIST OF QUERIES.
[The following communications were not received in sufficient time to include them in the foregoing classification .]
Marcus Sievwright, Esq., Melbourne. — The writer haring had the honor of receiving a circular dated the
27th October, 1858, from the Hon. T. McCombie, chairman of the select committee of the Legislative
Council, appointed to inquire into the present condition of the aborigines, which circular is accompanied by a
number of queries thereon, with a request to give any information on the subject—l feel much pleasure in
forwarding the following information, premising at the same time that the answers sent are given from
recollections made in accompanying the late Captain C. W. Sievwright, who received an appointment as
Assistant Protector of Aborigines during the years commencing January, 1839, to March, 1843. — 89, Swanston-
street, 10th January, 1859. — Marcus Sievwright.
Replies to Division No. I.
1. The district will contain about fifty aborigines, consisting of the remains of one or two tribes formerly
known as the Waddowrow tribe.
2. The existing natives about Melbourne consist of more males than females, both sexes being in bad
health ; and their ages average thirty.
3. From my personal knowledge during the last ten years, the mortality has been very marked among
all the tribes around this city and townships, and from what I have personally observed after having
visited districts during an absence of seven years—the chief causes of mortality being pulmonary complaints,
accelerated by venereal diseases, and which have in my opinion taken such a firm hold on their constitutions
as will now decimate them in the course of comparatively a short time.
4. I am not aware of assistance of any kind being given to the aborigines, except it is through William
Thomas, Esq., Guardian of Natives, who is a most zealous and worthy advocate in their behalf. The aborigines
in my opinion at present have no means of living anywhere within the settled districts; and I need scarcely
remark that, in consequence of the alienation of their land and subsequently the purchasers or Crown-tenants
fencing them out of their demesne, they have been driven (to use a homely phrase) from pillar to post to eke
out the remainder of their existence. I believe there is an aboriginal reserve at Mordialloc, and I believe it is
fit for its purpose, although the natives should have the privelege of choosing their own camping or reserve
ground.
5. In reply to this question, I think Mr. Thomas would be the gentleman who would undertake the
duties referred to.
6. The natives are with rare exceptions addicted to excessive intemperance; the drink I suppose coming
through their being supplied by the publicans. I have no direct testimony on the latter subject.
7. The compulsory keeping the natives from the towns, particularly in the interior, would be of some
benefit, but it would not attain the desired object unless the blacks had a depot or reserve to induce them to
return when compelled to avoid the constabulary; and the police would have great difficulty in keeping them
away from towns.
8. I am not aware, but I think there are many medical men ready to undertake the performance of
medical duties for a proper compensation.
9. The natives are all quiet about Melbourne, and in Geelong when I was there; but in the interior, viz.,
all over the western district, in the years 1840, ’4l, ’42, and ’43, I was very often a witness to the result
of their depredations of property and of the taking away of life among themselves. But lam unable to state
whether the white population now avail themselves much of the services of the natives, or compensate them
by wages or otherwise.
10. I have known the natives to steal from the settlers, in the first instance 'through want, and being
emboldened by success and led on by an evil-disposed chief or leader, they have continued to perpetrate the
mischief of sheep-stealing or the destruction of cattle and horses wantonly and in excess of the benefit derivable
from destroying more than what they could consume.
11. The Rev. Mr. Tuckfield, a Wesleyan missionary, resided about forty miles from Geelong, and
endeavored during 1840 and some time after to educate the aborigines, as well as Assistant Protector
Sievwright, but their efforts in the western district w r ere (with a few exceptions) quite fruitless.
12. My opinion of their general intelligence is, that the children and young natives, and in many in-
stances the middle aged blacks are, when kept from intoxicating drinks, very intelligent, and are prone to
receive a slight education, literary and moral.
13. I can suggest a plan to the honorable committee by which the Government may serve to ameliorate
the aborigines from ultimate extinction ; and that is—ln the unsettled districts large reserves should be
chosen, and the locality should be marked out by the natives, and set apart from the settlers. Fencing in the
reserve should be (where practicable) carried out, and allowing or reserving also plenty of hunting or fishing
grounds. Let there be a homestead presided over by some intelligent European family, who are to endeavor
to keep the natives from communicating with any other white person, and to supply them with a daily
allowance of food, such allowance being portioned out conditionally to the males doing such work on the
station as required of them, such as fencing, grubbing, &c., and occasionally withholding the supply of food


to a greater extent Irom such as can work and wont work, or such as leave the homestead. The natives
Should be also induced to erect small huts to live in, and they should be well clothed in winter with woollen
clothing, and supplied with good medical attendance to keep down prevailing diseases among them.
14. From the inherent tendency of all the natives to change and travel, 1 think, after what I have
observed among them, that the remains of the tribes about Melbourne and the inland towns should have
several small reserves or homesteads to enable them to visit or change to, as their hunting grounds are occupied,
and which they should be induced to stay or settle at, during the whole year round. In having more than one
reserve, the inducement to settle, when their roving propensity takes place, would be for them to call and
locate at such a homestead as they would feel disposed to reside at, and so keep them from calling at the towns
or scattering themselves through the bush and public houses.
15. The aborigines have every disposition to imitate their white brethren in nearly everything ; but
from the tendencies implanted in them, they find the less restrictive savage life more enticing than civilization,
and a great difficulty exists to reclaim them from their habits thoroughly; and I am strongly convinced that
the rising generation should be induced to follow some European occupation, so as to divert their attention
from joining their parents and others in keeping up their customs.
The Queries from 1 to 16 in Division 2 remain unanswered, in consequence of the subjects being too
abstruse.
ANSWERS TO DIVISION ON INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY LIFE.
17. There are some tribes who observe a ceremonial procedure on the birth of a child. Others do not
observe any, except it is very trifling, by indulging in a chaunt got up by the head of the family, and no
difference is made if male or female.
18. Infanticide used to be, and in some tribes is still very prevalent. The habit of destroying children
arose generally from hunger, which eventually was perpetuated into a custom, and caused female children
to be destroyed as soon as they were born, allowing the males to survive ; the male children being a greater
acquisition to a family than females. I think they would have no great objection to give up their orphans or
other children to the whites to be nursed, subject however to the children being taken in full.
19. T never yet knew of native children being exposed from any cause.
20. There is no practice, that I am aware of, of dressing or cradling children, further than when the
native mothers in the Mount House (native name “ Kolor ”) district, were digging for roots, they hung up
the child in a basket until their digging was over.
21. The only method adopted in altering the shape of the body, is that of puncturing the cartilage of the
nose, about the age of five or six years, and inserting in the orifice as large a piece of reed as they can bear,
which distends the nostrijs considerably ; and with the Goulburn tribes, the custom of puncturing out the
two front upper teeth was a ceremony that never was dispensed with by the males on attaining the age of
puberty.
22. The native children are taught early by precept the means of providing for themselves, in hunting,
fishing, digging for roots, &c., and follow their parents or tribe through a variety of hardships, such as taking
long journeys at the age of two or three through interminable forests or endless plains, during great
dearths of water and food. At the age of six or seven, the females are betrothed, and very often earlier, to
their future husband, who is thus rewarded by a wife in prospect ; the girl’s father giving her away on the
occasion of some greal; feat of courage having been performed by the intended husband : and on the age of
puberty among all the tribes, the males undergo the ceremony of circumcision; on which rite being performed,
the boys are taken great care of by their father’s, in not allowing them to w r et their feet.
23. The only remarkable sports among the boys is their indulging in throwing round pieces of thick
bark along o row of playfellows, who are armed with miniature spears, and as the round piece of bark rushes
past, they endeavor, and often succeed in striking the dart into the middle of the bark. Another game
indulged in by the children of some tribes, as well as by the men, is making a piece of wood shaped like a long-
pointed walnut, with a long thin wooden handle. This is held by the thinnest end of the handle ; then they
strike the knob on a knoll of grass, and send it flying through the bush in a hopping style. The children
have also miniature corrobborees in the day time.
24. Puberty takes place among most tribes at the age of twelve with the females, and fourteen with the
males; and I think fourteen is the earliest period at which the females have given birth.
32. Chastity among the aborigines is deficient to the same extent as portrayed by the lower orders
in London and elsewhere. I extract the following from Henry Mayhew’s work on “ The London Labor and
the London Poor,” page 477, as a passage applicable to the subject. He writes : —“Nothing can well exceed
“ the extreme animal fondness for the opposite sex which prevails amongst them. Some rather singular
“ circumstances connected with this subject have come to my knowledge, and from these facts it would appear
“ that the age of puberty, or something closely resembling it, may be attained at a much less numerical
“ amount of years than that at which most writers upon the human species have hitherto fixed it. Probably
“ such circumstances as the promiscuous sleeping together of both sexes, the example of the older persons
“ indulging in the grossest immorality in the presence of the young, and the use of obscene expressions, may
“ tend to produce or force an unnatural precocity, a precocity sure to undermine health and shorten life.”
As to chastity being cultivated, it is rather the reverse. I have known certain females who generally were
refugees or runaways from other tribes, and were compelled to follow the life of courtezans, in consequence of
not having a parent or male relation to protect them. The cries which the female has uttered at night, by
blows received by the unfortuate victim at the hands of the men, have reached the encampment, and created
feelings of disgust, when it was known that a compulsory cohabitation was enforced for a time by a number
of men.
There are superstitions among most tribes as to the chastity of mothers-in-law towards their sons-in-
law. They establish a rite that makes it compulsory on the mothers-in-law to avoid the sight of their son-
in-law, by making the mothers-in-law take a very circuitous route on all occasions, to avoid being seen, and
they hide the face and figure with the rug which the female carries about her.
34. There is often a dance takes place among the women on the occasion of a great marriage; other
times the ceremony consists merely in the intended husband making a tent, and his bride comes to it after
dusk, and remains with him until dawn, and then returns to her parents’ fireside.
35. Polygamy is practised, particularly among the larger tribes; not to a great extent though ; about
four women has been the greatest number of wives which the writer has seen kept by one chief. Should a
native warrior or chief proceed on a tour, his wife or wives are given in charge to his brother (if any), and
a co-habitation takes place until the return of the husband.
36. Divorce is not at all frequent. Now and then a wife runs away from her husband, and goes with
some other man belonging to a distant tribe, where she always has to remain ; the fear of being murdered by
her husband or his tribe, if ever she was caught, prevents her from ever expecting a return to the tribe
she left.
37. The treatment of widows depends mostly on their youth and beauty. There arc some who, among
the males, are considered worth fighting for, on account of their being handsome or useful in domestic duties.
Should a widow be advanced in age, she seldom finds a husband, and she therefore joins some family, and
assists in the domestic duties of providing food.
38. Among the wild tribes the prevailing food is composed of animals and vegetable substance.
Sometimes the district in which some tribes or parts of tribes live is nearly devoid of animal food, and then
73
Aborigines.— t.


roots, plants, and herbs form the chief nourishment. Fishing on the coast, as well as in lakes, rivers, creeks,
and marshes, is a favorite pursuit during the proper season. They always trust to the bounty of nature,
nor do the aborigines ever cultivate vegetables or rear animals, except taming the native dog- They generally
broil their food, either on the living embers or in the ashes of their fires. They also, by the process of
heating stones, bake or steam kangaroo, as well as a certain esculent vegetable called “ moonung,” which,
when cooked between heated stones, turns quite sweet, and then is termed “ mirnee.” The writer has seen
the aborigines, in their savage state, indulge in every sort of food, who did not scruple in eating their own
children and relations’ bodies, as well as their enemies’ flesh: they except the head, which is either burned
or buried ; and the most deadly snakes, as well as grubs, the eggs of ants, and many reptiles, are eaten by the
natives, and they reject nothing except spiders and caterpillars. As they approach civilisation they leave off
eating the above description of food. The writer has never known of any fermented or exhilarating liquor
among or used by the blacks. They generally have two meals a day, in the morning and at sundown, but
often eat in the middle of the day, and their capacity for temporary or sustained exertion is great. Fire arms
should be given only to those who are specially known for sobriety, and who can be recommended by an
European as being worthy to use a gun, which will be attended with a good result in hunting; and
registration will be of good service in preventing them passing the Are arms from one to another.
36. In the summer time, in the unsettled districts, the men and children mostly go in a state of nudity,
the females wearing either opossum or kangaroo rugs or mats of grass ; and, as winter approaches, the skins
of animals are made into cloaks and worn by the men. The young females wear a fringe about the loins.
No special dress is used for great occasions. In going to a battle or dance, the men throw everything off,
and paint themselves over with red ochre and white chalk, and tie on bunches of leaves round their ancles,
and put cockatoos’ feathers in their hair. The practice of tatooing used to be more extensively in vogue
among the tribes about Port Phillip Bay. The natives in the western district not having such deep cica-
trization as the Melbourne, Geelong, and Goulburn tribes ; regular streaks on the shoulder blades, about the
size and thickness of the human fingers, were very often observed by the writer on the chiefs’ and warriors’
backs, as well as smaller cicatrizations on their breasts and those of females; and (as observed before) the
cartilage of the nose is pierced in both sexes, and the two front upper teeth of the men in the Goulburn
tribe are knocked out.
40. The writer was a spectator about eighteen or nineteen years ago of a variety of athletic sports,
games, and dances among the Melbourne, Geelong, Colac, Lakes Kilambeet and Tarang tribes, in the Portland
districts, as well as at Mount Ivolor, near the Grampians. At Kilambeet the younger men would engage in
the morning in wrestling matches, and at night on the occasion of tribes meeting, would have a dance called
a corrobboree, in which men (and some boys) would dance to a song sung by a leader near a large blazing fire,
with about six to twelve women beating time on their rugs rolled or wrapt up very tight. The women also
have a dance among themselves, exhibiting themselves quite naked, with the exception of their fringe all round
the loins made of grass or threads taken out of European rugs, and descending about half way to the knees; but
the female dances were seldom indulged in.
41. There are no games of chance except playing with a string, familiarly known as “ cat’s cradle.”
42. The natives appear to be short lived, from the diseases introduced by Europeans ; but the writer
has no personal knowledge as to whether there is a similitude with respect to longevity among the natives
and Europeans.
43. The sick are mesmerised and are looked after very carefully by their families, and carelessly
attended if the sick person has no relatives ; and they seem perfectly ignorant as to whether diseases are
contagious or not, and no medical treatment is adopted. They believe that an evil spirit or enemy has caused
their illness. The writer has not observed for the last twelve years what diseases are prevalent among the
natives.
44. The writer is unable to answer this query.
45. The like reply.
46. The mode of disposing of the dead in and near Port Phillip Bay tribes, is by burial in the ground,
by tying the body in a roll, the corpse is thrown head foremost into the grave from five to eight feet deep.
In the Portland Bay district it was generally the custom to burn the dead, where timber was plentiful; in
other cases they would put the bodies in the forks of trees covered with branches.
47. In cases of interment the clothing and implements of war, with domestic utensils, are deposited with
the dead. Murder is not concealed, except in the case of one or two who are leagued together and enter into
an enemy’s ground or camp, on which occasion secrecy is adopted with every precaution. The writer has
seen on one occasion, a tribe of fighting men come to an encampment where a few females were, and cne man
out of the warriors approached with a spear and sent it into the body of a young female, the wife of another
native warrior, who looked on without retaliating, until the following day, when a regular pitched battle took
place, and the murderer was well thrashed.
48. There is no subsequent visitation of the dead and the bodies are buried separately.
49. The aborigines believe in the soul of the deceased returning in another body in the character of
another individual.
50. The habitations are generally composed of wood branches, bark, and leaves, consisting of one apart-
ment, and when the encampment has been occupied for some time, the habitations are left to decay. Ho
method is adopted in building either into villages or towns.
51. Ho monuments have been raised.
52. The writer cannot comply with this query.
53. 54. The like replies to these questions. Domestic animals are not to be seen, except dogs (obtained
from the European) and the dingo.
55. The Government among the natives partakes of a republic.
56. The chiefs are elective.
57. There is no division of clans or castes.
58. .None.
59. None.
60. The writer is not aware of any set of laws which have been or are in existence among the natives,
and he never made research on this subject. No practice exists of hiring laborers.
61. None, except leaving it to the elders of the tribe to talk a great deal,
62 to 67. The writer is unacquainted with the subjects connected with these queries.
GEOGRAPHY AND STATISTICS AND SOCIAL RETURNS.
68 to 76. From absence and a continued residence in the city of Melbourne, the writer is not in a position
to reply to these questions satisfactorily.
77. None, and regardless of religious observances.
78. They do not have any great spirit, but are polytheists.
79 to 88. The writer, from other avocations pressing on him, regrets to be unable to reply to these queries.
89. The European cannot do better than be an observer of the manners, customs, &c., of the
aborigines, and by patience, perseverance, and a quick perception of the native in his natural state, he will
not only learn much, but ingratiate himself with the black, and be the means of doing much in ameliorating
the natives of Australia.


Men.
Women.
Chidren.
Total.
Port Albert
7
2
1
10
Plains and Dargo...
... 18
17
10
45
Swan Reach
... 16
5
4
25
80
From C. W. Carr. Esq., Worden, Anderson’s Creek, District of St. Andrews. —
Division I.
ANSWERS TO GENERAL QUESTIONS.
1. The number of aborigines in this district amounts to about twenty. They are known amongst the
settlers hero by the name of “ Upper Yarra blacks.”
2. The men are apparently from twenty-five to forty years of age; the women from sixteen to twenty-
five. There seem to be no males amongst them under the age of twenty, and there are only three children, all
females. The proportion of the sexes is about equal, and their general health seems to bo good.
3. Mortality amongst them can hardly be considered great, or the remnant of the tribe would long ago
have ceased to exist. No “particular disease” seems to prevail amongst them, as far as one may judge from
their appearance.
4 & 5. X have been informed that Mr. De Castilla, a gentleman residing in this district, supplies them
with rations and clothing provided by Government. 1 have seen in the survey plan of the district a place
marked as a “ Reserve for Aborigines,” situate on the north bank of the River Yarra. lam the stipendiary
magistrate in charge of this district; and as such I should be happy to take charge of supplies and see to their
proper distribution amongst the aborigines.
6. The blacks rarely or never make their appearance amongst us without two or three of their number
being in a state of intoxication. It would be difficult to ascertain who supplies the unfortunate creatures with
ardent spirits, there are so many “ sly grog shops” throughout all the diggings.
T. I can offer no opinion as to the benefit likely to result in preventing the aborigines coming within a
certain radius of the towns of the colony; but should it be found desirable to do so, I am satisfied the police
force could be entrusted in the performance of any duty such a law might require at their hands.
8. There is no “ paid” medical officer in this district.
9. The blacks here are quiet, but I fear more from interest and necessity than any higher feeling. They
are very little disposed to perform any kind of work of even the most trifling nature. Their edible wants are
very easily satisfied, and are supplied for the most part, if not altogether, by the farmers of the neighborhood.
Whatever they earn from the sale of opossum skins, birds, and occasionally wild fowl and fish, is immediately
spent in the public house, but never in procuring for themselves any civilized comforts.
10. 1 believe they are addicted to thieving, when favorable opportunities occur ; but being generally in
fear of immediate and summary punishment resulting in detection, they rarely indulge in the propensity.
11. 1 am not aware that any effort has been made to educate the aborigines of this district, or impart
any religious instruction to them. The method they adopt in the interment of their dead, viz : —placing the
corpse in a standing position with the head a few inches from the surface of the ground (and the reason they
assign for so doing, viz., to enable the spirit to walk without any loss of time into some other body), leads one
to infer that they have some belief in the doctrine of metempsychosis ; but from what 1 have seen of them, I
should say they were more addicted to swearing than devotional exercises.
12. They do not want for intelligence; and, like children, seem to possess a great capacity for acquiring
a colloquial knowledge of languages; but their intellectual powers seem to be altogether of an imitative character.
13. I cannot suggest any plan by which the aborigines of this country might be saved from ultimate
extinction, nor can I resist confessing that I can see no good likely to result morally, socially, or commercially,
in the preservation of a race so utterly useless and irreclaimable, except it bo the desirability of preserving a
few living specimens of the lowest type of humanity for the investigation of science. Ido not think any efforts
on our part could induce them to abandon their present uncivilised and wandering habits.
From C. J. Tyers, Esq., J.P., Commissioner of Crown Lands, Albertan. —
Division I.
ANSWERS TO GENERAL QUESTIONS.
1. In the district of Gipps Land there are about eighty aborigines —men, women, and
are divided into three tribes, viz :
Besides these, there is a tribe inhabiting the country between the Snowy River and Cape Howe, about
the boundary between New South Wales and Victoria—seldom seen in Gipps Land—who number, at the
outside, one hundred —men, women, and children.
2. I have no data to enable me to arrive at the ages of the aborigines ; but the proportion of sexes is
about two males to one female. Their bodily health is not in general very good. They suffer much from a
cutaneous disease known as the devil-devil, and colds and catarrh—the latter probably augmented by sleeping
in wet blankets. They lead an idle life—wandering about the country from station to station, where
opportunities of obtaining food. &c., offer.
3. During my residence in this district (fifteen years) the mortality has been very great. I have known
many die from catarrh ; some, I believe, from inflammation of the stomach, probably arising from too long
abstinence followed by repletion. I have not heard of any particular disease among them which is likely to be
propagated among the white population, except venereal.
4. Blankets are issued once a year to them by the government, but no clothing or food. Medical
attendance has not been provided. They live chiefly by hunting and fishing, and by what food they can
obtain from the settlers. There are no reserves in Gipps Land, but places well fitted for such.
5. No doubt the police magistrate at Sale would be willing to take charge of supplies, and see to the
distribution of them among the aborigines ; but I know of no place fitted for a reserve within a convenient
distance of that township.
6. The aborigines are addicted to intemperance, and when in that state, are liable to come into
collision with the white people. I know of no instance of their having been supplied with the means of
intoxication directly from the publicans.
7. I think it would be beneficial to prevent the aborigines from encamping within a mile of the several
townships of this district—as there would be less chance of their obtaining spirits from bullock drivers and
others, and consequently of coming into collision with the white people. Except when the aborigines travel in
large numbers, there is no doubt but that the police could be entrusted to carry into operation a law to
prevent the aborigines from going into towns.
8. There is no paid medical officer in Upper Gipps Land (where the blacks generally inhabit), but I
think the services of one might bo procured, by providing a proper compensation for the performance of the
duties of medical attendant on them. (The Coroner for instance ?)


9. The aborigines of this district arc now quiet ; but they have committed great depredations against
life and property. The services of the blacks are seldom made available by the settlers, farmers, and others.
At the time of the discovery of gold, however, many of them were found useful as shepherds, stock-keepers,
reapers, &c., and received wages, clothes, and food.
10. The aborigines have not been impelled by their necessities to steal from the settlers ; but they have
been actuated probably by their own laziness, seldom by a desire to perpetrate mischief wantonly, or revenge-
fully, without benefit to themselves. I have known them to spear twenty or thirty head of cattle at a time,
and smoke the meat for use, leaving the skeletons with scarcely a particle of flesh on them.
11. I am not aware that any efforts have been made in this district to educate or impart religious
instruction to the aborigines, except perhaps in two instances, where children have been brought up in the
families of white people. One boy, Jack-a-Waddcn, went to school in Melbourne, where he learnt to read and
■write. He afterwards absconded, and has become a rather troublesome character, particularly when inebriated.
12. The aborigines are no doubt intelligent and capable of receiving to a certain extent, literary, but
not moral instruction. . .
13. The only plan by which I think there is any probability of succeeding to save them from extinc-
tion is the harsh and unnatural one of taking the young children of both sexes from their parents, and not
allowing them to have any intercourse with their race ; and after giving them a plain education, to place them
on a reserve under proper superintendence, where they might be taught to cultivate the ground, and such
trades as are necessary to civilised life. In teaching them a trade, it would probably be advisable to apprentice
them, while they would have the advantage of the example of white boys of their own age, in a similar
position.
14. Attempts have already been made to induce the adults to settle upon and cultivate land reserved
for them, but they all proved miserable failures. They will not give up their independent way of living for
all the benefits and luxuries of civilization.
Division 11.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.
1 & 2. I have not now any opportunities of acquainting myself with the information required.
3. Complexion, black ; hair, black and coarse, straight and matted, but when combed greased
frequently curled ; eyes, black. A most perceptible peculiarity of odor, independent of their want of cleanli-
ness (similar to the Hottentots), which much facilitates their apprehension when wanted.
4. Same answer as 1 and 2.
5 to 12. Not qualified to give the required information.
LANGUAGE.
13. I am not aware that the language of the natives of Australia is known to philologists. It is a
language, I believe, peculiar to the continent, but the dialect differs with almost every tribe.
14. I may, perhaps, at a future time be able to furnish a vocabulary of the Portland tribe ; I cannot at
present lay my hands upon it.
15 & 16. I can give no information.
INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY LIFE.
17. None that I am aware of.
18. I heard, about fifteen years ago, of a young child being eaten by a party of aborigines of both sexes
the parents partaking of the repast; nevertheless, I doubt mothers would part with their children to be
nursed by the whites.
19. I think not.
20. The children are not dressed nor cradled. They are carried about on the back of the mother, in a
net made fast round her neck. No attempt is made to modify their form. They are left as much to nature
as a litter of pigs.
21. None.
22. The education of the children consists in teaching them to hunt and fish, and of course the use of
the spear and of other weapons used in hunting and fighting. The chief object of the corrobboree seems to be
to induce a savage and ferocious feeling prior to attacking their enemies ; although there is no doubt but that
hunting, and perhaps love, is not forgotten in this remarkable dance.
23. 1 cannot answer this question.
24. I cannot answer this question, but from mere surmise. I should think puberty takes place in the
female about twelve, and in the male at fifteen.
32. 1 have seen nothing that induces me to believe that chastity is cultivated by either sex.
33. I believe none.
34. The general practice of obtaining a wife is to steal a young girl from another tribe, or to sneak
upon a man, against whom he has a grudge, while asleep with his wife, kill him, and carry off' the wife for his
own benefit.
35. A man may have as many wives as he can get. One of the Plains Tribe, named “ Kangaroo Jack,”
has four wives. Ido not think respect is paid to consanguinity.
36. If a man is tired of his wife, he gives her to another.
37. If not too old, the widow immediately finds another husband.
38. The prevailing food is kangaroo, opossum, native bear or monkey, wombat, &c., and every other
animal found in the bush (except the dog), fish and roots. They do not trust to what the bounty of Nature
provides, nor do they cultivate Vegetable, nor rear animals, but help themselves to the cattle and sheep and
provisions, generally, of the settlers. They have no cooking utensils, but throw their meat into the ashes,
and when half cooked, or just warm through, eat it. They reject nothing but the offal. Their drink is water,
but they prefer tea or grog. They have no usual time for their meals, but eat when hungry. They frequently
carry several half-cooked opossums on their backs for immediate use. They can undergo great exertion in
travelling and hunting, but not in manual labor. The possession of fire-arms is, no doubt, attended with evil ;
and, if possible, they should be restrained the use of them.
39. The dress generally worn by both men and women is an opossum cloak thrown over their shoulders,
covering the body as far as the knees. The cartilage of the nose is pierced, and through the hole a stick is
thrust ; but the practice, common to some tribes, of knocking out one of the front teeth does not generally
prevail. The shoulders and breasts of the adult men are generally cicatricose. When mourning for a relative
or friend, their faces are daubed with pipe-clay.
40. The corrobboree seems to be the prevailing amusement.
41. They have a strong passion for gambling, and use cards for games of chance. This they learned
from the white people.
42. The aborigines generally do not seem to be long lived ; but there are occasional instances of their
apparently arriving at the age allotted to man. Old Morgan, a native of the Port Albert tribe, had the
appearance, fifteen years ago, of being fifty-five years of age. He is still alive, and wanders about the country
with his tribe as usual; but, I presume, does not assist in their hunting excursions. Some years ago I saw
others apparently between sixty and seventy. These were generally left with the gins, or women. 1 have seen
one or two old women ; but 1 do not think the females are as long lived as the males.


43. The sick are commonly neglected. They dread no disease as contagious, that I am aware of. No
medical treatment is adopted. No superstitions or magical practices connected with the treatment of the sick.
44 45. Cannot say.
46. To the first part, No ; to the second, Cannot say.
48. No.
49. It used to be a common notion among the aborigines that black men rose from the dead and became
white men. Hence, some years ago, many white men were named after their deceased relations. I doubt if
they entertain that notion now.
BUILDINGS AND MONUMENTS.
50. Huts made of boughs of trees and sheets of bark, not permanently fixed : one for each family, or
one for several young and single men, scattered about without regard to order or regulation.
51. No.
WORKS OF ART.
53 and 54. Their works of art consist of implements of war and chase, viz., spears, boomerangs, nulla, &c.;
fishing nets and netted game-bags, made with grass.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
None, except cats and dogs obtained from the whites.
GOVERNMENT AND LAWS.
55 to 67. Have neither government nor laws, but are as independent of each other as a herd of swine-
GEOGRAPHY AND STATISTICS.
68. Bounded on the east by the Snowy River; north, by the Australian Alps ; west, by a north line
from Wilson’s Promontory. Mountainous, open plains, forests and lakes.
69. Already been answered.
70. Reduced from about 800 to 80 in fifteen years.
71. Causes of decrease : sickness and war. Perhaps 500 have been killed during the last fifteen years,
chiefly by neighboring tribes. X heard of about 150 having been killed in one night, at Pawl Pawl, an island
on the lakes, by the Melbourne blacks, headed by the notorious Billy Lonsdale. At least fifty were killed by
the native police and other aborigines attached to the parties in search of a white woman supposed to have
been detained by the blacks, and a few by collision with the white people, from ten to fifteen years ago.
72. As hitherto.
73. This and several other questions can, perhaps, be better answered by a letter addressed to his
Honor Mr. La Trobe, dated 23rd January, 1850.
It is as follows -
“ I regret it is not in my power to report any improvement in their condition, either moral or civil,
since my first communication to your honor on the subject.
“ (2.) In my report of the 9th December, 1846, I stated that the aborigines living in Gipps Land may-
be divided into two classes—the natives of Omeo, Manerro, Mitta Mitta, and the districts bordering on Gipps
Land, forming the first class : and the Warriguls or wild blacks, natives of Gipps Land, the second class.
“ (3.) That the first class, consisting, perhaps, of two or three hundred, lead, the greater part of the year,
a vagabond or gipsy-like life, moving in small parties from station to station, as chances of obtaining food
from the settlers offer ; and that during the shearing season some of these assist in shearing sheep, for which
they have a small daily allowance, which they spend at the stores in tea, sugar, flour, &c. ; and others
whose intercourse with the Europeans had been of longer duration act as stock keepers and bullock-drivers,
receiving for their services rations and wages somewhat less than given for European labor. I also stated
that the civilization of this class may be said to be confined to a knowledge of, and, in a very small degree
to a participation in, the European habits and manner of living, and of the acquirement of sufficient of the
English language to communicate with the white people ; that no attempts had been made, as far as I was
aware, to instruct them in reading or writing ; that they had no idea of a Supreme Being ; and that their
moral condition did not, seem to have been bettered by their intercourse with the white people.
“ (4.) To this statement of the habits &c., of these tribes, my experience will not enable me to add
anything. They are still the same wandering, idle vagabonds, moving about the station where chances of
obtaining food in idleness offer. A few of these indeed, for short periods, engage themsel- es as stock-keepers
and guides, but invariably return to their wandering mode of life.
“ (5.) The second class, or wild blacks, natives of Gipps Land, I stated, were seldom seen by the settlers;
that they lived in the mountains, morasses, about the borders of the lakes, and on the sea coast, by hunting
and fishing ; the mountains affording wombats, &c., the forests kangaroos, opossums, &c.; and the lakes
abundance of fish; and that they committed great havoc among the stock of the settlers by spearing them at
night.
“ (6.) Since that time a great change has taken place in the condition of this class for the worse, although
they have been brought into communication with the white people, and are allowed to encamp at several of
the head stations, where their occasional work, such as carting and carrying wood, procures them a scanty
subsistence, and their depredations on the stock of the settlers are less frequent. Their number has been
much reduced, and the men, then strong and athletic, and who used to be the terror of the neighboring
tribes, are now in their turn, hunted by, and kept in constant fear of those tribes.
“ (7.) I can hardly venture to offer an opinion whether they have been benefited by the intercourse with
the white people. The decrease in their number has been, I think, chiefly caused by the retaliation of the
Melbourne blacks for murders committed by them several years ago, when the Melbourne tribe was all but
annihilated by a loathsome disease, which, although I believe to be inherent, has not been mitigated by their
intercourse with the white people—and by influenza, a disease very much resembling in appearance, and
having the same effect as the sheep-catarrh, prevalent in the colony.”
74. None.
SOCIAL RELATIONS.
75. None, as a general answer.
76. Addicted to petty warfare, either to revenge the death of one or more of their relations killed by
an opposing tribe, or to procure wives. They fight with spears and boomerangs chiefly. They leave their
dead ou the ground, after feasting on their kidney fat, which they extract with some expertness. They have
no mode of commemorating victories by monuments, &c. They have no poems, traditions, See., as far as I
can learn. They use fire arms when ammunition can be obtained, in preference to their own weapons. No
knowledge of their origin or history can be obtained.
RELIGION, SUPERSTITIONS, ETC.
77. Regardless of all religious observances.
78. No idea of a Supreme Being, nor are they polytheists.
79. Sequence to 78.
80. None.
81. None.
82. They have no religion.
Aborigines.— u.


83. Nor have the neighboring tribes.
84. They have not.
85. Ditto.
86. Cannot say.
87. I think not.
88. I do not know.
Wm. McKellar, Esq., Lima, Broken River. —
Division I.
GENERAL QUESTIONS.
3. The mortality has been very remarkable for the last ten years. They are very subject to the
venereal disease.
4. There is no assistance that lam aware of afforded them by the Government. They get their living
in the townships. There are no aboriginal reserves.
5. I have no doubt that there are persons who would see that they got their provisions and clothing.
6. Yes, they are very much addicted to intemperance ; but I cannot say from what source they obtain it.
7. It would be very beneficial to the aborigines, were they kept at a reasonable distance from the
townships ; and I think the police force could be entrusted to see that the law (if enacted) would be carried
into effect.
8. I know of no paid medical officer in this district.
9. They are very quiet now ; but they formerly committed depredations both against life and property.
Their services are not generally available, even if well rewarded.
10. They have not been compelled by necessity to steal from the settlers, but were rather actuated by a
desire to be revengeful.
11. Not that I am aware of.
12. The mental powers of the aborigines are not of an order which can bear comparison with those of
civilized man ; but if compared to the South American Indians, they will not be found inferior to them. The
ethnologist who places them last in the intellectual scale does so gratuitously, and without knowledge or
information. Memory, imitation, locality, language, and tune are faculties few Europeans evince larger
possession of than the aborigines. They never forget place or person. A gesture, tone, or peculiarity is
imitated instantaneously, and mimicry is constantly a recreation.
14. They could not be induced to settle on any reserve.
Division 11.
INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY LIFE.
17. There is one very remarkable ceremony connected with the birth of a female child. Long before the
child is born she is given away ; even the choice of her appearance is disposed of.
18. Infanticide prevails to a great extent ; a vast proportion of the children born are destroyed, stran-
gulation and drowning being the chief means employed. Half-breed children are universally destroyed. The
mother is well aware of the ultimate fate of her child.
34. When a man gets possession of a woman, he becomes an object of intrigue to several of his friends ;
each of whom wishes him to promise his daughter yet unborn to himself. Perhaps friendship decides him,
and his dearest confederate is promised the first ; but as more are as likely to be born as one, he can promise
as many as he pleases. A custom which is held sacred often induces a husband to promise his daughter to a
man of whose designs upon his wife he may be jealous ; this usage rendering any communication between a
man and the mother of his intended a capital crime. The person promised the first daughter gets her, but
should there be no other, all the rest have a vested right in her.
38. The principal food of the natives is opossum, kangaroo, squirrel, wild turkey, emu, native companion;
all sorts of fish and birds, with the exception of the crow, which they have a great aversion to. Very little
fire is applied to any article of food ; when the outside is grilled the animal is supposed to be done, and he is
then transferred from the embers to the hands and teeth of his proprietor.
39. The dress is composed of a number of opossum-skins sewn neatly together in the form of a blanket.
40. They have one remarkable mode of amusement in particular, which is the corrobberee, or war-dance.
They also sometimes hunt for amusement.
41. Games of chance were not formerly known to the aborigines, but they are now coming to know them.
42. The aborigines are not remarkable for their longevity ; but rather, on the contrary, for their short
lives.
43. When they are sick they are obliged to carry a lighted stick about with them, and to walk and sleep
apart from the rest of the tribe.
46. There are different modes of disposing of the dead ; some inter their dead in the earth ; others erect
a sort of scaffolding over a running stream, and deposit the remains of their departed friend there.
47. If a black dies and is buried, all his war implements and wearing apparel are interred with him.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.
2. The males are well-proportioned, muscular, and sometimes good-looking.
3. Their features have nothing of the negro appearance, except when their hair, which is commonly
straight or straightly curled, is crisped and curled. The eye is large and dark, and its look more mirthful
than sullen. The nose varies, and is highly arched as well as flattened. Beautiful teeth and round chins set
oft' their faces. The women are not in comparison so handsome as the men, but they have much prettier hands
and feet.
5. The skull-bones are generally supposed to be very thick, for they can stand a great deal of knocking
on the head. The frontal bone is generally divided by a middle suture. The teeth are generally white and
well set.
BUILDINGS AND MONUMENTS.
50. They have two kinds of habitations ; the one is erected with boughs of trees, and the other with
bark from the same, got up in the way of a gunyah. They are not permanent, nor need they be, for the
blacks never stay long in one place. They universally consist of single apartments, at irregular distances from
each other.
51. They very often erect mounds or tumuli over the graves of their departed friends as a token of
remembrance.
WORKS OF ART.
53. The war-like weapons are nullah nullah, spears, boomerangs, and the elleman or shield. The toma-
hawk of iron has taken the place of the stone axe, and is employed in war. The nullah nullah is for close
fighting, and is formed from the heaviest wood obtainable. Its length is commonly two feet, and the end with
which they strike is large and weighty. The spears arc of two sorts—one light and partly made of reed, used
for throwing great distances ; the other is the war or jagged spear, twelve or thirteen feet long, cut from a
living tree, and used when the fighting men commence to close, or in surprises. The boomerang is semi-
circular, with the edge outwards. The elleman is of an angular shape at both ends, is light; hard, and slopes
from its centre to the sides.


DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
There are only two domestic animals, which are the dog and the cat, both of European breed. The
dog is used for hunting, and the cat is made a pet of.
GOVERNMENT AND LAWS.
55. The system of government is most decidedly republican, yet no man can do all his heart’s desire.^
Each individual is amenable to the whole, and an infringement upon the customs in use has rendered him
certain to be punished. _ .
56. The old men are highest in rank, but only from possessing greater intelligence; and trom that alone
exercise sway in council where all can speak, and from the designs of which there is no appeal, no other
superior power being known. All individuals are equal; and although the whites invest certain persons with
the title of chief, no such rank is recognised by the blacks. Pre-eminence in -wisdom or in valor procures
respect, but is never attended by further assumption of power. All matters relating to the public allairs are
decided upon in full and openly, notice previously being given to the scattered members of the tribe when
such things are to be discussed. Such intimation is regarded as a writ of attendance, and disobedience is
punished, sometimes by the infliction of death, sometimes by forcibly carrying to the place of meeting the
offender, and there awarding him with slighted correction.
GEOGRAI'HICAI. STATISTICS.
68. The geographical limits comprehend the districts between the Ovens and Upper Goulburn, which
is chiefly mountainous.
69. I should suppose them to be about (60) sixty in number.
70. The number of inhabitants has varied from (300) three hundred or upwards to about (60) sixty
within the last (10) ten years. _ _
71. The number has diminished principally from intoxication and disease.
SOCIAL RELATIONS.
76 They are peaceable. War is never declared. Some injury is given ; a gin stolen, perhaps ; or, in
sudden quarrel, a man slain. Information is collected ; a council is called ; war songs sung ; lances danced
and measures determined upon ; warriors are mustered and marched stealthily into the country of the
offenders, kindling no fires, and moving from concealment only when discovery is impossible. The position of
the enemy is ascertained, and the point of attack, oftenest a detached camp, fixed. Early in the morning,
generally before dawn, a rush is made upon the devoted encampment, and amid yells and barking of dogs
aroused "too late to save the inmates, who are speared, tomahawked, nulla-nullaed. Resistance is seldom offered,
The kidney-fat is extracted from the slain, and sometimes from the living ; spoils caught up. females marched
away and hasty retreat made. As soon as they have gained a victory, the warriors are called together, and
a rejoicing corroberie is danced in token thereof; and this is continued for some time at the full moon.
RELIGION, SUPERSTITIONS, ETC.
77 Regarding their religious practices, very little is known; so little, that Europeans in general believe
them totally devoid of any. Yet they do, according to their manner, worship the hosts of heaven, and believe
particular constellations rule natural causes. Eor such they have names, and sing and dance to propitiate
and gain the favor of the Pleiades (Mormodellick), the constellation worshipped by one body as the giver of
rain • but if it should be deferred, instead of blessings, curses are apt to be bestowed upon it. In fact, they are
destitute of the refinement of mind necessary to the formation of an idea of a Living Head of all, and as a
sequence fall into gross beliefs concerning their earthly state. Some idea of a future state they possess, but
of so indifferent a nature as to leave description impossible. They believe in the magical powers crafty and
gifted men amongst them attribute to themselves. Plying, the power of invisibility, and of causing death by
supernatural means, such individuals are by the majority supposed to have, and the tales told ot the deeds
done bv them exceed in wonder an Arab tale. They tell, with every appearance of firm belief, of a warrior
surprised bv many enemies and forced to flight, being closely pursued by another possessed of supernatural
powers Both exerted their most powerful charms to disable each other, but for each “ gibber ” one cast from
his mouth the other cast another. At length he who was pursued spat a “gibber” and took refuge in it ; the
pursuer dashed in it after him, which shivered it into fragments. In the confusion the one pursued escaped
with a twig of the diameter of a pipe-stem, and so baffled his adversary.
87. The division of the year is reckoned by the full moons, and also by what they term “sleeps
(days).
From E. S. Farlier, Esq., (late Protector of Aborigines) Mount Franklin .
Division I.
GENERAL QUESTIONS.
1. I take as the boundaries of the district to which my remarks will have reference, the Campaspe on
the east • the Murray, on the north ; the Avoca, on the west; and the southern boundary of the county of
Talbot, on the south." Within these limits, inclusive of the country on both sides of the Campaspe and Avoca,
I estimate the number of natives at from 250 to 300. There are several petty tribes included in his number
I have been accustomed to apply the term “tribe” to an association of families, nearly or remotely re a
each hav£g“distinctive appellation, and occupying originally a tract of country of corresponding
designation Ordinarily, the term is vaguely used in reference to distinctions of locality originating wi* the
European, as “ the Loddon tribe,” “ the Yarra tribe,” &c. It is not possible, without a minute census, to give
the numbers in the respective petty tribes. Some are almost extinct, having one family only left , others
include from twenty to thirty individuals. , ~ „ , rm,_ Tr
2. I cannot give exact numbers. The males, however, unquestionably out-number the’ T ey
are not more unhealthy now than at former periods ; but the habits of all who are roving about on or near
the to their numbers within the peroid referredto The
diseases which have been most fatal have been diseases of the respiratory organs, dysentery, and affections
the liver. I know of no particular disease prevalent among them likely to be communicated to the
4. A little food has been occasionally given at the Loddon aboriginal school, to a few agedi and infirm
persons, relatives of children in the school. With this exception, no supplies of any kind have been given to
t P he aborigines in the district. There is a portion of land, containing about 112 it wodd
aboriginal reserve near the school. The site of the school is, however, laid out as a 1
be difficult to maintain reserves of land in the present state of the country. There is a tract ot forest land
79


Estimate of Expenditure required in formation and maintenance of Aboriginal Homesteads and Schools.
Outfits, fyc.
Buildings—One House to contain two rooms, for Schoolmaster, dining and living room, and
two or three separate sleeping rooms for children, store, and kitchen, on the plan of
the Loddon School House, built en pise, or of slabs and bark, detached school room
adjoining, say ... ... ... ...
£300
0
0
Fencing (with the aid of native labor) ...
100
0
0
Outfit, to include two horses, or four bullocks, cart, ploughs, harrows, spades, &c., and seed
250
0
0
£650
0
0
Maintenance.
Salaries. —One Manager to act as Schoolmaster and religious teacher, having charge of
stores, &c., with rations
150
0
0
Matron and Schoolmistress (his wife)
50
0
0
One Agriculturist and general laborer, with rations
75
0
0
Occasional pecuniary rewards to native laborers
25
0
0
300
0
0
Provisions, clothing, &c., for year, £900. Second and following years
500
0
0
Medical attendance
50
0
0
Total ordinary annual expenditure, to include supplies of blankets and necessaries to aged
and sick, and infirm natives
£850
0
0
on the dividing ranges between the northern and southern rivers, which, being little used by the Europeans,
and rather remote from settled localities, might be suitable for a reserve, but it has never been frequented by
the natives, and there would be some difficulty in inducing them to settle there.
5. In my own vicinity I should be happy to render aid in the distribution of supplies. Ido not think
it at all advisable or expedient that the distribution of supplies should take place at the police establishments.
It would be better in the hands of clergymen, or other resident gentlemen, who would be interested in the
moral welfare of the aborigines, and whose station and character would be a sufficient guarantee to the
Government that the supplies would be properly distributed.
6. Intemperance has greatly increased among them since gold mining commenced. The law prohibiting
publicans, or indeed any person, from giving ardent spirits to the aborigines, is like most of the sumptuary
laws referring to the sale of intoxicating liquors, in a state of utter desuetude.
7. It may be desirable, in reference to such large towns as Melbourne and Geelong; but, generally
speaking, I do not think any particularly good result may follow from a more extended application of this
restriction. I doubt its practicability, and would not employ the police in such work. 1 rarely meet natives
in the country towns.
8. None. There is a most urgent need for some arrangements to ensure medical aid for these unfortunate
people. I have given those to whom 1 have had access all the medical aid in my power ; but I have painfully
felt the want of means and authority to call in competent medical advice in acute and urgent cases. I know
several instances in which life has been sacrificed for the want of ordinary medical aid.
9. The two races, when they are associated together, live in peace. It is very long since I heard of
any case of aboriginal delinquency.
10. In no case that has come to my knowledge of late years.
11. Since the abolition of the protectorate department at the commencement of 1850, a school has been
maintained by the Government at the old aboriginal protectorate station. The number receiving instruction
has varied ; but at no period has the establishment been left without pupils. There have always been a few
other natives domiciled about the place, in addition to the two or three families civilized and settled on the
small farms allotted to them by the Government. They have formerly received religious instruction from
myself. Within the last few years it has not been in my power to maintain a distinct native service ; but
the young people at the school, and some of the other native residents, attend Divine service, which is
regularly held in the vicinity. In several instances they are sufficiently acquainted with the English language
to receive instruction from these services.
12. I think them thoroughly capable of receiving instruction ; and the obstacles to their improvement
are solely traceable to moral deficiencies.
13. I can only enunciate general principles, which I give as the results of actual experience, as to the
best mode of treating these unhappy people. Having a firm conviction that Christianity is the only effective
instrument of civilization, I think the Government and the Legislature should give ample encouragement and
support to any efforts that may be made by the different churches to bring these people under Christian
instruction. The existing missions of the Church of England and the Moravians should be well supported.
I think the other religious bodies in the country should be invited by the Government to take up the matter,
and each send out its missionary agent or missionary schoolmasters, and thus occupy some portion of the
field of labor. lam of opinion that these Christian communities are most likely to obtain and select the most
suitable men for such a work—men who would enter upon their engagements under the influence of higher
motives than a regard to the mere pecuniary recompense. I doubt the propriety of establishing mere
Government secular institutions. It has always been difficult to find suitable agents. Such institutions have
always been the objects of public jealousy and suspicion. Unless under very efficient superintendence they
are liable to be abused, and their resources mis-appropriated. I should like to see schools established wherever
a sufficient number of natives could be collected together. The relatives of the children might have supplies
of food given them, and be induced to settle down on the adjoining land, which should be reserved for their
use. A system of rewards for industry and good conduct might be established at such places. Medical
assistance should be accessible. If any of the young men should prove sufficiently steady and industrious in
their habits, allotments of land should be secured to them, and they should be assisted with seed and utensils
to commence cultivating for themselves. Such measures as these have succeeded under my own eye, and I
know no reason why, if faithfully and perseveringly followed up, they should not succeed in other cases.
As a secondary measure, of more limited application, I should recommend that every facility and
encouragement should be given to the many benevolently disposed persons who may be found in the com-
munity willing to take charge of and educate young aborigines. Mutual agreements of the nature of
apprenticeship indentures should be encouraged and protected by legislative enactment, so as to give the
persons charging themselves with such care a kind of parental authority over the native, and securing to
the latter proper support and protection.
14. 1 do not think that merely setting apart a portion of the land, unaccompanied with any other
arrangements would promote their reclamation. The native must be brought under sufficiently powerful
motives before he will relinquish his erratic habits, and it is only the influence of religion that can bring him
within the range of such motives.


Foster Shaw, JEsq., J.P. , Geelong —
Division I.
GENERAL QUESTIONS.
1. I cannot.
2. I have no opportunity of forming an opinion.
3. Either dysentery or drunkenness.
4. Occasionally blankets and provisions are given on particular occasions, when required to walk in
procession ; but lam not aware of any medical attendance. No reserves that lam aware of.
5. Geelong Police Bench.
6. They are addicted to intemperance very much.
8. There is a paid medical officer, Dr. Callan, district surgeon.
9. They are quiet. Not that I know. Services not available.
10. I cannot, indeed.
11. No.
12. They are not wanting in intelligence, but it is almost impossible to correct their migratory habits.
13. I cannot, indeed.
14. Ido not think it would succeed ; the effort was made some years ago in the neighborhood of Colac,
but was not successful.
Division 11.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.
1. Males, from 5 ft., to 5 ft. 8 in. ; average, 5 ft. 6 in. ; I have seen them to 5 ft. 10 in. Females, from
5 ft. to 5 ft. 3or 4 in. ; seldom if ever above. The weight is, I imagine, proportionally less.
2. The head is rather large, and the upper extremities are larger in proportion.
3. Dirty copper color; hair black, lank, line; eyes black; odor very peculiar.
4. Elongated from before backwards ; face broad.
5. I have seen many skulls of the natives, and could never discover any difference in weight or thickness.
The ossa triquetra are frequent, in two out of three skulls in my possession ; the os unguis and nasal meet at
an angle ; upper jaw-bone prominent.
INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY LIFE.
17. I do not know.
18. I have heard so, to the trouble of carrying it about in their migratory rambles, and that the females
are required to perform most of the work attending thereon.
19. Cannot say.
39. Chiefly opossum rugs, paint, and grass-cloth.
46. In this neighborhood I have seen them buried in a sitting position ; in other parts, they are placed
m the hollows of trees, and on the branches thereof.
49. They have an idea that, when they die, they go to Van Diemen’s Land and return white. On one
occasion they seemed to have claimed relationship with a lady of my acquaintance, avlio had a scar from a
burn on her face ; and brought the son of a deceased mother, who had been burnt in the bush, at the heads, and
ntroduced him to this lady as her son, and a most dissipated drunken rascal he was.
•
J. M. Clow , j Esq. f P.M. —
Division I.
12 - After carefully considering the question, so as to place the aborigines in as favorable a light as
possible, I am compelled to state, that the more extended my observation of them became the more continued I
became in the opinion, that their general intelligence was embraced in natural instinct of supreme degree, and
that they have not sufficient capacity to receive either literary or moral instruction ; that is, to appreciate it,
and have ability enough to apply it to use, or put it into practice, although they can be taught to repeat lessons.
J would merely urge upon the committee the plan pursued with so much success by the United
States Government towards similar tribes in her territory. There is no doubt that, in attempting to carry
out here a similar plan, serious difficulties interpose themselves which had not to be disposed of by that
Government, In America, territory abounding with game, fish, and every other auxiliary, to the support of
aborigines, and such as they had enjoyed before the appearance of Europeans amongst them, was to be
obtained by mere deportation to and allocation in some unoccupied tract such as that described ; here such
tracts cannot be obtained. In adopting the plan of locating the oborigines in such a manner that they
may be located strictly se in this country, and in striving to make it efficient in execution, recourse would
nave to be had to the purchase of tracts now held under pastoral occupancy. Assuming that it is desirable to
go deeply into the consideration of this subject, it may be as well to point out, for instance, one or two tracts
which appear adapted for such a location, which must be as in America, on a very extensive scale, or not at all.
I he first now given will be the tract of country comprised within a line between Cape Liptrap and the
eastern promontory or headland of Western Port as a sea coast line, thence by the ranges forming the
southern and eastern sides of the basin of Bass’s Diver to the eastern termination of what is laid down on
the maps as btrelecksi’s Range ; thence by a hill laid down and formerly called “ Mount Ararat ” to the
dividing range between the Yarra River and the waters which flow into the great swamp ; thence easterly
frjfA at ( - lvldin range to a point north of Cape Liptrap; thence southerly by what is laid down as
Hoddle’s Ranges to Cape Liptrap.
J liese lines embrace within them a few pastoral stations. As shown already, the purchase of such
would become inevitable in carrying out the plan efficiently ; and still more inevitable, the purchase of the
stock on them, or of other appropriate kinds of live stock to depasture within the limits of the reserve. The
game to be procured in a natural state is insufficient to meet there, as elsewhere in the colony, the probable
requirements as food for them ; and after collecting the aborigines in one spot for the purposes of amelioration
ot condition, failure of plan would certainly ensue, unless the supply of food was both abundant and easily
procurable. J
Upon even the most superficial consideration of the plan many questions of importance force themselves
into notice.
Ist. Would not the expense be very considerable to carry it out effectively ? Possibly it might. But
it must be remembered that England gave twenty millions for the benefit of the West Indian negroes who
never had benefitted the beneficiere, namely, the people of England collectively. It was not twenty millions
tor value received. But here there has been value received. The colonists have reaped millions by having
had pastures on which to rear their flocks, and have taken millions of gold from the soil. The Government
has received millions for the land alienated by sale, and have yet to receive millions for the land on which
the aborigines dwelt and subsisted, at one time, in a state of independence and health.
2ndly. Would not the congregating of aborigines (as suggested), with whom the disproportion between
the sexes is so great now, through contact with the whites, lead inevitably to serious fights and quarrels
among the males, and thus tend to diminish instead of to preserve their present numbers ? To obviate that
difficulty, it would not apparently be more absurd or ridiculous to equalise the numbers of the sexes at the
outset by importations of females from the Polynesian group, where they abound, than to con inue tho
Aborigines.— x.


course hitherto pursued of balancing, as far as possible, the proportion between the sexes of the white race ;
the white race being decidedly more capable of providing for themselves in that particular, through the
medium of correspondence, than these aborigines. This suggestion would be perfectly useless if it is desired
not to preserve the race of aborigines, hut merely to treat with some show of attention those who are alive,
and until they gradually disappear, through that want, joined with others. It cannot have escaped the
observation of the first colonists that the men having females and children avoided more than others the
haunts of the white man. This trait (if I am correct in my observation) would materially assist in giving
efficiency to any plan of location per se.
3rdly, Should residence on one or more of such reserves he made coercive on all ? I think it should at
first, to ensure success. After a fair trial, special permission to reside without the bounds could be given to
particular individuals, when it had been found that it would be impolitic not to grant the permission. It
would he desirable to have, for many reasons, more than one of such reserves; for if from any unforeseen
quarrel or other cause, it became necessary to interfere, the separation of conflicting parties could be arranged
more speedily. It might also be found necessary to order change of locality to avert sickness attributed to
residence in a particular locality.
4thly. Are there other extensive tracts similar to the one already described which could be also made
available for the purpose proposed ? Others than myself may be able to state more precisely whether on a
line of sea coast between Cape Otway and Warrnarnbool, and between that line and the occupied tracts on the
south of the Barwon and Lake country there exists an available tract ; also in the Victoria Eange. The best
mode of assisting the Murray blacks would be to plentifully supply them with boats, gear, and fishing tackle.
A hunting and live stock reserve for them might perhaps be most eligibly situated in an angle at the junction
of such rivers as the Murray and Darling.
sthly. How should the cattle and other live stock be distributed ? From my observation of the aborigines
(which commenced in 1837) I think that the most satisfactory and least expensive mode would be to render
the live stock as wild as possible, to destroy every yard and enclosure, to supply arms and ammunition to all
capable of carrying and using them, and direct the aborigines to shoot the cattle, &c., themselves, as they
required them. The exercise of hunting appears with them to be essentially necessary for the prolongation
of life and health. If buildings be erected or maintained on the proposed reserves, and supervision through
resident employees be exercised by the Government, I think it very probable that the buildings would be
infested with them ; attempting to continue the avocation of begging their daily food instead of procuring it
as formerly by their own exertions in hunting.
6thly. Would it not be impolitic and attended with some danger to arm the aborigines ? It is difficult to
see the danger or impolicy. Legislation could provide for and avert any difficulty connected with the supply of
gunpowder to them by others than the government, if good ground for the impending danger ever arose. As
,to the probability of using the arms against each other, if they have made up their minds to attempt the life
of another. I think that the offensive weapons of their own manufacture are as likely to be put in requisition
on such an occasion. The numbers of the white population are too formidable now for them ever to think of
turning the arms against them. When they have become armed to a considerable extent and proficient in the
use of the rifle or fowling piece, they might perhaps be of service on some future day as auxiliaries against an
invading foe, as in the American war. They have no deity whom they worship, and no religion which they
follow or observe ; therefore the danger which has arisen of late in the East Indies could not arise here.
7thly. Should missionaries or officers exercising supervision be tolerated amongst them, when carrying out
such a plan ? lam of opinion that they should not, and that the evil of progressive degencration,attempted
to be righted will, if they are placed by themselves as suggested, very soon right itself as to their general
health. In succeeding years, when the diseased and decrepid have become thinned out from the main body by
death, and the unnatural progress of extinction of race has become to a material degree checked or averted, it
will be time enough then to devise some plan of limited education for those susceptible of receiving it to an
advantageous degree.
Mr. L. Becker. —
Division I.
6. Yes ; and the publicans, if they do not sell ardent spirits, &c., to the natives themselves, ought not
to allow that spirits, See., be given to the aborigines even gratis, either by the landlord, his servants, or
customers in the rooms of public houses.
10. I believe they steal, impelled by necessities.
12. Not below the average intelligence of all the other uneducated masses of nations, may they belong
to the black, colored, or white races of man.
Division 11.
1. Average height, 5 feet 5 inches to 5 feet 10 inches.
2. Not actually disproportioned art- the different parts of the body ; but generally the arms and legs are
leaner than in the negro race ; but muscles and sinews are strong. Want of fat is not always a sign of want of
strength. If the natives receive sufficient food and shelter during the cold season they improve their external
appearance very soon.
3. The prevailing complexion is a chocolate brown. Hair jet black, and when combed and oiled falls in
beautiful ringlets down the cheeks and neck. Beard black, strong, curly. Eyes deep brown-black, the white
of a light yellowish hue. A peculiar odor is perceptible, but not for want of cleanliness ; it is very much like
the well known odor observed as coming from negroes, but not quite so strong. It is to me as if phosphorus
was set free during the process of perspiration. It is very likely this odor which enables the horses to discover
the proximity of aborigines, and thus saving many times the members of exploring expeditions from being
surprised. Leichardt, Gregory, and others describe sufficiently the mode in which the horse shows its
uneasiness.
For 4 and 5 of Division 11. see explanation of the plate.
Mr. W. N. Waller, Wyuna Station, Lower Goulburn. —
Division I.
1. I should estimate the number of natives belonging to the Lower Goulburn to be about thirty souls.
This not to include the Murchison blacks, or those of the Murray or Campaspe, who occasionally visit
this station.
2. The ages of these natives are similar to those of an average number of Europeans to be found in this
country, and the masculine sex predominates over the female, but not iu a very remarkable degree.
3. The mortality during the last ten years has been great, arising from war, drunkenness, consumption
or phthisiscal disorders, and venereal affections; which, amongst the females especially, have caused many
deaths. With the exception of this latter disease, lam not aware of any complaint likely to be communicated
to the white population.
4. At present, nor lately, the aborigines have received neither clothing, food, nor medical attendance from
Government. They live principally on opossums, fish, and yams (which latter grow wild), and occasionally


they get kangaroo, and emu, and native turkey. There are no aboriginal reserves near here, nor are there I
believe, places adapted for such.
5. I think there would be no difficulty in finding a proper person (resident) who would distribute any
supplies, &c., which government might be disposed to grant them.
6. The natives arc much addicted to intemperance, and the publicans do sell ardent spirits to them and
that too to a considerable extent.
7. It would be beneficial to prevent them from coming near the towns, and in most cases the police
would be able to see that the regulation was enforced.
8. There is no doubt, for a proper remuneration, that a medical officer could be found to attend them.
9. The natives arc quiet and innoffensive. They are useful to squatters at times and are employed in
sheep-washing, cutting bark, making brush fences ; and the young boys make good stock-men, and arc
excellent horsemen, and in many instances live with the whites and receive wages.
10. At no time have they been compelled to steal from the settlers, as the country produces spontaneously
sufficient food for their subsistence.
11. Yes, in former years.
12. They are a sharp witted race, and, if taken when very young, would learn aptly, but I should think
have not much depth of intellect.
14. I consider that all the population under twenty years of ago, would gladly embrace the opportunity
of acquiring land and would settle down, provided that their occupation was not laborious. The land should
be unalienable ; otherwise they would sell it for grog.
Division 11.
1 should think the height of the males is 5 ft. 71 in. and of the females 5 ft. 3 in.
2. The legs in all instances are remarkably small, especially the calves.
3. The prevailing complexion is a dull brown copper color, with occasionally a yellowish cast. The
hair black, rather coarse, curly, but not like that of an African negro. Byes large, animated and expressive,
and of a very dark brown ; and there is a peculiar smell which pervades the whole body.
5. The skull is remarkably thick. A blow which would kill a European would have very little effect on
one of them. These Lower Goulburn natives always knock out the two upper middle teeth as a distinctive
mark of their tribe.
13. The native language is not known to philologists ; it is particularly euphonious, as it is for the
most part composed of vowels and liquids.
14. Nos. 1,2, 3, are expressed thus —wulgthuwul, wulthuwul wulthuwul, wulgthuwullce ;or perhaps
spelt like “wultuwul”; and if they want to express a large number, they repeat the word “wultuwul” many
times over. The names of places near here are these, viz :
Wyuna* (* the final “a” soft in all.)
TathumnSra
Madoula
Embra
Toureptca
Tissica
Lambana
Cotupna
Tunaba
Oundanja
Korowa
Gulgyla
Cocomo
Most tribes have different dialects, for the Kilmore blacks differ from those of the Goulburn ; and in
fact a tribe in the Portland district could hardly understand a word if placed amongst these.
18. They manifest great disinclination to part with their children, and seem to love those which are
half-castes still more than those which are purely from native parents.
19. Children do not seem to be deposed ;as there are several instances of deformed, which seem to be
well taken care of.
20. No.
21. No.
24. At from thirteen to fourteen years, and it is even earlier in the female.
32. Chastity is not cultivated, as most of the native girls for a small remuneration wili have connection
with the whites.
33. It is generally believed that a woman having borne a child by a white man will not have children
afterwards by one of her own race.
35. Polygamy exists, but I think that none have more than two wives at once.
38. They live principally on opossums and fish, with a native yam somewhat resembling a parsnip.
They live entirely on what nature provides, and cook almost entirely by roasting on the hot ashes; but at
times bake their meat in a cavity in the ground, when they season it with the young leaves of the gum or
peppermint tree. They have no fermented or other liquors, and frequently make long fasts of thirty-six hours;
but when they have plenty, eat to repletion, and cannot compare with the whites for constant and prolonged
exertion. Fire-arms in their hands are harmless, as they have a most wholesome dread of the whites.
•39. The sole article of dress was formerly an opossum cloak for both sexes, and when at their own camps
they usually sit entirely naked. These are mostly tatooed with bars across the shoulders and breast.
40. The “ corroboree” or dance is universal.
42. There are many instances of very old men ; and on the whole, those who do not partake of the vices
of the whites, attain to a good old age. The men seem to be the longer-lived.
43. The sick are attended by a native doctor, and seem to be well cared for ; but he trusts to the effects
of charms and spells, than to the virtues of medicinal plants. The prevailing disease seems to be phthisis and
liver complaints. The first arising from their habits of sleeping out, and throwing aside the clothes which
they may have worn for months, when living near the whites, combined with want of shelter from the changes
of the weather.
46. They now generally bury their dead.
49. They believe in the doctrine of annihilation.
50. Their only buildings, if such they may be called, consist of a few sheets of bark placed slanting
against a horizontal beam, supported at the ends by forked sticks, and are placed without regard to order.
They possess a great number of mongrel-bred dogs, derived from frequent crosses of the native dingo and
European varieties, and are used entirely for hunting the smaller species of kangaroo, &e. Each tribe has its
territorial rights and adhere to the boundaries belonging to them. They cry out much that the whites have
taken away their land.
70. There numbers are rapidly decreasing, owing to the effects of venereal disease and use of ardent
spirits.
72. They adhere in the main to the customs and habits of their forefathers.
74. Not in the bonds of matrimony.
75. Almost every one under twenty-five years of age speaks English, quite sufficient for general
purposes of conversation.
76. They are not a quarrelsome race ; and the spear, tomahawk, and boomerang constitute their
weapons.
These remarks are intended to apply to the natives of the Lower Goulburn, below Murchison, and
comprise those of the adjacent country, and bordering on the river.


\_Several of the gentlemen to whom “ Circulars ” were sent having replied in a general way, their answers cannot be
classified. Subjoined are extracts from their communications .]
from Thomas Embling , Esq., M.L.A. —In reply to your queries I desire respectfully to state that I have
not mingled with the native tribes for some years. 1851 and part of 1852 I spent in wanderings over the
north-western portions of the colony, and as often as I could I occupied myself studying the native character,
and in affording them professional assistance. During this period I have often been amongst the aborigines,
quite away from other Europeans. 1 have travelled with them as my assistants up and down the distant
interior, and have employed them as opportunity offered. When I returned to Melbourne I left the native
peoples with the impression on my mind, which I still retain, that they have been and are a cruelly wronged
and injured race; that the protectorates, as a rule, have been a gross mockery, delusion, and sham ; and
that these hapless beings have been ruthlessly dealt with, with the distinct and prevalent notion of hastening
their extinction, and the sooner the better. My own judgment of them is, that they are capable of moral
elevation, but that the means for their destruction has placed such a prospect almost beyond the bounds of
possibility. I found them to be truthful, fully reliable, most grateful for kindness, their gratitude showing
itself in almost childlike expressions of delight and confidence. The lubras, I believe, as a rule, and as a fact,
taking their view of social life, are very chaste, and dutiful to their coolies. The gross immoralities, the
degrading examples and temptations held out to these simple people by some settlers and their dependents,
are such as to call for the most firm condemnation. They were (of course I write generally), most atrocious.
The aborigines were treated as very dogs ; although when, as I have seen, they were treated kindly, they fully
appreciated such kindness, and the settlers always found them in such circumstances, most valuable bush
allies ; and had the bush pioneers been all of the class immediately referred to, so reliant were the aborigines
upon the kind white fellows, that some more grateful memories would have thrown their “ lights ” upon the
“shadows” which have shrouded the last days of a dying race; but, as a general rule, kindness was not
the prevailing feature of “bush life,” and the black fellow is passing away, unheeded by his white brother.
Their language is full and expressive, abounding in consonants,'and capable of as much force, beauty,
and elegance as are the tongues of Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
Their religious “ notions ” are chiefly those of a gloomy character. They have “no hope.” It is all a
shadowy thing without a foundation. I could not find a name for “ God.” 1 have often and often held long
talks with their doctors and their chief men, and I could gather nothing of moment from them. The chief
burden of the language of their most intelligent men was, that “ the black fellow would go away because
white fellow come.” They felt themselves to be a dying race, and that no effort they could make would avert
their destiny. They could not comprehend (what I found most difficult to communicate) the rudimentary
ideas of sin, of transgression, moral law, and of a hereafter ; and these efforts of instruction were made when
listeners and speaker alike were as willing to learn as to teach, when some physical ill had been relieved, and
a spirit of affectionate confidence fully obtained. Appeals to the glory of the sun, the moon, the violence of
the storm, awakened no thought, excepting of the “ present.” In fact, the fingerings of tradition, although
indicating a clear connexion with the thoughts and creeds of the northern nations, yet are almost lost from
among these aborigines. A faint idea of a “ Elood,” of a “ Big Fellow angry long while ago,” and of the
subsequent hopeless degradation of the black fellow from an anterior higher state of existence, and the opinion
that the supersession of the black fellow by the white fellow was, as a law of necessity—inexorable necessity,
are all I could trace out, and these are but poor and feeble glimmerings ; they have no weight on the native
mind. Hopelessness is their prevailing feeling.
That they are capable of intellectual elevation cannot be doubted by an impartial mind.
That they will all speedily pass away is also without doubt ; that wo may anticipate. Disease, often
wilfully introduced among them, and drink, which they can easily obtain, together with the absence of the
same facilities of roaming free over the interior, are doing their work. Could they, or the children, be isolated
from the white man, be well fed and cared for, probably some good might be done; but to secure this their
liberty must be infringed upon. The case is one of extreme difficulty. The Moravian mission, I think, has
looked at it in the right fight, and their scheme I approve of.
Robert Burke, Esq., J.P., Mount Shadwell. —The number of aborigines in the Western Province does
not exceed one thousand souls. In my own immediate neighborhood they do not number more than fifty ;
of this number about thirty are men, twelve are women, and eight children. This number is only the remnant
of the tribe, which at one time consisted of several hundred souls ; but the decrease has for several years been
much in excess of the increase. Diseases, the unavoidable consequences of r ice, have impaired the strength
of the men and the fecundity of the women. The race is evidently undergoing physical degradation ; which,
before many years, will terminate their existence as a separate race. The debasing influences are prostitution
and intemperance, to which may be added the total want of independent feelings. If it were possible to
remove the men from the fatal influence of the public houses, and to deter the women from submitting to an
intercourse disgraceful to both races, it would, perhaps, be possible to restore to the natives that feeling of
independence which is now all but lost amongst them, and without which they will sink.
As an experiment, I would suggest that, some central place in each province should be selected, and
that every encouragement should be given to the natives willing to locate themselves upon the reserve. Huts,
land, implements, and seed, should be supplied to those who were willing to cultivate the land. If the effort
were attended with success, a school and a Christian minister could be added to the establishment. An asylum
should be opened to the infirm, the sick, and the aged. If the natives became thoroughly convinced of our
desire to benefit them, no inconsiderable number, I think, would take advantage of the opportunity afforded
to them of bettering their condition. But it would take some time before they would learn to appreciate
our motives, and also before we could hope to counteract the strength of their evil habits. Such measures
■would not, perhaps, prolong their existence for many years. It may be too late to save the race from the
decree of extinction ; but their adoption would at least afford us the consolatory reflection that we had adopted
measures which we hoped might prolong the existence, and which certainly would alleviate the miseries of a
race which owe their present physical and moral degradation to the presence of a superior race.
In my district the natives are perfectly quiet. In former times depredations of a serious character
were committed, and many fives were sacrificed.
The services of the natives are often made use of by settlers. I have had natives employed at every
kind of station work.
I only know of one aboriginal family who have embraced Christianity in this district.
It would not, I think, be desirable to give clothes or supplies to the natives, unless they could be
induced to reside together in some central place. But if the committee should determine upon giving them
assistance of this kind, there will be no difficulty in finding proper persons to distribute the public bounty.
As a race, I believe the intelligence of the natives has been much under-rated. The introduction of
civilization has not tended to develop their character advantageously; but on the contrary, they have suffered
a moral and physical degradation which has re-acted upon their intellectual powers. Had we been able to
reclaim them from barbarism without subjecting them to the temptations of evils which have enslaved them,
we should have found them an intelligent race. Physically, morally, and intellectually the race has undergone
and is undergoing an amount of depression which, according to an invariable law of nature, tends to the
extinction of the race ; and we should, therefore, form an unfair estimate of the race if we judged them by
their present degraded condition.


The natives believe in the existence of an evil spirit which occasionally embodies itself and appears to
them. Any misfortune that happens they attribute to the direct interference of this evil spirit. When one of
a tribe dies they endeavour to kill an individual belonging to a neighboring tribe, in order, as they believe, to
appease, by so doing, the anger of the evil spirit. A young black boy, who has been in my service for many
years, told me that, when a boy, he lived with his grandmother, and that one night after they had all retired to
rest he rose to go to the fire that was burning in their camp. On rising he saw a tall white figure stand
beside the fire, and as he looked at the figure it became visibly much larger. It then uttered words in a
tongue which he did not understand. On rising in the morning he told his grandmother, who said she knew
the figure well. It was the evil genius of the tribe, and that it came to warn her of the approach of death.
She died two days after. 1 have heard the natives relate many other instances of the supernatural appearance
of the evil spirit. Ido not think that they have any clear idea of a Creator, hut lam inclined to think that
they entertain an instinctive idea of a resurrection. When they bury their dead they endeavor to obtain as
much tea and sugar and articles of clothing as they possibly can to bury with the dead, for the use of the
spirit of their departed friend.
1 regret that I am unable to give you any' further information upon the subject of your circular ; and
have merely to express a hope that your deliberations will bring about a change in the condition of the
unhappy race now under consideration.
Messrs. T. and C. Peevor, Langley. —We regret that we are not in a position to reply to your queries, or
to give you any information respecting the aborigines of this country. During a residence of eight years in
this neighbourhood, we have not met with more than one party of them.
/’. Call, Esq., P.M., Carishroo/t. —There are not any (aborigines) about this part of the country, and I
have it not in my power to supply you with any historical knowledge respecting them.
William Lavender, Esq., P.M., Kyneton. —ln reference to your circular, relative to the aborigines of this
district, I have the honor to acquaint you that they have long since disappeared, and I do not recollect meeting
a single native of any tribe, during my residence (six years) in this part of the country. Tor many' miles round
Kyneton, the land is enclosed, and under cultivation; but even in the forests of Mount Macedon, Jeffreys, Seven
Mile, and Clowes, extending to Mount Blackwood and Balian, 1 never heard of one ever having been seen in
them during my time.
John C. Thomson, Esq.. J.P., Gisborne. —ln reply to your letter, requesting me to forward to you answers
to a number of queries respecting tire aborigines, I have the honor to state that, in the district in which I am
police magistrate, 1 have not seen one who claimed to belong to it ; and with regard to the Western Port
district, of which I am Commissioner of Crown Lands, the aborigines live chiefly on the banks of the rivers
Goulburn and Murray, the extreme boundaries of my district, which on account of my magisterial duties I
have been prevented from visiting, except in parts ; so that they have very seldom come under my particular
notice.
C. C. Dowling, Esq., P. I/., Parkland. —ln the district under my supervision no aborigines have been
known to exist during the past five years.
P. C. Crespigny, Esq., Warden, Amherst. —As there are no aborigines in the district under my supervision,
I am unable to afford the select committee the information they seek.
T. D. Heron, Esq., P. .)/., /• ryerstovm. —l beg to state that there are no aboriginals residing in the district
under my charge; and therefore I am unable to furnish any information on the subject.
S. T. Clissold, Esq, P.M., Ballaarat. — During my short residence in this district 1 have seen but five or
six aborigines, and have had no opportunity of judging of their characters, &e., &c.
William 11. Gaunt, Esq., Warden, Indigo. —During my residence in the colony I have been exclusively
employed upon the gold-fields ; and as 1 have found it necessary in every case where tiie natives have visited
the diggings to cause, for tiieir own security, their immediate removal, I regret that it is out of my power
to afford the honorable committee any reliable information.
Henry C. Jeffreys, Esq, J.P., Birnewang Station, Campaspe River. —I have the honor to state that, in the
part of the district which comes under my own observation, the number of natives has diminished so much
that they can hardly be said to exist as a tribe. The Jfew families that are left are invariably to be found
hanging about the neighborhood of flic public houses, and are perfectly indifferent to everything but obtaining
the price of a glass of spirits. Even this small remnant is fast disappearing. Deaths are frequent and disease
prevalent; and in the course of a few years the total extinction of this tribe may be expected. Under these
circumstances it is of course quite out of my power to answer questions relating to quite a different state
of tilings.
W. 11. F. Mitchell, Esq., J.P., Burford, Kyneton. —lt is not in my power to afford you much information
respecting the aborigines, who at one time formed no inconsiderable portion of the inhabitants of this part of
the colony. I settled in this, the Mount Macedon district in 1842. At that time the natives were numerous,
and I have frequently seen assemblages of some hundreds near my present residence, and as many as fifty
young children in a party at play. There was, however, a sensible diminution in their numbers before the
discovery of gold. I left the district in 1862; I returned to it at the beginning of this year; and it would seem
that, since the diggings opened the native race has entirely disappeared. I believe that a few individuals still
exist at the protectorate at Jim Crow, but as a race their history is a tale of the past,
Alfred Chenery, Esq., Delatite. —The fact of not having had any opportunity of judging of their (the
aborigines) condition for some years past will preclude my giving detailed answers to those questions ; hut,
from former experience of their habits, I may be allowed to suggest that the only chance (in my opinion) of
saving a remnant of the aborigines is to take away the children and educate them beyond the influence of
their respective tribes; at the same time doing what can be effected to ameliorate the condition of such adults
as may be left by serving out to them blankets, flour, &c., where needed.
W. Price, Esq., P M., Beechworth. — I regret 1 am not in a position to afford you the information called
for, as I do not recollect ever having seen any aborigines of this colony on the gold fields under my charge.
The Bishop of Melbourne. —l regret that I am not able to afford the members of the committee of the
Legislative Council of Victoria, appointed to enquire into the present condition of the aborigines, any infor-
mation that will be of use to them in their enquiries ; as my knowledge, derived from reports of others, is not
sufficiently definite to enable me to reply to their queries. I would, however, if 1 may be allowed, suggest
one particular, which does not appear to have been heretofore sufficiently attended to, for the consideration of
the committee, viz,, the enforcement of the law for the protection of the lives of individuals, and for the
prevention of war between different tribes. In a recent case two aborigines have been convicted of murder ;
but I believe that in many other cases no attempt lias been made by magistrates for the discovery and
punishment of criminals ; and not many years ago a tribe in Gipps Land was almost wholly destroyed by
another from a distance. It appears to have been forgotten that the law is intended for the protection of life ;
and that the question for consideration is not so much what degree of guilt attaches to the man who takes
away the life of another, as how others may be effectually deterred from following his example.
James Blair, Esq. P.M., Portland. —For the last four or five years ray duties have confined me altogether
to the town ; in fact, I could not absent myself without leave, and with the exception of an occasional stockman
or bullock-driver in tire service of a settler, 1 have seldom seen an aboriginal during that period. Seventeen or
eighteen years ago, large parties of aborigines used frequently to visit Portland, and were to be met with in
almost every part of the district ; but year after year their numbers have diminished ; and about ten years
ago, when the last permanent camp that I saw was formed here, it did not consist of more than thirty in-
dividuals of all ages and sexes, and of these six or seven died, within as many weeks. As each death occurred,
the body was placed in a shallow grave, lightly covered with earth, and having a quantity of dead leaves and
Aborigines.— y.


Names and Ages of the Aborigines
, male and female, occupying the Yalley of the
Wannoii, from the lower fall to Sandford.
AGE.
AGE.
1. Pinnoit brunbringil
42
23
2. Warbling baugbal
40 =
Mungweeringyar ...
3. Licouerrimin ...
35
Kalkmerrimin
40
4. Weerungweeroit
40
Youwill
42
5. Mullupmoal ...
33
Alkingorrimin
40
6. Pookoiweerip ...
50
Poorgooying
25
7. Bialgoolun
19
Bilprin
... 45
8. Nechmoallurt...
17
9. Koioket
60
10. Beegpoonerrirain
10
Coyam
30
11. Yammawellang
30 =
12. Biawgerung ...
30 =
Kcringwerangun.
13. Tureep
19
14. Coot arung
30
25
15. Yillilbrin
30 =
Poorait poonanung
16. Tricarait
35
17. Wirrygomirrimin
28
18. Corungberrimin
35
40
19. Youiwong
40 =
Brucammuc
20. Allaloop
50 =
Bondigmingung ...
40
21. Galgal
32
Woonerriming.
22. Whoitnum
21
23. Pripinkapoon ...
20
brushwood heaped upon it, with a view, as it occurred to me, to its being consumed by a bush-fire, and the
camp removed a few hundred yards from it. They were all in a shocking state of filth, disease, and pulmonary
consumption, which had caused the deaths ; and was supposed to have been induced by exposure to wet and
cold while under the influence of medicines some charitable person had administered to them.
Foster Fyans , Esq., J.P. , Balyang , Geelong. —The only statement I could offer would commence in 1837.
This, I think, would be conclusive, as to the rapid decrease of the aborigines. On my arrival here. Governor
Bourke ordered me to assemble all the native population, to receive gifts furnished by him. He ordered
Buckley, a man who resided in and about this place for about thirty-three years, to render me his assistance.
I considered we assembled all the native popolation within thirty miles, amounting to two hundred and ninety-
seven men, women, and children ; each receiving clothing, a blanket, and a portion of flour. I consider at the
present time there are not twenty of the two hundred and ninety-seven alive ; the very few I occasionally meet,
even at that time children, and now in appearance old, aged, and infirm. I therefore conclude the race will be
extinct in a short time ; and I may add, from my experience for many years as Commissioner of Crown
Lands in a large extended district, Portland Bay and the Wimraera, that on my numerous visits, in every part,
I could i>erccive the rapid decrease of these poor people. I often had to regret the misapplied funds at Mount
Rouse. Had my suggestion met the approval of Mr. La Trobe, I think great good results would have
followed. My proposal was to keep the tribes on their own grounds, and the Government supplying the
settler witli a ration of flour for each individual, and a blanket occasionally. I am of opinion this system
would have operated well. I have met with many natives on runs working well and generally useful, and well
taken care of by the squa!ter.
Samuel Pratt Winter , Esq. —
The mark = indicates the women who live with the men whose names are on the same lines. Xos. 10
male and 21 female are the only children in the trihc. The ages given are as near as 1 can calculate ;
all under 22 years are correct. The boys Nos. 7 and 8 have lived with me for the past three years, and
have conducted themselves remarkably well. They have purchased mares with their wages, and take great
interest in their property. The old natives generally live near the public houses, and are frequently drunk.
It is commonly reported that they obtain money from the white men for the prostitution of their women,
which will probably account for the remarkable circumstance of there being only two children in the tribe—
both half-caste. The influenza caused the death of a great number of the aborigines during the winter el 1843.
Previous to 1837 they had large well constructed winter huts, which were destroyed by cattle ; they never
rebuilt them, but lived under breakwinds of bark and boughs ; and no doubt the exposure to the cold
and damp of the winters of 1842-3 brought on pulmonary disease. Froni 1836 to 1841 the winters were
remarkably dry and mild. I do not believe the aborigines have ever suffered from want Oi food. Ine
indigenous animals are far more numerous than in 1837. During the winter months the natives obtain
food whenever they require it at the settlers stations. There has never been a Government reserve in this
neighborhood for the aborigines, and T believe they would prefer their roving independent life to any other. It
would be advisable to appoint a medical officer, and provide a hospital and residence for the sick and infirm.
Clothing and blankets of some peculiar texture should be manufactured in England, and a law should be trained
similar to that which prohibits the public from purchasing the clothing of soldiers. The police magistrate
should appoint a trustworthy person to distribute the clothing to natives bringing certificates signed by
respectable persons, which should be also signed by the police magistrate. Since the year 1839 the aborigines
have been quiet and harmless, and I always found them honest ; the depredations committed b;. them pnor to
that date were chiefly in retaliation for civil injuries inflicted on them by the whites. The natives do not like
any regular or monotonous work. The boys in my employment are generally occupied stock-keeping, an
employment they like. No effort has been made to give either secular or religious instruction to the natives,
and unless they could be removed from intercourse with white men, and the law prohibiting the sale or
supply of intoxicating liquors strictly enforced, it would be impossible to convince the aborigines of the
advantages of religious precepts which are completely disregarded by the European population. 1 think
it probable the natives could be induced to send some of their children to school. 1 observed several very
intelligent looking half-caste children with the Lake Condah tribe ; I believe them to be fully as intelligent
and capable of receiving instruction as white children. When educated, the experiment could be tried
of settling them in some industrial pursuit, under the guidance of an European who would have an interest in
their welfare.
INDIVIDUAL AX'D FAMILY LIFE.
The aborigines are remarkably kind to and patient with children, which are allowed to grow as nature
designed them "They are instructed very early in swimming and throwing small spears at objects rolled along
the ground by their parents. I have never known any instance of the natives having made improper use
of fire arms. The present generation have not adopted their ancestors’ custom of tatoomg. When they have
a regular supply of food they do not consume .as much as Europeans. About every three months a koiorn or
General meeting of tribes takes place, for three or four days hunting, feasting, and amusement They are kind
to the sick and infirm ; abstinence is the chief remedy for ill health. The dead were formerly deposited in a
hollow tree and covered with bark and sods of earth ; latterly, in some instances, the\ have buried tneir dead.
86


Eighteen or twenty years back the natives had an idea that the Europeans inherited the departed spirits
of their ancestors, but a further acquaintance with white men dispelled an illusion so uncomplimentary. The
natives had formerly a dread of an evil spirit which loved darkness. About twenty years back a large number
of natives rushed terror stricken, in the middle of the night, into my hut, and told me that “Weering” had
driven them from a spring about a mile off, where they had camped ; they described him as having a
long white face, glaring eyes, and horns. It proved to be one of ray Hereford cows, the light of the camp fire
having been reflected from the white face and horns. The natives do not now dread walking about at night.
John Hepburn, Esq., Smeaton. —Although X have been nearly twenty-one years on this station, I am not
possessed of any information respecting the natives. On my taking up this country I fonnd it necessary to keep
them at a respectable distance,from circumstances not necessary to detail. They have always had great dread
of me, the very few that remain even up to this period ; however, you must not be led to suppose I have
treated them ill; I never injured one of them in any way.
After the establishment of the aboriginal reserve at Jim Crow, near Mount Franklin, 1 had very little
trouble with the natives. I de not think there was any fixed tribe in this quarter; the general resort was
further to the north on the Loddon. In the early days there used to be about sixty men, that is the largest
number I ever saw, with about half the number of women, and perhaps twelve or fourteen children. This
district appears to have been visited principally for hunting by various tribes from different quarters. There
still remains what is called ovens, where they cooked their game ; and if one might judge from them, this was a
great mustering place ; and I observed that all those monuments arc upon elevated spots, no doubt, to prevent
surprise.
Of late years, we have hardly seen a native black, without about Mount Franklin, and occasionally
a few drunk about the diggings. For my part, I consider all efforts that have been made to civilize them a
perfect failure. Ido not think there is a w-ant of capacity or intelligence, but a great want of application.
Only yesterday, I heard of a man who I know was brought up in Mr. E. S. Parker’s house from a child, and
who now, from account, is perfectly lost, from the habit of drinking spirits.
Andrew McCrae, Esq., P.M., Kilmore. — As the queries are numerous, and much of the information
asked is upon point s that lam not competent to deal with, i beg to answer generally; That having seen
much of the aborigines back in the early days of the colony and afterwards, I have always been of opinion
that, if properly treated, particularly if faith was strictly kept with an aboriginal, he generally fulfilled his
engagement, and in certain kinds of labor, shepherding, stock-keeping, horse-breaking, bullock-driving, and
reaping, he frequently proved a most useful help.
In confirmation of this fact 1 beg leave to refer you to a report furnished by me, at the desire of His
Honor Superintendent La, Trobe, for the blue book, in" the year 1853, if I remember rightly ; from which it
will be seen, that a party of natives of the Tara tribe, in Gipps Land, worked constantly at reaping for a con-
siderable space of time, and assisted in saving a large quantity of grain; which otherwise, at that time —shortly
after the discovery of the gold, when labor was not to be had—would have been lost.
The report above alluded to was sent home by Mr. La Trobe, "was printed in the Blue Book, and re-
printed in several of the Scotch newspapers.
87


EXPLANATORY REMARKS ON PLATE.
Pie. 1. Portrait of Billy, a native from Port Pairy. The likeness was taken by me from life in 1854.
His age was eighteen years ; height, five feet two inches; complexion, light chocolate-brown ; flat nose ; jaws,
very much projecting ; mouth, large; lips, sharp, edged with a reddish hue; teeth, complete and pure white ;
chin, small and receding ; well-shaped eyes, the iris nearly black, the white of the eye has a light yellowish
tint ; eye-lashes, long and black ; head, well-formed ; forehead, rising nearly perpendicular from horizontal;
black and bushy eye-brows ; hair, jet black and full. His voice is a fine manly baritone. Chest, broad ;
neck, short ; powerful arms ; legs, not very full or fat, but strong and a little outwards bent, so called O legs,
in juxtaposition to the X legs. He was formerly in the native police force, and afterwards servant of
Dr. Youl, in Melbourne ; left Ids native place when a boy.
Pig. 2. Portrait of Tilki, a native from near the mouth of the Darling River. When I took his likeness,
in 1854, his age was twenty years. His general appearance is like the former’s, with the exception that the
skin is a little darker, the hair more curly, nose shorter, mouth smaller. His height is five feet seven and a
half inches. One tooth in front of jaw is missing, in consequence of a ceremony performed on reaching
manhood. His tribe does not know the boomerang ; their chief weapon is the spear (rocki), thrown with the
assistance of the yunka (the woomera of the blacks near Port Phillip), the kalke (waddi), and the shield
(woomi). They have only one word for hair, beard, eye-brows, eye-lashes viz., gras. While I was drawing this
well-formed man’s profile, I observed that the thumb of his left hand was in a crippled state, and asking him
the cause of it, he answered, “ I was a child and on my mother’s back, when she, with other black women,
searched for mussel-fish on the Murray near Mount Dispersion. There some men belonging to Mitchell’s
exploring expedition tired into us, and a musket ball carried off part of my thumb, which never grew afterwards
so well as the one I have left here on my right hand.” The historical fact just related by him enabled me to
put down his exact age, which seldom or never is known to themselves. Tilki (his native name) was in 1854
at Kalcyne, a station on the Murray.
Pigs. 3,4, 5, 6. Skull of King John, a chief of the Adelaide tribe. It is a well -preserved skull of a young
man. The bones are very much developed and of great strength. The peculiar character of the Australian
race is in this specimen well represented.
Parietal diameter ... ... ... 5J inches
Occipito-frontal diameter 7J „
Width of forehead between the temples 3f „
The zygoma, although very strong, is less projecting and less curved than in the Mongolian race. The upper
jaw slants so much forwards that the facial angle is lowered to 85 degrees. In the same proportion the chin
falls backwards. In consequence of the obliquity of the jaw, the front teeth are also in an oblique direction, so
much so that, after some time, by chewing and gnawing, the teeth are worn away in such a manner as to
resemble molar teeth, for which indeed they are often mistaken. The form of the upper half of the cranium,
when viewed from behind or in front, has a pyramidal shape, which I found to be the case with all the native
skulls I had under examination. This appears to me to be a typical characteristic of the Australian race.
Pigs. 7,8, 9, 10. Skull of a native from Port Phillip district.
Parietal diameter 5 inches
Occipito-frontal diameter 7 ~
Width of forehead between the temples 3 J „
The skull belonged to a very old individual, as will be seen by the disappearance of the sutures, with the
exception of some traces left near the occiput, by the alveola; of all the molar teeth being filled out with an
osseous matter, and the few remaining teeth worn down to the roots. The crest of the head shows two
peculiar ridges, with an indent of the skull between them, stretching from the occiput up to the middle of the
head. Pacial angle, 85 degrees.
Pigs. 11, 12, 13, 14, represent a skull of a native of the Warrnambool tribe.
Parietal diameter ... ... ... 5 ! t inches
Occipito-frontal diameter ... ... 7J „
Width of forehead ... 3| „
Like the former, a very old head, to which it has great similarity, excepting in the formation of the zygomatic
arch, that being greater ; and in the formation of the upper jaw, that being shorter.
LUDWIG BECKER.
Melbourne, January, 1859.




APPENDICES.
APPENDIX A.
“POONINDIE MISSION.
“ To the Editor of the Register,
“ Sir, — I have obtained permission to offer to you, for insertion in the Register , the following interesting
and authentic account of the present state of the Poonindie Institution, which will, I believe, bo gratifying to
your readers, and all who take an interest in the aborigines.
“ I am, Sir, &c..
“A. ADELAIDE.
“ September 18, 1858.”
“ Having just returned from Port Lincoln and the Mission Station at Poonindie, where I have been
spending a week, I thought you might like to hear what impression has been made on my mind, arising out
of personal observation of the natives at the station.
“ Mr. Hammond having met Mrs. 11. and myself at Port Lincoln, escorted us to Poonindie. We did not
arrive at our destination before the night set in ; then most welcome was the sight of lights dancing about
in the little village as we wound our way through the dark trees, and crossing the River Tod ascended the
beautiful slope on the top of which the schoolroom loomed in sight, with the little attendant cottages of the
natives. The noise made by the approaching horses caused several doors to be opened, and the bright
glare of the sheaoak fires was a most cheering and homely greeting for us chilly mortals after our sea-
coast ride of twelve miles. We were kindly received by Mrs. Hammond, and after a hearty meal
the bell rang for evening prayers. I was particularly struck with the earnest, simple, and reverent
manner of the natives during worship. My old friends Konnillan and Tolbunos (of St. John’s Sunday-
school) knew me at once, and appeared glad to see me. They always lead the hymns with their
flutes ; both of these young men read and conduct the services of our Church by turns on Sunday morning,
when Mr. Hammond is absent celebrating divine service at St. Thomas’s, Port Lincoln. Most of the
natives have a good ear for music ; their time is correct, and they join most heartilj' in the responses
as well as in the singing. It is most edifying to join in the worship of the Almighty with these dark
children of the soil. I felt more gratification and real satisfaction than I have experienced in uniting in
worship with many a congregation of white Christians. The behavior of our dark brethren would prove a
good example for many a thoughtless person to follow in this respect. I will now attempt to give you a
sketch of their week-day course of life. During the present (winter) season the first bell rings at 7 o’clock
a.m., prayers at half-past 7, then breakfast ; at half-past 9 the people go to their respective employments,
some to ploughing, some trenching and draining, &c., others (the boys chiefly) herding cattle, milking the
cows, and digging the garden. The women and girls go to morning school, where reading, writing, spelling,
and sewing, also arithmetic, are taught. The duties of schoolmistress is conducted by Miss Hammond.
Most of the women make their own dresses. At twelve o’clock the men come back to dinner, which is cooked
by Mindise. I believe several take the office of cook and butcher by turns. All the meals are prepared in the
large kitchen. The children dine first, then the men and women. The bread they bake, made from
flour ground out of wheat grown on the station, is capita! ; there is a large brick oven which will bake a
batch sufficient to last for several days. I was much amused at observing the conduct of the “ wurley”
natives, as they call the Port Lincoln natives, who congregate, especially during the winter months, in the
neighbourhood of the station. They treat the Poonindie “settlers” with marked deference, and arc literally
made “ hewers of wood and drawers of w r ater” for their more civilized brethren, in return for which, they are
liberally supplied with food, and further rewarded for good behaviour, with tobacco. Our friends at Poonindie
evidently look upon them as inferior beings. Seeing two ill-clad natives busy scrubbing out the kitchen, and
another occupied in tending the fire and pouring water into a large pot containing rice, hanging over the fire, I
asked who they were; the reply I received was, “ Oh, only wild blackfellows.” These wildblackfellows are often
induced to leave their children at the station, where they know they will be cared for. In the afternoon the
women, children, and boys attend the school, when the men again return to work, from which they return at
half-past three or four o’clock ; after tea the men willingly attend the school to be instructed by the Rev. Mr.
Hammond in writing, reading, and arithmetic. I was much gratified to find that they all appeared both
willing to learn and desirous to acquire knowledge. How many English laborers, after a heavy day’s toil,
will leave their fire-side to attend school ? I believe it has been found that very few English laborers, even if
they can, do so. What pleased me very much was, to see the happy contented expression of their faces. It
amused me to see the men after breakfast playing marbles with all the earnestness of boys, and laughing so
heartily and joking among themselves at any slips, &c. They are capital cricketers, the best in the district.
They played a match with the settlers at Port Lincoln, who brought their best players into the field, but the
natives beat them easily. An eyewitness told me that, although they seemed gratified at the result, no un-
seemly expression of exultation escaped them. I begged for a holiday, as a visitor, to be given to the natives,
and Mr. Hammond willingly acceded. Mr. Hawson kindly lent us his whaleboat, and accompanied us to the
snapper-ground off' Tumby Island. AVe had rare sport. In about a quarter of an hour from the time we
commenced fishing we had over three dozen large snapper in the boat. The natives are very fond of fishing,
generally spending their holidays in this way. We took bread, salt, and tea with us, and made a good dinner
on shore (near Mr. Tenant’s place), by cooking the fish on the red embers and covering them over with ashes
till they are quite roasted ; this is a native mode of preparing fish, and decidedly the best 1 know of. Whether
it arises from the extreme freshness of the fish 1 know not, but they are most delicious when cooked in this
Aborigines (Appendices).—z.


Age, period of stay at School, and present Educational Progress.
NAMES.
Age,
Period of stay at School.
Social Relation.
Progress in Education. ;
Males.
Morpoke
15
Occasionally for six years
Has an aged mother
Can read and write, and has
some knowledge of arithmetic.
living
Warbourp
15
Occasionally for six years
An orphan
Can read and write, and has
some knowledge of arithmetic.
Weregoondet
13
Two years and a-half ...
An orphan
Can read and write.
Willie ...
9
Two years
Half-caste
Can read and write.
Denny...
14
Three months
Half-caste
Can read and write.
Fred ...
9
Two years
An orphan
Can read and write.
Robert
U
Three months
An orphan
Can read. .
Females.
Alice ...
13
Three years
Half-caste
Can read and write, and has
some knowledge of arithmetic.
Helen ...
9
Four years
Father and mother
Can read and write, and has
living
some knowledge of arithmetic.
Mary Jane
adult
Occasionally for five years
Married
Can read and write. |
rough fashion. We returned to our fishing ground after dinner, and caught fish enough to cover the bottom
of the boat, then sailed back to Poonindie, entered the mouth of the Tod, and rowed up to the bottom of the
large paddock close to the station, where we arrived at eight o’clock in the evening with three sacks full of
snapper. I could not help remarking that, during the whole day, while in company with the natives, although
the sport produced great excitement, caused by a more than usual run of luck, no unkind word was spoken,
or any offensive expression made use of; but hilarity and good humour prevailed throughout the day. When
I expressed my gratification at this happy circumstance to Mr. Hammond, he said that there was nothing-
unusual in it. 1 must acknowledge that my experience amongst young white gentlemen, when associated
with them in similar parties of pleasure, has been of quite a different character. I cannot leave this subject
without observing that, during my sojourn at Poonindie, I never heard any swearing or offensive language used
by any one there; not that the natives generally are ignorant of that vile habit, which has been acquired
through intercourse with careless and profane white men. This is painfully proved by the language used by
many of the uncared-for natives of these colonies.
“ I read the 24th chapter of St. John’s Gospel with the first class, consisting of six men. They read
perfectly ; and when I questioned them, answered correctly, but timidly, fearing to give a wrong answer. Had
I been a perfect stranger to them, they would (Hr. Hammond told me), probably have remained silent. A
great deal depends upon the way of putting a question to them. Mr. Hammond would obtain a reply or draw
information from them when others could not prevail upon them to utter a sentence. The Murray River
natives, who principally compose the inhabitants of the station, are superior, mentally and physically, to any
other tribes 1 have ever met with in this colony. New South Wales, or Victoria.
“ Panulta’s wife presented him with a little daughter while we were there, making, I think, the third
born since Mr. Hammond has been in charge of the mission. Panulta promised to have it christened Edith
Poonindie Panulta. Mrs. Hammond is a very great favorite with the natives. Whenever they are sick they
always go to her ; she supplies them with medical comforts, and is very kind to the native children, with whom
she takes much trouble. There were 45 or 46 natives at the home station, and six out shepherding with wives
on different parts of the run. Mr. Hobson superintends the stock and sheep—a gentleman who appears
to possess a very considerable amount of practical knowledge—and under him a Scotch shepherd, Robinson,
with wife and three children. Mr. Hammond has made an excellent garden, and is growing large quantities
of turnips, cabbages, onions, &c. The natives are very fond of vegetables ; it is a most valuable addition to
their diet. Mr. Hammond intends to encourage them to plant small gardens for themselves. I will conclude,
only observing that what I saw may be summed up briefly thus, viz.:—a village of civilized aborigines living
happily together, employing their time in cultivating a magnificent estate, and while providing, by their own
labor, for their temporal wants, not neglecting their all-important spiritual necessities, but daily seeking to
acquire a further knowdedge of their Creator and Redeemer, and striving to worship Him in spirit and in
truth ; they all appeared cheerful and contented. The station possesses a good woolshcd, carpenter’s work-
shop with a supply of tools, grinding mill, brick-kiln, stockyards, and dairy, &c. God has, indeed, blessed the
efforts of that good, self-denying man, the Bishop of Perth. When I reflect upon the difficulties that he must
have had to contend with, it seems so evident that the trials of temper, patience, and anxiety in establishing
such an institution could only have been borne by means of God’s grace strengthening him, and from a faithful
love for his Redeemer. 1 felt happy that I had been associated with the institution at its commencement.
“ I remain, with respect,
“ My dear Lord Bishop,
“ Your faithful servant,
“G. W. HAWSES.”
APPENDIX B.
RETURN of Aborigines attending the Aboriginal School at Mount Franklin, showing their
CHARLES JUDKINS,
Schoolmaster.
Edwd. S. Pakkek, Visiting Magistrate.


NAMES.
Period of Attendance
at School.
How long since left.
Age.
Present Abode and Occupation, if any.
Boys.
Billy Green ...
One year
Two years
10
The Avoca.
J acob
One year
Two years
12
The Avoca.
Babadur
18 months
Two years
14
The Avoca.
Donald
Six months
Two and half years
8
McCallum’s Creek.
Bing-bing
One year
Four years
18
In service.
Mid-bally
Six months
Five years
17
In service. \
Juan Jibbito ...
One year
Two years
12
The Avoca.
Captain
Six months
Three years
14
The Avoca.
Sergeant
Six months
Three years
15
The Avoca.
Gellibrand
Three months ...
Nine months
6
Clunes.
Giri.s.
Caroline
Six months
Nine months
8
Chines.
Victoria
Six months
Nine months . .
7
Clunes.
APPENDIX C.
RKTI 11 \ of Children formerly attending the Aboriginal School at Mount Franklin, period
of attendance, and how long since left.
CHARLES JUDKINS,
Schoolmaster.
APPENDIX D.
SUCCINCT SKETCH OF THE ABORIGINAL LANGUAGE.
Br William Thomas, Esq., Guardian of Aborigines.
GRAMMAR.
From observations I have been led to make, and attentively noticing their expressions, I am led to conclude
that, like many of the civilised languages, much is abridged by the use of prepositions and terminations,
which gives a musical tone to savage languages, not to be found in civilised tongues. Such has been observed
in the South Sea Islanders, and generally among other barbarous nations; in fact, every aboriginal is a true
child of nature,—and nothing more than what is actually required will be found in their language. Reduplication
is a feature in the aboriginal language of the two Melbourne tribes, which renders it at one and the same
time simple and harmonious. The degrees of comparison in the adjectives are generally formed thus—
Worbrinun, tired; worbrinunun, very tired; worbrinununun, excessively tired —regularly done. Nerrebrunin,
hungry; nerrebruninun, very hungry; nerrebruninunun, regularly famished; and so on, though they some-
times say kungee nerrebrunin, excessively hungry.
Articles are seldom used, the numeral adjectives answering fully their purpose. The article is always
used (though at the termination) when describing any part of the human frame, and that in an elegant
manner. Arter, the; thus—Myng, eye; myngarter, the eye; tallan, tongue; tallanarter, the tongue. They
however often use the particle o for the, as—tenung, foot; tenungo, the foot; rayngo, the eye, &e.
Plurals are generally formed with the numerals, though sometimes (quite an original method) by ge
to the end of the first singular, making both the substantives plural, thus—koolin, man; bagrook, woman;
koolinge-bagrook, men and women; and often dispensing with the conjunction altogether; thus—wein, fire;
parn, water; wein-parn, fire and water.
Verbs are more regular; in fact, they appear one and all upon one general footing, like the French, but
destitute of the irregular and reflective. Their verbs invariably terminate in eit. The eit cut off and the verb
may be conjugated ; though I could never go through or find out, as in the French and English grammar, the
whole of the tenses. I select a few of the principal verbs.
Banganeit to have
Burgoneit to spear
Bouldoneit to fall
Boundoneit to bite
Gnolbuneit to carry
Gormurgeit to cover
Komargeit to get up
Koonaneit to hold
Mardoneit to cry
Monkeit to make or do
Marngoneit to mend
Narngoneit to hear
Ngarneit to see
Nobeaneit to drink
Pundarroneit to dig up
Purrumboneit to rub out
Paarthrabuneit to steal
Tunganeit to eat
Toewangeit to go
Tomboneit to enquire
Toomdereneit to talk
Tiowoneit to be sick
Umoneit to throw
Koomoneit to bury
Wolwooneit to run
Weagolaneit to die
Wongoruneit to be stupid
Yemoneit to dwell
Yaarkoneit to look for
Yarwoneit to swim
Yannoneit to walk
Yangowlaneit to go away
Thus—bangan, have; banganerdon, I did have; yarwon, swim; yarwonerdon, I did swim; tanganaraka
did I eat? bouldonerdon, I did fall; and so on. Since they have been with the white people they however use
the pronouns I, you, &c., thus—murrumbeek yarwon, I swim; murrumbinner tanganan, you eat; &c., &c., &c
Pkonouns are also subject to reduplication by abridging or annexing to the terminations, thus—
Murrumbeek I or me
Murrumbiek Mine
Adverbs in like manner, as—
Ganbo One
Ganboden Once
Ganbony First
Murrumbinner Thou or you
Murrumbianner Yours
Bengero Two
Bengeroden Twice
Bengerodenum Second
Particles are seldom used separately, and are so strangely interwoven with verbs, adverbs, and the
other parts of speech, that, in a brief sketch like this, it would be useless to enter upon.
Conjunctions they have but few; but all that is necessary.
I will now give a list of the principal adverbs, particles, prepositions, conjunctions, &c. The verbs
have been briefly given, and the adjectives will come in the regular vocabulary.
91


Advehbs of Number. —Ganboden, once; tindee, only; tindee bengero, only two; tindee bengero-
ganmel, only three.
Adverbs op Order. —Ganbony, first; ganbronun, first time; bengeroudin, second; telutkin, before;
kurrengerin, after; wunadak, behind; werneit, last; mingo, beginning; toloma, middle; moibo, end.
Adverbs of Place. —Karbe, here; teraon, there; mihu, these; notto, here; winda, where; windowring,
whither; monkir, thither; karboit, above; kubberdon, below.
Adverbs of Quantity. —Bullito, much; kerthcrba, together; wyebo, little; nogee, enough; uungo,
more; bullitodebar, too much; wyebo-debar, too little; wootunno, abounding; nungutbudin, how many;
nunggudbuddiu, how much.
Adverbs of Time. —Netbo, now; wombo, sometimes; moloco, presently; yellewa, to-day; baboreen,
to-morrow; mola raolok, yesterday; mologuan, by and by; yerramboot, day after to-morrow; yellingout,
another day; banban cram, morning; kurren munnebo, noon; krungine ngervein, evening; borun, night;
gnanbo, long time; tutanbo, short time; nierbuddun, never; nunuelliner, then; borundut, midnight.
Adverbs, Negatives. —Nier, nay; utur borak, no.
Adverbs, Inieerogatives. —Wener, which; winnerdon, which one; windower, to which; wener, what;
winnerer, what is; winda, where; windart, where did they; kunne, this.
Interjections. —Ki! ki! surprise; ur! ur! hush! hark! yarka! grief, pain; wa! wa! lookout!
Particles affixed, &c.—Ut, in; oot, on; dap, in; wea, in the; wa, to, at; arter, the; o, the; burnin,
at; ter, add; teno, at the.
Conjunctions. —Bar, and; ge, occasionally, and; fey, also.
Pronouns. —
Singular.
I, or me Murrumbeek
Thou, or you Murrumbinner
He, or him Munniger, kargee
Plural.
We Murramaner
You Murrumbinner
They Murrumnuller
Possessive.
Mine Murrumbieek
Yours Murrumbianner
Ours Murrumbunarter
His Kargeeieek
Us Nurnin
Them Murthiger
Myself Ganieek
Yourself Ganninner
N.B.—lt will be necessary here, in order to give an idea of the use aborigines make of these small
particles, to give examples, thus: —Ut, in; beek, ground or earth; heekut, in the ground. Willum, house or
miam; willumut, in the house. Dap, in; koorong, boat; koorongdap, in the boat. Wa, in the; weing, fire;
weingwa, in the fire. Wa, to or from; Sydney wa, to Sydney. Oit, to or at; Melbournoit, to Melbourne.
Arter, the; tallanarter, the tongue; rayngarter, the eye. O, in the; weingo, in the fire; &c., &c.
The aforesaid will, I trust, be to the Committee and philologists some clue to the language of the two
Melbourne tribes, comprehending no small extent of country along the coast and inland to the Goulburn,
Ovens, Broken, and Devil’s Rivers, which may serve as a key (as far as my experience goes) to a chain of
communications throughout Victoria, and upon the same rule, throughout the whole of New Holland. I leave
this sketch and my remarks for what they are worth, and now proceed to the vocabulary.
SUCCINCT LANGUAGE.—MORT NOULAR.
Adjectives.
Bitter Ballin
Broad Yerringooden
Big Bullitto
Blind Toutmyng
Bad Nillam
Black Woorkoordin
Blue Wookurrerble
Clean Kurrebully
„ Worrework
„ Woorrebully
Dry Kuubebel
„ (dead) Bidderup
Deaf Toutweing
Dirty W oorgurrin
„ Woorgulbunna
Dark Boorundara
Deep Mer-rim
Deeper Mer-rim-er
Plat Koy-eon
Fat Marm-bull
Free Poo-tun-uk
First Gan-bro-nun
Good Mar-na-meek
Good (very) Boon-dup
Greedy Bul-let-garn
Giddy Lar-lun-en-et
Hot Num-mun-in
Hot (as fire) Tou-nar-bon
Heavy Bern-bern
Hungry Ner-re-brum in
Hoarse Kiel-bul-un-in.
Industrious Tar-tuk-ur-nup
Idle Tour-nur-nin
Lazy Tour-lin-tab-lun
Lazy (very) Tour-nur-ne-nun
Lazy (sluggish) Tal-lun-der-ner
Long Ner-rim
Light (weight) Bul-ler-bul-ler
Little Wye-bo
Lame Nar-boon ■
Last Van-neite
Long Ner-rim
Mighty 8001-ut-pall-eet
Nasty Nil-lam
Narrow Win-nin-koo-dip
New Moo-10-good
New (fresh) Tur-den-den
Old Wag-ga-bell
Poor W a-wat-tun-ner
Proud Tou-lup
Pretty Bourn-dup
Round Pi-o-bu-bur-din
Round (as tree) Piou-bur-rin
Rough Te-rip-te-rip
Rotten Brun-guit
*Rich Narn-get
Red Be-bet-ur-nin
Short Mort-ku-ding
Sweet Bab-ber
Strong Pal-leet
Sloping Kur-nurm-bii-ber-ding
Square Purk-bun
Stupid Naw-lun-nin
Sound Pal-let-ku-ding
Sick Tarn-der-hun-in
Sick (not well) Toy-yon
Sick (very) Gee-gee-ry
Straight Ur-din
Smooth Barm-bur-din
Slow Port-be-uk
Stinking f Buun koon
Sweet Lal-lee-woon
Tall Kur-nile
Thick Bun-neet
Thin Lal-lum
Thirsty Kurn-brun-in
Tired W or-brun- in
Ugly Nil-lam
Upright Murm-bull
Upright (as a stick) Ter-ree-dee
Wet Toln-go don
Wet (as damp) Tul-gru-rain
Weak 80-rup
Wicked Me-ung-o-wor-gile
Wicked (bad) Nil-lam
Well (not ill) Ko-rum-din-in
White Tarn-der-din
Wise Narn-ger-bon
Wide Wyl-gul-ter
Young (male) Yan-yean
Young (female) Mon-mon-deek
Yellow Ki-er-lin
* Kot in our sense—wealth; but estimation—eloquence, advice, or war.
t A nasal long drone.


Substantives.
Parts of the body.
Body Mur-rum
Hair Yarra
Hair (of the head) Yar-ra-kow-an
Head Kow-an
Head (crown of) Troot-toop
Skull Turp-turp
Brain Tourn-tourn
Forehead Myng-nin
Bone over eyes Tourn-a-myng
Ear Wer-ring
Eye Myng
Eye brows Yar-ra-myng
Eyelashes Yar-ra de-myng
Eyeball Woor-wor-ri-mer
Nose Gaarn
Nostrils Myng-gaarn
Mouth Kun-der-ner
Mouth (open) Um-ble-bun-ark
Lips Woor-roon
Teeth Lee-ang
Tongue Tal-lon
Cheeks Woflng
Cheek bone Tourt-wotlng
Chin Un-duk or nun duk
Jaw Eurt
Beard Yar-ra-nun-duk
Moustache Yar-ra-mon-tu-be-run
Neck Kourn
Shoulder Buck-ur-er
Arm Ter-ruk
Elbow Ko-rum
Armpit Won-gu-ruk
Wrist Un-ung
Hand Mun-ung
Hand (palm of) Ber-ring-ber ring
Fingers Munnong
Finger (first) Won-mun-mill-uk
Finger (little) Won-raun-mill-uk-wye-bo
Thumb Bar-bin-bar-bin
Nails Tir-re-bee-mun-ung
Breast Bar-um-boom
Breast (nipple of) Brem-brim
Bosom Ber-ring
Belly Bourt
Naval Tour-luk
Back Bun-nin-bun-nin
Backbone Nilgn er-ur-ruk
Bibs Nilgn-e-tur-min
Posteriors Bill-ake
Hip Kow-an-hour-no
Thigh Ngar-ke-ter-rang
Knee Bur-din
Leg Lour-ko
Leg (calf of) Lourk
Ankle Tour-rum-ke-kun-uk
Foot Te-nan
Instep Ngar-te-nan
Heel Pern
Toe Kow-an-te-nan
Toe (big) Bar-hun-te-nan
Toe (little) Wye-bo-te-nan
Skin Tar-bo
Bone Nilgne-ka-rook
Flesh Ngar-huk
Windpipe Tur-tur kur-rum
Lungs Nin-nin-e-bourt
Heart Toor-oor
Breathing Ang
Throat Turn
Gullet Tal-ler-be-gourn
Stoma ch Tur-rum-ber-lin
Guts Moon-mur
Liver Bour-doo
Kidney Woor-ror-marp
Kidney (fat of) Marm-bul-la
Bladder Mour-rut
Urine Bulgl
Vein Gour-uk
Sinews Pee-reep
Blood Kul-mul
Marrow Dee-dit
Sweat Moor-run-moor-run
Of the Heavens, Sfc,
God (or first cause) Pundgyl-Marman
Devil [some tribes have] * Bull-gen-kar-nee
Heaven Woor-woor-rer
t Hell Moo-eep-nall-ook
Soul Moor-roop
Spirit Nar-roon
Ghost Moor-roo-bull
Apparition (of one dead) | Lam-bar-moor
Sun Nger-wem
Moon Myn-cam
Star To-py-rum
Cloud Lark
Sky Woor-woor
Morning star Woo-to-ko-rook
Evening star Mar-be-ang-rook
Dew 800-re-arn
Fog Ng-err
New moon Bunn-bo
Half moon Bul-go
Full moon Tu-an-de-boop
Thunder Woon-du-ble
Lightning Moor-rin-no
Ice Tarn-bulk
Snow Kab-bin
Hail • | Tu-dee-war-ree
Rainbow Brin-beal
Storm Ko-reen
Wind Morn-moot
Whirlwind Burt-ko-reen
Hot wind Weet-mul-lin
Rain Parn-min
Spring Moo-dee-e-ram
Summer Mer-rim-Nger-weln
Autumn Moo-dee-Nger-wein
Winter Per-ring-Nger-wein
Cardinal Points,
East Kul-lin-bi-rem
West Nut-bro-ki
North Bur-gee
South Koor-reen
Sea War-reen
River Woor-neet
Spring (rise water) Gan-noon
Creek Kun-nung
Waterhole Tam-boore
Waterhole (temporary) Pun-pun
Four dements.
Earth Beek
Air Ngrn Tou-ra
Fire Weing
Water Parn
Five Senses.
Taste Bar-ro-muk
Smell Ngar-o-buk
Feel Purn-boo-nuk
See Ngar-noon
Hear Ngar-goon
Face of Countries.
Mountain Bunnull
§ Ranges Noo-ur-or-ur-rook
Hill Wye-bo-Bun-null
Rise Mill
Flat Taul
Swamp Bull-ook
* My blacks state, this only means ugly.
t They have several terms for the abode of bad souls. This is the most impressive, continued descending through a narrow opening,
and never stopping.
t A long solemn drone.
§ Every range has its name ; likewise every mountain has its particular name; so that blacks can state the precise mountain or hill,
in an extensive range where they will meet. I have upwards of ‘2OO names of mountains in the Australian Alps. Aborigines renuire-
neither latitude nor longitude; plain nature by day and the stars by night.
Aborigines (Appendices). —2 a.


Stone, Clay, Sfc.
Stone Larng raong
Flint (white) Go-work
*Ked (ochre) Wee-rup
White (ochre) Nar-rum-ble
Brown (ochre) Ter-reel
Drick Der-re-kul-mul
Clay Nut-kun-tare
Gravel Ter-ree-beek
Coal Lourn
Charcoal Kun-nun-dare
Sand Kar-ga-ruk
Ashes (dust) Mun-nip
Kindred.
Man Koo-lin
Woman Bag-rook
White man Hom-mer-geek
Black man Woor-gur-din-koo-lin
Old man Wag-a-bil-koo-lin
Old woman Moon-deg rook
Infant (male) Wye-bo-80-pup
Infant (female) Wye-krook
Child 80-pup
Girl Mon -mon-dik
Young man Yan-Yean
Young woman Mon-mon-dik
Husband Nan-go-ron
Wife Bren-bun
Son Mum-mum
Daughter Man-gip
Father Mar-man
Mother Par-pun
Grandfather Ner-bun-ger-ron
Grandmother Ko-kung-e-up
Sister Leur-rookong
Brother Woon-do-1
Elder brotlier Barn-gun
Elder sister Lun -dun
Uncle Kurn-kurn
Aunt Bum-boon
Niece Pa-ren-ger-roon
Nephew Nar-bung-ur-roon
Half-cast Tree-be-mur-rum
Friend Kor-ki
Clothes, s*c.
Coat Woor-kud-der-bil
Trousers Ta-rang-ar-look
Shirt Ta-run-a-look
Shoes Te-nan-a-look
Hat Kum-bra-kow-an
Mur-ri-guil Worn over secret parts of males
till married
Nour-rite orKiar- Worn over secret parts of females
yeun till married
Leek Band round forehead, worn by
male and female
Mur-rur-kul-lim Band neatly made of thread
Til-bur-nine Fine apron made of emeus’ fea-
thers, goes all round the waist,
worn by females in a single dance
Mur-ri-kle Strips of opossum skin worn
to hide the fundament in males
when in a dance
Kourn-but Necklace made of reeds
Kourn-ur-run Pine necklace, made of the sinews
from emeus’ legs
Wal-ler Wal-lert Opossum rug
Yel-ler-ne-bre A blanket
Yell- un- cct- fur- Band round the arm to strengthen
ruk arm
Ber-buk Belt round the belly to keep off
hunger
Mi-ara or wil-lum A house or place to lie down in or
live
Yel-low-dung Sapling from one end to the other
of the miam
Lee-an Forked sticks to support the
sapling of miam
Tourn-der-ry Thick bark with which the blacks
make miam
801-loom Thin bark which blows off trees,
kindles in an instant
Tar-nuk Native bucket, made from the
elbow or wart of trees
Kill-bill-ling-ur- Native tomahawk, made from a
r °°k blue flat pebble stone, found in
certain ranges. The blacks had
great labor to get them to cut ;
the handle was bent wood
Min-der-min Native nails or pegs made by
hardening wood in fire
Pee-reep Native thread
Moo-gra-moo-gra Kangaroo bag, in which the black
holds all his wealth but his
spears
Be-lang-be-lang Native bag, made of grass
Bin nuk Native basket, made of native
flags of grass
String (Europ.) Woo-gle-woo-gle
f Looking glass Woor-un-dul-min
(iun Trang- bul-la-bill
Powder and shot Mor-ra-doo
Flint (of gun) Pel-lin [or] oour-uk
Knife Kul-pen-kul-pen-gee-up
Pork Kal-lup
Spoon Tourn-der-ry [made of bark]
Bason Ko-ron-er
Box Lil-le-ry
Brush Wor-oor-wort
Dish Wel-len-wel-len
Pannican Pan-ni-can
Candle Marm-bull
Hammer Num-bert
Chisel Beum-bean
Saw Pinder-bul-lup
Axe Num-be-mon
Gimblet Man-mure-bul-lup
Spade Bel-ler-rer
Hoe Wye-bo-baHer
Ship Bul-li-to-koo-ron
Boat Wye-bo-koo-ron
Paddle (as canoe) Kun-ne-ko-lon
Animals.
Kangaroo Koo-im
Wollaby Wym-bir
Wombat War-reen
Bear Kur-bur-rer
Bandicoot Boe-ung
Opossum Wal-ler-W al-lert
Plying squirrel Eur-run
(three kinds)
Smaller kind Ku-an-boo
Very diminutive Tu-an-tu-an
Kangaroo rat Ber-uke
Mat (common) Ty-ung
Kingtailed opos- Be-min
sum
Mouse Bar-rut
Dog Wer-run-un
Dog (wild or na- Wer-ren-wil-lum
tive)
Cat Urn [or] yurn
Water mole Tu-la-or-ong [or] Pal-la-rale
Platterpus Mur-rin-raoor-roo
Hedgehog Kow-an
Horse Kul-ken-tur-nuk
Bullock Bul-gan-ner
Sheep Eu-ep
Birds.
Bird (general Koy-up
term)
Emeu Bur-ri-mil
Native companion Kur-ur-rook
Turkey Woon-mar-bel
Pelican War-gill
Swan Koon-war-ror
Mulligan A large bird of prey, lives only
on birds and fish by the coast
Eagle (very large) Pun-dyl
Eagle (smaller) Ber-pip
Sparrow hawk Par-rite
White hawk Kab-bin
White do. (very Tur-rer
small)
Lyre bird Bulln-bulln
Nankeen bird Kar-warn
Pigeon Moon-go-bra
Cockatoo Gnur-uile
* These ochres are used promiscuously in painting their bodies for corrobcrries, &c.; but two of them for sacred ournoses ■ viz the
white for mourning ; reel, for joy when a victim has been offered up for their dead. 1 P
t When white people had regularly made a footing at Port Phillip, one, Budgerry Tom, was noted for giving names to European
things and animals. These names are mostly of his giving. 6 b ° 1
94


Black cockatoo Gnur-nan
Cockatoo parrot Kar-mile
Parrot (general Tan-dun
name)
Ditto (Magella) Bro-gil
Ditto (BlueMoun- Lar-guk
tain)
Ditto (king) Uu-gup
Ditto (very small Nel-la-woon
kind)
Satin bird Ngar-ran
Whip bird Yan-yan-gak. So named from
' its noise, like the cracking of
a whip
Wattle bird Yan-guk
Leather bird Bo rat-be-rat
Mawpoop Goor-koom (night bird)
Cuckoo (noiselike) Woork-woork
Magpie Per-er-warn
Gean-gean A bird between a crow and mag-
pie. [The natives have strange
superstitious notions of it]
■Crow Warn. [Superstitious of this]
Laughing jackass Tour-ur-rong. [Called the bush-
■ man’s timepiece]
Bell bird Trin-war-reen
Redbreast Tee-ung
Fowl Bowl
Duck Tou-loom
Kor-rung-un-un Very large water fowl
Goose Nup-nup
Quail Tre-bin
Snipe Kruk-wor-rum
Soldier bird Bill-bill-man-nere. [So named by
the whites from its always being
on the qui vive, and alarming
the forest, to the great mortifi-
cation of the sportsman]
Tug-gan-kow-an A small bird, makes a howling
distressing noise
Bat Pol-ly-ong
Fishes.
Tu-at General name of fish
Whale Pet-ti-heel
Shark Tal lan-nur-run
Porpoise Bar-bar-ka
Salmon (a kind Kur-nur-guil
of) *
Cod (in Goulburu Mal-lun
and Murray)
Lobster Kur-rite
Craw fish (fresh- Tar-luk-purn
water)
Craw fish (salt- Toy-yon
water)
Oyster Tou-at
Mutton fish Woor-din
Cockle Mur-yoke
Muscle Mur-bone
Pennywinkle Pid-de-ron
Sprat (a kind of) Tal-li-bal-li
Herring Tar-uk-war-ra-bil
Leech Ter-rnra-be-leet
Frog Nar-rut
Miscellaneous.
Insects (general Kam-kam-koor
term)
Locusts (green Tee-een
wings)
Locust (a large Karl-kal. [The dung of this insect
kind) is sweet; it is generally termed
manna, though not generally
known to be the soil of this
insect; but such is the case. I
have gathered as much as a
quart from the targan (or box
tree), at its base of a morning]
Moth Bar-lum-ber-lun
Butterfly 801-lom-bol-lom
Grasshopper Nar-rite
Fly (common) Kow-urk
March fly Kurm-bur-ra
Mosquito Koor-gook
Flea Man-nun
Louse Noo-noon
Lizard Eu-roke [or] Tun-per-rim
Ditto (small kind) Nur-rung
Ditto (very large) Per-ren-un. [At the Ovens and
Broken River; and to the north
they run to four, five, and six
feet long. I have measured one
five feet]
Ditto (another Pudg-gen. [Eaten by the blacks
kind, very fat, generally]
hut small)
Snake Karn
Ditto (black) Tar-run-del
Ditto (diamond) Koon-mill
Worm Tur-ror
Grub Yer-ring. [Very large and fat;
blacks eat them raw. Said by
Europeans to be fine eating,
when roasted or fried]
Grub (smaller) Bear-uk
Grub (very small) Yeour-ong. [Not bigger than a
small maggot. I have seen
quarts and pecks of them got
from near the roots of the trees.
The blacks mix them with
charcoal, and thus separate
them from the rotten tree and
eat them |
Centipede Ter-run-mur-ruk
Ant (common) Murrub
Bull ant Oeur-rong. [Awfully sharp bite]
Trees, Shrubs, Sfc.
Tree (general Tur rung, kulk
name)
Tree (blossom of) Kurn- brook
Tree (seed of) De-ran-dell
Tree (root of) Wca-eu-ruk
'free (trunk of) Wee-reep
Branch Ter-ru-galk
Leaves Mur-run
Veins Mur-rer-mur-uk
Sap Tu-un-no
Bark Tourn-der-ry
Gum tree (red) Be-al
Gum (white) Yar-ra-bin
Be-nup (a gum) [Grows stately, but very irregular
in its branches ; pure snowy
white bark. From the elbows
of this tree the blacks formerly
made their tarnuks or water
buckets, which appear by a
kind Providence to be designed
for that purpose]
Box tree Tar-gan
Ditto (bastardy) Beet
Stringy bark Bun-ger-look
Ditto (inferior Way-out
kind)
Light or black Burn-nar-look
w'ood
Ditto (spurious) Marn-gan-noy-an
Peppermint Eur-look
Honeysuckle f War-rak
Sheoak Tur-run
Turpentine (tree) Vi-al. [The oozing from this tree
the natives use as a plaster for
wounds]
Wattle tree (com- Kur-run
mon)
Ditto (silver) Moy-yan
Ditto (marmoza) War-our-e-rup
Ditto (dwarf) Eurt
Cedar (bastardy) Wy-gout
Cherry tree Poo-lyte. [The stone grows out-
side, and not inside, as in Eu-
rope]
Fern tree Kum-ba-da
Ditto (short ditto) Ku-der-ron
Cabbage or grass Kum-be-deek
tree
Pivit (shrub) Kar-ran
Myrtle (native) Tid-e-am
Strawberry (na- Koo-gor-ruk
five)
* Shoals of these in muddy rivers at Western Port.
t Tree generally stunted, not more than six or eight inches in diameter ; but on the Ten Mile Beach, between Moody Yallock and
Mount Eliza, between the two first inlets of the sea, on mere sand, they grow as high and in diameter as a huge gum tree.
95


Rush Bourt-bourt. [Good substitute for
candles in the early history of
the colony ; grows a fine size
at Western Port, and used by
the primitive settlers there for
candles]
Flag (many kinds, Kur-ra-wan. [Black lubras make
principal) fine baskets and mats of them
split]
Fig (native) Bung-bur-rulk or Kum-me-ree
Butter-cup Kurm-bur-root
Convolvulus Nur-rur
(three kinds)
Grass 80-curt
Vegetables ( indigenous ), $-e., eaten by Blacks.
Tal-le-rup Grows 3 feet 6 inches high on the
rich land and swamps; they eat
it raw; tastes like cabbage
Yep-pere Small sweet bulb
Mur-nong A nourishing bulb, grows on poor
loomy soil; blacks very fond of it
Kurn-ger-rer Tapering root, like a carrot; eaten
raw, or thrown into the fire"
800-yeat Grows high, like Kum-be-duk.
They bruise the outside, with
which they make a kind of
dough; eat the inside raw
Kur-run Gum; a valuable portion of abo-
riginal diet. In dysentery they
use it as a medicine made up
into pills—a good medicine too
Kurrn A small maggot; eaten in thou-
sands
You-urn Larger kind; eaten also
Knu-nal Eggs of ants
Nurm-nurp Large vegetable, grows in rich
land and swamps, as high as
celery and not inferior
Bourt-deet A superior fibrous vegetable;
blacks eat it raw or cooked
K.B.—lt would be well here to state, that these roots are all in-
digenous, and were in abundance before the whites came among
them. Civilized, or tamed, animals and enclosures have much
diminished their dependence. All were eaten by the blacks.
To avoid touching upon the like subject again, I may state, that
all animals, except the snake and a few other animals, were eaten
by the two Melbourne tribes; and tribes to the westward—even
the Geelong blacks—used to eat snakes and bodies of large moths.
European Food, Sfc.
Bread or flour Ner-rong
Rice Kur-ran
Sugar Gaem gaem
Meat (general) Win-gar-um
Beef Bul-gan-ner
Mutton Eec-up
Fork Tal-lum. [I must remark that,
when I first came among the
aborigines, they would not eat
any part of the pig. I soon
found, however hungry a black
might be, that he would not
partake of a rasher of bacon.
They could not explain why,
only “no good pig.” They,
however, have long got over
this prejudice, and now enjoy
it much]
Biscuit Pal let-ner-rong
Soup Lil-le-bro
Tea Mor-an-doo
Butter Brim-brira-o
Milk Brera-brera
Herbs Par-rum
Carrots Kam-bo-duk
Tobacco Kun-ang-ner-ro-men
Spirits Bal-lam
To drink spirits No-bi-an-bal-lam
* To get drunk Bul-lito No-bi-an
A FEW LEADING SENTENCES.
Come here War-ra-Wee
Go away Tan-na-To a
Give me TJ-mar-leek
Lend me We-am-be-kan
Bring me Won-da-nun
Send me U-ro-ma-kun
Take it Koon-uk
Go and fetch Yan-na-no
Cut it Ti-buk
Put it down Mar-buk
Sit down there Nor-lum-bee-not-to
Come here to-morrow, and cut me some wood, and
me give you white money.
What for you stupid, and get cm big one drunk;
by and by you die like it another one black fellow.
Will you go with mo?
Where are you going?
This way, that way.
What going for?
To look out kangaroo.
Where are your spears?
Here, in my miam.
No good spear. Very good gun.
Now, let us go.
Me see kangaroo; no you make noise, me shoot
him.
Go on fire. Ah! tumble down dead.
No dead, only gammon; you see run away that one.
Big one stupid. Now, go look out opossum,
t Me see tracks up the tree.
Black fellows’ corroberry to-night.
No; too much tumble down rain.
You tell ’em black fellows to corroberry, and
me give them white money.
Black fellows big one stupid, no corroberry.
What for black fellows no corroberry ?
Black fellows die last moon.
Black fellows’ corroberry to-morrow night.
Yes, big one corroberry; all black fellows dance.
Don’t you know another one moon come?
Ba-bo-ring mur-rum bin-ner wo-man, bar til-ben-er
kulk, bar murrumbeek umarleek white money.
Kundee vener wong runnin murrumbinner bar bul-
lito nobean ballam molocho weaken tandowring uungo
koolin.
Tan-na-noul?f
Winda lingo murrumbinner?
Temon-o, temon mihu.
Kundee vener?
Kundee koim.
Winda tarren-o?
Mihu Willumut.
Nillam tare Marnameek tranbulla-bel.
Yan-na-wat.
Narnardun koim nier banner tomnboonner raur-
rumbeek vioner.
Mangkonuk vioner wa trantnblulneit.
Borak weakoner, tindee moyup, murrumbinner
ngarren woolwoor.
Nowlununartun, warrentenul, kundee waller wallert.
Nangerdon munnung kalligi myngnoit.
Koolin ngargunner borundut.
Utur, bullito parn-min boldoneit.
Torabannerreunun ngargun, bar murrumbeek umal-
len white money.
Kooliner, wongrunin bullito, borak ngargun.
Kundee vener borak ngargee kooliner?
Koolin weakun ninneam werneit.
Baborin borundut kooliner ngargee.
Yea, ngargoon waga-bil, umarko koolin yeilve nier.
Mangeit mincam uungo women ?
* The first black I over saw drunk was uf the Goulburn tribe—a man in years. Poor fellow! He was brought up to my tent by
his wife and others, to know if lie would die—had he been poisoned. He cried, staggered, and Jay down in my tent: this was eariy in
1839. I believe, sucli tvas their innocence at that time, that the blacks thought lie had been poisoned. Alas! now they crave this poison,
t This “noul,” at the termination of the verb go, answers to “will you with me ?”
I Blacks can tell by the bark if an opossum is up, by claw marks.
96


DIALOGUES.
ON RISING IN THE MORNING.
Awake; get up, get up, get up.
I will get up directly; stop, stop, my trousers are
wet.
Get up and make the fire; the sun is high.
You are lazy; get up; chop some wood; the sun is
up; dry jmur trousers.
What for you tell ’em lie; sun only little up. Where
tailwork ?
Tailwork not dry; name who leave it on the ground
last night.
Now it is dry; go on, turn away. Ah! I see smoke;
fire soon come.
Very good now T , big one fire; now sit down and
smoke your pipe.
All good white men when they get up, say their
prayers, and thank God for taking care of them all
night.
Big one stupid me and all black fellows, no like it
white man.
Ngiemuk ; kommergee, kommergee, kommergee.
Murrumbeek kommergee tudan; hurra, hurra,
murrumbiek tarrunarlook tulgunner.
Kommargee werigut vein ; ngervein karboit.
Tandnm murrumbinner ; kommagee ; tilberner
kulk ; ngervein karboit ; biderup tarrunarlook.
Wenerrer wa moyutpin murrumbinner; ngervein
tindee wyebo. Winda tailwork ? *
Tail work nier bidderup; nerreno welain narlumboon
nge, bukerborin molomolac.
Netbo bidderup ure purrumbon. Ah! ngeren port
molocho vein woman.
Marnameek netbo, bullito vein; narlumby promhean
pipe.
Bondup kommergee-ker nerdoit kommergee pardo-
gurrabun, bar thank Pundgy’l marman, tnduk kunun-
unner nerrembee borundut.
Wongrunin murrumbeek bar koolinner, nier tan-
dowring hommageek.
ON GOING A JOURNEY.
Now, my hlackfellows, make haste and get your
breakfast ; we will be going.
Where are the bullocks ?
Over there, behind that hill.
Did you see their tracks ?
Yes ; I saw them this morning.
Where did they bed last night.
By the big tree, don’t you see their dung ?
Go and fetch them, that’s a good fellow; I will lend
you my horse.
Very well; where ?
Bridle and saddle, I will go and fetch them ; put
my bag in the cart.
Now get the things together. Where are the panni-
cans ? Don’t leave anything behind.
Here are the bullocks. You are a good fellow
Bugup; here is a stick of tobacco for you.
Now blaekfellows, hold up the pole of the dray,
and two of you hold on the back of the cart.
There now, that will do—stop, let us see if any-
thing is left behind, look about.
Eur barbullin kunarkut yanner bullen kunnee wat,
kunnee wat.
Winda wottcring bulganna ?
Karbering miring bunnul wa.
Narnadarta parren teno?
Ter ; Narnnerdonerun banban eram.
Windart kudunger borundut ?
Narnnarlonniart karlto kuddalling tarrung kunar ?
Kungargewat wallarboyun nulliuner, kulkelturne-
gieek.
Kungargewat ?
Worong kukedo nunnieek pelan minebuk ngargee
karber voit.
Perkart yarrite ketherba, windowring tarnuk tu-
mart nowvolumbernner yarrite
Mihu pinnuk tudeyoul. Kungewa boundup Bngup;
moode yanner kunnunne murrornanner.
Netbo tarmbar karteekulgo, bengeronewat mum-
medo karter.
Nogeeballing, nageeballing tudan, yartkun nut
terredee yarrite ngarreen.
OF EATING AND DRINKING.
Put the pannican on the fire. Where are the tea
and sugar ?
There is no water. Tell the lubras to get some
water; pannican in miam.
I cannot see the pannican ; it is not in the miam ;
1 have looked all about.
Oh ! big one, stupid me, it is behind the miam by
that gum tree.
Wash the pannican. Very good clean, no good
dirty.
Me big one hungry. Where is the kangaroo, the
opossum, and the bandicoot ?
There they are, also the bear, wollaby and wombat;
put them all to the fire. Plenty of food in the bag.
Sit down to-day; no look out, only eat, sleep, and sing.
Here piccaninny, give that to the lubras, and tell
them when they have eaten to go and look out gum
for hlackfellows to eat.
This kangaroo is very good, it is a joe ; here is
another, young lubra, ah !
The water boils, put in the tea, and give some to
the children, and they fetch us more water.
You too much greedy piccaninny ; you give some
of that kangaroo to that piccaninny out there.
Now let us sleep, big one stupid ; white man work
every day, no like ’em this. No you make a noise
piccaninny; play out there. Big one bellyful me.
Korourk pannican veinoit. Winda morrador bar
gaem gaem ?
Nier parn. Toom bergee bagrook wantagu parn ;
pannican willumut.
Nier ngerrcn pannican murrumbeek, miring wil-
lum, nier yarkunncr.
Oh ! wongurrunin murrumbeek, monkir willumut
karbe nge heal turrung.
Kurworbun pannican. Marnameek kerwoneit, nil-
lara kunnit pin.
Nerrebrvmin bullito murrumbeek. 'Windowring
koem, waller wallert, bar boong ?
Notto nangeit, bar wimbi, warren, turnanook
umarko, bar kurbora, bullito tanganan narlumby
woollaminin, quomba yellinewa, utur, koondee, tinde
tanganan, yemen bar yengerk.
Wa ! bopup kunuk kunnee bagrook, tombanna
bagrook, tinderbuk tanganan, dado koondee kurrun-
tuduk koolinner bullito tanganan.
Kunne koem marnameek, joe kargee; bar unngo
marnameek, monmondeek, ki!
Barn touloppun, quamba morador, bar umarleek
bopup, tudun bopup wantagee parn uungo.
Bullito garn murrumbinner bopup, umerleek bopup
monkyne nge, tanganun koem tudan.
Netbo mallyemena, bullito wongorunin hommageek
mongan yellenwa yellenwa, nier tandowring nge-
nier bopup tillutkerin monkyne nge, bullito marp
murrumbeek.
PLATS AND DIVERSIONS.
What shall we play at first ?
We will play at ball, you make it up, very high
don’t you see one. Very good that one, go on kick.
Come, come; me get it ; make haste.
Take care of the child ; no me throw it down ; no
me stupid.
Throw it out again ; out further. Call the boys
outside.
Wener ganbony tillutkerrin ?
Mangut marnameek, mongun ganbony murrum-
binner, marnamuk kumrap, ure kurruk ngerin karboit.
Kolly-warree, wolley kungardon.
Tartbuk bopup niup badan umite nier wongrunin
murrumbeek.
tlmark worreder, weatbuk, marnameek, tombargee
bopup millarree.
* When I first came among the blacks, not an adult male or female were without their tailwork—a wood from which they procure fire;
not by friction, as tire Sydney blacks ; but perpendicular, as working a drilling-bow.
Aborigines (Appendices).—2 b.
97


Take care of the stumps, take care now, you go on
too fast.
No more ; that will do ; the ball broke ; sit down.
Play at soldiers. Come here. Stand up. Hold up
your head. That will do, that will do.
Right about face.
Stand at ease.
Attention.
Quick march.
Another one day get ’em guns.
No more play now, it is too hot. When go down
sun, then play at wavoit.
Now koolin, where wavoit? Come all blackfcllows.
Now let us see who throw out the farthest. Throw
it out.
You can’t catch me. No you take it, my wavoit.
This is mine. No, no ; me give it you.
All done play. Dark now. Come on, come on.
You walk and I will run.
Sit down. Where pipe ? Outside, inside miam ;
make haste and get it.
Sit all around. Stop, j ust stop.
Warregerry kulk, warregerry kulkerbrook, kul-
berlin woovoneit murrumbinner.
Nogee, nogee, mangut tinderbeek, narlumby.
Tillutkerrin policemen. Warra wee. Terridee,
kommergally, berunggally, nogee, nogeemee.
Pierup koodelly.
Tilbert mununinner.
Tilbert terreninna.
Yanna uree.
Hung yellenwa kundu trangbullabil.
Nogeemee woodu ngervein tournaboon, nerdoit nar-
lumby ngervein, wavoit.
Netbo koolin, winda wavoit? Womenderrewat.
Malnangyer, wida umeit warreete, urauk perper-
duuk.
Nier benerak bunner, nier paarthrabun, wavoit
murrumbiek, kunne murrumbiek, utur, nier urbinan
umanner.
Tinderbeek tillutkerrin, borun netbo, warra-wee
murrumbinner yannon, murrumbeek woovon.
Narlumby. Winda pipe. Kiering raihu willum ;
ure urebuk.
Wan wan broodewat. Pingoody, pingoody.
ABORIGINAL LANGUAGE.
TRANSLATIONS.
THE CXXI. PSALM.
1. I will lift up mine eyes unto God ; from Him
cometh my help.
2. My help cometh from the Lord, who made the
heaven and the earth.
3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved ; He that
keepeth thee will not slumber.
4. Behold! He that keepeth Israel shall neither
slumber nor sleep.
5. The Lord is thy keeper ; the Lord is thy shade,
upon thy right hand.
6. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the
moon by night.
7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil; He
shall preserve thy soul.
8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy
coming in, from this time forth, and even for ever-
more.
1. Murrumbeek wmorunderoneit mynginiek lending
Pundgyl Marman ; weda womonner nunlbeunnul.
2. Murrumbiek nunlbeunnul womoner Pundgyl
Marman, wellainer monkeit woorwoor bar beeker.
3. Kargee nier malbodoneit murrumbiek tinan ;
mungither wellainer koonark murrumbinner nier
yemoner.
4. Wa! Mungither wellainer Koonark murrum-
binner nier yemee nier yemoner.
5. Pundgyl Marmon kunark murrumbinner;
Pundgyl Molariek ulbinner munung.
6. Nier ngervein tilbunner murrumbinner yellanwa
nier mineam boorundut.
7. Pundgyl Marman nulworthun murrumbinner;
nier nillam woman mungither moorupick nulwor-
thununner.
8. Pundgyl Marman nerdoit murrumbinne yannon
nulworthun, bar nerdoit womoneit nulworthun mur-
rumbinner, netbo bar w-ootunno yearamboot tille
mille nanbo.
* THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS.
1. In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth.
2. And the earth was without form and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
3. And God said, let there be light, and there was
light;
4. And God saw the light that it was good, and
God divided the light from the darkness.
5. And God called the light day, and the darkness
he called night; and the evening and the morning
were the first day.
6. 7. And God said, let there be a firmament. And
God made the firmament; and divided the waters
which were under the firmament, from the waters
which were above the firmament, and it was so.
8. And God named the firmament, heaven ; and the
evening and the morning were the second day.
9. And God said let the waters under the heavens
be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry
land appear ; and it was so.
10. And God called the dry land, earth; and the
gathering together of the waters, called he seas : and
God saw that it was good.
1. Ganbronin Pundgyl Marman monguit woorwor-
rer bar beek.
2. Nier beek nowdin netbo, beek tandowring tar-
kate; nier boit, nier mill, nier taul, nier turrong, nier
uungo; bar boorundara kormuk bundle. Bar Moo-
rup Pundgyl warrebonuk narlumbanan parn.
3. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombuk, womear yanga-
mut, bar yangamut woman.
4. Bar Pundgyl Marman nangeit yangamut, bar
tombak boundup nge, bar Pundgyl Marman borung-
nergurk yangamut boorrundara.
5. Bar Pundgyl Marman nerreno yangamut yellen-
wo, bar borundara borundut; bar krunguine bar ban-
baneram nerreno ganbronin yellenwa.
6. 7. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombak, malwomoar
firmament. Bar Pundgyl Marman mongeit narng;
bar borungnergurk parn kubberdon beek, bar nungo-
nuk parn lending karboit tandowring nowdin netbo.
8. Bar Pundgyl Marman nerreno firmanment woor-
woorrer ; bar krunguine bar banban eram nerreno
bengerrowlin yellenwa.
9. Bar Pundgyl marman tombit, malwo mear parn
kubberdon woorwoorrer kundee ganbony tombor. bar
malwomear palletdebuk ; bar nowdin netbo.
10. Bar Pundgyl Marman nerreno bidderup beek
(earth), bar wotonno parn nerreno warreen-warreen:
bar Pundgyl nangeit kooding nge marnameek.
* Abridged in some of the verses, in order to simplify the chapter to suit aboriginal capacity; but the full purport is retained.
98


11, 12, 13. And God said let the earth bring forth
grass, herb and trees, whose seed is in itself, and it
was so ; and God saw that it was good. And the
evening and the morning were the third day.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And God said, let there be
light above, to divide the day from the night, and let
them be for lights to give light upon the earth, and
it was so ; and God made two great lights: the
greater light to rule (or make) the day ; and lesser
light to rule (or make) the night. He made the stars
also. And God saw that it was good. And the
evening and the morning were the fourth day.
20, 21, 22, 23. And God said, let the waters bring
forth abundantly of fish, great and small. And fowl
that may fly above the earth. And God saw that it
was good. And the evening and the morning were
the fifth day.
24, 25. And God said, let the earth bring forth all
living creatures after its kind; and it was so. And
God made beasts of the earth, and all cattle after its
kind. And God saw that all was good.
26, 2f. And God said let us make man in our
image. And God made in his own image, man ; in
the image of God created he him, male and female
created he them.
28, 29, And God blessed them, and said, increase
and replenish the eartn ; and have power over the
fish of the sea, and fowl of the air, and all living
things. And God gave man every tree and herb
bearing fruit and seed for man’s food.
30. 31. And God gave every living tlfng to man
for food : and it was so. And God saw everything
that he had made, and behold it was very < ;ood. And
the evening and the morning were the six h day.
11, 12, 13. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombit, warra
wee bolt, bar kunnulderbil kurrennun, bar, terrung
willainer kooding nge ; bar Pundgyl Marman ngerren
bar tombak marnameek. Bar krunguine, bar banban
erara yellingwa bengero gammi.
14, *l5, 16, 17, 18, 19. Bar Pundgyl Marman tom-
bak, malwomear yangamut karboit, bar nungonuk
yellenwa bar borandut, tuduk yangamut beeker; tan-
dowring netbo: bar Pundgyl Marman monkeit ben-
gero bullito yangamut; koonge bullito narngate yel-
Icnwa, bar wyebo yangamut narngate borundut.
Mungitber monkeit wotunno topiram nowdin netbo.
Bar Pundgyl Marman nangeit koodin marnameek.
Bar krunguine bar banbaneram bengero bar benge-
rowlin yellenwa.
20, 21, 22, 23. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombak, mal-
womear tuat wootunno; wyebo bar bullito narlum-
bunner parn. Bar koyup woolwoin karboit beeker.
Bar Pundgyl Marman ngerrecn boundup nge. Bar
krunguine bar banban eram, bengero bar bengero
gaumelrowling yellenwa.
24, 25. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombak, mallongener
beek, wantagee umarko kunup togan nge ; bar tau-
dowring nge. Bar Pundgyl Marman monkeit tukin
ungut tandowring nge. Bar Pundgyl Marman nan-
geit marnameek kuding.
26, 27. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombak, mallun
monkeit kooling tandowring murrumbunick. Bar
Pundgyl Marman monkeit tandawring kargeeiek koo-
linner, —nowdin kargeeiek monkeit munniger—koo-
ling bar bagrook monkeit murrumnuller.
28, 29. Bar Pundgyl Marman tombit boundup mur-
rumnuller ; geanboon koolinge bagrook bar wootunno
bopup kuding beeker; bar umanaro umarko tuat
kuding warreen, koyup worworrow bar umarko
yeareit togan. Bar Pundgyl Marman uminara koo-
lin umarko turning, bar umarko uungo tunganan
koolinge bagrook.
30, 31. Bar Pundgyl Marman nmanarerkunnulwar-
rablo tuduk tanganan ; kuding nge. Bar Pundgyl
Marman ngarren umarko kargee mongon, bar wa
tombak koongee boundup. Bar krunguine bar ban-
ban eram, nerreno bengero, bengero, bar bengerow-
ling yellenwa.
THE CREED.
I believe in God the Father Almighty Maker of
Heaven and Earth ; and in Jesus Christ His only
Son our Lord ; who came down from heaven to save
man, and die for his people ; who was by wicked
men killed and hanged on a tree ; who was dead
and buried ; who rose again the third day from the
dead, and ascended into heaven, and sat down at
the right hand of God the Father ; from whence He
shall come again and make all mankind stand before
Him ; and separate the good from the wicked.
1 believe in the Holy Ghost, the resurrection of the
body, and the life everlasting.—Amen.
Murrumheek • nunurrunkella kuding Pundgyl
Marman koongee palleek mongeit woorwoorrer bar
beeker ; bar kuding Jesus Christ Tindee mummum
murrumbununner Lord ; wellainer burrawee woor-
woorrer mongonner koolinge bagrook marnameek ;
wellainer nillam koolinglilbnk weakeit bar berbuk,
narlumboon burrung ; wellainer weagoulaneit bar
numbuk; wellainer tinderbeek bengero ganmel yellen-
wa, kuding commargee numnumo, bar kuhhoweer
woorwooroit bar narlumby ulbinner munung Pundgyl
Marmanieek; Uungo yellenwa Jesus Christ uerlingo
mongoin umarko koolinge bagrook terridee kargeeiek;
bar pindoner houndup bar meungo.
Murrumheek nunurrunkella Boundup Moorrup,
commargee murrum, bar moorrup, tillee millee
nangbo.—Amen.
THE LORD’S PRAYER.
Our Father who art in heaven ; hallowed be Thy
name; Thy kingdom come ; Thy will be done on
earth like it in heaven. Give us this day our daily
food ; and forgive us our bad deeds, as we forgive
them that do us bad ; and keep us from sin this day,
and from all evil.
Only Thou O Great Father can keep us now and
ever.—Amen.
Marmanella Marman wellainer narlumboon kar-
boit ; nerrlno murrumbinner koongee boundup ;
woman trangbulk murrumbinner mongon tandowring
beeker. Umarleek nurnin yellenwa tanganan ;
bar narlarnarny nurnin nowdin murrumarter nar-
larnarny ungo ; bar kunark nurnin watticar koolin
yellenwa nicr nillam womeit.
Tindu Murrumbinner, Boundup Marman, nulwor-
then nurnin Netbo bar nanbo. —Amen,
FROM CHURCH SERVICE.
My dear blackfellows, —God’s hook tells us in many
places to acknowledge and confess our many sins,
and that we should not hide them before the face
of Almighty God, but confess them with sorrow,that
we may have forgiveness of them through His great
goodness ; and though every day we ought to tell
God our sins, yet more so on Sunday, when we all
meet together ; to thank Him for all His goodness ;
to hear His good book ; and to ask all good for our
bodies and souls. So let us all, as many as are now
here, fall upon our knees, and pray to our Great
Father in heaven, saying—&c. &c.
Murrumbick koolin, —kunne paper wa Pundgyl
Marman tombak wongonon, dado pardogurrahun tom-
boon nillam nurnin koonge meungo, bar nior culetbee
nillam nurnin tuduk nicr wongrunin pallat Pundgyl
Marman, tindee mardon mallun tombak mongderre-
wat mardoneit kunnup Pundgyl Marman yangally
narrite umarko boundup rige ; bar nelnwa pardogur-
rabun banban eram bar krunguite Pundgyl Marman,
nerdoit bullito Sunday womon wotunno pardogurra-
bun narlumby umarko ; thank Mungither tuduk
umarko boundup narngon kargeiek borkerk; tombar-
larnon yarrite boundup murrum bar moorup ; netbo,
malpardogurrabun umarko, marlumhunun mihu bul-
lito Pundgyl boundup Marman narlumboon karhoti
tom-der-run-en-er—&c. &c.
99


* HYMN TO OLD HUNDRED.
1 Pund-gyl Mar-man, bar mar-na-meek
Nun-guk kub-ber-don mur-rum-beek
Mong-der-re-wat koo-lin net-bo
Tan-dow-ring koon-gee mur-rum-bo.
2 Mal-yeng-erk par-do-gur-ra-bun
Tu-duk yar-rite ko-dun-un-un
Ner-rem-bee bo-run, yel-len-wa.
Nul-wor-then bo-pup Koo-lin-ner.
3 Ner-doit ye-men-ner mur-rum-beek
Lack-boo-ding myng-ner kar-gee-iek
Bar ner-doit yan-na-ner war-reet
Kar-gee nger-ren-er mur-rum-beek.
&c., &c.
catechism.
Q. —Tell me, my child, who made you ?
A. —The Great God who made the heaven and the
earth.
Q. —Tombannerek murrumbiek bopup, wellainer
mongeit murrumbinner.
A. —Pundgyl Marman weda mongut woor-woor-rer
bar beeker.
&c., &c.
APPENDIX E.
In addition to the answers given to the queries, the language and translations, I would submit the two
enclosed documents as -well worthy your honorable committee’s consideration.
No. I.—“ Proposed Plan for the better treatment of the Aborigines,” by John Hunter Patterson, Esq.,
a Squatter. June, 1842.
No. 2.—Colonial Secretary’s Despatch to the Superintendent, Port Phillip, on the breaking up of the
Protectorate, January, 1850; with Dr. O’Brien’s Suggestions for Medical Attendance upon the Aborigines.
Although I do not identify myself as acquiescing in the whole of the Colonial Secretary’s Despatch,
particularly with the ninth clause, and though some of the humane suggestions of Dr. O’Brien can never
be carried out, yet the document is well worthy your honorable committee’s consideration.
Counsel for Aborigines.
Counsel for aborigines appears wholly to have been lost sight of in the queries and evidence taken;
which I would solicit your honorable committee, ere you close your labors, to give the subject your humane
consideration. From the date of the appointment of a judge at Port Phillip the aborigines have had an
authorized counsel and solicitor; but, on the arrival of Sir Charles Hotham, standing counsel for aborigines
was discontinued.
WM. THOMAS,
To the Honorable Chairman of Select Committee on Aborigines. Guardian of Aborigines.
PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE BETTER TREATMENT OF THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA
FELIX. BY JOHN HUNTER PATTERSON, OF MELBOURNE, PORT PHILLIP, 7th JUNE, 1842.
Although much has been done by the Government and enterprise of individuals to advance the interests
of this Colony, it is a matter of general complaint, that no efficient means have been adopted to restrain the
predatory habits of the Aborigines. At the same time it is universally admitted that, unless these are
restrained, and the colonists furnished with a reasonable guarantee for the security of their persons and
property, the resources of the country can neither be fully nor speedily developed.
It now appears to be established beyond the reach of dispute that the extensive occupation of the
territory has produced a scarcity of those plants and animals which constituted the staple articles of their
subsistence, —and this view is confirmed by the fact, that the depredations of the aborigines have been hitherto
committed with thq sole purpose of obtaining food or clothing.
In these circumstances it is sufficiently obvious that, before any system can be devised for ameliorating
their condition, an adequate provision must be made, for supplying them with the first necessaries of life ; for
it is idle to talk of reforming, or even of restraining, by punishment or otherwise, a starving population. Nor is
this a mere matter of expediency. If the occupation of the country by our flocks and herds has had the effect
of depriving its natural possessors of their customary supplies of food, we are bound on every principle of
justice, either to provide them with an equivalent, or patiently to submit to their irregular excursions, what-
ever be the individual annoyance, or positive detriment arising out of them.
It is from a want of attention to this fundamental principle, we conceive, that the measures resorted to
by the Government have proved so notoriously ineffectual. For, without entering into unnecessary details, it is
admitted even by those who are disposed to give the greatest credit to the measures adopted by the local
authorities, that those stockholders who are more immediately under the eye of the district protectors have
invariably suffered the greatest amount of injury from the depredations of the blacks.
In respectfully submitting the following details to the consideration of the government, I would be
understood then to take it for granted, as an essential pre-requisite to any radical or permanent improvement,
that the native population be, in the first instance fed, and fed gratuitously , let the cost and sacrifice be what
they may. This in my opinion, would be best effected:—
Ist. By appointing Sub-Protectors to each tribe, whose duty it should be to accompany them in all their
excursions, and to inform themselves accurately of their numbers and names. In this case, no one could
absent himself from his tribe without the knowledge of his superintendent; and it would be easy for the latter
to ascertain in what manner absentees had been employed, without resorting to measures calculated to lessen
their confidence. And although everything like harshnesg or severity ought in the first instance to be
studiously avoided, the very fact that their movements were observed and known would have a salutary,
because a restraining tendency.
2nd. It should be considered the first duty of Sub-Protectors to see that every individual receives an
adequate supply of wholesome food. They should therefore be authorised to draw rations of meat and flour
from the settlers in their respective districts for some specified period ad. libitum. Nor should the allowance
be curtailed on account of the misconduct of the natives, or from any other cause. After a relish for the food
and conveniences of civilized life had been acquired, it might be found sufficient to establish one, or, at most,
two depots for each tribe, in such situations as might be considered most eligible. Rations might then be dis-
tributed only to those who remained in the vicinity of the depot, and encouragements held out to such as
chose to cultivate the soil, or engage in some useful employment ; but coercion, in the first instance at least,
* The black children at Merri Creek school used to sing this admirably,
100


ought on no account to be permitted; for it should never be forgotten, that indolence, or neutrality on the part
of the aborigines, is infinitely preferable to active and open hostility. They would thus be gradually weaned
from their roving and unsettled habits, and though it might be found impracticable to effect any permanent
improvement upon the condition of the present generation, the children would be brought within the reach of
discipline and instruction, which of itself is of the first importance, but at present confessedly impossible.
Srdly. The Sub-Protectors should be instructed to report weekly as to the state of their respective
tribes ; the number absent; their names and description; how employed ; and in general everything calculated
to throw light upon their manners and habits.
4thly. That a Chief or Managing Protector be appointed, with an office in Melbourne, to take cognizance
of all the details connected with the working of the system, and more especially the conduct of his agents. It
would be his duty to register and systematize the information contained in the periodical reports ; to visit
and inspect the different tribes; to appoint, suspend, or remove the sub-protectors, when he considered it
necessary; to receive the suggestions of the colonists ; secure their co-operation; redress their grievances ;
and generally to exercise an active and minute surveillance—so as to maintain the efficiency of the system: and,
as success would depend in a great measure on his zeal and personal ability, a sufficient salary—say from £4OO
to £5OO per annum, should be guaranteed, in order to secure the services of an individual possessed of the
requisite qualifications.
sthly. That Colonists be prohibited to harbour the aborigines, or offer them any encouragement to
remain at their stations, and in case of disobedience, punished by fine, loss of licence, or otherwise.
The above plan possesses one great recommendation —that it does not supersede or interfere in any
way with the measures already instituted and sanctioned by the Government. The whole of the machinery
necessary to its immediate and efficient operation may be said to be already in existence. There is already a
Chief Protector, invested with nearly similar powers, and subordinates stationed in different districts, in
direct communication with the blacks. IT DOES NOT CREATE A NEAV MACHINERY ; IT ONLY
CHANGES THE DIRECTION OF THE OLD.
It /may indeed be objected that the expense of such a plan must effectually prevent it from ever being
adopted; but where this is met by a generous tax upon the Colonists, the hardship on individuals would be
scarcely felt; and as the largest item of expense would be incurred for rations of flour and meat, the tax might
be collected IN KIND. From the calculations which I have made, lam almost satisfied that the tax, if levied
in this way, would not greatly exceed in amount the outlay at present imperatively necessary on the part of
stockholders for the protection of their flocks—especially when coupled with the losses to which they arc
subjected from actual depredations.
It will be observed that the great object of the above plan is to restrain the roving propensities of the
blacks, and to protect the lives and property of the colonists ; hence the necessity of maintaining a strict watch
by night and day on all their movements. No one individual of course could be expected to do this ; but it
would be requisite to support the sub-protectors, by a sufficient number of assistants or overseers, so that no
considerable party could be detached from the main body without being observed.
It might be found necessary, also, to modify the details in particular circumstances; for it is obvious that
no system, confessedly elementary, as the present, is, could be persevered in with any prospect of usefulness,
after the objects contemplated by it had been gained. To effect the permanent amelioration of the native
their treatment must vary with and be adapted to their progressive improvement. The present plan ought
therefore to be regarded only as preparatory. After the blacks have been converted, through its operation,
from a fluctuating into a stationary population, a higher and more advanced system might be advantageously
introduced, and no better data could be furnished for its construction than the information embodied with
reports of the subordinate agents, concerning the manners and habits of the different tribes.
APPENDIX.
Being unable to obtain any correct information relative to the numbers, ages, and sexes of the aborigine s
immediately under the superintendence of the Protectors, the following calculation is made from a carefu,
examination and a colonial experience of twenty years’ standing. 1
1000 Men, AVomen, and Children, 1 lb. of meat and 1 lb. of flour per diem
at 3d. per lb. each ... ... ... ... ... ... £9125 0 0
2000 suits of clothing ... ... ... ... ... ... 1500 0 0
1000 pair of blankets ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 0 0
Tea, sugar, tobacco, and soap, given for good conduct ... ... 500 0 0
Tools and other contingencies for three establishments ... ... 300 0 0
Salary of Chief Protector ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 0 0
Clerk to ditto ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 120 0 0
Three Surgeons at ss. per diem ... ... ... ... ... 273 15 0
Three Sub-Protectors ... ... ... ... ... ... 900 0 0
Twelve Overseers ... ... ... ... ... ... 600 0 0
Medicine and medicinal comforts ... ... ... ... ... 200 0 0
£14,518 15 0
Estimated Expense under the Present System.
Salary, provisions, &c., &c. ... ... ... ... ... £BOOO 0 0
Half of the Mounted and Border Police charged to the blacks, which
would be unnecessary under the present plan ... ... ... 4905 12 1
Balance to be raised by taxation, in money or kind, (or supplied from
squatting licences and assessment) ... ... ... ... 1613 211
£14,518 15 0
50 | 266 [Copt.]
50 | 45 Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 29th January, 1850.
Sir,
Reverting to the subject of the formation of reserves of Crown land, and other measures for the
amelioration of the aborigines of this colony, which either directly formed the subject of, or was incidentally
alluded to in your Honor’s several despatches noted in the margin, I am now instructed to state that, after
a mature consideration _of the voluminous reports and papers bearing on this question, His Excellency the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, has arrived at the following conclusions, which I am to
request that your Honor will cause to be carried into effect, so far as regards the district of Port Phillip.
1. The native police force should be increased throughout the colony to the utmost practicable extent, ;
and beyond the settled districts a certain proportion of aboriginal natives should be attached to the ordinary
police.
101
Aborigines (Appendices).—2 c.


2. Throughout the country lying beyond the settled districts, a suitable number of reserves of moderate
extent should be made for the use of the aborigines.
3. The reports of the several Crown commissioners throughout the colony have been referred to the
surveyor general, in order that he may offer such remarks as he may think necessary, respecting the sites
which those officers have proposed, and respecting the extent of land which would be sufficient in each case
to meet the object in view.
4. In making the last-mentioned reference it has been explained to the surveyor general that the
Council fully concurred in the correctness of Earl Grey’s conclusion that the system of large reserves for
the aborigines is inapplicable to the circumstances of this colony, and that they could not approve of such
extensive tracts being set apart for the use of the aborigines as are proposed by the commissioner of Crown
lands for the district of the Murrumbidgee.
5. The Council likewise fully concurred in the opinion expressed by your Honor, that these reserves,
when brought into use, should remain under the direct control of the Executive Government, and that it
would not be advisable to invest them in trustees, as is suggested in Earl Grey’s despatch.
6. They also adopted the opinion that the reserves should be placed under the charge of a medical
officer, if possible, and they suggested that an arrangement of this nature may be brought into effect at the
station of the Protectorate, in the district of Port Phillip, when the present establishment is broken up.
7. Every commissioner of Crown lands should be instructed to act in his magisterial capacity as
protector of the aborigines within his district, and he should be under obligation to afford them every
assistance in his power. He should also be constituted the official visitor of all aboriginal reserves in his
district, and as such should be required to render periodical reports, giving a brief summary of the state of
things at each reserve, as noticed by him at his visits of inspection, and exhibiting as nearly in a tabular
form as the nature of the subject will allow, the actual use made of the land, the resort to it by the natives,
the amount of food and clothing (if any) distributed there, and any other particulars admitting of such
recapitulation.
8. The Commissioners should further be required to furnish annual returns, showing the number of
aboriginal tribes within their respective districts, and the number of individuals in each tribe, according
to the best information which it is in their power to obtain. These returns should be accompanied by reports
setting forth the general habits of the several tribes, and the disposition shown by them towards the European
settlers, and giving the fullest possible information as to any services which may have been rendered by the
aborigines to the settlers, the degree of perseverance shown in the performance of them, and the nature of
the remuneration which formed the inducement to their being undertaken.
9. As respects the issue of food or clothing from the reserves or other Government establishments, it is
considered that it would be highly inexpedient to give anything gratuitously to the aborigines, except in cases
of extreme emergency. It should be an established rule, to be departed from only in cases of clear necessity,
that no aboriginal native should receive anything from a Government institution, which he has not earned by
some moral or physical exertion.
10. The Council deeply regretted that they could sec no sufficient prospect of success to justify them in
advising that the Government should incur the expense of establishing an experimental school at Melbourne
for aboriginal children, as suggested in your Honor’s letter of the 21st Eebruary, 1849, No. 129. In the
correctness of this conclusion the Council inferred that your Honor was prepared to concur, as, in your last
letter on the subject, in which you report the result of the experiment at Adelaide, you conclude by observing,
“ the question naturally arises, what can be the real advantage of education reaped by the individuals, or its
influence upon the tribes to which they belong, when that education terminates by a return to the degraded
habits of a savage life.”
11. 1 have already expressed to your Honor the concurrence of the Governor and Council in your
Honor’s suggestion, that the reserves made use of for the benefit of the aborigines should, as far as possible,
be placed under the charge of medical officers ; but it appeared to the Council to be the duty of Government
to make some general provision for the medical attendance of the aborigines, more especially considering the
diseases which have been engendered amongst them by their intercourse with the European population.
Wherever, therefore, the services of a medical practitioner can be procured, arrangements for the attendance
of the aborigines beyond the settled districts should be made in accordance with the suggestions of
Dr. O’Brien, as explained in the annexed paper, which appear to be complete and well adapted to effect the
object in view at a reasonable cost. Within the settled districts the aborigines can of course be admitted to
the benefit of all public hospitals and dispensaries, on the understanding that the expenses incurred on their
account in those institutions will be defrayed out of the territorial revenue.
12. In reference to a suggestion made by the survevor general, that, within the settled districts, reserves
should be made and set apart for the use of the aborigines at any places known to be still frequented by them,
either along the sea coast, or on streams where they are in the habit of fishing or encamping, I beg to state
that that officer has been requested to report such places of this description as may from time to time fall
under his notice, so that a decision may be given on each as to the expediency of reserving it for the use of
the aborigines. It is possible that, in the Port Phillip District, it may in like manner be deemed expedient to
act on this suggestion.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. DBAS THOMSON.
His Honor the Superintendent,
Port Phillip.
[Copy.]
DE. O’BRIEN’S SUGGESTIONS.
Medical attendance upon the Aboriginal Natives in the districts beyond the boundaries,
1. The sum of £2O a year to be paid to the surgeon as a fee for his services as medical attendant upon
the aboriginal natives in his district.
2. The annual sum of £5 per hundred (as ascertained from the commissioner’s returns) to be allowed to
the surgeon for medicines to be supplied to the sick aboriginal natives.
3. The surgeon to be in attendance at his own residence one day (say Wednesday) in each week, for
the purpose of giving advice and medicines to such sick aboriginal natives in his district as may require
medical aid.
4. In the event of an aboriginal native suffering under any illness that would require medical comfort
as well as medical attendance, the commissioner to procure for the sick person such suitable accommodation,
&c., as can be obtained, and as near as possible to the residence of the surgeon, who will be expected, under
such circumstances, to visit the sick person.
5. For the performance of any capital operation upon an aboriginal native the sum of £5 to be paid to
the surgeon, the commissioner giving a certificate that such operation has been performed.
6. The surgeon to send in to the commissioner of his district, for the information of the Government,
quarterly returns of the sick aboriginal natives treated by him.


APPENDIX F.
EXTRACTS OF AN EXCURSION TO WESTERN PORT.
(from “bunce’s wanderings in the australias.”)
Having been introduced by one of their number to a tribe of aborigines, I formed the intention of proceeding
to the Dandenong ranges, and thence to Western Port. Among the natives were Derrimut, Yammabook or
Uawk’s-Eye, and Benbow. The latter is he who gave information of an evil design which some of his com-
panions had conceived, and thus prevented what might have been a fatal encounter between them and the
first white settlers. Benbow invariably rejected all solicitations to partake of spirituous liquors, and is the
only teetotaller I ever met with among the aborigines. In a corner of Mr. Batman’s garden, Benbow and
his wife, Kitty, dwelt in a small hut of his own constructing. Within everything was cleanly, and in good
order. Benbow was often consulted by the settlers concerning various matters ; and he was always willing
to impart what information he possessed. He was not only an intelligent native, but a really worthy fellow :
an evidence that the aborigines of Australia are not, as has been so frequently stated by various writers,
incapable of being civilized.
********
Wc encamped the first night between Gardiner’s and Babee Jim creeks, where the country was
extremely rich, undulating, thinly-timbered, and thickly-grassed. Our camp was about the distance of four
miles from the southern bank of the river, on which was then a station belonging to Messrs. Walpole
and Goggs.
********
This w'as the first time I had ever camped for the night in company with aborigines. Having at that
time but a very imperfect acquaintance with their language and customs, my first impressions concerning
these singular and inoffensive people were by no means favorable. It being clear and star-light, we were
sufficiently sheltered for the night by a few branches from the neighboring gum trees.
As an additional protection for me, my new friends covered the spot where I was to lie with a sheet of
bark, supported upon wattles. They cooked an opossum for our evening meal. Although delicate in appearance
as an English rabbit, the flesh was not so agreeable as I had been led to anticipate, it being very strongly
tinctured with the volatile peppermint smelling oil, common to the leaves of the eucalyptus piperita, or pepper-
mint tree, in which tree the opossum finds its chief food.
In searching for and catching the opossum, the natives display acute observation and much skill.
Indications of the presence of their game, quite imperceptible to the white man, are by them instinctively
recognised. They examine cursorily all the large trees likely to afford shelter to the animal. If, from
observation of any particular tree, the hunter has conceived it probable that the opossum has taken refuge
amongst its branches, he, by making a series of notches in the bark for his feet, ascends to what altitude he
pleases. Should the opossum have taken refuge in a hollow, a small stick is used to dislodge him. On
emerging from his retreat, he is caught dexterously by the tail, and swung rapidly round twice or thrice,
until his head is made to come in contact with the tree and stunned.
After retiring to my berth, I lay awake a great part of the night, watching the natives, who were
seated around the camp fire, endeavoring to catch the meaning of the language in which they conversed
cheerfully with each other. _
We were afoot again by early dawn. At ray request, my companions tarried a short time, while I
collected specimens of the flora of the place ; and as soon as they perceived the reason of our delay, rendered
willingly what assistance they could, by bringing to me various leaves, herbs, &c. They had names for many
of them, which I carefully noted, for future reference. When the sun was fairly up, the short, rich notes of
the native thrush, the sweet warble of the magpie, and the jocund cadence of the laughing jackass, rever-
berated through the woods. We made for Mount Koronth Marabool, a small mountain divided from the
main chain of ranges. Pursuing our journey over the gently undulating country, we stayed for refreshment
beside a small streamlet, known as Babee Jim Creek. * * * * Upon reaching
the creek, some of my companions walked into a neighboring lagoon for the purpose of catching eels ( eeoke ).
With a small spear in his hand, the aboriginal eel-catcher walks slowly and cautiously about the shallow
water, until ho has trodden so gently upon the object of his search as not to awaken its attention. Although
half-buried in the mud, its position is judged with such accuracy, that, with one blow, the eel is pierced by
the native. Immediately he takes it out of the water, and disables it by giving it a crush between his teeth.
We arrived at the foot of the mountain about sunset. In reaching it we had been delayed while some of our
friends secured a fine kangaroo, which was shot by one of them, named Jemmy, in a small patch of grass.
It would appear that the kangaroo cannot, or does not, notice objects directly ahead ; and by Jemmy, with
his gun under his arm, cautiously creeping, under cover of a large bough, which he carried in his hand,
(some others having placed themselves in the rear), he was allowed to approach, shoot, and secure his prey
without difficulty. It was a noble specimen, although not full-grown, and was carried in triumph to the camp
over the shoulders of Jemmy. In skinning the kangaroo, one of the natives made his feet serve him very
usefully. I have often had occasion to remark how dexterous these people are in making use of their
feet. The kidney-fat they ate as soon as the entrails were taken out. The hinder part roasted made us
an excellent evening meal. The tail, which is regarded as a great delicacy, was cooked separately ; and I
do not remember ever having eaten anything with greater gusto than the two joints of tail which fell to my
portion. The fore-quarter was given to the dogs, and the bones and other portions of the tail, which the
black fellows could not eat, were thrown over their shoulders, and caught by their wives, with less concern
than they observed in feeding their canine companions. The ladies received these scraps with a quiet
humility, which it was really quite charming to observe in them, although I could never see such indifference
manifested on the part of the blacks towards their wives without aversion.
Our camping-place was on the rise of the mountain, behind which flowed a small gurgling brook,
with banks lined with the tree-fern, billarderia, and which the blacks call Quambee Jack. The heart of the
tree was cut out and eaten by the natives, in the same manner as we have subsequently seen the aborigines
in north-eastern tropical Australia appropriate the crown or heart of the corypha, palm-tree, as well that of
the larger fern-tree, alsophiUa ele.qans, which in those parts assumes a height and size of stupendous magnitude.
Here we stayed for the night. Rising earlier in the morning than the rest, I took a stroll up the valley of
the creek, among a forest of fern-trees. Occasionally the climbing plants, which were thickly interspersed
with ferns, with the dodonea , sassafraz, leplospermum, and ozothamnus, formed scrub so dense as merely to
leave a small opening, enabling me to take a sidelong peep, at intervals, into the valley of the creek below.
In most cases, I observed that the ground had been torn or scratched up. On our visit in company with
Jemmy, we afterwards learned that this was the work of the Bullen Bullen, or lyre bird, in its search for large
worms, its favorite food.
* * * * * * * *
The native women sometimes went out by themselves, and returned with a quantity of liquid amber
gum, which exudes from the acacia decurrens, or black wattle tree. This gum they call horong. I hey prepare
it as a relish for their food in the following manner : having formed, of a sheet of wattle bark, a trough to
hold water ( willum ), the women soak the gum until it assimilates with the water, and forms a thin glutinous
liquid ; a little sugar or manna is then added to make it palatable.


Some of the women brought large white grubs, the larva? of the gigantic moth, which they considered
as a dainty not easily to be rejected. These grubs were slightly grilled before being eaten. Some long
tuberous roots of a composite plant were also brought, and of which we partook. These plants produced a
hunch of tubers like the fingers on the hand, from whence they were called myrnong-myrnongatha, being the
native word for hand.
As we were returning towards the camp one evening, Jemmy captured a native bear, or sloth, from
among the branches of a huge gum tree. None but a native would have observed the creature, as the color
of its wool so nearly resembled that of the bark of the tree.
During th#excursion our diet consisted chiefly of opossum and kangaroo, varied occasionally with the
flesh of the porcupine and wombat. The heart or crown of the fern tree slightly roasted, furnished us an
acceptable dish, the taste of which reminded me of the flavor of the cocoa-nut. Native potatoes, or roots of the
ordudacece, were not wanting; those of the gastrodia sessamoides were especially plentiful, large, and well
flavoured. On evening we took three wombats, and next day the natives held a banquet, preceded as a
matter of course, by a grand corroborree.
Proceeding upon our journey, we crossed several creeks and streams, and eventually ascended the highest
part of the Western Port ranges. Each day I was enabled to add some fresh varieties to my herbarium. The
western mountains abound in healthy timber. In this locality, too, there is plenty of a light white wood,
which the natives call weenth kalk kalk (fire-stick', as they obtain a light from it, by means of friction, very
readily. This kind of wood is also called lhaal kalk (sounding stick), because a solid ringing sound can be
produced by two round billets being beaten together. AVhen the natives hold a corroborree, a festival in
which dancing forms the chief element, those who do not join in the dance beat time with the sounding-stick,
while they sing continually, “ Yah-yabba, yah-yabba, yah.”
***** ‘ * * * *
We determined on our return the following morning, by way of Dandenong Creek, near the station
then belonging to the Kov. Air. Clowe, but now the property of Mr. Beilby. Unfortunately, shortly after
sundown, there were signs of rain, the sky became overcast, thunder was heard in the distance, and forked
lightning played among the branches of the trees. The women were busy with their tomahawks in stripping
large flakes or sheets of bark from the stringy-bark trees, and setting forks and saplings whereon to place the
bark for the erection of willams, or dwellings, as a shelter. The 01113- parties disengaged were the black
fellows, whose duties appeared to be to pray for fine weather by a continued melancholy chant. This office
they continued for a short time after the rain commenced, and when all the rest of us had retired under
shelter ; but finding that their good divinity, in the present instance was deaf to their appeals, they exclaimed
“ Marmingatha bullarto porkwadding: quanthueeneera ? ” “ Marmingatha is very sulky, and why ?” and
commenced throwing ashes in the direction in which they believed she resided ; and saying, “ Tesee waugh ! ’
an exclamation of contempt and defiance, they returned to the willams. In this instance they did not believe
in her. The storm raged for a short time, but like all other occurrences, whether of divine or human agency,
ceased, and towards midnight all was again calm, and a clear moon and brilliant starlight night succeeded.
Sleep had sealed the eyes of most of our party, when a gruff “Noo-jee, noo-jee” (Anglice, “That will do, that
will do”) was heard in response to the sharp whizzing bark of poor old “ Go away,” the dog, upon which the
camp was fully awake, and greeting the new comer. Our nocturnal visitor was “Big Jack” (a notice of
whose death from cholera was noticed a few weeks since in the Melbourne journals), the husband of the
plump, curly-haired, pleasing, and musical-voiced Mary Anne, of Yore, but now decrepid with pains at
Moordy-Yallock. After helping himself, without “ By’r leave,” to a plentiful supply of the various viands,
he coiled in, and we were soon all asleep.
Shortly after breakfast all the older men disappeared, leaving mo and Jemmy and two or three youths
to take charge of the camp and its interesting and astonishingly lovely female occupants. On this occasion
my desire to acquire a knowledge of their language axtpeared to have been observed, and little Sally Sally, the
affianced bride of Jemmy (two most faithful likenesses of whom we observed the other day in a window in
Elizabeth street, by Mr. Haseldon), undertook the part of instructing me, and 1 consequently commenced
taking my first lessons in the language. My clumsy attempts at pronouncing their soft Italian, although
somewhat guttural, idiom, was the occasion of loud bursts of laughter from Sally Sally, in which she was
joined by the other females, and occasionally by the young men.
The first lesson consisted, as usual, in making me acquainted with the names for the various parts of
the body ; and commencing first with the head, “ Myrnong-atha”—foot, “ Geenong-ah-tha”—leg, “ Thorrong-
ah-tha”—the boots, “ Geenong-alook,” or covering for the foot—trowsers, “ Thorong alook, or covering for
the logs—gloves, “ Myrnong-alook ” —head, “ Cowong-atha”—hat, “Cobbera Cowong”—eyes, “ Myrring-
ah-tha” —mouth, “ Worong-ah-tha”—car, “Kidnong-ah-tha”—hair, “Yarra gondackahtah.” Wo observed
that every substance of a flowing character was occompanied by the word “Yarra,” in its various forms and
modifications. The name of saltwater, rolling in on the beach, was “Yarrain”—the river Yarra Yarra,
“flowing flowing”—the beard and whiskers, “ Yarragondook,” &c. For further information touching their
language the reader should refer to my work on the aboriginal language, printed at the Argus office in 1851,
the production of which work was the result of the present lesson. This morning we observed that they
practised some little amusements Among themselves, and some were playing with a puzzle made of string—
“ cudgi, cudgic”—made from the fibre of a tree (sida put elidin') common on the banks of the mountain streams,
as well as occasionally on the banks of the Yarra. This puzzle was played between two individuals, and
required two pairs of hands, in the same manner as the juvenile game of “ cats’ cradle,” common to our own
country. Many opossums had been caught during our excursion, and the skins were now pegged out on
sheets of bark, and stretched to their fullest tension with wooden pegs of the pomaderris apetu'a, or dogwood.
The points of the pegs had been previously scraped with a piece of broken bottle and hardened with the fire,
so as to enable them to act as a substitute for European tacks and nails; and a quantity of them was the
never-failing accompaniment of the “Baggerooks” or black woman’s basket, or “ Becnack.” After the
ojrossum skins are sufficiently stretched and dried they are very curiously marked, the work of the men—
animals, kangaroos, emus, as well as the human figure, arc. frequently represented by a piece of broken glass
bottle, or when not to be obtained, the bowl of a metal spoon with one side filed sharp for the purpose of
scratching the skin when in the soft state. Prior to the introduction among them of needles and thread they
used the finer tendons and sinews of the kangaroo and opossum for thread, and the sharp-pointed bone of a
fish or kangaroo for a needle, in sewing their rugs. In those days they needed not the aid of foreign ornament,
but were amply adorned with strings, and a necklace called “coornburt,” composed of a number of short pieces
of reed strung together and hanging pendant from the neck. Through the septa of the noses of the young
dandies of the male sex were large pieces of bone running transversely through, and forming a kind of sprit-
sail-yard. The young ladies wore around them a kind of bustle, composed of a ropeyarn-like substance,
which hung in pendant waves half-way down to the knees. With their hair they took great pains, and to
judge from the extreme anxiety observed in carefully using and putting by into their baskets every string
or other decorative material, it would seem to have been connected with one of their rude superstitions ; and
as I subsequently discovered, such was the case. Pomade and grease of opossum fat was rubbed abundantly
on the hair, a piece of gaily-colored rag being afterwards tied round the head. Fortunately for us, we had
taken our first day’s lesson in languages before their elaborate toilette of the day, otherwise we should have
committed a breach of aboriginal etiquette in leaving a neighborhood whose perfume resembled not the aroma
of the mignionette or jasmine.
Towards sundown the old warriors returned, as warriors of any nation should, with shield, helimar,
spear, jagged geraor, and the “womraera” or throwing stick, an instrument necessary in giving the proper


impetus to the spear. The helimar, with many other of its ornamental companions, is now extinct. It was made
of the thin piece of wood which may be occasionally seen forming protuberances from the large trees ; and in
being removed the outer portion of the bark was taken off and the whole affair finished into an excellent
shape, with a handle through the middle of the under portion, whilst on the outer surface was cut or carved
a number of zig-zag characters or stripes, on which, in whatever way the spear of the enemy alighted, its
point was caught. Our friends had brought wdth them, in addition to the shields, a plentiful supply of some
other particularly formidable-looking implements of warfare. They appeared to be in a high state of excite-
ment, as compared with the usually philosophic and well-bred bearing which in general characterised this
sooty generation. A hive of native bees had been discovered by one of the children —a yan yean, or boy—
who had caught one of the little insects, not much larger than a musquito, while dipping its little proboscis
into the blossom of a native honeysuckle, banksia, extracting from the nectaries of the flower its sweet juices.
The little fellow was caught and marked by the boy with the feather-like seed of a composite plant, and
followed to its home in a neighboring gum tree ; thus betraying the little industrious community of which it
formed a member. The boy returned to the camp and communicated the result of his discovery, when two
large hollow sheets of bark were procured, thus forming bowls, which were carried to the tree and speedily
filled with pure honey.
The native bees are very small, half the size of the common house-fly, and are stingless.
The bellicose intentions of the warriors appeared to lead them in the direction of the Plenty ranges and
the Goulburn river, as they took that direction on leaving the camp ; and as I had not yet visited that part
of the country, I determined upon prevailing upon Jemmy and one or two of his companions to accompany
me in that direction.
My desire met with a ready response, and the next morning was determined on as the time for setting
out. The warriors made their exit simultaneously during the silence of the night, as is their wont. In
taking the direction of the ranges we were in some measure actuated by a desire to see to what use they would
apply the spears at the fight, if fight was intended ; and we had now gained sufficient knowledge of the
natives as induced us to place the strictest reliance upon their good faith of respecting our claim as a non-
combatant, to prevent any fear of being compromised in the results of the campaign.
********
Wc soon reached what was afterwards called Thomson’s Station (now Frencham’s), near the
Anderson’s Creek diggings. Wc camped here for the night, and after travelling a few miles the following
day in the direction of the ranges, learned that peaceful overtures had been made by the Plenty blacks, and
accepted by our advanced plenipotentiaries. We again returned to Thomson’s Station, and from thence
commenced our final return to the settlement. Passing through the scrubby ground and thinly timbered and
undulating country about Heidelberg, we reached the settlement, after an absence of a few days.
By Authority : John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.
Aborigines (Appendices).—2 d.
