

WORLD’S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION, CHICAGO.
1893.
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES COMMISSION.


1894.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES COMMISSION,
& c., &c., &c.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP STREET,
1894.
124 21—94 a


REPORT
OF THE
PRESIDENT OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES COMMISSION,
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.
To His Excellency the. Eight Honorable Sin Egbert William Dupe,
a Member of Her Majesty’s Most Honorable Privy Council,
Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint
Michael and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of
the Colony of New South Wales and its Dependencies.
Mat it please Tors Excellency,—
The Commissioners appointed under the Great Seal of the Colony to devise and
carry out the details necessary for the collection and transmission to the World’s
Columbian Exposition, Chicago, of all articles intended for display thereat, have the
honor to suhmit'to Tour Excellency this, their report.
Appointment of Commission.
The first members of your Commission were gazetted on 29th September, 1891,
and the names of the members of the Commission originally appointed, together with
those of gentlemen who, from time to time, were added to the original number, will be
found in Appendix A, along with the text of the Commission in accordance with which
these gentlemen were gazetted, which Commission defines the duties with the carrying
out of which they were entrusted under the Seal of the Colony.
Eirst Meeting of Commission. —Appointment of Administrative
Committee.
The first meeting of the Commission was held at the Colonial Secretary’s Office
on the 7th October, 1891, William McMillan, Esq., M.P., President, in the chair, there
being in attendance no less than forty-four members out of a total of fifty-one
A


appointed. An Administrative Committee was called into existence, on the motion of
Sir Joseph Abbott, Yice-President, seconded by W. P. Manning, Esq. (now Sir W.
Patrick Manning, M.P.), Mayor of Sydney, Yice-President, whose duties, as stated in
the resolution, were to nominate the staff of the Commission, and generally to carry
out all preliminary arrangements, and, from time to time, to report for approval to the
Commission. A further resolution empowered the same Committee to consider the
various applications for the position of Secretary, and select therefrom the names of
four persons for submission to the Commission for its advice.
Appointment of Secretary.
The Administrative Committee held its first meeting on the 12th October, 1891,
and resolved to recommend to the Commission the appointment of Mr. Alexander
Cumming as Secretary. Recommendations were also made in connection with the
positions of Clerk to the Secretary, and Messenger to the Commission. At a meeting
of the Commissioners, held on the 16th October, the recommendations of the Adminis-
trative Committee were approved.
Preliminary arrangements.
At the second meeting of the Commission, held on the 20th October, 1891,
preliminary arrangements were made for obtaining suitable office accommodation, and
the Secretary was instructed to prepare drafts of an official programme and form of
application for space or entry form. A number of matters of detail, having regard to
the relations of the Commission with exhibitors, were decided upon at this meeting, to
be embodied by the Secretary in the documents referred to, and a sub-committee was
appointed to subdivide the very elaborate classification of the Chicago Exhibition
authorities into departments to be placed under the control of various committees. A
Einance Sub-committee of the Administrative Committee was also appointed, and the
meeting of Commission instructed the Secretary to obtain information as to the cost of
previous Commissions for Exhibitions at which Kew South "Wales had been represented,
in order to guide them in forming an estimate of the probable total expenditure in
connection with the Chicago representation.
Executive Commissioner’s Staff.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 26th October, 1891,
the President drew attention to letters which he had received from the Colonial Secretary
(the Honorable Sir Henry Parkes, Gr.C.M.G.), intimating the following appointments had
been made on the staff of the Executive Commissioner: —Mr. Oscar Meyer, as Organising
Secretary,and Mr. William Wilkins,as Literary Secretary; while he had also been officially
informed that James Martin, Esquire, M.P., had been appointed as a Special Commis-
sioner to report upon Manufactures. It seemed to him that this Commission had no
responsibility in connection with the appointments made on the Executive Commissioner’s
staff, and that their notification should be regarded simply as an act of courtesy to this
Commission. Dr. Eenwuck, Executive Commissioner, in the course of the discussion


which ensued, said that his duties in that position were defined by a Special Commission
under the Great Seal of the Colony, and the powers given to him therein were indepen-
dent of the Commission itself, although he recognised the fact that an Executive
Commissioner should act in perfect harmony with the Commission ; and with respect to
the two appointments on his staff which had been mentioned to-day, he might state that
he had been consulted on the subject. The letters were read and received.
Classification.-—Sub-Committees.
James Martin, Esq., M.P., brought up a report from sub-committee as to
the arrangement of the original classification of the Chicago Exhibition authorities
into divisions before issue, for organising the work of local committees, and this report
was duly adopted. It was further agreed to recommend to the Commission the
appointment of a number of ladies to act as a Sub-Committee of Department M, to deal
specially with group 168, Woman’s Work. A resolution was also passed, deciding that
members of the Commission should elect to serve upon no more than three of its
committees, the President and Vice-Presidents, however, to be ex-officio members of all
committees.
Relations between Exhibitors and Executive Commissioner.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 2nd November, 1891,
it was resolved, after discussion, that, subject in all cases to the approval of the
Executive Commissioner, and under his control,' an exhibitor of this Colony or his
accredited agent may take charge of the arrangement and display of all his goods in the
New South Wales Court at Chicago, and that any other special arrangement in
connection with exhibits while at the Exhibition be subject to the approval and decision
of the Executive Commissioner.
Wbat the representation should be.—Relative duties of the Commis-
sion and Executive Commissioner.
At the next ensuing meeting of Commissioners, held on the 2nd November,
Dr. Eonwick, Executive Commissioner, addressed the members, chiefly on the subject
of the important duties with which he had been entrusted by the Government of the
Colony. Special reference was made by the Executive Commissioner to the principal
sections in which it was desirable to have a very complete representation, and in order
to ensure this result the Commissioners depended upon the efforts of the sub-
committees in charge of the various Departments of Classification. Our mineral
industry and our wool production would require to be prominently presented, and
wherever practicable our raw produce should be displayed at Chicago in the form of
balky trophies. At this meeting an opinion was expressed that it would be well to have
a clear definition of the respective duties of the local Commission and the Executive
Commissioner, and copies of the latter’s appointment under the seal of the Colony
were submitted to the meeting. The President, speaking on this subject, said that the


position was very clear, and that the Executive Commissioner, who was also a member
of the local Commission, desired to work harmoniously with the general body of
Commissioners. The moment the exhibits arrived at Chicago they wmre under the
control of the Executive Commissioner.
Appointments under the Executive Commissioner, &c.
The President notified the receipt from the Principal Under Secretary of an
official communication respecting the appointment of Sir Roderick W. Cameron as a
Commissioner for New South Wales in America. Official letters of appointment of
Mr. James Martin, M.P., Mr. Oscar Meyer, and Mr. W. Wilkins were submitted to
the meeting ; and an official communication was also submitted, notifying the appoint-
ment of Dr. Eenwick as Executive Commissioner.
Probable cost of Representation.
The Honorable John Davies asked what would be the probable cost of the
representation of the Colony ? The President said he thought about £50,000, but that
it was his intention to have an interview with the Premier without delay on the subject
of an estimate of probable expenditure, the result of which he would report to the
Commission.
Composition of Committees.
Dr. Eenwick was appointed an ex-ofjicio member of all committees, and it was
decided to send out a circular to all the members of the Commission who had not yet
replied, asking them to decide without delay as to the committees upon which they
desired to serve.
Cost of Representation.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 10th November, 1891,
drafts of official programme and form of application for space w r ere submitted and
approved. The President reported that he had had a preliminary conversation with the
Honorable the Chief Secretary and Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, G-.C.M.G., M.P., as to
the estimate of expenditure for the proper representation of the Colony, and he stated
that the Premier was inclined to leave this matter in the hands of the Commissioners
themselves, they acting as economically as possible under their responsibility as Com-
missioners appointed for a specific purpose.
Resignation of Administrative and Finance Committees.
After discussion it was resolved that the President be requested to report to the
Commission the resignation of the Administrative Committee for the conduct of
preliminary business, and of the Einance Sub-committee, in terms which had been
indicated in an address of the President made to the meeting at an earlier stage.


Combined representation of the Colonies.
Letters from the Premiers of South Australia and Tasmania to the Premier of
New South Wales, having reference to the combined representation of the Australian
Colonies at Chicago, were read to meeting of Commissioners held on the 10th November,
1891, and the opinion of the Commission was asked as to how this could he arranged.
The President was of opinion that co-operation between the Colonies, while likely to he
of little value in connection with the local work of collecting exhibits of each Colony,
would prove a most excellent thing in America, where it was desirable that the Execu-
tive Commissioners representing the various Australian Colonies should work together
for the general interest. As suggested by the new Premier, the Honorable George
Dibbs (now Sir George Dibbs, K.C.M.G., M.P.), co-operation of this kind in Chicago
would probably result in largely minimising the combined expenditure. The President
was requested to communicate with the Chief Secretary in accordance with the views
he had enunciated to the members.
Appointment of Committees.
Committees of Classification were then appointed, with power to add to their
number. The resignation of the Administrative and Pinance Committees was reported,
and new Administrative and Pinance Committees were elected in their place. It was
agreed that the duties of members of the Administrative Committee should comprise
all matters of finance, appointments, and general detail, to be reported upon to the
Commission as a body. The names of the members composing the various Committees
will be found in Appendix B.
Cancellation of appointments to staff of Executive Commissioner,
and definition of powers of local Commission.
Letter dated the 12th November, 1891, from the Principal Under Secretary to
the President of the Commission, was read to meeting of the Commission held on
the 20th November, enclosing minute of the Premier, referring to the cancellation of
the appointments of Mr. Meyer and Mr. "Wilkins, which appointments had been made by
the late Ministry, and to the necessity for a complete reorganisation of the working of
the Commission. At present there was a dual management in the fact that there was a
President and a Commission to deal with work which would entail the expenditure of large
sums of money, and an Executive Commissioner also, with the power of employing a staff
and incurring the expenditure also of large sums of money. The Premier therefore
recommended that the dual form of management should cease. The Government would
hold the President of the Commission as the responsible head of the whole business, and
it must be understood that the Executive Commissioner, as such, is not independent of
the President of the Commission and the Commission itself, except in regard to his
duties at Chicago as defined in his commission. The President, in referring to the letter
above cited, said that he believed that Dr. Eenwdck should have full control over and
the nomination of those who would be attached to his staff in Chicago —men in whom
he would feel the fullest possible reliance, and who should be appointed subject to the


approval of the Commission here. The Executive Commissioner said that there was no
doubt that this Commission should be consulted in all matters connected with the repre-
sentation of the Colony. He was of opinion that the Government would yet find it
necessary to have an Organising Secretary, who- was a very important officer. His
whole desire as Executive Commissioner was to work harmoniously with the Commission
here, to secure the best possible representation of the Colony, and the matter of
appointments was comparatively a small one.
Conjoint Australian Representation. —Wool Exhibits. —Minerals.
At this same meeting there was read a letter, dated 18th November, 1891, from
the Principal Under Secretary to the President of the Commission, enclosing copy of a
communication made by the Premier to the Prime Ministers of the other Australian
Colonies, with reference to a conjoint representation at Chicago, with separate Courts
for the various Colonies. There was read Report from the Wool Committee recom-
mending that all classes of the product should be shown in bale and fleece ; that the
wools from each district or division of the Colony should be shown separately, as the
characteristics of the wool product of the various divisions are essentially different, and
the committee was of opinion that by this mode of arrangement woolbuyers would be
better able to choose whatever samples may be best suited to their special requirements ;
that greater care than usual should be taken in classifying the exhibits ; that commercial
samples with prices attached should be part of the wool display ; and that it is not so
necessary to take steps to secure exhibits of the present season’s clip as it is to so arrange
that there shall be a full representation of that of next year, which would be in ample
time for despatch to the New South Wales Court. The committee finally requested
the Executive Commissioner to -write to the Exhibition authorities for full information
with respect to wool exhibits —the form in w-hich they are to be shown, and the
detailed classification, if any, which has been adopted for wool. A report -was also read
from a preliminary meeting of the Mining Committee, which stated that the Executive
Commissioner had undertaken to see the Minister for Mines as to the extent of the
Departmental representation, and the committee expressed it as their opinion that
it was extremely desirable that apart from Departmental exhibits an effort should
be made to secure from the chief mining districts samples of various ores in bulk
as private exhibits, portions of which might be submitted to experts from Germany,
Great Britain, &c., with a view to obtaining from their after analyses suggestions as to
their more efficient and economical treatment. Preliminary meetings of Committees
YIII on Machinery and Implements, and IX on Manufactures also reported dealing
with proposals which they had discussed with respect to obtaining definite information
as to persons throughout the Colony most likely to contribute suitable exhibits.
Cost of Representation estimated at £30,000.
At a special meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 30th November,
1891, there was taken into consideration the question of the sum which will probably be
required to meet the expenses of the representation of the Colony at Chicago, with


a view to informing the Honorable the Chief Secretary, and the following resolution
was agreed to : —“ That the committee report to the Commission that they are of
opinion that a reply may be sent to the Chief Secretary’s letter of the 25th November,
asking for an approximate estimate of the probable cost of the representation of
the Colony at Chicago, in the following terms ; —‘ That the Committee is impressed
with the necessity for economy in connection with the Exposition, and is of opinion that
an adequate representation should he secured for a sum not exceeding £30,000’ ” ; and
at a special meeting of the Commission, held on the 4th December, the report of the
Administrative Committee w r as brought up, and the resolution adopted by the Commis-
sioners with the verbal alteration that the “ Commission ” instead of the “ Committee
is impressed, &c.”
Woman’s Work Committee. —Scope of Sectional Committees.—Wool
Exhibits.
At the same meeting of the Commission, held on the 4th December, a committee
of ladies was appointed to inquire into the question of exhibits of woman’s industry, and
to report to the Commission the result of their deliberations, and to also state if they
could, what would be the probable cost thereof, the Executive officers of the Commission
to advise with the committee. The names of the ladies referred to will he found in
Appendix C, with the addition thereto of a report from Lady Windeyer, as President of
Committee XII, giving a statement of the work done by that Committee, which reported
soon after the meeting referred to that it w 7 as thought possible that a suitable represen-
tation in this section could be obtained for a sum not exceeding £SOO. It was resolved
to call a meeting of the chairmen of departments to consider the scope of their several
sections, and also the work that required to be done by canvassers, with a view to
reporting to the Commission ; and it was agreed that a selection of the names of four
persons to act as canvassers be left with the Administrative Committee. On the report
of the 'Wool Committee it was agreed that the Woolbrokers’ Association be requested
to meet, and after discussion to select such brands as they may deem most suitable to
represent different districts of the Colony, and that it is desirable, as far as practicable,
for manufacturing purposes, to give the quantity of each class of wool available for sale.
Committees 111, on Viticulture, Wines, &c.; IV, on Horticulture-; VI, on Eish and
Eisheries; VII, on Mines, Mining, and Metallurgy; VIII, on Machinery and Implements;
IX, on Ma nufaetures; X, on Fine Arts; and XI, on Liberal Arts ; also reported detailing
the progress of work entered into by members of these committees, in order to secure
suitable representation.
Appointment of Canvassers. —Eorest Products and Cereals.—Wool. —
Minerals.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 16th December, 1891,
four canvassers were appointed—two for the city and suburbs, and two for the country —
and these appointments were reported to the Commission at meeting held two days
later. A report was received from Committee lon Agriculture and Eorest Products,


stating the steps that had been taken in order to secure a suitable representation of the
Colony in forest products, and that a letter had been received from Mr. J. Ednie Brown,
F.L.S., Director-General of Forests, promising the fullest possible assistance to the com-
mittee in this important matter. The committee had decided to have the cereal produce
of the Colony well represented, especially in the matter of maize in cob for trophies.
The "Wool Committee reported that to the Woolbrokers’ Association had been left the
work of selecting the brands of wool from the various districts of the Colony which it
was most desirable should be shown in competition at Chicago. Committee VII on
Mining and Metallurgy reported recommending that with respect to refractory ores the
exhibits should be in bulk, not only to impress visitors by their size, but also to leave
sufficient for samples to be at the disposal of the Executive Commissioner for treatment
by experts. It may be mentioned that about this period in the history of the work of
the Commission, committees began to report to the general Commission, in accordance
with its resolutions, the various classes in the official schedule of the Exhibition
authorities to which they had decided to confine their efforts, there being a number of
classes and groups which might practically be omitted from the classification of the several
departments owing to the fact that no suitable exhibits of colonial production were
likely to be forthcoming therein.
Regulations for Canvassers. —Timbers. —General expenses in connection
with all departments of classification. —Opinion expressed by
Chamber of Commerce. —Fisheries exhibits and pamphlets.—
Project to cross from Sydney to San Francisco in small boat.—
Photographic illustrations of public buildings. —Proposal to show
aborigines at Chicago.
A series of regulations for the guidance of canvassers w'as adopted at a meeting
of the Administrative Committee held on the 23rd December, 1891. A report was
adopted from Committee I on Agriculture, in which that committee recommended that
timbers in the shape of railway sleepers, wooden blocks, planks of cedar, tallow-wood,
and other of our more valuable timbers should be shown, as also furniture made from
colonial woods suitable for the purpose, but it was understood that as this matter was
more properly in tho hands of the Committee on Manufactures the Agricultural
Committee w r ould only seek to render all assistance in its power in this regard. The
committee, at the instance of the President and the Executive Commissioner, entered
into consideration of what would probably be the general expenses in connection with
the various departments of classification, and prepared the following rough estimate to be
submitted to the general Commission : —Agriculture and forestry, £2,000 ; wool, £SOO ;
viticulture, £500; horticulture, £100; live stock, (sum not stated) ; fish and fisheries,
,£500; mining and metallurgy, £2,000; machinery and implements, £250; manu-
factures, £I,OOO ; liberal arts, &c,, £2,000 ; fine arts, £500; woman’s w r ork, £500;
total, £15,850. A general standing advertisement for insertion in the daily and weekly
papers was adopted by the Administrative Committee at meeting held on the 30th


January, 1892, and the first series of reports from canvassers in town and country was
submitted for the information of the committee. A letter from Mr. H. C. Mitchell,
Secretary of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce, was read to meeting of Commission
held on the 15th January, 1892. It enclosed, by direction of the committee of the
Chamber, the following resolution: “ That it is the opinion of this Chamber that the
exhibits from this Colony should he confined to natural products, and such other
materials as would he likely to produce practical results.” After discussion the letter
was remitted to the Administrative and Finance Committee for consideration and
report. A report from the Administrative Committee, furnishing an estimate of the
probable expenditure in connection with all departments of classification, was received
and adopted. The Fish and Fisheries Committee (No. YI) reported as to the action
they had taken in order to secure suitable exhibits illustrating the fish suppN of the
Colony, and also the arrangements they had made as to pamphlets illustrating the
subject. Committee YIII on Machinery and Implements reported that they had taken
into consideration a proposal of Messrs. Yon Eantzow and Engelhard! to obtain the
assistance of the Commission in the construction of a lifeboat in which they pfoposed
to cross from Sydney to San Francisco, and that they had decided that the matter was
one that did not come within the scope of the Commission’s operations. Committee X
on Fine Arts reported that they had taken over from Committee XI on Liberal Arts,
at its request, all photographic illustrations of public buildings, &c. Committee XI on
Liberal Arts reported as to proposals of Mr. H. Stockdale for the display of fifty or
sixty natives of the Northern Territory of South Australia at the Chicago Exhibition,
and also for assistance in enabling him (Mr. Stockdale) to procure photographic or
other reproductions of cave drawings by aborigines in the Northern Territory, and the
Commission unanimously decided that Mr. Stockdale be informed that it declines his
proposed representation of Australian aborigines in America.
Appointment of Special Canvasser for Ethnology. —Storage for
Timbers.— Gun-stocks from Colonial timbers. —Ethnological
Collections.
Meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 27th January, approved
of the appointment of a special canvasser in the ethnological section, and of the com-
pilation of a pamphlet on the manners, customs, religious belief, &c., of the Australian
aborigines. Committee I on Agriculture reported, recommending that storage be
obtained for the reception and inspection of timber exhibits, and that they had decided to
obtain gun-stocks prepared from suitable timbers, while the Director-General of Forests
had intimated to the committee that there were in course of preparation designs for
suites of furniture to illustrate the suitable character of some of our principal
woods for the purposes of the cabinetmaker. Committee XI on Liberal Arts related
the steps they had taken to date to obtain suitable ethnological collections of Australian
weapons, as well as similar collections from the South Sea, Islands, and mention was
made of the assistance which had been promised by the Trustees of the Australian
Museum in the natural history section.


Departure of the President for England.
The President of the Commission reported to meeting of Administrative Com-
mittee, held on the 3rd February, 1892, that he proposed in about a week to leave for
England. He had thought it right, before leaving, to report to the Administrative
Committee his intention. He was not certain whether, in the circumstances of his
absence from the Colony for a period of at least six months, he ought to retain the
Presidency. The members of the Administrative Committee expressed a unanimous
hope that the President would retain his position now that the preliminary arrange-
ments were well settled, and it was agreed to recommend to the Commission that during
the absence of the President the power of appointment and dismissal of canvassing
agents and other officers be left to the Administrative Committee. The President also
reported his intended departure to the Commission on the sth February, and
expressed it as his feeling that in view of his necessary absence from the Colony he
ought to place his resignation in the hands of the Honorable the Colonial Secretary ;
but the Honorable E. Burdett-Smith moved the following resolution, which was unani-
mously agreed to : “ That the President be desired to retain his position as head of this
Commission, and that whatever leave of absence he may require will be wdllingly granted
by the Commission,” and in speaking to the resolution several members, including the
Executive Commissioner, joined in the hope that the President might benefit by the
change he was about to take. The Administrative Committee was, by resolution,
authorised to deal with appointments and dismissals in the absence of the President.
The Executive Commissioner, in reply to a question on the subject, said that no definite
decision had yet been arrived at by the other colonies as to joining in a united Australian
representation. The meeting adjourned after passing the following resolution: “ That,
during the absence of the President, the Secretary confer with the Executive Commis-
sioner on all matters of importance outside of meetings of the Administrative Com-
mittee and of Commission.”
Failure of negotiations for combined Australasian representation.—
Typical plants of the Colony.—Suggested exhibit of Live Stock.—
Exhibits of Tinned Fish.-—Arrangements with Mines Depart-
ment for display of Mineral exhibits.—Photographs of Public
and Commercial Buildings.
The Executive Commissioner reported to meeting of Commission, held on the
12th February, 1892, that the negotiations that had been entered into by the Honorable
the Chief Secretary, at the suggestion of the Premiers of South Australia and
Tasmania, for a combined Australasian Court, with himself as Executive Commissioner,
had fallen through. In his report Dr. Eenwick said he regretted that unfortunately
thus had been lost an excellent opportunity of “presenting to the world a practical
proof of the value and importance of the Federal idea as it is regarded in
Australia, together with the opportunity afforded for obtaining a united repre


sentation of Australasia on an economical basis in connection with the united
efforts of all the Colonies to display their resources as a whole.” He might state
that the Honorable the Chief Secretary had been good enough to give every
assistance in connection with this important matter, but his suggestions and those
of the two colonies named had not been adopted. Committee IY on Horticulture
reported that in its opinion it might be possible with due care in the preliminary
arrangements, -which would include the developing of the plants in conservatories
in some of the public gardens in Chicago some months before the opening of the
Exhibition, to send a number of the gigantic ferns of the Colony for the decoration
of the Court; and a further report of a subsequent meeting was submitted, suggesting
that inquiries might be made in Chicago from the authorities there, whether, if
the plants were forwarded, due care would be taken to protect them against
excessive cold, and to see to their proper development. The Commission adopted
report from the Live Stock Committee, recommending that if suitable exhibits were
offered, principally of sheep, they might be sent to the Exhibition, together with
typical live Australian animals, and this report further recommended that, subject to the
approval of the Minister for Mines agreeing to his services being placed at the disposal
of the Commission for supervision of this section, Mr. Alexander Bruce, Chief Inspector
of Stock for New South "Wales, be appointed to take charge of the exhibits. Committee
YI on Eish and Fisheries reported that it had been decided to ask the Sydney Meat
Preserving Company if they will be so good as to undertake to assist the Commission
by preparing tinned fish to bo shown in the New South Wales Court, and, in addition,
to be used in connection with such luncheons as may be given by the Executive Com-
missioner. Committee YII on Mining and Metallurgy reported, and the report was
adopted, that the Chairman had had an interview with the Honorable T. M. Slattery,
Minister for Mines, as well as the Under Secretary of the Mines Department, with refer-
ence to the assistance which the Department would be in a position to afford to the
Commission, when the following matters were agreed to, subject to the approval of the
Commission, on the report of the Chairman ;—l. All exhibits to be shown in the name
of the Commission. 2. The Mines Department to lend the Commission its present
collection of geological mineral specimens, and such to be exhibited as lent to the
Commission by the Minister for Mines or Department of Mines. 3. An officer of
the Mines Department to accompany the exhibits, display them, and to be responsible
for their care. 4. The Commission to defray all costs in connection with the collection,
despatch, and display of exhibits. 5. The officer allotted by the Minister for Mines to
collect and prepare exhibits, to confer generally with the committee, and report
progress from time to time at approved intervals. G. Bulk samples to be available for
experimental treatment, and reports to be made upon them by experts in Chicago.
Committee X on Eine Arts reported that they had taken steps to obtain, with the
assistance of the Glovernment Printer, a large number of well-selected photographic
illustrations of the principal public and commercial buildings, with selections from
leading churches.


The Question of a Federal Court. —Co-operation of Leading Wine-
growers. —Publication s on the Colony. —Busts of distinguished
Colonists.
The Executive Commissioner, at meeting of the Commission held on the 26th
February, 1892, drew attention to an article in the “ Melbourne Age,” which had
asserted that the Colony had been opposed to a Federal Australian Court, whereas the
contrary had been the case ; and he had deemed it his duty to send a reply to that
paper, and to communicate the nature of his reply to the Premier of this Colony, and
of all the other Australian Colonies, with the exception of Hew Zealand and Western
Australia. The report presented by Committee 111 on Viticulture, Wines, &c., showed
that all the principal wine-growers throughout the Colony had promised to become
exhibitors. A communication from the Tinder Secretary for Mines, reported upon by
Committee VII on Mines, Mining, and Metallurgy stated that Mr. Came, Curator and
Secretary of the Mining Museum, would be detailed to visit the principal mines to
collect suitable specimens, including bulk samples of refractory ores. The Commission
adopted, on the report of Committee XI on Liberal Arts, a draft list of the publications
upon the Colony, which it was proposed should be printed and published in Sydney, and
issued from the New South Wales Courts. The same Committee furnished a list of
distinguished Colonists in various spheres of usefulness, whose busts it wms proposed
should be prepared in plaster, and shown at Chicago, to illustrate a special group in
the classification of the World’s Fair purposely inserted to allow of their display ; but
after discussion the proposal of this Committee was declared to be lost.
Show-cases. —Shipment of Exhibits to Chicago.
It .was announced to meeting of the Administrative Committee held on the 9th
of March, 1892, by the Executive Commissioner, who was in the chair, that, in order to
avoid expenses of freight, &c., he was obtaining from the Mines Department, Technolo-
gical Museum, Australian Museum, Technical College, and other institutions, informa-
tion as to the number of show-cases (Sage’s counter-cases), which will be required for
the display of case specimens they are about to forw r ard; and he would take the neces-
sary steps, if inquiries which he was about to make proved favourable, to have this
work done in America, if the cases required could not be obtained on hire. A resolu-
tion was passed affirming the expediency of shipping to Chicago the bulk exhibits not
later than September, in order to obtain moderate rates of freight.
Maize in Cob for Trophy.—Suites of Furniture.—Representation of
Fishing Industry. —Co-operation of the Education Department.
The Agricultural Committee (No. 1) obtained the approval of Commission
meeting held on the 11th of March, 1892, for the purchase of maize in cob for trophies
in the New South Wales Court; and a ,sub-committee to supervise the matter of
designs for and construction of suites of furniture, to be made from Colonial timbers,
was appointed on the recommendation of Committee IX on Manufactures. The


Fisheries Committee gave information as to their proposals for securing a suitable
representation of the fishing industry. The Liberal Arts Committee (No. XI)
announced the co-operation there was being obtained from the Department of Public
Instruction, together with the Technical College and the Technological Museum, and
Trustees of the Australian Museum.
Collection of Natural History Specimens.—Tender for Cartage.
The Administrative and Finance Committee, on IGth March, 1892, adopted a
joint recommendation from Committee YI on Fish and Fisheries and Committee XI
on Liberal Arts for an expenditure of, say, £SOO, for a full collection of natural
history specimens including fishes and also ethnology from the Australian Museum
Trustees. The tender of Mr. J. McMahon & Co. for cartage was accepted as being the
lowest of all the tenders submitted in answer to advertisement.
Exhibit of Cereals. —Popular Pamphlet on the Fisheries of the Colony.—
Samples of Marble, and Photographs of Cave Scenery.
At meeting of Commission held on the 20th March, 1892, Committee I on
Agriculture reported that Mr. Anderson, Director of Agriculture, had reported to them
as to the steps that would be taken to obtain a collection of maize in cob for trophies
in the New South "Wales Court, and also well-selected samples of other agricultural
products. Committee YI on Fish and Fisheries reported the steps they had taken for
the preparation of a popular pamphlet upon the fish and fisheries of New South Wales.
The Mining Committee (No. YII) reported- as to the action they had taken to secure
samples of Colonial marble of suitable quality and photographic illustrations of the
various limestone caves throughout the Colony.
The late George Cass, Esq., M.P.—Appointment of United States
Consul to all Committees.—Typical Plants. —Photographs of
Aboriginal Natives.—Exhibit illustrative of work of Fisheries
Commission. —Technical Education,
At meeting of the Commissioners, on the Bth April, 1892, the Executive Com-
missioner expressed the sympathy of the Commission with the widow of the late
George Cass, Esquire, M.P., a member of the Commission. In order to facilitate
his communication of important letters from the United States, to the various com-
mittees of the Commission, Alexander Cameron, Esquire, Acting United States Consul,
was appointed ex officio a member of all committees. Committee IY on Horticulture made
known the progress of the steps they had taken to secure a suitable representation of
the typical plants of the Colony. The Liberal Arts Committee stated that they had
taken action to secure the preparation by a photographer in Sydney of well-chosen
enlarged photographs of the aboriginal natives of the Clarence and [Richmond [Rivers
districts. The Commission approved of recommendation from the Fish and Fisheries


Committee that a sum not exceeding £250 be at their disposal for a collective exhibit
from the Fisheries Commission, to be completely illustrative of the work of that
department; and approval was also given to a recommendation from Committee XI on
Liberal Arts that a sum not exceeding £SOO be placed to the credit of the Committee
for the full representation of the technical educational system of the Colony, including
the work of the principal classes of the Technical College, and also exhibits from the
Technological Museum.
Circular to probable Wool Exhibitors. —Suggested appointment of
Mr. Bruce to take charge of Wool Exhibits at Chicago.—Prepa-
ration of Preserved Eish.—Exhibit Illustrative of Ethnology of
South Sea Islands.—Acceptance of Tenders for Eurniture.
The Wool Committee (II) reported to the Commission of the 26th April, 1892,
that they had arranged for the issue of a circular to embody the classification for
exhibits. It was also resolved, as apart from competitive fleeces, to accept exhibits of
bale wool, scoured, washed, and greasy, this wool not to be too hard pressed ; and it
was further stated that the committee had resolved to recommend to the Minister for
Mines that Alexander Bruce, Esquire, Chief Inspector of Stock, be allowed leave of
absence from his ordinary duties during the currency of the Exhibition, in order that
his services may be at the disposal of the Executive Commissioner at Chicago in con-
nection with the wool exhibits to be sent from the Colony, as well as live stock, should
it be determined to send contributions in the latter department. The Fish and Fisheries
Committee intimated that they had taken steps to have a large quantity of our best
Colonial edible fish preserved in tins for despatch to Chicago. It was agreed to place a
sum not exceeding £3OO at the disposal of the Liberal Arts Committee, in order to
ensure an efficient display of the ethnology of the South Sea Islands! Committee IX
on Manufactures reported the acceptance of tenders for bed-room, dining-room, and
library suites of furniture, to be constructed of Colonial timbers, in accordance with
designs specially prepared, which were to illustrate Australian flora and vegetation.
Suspense Account for Purchase of 'Metals.
The Executive Commissioner, at meeting of the Commission held on the 6th May,
1892, reported as to the steps he had taken for obtaining sum of £4,500 as a Suspense
Account for the purchase of silver in bar, and tin and copper in ingot, as under the
circumstances it was thought that this sum should be obtained in this particular manner
rather than made a charge against the funds placed at the disposal of the Commissioners
for general purposes, because the minerals so purchased would be permanent actual value
for the amount of purchase money, and that little or no loss, and probably gain, would
be the result of sale after exhibition. It was subsequently decided, however, to purchase
tin and copper in ingot only, and not to go to the expense of purchasing silver, so that
the sum obtained from the Treasury for the purchase of metals was reduced to
£826 2s.


Exhibits of Wines.
J. E. Burns, Esquire, the Chairman of the "Wine Committee, reported to meeting
of Commission held on the 20th Maj, 1892, that the principal wine-growers throughout
the leading districts of the Colony in which viticulture was pursued, had decided to send
samples of their wines for exhibition, and that steps had been taken to communicate
with the very few of the leading vignerons who had not yet intimated their intention of
contributing, and that the Committee were of opinion that it was desirable that, in
addition to samples of -wine in bottle, the growers of the best-known brands of Colonial
wines should be invited to send selected vintages in wood, which could be disposed of on
their behalf from the New South Wales Court, either during the currency of the
Exhibition or after its close, so as to popularise, as far as possible, the best-known and
most-prized of New South Wales -wines.
Photographs and Collections of Pine Art Exhibits.
The Honorable E. Burdett Smith reported from the Eine Arts Committee that
it had been arranged to take steps for the full illustration of the scenery of the Blue
Mountains, and of city and country life. Arrangements have been made for a compe-
titive collection of pictures from the Art Society of New South Wales, and for the loan
of a collection of works by Australian artists from the Trustees of the National
Art Gallery.
Storage.
The Administrative Committee, at meeting held on the Ist June, 1892, decided to
rent stores at Nicholson-strect, Woolloomooloo, for the reception and packing of mineral
exhibits ; and subsequently Messrs. Hudson Brothers granted storage free of expense
to the Commission at the Government Meat Stores, Darling Harbour.
Proposed Exhibit of Sheep.
The Honorable G. H. Cox, Chairman of the Live Stock Committee, at Commission
meeting held on the 3rd June, 1892, obtained the approval of the meeting to the
advance of sum not exceeding £250 to be devoted to the purpose of defraying the
expense of conveying exhibits of sheep to Chicago, the estimated number being about
thirty. At an after stage in the proceedings of the Commission it was, however, found
impracticable to carry the intention of the Live Stock Committee into effect, and
the vote of the Commission was not drawn upon.
Question of a Combined Australasian Representation.
At the same meeting the Executive Commissioner gave a summary of the
correspondence with the other colonies on the subject of a joint Australian
representation which had extended from the month of August, 1891, to the present
date. In referring to this correspondence Dr. Eenwick said: At first, South
Australia proposed that a joint representation should he carried into effect for


purposes of economy, and communications were addressee! to the various colonies upon
this subject, asking them whether they were willing to fall iu with the idea. The
Government of Tasmania, on his meeting their representative while in that colony,
had agreed to the proposal. Queensland at first was favourable, hut afterwards
intimated that it was found impossible to carry out the idea, as it was not now proposed
to have a representation, and this was the tenor of the reply which had now been
received from the whole of the Colonies, that they did not see their way to be represented,
and it would now seem that New South Wales would be the only Colony to send
exhibits to Chicago.
Dr. Ilcmvick’s Departure.
In reply to a question, Dr. Eenwick said he proposed to leave for Chicago on the
27th of that month, when he would visit the continent of Europe for a little relaxation,
and afterwards proceed to London. He had a good deal of business to transact in
England in connection with insurances, railway freights, and other matters of the
utmost importance, that could not be so well dealt with in this Colony. W. S. Dowel,
Esq., M.P., and J. E. Burns, Esq., referring to the approaching departure of the
Executive Commissioner, bore testimony to the great attention which he had bestowed
upon the work of the Commission to date, and were of opinion that the intended visit to
England and America "would be to the best advantage of our representation.
Conveyance of Exhibits to America.—Appointment of J. E. Burns,
Esquire, as Yice-President. —Exhibits of Cereals.—Wooden Blocks
for Paving Purposes.
The meeting of Administrative and Einance Committee, held on the loth June,
1892, decided to advertise for tenders for the conveyance of exhibits by steamer from
Sydney to New York or Newport News, in Virginia, but, as will be hereafter seen, it
was subsequently agreed to send the goods by the Union Steamship Company to San
Erancisco, and thence by rail to Chicago ; and at the following meeting of the general
body of Commissioners, held on the 17th June, the Executive Commissioner stated that
they would be glad to hear that Mr. Burns had been appointed Yice-President by the
Government, to act as executive head of the business of the Commission during absence
of the President and himself from the Colony, but he thought a resolution might be passed
by the Commission placing the work in the hands of that gentleman, and accordingly a
resolution to that effect was unanimously carried. Committee I on Agriculture reported
that it had taken steps to obtain, with the assistance of H. C. L. Anderson, Esq., Director
of Agriculture, from the principal farming centres of the Colony, samples of cereals other
than maize, to include wheat, rye, barley, and oats, together with rice and fodder plants ;
and the same committee further reported that it had agreed to recommend to the
Administrative Committee that an expenditure bo made upon the formation, on an
elevated platform in the New South Wales Court, of a section of roadway paved with
wooden blocks, to show the use of our Colonial timbers for this purpose, and, in addition,


to provide for a trophy of these blocks to be exhibited in the New South Wales Court
in the Agricultural Building. Committee YIII on Machinery and Implements re-
ported, through the Honorable John Davies, C.M.G., M.L.C., that it was desirable to
have prepared models of prominent public works, to include the Sutherland Dock at
Cockatoo Island and the Lithgotv Talley Zig-Zag, and this report was accordingly
adopted.
Negotiations for Space. —Departure of the Executive Commissioner.
The Executive Commissioner reported for the information of the Commission on
this subject, commencing with the promise that had been made by Colonel Campbell,
delegate from the Exhibition authorities, of not less than 300,000 superficial feet of
space for Australian exhibits, and he had thought that the pledges entered into by
that gentleman would be implicitly carried out. On the 3rd Eebruary he,
however, received from the Honorable "Walker Eearn, Chief of the Department
of Foreign Affairs of the Exhibition, a letter asking 1 that we should apply for
space to the British Eoyal Commission from whom Mr. Eearn hoped we might obtain
a good allotment. In reply he told Mr. Eearn that, as a Eoyal Commission, we preferred
to deal directly with the Exhibition authorities as to our own space requirements, and
that Great Britain, having only at her own disposal about as much space as w 7 e ourselves
would require, was not in a position to treat with us on the subject. The result was
that we were informed that this Colony would have the most liberal treatment possible,
but that it was thought by the Exhibition authorities, and by the Eoyal Commission in
London, that some mistake must have been made in the figures set down as representing
our requirements in the matter of space. By every mail since then, from the offices of
the Commission, and through the Agent-General by medium of the Colonial Secretary,
the demands of this Colony for space were submitted to the Executive in Chicago, who
replied that our requirements would meet with every consideration. He had lately been
in a position to advise Mr. Eearn that this Colony would be the only one in Australia
to be officially represented, so that there should be no difficulty in complying with
our request to have sufficient space placed at our disposal. It seemed possible,
however, notwithstanding the promises of every consideration, that he would have to
interview the Exhibition authorities before sufficient space in the various buildings
would be allotted to New South "Wales, for we had now given up the contention for
the concentration of the whole of our products under one roof, and so large and so
important would our exhibits be in the agricultural, forestry, mines, wool, and
other departments, that we would not appear to such disadvantage as originally
appeared likely to be the case should the contributions of this Colony be subdivided.
At the close of the meeting Dr. Ecnwick referred to his approaching departure
from the Colony, and said that Mr. Eobert Hudson who, as a Commissioner, had taken
a leading part in the work of the various committees, had agreed to go to Chicago as
A vote of thanks at the close of the proceedings was awarded to Dr.
Eenwick for his most valuable, untiring, and indefatigable exertions on behalf of the
representation of the Colonv.
B


A special meeting o£ the Commission was called for the 28th of June, 1892, the
day of Dr. Eenwick’s departure from Sydney. In the remarks made at this meeting
the Executive Commissioner said that he was sure that our representation at Chicago
would bear very great fruit in the future welfare of this country, and that it would tend
to make us much better known than we were at present. It was his intention when he
reached Chicago to endeavour as far as possible to impress the American mind with a
proper sense of the importance of the oldest of the Australian Colonies.
The appointment of J. E. Burns, Esq., as Vice-President, was officially notified to
meeting of Commission held on the Bth July, 1892, and at this same meeting that gentle-
man, in answer to a question from A. W. Meeks, Esq., said that the work of selecting
exhibits in each section of classification would be left to the committee in charge of that
section. (At a subsequent period the duty of approving of exhibits after their receipt
into store, with a view to rejecting such as might prove to be unfit, was left in the hands
of the chairman of each committee.)
Return of President/—Eifty thousand feet of space accepted.—
Anthropometrical data. —Exhibit of Chartography by Department
of Lands.
Among the correspondence submitted to the Commission at meeting held on the
22nd July, 1892, was a letter dated Paris, 3rd June, 1892, from the President of the
Commission to the Secretary, stating the time at which he would probably return to the
Colony, and also a letter dated 13th July, 1892, from the Principal Under Secretary
with reference to the acceptance of 50,000 feet of space in the main buildings of the
Exhibition. The Liberal Arts Committee reported that steps were being taken to
procure a series of anthropometrical data of physical measurements of the remaining
aborigines of the Colony for incorporation with work now in course of publication upon
the indigenous races of New South Wales, and that a communication had been received
from the Department of Lands showing that it was the intention to exhibit from the
Survey Branch a very comprehensive and well-finished display of chartography.
Shipment of Typical Plants.
The Horticultural Committee reported to meeting of Commission held on the
12th August, 1892, that they had shipped by the “ Monowai,” which sailed on Monday,
Bth August, the following selected plants, typical of the peculiar vegetation of
Australia: —Twelve specimens of Macroeamia spiralis ; four specimens of Macrozamia
Denisonii; twelve specimens of Asplenium nidus, or “ bird’s nest ” fern ; eight speci-
mens of Platycerium alcicornis, dr small “ elk’s horn ” fern ; thirty-one specimens of
Dicksonia antarctica; six specimens of Alsophila Cooperii; two specimens of Alsophila
Australia; two specimens of Todea larbara; and specimens of the Pendrobium speciosum.
These plants were sent in the care of Mr. Bowles, of the Botanic Gardens, who, after
delivering the plants in San Erancisco, and seeing them aboard the freight cars, was to
return forthwith to Sydney.


Appointments to Staff of Executive Commissioner. —Exercise of
economy.
The matter of appointments on the staff of the Executive Commissioner in
Chicago came under the notice of this meeting of Commission, and a number of questions
were put upon the subject, and J. E. Burns, Esq., Vice-President, from the chair, said that
the only appointments that had so far been made were those of Dr. Eenwick, Mr. Hudson
as General Superintendent, Dr. Eenwick’s private secretary (Mr. E. J. "Welch, E.G.S.),
and a gentleman whom the Executive Commissioner had engaged in Melbourne—
Mr. Thomas Pugh—to act as Assistant General Superintendent of the Court. It was
certainly the case that Dr. Eenwick had left a list of gentlemen whom he considered
were well adapted to perform certain work in connection with the Courts apportioned
to this Colony in Chicago, and whom ho would like to have on his staff there, because
he knew them and had confidence in their capacity, but this list would have to go before
the Administrative Committee for its consideration. It was, however, premature to deal
with this matter, as there was no occasion to send these gentlemen away until the
exhibits were in readiness for transmission to their destination. Every effort, in accord-
ance with the promise made by the Commission to the Honorable the Chief Secretary,
had been made to keep down expenditure, and he assured the Commission that there
had been no extravagance whatever in the working so far ; in fact great economy had
been practised throughout.
Tobacco in leaf. —Typical Bark but. —Pictures of edible Eishes.—
Return of expenditure.
Committee I on Agriculture reported to meeting of Commission held on the 26th
August, 1892, that steps had been taken with a view to obtaining suitable exhibits of
tobacco in leaf. The same Committee reported as to the construction of a bark hut to
illustrate the dwellings of new settlers in the more sparsely-peopled districts of the
Colony. Committee VI on Eish and Fisheries informed the Commission that the members
had taken steps to have pictorial representations prepared of some of the principal
edible fishes, and also specimens of the seals generally to be found on the coast of Hew
South Wales, especially about Seal Eocks. The chairman submitted a return showing
the amount expended in each department of classification, the liabilities incurred, and
the probable cost of the Commission in Hew South Wales.
Adjustment of accounts. —Payment of Railway charges. —Reduced
Passenger fares to Chicago.
The meeting of Administrative and Finance Committee, held on the 31st August,
1892, decided that they would only keep the accounts of the local Commission, adjusting
with the Audit Department all advances made for its purposes in Sydney, leaving it to
the Executive Commissioner to adjust all advances made to him for the purposes of the
representation in Chicago. The Secretary reported to the meeting that the Chief
Secretary had decided that the Commission should pay from month to month accounts
preferred by the Commissioners for Eailways for carriage of goods to Sydney by rail.


and tliis course approved. (TIIO arrangements now made by the Commissioners for
Railways were that half ordinary freights should be paid on all exhibits by rail to Sydney,
with free returns of all goods sent back to this Colony.) The Secretary was authorised
to inquire from the various steamship companies in Sydney whether any steps were being
taken to reduce ordinan r rates for passengers to Chicago, as the Commissioners, although
frequently asked for information on this matter, had no knowledge of any concessions
having been made.
Exhibitors to be interviewed by Mr. Hudson.—Freights and space. —
Appointment of Storekeeper.
At subsequent meeting of the same committee, held on the 14th September, 1892,
Robert Hudson, Esq., designated as General Superintendent in Chicago, was requested
to interview parties who had promised exhibits, and to press for their being forwarded
without delay. IY. A. Hutchinson, Esq., J.P., a member of the Commission, who had
just returned from Chicago, attended the meeting, and gave information respecting
freights between this Colony and Chicago. He had been able to arrange for space for
Hew South Wales in the various buildings of the Exhibition, the allotment in each
instance being in a similar position in each building, and contiguous to Great Britain and
Canada. The committee took into consideration the list of applicants for the position
of storekeeper and receiver of exhibits, but a definite appointment was deferred until
the goods came in more freely. It was, however, decided that in the meantime, should it
be found necessary, Mr. Yon Rantzow might he appointed to receive and label goods.
This temporary appointment was afterwards confirmed, and Mr. Yon Rantzow became
storekeeper to the Commission.
Estimates of Space and valuations for Insurance.—Departure of Mr.
Hudson.
At the next ensuing meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on tho 30th
September, the Secretary submitted estimates of space, both for floor and wall, which it
was calculated would be taken up by the exhibits in the various departments of classifi-
cation, together with valuations for purposes of insurance, and also extracts, including,
under their respective headings, the exhibits about to be forwarded, classified according
to the official classification, Ho. 10, for freights on the United States railways, which
came into operation on tho Ist April, 1892. The meeting approved of Mr. Hudson’s
departure at the beginning of October for Chicago by way of San Erancisco, and agreed
that he should be accompanied by a member of the staff, who had been nominated by
the Executive Commissioner for a clerical appointment in the office at Chicago.
Insurance of Exhibits at Chicago.—Question of Expenditure.
The same meeting decided that a cable message be sent to the Executive
Commissioner, ashing him to insure the exhibits for £25,000, from Eebruary of 1893
until the same month in the year ensuing. At the Commission meeting held on the
same date the action of the Administrative Committee was approved, and after reports


of Committees had been read and adopted, the Chairman (J. E. Burns, Esq.), took
exception to a number of exaggerated statements, not confined solely to the public press
but repeated by members of the Commission, as to the sum likely to be expended by
the New South Wales Commissioners. The greatest economy was being exercised, and
the Commission had not for a moment lost sight of their promise to the Government to
keep, if possible, within the estimate of £30,000 for all purposes furnished to the
Chief Secretary nearly twelve mouths before.
Reports of Committees.
At the last-named meeting of the Commission, as at all meetings held for months
past, as -well as those held for months after this date, nearly every committee of the
Commission furnished reports for the information of the members, detailing work
transacted in the interval between meetings of the general body of members, and at
several of these meetings some of the principal Committees of Classification furnished
as many as three reports, giving full details as to the progress of the work with which
they had been entrusted.
Return of tlie President. —Organising Work of J. P. Burns, Esq.,
Executive Yice-President, &c.—Selection of Exhibits.
The President of the Commission was present on his return from Europe at
general meeting held on the 21st October, and expressed his pleasure at being back
once more in Sydney, and he was gratified to know that during his absence Mr. Burns,
Yice-President, and the other members, had carried out the work of organisation most
successfully. The question arose as to the steps that had been taken, now that
applications for space for exhibits and the goods themselves were coming forward, to
see that proper- care was being exercised in checking the quality of the proposed
contributions, and it was announced that for months past the committees at their
frequent meetings had exercised their power of selection of the fittest exhibits in a most
careful manner, and besides, the goods in store would be inspected by the chairmen of
committees before they were allowed to be finally labelled for transmission to Chicago.
Appointments to Pr. Renwick’s Staff.
The Administrative Committee, at meeting held on the 20th October, 1892,
decided to communicate forthwith with Dr. Benwick in Chicago, and bring under his
notice the whole of the nominations for his local staff, with a view to his deciding as to
a reduction in the list of names, in accordance with the lessened space at the disposal of
the New South "Wales representation, and at the next ensuing meeting of Commission,
on the 2nd November, 1892, it was decided to inform Dr. Eemvick of seven appoint-
ments only -which the Commissioners in Sydney had deemed it desirable to approve, and
these included the appointments of Mr. Bobert Hudson, as General Superintendent,
Mr. Thomas Pugh, as Assistant General Superintendent, Mr. Alexander Bruce, Chief
Inspector of Stock, and Mr. J. E. Came, E.G.S., Superintendent of Mining Section, the
whole number of appointments so approved being seven.


Estimated Expenditure in Chicago. —Minerals Ready for Shipment.—
Appointments to Dr. Renwick’s Staff.
At meeting of the Commission, held on the llth November, 1892, there was
adopted a report from the Administrative Committee, stating that it had been decided
to write and ask the Executive Commissioner to so minimise his expenditure that the
total outlay, within Sydney and Chicago, shall not, if possible, exceed the estimate for
all purposes of £30,000, and to enclose at the same time a statement of the past and
probable expenditure in Sydney, to show Dr. Eenwick the margin that would be left for
his own special purposes. The Mining Committee reported that the total number of
packages of minerals then packed and labelled, weighed and measured, ready for ship-
ment, was 1,650, weighing approximately 250 tons. The matter of the appointments on
the staff of the Executive Commissioner again formed a subject of discussion, and the
President repeated that the Commission and the Administrative Committee had selected
from a list of nominations a limited number of gentlemen of special qualifications, and
these appointments, which had been duly ratified, were deemed sufficient, it being left to
the Executive Commissioner to add to his staff from persons whose services might be
offered in Chicago. They were aware of the force of the argument that, at all events,
principal members of the staff should be gentlemen in whom the Executive Commis-
sioner should have every confidence, and they had, therefore, made appointments in
accordance with this view, of residents of Sydney, known to the Executive Commissioner,
and nominated by him, and possessing qualifications suitable for the supervision of the
principal departments of classification ; and the appointments (seven in number) already
notified and approved at previous meeting of Commission, were duly confirmed. The
President also gave for the information of the meeting a summary of the expenditure to
date, pointing out the balance that would be left for the use of the Executive
Commissioner.
Ereight of Exhibits to Chicago.
A special meeting of the Administrative and Einance Committee was held on the
14th November, to take into consideration a letter received from Mr. Robert Pludson,
in which he said that he had concluded a contract with Messrs. Spreckels Brothers,
agents for the Union Steamship Company (Limited), for the through freight of exhibits
from Sydney to Chicago at 16 dollars per ton. Mr. Hudson, on leaving Sydney, had
been requested to make inquiries at San Erancisco, and also at Chicago, if necessary,
which would enable the local Commission to come to a decision upon the matter of
freights, but that gentleman, the President said, had never been authorised to take
independent action, and to settle personally a matter of so much importance. A
resolution was passed, stating that the Commission could not recognise the freight
arrangements without further information, and asking the Executive Commissioner to
cable at once respective rates for the New York and San Erancisco routes. To this
cable the Executive Commissioner replied, and as he deemed that the arrangement,
though an unauthorised one, was satisfactory, the contract was confirmed, and the
goods shipped in accordance therewith. The attention of the Administrative Committee


at several meetings about this time, and up to tbe date of the meeting just referred
to, was largely taken up with this same question of freights, and the consideration of
the tenders for carriage of New South "Wales’ exhibits by steamer and sailing vessel,
both by way of the Pacific and Atlantic coast.
Departure of Mr. Pugh.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on tbe 25th November, it
was resolved to approve of the departure of Mr. Thomas Pugh, Assistant General
Superintendent, with the first shipment of exhibits by the “ Alameda,” on Monday, the
28th November, 1892.
Photographs prepared by the Government Printer.
A report was presented from Committee X on Pine Arts to meeting of Commis-
sion held on the 25th November, stating that the photographs prepared by the Govern-
ment Printer at the instance of the Commission, who chose the subjects, included
panoramas and other views of Sydney and its harbour, views of public buildings, of the
principal churches and colleges, of the Garden Palace, the principal banks and arcades,
the Sydney Botanic Gardens, Sydney water supply, illustrations of the limestone cave
scenery of the Colony, and of the principal points of interest on the Blue Mountains,
also representations of the Volunteer and Permanent forces, Police forces, and principal
public works, the aboriginal natives of the Colony, and of old Sydney, together with
views of New Guinea, Samoa, Tonga, Fiji, and New Britain.
Proposed appointment of a Deputy Commissioner.
The Administrative and Finance Committee, on the 30th November, dealt with
the necessary reduction of the staff at the end of the year, in view of the fact that by
that time the majority of the exhibits would be shipped to their destination, and
at the next ensuing meeting of the same committee a letter was read from the Under
Secretary for Mines and Agriculture to the President of the Commission, stating that
Mr. Came, F.G.S., -would be the officer to receive a commission to take charge of the
New South "Wales court in the event of the absence of the Executive Commissioner
from Chicago, this course having been recommended by the Commission, and steps were
taken at the same meeting to arrange for the departure by the “ Mariposa,” of Mr. Came
as Superintendent of the Mineral court, and of Mr. Thomas Ford as Assistant Superin-
tendent of the same Court.
The Commissioners at meeting, held on the IGth December, 1892, adopted a
report from the Administrative Committee, approving of the appointments of Air. Came
and Mr. Thomas Ford, and of the former gentleman, subject to the approval of the
Government, to act as Deputy Commissioner should the Executive Commissioner
require to leave Chicago at any time.


Selected Wines for Luncheons.
The Wine Committee reported that they had agreed, subject to the approval of
the Commission, to obtain selected wines from New South Wales vignerons of a value
not exceeding £6O, to be forwarded to Dr. Eenwick for use in connection with luncheons
in the New' South Wales court. These were not intended as exhibits, but to be supple-
mentary to the competitive samples forwarded by exhibitors.
Authority to Deputy Commissioner.
At the Administrative and Finance Committee meeting on the 4th January,
1893, there was read a letter from the Principal Under Secretary to the President,
stating that dormant authority, empowering Mr. Came to act on behalf of the Executive
Commissioner in the event of his absence from Chicago, given by the President of the
Commission, would be sufficient for all purposes, and it was reported by the Secretary
that the President had given such letter of authority to Mr. Came. The Executive
Commissioner having been advised of the action that had been taken in Sydney in the
matter, replied from Chicago, that he did not anticipate that it would he necessary that
this authority should be exercised, as it was his (Dr. Eenwiek’s) intention to give his own
personal supervision to all matters connected with the representation of the Colony in
Chicago ; and in all sections Dr. Eenwick’s intention was fully carried out, and he did
not leave Chicago until several weeks after the close of the World’s Fair.
Shipment of Exhibits.
The Chairman of the Finance Sub-committee reported that the “ Mariposa,”
which left Sydney on the 26th December, 1892, carried 452-| tons of exhibits,
valued at £15,362, this being the second hulk shipment of exhibits, and, further, he
estimated that 250 tons additional would be shipped by the “ Monowai ” at the end of
January, making a total in all of about 1,000 tons. The following details as to ship-
ments to date w r ere furnished by the Chairman of the Finance Sub-committee to the
Commission at their meeting held on the 3rd February, 1893. “On the 23rd of
January there were shipped per the ‘ Monowmi ’ 321 packages, measuring 104| tons,
with a valuation of £4,073 Ss. 2d., the previous shipments having been per ‘ Monowai’
on the Bth August, 1892, 78 packages of plants measuring 63 tons, with a valuation
of £300; per ‘Alameda’ on the 28th November, 1892, 1,053 packages, measuring
245 tons, with a valuation of £6,901; per ‘ Mariposa,’ on the 26th December, 1892,
2,364 packages measuring 452 i tons, with a valuation of £15,381 55., giving total of
packages shipped to date 3,816, with a measurement of 865 tons, and a valuation of
£26,635 13s. 2d.” A tabulated statement of all shipments of exhibits from Sydney to
Chicago, via San Francisco, will he found at Appendix D ; wdiile in Appendix E are
furnished detailed particulars of all exhibits comprised in the shipments made from
Sydney from time to time during 1892 and 1893.


Secretary ? s Staff. —Display of wool. —Nominations for appointments in
tlie New South Wales Court.
On the 3rd February, 1893, the Administrative Committee reported to the
Commission that great reductions in the strength of the Secretary’s staff had been
effected, and it would be still further lessened after the publication of the catalogue so as
to consist only of the Secretary, clerical assistant, and messenger. To the same meeting
there were submitted reports from Committee II on Wool, detailing the efforts which
were being made by the Sydney Wool-Selling Brokers’ Association to provide a suitable
representation of our staple product; but the number of bales furnished for display fell
short of the total number promised by the Association, viz., 400, but it fortunately
happened that the bales forwarded were of exceptionally good quality, and sufficiently
numerous to form an imposing display. The Secretary, by instruction of previous
meeting of Commissioners, placed on the table a list of the nominations for offices in the
New South Wales Court in Chicago, which had been made by the Executive Commissioner,
these nominations being of persons whom he desired should receive appointments, and
the list so tabled specified the seven gentlemen whose nominations had been approved
of by the local Commission.
Shipments of fresh Fruits. —Exhibits shipped to Chicago.
The Administrative Committee on the 22nd February, 1893, placed at the
disposal of Committee IV on Horticulture a sum of £lOO to enable that committee to
forward to the New South Wales court in Chicago periodical supplies of fresh fruits in
season, it being left to the judgment of the committee whether to send such fruits by
way of San Francisco or by way of London. The greater part of the fruits was
ultimately shipped as ordinary cargo by the Californian mail steamers. The Secretary at
this meeting reported that the total number of packages shipped to date had been 3,886,
measuring 877 i tons, and valued at £29,529 Bs. 2d. It was proposed to ship by the
“Ophir” to London en route to America, gold specimens and precious stones, &c., to
the value of about £7,000, which would bring the total estimates or shipments for
insurance purposes up to between £36,000 and £37,000.
Expenditure.
There was submitted to meeting of Administrative Committee, held on the Ist
March, 1893, the follow ing documents prepared for the information of the Commission: —
1. Statement of accounts paid to date. 2. Estimated probable expenditure in Sydney
until the close of the work of the Commission. 3. Statement showing the sums that
had been paid in Sydney on account of the Executive Commissioner. The Secretary
submitted for purposes of comparison previous estimates of local expenditure, and the
President of the Commission, for purposes of comparison, submitted to the meeting a
statement which he had made regarding expenditure on the 11th of November of the
previous year (1892_L The meeting arranged on behalf of the Executive Commissioner
for the passage by the “ Mariposa” of Mr. Alexander Bruce, J.P., Chief Inspector of
Stock, who would take charge under Dr. Eenwick of the wool section of the New South
Wales representation.


Catalogues of New South Wales Exhibits.
At the next ensuing meeting of the same Committee, held on the 29th March,
1898, the Secretary reported that the Liberal Arts Committee had agreed to limit the
circulation of the catalogue of exhibits as follows ;■ —5,000 copies of each of the four
principal sections —Agriculture, Minerals, Liberal Arts, and Forestry; and to divide a
total further issue of 20,000 copies among all the other sections of classification, nearly
a dozen in number. The Secretary pointed out that the Liberal Arts Committee had
approved of a suggestion which he had made, that in order to avoid expense the cata-
logue should be published in sections, so as to provide for an issue for each building
assigned for Departments of Classification.
Preparation of Special Literature upon important Colonial subjects.
A most important feature of the work done by the Liberal Arts Committee chiefly,
but aided by other Committees of the Commission, was the preparation by specialists
of pamphlets upon some leading subjects connected with the resources of New South
Wales and their development. These works were eagerly sought for at the World’s
Fair, and no participating country was so well represented by a literature specially
prepared. The following tabulated list gives full particulars as to the various publications
prepared and issued under the auspices of the New South Wales Commissioners: —
Subject.
Agriculture in New South Wales
Sheep and Wool in New South Wales
(with diagrams).
History of the Fisheries of New South
Wales (with maps and illustrations).
Compiled from official and other
authentic sources.
Edible Fishes and Crustaceans of New
South Wales (with illustrations).
The Marine Fish and Fisheries of New
South Wales, past and present, in
their commercial aspect. (One map).
Physical Geography and Climate of
New South Wales (with map and
diagrams).
Sketch of Progress and Besources of
New South Wales (with coloured
diagrams).
Bise, Progress, and Present Position of
Trade and Commerce in New South
W sdes.
Australia and America in 1892. A
contrast.
Author. Pages.
W. Wilkins, formerly Under 50
Secretary of Public Instruc-
tion.
T. A. Coglilan, A.M. Inst. C.E., 21
Government Statistician.
Lindsay G. Thompson, Chief 128
Inspector of New South
Wales Fisheries.
J. Douglas Ogilby ... ... 214
Philip Cohen ... ... ... 30
11. C. Bussell, 8.A., C.M.G., 30
F.E.S., P.E.M.S., Govern-
ment Astronomer of New
South Wales.
Greville Tregarthen, Chief 48
Clerk, Government Statis-
tician’s Department.
Edward Pulsford ... ... 52
Edward Dowling, Hon. Sec. of YIII
the Australian Natives Asso- and
ciation, and Secretary to the 172
late Board of Technical Edu-
cation.


Subject.
Coins, Coinages, and Currency of Aus-
tralasia (with illustrations).
Catalogue of Coins, Coinages, and Cur-
rency of Australasia (with specimens
of medals).
Social, Industrial, Political, and Co-
operative Associations, &c., in Hew
South Wales.
Drama and Music in Hew South Wales
Prison System of Hew South Wales ...
Aborigines of Hew South Wales (with
illustrations).
Hotes on the Aborigines of Hew South
Wales.
South Pacific and Hew Guinea; Past
and Present.
Australian Timbers (with map showing
distribution of timbers and numerous
diagrams of tests).
Author, Pages.
Coleman P. Hyman ... ... 160
Exhibited by Coleman P. 18
Hyman.
E. W. O’Sullivan, M.P. ... IY
and 24
E. C. Brewer ... ... ... 96
George Miller, Comptroller- 6
General of Prisons.
John Eraser, 8.A., LED. ... 102
Hon. Richard Hill, M.L.C., and 8
Hon. Geo. Thornton, M.L.C.
Bev. William Wyatt Gill, B.A. 38
(Lon.),LL.D. (St. Andrew’s).
W. H. W arren, Wh. Sc., M. Inst. 68
C.E.,M.A.M.Soc.C.E.,ChaIIis
Professor of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering,Univer-
sity of Sydney.
Success of tlie New South Wales representation.—New South Wales
exhibits first to reach Chicago, and first to he arranged. —Further
shipments.—W 001.
At meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 3rd May, 1893,
there was read a cablegram to the President of the Commission from the Executive
Commissioner in Chicago, This cablegram was dated the 2nd May, 1893, and was
as follows: —“At opening to-day our country all ready. Press allow in natural pro-
ducts and liberal arts we equal any nation. Congratulate Commission.” It was
decided to send a reply to the Executive Commissioner, complimenting him on the
success of the Colony’s representation. The letters subsequently received from the
Executive Commissioners showed that, owing to the energetic efforts of the local Com-
mission, the Hew South Wales contributions to the World’s Pair were the first to reach
Chicago, and by the diligence of the Executive Commissioner and his officers, were the
first completely arranged for display in the leading sections of classification. The
Secretary reported that since last statement of shipments packages had been forwarded
by the “ Ophir” on the 23th February, the “ Oroya ” on the 25th March, the “ Orient ”
on the Bth April, and the “ Monowai ” on the 17th April, bringing up the total
of packages shipped to 3,947, representing a tonnage of 8821, and a valuation of
£36,509 12s. 4d. These shipments had consisted of fresh fruits, duplicate wines, wines
for the use of the Executive Commissioner, and printed matter.
The Wool Committee reported to meeting of Commission, held on the 12th
May, 1893, that at meeting on the 16th March the views of the committee on the
subject of the representation of the wool section at Chicago were explained to Mr.


Bruce on the eve of his departure for America. These views were, that our wool should
he shown in Chicago in the manner best calculated to set forth the capacity of the
Colony for wool production. With respect to a modification of the tariff it was not
anticipated that the whole of the duties would be abolished, but it was deemed likely
that there would be some considerable modification of existing duties. The committee
considered that such modification would be all the better if it were to take the form of
ad valorem duties upon the various descriptions of wool, as this would be the means of
admitting all grades of our product into the American market. This plan was regarded
as preferable to specific duties, and likely to prove of very great assistance to our
woolgrowers.
Exhibits from Australian Museum.
The Liberal Arts Committee reported that supjulcmentary exhibits from the
trustees of the Australian Museum would shortly be shipped, consisting of casts of the
bones of the following extinct mammalia of the continent of Australia : — JDiprotodon,
or gigantic native bear, partaking of some of the characteristics of the American sloths,
and the skull of the Thylacoleo , or marsupial lion.
Congratulations to Executive Commissioner.
The following resolution was passed, on the motion of The Honorable John Davies,
C.M.G., M.L.C., seconded by E. E. Winchcombe, Esq.:—“ That a letter be forwarded to
Dr. Eenwick by the outgoing American mail, stating that the Commission are highly
gratified with the reports received with respect to the K"ew South Wales Courts, and
trust that everything will be equally satisfactory up to the close of the work.”
Eurtlier shipment.
It was reported by E. D. Adams, Esq., that by the “Alameda,” which sailed on the
loth May, there were shipped eighty-four packages for the JVew South Wales Court,
chiefly consisting of fresh fruits, and publications, the total value being £990 19s. Gd.
Disposal of Exhibits purchased by Commission.
The Administrative Committee, on the sth July, 1893, took into consideration
the manner of disposal of exhibits purchased out of Commission funds, and dealt with
a complete list of all such exhibits, noting inAach instance for the instruction of the
Executive Commissioner how each exhibit is to be dealt with. Instructions were given
for the sale of some exhibits ; others, in accordance with the direction of the Chief
Secretary, w r ere noted to be handed over to the Imperial Institute, while a small number
were to be returned to the Colony. In a’number of instances the disposal was left to
the discretion of the Executive Commissioner.


Death in Chicago of a Member of Commission. —Sale of private
Exhibits in Chicago.
A letter from Dr. Eenwick, dated the 14th July, 1893, was read to meeting of
Administrative Committee held on the IGth August, 1893, intimating the death in
Chicago of Dr. Carl Fischer, one of the members of the Commission. At the same
meeting there was taken into consideration a request from the Executive Commissioner
that exhibitors be asked to leave the sale prices of their goods to his discretion, as in
many instances the prices affixed were so large that, with customs duties under the
McKinley tariff added, a sale would be almost a matter of impossibility. In accordance
with this view of Dr. Eenwick, a circular was issued to exhibitors, and it was resolved
that all replies of exhibitors to such circular should be tabulated and forwarded to Dr.
Eenwick at the earliest possible moment for his guidance. At the next ensuing
meeting, on the 30th August, the Secretary reported that most of the replies of
exhibitors had come to hand, and that the greater majority had expressed their
willingness to leave the selling prices of their goods absolutely to the discretion of the
Executive Commissioner.
Meetings of Administrative and Einance Committee.
The next ensuing monthly meetings of the Administrative Committee deal-t with
accounts, which were small in number and amount, and included the monthly salaries
of the now greatly reduced head-office staff. At these meetings there were submitted for
the information of the members the progress reports received hy mail from Dr. Eenwick,
the gist of which reports had been supplied to the Press for the information of the
members of Commission and of the public generally.
Exhibits donated to Imperial Institute.
It was decided at meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 12th
January, 1894, that credit should be taken by the Kew South Wales Commission in
their statement of accounts for the exhibits which Lave been purchased out of Com-
mission funds and forwarded at the close of the Exhibition to the Imperial Institute by
direction of the Chief Secretary.
Arrangements for dealing with returned Exhibits.
At a meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 2nd February, 1894,
the late storekeeper to the Commission was reappointed, and further arrangements
were made for the reception of the exhibits on their arrival in Sydney, and their
distribution to their owners.
Return of Exhibits purchased out of Commission Eunds.
At meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 2nd March, the
Secretary reported that the returned exhibits had been expected by the s.s. “ Mariposa”
during the month of February, because the manifest for these goods bore the


“ Mariposa’s” name. This steamer, however, arrived without them, and a cablegram was
sent to Messrs. Sprockels Brothers, San Francisco, asking whether they might be
expected by the “ Monowai,” due early in March, and a reply in the affirmative was
received. The Secretary reported that, according to the manifest received so much in
advance, it appeared that, owing, it was understood to the restrictions in the way of sale
offered by the excessive duties which would be levied by the United States Customs
under the MTvinlay Tariff, many exhibits purchased out of Commission funds were
being returned to the Colony, including, for instance, the suites of furniture made to the
order of the Commissioners by Messrs. Bartholomew & Co. and Messrs. Yerdich & Co.,
and comprising library, dining-room, and bedroom suites, constructed of selected colonial
timbers from specially prepared designs.
Expenditure till close of the work of the local Commission.
At this same meeting (the 2nd March) it was decided to ask for a further
advance from the Treasury of £I,OOO, which it was estimated would be sufficient to meet
all claims until the final closing of the work and offices of the Commission.
Return of the Executive Commissioner to New South Wales.
A meeting of the New South Wales Commission was held on the 9th March,
1894, when, after a number of reports had been read from the Administrative Com-
mittee, a conversation ensued among the members, during which the President spoke in
the highest terms of the manner in which the Executive Commissioner had carried out
the duties of his responsible position in connection with the representation of the Colony
at Chicago. An opinion -was expressed that steps might be taken to recognise these
services, but that while the Commissioners could not, in such capacity, take any action
in this direction, they would assist in their private capacity in every possible way to
ensure the success of a public recognition.
Address by Dr. Renwick on tlie subject of the Representation at
Chicago.
A well attended meeting of the New South Wales Commission was held on the
6th April, 1894, at the Colonial Secretary’s office, the President in the chair, to hear
from the Executive Commissioner a verbal report on the display made by the Colony at
the Chicago World’s Fair, and at the close a unanimous vote of thanks was presented
to the Executive Commissioner, on the motion of W. S. Dowel, Esq., M.P., seconded by
the Hon. P. Gr. King, M.L.C.
Resolution of Congress, recognising the participation of Eoreign
Countries.
Tbere was read to meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the
4th May, 1894, letter dated 9th April, 1894, from the Principal Under Secretary to the
President of the New South Wales Commission, transmitting for his information copy
of correspondence that had been received from the Secretary of State for the Colonies


by His Excellency the Governor, relative to a joint resolution of the Senate and the
House of Representatives, expressing the sense of the Government and people of the
United States of the co-operation of the various foreign countries in the Exhibition
lately held in Chicago.
Disposal of Returned Furniture and Woman’s Work Exhibits.
The Secretary, at meeting of the Administrative Committee, held on the 18th
May, was instructed to communicate with the Government, asking whether it would
take over, for use at Government House, the suites of furniture constructed from
Colonial timbers to the order and at the expense of the Commissioners. The furniture
was afterwards inspected at the stores of the Commission and taken over by the
Chief Secretary for use at Government House.
Woman’s Work.
The Secretary was instructed to have the returned exhibits of Woman’s Work,
purchased at the cost of the Commission, sold by public auction, and this was done, and
the proceeds paid into the Treasury.
The Work of Commission and Committees.
The following figures will tell their own story of the extent of the work done by
the New South Wales Commission and its committees ; during the more busy period of
organisation arrangements, no less than 426 meetings having been held, the greater
number of which took place between the end of 1891 and the close of the next ensuing
twelve months. The following table gives the particulars of the whole of the meetings
held, until the close of the local work in Sydney
Meeting
New South Wales Commission ... ... ... ... ... 39
Administrative and Finance Committee ... ... ... ... 67
Finance Sub-Committee of Administrative Committee ... ... 34
Committee lon Agriculture ... ... ... ... ... 29
Committee II on Wool and Silk, &c. ... ... ... ... 22
Committee 111 on Viticulture, Wines, &c. ... ... ... 7
Committee IV on Horticulture ... ... ... ... ... 15
Committee Von Live Stock ... ... ... ... ... 14
Committee VI on Fish and Fisheries ... ... ... ... 28
Committee VII on Mines, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 27
Committee VIII on Machinery, Implements, &c. ... ... 10
Committee IX on Manufactures ... ... ... ... ... 42
Sub-Committee of Committee IX on Manufactures —Furniture 6
Committee Xon Fine Arts... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Committee XI on Liberal Arts ... ... ... ... ... 48
Special Sub-Committee, Office accommodation ... ... ... 4
Special Sub-Committee for Classification ... ... ... ... 3
Total number of meetings ... ... ... 426


11l several instances three and even four meetings were held in a single day.
The correspondence incidental to the operations of the Commission as a whole, and of the
various Committees in particular, was necessarily a heavy one, about 10,000 typewritten
letters, many of them extending over eight foolscap pages closely written, besides
appendices, were dictated, while circulars to exhibitors in the various departments of
classification and for the convening of meetings were issued to the number of nearly 17,000.
The President understands from the Secretary that for many months the extent of the
work of the Commission demanded that he and his staff should work long after the
ordinary office-hours, and until after 10 p.m., and on one occasion, at least, the staff
were kept busily engaged with the first bulk shipment of exhibits for some three days
and three nights in succession with hut slight intermission. The Secretary of the
Commission also informs the President that the members of the clerical staff of the
Sydney office have discharged their duties in a most exemplary manner. The various
officers proved themselves not only most attentive to their duties, but also painstaking
and competent in their discharge.
Por the greater part of the time over which the work of the local Commission
extended, Mr. John R. Martin was clerk to the Secretary, and Accountant, and discharged
the duties of his office in a highly satisfactory manner. Mr. W. A. Baird was chosen to
succeed Mr. Martin on his resignation, and that gentleman proved himself in every
respect fully qualified to perform the important functions of the position for which he
had been selected. Mr. Patrick Lyons, the only other permanent officer of the
Commission, who was appointed at the very beginning of its operations, discharged the
duties entrusted to him in a most conscientious and careful manner. Mr. L. Yon
Rantzow is elsewhere mentioned as having been appointed storekeeper to the
Commissioners, and that gentlemen, in carrying out the work connected with the
reception into store and packing and shipment of exhibits, and returning them to
their owners after the close of the Chicago Exposition, displayed great energy and
capacity.
Private Exhibits sold in Chicago and adjustment of claims for
damages.
The Executive Commissioner, ou his return to Sydney, handed over to the Com-
mission the moneys necessary to enable it to pay the sums due to exhibitors on account
of their goods sold in Chicago. The total sum so disbursed was £2,519 55., of which
£1,921 9s. lid. was on account of wool exhibits ; the balance represented general
private exhibits. Of course the majority of the private contributions from New South
Wales were returned to Sydney. In connection with the return of those exhibits to
Sydney, owing no doubt, in large measure, to the risk of the very long journey they had
to undergo, a few articles arrived in Sydney in a somewhat damaged condition, and
although the Commission, under its regulations, held themselves free from all liability' on
account of damage or loss of any kind which might not be covered by the insurances


effected, it decided to adjust these claims, and, on this account, a sum only slightly in
excess of £SO was disbursed, a very small amount indeed, when the gross valuation of
the exhibits is taken into consideration.
Importance and success of New South Wales representation.
It is gratifying to know that on all hands, it has been admitted that in several of
the principal sections of classification, New South Wales, in her contributions, equalled
some of the leading nations of the world represented in Chicago, and, in three depart-
ments at least, this Colony undoubtedly took first place, namely, in the representation of
mineral wealth in the Mines Building ; secondly, in the display of wool and cereal pro-
ducts in the Agricultural Building ; and in the third place, by the magnificent display of
hardwood timbers exhibited in the Forestry Section. It has been universally admitted
that at this great exhibition, but for the very valuable and extensive contribution of
Hew South Wales and Canada, the representation of the products of the British Empire
would have been altogether inadequate. Testimony to this fact has been borne among
others by Sir Henry Trueman Wood, Secretary to the British Eoyal Commission and
of the Society of Arts, in his official report to the British Eoyal Commission, and also by
Air. James Dredge, one of the British Commissioners, who, on the occasion of a lecture at
the Imperial Institute on the display made by Great Britain and her colonies, said that
Hew South Wales had shone most luminously, her exhibits being of the highest order.
Journal of the Final Session of the New South Wales Commission.
The final meeting of the Commission was held at the Board Eoom, Colonial
Secretary’s Office, at 4 p.m., on Thursday, the 2nd August, 1894. There xvere present:
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President), in the chair, the Hon. Sir Arthur Eenwick,
Kt., M.D., M.L.C. (Executive Commissioner), Hon. J. E. Burns (Vice-President),
E. D. Adams, Esq., J. Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P., J. J. Calvert, Esq., J.P., C. Collins,
Esq., M.P., M. C. Cowlishaw, Esq., J.P., J. Carl Eischer, Esq., Hon. Charles Goodchap,
M.L.C., W. A. Hutchinson, Esq., J.P., Alderman Thos. Jessop, J.P., Joseph Marks,
Esq., J.P., Alfred W. Meeks, Esq., J.P., Charles Moore, Esq., J.P., Louis Phillips, Esq.,
J.P., Hon. E. Burdett-Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C., Francis Wright, Esq., J.P., M.P.
Apologies were received from the Hon. W. H. Suttor, M.L.C., and Alderman
John Hardie, J.P.
The minutes of the previous meeting having been read and confirmed,
E. D. Adams, Esq. (chairman of the Finance Sub-Committee of the Administrative
Committee), submitted, for the information of the Commission, the following balance-
sheet and statements of account, and information regarding disposal of exhibits pur-
chased out of Commission funds,
c


New South Wales Commission, World’s Columbian Exposition, 1893.
Dr.
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE.
Cr.
1891.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
27 Nov.
To Colonial Treasurer, 1st advance
500
0
0
By Salaries
3,934
2
6
1892.
Stationery and advertising
631
5
11
25 Feb.
,, 2nd ,,
1,000
0
0
Office expenses and petty cash
Canvassers’ travelling expenses ..
237
2
4
19 May.
„ 3rd
2,000
0
0
409
4
7
22 July.
,, 4th ,,
2,000
0
0
Bent of offices and stores ....
628
14
0
20 Oct.
,, 5th ,,
2,000
0
0
Insurances
304
1
9
17 Dec.
,, 6 th ,,
2,000
0
0
Labour in store
1,036
10
1
1893.
Claims paid on account of damage to exhibits..
46
11
9
8 Feb.
,, 7th ,,
5,000
0
0
Preparation of exhibits
1,450
0
10
7 ilpril.
,, 8th „
3,000
0
0
Compilation of pamphlets
513
10
0
20 June.
„ 9th
2,835
17
9
Purchases of exhibits —
1894.
500
0
0
Committee No. I. Agriculture
640 15
10
28 Mar.
,, 10th „
TTT w- a
9
500
0
0
28 May.
14
0
0
— Aug.
„ 12th „
/ * 44 “YTT t - '*1 •
6
2
36
2
-P91 34 Q 17
9
3 , ,, VIII. Machinery
275
0
0
1893.
3 May.
2 Aug.
Less —Refunds to Treasury —•
£ s. d.
... 2,661 19 9
... 173 18 0
,, ,, IX. Manufactures
,, ,, X. Fine Arts
767
248
0
2
11
6
Balance of 8th advance
Amount repaid
,, ,, XI. Liberal Arts
„ ., XII. Woman’s Work
638
245
4
18
0
0
9 S3n 17
9
750
0
0
Cartage ,
209
11
6
Cablegrams
£
s.
d.
190
15
0
Expenses incurred on behalf of Executive
Commissioner
619
2
6
Expenses incurred on behalf of Executive
Commissioner, as adjusted in his accounts
443
4
0
1,062
0
6
Freights —Chicago and local
3,613 19
4
£18,514
0
0
£18,514
0
0
Chairman, Finance Committee.
R. D. ADAMS,


N. S. W. Commission, World’s Columbian Exposition, 1893.
Statement showing Net Expenhituee.
£ s. d.
Expenditure per statement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18,514 0 0
Less Credits as follows : £ s. d.
By Sales of Commission purchases... ... ... 1,000 13 10
„ Payments made on behalf of Executive Com-
missioner ... ... ... ... ... 1,062 6 6
„ Return Ereights and Insurance ... ... 288 4 3
~ Eurniture presented to Government House ... 767 011
„ Payments to Treasury ... ... ... ... 128 310
* 3,246 11 4
Net Expenditure ... ... ... ... ... ... £15,267 8 8
Purchases to the value of £1,662 17s. 7d. were also donated by the Commission
to various institutions.
Statement showing Total Net Expentmtuee.
£ s. d.
Expenditure of Executive Commissioner, as per his Statement... ... 16,105 14 11
Less proceeds Sales of Private Exhibits paid to Exhibitors ... 2,352 3 1
£13,753 11 10
Add Payments made by N.S.’W. Commission ... ... ... 619 2 6
Return Ereight and Insurance ... ... ... ... ... 288 4 3
Net expenditure of Executive Commissioner ... ... ... £14,660 18 7
„ „ N-SAY. Commission ... ... ... 15,267 8 8
Total net Expenditure ... ... ... ... £29,928 7 3
R. D. ADAMS,
Chairman, Einance Committee,


Statement showing Cost and Disposal of Exhibits Purchased and Prepared by the
New South Wales Commission.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
8.
d.
Purchases by Committee—
-No. I.
Agriculture ..
15
10
Of these exhibits, sales were made to the extent of...
282
8
2
And the balance was disposed of as samples, value...
358
7
8
640
15
10
No. III.
Wines
0
9
Of these exhibits, sales wore made to the extent of...
19
2
9
And the balance used for luncheons in the New
South Wales Court ...
33
7
0
52
9
9
No. IV.
Horticulture.
.... 380
13
3
Of these exhibits, sales were made to the extent of...
205
15
4
And the balance was donated or injured in transit
from Sydney
174 17
11
380
13
3
No. VI.
Fisheries
.... 211
17
6
Of these exhibits, sales were made to the extent of...
61
14
7
And the balance was donated and given away as
samples
150
2
11
211
17
6
No. VII.
Mines
36
2
o
These exhibits were donated to the Museum of
Denartment of Mines
36
2
2
n YTTT
. . 275
0
0
These models were sent to the Imperial Institute ...
275
0
0
No! ]X.
Manufactures
767
0
H
Furniture presented to Government House, Sydney
767
0
11
X
24-8
2
6
These exhibits sent to Imperial Institute
248
2
6
>5
No. XI.
Liberal Arts .
638
4
0
Of these exhibits, sales were made to the extent of...
401
4
4
Donated to Imperial Institute
236
19
8
No. XII.
Woman’s Work
. ... 215
18
0
Of these exhibits, sales were made as follows : —
038
4
0
At Chicago
60
7
9
At Sydney
35
12
6
96
0
3
Loss on sale
149
17
9
245
18
0
£3,496
3
11
£3,496
3
H
£
s.
d. -
—
—
1,068
5
5
Lew Woman’s Work
(Sydney)
35
12
6
Cash received for sale proceeds
1,066
5
5
29
17
1
2,429
18
G
Net proceeds
Co
..£1,000
0
15
7
10
£3,496
3
a
R. D. ADAMS.


The Services of the Secretary.
The President submitted the following memo., which was unanimously adopted
and endorsed by the meeting ; —“ That the manner in which the Secretary, Mr. Alex.
Gumming, has discharged his duties is beyond all praise. His energy, industry, and
intelligence have been felt in all departments ; and to his careful management and close
study of details is largely due the very moderate expenditure in the collection and
despatch of exhibits.”
It was also agreed that a bonus of £lOO he paid to the Secretary.
Mr. Gumming acknowledged the kindness and consideration of the Commissioners,
and said that he had had the good fortune to have associated with him a very competent
and conscientious staff.
Mr. Adams referred to the able manner in which Mr. W. A. Baird, and his
predecessor, Mr. J. Eoxburgh Martin, had performed the duties of accountant.
The following resolutions w r ere unanimously agreed to: —
Thanks to Government Departments and other Exhibitors.
Moved by Alderman Thomas Jessep, Esq., seconded by J. Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P.: —
“ That the cordial acknowledgments of this Commission are hereby tendered to the
various Government Departments and private firms and individuals who con-
tributed to the success of the New South "W ales representation at the Chicago
World’s Pair, to the Commissioners for New South Wales Hallways for
concession in freights, and to the Postmaster-General for free telegrams
throughout the Colony.”
Resolution for Woman’s Work Committee.
Moved by J. J. Calvert, Esq., J.P., seconded by Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.: —
‘‘That this Commission cannot close its proceedings without recording its high
sense of the invaluable services rendered by Lady Windeyer, President of
Committee 12 on "Woman’s Work, and the members of that Committee in
organising the very effective representation in Chicago of the important section
confided to their care.”
Thanks to the Administrative and Einance Committee.
Moved by J. Carl Fischer, Esq., seconded by the Hon. Chas. Goodchap, M.L.C.: —
“ That the thanks of this Committee are especially due, and are hereby tendered, to
the Administrative Committee of the Commission and also to its Finance Sub-
committee, of which E. D. Adams, Esq., is the Chairman ; the functions of
this particular Committee and its Sub-committee having been exceptionally
important and arduous.”


Thanks to the Executive Commissioner.
Moved by F. A. Wright, Esq., J.P., M.P., seconded by Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.:—
“That this Commission desires to cordially reaffirm its resolution of special
meeting, held on the 6th April last, bearing testimony to the exceptional zeal
and ability displayed by Sir Arthur Eenwick, in the discharge of his functions
as Executive Commissioner for New South Wales, at the World’s Columbian
Exposition.”
Thanks to the Executive Yice-President.
Moved by E. D. Adams, Esq., seconded by E. A. Wright, Esq., M.P.; —
“ That this Commission desires to record its especial thanks to the Hon. J. E.
Burns, Executive Yice-President of the Commission, for his most valuable
services in attending to the official work of the Commission in Sydney, during
the temporary absence in Europe of the President and on other occasions.”
Thanks to the President.
Moved by the Hon. E. Burdett Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C., and cordially supported:—
“ That this Commission desires to place upon record its hearty appreciation of the
great interest taken by the President in the success of the Commission’s
operations, and to record its sense of the high value of his most efficient
Presidency.”
The President, in reply, thanked them very much for their kind vote of thanks.
That day they closed their long labours, and one of the most satisfactory parts of their
procedure was the report of the Finance Sub-committee showing the manner in which
they had kept dowm expenditure. For this the thanks of the Commission were
due to the Administrative and Finance Committee, and of course to the Executive
Commissioner’s management on the other side of the water. (Hear, hear.) After all
their trials and difficulties they had to hand back to the Government a report of the
most successful Exhibition ever known in the history of this Colony. Everyone agreed
that as an object lesson the natural productions in the New South Wales Court were
not equalled by any other at this great gathering of the nations. It was most important
that they had decided not to fritter away their energies on useless exhibits, but had
confined their attention to large block-views of the Colony’s productions, and this was
in large measure the cause of the Colony’s success. Owing to the impending financial
crisis there were not many visitors from the Colonies to the Columbian Exposition, and
thus we had not the enthusiasm which would have been brought about had colonial
visitors been numbered in thousands. He predicted that, with the reduced tariff in the
United States, and with closer relations with America, the fruits of this Exhibition
would be seen in the next few years, and even those who had been most disparaging in


their remarks about the Exhibition would have to admit the good that would be done.
That the New South “Wales portion was carried out successfully, and with so little
expense, must be a matter of congratulation to all of them. (Cheers.)
[The Commissioners having thus completed the various duties which devolved on
them by virtue of the Commission which His Excellency the Governor was pleased in
Her Majesty’s name, and under the G-reat Seal of the Colony, to issue, adjourned
sine die.~\
I have the honour to be,
Tour Excellency’s most obedient servant,
W. MCMILLAN,
President.


APPENDIX A.
New South "Wales Commission.
{Gazetted, 29 September, 1891.)
President:
"William McMillan, Esq., M.P.
Vice-Presidents:
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Ivnt., M.P., Speaker o£ the Legislative Assembly.
The Eight Worshipful "William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney.
John Pitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Gazetted, 17 June, 1892.)
Executive Commissioner:
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Gazetted,
20 October, 1891.)
Members:
Joseph Abbott, Esq., M.P.
Eobert Dudley Adams, Esq.
John Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P.
John Spencer Brunton, Esq.
Alexander Cameron, Esq.
Joseph Hector Carmthers, Esq., M.P.
Meville David Cohen, Esq.
The Hon. Edward Combes, C.M.G., M.L.C.
The Hon. George Henry Cox, M.L.C.
James Charles Cox, Esq., M.D., E.E.C.S., E.
Joseph Creer, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable John Davies, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Henry Dawson, Esq., M.P.
William Springthorpe Dowel, Esq., M.P.
John Daniel Pitzgerald, Esq., M.P.
Henry Chrichard Eraser, Esq.
Charles Launcelot Garland, Esq.
Jacob Garrard, Esq., M.P.
George Henry Greene, Esq., J.P.
John Hindle, Esq., M.P.
Eobert Hudson, Esq., J.P,
James Inglis, Esq,, M.P
Eranois Edward Joseph, Esq.
Alexander Kethel, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable "William John Lyne, M.P.
George Maiden, Esq., J.P.
Donald Manson, Esq., J.P.
James Martin, Esq., M.P.
William McCourt, Esq., M.P.
Alfred William Meeks, Esq., J.P.
Charles Moore, Esq., E.L.S., J.P.
Henry "William Newman, Esq., M.P.
Edward William O’Sullivan, Esq , M.P.
William Henry Paling, Esq., J.P.
James Paterson, Esq.
Louis Phillips, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Charles Eoberts, C.M.G., M.L.C.


The Honorable John See, M.P.
Bruce Smith, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable Robert Burdett Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Sydney Smith, Esq., M.P.
Joseph Henry Storey, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable William Henry Suttor, M.L.C.
The Honorable George Thornton, M.L.C.
James Torpy, Esq., M.P.
John Young, Esq., J.P.
( Gazetted, 23 November, 1891.)
Frederick Earl Winchcombe, Esq.
Andrew Howard Moore, Esq.
William Frederick Buchanan, Esq., J.P.
James Ley Row, Esq.
Mahlon Clarke Cowlishaw, Esq.
( Gazetted, 11 February, 1892.)
Octavius Charles Beale, Esq.
Alexander Brown, Esq., J.P.
Charles Collins, Esq., M.P.
Wilhelm Carl Fischer, Esq.
William Henderson, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Solomon Herbert Hyam, M.L.C.
Stewart Keightley, Esq.
Lloyd Alouza Kimball, Esq.
Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.
William Bethel Sharp, Esq.
Francis A. Wright, Esq., M.P.
{Gazetted, 26 February, 1802.)
Carl F. Fischer, Esq., M.D., M.R.C.S., &c.
The Honorable Charles Augustus Goodchap, M.L.C.
lonian Melville, Esq., M.P.
Bruce Baird Nicoll, Esq., M.P.
Joseph Benjamin Ollilfe, Esq., J.P.
George Russell, Esq.
( Gazetted, 21 March, 1892.)
George Cass, Esq., M.P.
W. A. Hutchinson, Esq., J.P.
Frederick William Jackson, Esq., J.P.
(i Gazetted, 26 April, 1892.)
John Jackson Calvert, Esq., J.P.
Frank Farnell, Esq., M.P.
Frederick Augustus Franklin, Esq., C.E., J.P.
The Honorable Philip Gidley King, M.L.C.
James Alfred Roberts, Esq., J.P.
James Rutherford, Esq., J.P.
Thomas Saywell, Esq.
C. Carleton Skarratt, Esq., J.P.
Richard Threlfall, Esq., M.A., Professor of Physics at the University of Sydney.
( Gazetted, 28 June, 1892.)
Thomas Robert Allt, Esq., J.P.
Austin Chapman, Esq., M.P.
Frederick George Crouch, Esq., J.P.
Charles D’Arcy, Esq.
John Bloyd Donkin, Esq., J.P.
John Hardie, Esq., J.P.
William Henry Hinton, Esq., J.P.


Louis H. Hyman, Esq., J.P.
Thomas Jessep, Esq., J.P.
John Nohbs, Esq,, M.P.
Walter Hussey Vivian, Esq., J.P.
Benjamin Prancis Marks, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Martin, Esq., J.P.
{Gazetted, 21 March, 1893.)
Miss Margaret Windeyer.
Commissioners in America :
Sir Roderick W. Cameron, Knt., Hew York. (Gazetted, 29 September, 1891.)
Henry W. Peabody, Esq., Boston. (Gazetted, 1 March, 1892.)
Secretary of New South Wales Commission :
Alexander Gumming.
Text of Commission.
VICTORIA, by the Grace of God, of the L T nited Kingdom of Great and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Paith, and so forth, —
To our trusty and well-beloved —
William McMillan, Esquire, a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Our Colony of New South
Wales, President;
The Honorable Joseph Palmer Abbott, Speaker of Our said Legislative Assembly ; and
The Right Worshipful William Patrick Manning, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony, and
The Mayor of the City of Sydney, in Our said Colony, Vice-Presidents ;
Joseph Abbott, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
Francis Abigail, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
Robert Dudley Adams, Esquire ;
John Ednie Brown, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony, and Director-General of
Forests;
John Spencer Brunton, Esquire ;
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
Alexander Cameron, Esquire, Vice-Consul for the United States of America, at Sydney aforesaid ;
The Honorable Joseph Hector Carruthers, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly, and
Minister of Public Instruction of Our said Colony;
Neville David Cohen, Esquire;
The Honorable Edward Combes, C.M.G., a Member of the Legislative Council of Our said Colony ;
The Honorable George Henry Cox, a Member of Our said Legislative Council;
James Charles Cox, Esquire, M.D., F.R.C.S., E. ;
Joseph Creer, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
The Honorable John Davies, C.M.G., a Member of Our said Legislative Council;
Henry Dawson, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly;
William Springthorpe Dowel, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
J ohn Daniel Fitz Gerald, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
Henry Chriciiard Fraser, Esquire, President of the Chamber of Commerce;
Charles Launcelot Garland, Esquire ;
J acob Garrard, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
George Henry Greene, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony;
John Hindle, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly;
Robert Hudson, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
James Inglis, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly;
Francis Edward Joseph, Esquire;
Alexander Kethel, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
William John Lyne, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
George Maiden, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
Donald Manson, Esquire ;
James Martin, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
William McCourt, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
Alfred William Meeks, Esquire;
Charles Moore, Esquire, F.L.S., a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony, and Director of the
Botanic Gardens ;
Henry William Newman, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
Edward "William O’Sullivan, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;


William Henry Paling, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace cf Our said Colony ;
James Pateeson, Esquire;
Loots Phillips, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony ;
The Honorable Aethue Renwick, M.D., F.R.C.S., Ediu., and a Member of Our said Legislative
Council;
The Honorable Chaeles Jambs Roberts, C.M.G., a Member of Our said Legislative Council ;
John See, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ;
The Honorable Bruce Smith, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly, and Colonial Treasurer of
Our said Colony ;
The Honorable Robert Buedett Smith, C.M.G., a Member of Our said Legislative Council ;
The Honorable Sydney Smith, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly, and Secretary for Mines
and Agriculture of Our said Colony ;
Joseph Heney Stoeey, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colonj';
The Honorable William Heney Suttor, a Member of Our said Legislative Council, and Vice-
President of Our Executive Council of Our said Colony ;
The Honorable George Thornton, a Member of Our said Legislative Council;
James Toepy, Esquire, a Member of Our said Legislative Assembly ; and
John Young, Esquire, a Justice of the Peace of Our said Colony.
Greeting: —
Whereas an International Exhibition of Arts, Industries, Manufactures, and the
Products of the Soil, Mine, and Sea styled*the World’s Columbian Exposition, is to be
held in the City of Chicago, in the United States of America, in the year one thousand
eight hundred and ninety-three, for the purpose of celebrating the Eour Hundredth
Anniversary of the Discovery of America : And whereas it has been represented to Us
that it is desirable that Commissioners should bo appointed on behalf of Our Colony of
New South Wales to collect, classify, arrange and provide for the safety and preserva-
tion of Exhibits ; and to make all arrangements in Our said Colony for the effective
representation of New South Wales at the said Exposition, giving special prominence to
the Wools, Minerals, Timbers, and other natural products: Now know ye, that We,
reposing especial trust and confidence in your knowledge, integrity, and ability, do by
these presents authorise and appoint you to be such Commissioners accordingly, of
whom any ten shall form a quorum, with full power to act in these premises ; And We
do hereby authorise and appoint you, the said William McMillan, to be President
of this Commission ; and the said Joseph Palmer Abbott and William Patrick
Manning to be Vice-Presidents of this Commission ; And We do authorise you, the
said President, Vice-Presidents, and Commissioners above described, to duly report your
proceedings from time to time to Our Governor of Our said Colony of New South
Wales, until the business of this Commission shall have been brought to a conclusion.
In testimony whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patent, and
the Great Seal of Our said Colony of New South Wales to be hereunto
affixed.
Witness Our Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Cousin and Councillor
Victor Albert George, Earl op Jersey, Knight Grand Cross of
Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George,
Our Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Our said Colony of New
South Wales and its Dependencies, at Government House Sydney, in
New South Wales aforesaid, this twenty-eighth day of September, in
the year of Our Lord One thousand eight hundred and ninety-one,
and in the fifty-fifth year of Our Reign.
JERSEY.
His Excellency’s Command,
HENRY PARKES.
Entered on Eeeord by me, in Register of Patents, No. 14, page 192/3, tins
twenty-ninth day of September, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-one.
Eor the Colonial Secretary and Registrar of Records,
CEITCHETT WALKER,
Principal Under Secretary.


APPENDIX B.
Administbatite and Finance Committee.
JEx-offlcio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Eitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner).
Members :
Joseph Abbott, Esq., M.P.
Eobert Dudley Adams, Esq.
Eobert Hudson, Esq., J.P.
James Martin, Esq., M.P.
Alfred William Meeks, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Eobert Burdett Smith, C.M.Gf., M.L.C.
The Honorable William Henry Suttor, M.L.C.
Sub-Committee on Finance.
Eobert Dudley Adams, Esq. (Chairman).
John Eitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P.
Alfred William Meeks, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable William Henry Suttor, M.L.C.
Committee I on Ageicultuee.
Tlx-offido Members:
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President) .
John Eitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner) .
Members :
John Young, Esq., J.P. (Chairman).
John Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P.
John Spencer Brunton, Esq.
Austin Chapman, Esq., M.P.


Joseph Creer, Esq., J.P.
Henry Dawson, Esq., M.P.
Frederick Augustus Franklin, Esq., C.E., J.P.
Jacob Garrard, Esq., M.P.
George Henry Greene, Esq., J.P.
John Hindle, Esq., M.P.
Eobert Hudson, Esq., J.P.
Louis H. Hyman, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Solomon Herbert Hyam, M.L.C.
James Inglis, Esq., M.P.
Frederick William Jackson, Esq., J.P.
Thomas Jessep, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Kethel, Esq., J.P.
William McCourt, Esq., M.P.
Henry William Newman, Esq., M.P.
Bruce Baird Nicoll, Esq., M.P.
John Nobbs, Esq., M.P.
James Paterson, Esq.
The Honorable John See, M.P., Colonial Treasurer.
(Sydney Smith,Esq., M.P.
Francis A. Wright, Esq., M.P.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.
ComiiTTEE II o:sr "Wool.
Ex-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President) .
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Fenwick, M.D., F.11.C.5., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner).
Members :
The Honorable George Henry Cox, M.L.C. (Chairman).
Joseph Abbott, Esq., M.P.
William Frederick Buchanan, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Cameron, Esq.
George Henry Greene, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Philip Gidley King, M.L.C.
The Honorable William John Lyne, M.P., Minister for Public Works.
Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.
Andrew Howard Moore, Esq.
James Paterson, Esq.
James Ley Eow, Esq.
Jamas Euthorfoid, Esq., J.P.
William Bethel Sharp, Esq.
The Honorable William Henry Sutler, M.L.C.
Walter Hussev Vivian, Esq., j.P.
Frederick Earl Winchcombe, Esq.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.


Committee 111 on Yitictilttjee, Wines, &c.
JSx-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq,, M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Yice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Yice-
President).
John Pitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President and Chairman of Committee).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., P.E.C.S.,Edin.,M.L.C. (Executive Commissioner).
, Members:
Thomas Robert Allt, Esq., J.P.
Seville David Cohen, Esq.
Mahlon Clarke Cowlishaw, Esq., J.P.
Prederick George Crouch, Esq., J.P.
Charles D’Arcy, Esq., J.P.
Wilhelm Carl Pischer, Esq.
William Henry Hinton, Esq., J.P.
James Inglis, Esq., M.P.
Brands Edward Joseph, Esq.
Stewart Keightley, Esq., J.P.
William McCourt, Esq., M.P.
Charles Moore, Esq., P.L.S, J.P.
Joseph Benjamin Olliffe, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Charles James Roberts, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Thomas Saywell, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable John See, M.P., Colonial Treasurer.
C. Carleton Skarratt, Esq., J.P.
Alex.
Cumming, Secretary.
Committee IY on llonTicmTiiEE.
ISx-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker o£ the Legislative Assembly
(Yice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Yice-
President).
John Eitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Renwick, M.D.,E.E,C.S.,Edin.,M.L.C. (Executive Commissioner).
Members :
Charles Moore, Esq., E.L.S., J.P. (Chairman).
John Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P.
Erank Parnell, Esq., M.P.
Wilhelm Carl Pischer, Esq.
John Hardie, Esq., J.P.
James Inglis, Esq., M.P.
Thomas Jessep, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Kethel, Esq., J.P.
Ales.
Gumming, Secretary.


Committee V on Lite Stock.
Ex-officio Members:
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice- President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President) .
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwiek, M.D,,F.E.C.S.,Edin.,M.L.C. (Executive Commissioner).
Members:
The Honorable William Henry Suttor, M.L.C. (Chairman).
Joseph Abbott, Esq., M.P.
William F. Buchanan, Esq., J.P.
Charles Collins, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable George Henry Cox, M.L.C.
James Charles Cox, Esq., M.D.
H. Dawson, Esq., M.P.
George Henry Greene, Esq., J.P.
A. H. Moore, Esq.
James Alfred Eoberts, Esq., J.P.
J. Eutherford, Esq., J.P.
C. Carleton Skarratt, Esq., J.P.
Sydney Smith, Esq., M.P.
Frederick Earl Winchcombe, Esq.
Francis A. Wright, Esq., M.P.
Alex.
Cumming, Secretary.
Committee YI os' Fish and Fisheeies.
Ex-officio Members:
"William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President!.
The Honorable Arthur Eenwiek, M.D.,F.E.C.S.,Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commissioner).
Members :
James Charles Cox, Esq., M.D., F.E.C.S.,E. (Chairman).
Joseph Hector Carruthers, Esq., M.P.
Austin Chapman, Esq., M.P.
Frank Farnell, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable Solomon Herbert Hyam, M.L.C.
John Nobbs, Esq., M.P.
Joseph Benjamin Olliffe, Esq., J.P.
Edward William O’Sullivan, Esq., M.P.
C. Carleton Skarratt, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Gleorge Thornton, M.L.C.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary,


Committee VII on Mining and Metallurgy.
Ex-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., F.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner).
Members :
Charles Launcelot Garland, Esq. (Chairman).
The Honorable Alexander Brown, M.L.C.
Austin Chapman, Esq., M.P.
Mahlon Clarke Cowlishaw, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable John Davies, C.M.G., M.L.C.
William Springthorpe Dowel, Esq., M.P.
Jacob Garrard, Esq., M.P.
W. A. Hutchinson, Esq., J.P.
Frederick William Jackson, Esq,, J.P.
Francis Edward Joseph, Esq.
Stewart Keightly, Esq., J.P.
Lloyd Alonza Kimball, Esq.
Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.
James Martin, Esq., M.P.
Henry William Kewman, Esq., M.P.
Bruce Baird Kicoll, Esq., M.P.
Edward William O’Sullivan, Esq., M.P.
Thomas Saywell, Esq., J.P.
Sydney Smith, Esq., M.P.
James Torpy, Esq., M.P.
Francis A. Wright, Esq , M.P.
John Young, Esq., J.P.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.
Committee YIII ox Machinery and Implements.
Ex-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William .Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner).
Members:
The Honorable John Davies, C.M.G., M.L.C. (Chairman).
John Daniel Fitz Gerald, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable Charles A. Goodchap, M.L.C.
John Hardie, Esq., J.P.
William Henderson, Esq., J.P.
Frederick William Jackson, Esq., J.P.
Lloyd Alonza Kimball, Esq.


Alexander Alartin, Esq.
James Martin, Esq., M.P.
Henry William Newman, Esq., M.P.
James Alfred Eoberts, Esq., J.P.
Eichard Threlfall, Esq., M.A.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.
Committee IX ok Makufactitees.
Ex-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly (Vice-
President) .
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick,. M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner) .
Members:
James Martin, Esq., M.P. (Chairman).
John Ednie Brown, Esq., J.P.
John Spencer Brunton, Esq.
The Honorable John Davies, C.M.Gr., M.L.C.
Henry Chrichard Fraser, Esq.
John Hardie, Esq., J.P.
"William Henderson, Esq., J.P.
Eobert Hudson, Esq., J.P.
W. A. Hutchinson, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Solomon Herbert Hyam, M.L.C.
Louis H. Hyam, Esq., J,P.
Francis Edward Joseph, Esq.
Alexander Kethel, Esq., J.P.
Lloyd Alonza Kimball, Esq.
Donald Mauson, Esq., J.P.
Joseph Marks, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Martin, Esq., J.P.
Alfred William Meeks, Esq., J.P.
Andrew Howard Moore, Esq.
Bruce Baird Nicoll, Esq., ALP.
Louis Phillips, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Charles James Eoberts, C.M.Gr., M.L.C.
James Alfred Eoberts, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable John See, M.P., Colonial Treasurer.
Walter Hussey Vivian, Esq., J.P.
John Young, Esq., J.P.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.
Committee X ok Fike Aets.
Ex-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
D


John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eenwick, M.D., F.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Com-
missioner).
Members:
The Honorable Eobert Burdett Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C. (Chairman).
John Ednie Brown. Esq., J.P.
W. F. Buchanan, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable Edward Combes, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Wilhelm Carl Fischer, Esq.
Henry Chrichard Fraser, Esq.
F. A. Franklin, Esq., M. Inst. C.E., J.P.
The Honorable Philip Gidley King, M.L.C.
Donald Manson, Esq., J.P.
Alfred William Meeks, Esq., J.P.
William Henry Paling, Esq,, J.P.
The Honorable Charles James Eoberts, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Bruce Smith, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable George Thornton, M.L.C.
James Torpy, Esq., M.P.
Alex.
Gumming, Secretary.
Committee XI os* Libekau Abxs, Education, and Exhxoiogt.
JEx-officio Members :
William McMillan, Esq., M.P. (President).
The Honorable Sir Joseph Abbott, Knt., M.P., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
(Vice-President).
The Eight Worshipful William Patrick Manning, M.P., Mayor of Sydney (Vice-
President).
John Fitzgerald Burns, Esq., J.P. (Vice-President).
The Honorable Arthur Eeuwick, M.D., E.E.C.S., Edin., M.L.C. (Executive Commis-
sioner) .
31 embers :
James Charles Cox, Esq., M.D., F.E.C.S.,E. (Chairman).
The Honorable Alexander Brown, M.L.C.
Joseph Hector Carruthers, Esq., M.P.
John Daniel Fitz Gerald, Esq., M.P.
F. A. Franklin, Esq., M. Inst. C.E.
Jacob Garrard, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable Charles A. Goodchap, M.L.C.
William Henderson, Esq., J.P.
Louis H. Hyman, Esq., J.P.
Stewart Keightley, Esq., J.P.
Donald Manson, Esq., J.P.
Alexander Martin, Esq.
Edward William O’Sullivan, Esq., M.P.
Bruce Smith, Esq., M.P.
The Honorable Eobert Burdett-Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C.
Joseph Henry Storey, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable William Henry Suttor, M.L.C.
Eichard Threlfall, Esq., M.A.
Walter Hussey Vivian, Esq., J.P.
Frederick Earl Winchcombe, Esq.


APPENDIX C.
Committee XII on Woman’s Woek.
Lady Windeyer (President). Miss M‘Carthy.
Mrs. Henry Austin. Mrs. A. W. Meeks.
Mrs. Alex. Cameron. Mrs. J. S. Mitchell.
Miss M. Clarke. Mrs. O’Kelly.
Mrs. H. E. Cohen. Mrs. Onslow.
Mrs. Hadley. Mrs. Louis Phillips.
Miss Edwards. Mrs. Pottie.
Mrs. Carl Eischer. Mrs. John See.
Mrs. Matthew Harris. Mrs. T. M. Slattery.
Mrs. S. H. Levy. Mrs. W. H. Suttor.
Mrs. W. P, Manning. Miss E. M. Woolley.
Mrs. Carl Eischer, Secretary.
Ill'] I’ORT from Lady Windeyer, as President of Woman’s Work Com-
mittee, to The President of the New South Wales Commission.
X.S.W. Commission World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago,
Sydney, 19 February, 1891.
To W. McMillan, Esq., M.P., President, —
Sir,
The duties of Committee XII, appointed on the 4th of December, 1891, to
secure a representation of Woman’s Work,” having now terminated, it remains for
me to report finally upon the result of the performance of those duties by your
Committee,
Before dealing with the business of their special department your Committee
desire to convoy to yourself, to the Executive Commissioner, to your honorable Com-
mission, and to Australia, their earnest congratulation upon the position taken by our
Colony upon the platform of art, industry, invention, and wealth. It has been a
proclamation to the world of the boundless resources of the nation which is slowly
gathering strength for the supremacy to which Federated Australia must ultimately
rise, a demonstration to the mother of nations our loyal and filial fealty to whom we
proudly assert, of the public spirit and enterprise of the mother Colony of the Australian
group. _ ....
The Legislature having, in a spirit of enlightened patriotism and of national
generosity, determined that the representation of this Colony at the Great World’s Fair
should be as complete as possibility would allow, it appeared to your honorable Com-
mission imperative that, in the schedule of the different sections, Woman’s Work, so
largely to be recognised in this great celebration, should not be omitted. Lour Com-
mittee was therefore appointed. They accepted the trust reposed in them with the
modest hope of gathering a collection of exhibits, the utmost merit of which might be
that it should not be discreditable to the women of this portion of Her Majesty’s
dominions.
Eor the purposes of the Committee the sum of £5OO was voted by the Adminis-
trative and Finance Committee, and was disbursed as follows: —
£ s. d.
Purchases of exhibits 245 18 0
Salary to Secretary ... ... ... ... 228 0 0
Packing exhibits... ... ... ... ... 28 611
£502 4 11


Tabulated
List of Shipments of Exhibits in Sydney for
Chicago.
Ship.
Date of manifest.
No. of
packages.
Measurement.
Weight.
Value.
28 Nov., 1892
999
ft.
9.426
in.
11
t.
149
C.
18
9-
3
lb.
3
£
6,901
s.
0
d.
0
26 Deo., 1892
2 364 &
16,760
4,142
482
i
287
12
3
1
15,361
5
0
23 Jan., 1893
20 Feb., 1893
8,000*
321
ii
42
7
3
10
4,073
8
2
50
3
4
7
3
12
2,893
15
0
Ophir
25 ,1893
7
25
0
0
6
o
8
6,S72
0
0
20 Mar., 1893
51
156
6
1
16
2
19
342
13
0
Oroya
25 ,, 1893
17
29
3
0
7
0
3
7
12
10
Orient
Monowai
5 April, 1893
17 „ 1893
22
25
46
109
10
3
0
1
10
15
1
2
27
6
14
85
15
15
10
6
Alameda
15 May, 1893
12 June, 1893
84
458
6
6
12
1
14
990
19
6
Mariposa
8
85
5
1
7
3
4
251
0
0
Monowai.
10 July,' 1893
18 ,, 1893
7
103
7
1
0
0
17
183
0
0
Miowera
1
7
11
0
2
0
10
11
0
0
7 Aug., 1893
4 Sept., 1893
29
1
9
3
0
26
134
10
0
1
10
4
0
3
2
3
50
0
0
11,960
31,873
lOt
507
12
2
23
38,172
14
10
The value of the goods for insurance was £Bl5 155.; the estimated commercial
value was £1,232 55., irrespective of certain inventions.
This statement demonstrates that the number of voluntary exhibitors has not
been small, and also that the money expended in purchasing has been profitably applied.
The official list of awards contains 96 awards allotted to the Department of Woman’s
Work. Deference to our catalogue shows that several hundreds of exhibits were sent
from over a hundred individual exhibitors. These consisted of thirty specimens of furs,
a number of the most remarkable birds and animals, specimens of woods, various exhibits
in photography, lace-making, knitting, illuminating, modelling, painting, and printing.
In ihe many branches of plain and fancy needlework the awards gained by our
competitors testify that in New South Wales the skill in these arts brought to this
far-off land by our mothers and foremothers has not degenerated. Especially Australian
were the cabbage-tree hats and the gloves made from yarn spun from opossum fur.*
In conclusion, I may state with much satisfaction that your Committee are able
to congratulate themselves that the modest hope with which they began their work has
been so for realised.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Tour obedient servant,
MART E. WINDEYER.
* In an official sketch of “ the Woman’s Building and what is to be seen in it,” written by Mary
S. Lockwood, it is stated that “New South Wales, snugly tucked in between Russia and Great
Britain, brings her gift from the taxidermist, her wares from the ceramic artist, her products of the
forest in rugs, and mats of skins and fur. There are also laces and embroideries, sculpture and
paintings deserving notice.”
APPENDIX D.
* Wooden blocks for paving-. t Equal to TOG tons, 33 ft. 10 in.


Detailed ParticulaTs of all Exhibits shipped from Sydney to San Erancisco, <&e., en route to Chicago.
Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
A
3
O
Sh
O
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
23 Jan , 1833
19
101
Abbott, ’William
Wagga Wagga..
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
803
Agriculture ...
8
48
Tobacco leaf.
43
292
26 Dec 1892
1491
Agriculture ...
8
48
28 Nov., 1892
1100-2
12
72-3
23 Jan 1893
10
630
23 ,, * 1893
104
653
Alford, Mrs. A. B
23 ” 1893
}
141
Allen, E. J
Stoney Creek, Young-
Mariposa
26 Dec , 1892
741
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool. “
Allison, J. M
26 ,, 1892
1714
9
60
Allsopp, Thomas
Murrumburrali
Alameda
20 Feb., 1893
731
i
ii
Flour.
23 Jan., 1893
106
669
Alston, J. R
iSuffolkVale Burrowa
•Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1717
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
26 „ 1892
901-3
297
23 Jan., 1893
1797
93
585
20 Feb/, 1893
1795
1
1
Angus & Robertson
28 Nov., 1892
471
150
Armidale P. A. and II. Assn
17 April,1893
2410-2
21
133
Armstrong & Brother, W. H
Callubri, Dandaloo
Mariposa
26 Dec.,' 1892
2042
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Armstrong & Co., A
Milroy, Brewarrina
Alameda
26 1892
2058
9
60
Armytage, F. W
Nocoleche, Paroo R’r
28 Nov., 1892
522
9
60
Austin, Robert
20 Feb., 1893
1198
77
484
Australasian Mortgage and Agency Co
20 „ ' 1893
2244
9
60
23 Jan., 1893
1794
157
921
26 Dec.j 1892
43
292
Australian Alum Co. (Ltd.)
28 Not.', 1892
46-9
43
316
26 Dec.,’ 1892
48
316
1794
150
854
Australian Brewery andWine and Spirit Go, (Ltd.)
Alameda
28 Nor., 1892
1136-40
Agriculture ...
12
73
Ale and stout.
17 Apl., 1893
2417-20
12
73
26 Dec., 1892
1772
14
82
Australian Kerosene Oil and Mineral Co. (Ltd.)...
28 Nor.', 1892
392-5
43
292
Mariposa
26 Dec.,' 1892
1-26
43
292
26 „ ' 1892
396-405
43
292
* Note.— In the following 1 list two general entries in the name of the Department of Public Instruction cover 51)4 Public School exhibits and 434 exhibits from the Sydney-
Technical College ; therefore, under these circumstances, this very large number of exhibitors has not been specified in detail.
APPENDIX E.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
d
o
■r~,
o
Class.
Nature of Exhibit
Alameda
28 Nov., 1802
23 „ 1892
472
154
903
Photograph.
1176-82
Agriculture ...
6
36
28 ” 1892
969
154
902
Photographs.
Shccp-shcaring machine.
Sheep-shearing machine.
Photograph.
Wool.
”
20 Feb., 1893
2276
Agriculture ...
9
60
20 „ 1893
2279
0
60
Australian Widows Fund L.A. Society (Ltd.)
23 Jan., 1893
1796
154.
902
Baird & Co., S. and M. H
Quant ambono,
Brewarrina
Alameda
28 Nov.', 1892
709
Agriculture ...
9
GO
Baker, E. K, II
19
101
Timbers.
28 Nov., 1892
20 Mar., 1893
34t
46
304
Bricks and clay.
Map.
Wines.
Banks, W. J
Mariposa
2321
149
842
Barnett, Joel
28 Nov,' 1892
1205
Horticulture...
20
120
17 Apl." 1893
26 Dec., 1892
2105
20
126
Wagga Wagga...
Mariposa
1278-80
20
126
23 Jan.' 1893
106
667
Hnnd-painlcd fan.
Oil paintings.
Bell, Miss Ada
20 Feb.', 1893
2247
140
Ophir ...
25 Feb.' 1893
20 Dec., 1892
2288
97
017
Agriculture ...
3
Honey.
28 Nov.'. 1892
322-31
42
390-1
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1405
19
105
Grass rope.
Glen Elgin, via
Glon Innes
42
290-1
Mariposa
Monowai
26 Dec., 1892
23 Jan., 1893
1570-1
Agriculture ...
9
60
quartz.
Wool.
Betts, H. S.M
Valehead, Molong
2156
9
60
42
290-1
RaymondTerrace
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
689
41
296
Building stone.
20 Feb.! 1893
26 Doc., 1892
1795
Agriculture ...
i
1
Blomdeld, F. B
Mariposa
2050
9
60
26 „ ' 1892
1702-3
uo
Aborigines’ weapons.
Wool.
Bolton, C. F “
Moorong, Wagga
Wagga
26 1892
1542
Agriculture ...
9
60
26 „ 1892
1269-70
87
547
Eucalyptus oil.
28 Nov., 1892
488-9
20
156
Boulton, E. B.
Mariposa
26 Deo.; 1892
1572
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Bourke, John
827
9
60
Junction
>>
Mariposa
28 „ 1892
752-5
60
Braddock, C. H
Manly
20 Feb., 1893
2312
Manufactures..
87
547
Eucalyptus oil.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group, j
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
28 Nov., 1802
487, 790-1
20
196 31
17 Apl., 1893
2407
9 0
196
28 Nov., 1802
247
42
900 1
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1802
000
42
900 1
20 , 1809,
1?,76 7
20
1 93
26 „ 1802
36-7
42
200 1
33
26 ,, 1802
1400-21
19
09-101
28 Nov., 1892
415-6
45
297
British Broken Hill Prop. S.M. Co. (,Ltd.)
Melbourne
28 „ 1892
268-306
42
290-1
Silver ore.
Broken Hill, Block 14, S.M. Co. (Ltd.)
42
290 1
42
290 1
Broken Hill Prop., Block 10, S.M. Co. (Ltd.)
)>
Mariposa
2G Deo , 1892
1631-9
42
290-1
26 „ 1892
917-8
42
290 1
26 „ 1892
2004-20
42
290-1
26 ” 1892
558- 9
33
43
292
Coal
Brown” T. H
15 May, 1893
155
909
20 Dec.” 1892
184-5
44
296
Sandstone.
26 Nov., 1892
406
44
296
Agriculture ...
9
60
26 Not., 1892
818
9
60
26 Dec.” 1892
1267-a
1
1-2
4 Sept., 1893
2526
143
834
23 Jan./ 1803
106
669
9
60
Wool
Mariposa
26 Dec , 1892
990
110
26 „ 1802
2031
9
60
26 „ 1892
910-20
44
296
23 Jan., 1893
106
665
Burrow Brothers
Burma Burma,
23 1893
2133
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
via Millie
Mariposa
26 Dee., 1892
1G78-80
43
292
Coal
26 ,/ 1802
1541
9
60
33
26 „ 1892
1599-1600
20
126
26 / 1802
1000
109
692
3 3
26 " 1892
3
26
Cadell, F. A
1781
150
864
Cadell', W. T
23 1893
2141, 314
9
60
Wool.
Caldwell & Co
Wagga Wagga..
Alameda
23 Not., 1892
1190-2
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
p,
o
Sm
o
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Caldwell & Co
Wagga Wagga.
Alameda
15 May, 1893
2421
Horticulture...
20
126
"Wines.
Caldwell, John T
42
290-1
Cameron, E
no
Aboriginal weapons.
Campbell, Fred
Y arralumla,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1492-3
Agriculture ...
9
GO
Wool.
Qucanbovan
Campbell, J. A
Dungalear, Walgott
26 „ 1892
519
9
60
Campbell, Mrs. J. B
Jerula, Careoar
26 ., 1892
1532
9
60
Campbell, R
Cambalong, Bombala
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2142
9
60
J(
Campbell, W. D
Paddington
Alameda
23 Nov., 1892
993
Liberal Arts ...
147
829
Ventilating cowls.
Cape Hawke Fisli Preserving Co
2199-2218
40
272
Careoar Cobalt Co
2S Nov 1892
687 8
42
290
Carmbhael. Gr. T. & J. 15 .
28 , 1892
430
Horticulture...
20
120
Wines.
26 Dec , 1893
2325 7
20
120
17 April,1893
2406
20
1 20
>}
Castle Wellington Tin and Silver Mining Co
42
290
Central Broken Hill Silver-mining Co
42
290
Cbarbonnet-Kellerman, Mme
23 Jan 1893
1 58
920
Chevreux. A . F.
2G Doc 1892
1110
139
820
Chew, H
Stoneridgo,
Monowai
23 Jan., 1S93
2151
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Mountcagle.
Chief Secretary for N.S.W
23 „ 1%93
i7m
9
01
Silk
Clubby, John
1109
4.8
319
Clarence River Fresh Fish and Canning Co
23 „ 1892
719-22
40
272
Clark, J. K
Quilendaddy,t'm
’’
Agriculture ...
9
60
W ool.
Boggabri
Clark, Mabel
Monowai
23 Jan 1893
653
Clarke, Miss Marian
23 „ 1893
141
Clegborn, W
Timlin,
15 May, 1893
2123
21
130
Close, E
Mariposa
26 Deo., 1892
520
Agriculture ...
9
Wool
Clout, Greorge
1
1
Cohen and Levy
4S5
1
i
Cohen, Mrs. Victor
23 Jan , 1893
Coleman Brothers
28 Nov., 1892
1187-8
21
141
Coleman, K
110
Colcmane and Sons (Limited)
Cootanumdra ...
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
531-2
Manufactures..
87
547
Eucalypti preparations
Collaroy Co.
28 Nov , 1892
822
9
GO
Wool
Collingridgo, A
26 Dec., 1892
140
Collins, Mrs. Jane .
Milson’s Point...
Monowai
23 Jan., 1S93
Woman’s Work
116
665
Lace.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor. |
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No, of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Colonial Mutual Life Insurance Socictv
1892
991
114
802
Photograph.
Combos, Hon.
E., C.M.GK, M.L.O
Mariposa
1892
140
Commercial B
1893
1781
114
903
Photograph.
Commissioners
for H.S.W
Alameda
28 Nnv'
1S9^
431-61
19
99-101
"
28
'
1892
465-YO
476
478
486
Ethnology ...
171
100
954 ;
”
28
1892
Photographs.
”
28
1802
150
28
1892
Agriculture ...
Ethnology
8
48
28
n
1892
490-1
160
Aboriginal weapons.
28
1892
493-6
160
>J
28
1893
503, 511-3
19
99
’
23
1892
' 531-5
37
247
Paintings of fish.
Doorway.
J)
23
1892
546
Manufactures
90
570
?}
23
n
1892
547
90
566
5 '
28
n
1892
548
42
290
Broken Hill Directory
Coal.
”
28
1892
560-679
43
292
28
”
1892
850-90
42
290
Copper.
Asphaltum tiles.
28
79
1892
1141-74
Ji
42
290
f>
1}
Mariposa
28
n
1892
1225-36
Liberal Arts...
150
854
1892
504
Badges.
Grain.
*
28
1892
725-35,
1111
Agriculture ...
1
1
20
”
1892
1
1
’*
26
n
1892
909-16
44
296
JJ
”
23
1892
1375-91
42
290
1 in.
JJ
26
1892
1393-1400
"
42
290
**
26
1892
1601-14
42
290
”
28
”
1892
1461-77
151
871
Photographs.
}>
28
1892
1491,1565
1494-1514
Agriculture ...
8
48
}>
if
26
1892
42
290
26
1892
1556-65
Agriculture ...
i
2
Maize.
"
28
189 9
1592-7
150
854
;;
”
20
1892
1681
44
296
Marble.
"
20
1892
1706
160
Aboriginal weapons.
26
1892
1710
21
137
)}
”
26
”
1892
1713
38
262
Model boat.
;J
28
1892
1721
Horticulture..
21
139
Dried fruits.
JJ
26
1892
1730-3
26
1892
1748-52
Liberal Arts..
160
854
Literature.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Loft Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Mariposa
1892
1773-4
1775-9
1900-1942
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photographs.
2G
189^
150
854
J/
55
1892
19
99
”
26
1802
2000-2000A
150
854
Ji
”
26
”
1892
2002b-
19
99
26
1892
2003d
2063-5
Liberal Arts...
150
854
’*
**
”
26
1892
2066-72
355
909
Natural History
specimens.
8,000 -wooden blocks.
26
1892
19
09
”
Monowai
1893
1784-90
1793
Agriculture ...
Liberal Arts...
1
2
,5
**
J '
23
1893
909
”
”
23
1893
1794-8
150
851
”
23
n
1893
1796,2103-
151
871
Photographs.
**
23
] S93
1943-75
19
90
*’
A
23
1893
2081-94
40
272
Pish exhibits.
?>
23
n
1893
2106-9
40
■ 272
J
"
’
23
n
1893
2112-6
90
567
55
23
1893
2117-20
2125
Transportation
85
530
>s
J)
23
1893
110
842
' J
23
1 803
Transportation
82
50S
Model of Zig Zig.
11
23
IKfifV 2183-98
00
567
”
’
23
1893
2219, 2243
2228,
150
854
"
"
23
1893
Alameda
20 TTnlv
1893
2235-8
1705
1
1
20
1893
2249,
2256-8
2260-2
Liberal Arts ...
150
854
Literature.
20
1803
1893
150
854
”
20
2264, 2278
”
150
854
i}
20
1893
2290-4
40
272
Opbir ...
Mariposa
25
1893
2275
Floral paintings.
,5
”
20
Mar.
1893
2300
150
854
>}
20
1893
2321
160
Photos, of aborigines.
Apples.
,}
>}
"
5>
20
”
1893
2328-36
Horticulture...
21
133
”
20
1893
2342-3
21
133
3#
i
,5
20
”
1893
2337-9
21
133
Grapes.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Mariposa
20 Mar., 1895
2310, 45-6
21
133
Pears.
20 „ ' 1803
2314
21
133
Passion fruit.
yi
Ji
Oroja ...
25 '' 1893
2354-7
21
133
Grapes.
25 1893
2358-60
21
133
Pears.
}i
25 ", 1893
2361-70
21
133
Apples.
3>
J '
n
8 April, 1893
2379-98
21
133
v
8 ‘, ' 1893
2399
21
133
Persimmons.
**
8 ” 1893
2400
"
21
133
Oranges.
11
17 ‘j, 1893
2348-78
20
126
Wines.
17 ” 1893
2413
150
854
Literature.
"
JJ
15 May, 1893
2427
150
854
**
15 1893
2143-57
21
133
,
”
15 1893
2458-73
21
133
Oranges.
n
15 ', 1893
2173-80,
L50
854
Literature.
”
82-4
15 „ 1893
2185-G
160
900
Australian Museum
”
”
exhibits.
15 „ 1893
2489-903
150
854
Literature.
5>
**
;
15 ” 1893
2504
21
133
Passion fruit.
”,
12 Juno, 1893
2506-13
150
854
Literature.
10 July,' 1893
2515
130
851
”
IS „ 1893
2522
150
854
9>
51
JJ
’*
7 Aug., 189 !
2523-4
”
150
854
28 Nor-i 1892
536-8
Transportation
80
503
Railway sleepers.
28 „ ' 1892
539
80
499
.Bolts and nuts.
* }
}?
28 1892
540
80
499
Rails.
}i
26 Dec., 1892
1742
80
499
Photographs,
”
23 Jan., 1893
2110
80
499
23 „ 1893
151
871
Cook, E
28 Not., 1892
262
46
304
Clay and shale.
Cooper, R. C.
Willeroo, Tarago ..
jj
23 „ ' 1892
814
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
2162
9
60
Cootanmndra Farmers’ Roller Milling Co
Cootanmndra ...
Mariposa
26 Dee.i 1892
1567
jj • •
I
11
Flour.
26 „ 1892
80S
42
290
23 Jan., 1893
2229
42
290
Kaolin diamond wash.
26 Dec.', 1892
28
42
290
Silver ore.
Cousins, W. Y
Bcbcah, Singleton
Alameda
28 Not.', 1892
1118-23
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines, &c.
}>
>>
Monowai
17 April, 1893
2408
JJ
20
126
Wines.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No, of
packages.
Department.
p
6
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Coventry, W
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2132
Agriculture ...
9
60
?3 # 1 SOS
9*931
3
17
Cox Bros
Ravvdon, Rylstone..
Mariposa
26 Dec,, 1892
2039
,,
9
60
Wool.
Cox, G. H
Burrandulla,Mudgee
23 „ 1892
757-8
9
60
Cox, J. B
CullenboiieV Mudgee
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
822-3
„
9
60
9
60
n
Crnir/ AW .
9S Ln ISOS
9 j 4Q
„
j>
Mariposa
26 rw 1 8Q9
1769
5)
9
60
)j
26 „ ' 1892
14-0
)i
26 1892
154.fi
9
60
26 ,, 1892
807
42
9QO
Crozier, William
Mnorna, Wentworth
2G „ 1892
1517-8
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Crozier, W. D
Horse-shoe, ,,
20 „ 1892
1549
9
60
26 ,, 1892
1615 23
44
9Q6
55
42
290
quartz.
Cuningham, A. J. and J
Lanyon, Queanbcyan
Mariposa
20 Dec., 1882
1538, 1513
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
26 „ 1802
978-9
87
547
104
853
23 Nov 1892
473-4
Liberal Arts...
no
858
20 Feb , 1893
2231
no
858
Files.
» >,
2488
no
858
7 Aug 1893
2525
no
858
))
Balgety & Co. (Limited)
5»
28 Nov., 1892
525
Agriculture ...
9
60
)>
Photograph.
26 Dec, 1892
204S
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan 1893
2137
9
60
Ban gar and Macdonald Bros
Wagga Wagga
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1569
9
60
9)
Ban gar Brothers
Gostw3'ck, Uralla. .
26 „ 1892
1422-31
Woman’s Work
9
GO
23 Jan. 1803
1Q6
665
Bavenport, Miss Julia
Eichmond
23 „ 1893
104
658
Sewing and darning.
23 „ 1893
2150
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Bubbo.
23 ,, 1893
140
Deans, T. M
Coonabarabran..
Mariposa
26 Dee., 1892
1533, 1544,
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
42
290
lodestuff.
B’Mboux, Louis W
Illunie,Koorawatha
Mariposa
20 Doe., 1892
817
Agriculture ...
9
60
'Wool.
Bcpartmcnt of Agriculture.
Alameda
20 Feb., 1893
2274
,,
1
8
Grasses.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
A
3
p
6
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Department of Agriculture
Sydney
Alameda
20 Eeb., 1893
2274
Agriculture ...
1
9
Forage plants.
Department of Public Instruction
a
20 „ 1883
2274
,
15
83
Publications.
28 Nov 1892
1124 30
Liberal Arts ...
1 IQ
84.9
Mariposa
20 Dec 1892
1237 05
1 4.Q
84-7
2G „ 1892
1475-89
149
847
”
»)
exhibits.
Alameda
28 Nor 1892
507 0
(9
28 '1S92
779
9
Monowai
28 Jan 18Q.8
1788
23 1893
2121 2
87
Diglit and Mack ay
Bulgandramine,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1716
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Parkes.
28 Jnn 1808
1781
g
40
Donnelly, D. C. J., M.P
20 1W 1802
rn
42
299
Donnelly, Mrs
93 .Inn 1SQ3 1
1 OR
(I85
Dowling, Y. J
Luo, Kylstono. .
Alameda
28 Not.', 1892
710-5
Agriculture ...
9
60
\V ool.
Mariposa
90 Don 2H5Q
9
GO
Doyle, E. E
20 1892
’
55
55
Dovle, J. E
Kaludah,Lochinvar
26 1892
1101-4
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
Doyle* Miss J. M
14.9
28 * 1898
1701
Liberal Arts..,
Musical compositions.
28 " 1808
1794.
926
Drinkwatcr, Charles
28 Nov.. 1892
1105
1 40
5 5
Dulhunty and Deakin
Killoola, Peel...
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1S93
1554
Agriculture ...
9
"go
Wool.
Duntroon Estate, Trustees of
Queanbeyan ...
Alameda
28 Nov., 1891
833-6
55
9
60
Durham, J. B
Monowai
1797
Liberal Arts ...
1 4,5
QOQ
. T-. , •, •, • . , i.„
Dymock, \V
23 1893
1781
1 50
854
Alameda
28 Nov 1892
974 7
Eaton, B. W. F
Wagga .
28 „ 1892
785
Agriculture ...
12
73
Ale and stout.
Eckford, J. W
Mallaraway,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1534
„
9
60
Wool.
Narrabri.
Egan, C
28 Nor 1892
750
9
GO
Elcanora Gold and Antimony Mining Co
26 Doc., 1892
921
42
290
55
23 Jan \ 1S93
104
R58
Ellis, T. E
Mariposa
20 T)po * 189*
1280
656
20 „ * 1892
1701
100
20 ” 189'
1294 0
12
Ale
28 Hot , 1892
351
43
290
Asbestos.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
28 Not., 1892
409
42
290
Copper ore.
28 * 1892
410
42
290
Chromite.
Equitable Life Assurance Society of U.S
Sydney
Mouowai
23 Jan., 1893
2111
Liberal Arts ...
154
902
Photographs.
Everill, Capt. H. C
Ethnology
160
Aboriginal weapons.
2128-12
Horticulture...
21
133
Apples.
17 Apr.* 1893
21
133
Fruits.
23 Jan/, 1893
2074-80
Liberal Arts...
150
858
Newspaper cxlibifc.
17 Apr., 1893
2414
,, •••
Agriculture ...
150
858
Files.
Faithful!, W. P
Springfield,
23 Jan., 1893
2158-9
9
60
Wool.
Goulburn.
28 Nor., 1892
1023-7
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
20 Mar/ 1893
2302-7
20
126
Fanner, E. F
North Sydney...
2G Dec., 1892
1741
Transportation
85
528
Yacht’s gig.
20 „ 1892
529
Manufactures.
in
697
Sole leather.
23 Jan., 1893
Wonian’sWork
150
854
Australian story.
Fetherstonhaugh, C
Gooriauawa,
Mariposa
2G Dec.', 1892
1550-3
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Gilgandra.
Fiaschi, Thomas, M.D
Sydney
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
21G3-72
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines, &c.
23 „ 1893
1781, 2210
,,
Fine Arts
20
126
Photographs.
26 Lee., 1892
140
Paintings,
Fischer, Miss G. F. C
23 Jan., 1893
W om an’ sW ork
21
140
Jams andfrrats.
Fischer, Mrs. Carl
23 „ ' 1893
22
169
J ardiniere.
23 1893
105
662
Furs.
”
23 " 1893
106
664
Laces.
*
23 '' 1893
172
Memorial of Exliibi-
”
”
tion of Woman’s Ind.
Fisher and Fraser
28 Nov., 1892
1335
Agriculture ...
12
73
Ale.
) 5 May,' 1893
2422
12
73
23 Jan.* 1893
Woman’ sW ork
150
854
Australian stories.
26 Lee/ 1892
1131
140
Painting.
2G „ ' 1892
2037-8,20-16
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
’
20 / 1892
784
Ethnology
160
Aboriginal weapons.
98 Nov.. 1892 1 ; 311-2
Mining
40
304
Bricbs and clay.
Forsyth and Sons, Jas
28 „ ' 1892
1021-2
Manufactures
111
697
Sole leather.
”
Ethnology
160
Stone Axe head.
Frankland Gf. J
23‘Jan., 1893
2246
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
Mining
42
290
Fraser. Mrs. J. Q-
Glebe
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’s ■work
110
095
Dressed dolls.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
package.
Department.
p
6
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
23 dan., 1803
106
CGI
Frew & Co., W
549
19
99
23 Jan., 1893
2,134
9
60
Frost, D. J
23 „ ' 1893
1781
150
561
Full wood, A. H ,
Art Society
Mariposa
23 Dec., 1892
140
Gant, J.
26 „ 1892
!
140
28 Nov., 1892
788
Agriculture ...
1
11
Gardiner, W. J
Rouchcl,
Mariposa
26 Etc.,' 1892
1535
9
60
Wool.
Murrurundi.
Garibaldi Gold-mining Co
£G „ 1892
307
42
290
Garnock Brothers „
Bukalong, Bombala
Mouowai
23 Jan., 1893
2233
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
21
136
Garrett, Mrs. K
100
G30
Genowlan Shale Co
26 Dec', 1892
74
42
290
Gcnty, L. T
28 Nov.', 1892
1109-1203
20
126
17 Apr.," 1893
2116
20
126
Geographical Society of Australasia
20 Mar., 1893
2312
155
908
Gibb and Son, James
Berthong,
Alameda
28 Not.', 1892
717-8
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Wallandbcen.
26 Dec , 1892
2045
9
60
28 Not., 1892
228
42
290
23 Jan., 1S93
106
665
Glcncross, 0
Macdonaldtown
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1743-4
Transportation
83
513
Cabs.
Golden Cloud Gold-mining Co
42
290
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1711
Transportation
83
5U
26 „ 1892
2060-2
83
511
Gordon Fmcry and Colour Co
26 " 1892
1621-6
48
319
Gordon, G. H. and H. E. H
756
9
60
26 Dec., 1892
1526
9
60
Government Astronomer
2S Not.' 1892
2215
155
908
Mariposa
20 Mar,' 1893
2312
155
908
Government Printer
26 Dee., 1892
1745-7
Machinery ...
74
458
”
electrotyping and stereo-
typing.
Grafton Home for the Aborigines
160
Photographs.
Grafton Municipal Council
151
871
Grant, L. McB ..
Buthcrvvah, Erana
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
524
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Grant, W
Bathurst
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
530
Manufactures
105
6G0
Fura and leather.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
s
o
u
O
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Wagga Wagga
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
505
19
99
Timbers,
30 Feb 1893
2250
20
126
Mariposa
26 Dec., IS92
1392
42
290
Great Jingera Proprietary Silver-mining Co
42
290
auriferous bismuth.
42
290
Mariposa
26 Dee , 1892
1770
1
2
26 „ 1892
1771
2 1
139
28 Not., 1892
1113-7
20
126
Greene, G. H
landra, Young 1 ....
Mariposa
2G Dec., 1892
1758
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
26 „ 1892
1682
43
292
26 \\ 1892
1197
144
A«b6Mrl
26 „ 1802
1212
77
486
1224
598
Grigor, W. G ...
North Sydney...
28 „ 1892
1223
,, ...
87
547
Eucalyptus oil.
Grogan, W. J
Tamangaroo, Yass..
Monowai
23 Jan., ]893
2161
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
28 Nov , 1892
1211
119
747
28 , 1892
1186
1
11
”
28 „ 1892
991
Woman’s Work
147
832
23 Jan., 1893
106
664
28 Not.", 1892
967-8
19
99
Hall' C. C
Yeumburra, Yass..
5)
28 Nov.; 1892
7J8 9
Agriculture ...
9
GO
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
103
66)
Hal May, P
19
99
23 Dec., 1892
HO
141
9
60
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1704
160
9
60
28 Nov., 1892
46
304
23 Jan / 1893
1781
150
864
28 Nov." 1892
1216
147
9
832
Harkness, W
Lincluden, Cooma..
Alameda
26 D.c, 1892
1132
Agriculture ...
60
Wool.
Harris, Mrs. M
23 Jan , 1893
27
23 ,, * 1893
100
630
"
23 1893
13 31
106
Harrison and Corscaden
Riverside, Forbes. .
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
521
Agriculture ...
9
00
Wool.
Hawkesbury Agricultural and Pastoral Association
Windsor
»
14
82
Photograph.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
ft
p
o
!h
O
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Haydon, B
Bloomfield,
Alameda
28 Hot., 1892
810
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Blandford.
23 Jan,, 1893
142
26 Dec.', 1892
684
42
290
23 Jan.’ 1893
UG
665
Fay". ..
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1536
9
60
2G 1892
685
42
290
23 Jan., 1893
104
653
23 1893
2096-2102
90
566
55
19
99
26 Dec., 1892
140
23 Jan.' 1893
1794
135
809
26 Dec., 1892
1674-6
43
292
Coal.
28 Hot.', 1892
506
19
69
Higinbotham and Kobinson
Sydney
Mariposa
26 Dee.,' 1892
1281
Liberal Aits...
150
864
Maps.
Hill, Frank
1G0
Hill' J. D
Bogalara, Bookham
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
2054
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
111
82
28 Not., 1892
1034
93
523
23 Jan.,' 1S93
1781
150
871
26 Deo.', 1892
987
140
23 Jan.j 1893
1781
151
871
28 Nov., 1892
1001-2
147
829
Glebe
Mariposa
26 Dec,,' 1892
1028
140
1
1
Holt, H. W. L
23 Jan., 1893
996-8
37
248
Hood, P
Mariposa
26 Dec.,' 1892
126G
2
12
26 „ ' 1892
1213-5
139
820
Horsfall & Co., J. S
Kerarbury via
Alameda
28 Not., 1832
523, 740,
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Narrandera.
725-6
23 „ 1892
9
60
Narrandera,
28 „ 1892
782
9
60
**
28 '„ 1892
308-9
42
290
147
832
26 Dec.' 1892
1283
151
871
23 Jan., 1893
2160
9
60
Hulks, Mrs. Y. A
Bathurst
Mariposa
26 Dec.' 1892
736-7
Horticulture...
21
140
Preserved fruits.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Peel
28 lor., 1892
951
9
60
Silk.
Mariposa
26 Dec.,’ 1892
952
96
26 „ 1892
103
42
290
Hume, 0. L
Castlesteads,
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2152
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool
Burro wa.
Hume, E. B
Frankfield, Gunning-
23 „ 1893
2148
9
60
Hume, F. W ...
Tarengo, Burrowa..
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
843-4.
»
9
60
>)
Hume, II. E. F
Everton, Rye Park
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2136
») • • •
9
60
))
Paintings.
2G Dec., 1892
140
23 Jan.’ 1893
1794
152
889
Hunter Eivor Bee-keepers’ Association
West Maitland
Mariposa
26 Dee.' 1892
1481-6
Agriculture ...
3
26
Honey.
23 Jan., 1893
2212
154
897
currency.
28 Nov., 1892
479
160
160
20 Feb,, 1893
226G-9
42
290
Opbir ...
25 „ ' 1893
1695, 2270
42
290
Jackson A
Derwent Park,
M onowai
23 Jan., 1893
2154
Agriculture ,,
9
60
Wool.'
Gunnedah.
28 Nov., 1892
703-4
9
60
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1707
**
16
84
Jaqucs, W. E
Therribri, Boggabri
26 „ ' 1892
815-G
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
2139
9
60
28 Nov., 1892
492
160
Agriculture ...
ji • • •
1
2
Johnson, J. W
Glenbrook, Cooma.
Mariposa
20 Dec., 1892
2034, 2052
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan,, 1893
1780
147
833
26 Dec.', 1892
1289
Jones, E
Cadow, Eorbes..
Alameda
28 Nov.', 1892
1540
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
28 „ 1892
1690-2
28 ” 1892
1100
151
871
17 April, 1893
2349
150
854
Kelly, J.'
Cambusdoon,
Mariposa
26 Dee., 1892
1545
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Yerong Creek.
Kelly Mrs. T. H
23 Jan,, 1893
19
99
Mariposa
26 Dec.' 1892
1433-56
26
220
Kemp, A. P
West Kcnipsey
26 „ ' 1892
1591
Liberal Arts...
155
909
Birds’ nests and eggs.
23 Jan., 1893
106
664
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Mariposa
20 Dec., 1892
1157
297
26 1892
1772
147
825
20 Feb , 1893
2277
80
499
23 Jan , 189-3
2230
2
12
Kitcli & Co., G-
23 Nov/, 1892
1189
151
871
26 Dec., 1892
1487-8
26
120
28 Nor., 1892
723-4
153
893
28 „ ’ 1892
1015-9
26
120
17 April, 1893
2404
26
120
23 Not., 1892
1222
26
120
160
28 Nor., 1892
922-50,
42
290
Star antimony.
1300-71
28 „ 1892
1372-3
42
290
■ ;
28 „ 1892
1374
42
290
;;
1799
42
290
26 Dec/, 1892
1598
150
864
28 Nor., 1892
789
1
7
23 Jan./ 1893
106
664
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1715
9
60
Wool.
Leoni, Keating, and party
Bhnbimbi Ck.,Mogo
26 1892
332
Mining
42
290
Auriferous quartz.
20 Feb., 1893
2252
26
120
26 Dec * 1892
1103
Agriculture ...
2
12
28 Not/, 1892
961
11
69
28 „ ’ 1892
407
44
296
v
28 \\ 1892
475
44
296
55
28 ~ 1892
408
19
99
28 1892
962-3
40
277
28 " 1892
497-8
160
23 ” 1892
954-60
26
120
28 ’’ 1892
1206-9
Agriculture ...
12
73
Litchfield, A. J. "
23 Jan., 1893
2147
9
60
Wool.
23 ., * 1893
1781
151
871
28 Nor., 1892
2282-7
42
290
25 Feb.,’ 1893
2286
42
290
20 Mar.’, 1893
2308
160
Loder, Andrew
Colley Crock,
Alameda
28 Nov.’, 1892
515-8
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Willow Tree.
-
APPENDIX E —continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Lowe, E. J -
Birriwa, Gulgong..
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
751
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
28 „ 1892
2424-6
Horticulture...
21
133
Fresh fruits.
Manposa
26 Deo., 1892
1218
Manufactures..
111
697
Leather belting.
Ethnology
160
Abor. drawing.
20 Mar., 1893
2312
Woman’s Work
121
Patent washer.
Macgrcgor and Tully
Warraweena via
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
514
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Bourke.
Mining
42
290
Opals.
Liberal Arts ...
149
851
Insects.
23 Jan., 1893
2240
Agriculture ...
151
871
Photographs.
Mariposa
2G Deo., 1892
1555
9
60
Wool.
26 „ 1892
1282-5,
Fine Arts
140
Plaster busts and oil
1489
paintings.
M‘Clintook, J
Ccofamundra ...
Alameda
28 Nov, 1892
819
Agriculture ...
0
60
Wool.
28 „ 1892
1029
Machinery
77
486
Patent rail switch.
Mariposa
28 „ 1892
953
Liberal Arts ...
152
880
Expansion rollers.
26 Dee., 1892
1298-9
Manufactures..
48
746
Horseshoes and
farriers’ tools.
M‘Fadyen, John
Murrurundi ...
Alameda
20 Feb., 1893
2289
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photographs.
M‘Farland, Young, & Co
Myall Ck., Inverell
23 Dec., 1892
826, 838
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
28 „ 1892
1435
Manufactures..
118
746
Horseshoes.
Agriculture ...
1
1
Wheat and flour.
M'Grath J. J
Wagga Wagga
Mariposa
26 Doc., 1892
1196
Transportation
83
523
Biding saddle.
M'Grath, P
Lang’s Ck., Burrowa
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
809
Agriculture ...
9
GO
Wool.
M‘Gregor, A. S
Art Society
20 Feb., 1893
2280
Fine Aris
140
Pictures.
26 Dec., 1892
140
Paintings.
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’sWorli
140
Paintings.
o
23 „ 1893
104
657
Gloves and socks.
M'Kay, W
23 ., 1893
2131
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
M'Keahnio, C. II
Qncanbeyan ...
Mariposa
26 Dee., 1892
1525
9
60
)»
M c Keown, Miss Rosa
Milburn Creek
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
1782
Woman’s Work
110
729
Seed cushion.
M'Lcan, L
Condobolin
Mariposa
26 Deo , 1892
2035
Agriculture ...
0
60
Wool.
26 „ 1892
1768
9
60
J)
Feather flowers.
M'Mylea, Mrs. VV. C
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’s Work
106
CG6
M-Nab, R
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1751-7
Manufactures.
US
746
Bellows and forge.
Agriculture ..
1
1
Cereals.
Magennis and Julian Bros
Bogolong, Bookham
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1812
1527
9
6)
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’sWorl
104
653
Child’s garment.
APPENDIX E— continneii.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Loft Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Maiden, J. H., F.L.S
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1590
909
42
940
98 ISTnv 1802
1 904
Agriculture ...
IB
7R
Mancliee, J. C
Willow Tree ...
28 „ ’ 1892
760-G
9
60
Wool.
3
26
Honey.
3
26
Alameda
20 Fab., 1803
2251
1 51
?*
531
1 4.0
Marsh, C. M'Leod
Tullisker, Uralla
Mariposa
26 Dee., 1892
820
Agriculture ...
9
~60
Wool.
1 10
OQ5
Martin, R
Bathurst
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1290
Manufactures
118
743
Horse-shoes.
151
871
Massey & Co
Aoung
Mari posa
26 Dee., 1892
1183-4
Manufactures
87
547
Eucalyptus extract.
28 Nov 1892
118;%
Horticulture...
20
1 90
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1566
20
131
Brandy.
1
1
104
0%3
28 Nov , 1892
Q70 1
19
99
2 1 Jan 1893
1799
85
pan
28 Nov , 1892
70% R 783
Agriculture ...
9
CO
Middleton, A. D
Kalangara,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1761
9
60
Cunningham.
Midwood, 0
Willoh via Bre-
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
708
>» •••
9
60
warrina.
Millard, W., J.P
19
99
Miller, D. S. K
42
990
Silver ores.
28 Nov , 1892
30 i 93 aa
42
990
28 , 1892
42
990
28 „ 1892
226 7,
42
290
236-8
28 „ 1892
346 155-68
42
290
28 „ 1892
175 9
42
290
190-1
28 „ 1892
- 195-7,
42
290
199 206
28 ,, 1892
61
42
290
■*
28 „ 1892
63
42
290
Metallic lead.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
28 Not.
1802
75-88
42
290
Graphite.
28
5>
1892
90-102, 239
42
290
Auriferous quartz.
"
28
1892
245-C,
42
290
347-9
28
1892
112-3
42
290
Stibnite.
)}
28
1892
114-21,
42
290
Show-cases.
137-40
28
1892
181-3,
42
290
411-4
28
1892
891-5
42
290
>5
Auriferous quartz.
28
1892
‘134-5,
42
290
419-24
23
1892
141-3,
42
290
Stream tin ore.
188-9
28
1892
187, 210
42
290
Lode tin ore.
J)
”
28
1892
230-1,
42
290
144-6
28
1892
152-4,
42
290
169-73
28
))
1892
240-4, 261
42
290
*'
28
1S92
'263
42
290
28
1892
147
42
290
Alunite.
28
1892
174, 223
42
290
Auriferous lodestuff.
i}
28
1892
192, 207-8
42
290
Copper ore.
u
28
1892
193
42
290
Antimony ore.
28
1892
194
42
290
Marble.
28
1892
198
42
290
Type metal.
»
28
1892
209
42
290
Alum earth.
28
1892
211, 225
42
290
Bismuth ore.
28
1892
224
42
290
Iron ore.
28
1892
258
42
290
Tripolite.
*’
”
28
”
1892
259-60
42
290
Building stones.
7>
359-84
28
>1
1892
264
42
290
J '
”
28
1892
333-9
42
290
Fossils.
28
}>
1892
355,357-8
42
230
Decorations.
"
a
28
1892
417-8
42
290
J '
28
1892
42
290
Diamond-drill core.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
d
»
o
u
O
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
28 Not.. 1892
885-7
Mining
42
290
Coal.
28
1892
390-1
42
290
Trachyte, &c.
28
1892
426
42
290
Granite.
”
28
1892
680-3
42
290
Sandstone.
"
28
1802
690-700
42
290
Minerals.
Mariposa
1892
27, 31, 53
42
280
Limestone.
20
1892
' 29
42
290
Lead ore.
26
1892
32, 44, 51-3
42
280
Auriferous quartz.
26
1892
33,38,41,67
42
290
Auriferous lodestuff.
26
1892
34, 136
42
290
Chrome ore.
n
26
1892
35, 39
42
290
Copper ore.
"
26
1892
40
42
290
Auriferous copper ore.
26
1892
42-3, 180
42
290
Lode tin ore.
221
26
5)
1892
54, 899
42
290
Silver ore.
20
1892
55
42
290
Manganese.
26
n
1892
58
42
290
Auriferous mispiekcl.
*'
26
1892
59-122
42
290
,, quartz.
26
1892
62-6
42
290
Iron ore.
26
1892
186
42
290
Show-ca-e.
"
26
1892
217-8
42
290
Kerosene shale.
26
1892
693
42
290
Minerals.
' 1
26
1892
1629-30
42
290
Kocks.
l '
26
1892
1651-61
42
290
Marble.
20
1892
1685
42
290
Labels.
}>
jt
26
1892
1686
42
290
Maps and diagrams.
} '
26
1692
1687
42
290
Granite.
ij
26
1892
1689
42
290
Silver ore.
28
1892
1693
42
290
Show-case stand.
"
26
1892
1097
42
290
Mosaic table.
26
1892
1698
42
290
Carbonate of lead.
26
1892
1699
42
290
Diamond-drill core.
■"
Monowai
23 Jan,,
1893
1684, 2234
42
290
Emerald matrix.
"
Alameda
20 Feb.
1893
2272
42
290
Geological Survey report.
20
1893
1683
42
290
Gold and gems.
"
Monowai
10 July,
1893
2516-21
42
290
Literature and map.
Alameda
20 Feb.,
1893
2274
Agriculture ...
15
83
Botanical specimens
and documents.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
26 Dec., 1892
Fine Arts
140
Water colour drawings.
Mitchell & n 0 . D
28 Not., 1892
988-9
Horticulture...
21
141
Jams.
21
133
Fruits.
Sydney
26 Deo., 1892
56
42
290
Auriferous quartz.
28 Nor.', 1892
806
42
290
Photographs,
Moffatt, Josias
Tarrawyck,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1530-1
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Armidale.
Mcir Dr. II C
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
797
Machinery ...
70
427
Fire escape.
Monk, D. J
28 „ 1892
481-4
Agriculture ...
11
71
Vinegar.
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
Fine Arts
140
26 „ 1892
2057
9
60
Wool."
Monowai
23 Jan.. 1893
Woman’s Work
106
665
Tatting.
Ethnology
160
Aboriginal weapons.
Moses, W. and F. A
Combadello, Moree
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
812
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’s Work
140
Painting.
23 „ 1893
1696
Mining
42
290
Antimony ore.
28 Not., 1892
101-11
42
290
Silver ores.
23 Jan.,' 1893
1693
42
290
Sulphide ores.
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
686
42
290
Auriferous lodestuff.
42
290
Coal.
28 Not., 1892
148-51
42
290
Silver lead ores
Goulburn
26 Dec., 1892
527-8
Agriculture ...
17
98
Lubricating oils
23 Jan., 1893
2241
17
93
45
297
Oilstones.
Mulholland, G. J
Oura, Wagga Wagga
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
746-7,772-4
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Mulliolland, T. J
Rosewood Park,
Monowai
23 Jan , 1893
2182
„
9
60
)>
Wagga Wagga.
Mullen, W. II
West Maitland..
Mariposa
26 Dec,, 1692
972-3
Fthnologv
160
Aboriginal weapons.
23Jan., 1893
22
167
Maitland
Agriculture ...
,,
3
26
Honey.
Murray, Andrew
Bannockburn,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
848, 2032,
9
60
Wool.
Inverell
2056
26 „ 1892
1569
9
60
Sydney
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
1217
Liberal Arts...
154
902
Photographs.
23 Jan., 1893
1794
150
854
“Rienzi” in phonography.
9
60
Wool.
Nash, Porteous, & Co
Gorah, Coona-
Monowai
23 Jan, 1893
2135
,,
9
60
»>
barabran.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney’.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
26 „ 1892
1734-40
Fine Arts
140
Paintings.
Darning.
Coal.
2312
Women’sWork
106
665
26 1892
550
Mining
42
290
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photographs.
Coal.
Mariposa
26 Doc., 1892
26 „ 1892
556-7
43
296
1573-4
Liberal Arts,..
151
871
Photographs.
Pupil’s work.
Kerosene shale.
5>
26 1892
1458-60
149
849
NSW Sim, In n.rid Oil 0.-)
28 Nnv.. 1Sfl2 ! 340. 428-9
296
Mariposa
26 Doc.,’ 1892
427
43
296
28 Not.', 1892
1134
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photo
5i
Mariposa
20 Feb., 1893
2271
Agriculture ...
9
60
20 Mar!, 1893
2296
Mining
42
290
Show-cards.
Nunthrrungic...
42
290
Silver-lead ores.
Agriculture ...
3
26
Honey.
Lemon syrup.
Wool.
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2173
11
69
Kallara, Tilpa...
23 „ ' 1893
2138
9
60
Mariposa
Monowai
26 Dec., 1892
1287
Mining
47
311
Artificial flagging.
Drawing.
23 Jan., 1893
23 „ 1893
Woman’sWork
140
2240
Liberal Arts,..
151
871
Photographs.
Lady’s garment.
Wool.
”
23 „ 1893
WOman’s Work
104
653
Eoxlow, Bun*
gendorc.
Kangaroo, Cano-
windra.
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
26 „ 1892
2040, 2043
Agriculture ...
”
9
60
2033, 2047
9
GO
28 Not., 1892
26 Dec, 1892
1113-5
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
Mariposa
1112
)’ • • •
Agriculture ...
Mining
20
126
Ourrandooley,
Bungendore.
26 „ 1892
2051
9
60
Wool.
43
296
Coal.
Bushfiekl, Jerilderie
28 Not., 1892
23 Jan., 1893
759
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Monowai
2177,2183-
4
9
60
Willoughby ...
23 „ 1893
Womau’sWort
106
669
Embroidery.
Painting.
Pianoforte composition.
23 „ 1893
140
23 1893
158
926
**
23 ” 1893
106
666
23 ” 1893
1781
Liberal Arts...
150
854
Shakespearean
sketches.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group,
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
23 Jan.,
1803
of gold.
1892
1175
47
312
JJ
1893
2240
47
312
23 „
1803
140
Agriculture ...
3
26
1893
2239
6
37
1892
796
s>
i
X
Peak Hill Prop. GP M. Co
Mariposa
20 Dec.,
1892
904-7
42
290
26 „
1892
798-802
Agriculture ...
2
12
26 „
1892
798-802
6
37
1893
151
871
1892
739
Agriculture ...
9
60
Mariposa
26 Dec.,'
1892
738
9
60
3
26
26 Dec.,
1892
1537
' 3
9
60
1893
2126-9
87
552
Mariposa
26 Dec.'
1892
2073
150
854
engravings.
26 „
1892
140
Paintings.
26 '
1892
1132
140
28 Not.. 1892
310-21
42
290
28 „
1892
229
42
290
Mariposa
1892
1292
118
746
26 „
1892
1271-2
Agriculture ...
10
65
cordials.
1893
151
871
23 „
1893
151
871
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
1297
44
296
Agriculture ...
1
X
1
1
28 Nov.,
1892
480
Ethnology ...
160
Rankin, Angus, Estate of
Bombowlee, Tumut
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
2036
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
28 Not.,
1892
499-502
Forestry
19
99
Wattle bark.
Mariposa
20 Mar.
1893
2322-3
Woman’sWork
172
Reid, D. J
1892
Fine Arts
140
Paintings.
26 „
1892
1705
Ethnology
160
Aboriginal weapons.
Reuben, A
Singleton
)>
26 ;;
1892
1515
Manufactures.
87
549
Prickly pear oil.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer, j
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
1893
Woman’s Work
106
669
Embroidery and
dressed doll.
Agriculture ...
14
82
Photograph.
Richmond and Scott
G-ingie, Walgett
Alameda
28 Nor.,
1892
712
,, •••
9
60
Wool.
Robb & Co., John
Talawanta, Bre-
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
2041
35 •••
9
60
»
warrina.
Roberts, R. H
Tiverton, Bar wan g.
Alameda
26 „
1892
770-1
,,
9
60
53
Roberts, R. W
Clifton, Young.
28 Roy., 1892
825
„
9
GO
„
1893
2232
if
3
17
Sugar-cane.
Robinson, J
Kimo,Grundagai
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
1539
,,
9
60
Wool.
Tumut
23 Jan.,
1893
1702
it
9
60
i}
Sydney
23 „
1893
Woman’sWork
34
230
Stuffed apteryx.
Ronald and Sons, R. B
Nap Nap, Hay..
Alameda
28 Roy.,
1892
743
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
14
82
Photographs.
Monowai
23 Jan,,
1893
2240
Liberal Arts...
152
589
Burial reform scheme.
Mining
42
290
Brown iron ore.
Mudgee
Alameda
28 Rov.,
1892
701-2
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Upper Macedon, Vic.
20 Feb.,
1893
2248
Pine Arts
140
Oil paintings.
Ophir ...
25 „
1893
2273
140
Water-colour drawings.
Eempsey
20 „
1893
Mining
42
240
Tin ore.
Russell, J. E. M
Petersham
Monowai
23 Jan.,
1893
1036
Manufactures.,
110
695
Safety bullion bank.
Rutledge Brothers
Gidley, Bungendor
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
2044
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Glenriddle, Barraba
)»
Alameda
28 „
1892
2055
,, ...
9
60
i>
Ryder Brothers
Calga, Coonamble..
28 Nov.,
1892
744
,, *♦»
9
60
if
Monowai
23 Jan.,
1893
2123
,,
18
94
Eucalyptus soap.
23 „
1893
2124
Manufactures..
87
549
„ toilet soap
Alameda
20 Feb.,
1893
2251
Horticulture...
20
126
Wines.
Mariposa
26 Dec.,
1892
1662-73,
Mining
44
296
Building stone.
1640-50
Alameda
28 Roy.. 1892
1133
Liberal Arts...
154
903
Photographs.
26 Dec.,
1892
1677
Mining
42
290
Coal.
23 Jan.,
1893
Woman’s Work
140
Painting.
Agriculture ...
3
26
Honey.
Monowai
23 Jan.,
1893
2140
9
60
Wool.
23 „
1893
W oman’ s W ork
106
664
Lace work.
Scott, James
Blink Bonnie,
23
1893
2146
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Armidale.
Scott, Miss Jeannie
Marrickville ...
a
23 „
1893
Woman’s Work
104
653
Lady’s garments.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
package.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Scott, J. W
Bogamildr,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1723-9
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Warialdi.
23 Jan , 1893
101
653
2487
150
854
23 Jan., It 93
Woman’s Work
11)5
662
28 „ ' 1893
141
£0 Feb., 1893
3020
96
698
23 Jan.' 1893
1781
140
3
26
23 Jan., 1893
104
657
Mariposa
26 Deo.', 1S93
1478
140
Agriculture ...
)} • ♦ •
8
48
Sbutticworih, H. W
Cucunigilligii,
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
831
9
GO
Wool.
Simpson, Gr . M
Stonehenge,
Monowai
23 Jan,, 1893
2157
9
60
New England.
Mariposa
2G Doc., 1892
J400
120
7'6
n, , .
42
240
26 Deo., 1892
1568
120
1781
182
880
28 Not,', 1892
806-8
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool
23 Jan.,' 1893
2179
9
60
23 „ ' 1893
i:si
85
530
Smith' C W
23 Nov., 1892
89
46
301
23 Jan.,' 1893
2130
9
GO
Mariposa
26 Deo.', 1892
1517
151
871
26 1392
551-3
43
292
55
26 1802
L40
Painting.
55
42
290
20 Feb., 1893
2265
Agriculture ...
7
Mariposa
26 Dec.' 189'
1719-20
1
1
26 „ ' 1892
1C05-14
21
HO
23 Jan., 1893
106
669
42
290
23 Jan., 1893
106
669
26 Deo.', 1892
140
23 Jan.' 1893
106
669
23 „ ' 1393
142
Painting on opal.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
X-eft Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1516
Agriculture ...
12
73
Ale.
26 „ 1892
1713
9
60
Wcol.
Kangiara,
Taugmangaroo
North Berry Jerry,
Wagga Wagga.
26 „ 189^
2030
0
60
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2115
9
GO
23 „ 1893
Woman’s Work
110
Painting.
Clothing.
Bathurst
Mariposa
26 Dlc., 1892
1104
Manufactures 1104
632
Barsham,
Biandford.
26 „ 1892
846, 1528
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
20 Mar., 1893
2301
9
60
Woman’s Work
158
926
Musical compositions
Timbers.
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
1107-8
Fore try
19
99
Mariposa
26 Deo., 1892
1293
Manufactures
103
660
Furs.
Warrangong,
Koorawatha.
21 „ 1899
1753
Agriculture ...
Manufactures
9
60
Wool.
Monowai
26 1892
533
96
598
Picture Lame.
23 Jan., 1893
1781
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photographs.
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
1037-99
Agriculture ...
6
36
Tinned meats.
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2174
Liberal Arts...
151
871
Photograph?.
Omnibus wheels.
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
961-6
Tranportation
Woman’s Work
83
522
"
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
109
692
Oilskin clothing.
“
23 „ 1893
1781
Liberal Arts...
152
889
Architectural drawings
Terrible Yale,
Kentucky.
Alameda
23 Nov., 1892
821
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
23 Jan., 1893
26 Dec., 1892
Woman’sWork
104
653
Lady’s garments.
Painting.
Wool.
Mariposa
Alameda
1195
Fine Arts
149
28 Nov., 1892
812-3
Agriculture ..
9
60
Coonamhlc.
♦
Mariposa
23 „ 1892
1030-3
12
73
Porter and ale.
20 Mar , 189 <
2310-1
12
73
26 Dec., 1892
545
,,
Liberal Arts...
9
60
Wool.
Alameda
23 Nov., 1892
792
150
862
Picture.
28 „ 1892
839-11
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Bathurst
28 „ 1892
1019
1
1
Wheat and flour.
S}dney
20 Feb., 1893
2263
Liberal Arts..
155
909
Publications.
Narrandera
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
2180
Agriculture ..
9
60
Wool.
3
26
Honey.
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
Group.'
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
Tunny, James ,
Sprint Park. Youmr
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
1762
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
26 „ 1892
995
Liberal Arts...
150
858
20 Feb., 1893
150
863
23 Jan., 1893
106
665
28 Nov.', 1892
477
Liberal Arts...
149
851
TXtz, P. " '
1
1
23 Jan., 1893
W oman 5 s Work
106
664
Agriculture ...
9
60
Yogele, A. J. C.'
3
26
23 Jan., 1893
Woman’sWork
106
669
Walker, Henry
Tong Bong, near
Alameda
28 Novi, 1892
937
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Eylstonc.
)>
28 „ 1892
68-73,
Mining
42
290
232-5
26 Drc., 1892
57
42
290
28 Nov., 1892
388
42
290
Walmsloy, Cameron, & Co
Tarcelari, Morcc . /
Mariposa
26 Dec.,' 1892
1759
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Walsh, W. M
23 Jan., 1893
1794
Manufactures
87
544
Warbv, James E
BillemhaU,
Alameda
28 Nov.', 1892
781
Agriculture ...
9
CO
Wool.
Narrandera.
23 Jan., 1893
144
28 Nov.', 1892
999
1
2
108
665
Sydney
Mariposa
26 Dec.', 189.'
804
140
26 „ ' 1892
803
909
Watt, D. J
Ulinda, Coolah
ft
26 „ 1892
1718
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Watt. P. 0
Goonal, Moree
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
716
j,
9
60
}J
Webb, executors of the late T. S
Springfield, Byng..
28 „ 189i
828-9
9
60
23 Jan., 1893
106
664
20 Feb., 1893
2275
109
683
26 Dec., 1892
289
42
290
White Brothers
Sauinarez,
26 „ ' 1892
1760
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
Armidalc.
White, F. E
Harben Yale,
>>
26 „ 1892
1763, 1767
9
60
Blandford,
White, H. C
Ilavilah, near
„
26 „ 1892
1761
9
60
Mudgee.
White, II. E. A. and V
Belltrccs, Scone • •
Alameda
28 Nov., 1892
832
>>
0
60
)>
APPENDIX E— continued.


Name of Exhibitor.
Address.
Steamer.
Left Sydney.
No. of
packages.
Department.
a,
o
O
Class.
Nature of Exhibit.
"White, II. E. A. and Y
Belltvees, Scone ..
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
512-3
Agriculture ...
9
60
Wool.
White Rock Proprietary Silver-mining Co
28 Nov., 1892
345
43
290
Silver.
26 Dec., 1892
60, 908
42
290
Monowai
23 Jan., 1893
105
653
Wickham and Bullock Island Coal-mining Co. ...
42
290
Monowai
23 Jan 1893
1791
88
552
Williams, Mrs. T. R
23 „ 1893
23
177
26 Dec., 1892
140
Paintings.
Monowai
23 Jan 1893
Woman’sWork
140
23 , # 1893
UO
9,6 Dec 1899
1193
06
Wilson, E. K
Turramurra ...
Alameda
28 Not., 1892
786-7
Agriculture ...
ii
~69
Fruit wines.
,,
Monowai
17 April, 1893
2415
ii
69
93 Jan , 1893
143
Wilson, S., Son & Co
Lake Cowal,
Alameda
28 Hov., 1892
510-1
Agriculture ...
9
lo
Wool.
Marsdon.
Monowai
W oman’ s Work
104
653
23 ,, 1893
104
657
23 1893
105
661
23 „ 1893
105
662
23 „ 1893
106
665
Applique collar.
23 „ 1893
LOS
669
Embroidery.
23 „ 1893
142
Winter, Irving
Tulcumbah,
Mariposa
26 Dec., 1892
2049
Agriculture ...
9
"(30
Wool.
Carroll.
23 Jan, 1803
106
661
23 , 1893
1781
9
60
Wool.
Wiseman, R. A
Clerkness,
Alameda
28 Kov., 1892
811
9
60
Bundarra.
Wolfe, Janies E
West Maitland..
28 „ 1892
544-5
Ethnology
160
Aborigines weapons.
Wrench, J. T
23 Jan , 1893
1781
149
849
23 ,, 1893
2240
140
28 Nov., 1892
793-5
Horticulture...
20
126
17 Apl., 1893
2409
90
126
26 Dec , 1892
817
9
60
28 Hoy., 1892
980-6
20
126
Wvndhatn, William
26 Dec.,' 1892
1708-9
20
126
Young Co-operative Roller Fiour-mill Co
Young
Alameda
28 Hot.'. 1892
1210
Agriculture ...
i
n
jj
Flour and plioto.
APPENDIX E— continued.


APPENDIX F.
List of wards to N.S. Wales Exhibitors.
NOTE,—The Diplomas which will he issued to Exhibitors will contain in a summarised form the Deports
of the Juror on Exhibits, giving the reasons why the awards were made. Each Exhibitor will
also receive uniform Bronze Medal.
DEPARTMENT A.—AGRICULTURE.
Group 1
Name. Address. Description.
Anderson, William... ... Moama ... ... Norfolk Red Wheat.
Black and Sons ... ... Molong ... ... Purple Straw Wheat.
Brunton & Co. ... ... Granville ... ... do do
Clout, George ... ... Brungle, via Gundagai Steinweidel Wheat.
Cohen and Levy ... ... Tamworth ... ... Purple Straw Wheat.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Wheats (7 awards).
Holsohier, John ... ... Moama ... ... Wheat.
Matthews, H. C. ... ... Bathurst ... ... Brown Hogan Wheat.
Moore, George ... ... Corowa ... ... Purple Straw Wheat.
M‘Gee and Quinn ... ... Parkes ... ... Wheat.
M‘Shane, Patrick ... ... Goulburn ... ... do
Pawley and MTntyre ... Inverell ... ... White Tuscan Wheat.
Quirk & Co. ... ... Wellington ... ... Purple Straw Wheat.
Reirath, C. ... ... ... Albury ... ... White Mexican Wheat.
Spratt, James ... ... Orange ... ... Wheat.
Tremain, William ... ... Bathurst ... ... Hogan Wheat.
Utz, F. ... ... ... Glen Innes ... ... White Tuscan Wheat.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Trophy of Maize in Cob.
M‘Shane, Patrick ... ... Goulburn ... ... Maize.
Waters, Michael ... ... Richmond ... ... Hawkesbury Champion Maize.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Oats.
Clout, George ... ... Brungle, via Gundagai do
Spratt, James ... ... Orange ... ... do
Clout, George ... ... Brungle, via Gundagai Barley.
White, J. ... ... ... Albury ... ... do
Clout, George ... ... Brungle, via Gundagai Eye.
Laurie, Alexander T. ... Rawden Yale, Glou- Arrowroot.
cester.
Department of Agriculture Sydney Collection of Grasses.
Spratt, James ... ... Orange ... ... Hay.
Department of Agriculture Sydney ... ... Collection of Fodder Plants.
Allsopp, Thomas ... ... Murrumburrah ... Flour.
Brunton & Co. ... ... Sydney and Granville., do
Cohen and Levy ... ... Tamworth ... ... do


Name. Address. Description.
Cootamundra Farmers’ Co- Cootamundra ... Flour.
operative Association.
Gardiner, Edwin ... ... Temora ... ... do
Grover, E. ... ... ... Glen limes ... ... do
Matthews, H. 0. ... ... Bathurst ... ... do
M'Gee and Quinn ... ... Parkes ... ... do
Pawley and M‘lntyre ... Inverell ... ... do
Tremain, William ... ... Bathurst ... ... do
Utz, F. ... ... ... Glen Innes ... ... do
Young Co-operative Flour- Young ... ... do
milling Co.
Do do ... do ... ... Photo, of Mill,
Cohen and Levy ... ... Tamworth ... ... Corn-meal.
Group 2.
Hood, Phineas A. ... ... Russell-st., Bathurst... Baking Powder.
Leslie, William ... ... Dubbo ... ... do
Peate, Lawrence ... ... George-st., Bathurst... do
Group 3,
Cowan, David William ... Tomki, Richmond Sugar-cane.
River.
Kirk, J. and W. ... ... Chatsworth ... ... do
Robertson, Duncan ... Grafton ... ... do
Hunter River Bee-keepers’ Care of R. Patten, 80l- General Award, Honey.
Association. warra, West Mait-
land.
Group 5.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Peas, “ Black-eyed Susan.”
Group 6.
Australian Meat Co. ... Ramornie, Clarence Beef Extract.
River.
Do ... do do ... Canned Meats.
Do ... do do ... Canned Soups.
Sydney Meat Preserving Co. Sydney ... ... Extract of Beef.
Do do ... do ... ... Canned Soups.
Do do ... do ... ... Canned Meats.
Peate, Lawrence ... ... George-st., Bathurst... Various Sauces, &c.
Group 7.
Spies, "Wilton, & Co. ... Mudgee ... ... Patent Churn.
Group 8.
Abbott, William ... ... Wagga Wagga ... Tobacco.
Ah Chung ... ... ... Tumut ... ... do
Commissioners for K.S.W Sydney ... ... do
Shu Pack ... ... ... Tumut ... ... do
p


Geotjp 9.
PURE-BRED FINE WOOLS (MERINO).
Name. Address. Description.
Allen, Edmund John ... Stoney Creek, Young... Two Fleeces.
Bettington, J. B. ... ... Brindley Park, Merriwa One Fleece.
Collaroy Co. ... ... Collaroy, Merriwa ... Two Fleeces.
Cox, Henry George... ... Burrundulla, Mudgee.. Three Fleeces.
Dickson, W. and T. 0. ... Yarrawin, Brewarrina. Two Fleeces.
Dowling, Vincent James ... Due, Rylstone ... Four Fleeces.
Dulliunty and Deakin ... Killoola, Peel ... One Fleece.
Duntroon Estate (Executors Queanbeyan ... ... Two Fleeces,
of).
Faithfull, W. P. ... ... Springfield, Goulburn.. Three Fleeces.
Featherstonbaugh, C. ... Goorianawa, Gilgandra One Fleece.
Gibb and Son ... ... Berthong, Wallend- Four Fleeces.
been.
Hall, Charles Castle ... Yeumburra, Yass ... do
Horsley, R. F. ... ... Yabtree, WaggaWagga One Fleece.
Hume, Frederick William... Tarengo, Burrowa ... Three Fleeces.
Loder, Andrew ... ... Colley Creek, Willow Six Fleeces.
Tree.
Manchee, John Charles ... Glen Moan, Willow One Fleece.
Tree.
Merriman, George ... ... Ravensworth, Yass ... Two Fleeces.
Mulholland, Geo. J. ... Oura, WaggaWagga... Three Fleeces
Murray, Andrew ... ... Bannockburn, Inverell One Fleece.
M'Callum, Argyle ... ... Goodhope, Yass ... Four Fleeces.
Peel River Land and Mineral Goonoo Goonoo, Tam- do
Company. worth.
Roberts, Richard Hutchinson Tiverton, Barwang ... Three Fleeces.
Scott, James Weir ... Bogamildi, Warialda... One Fleece.
Sloane, Alexander ... ... Mulwala ... ... Three Fleeces.
Suckling, John Lionel ... Barsham, Blandford... One Fleece.
Traill Brothers ... ... Llangollen, Cassilis ... Two Fleeces.
Yivers, William (Estate of).. King’s Plains, Glen do
Innes.
Walker, Henry ... ... Tong Bong, Rylstone.. Four Fleeces.
Wilson, Son, & Co., S. ... Lake Cowal, Marsden.. Two Fleeces.
PURE-BRED MIDDLE WOOLS (MERINO).
Allen, Edmund John ... Stoney Creek, Young... Three Fleeces.
Crozier, Wm. Douglas ... Horseshoe, Wentworth do
Crozier, William ... ... Moorna, Wentworth... One Fleece.
Devlin & Co. ... ... Ganmain, Wagga Two Fleeces.
Wagga.
Dowling, Yincent James ... Lue, Rylstone ... Five Fleeces.
Dulhunty and Deakin ... Killoola, Peel ... Two Fleeces.
Hall, Charles Castle ... Yeumburra, Yass ... One Fleece.
Horsfall & Co., J. F. ... Kerarbury, Kar- Two Fleeces.
randera.
James and Gray ... ... Kentucky, Corowa ... One Fleece.
Merriman, George ... ... Ravensworth, Yass ... do
Mullholland, George J. ... Oura, Wagga Wagga do
Scott, James Weir ... ... Bogamildi, Warialda... Two Fleeces.
Warby, James E. ... ... Billembah, Narrandera One Fleece.


PUEE-BEED LONG- WOOLS.
Name. Address. Description.
Executors of Duntroon Estate Queanbeyan ... ... Four Fleeces.
Murray, Andrew ... ... Bannockburn, Inverell Two Fleeces.
ALL CROSS-BRED WOOLS.
Executorsof Duntroon Estate Queanbeyan ... Three Fleeces.
FLEECE WOOL (UNCLASSIFIED).
Tubbo Estate Co. ... ... Wallendbeen ... ... Two Fleeces.
Yivers, William (Estate of) Glen Innes ... ... Four Fleeces.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Collection of Merino Combing Wool
in bales.
Do do ... do ... ... Collection of Merino Clothing
Wools.
Do do ... do ... ... Extensive Practical Display of
Wool.
Hawkesworth, Alfred ... Technical College, Collection of Samples of Wool.
Sydney.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Photos, illustrating Sheep-farming.
Do do do ... ... Photos, illustrating N.S.W. Sheep.
Dalgety & Co. ... ... 5, Bent-st., Sydney ... Photo, of Wool Warehouse.
New Zealand Loan and Mer- Bridge-st., Sydney ... Photo, of Wool Store,
cantile Agency Co.
Australian Shearer Co. ... Care of Jas. Martin & Sheep-shearing Machine.
Co., 249, Clarence-
street, Sydney.
Department of Agriculture Sydney ... ... Vols. 1 and 2, Agricultural Gazette,
Chief Secretary for N.S.W. do ... ... Sample of Raw Silk.
Group 11.
Levy, Miss Rosa ... ... 443,80urke-st.,Sydney Liqueurs.
Oertel, Charles ... ... 403, Pitt-st., Sydney... Lemon Syrup.
Pollock, Alexander... ... Berry-street, Nowra ... Cordials.
Monk, D. J. ... ... Henderson Road, Alex Wine Vinegar.
andria, Sydney.
Group 12.
Australian Brewery Wine Bourke-st., Waterloo, Ale in Wood and Bottle, and Stout
and Spirit Co. Sydney. in Wood.
El win & Co. ... ... Orange ... ... India Ale in Bottle; Extra Fine
Stout in Bottles.
Fisher and Fraser ... ... Grenfell ... ... Ale in Wood.
Group 14.
Australian Jockey Club ... 14, Castlereagh-street, Series of Photos.
Sydney.
Reynolds, Prank ... ... Tocal, Paterson River Photo, of “ Splendor,” by
“ Bathilde,” out of “ Stockwell.”
Patent Asphaltum Co. ... 244, Pitt-st., Sydney... Asphalt Blocks.
O’Neill, Charles ... ... 200, Cumberland-st., O’Neill’s Patent Caithness Flagging.
Sydney.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Wooden Block Road.
Do do do ... ... Section of same Road, showing
Foundation.


Group 16.
Name. Address. Description.
Jamieson, Neil Albury Double Furrow Plough and Patent
Appliances.
Group 18.
Sydney Meat Preserving Co. Sydney ... ... Neatsfoot and Trotter Oil.
Mallaby, George ... ... Armidale “ Champion Cleanser ” Soap.
Sachs, Valentine ... ... Glen Innes “ Australian Eucalyptus” Soap.
Mowbray & Co., M. ... Goulburn Branding Black for Wool.
DEPARTMENT B.—HORTICULTURE.
POMOLOGY.
Group 21.
Purcell, J. ... ... ... Parramatta ... ... Oranges.
Do ... ... ... do ... ... Lemons.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Oranges.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Periodical Shipments of Fruit (4
awards).
Faint, A. and J. ... ... Spring Yalley, Armi- Fruits grown in New England.
dale.
Mitchell, J. L. ... ... do ... ...■ do do
Green, G. K. ... ... Tumut ... ... Dried Fruits.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... do
Coleman Brothers ... ... Unwin-st., Canterbury, Collection of Jams and Marmalades.
Sydney.
Mitchell & Co., D. ... ... 153, Clarence-street, Jams in Yariety.
Sydney.
Cousins, W. Y. ... ... Bebeah, Singleton ... Orange Wine.
Pollock, Alexander ... Berry-st., Nowra ... Lime Juice Cordial.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Apples and Pears.
Do do ... do ... ... Lemons.
FLORICULTURE.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... .., Asplenium Nidus.
Do do ... do ... ... Platycerium Aloicorne.
Do do ... do ... ... Dicksonia Antartica.
Do do ... do ... ... Alsophila Australis.
Do do ... do ... 1.. Todea Barbara.
Do do ... do ... ... Photographs of the Botanical Gar-
dens.
VITICULTURE.
Group 20.
Bouffier Brothers ... ... Oxford-street, Sydney.. Hock and Chablis.
Brecht Brothers ... ... Rosemount, Denman... Muscatel and Shiraz.
Caldwell & Co. ... ... Lake Albert, Wagga Yerdeilho and Chablis.
Wagga.
Carmichael, G. T. and J. B. Porphyry, Seaham ... Porphyry.
Cousins, Walter Young ... Bebeah, Singleton ... Yerdeilho and Pineau.
Doyle, James F. ... ... Kaludah, Loch invar... White Wines.
Fallon, James T. ... ... Kievva-street, Albury.. Tokay and Reisling.
Fiaschi, Thomas, M.D. ... 39, Phillip-st.,' Sydney Shiraz.


Name. Address. Description,
Genty, L. T. ... ... Eaglemont, Miuto ... Reisling and Chablis.
Gray, John Guthrie ... Kentucky, Corowa ... White Wine.
Green, Walter 0. ... ... Norwood, Allandale ... do
Kelman, James ... ... Kirkton, Branxton ... Hermitage and Reisling.
Kurtz, E. ... ... ... Mt. Olivet, Dubbo ... Reisling.
Lankester, Alfred Ernest ... Emu Park, Albury ... White Wine.
Lindeman, Henry John ... Exchange, Sydney ... Sauterne, Hook, Tokay, Chablis,
Hermitage, and Muscat.
Mather, Thomas ... ... Roslyn, Inverell ... Shiraz, Pineau, and Tokay.
Sanger, John Mildred ... Wangamong, Corowa.. Reisling.
Wyndham, Egbert... ... Bukkulla, Inverell ... Pineau, 1877.
Wyndham, J. (Estate of) ... Dal wood, Branxton ... Shiraz, Reisling, Pineau.
Wyndham, William ... Kulki, Inverell ... White Wine.
Harbottle, Allsopp, & Co. ... Ettamogah, Albury ... do
Heel Wines.
Barnett, Joel ... ... Beaulieu, Inverell ... Hermitage.
Bouffier Brothers ... ... Oxford-street, Sydney.. Claret.
Bray, Thomas ... ... Mossgiel, Corowa ... Clarets.
Brecht Bros ... ... Rosemount, Denman... Sherry.
Caldwell & Co. ... ... Lake Albert, Wagga Shiraz and Claret,
Wagga.
Cousins, Walter Young ... Bebeah, Singleton ... Malbec, Claret, Hermitage, Lam-
bruscat, Verdot, and Muscat.
Doyle, James F. ... ... Kaludah, Lochinvar... Kaludah.
Eaton and Grant ... ... Albury ... ... Muscat.
Eiaschi, Thomas, M.D. ... 39, Phillip-st., Sydney Claret, Hermitage.
Frankland, G. J. ... ... Mowbray House, Hermitage.
Paterson.
Genty, L. T. ... ... Eaglemont, Minto ... Claret and Hermitage.
Gray, John Guthrie ... Kentucky, Corowa ... Malbec.
Green, Walter Clement ... Norwood, Allandale ... Hermitage.
Harbottle, Allsopp, & Co. ... Ettamogah ... ... Muscat.
Kelman, James ... ... Kirkton, Branxton ... Hermitage and Claret.
Kurtz, E. ... ... ... Mount Olivet, Dubbo Malbec.
Lang, John ... ... ... Midarro, Corowa ... Shiraz, Muscat.
Lankester, Alfred Ernest ... Emu Park, Albury ... Carbinet, Sauvignon, Verdot.
Lindeman, Henry John ... Exchange, Sydney ... Claret, Erontignao, Carbinet, Claret
Muscat.
Mather, Thomas ... ... Roslyn, Inverell ... Malbec.
Wyndham, Egbert... ... Bukkulla, Inverell ... Burgundy, Hermitage.
Wyndham, William ... Kulki, Inverell ... Red Sweet Wines.
Wyndham, J., Estate of ... Dalwood, Branxton ... Hermitage, Sherry.
Brecht Bros. ... ... Rosemount, Denman Sherry and Port.
Busch, William ... ... Moss Yale, Young ... Madeira.
Erankland, G. J. ... ... Mowbray House, do
Paterson.
Lindeman, Henry J ohn ... Exchange, Sydney ... Port, Madeira.
Bray, Thomas ... ... Mossgiel, Corowa ... Brandy (one year old)
Brecht Bros. ... ... Rosemount, Denman do
Cousins, Walter Young ... Bebeah, Singleton ... do
Kelman, James ... ... Kirkton, Branxton ... do
Wyndham, Egbert ... ... Bukkulla, Inverell ... do


DEPARTMENT C.—LITE STOCK.
Group 9.
Name. Address. Description.
Bruce, Alexander ... ... Chief Inspector of System of Registration of Horse
Stock, Sydney ... and Cattle Brands.
Do ... ... do ... ... System of Sheep Brands and Marks.
Do ... ... do ... ... System of Horse and Cattle Brands.
DEPARTMENT D.—FISHERIES.
Group 37.
Commissioners for N.S. W... Sydney , ... ... Collection of Fishes in Alcohol.
Do do ... do ... ... Collection of Oysters and other
Shells.
Do do ... do ... ... Collection of Crustacea.
Do do ... do ... ... Series of Paintings of Fishes and
Crustacea.
Do do ... do ... ... Collection of Reptiles in Alcohol.
Holt, Hugh William Lee ... Waratah ... ... Collection of Snakes and Reptiles.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Collection of Mounted Birds
Destructive to Fish.
Do do ... do ... ... Mounted Seals.
Do do ... do ... ... Seal Skins and Skeletons.
Group 38.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Series of Pamphlets on Fish and
Fisheries of New South Wales.
Do do ... do ... ... Model, New South Wales Fishing
Boat.
Fanner, R. E. ... ... Willoughby-st., North Yacht’s Gig.
Sydney.
Group 40.
Clarence River Fresh Fish Iluka, Clarence River Tinned Flat-tail.
Canning Co.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Collection of Fish Oils.
Do do ... do ... ... Porpoise Skins Fish Manures, Fish
Oil, Soap.
Lichtner and Solomon ... W T ynyard Buildings, Pearl Shell.
Wynyard Square,
Sydney.
DEPARTMENT E.— MINES, MINING, AND METALLURGY.
Group 42.
Minister for Mines... ... Sydney ... ... Collection of Tin Ores.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Iron, Managnese, and
Cohalt Ores.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Fossils.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Gemstones and Asso-
ciated Gravels.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Samples of Coal.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Antimony, Bismuth &c., Ores.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Copper Ore (Burraga).
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Iron Ore, Fitzroy Mine.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Magnetic Iron Ore, Blayney.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Iron Ore, Blayney.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Chrome Iron Ore (Nundle).


Name. Address. Description.
Minister for Mines... ... Sydney ... ... Collection Silver Ores.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Samples of Alluvial Gold.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Auriferous Veinstones.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Block Specimens, Gold
Bearing.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Silver Ores, in bulk.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Rock Specimens.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Tin Ores, in bulk.
Do . ... ... do ... ... ... Collection of Copper Ores.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Manganese Oxide (Woodstock).
Liversidge, Archibald, M.A., University of Sydney. Crystallised and other Gold Speci-
E.R.S. mens.
Do do ... do do ... Gem Sands and Associated Minerals.
Do do ... do do ... Metalliferous Minerals.
Do do ... do do ... Minerals, New Caledonia.
Isaacsohn, Martin ... ... Nundle ... ... Collection of Gold and other Metals
and Minerals.
Horton, T., junr. ... ... Drake ... ... Collection of Minerals, New England.
Crown of the Peak G. M. Co. 13l,Pitt-street, Sydney Auriferous Lodestuff.
Eleanora G. and A. M. C 0... Hillgrove, Armidale... do and Stibnite.
Garibaldi G. M. C 0... ... 19,PostOfficeChambers, do do
Pitt-street, Sydney.
Mitchell’s Creek G. M. C 0... Cape’s Chambers, Bond- do
street, Sydney.
Mount Gahan G. M. Co. ... Pambula ... ... do
Peak Hill Proprietary G. M. Dubbo ... ... do
Co.
British Broken Hill S. M. Co. 39, Queen-street, Mel- Argentiferous Lodestuff.
bourne.
Broken Hill Block 10 S. M. 15, Queen-street, Mel- Argentiferous Ores.
Co. bourne.
Broken Hill Proprietary 31, Queen-street, Mel- do and Trophy.
S. M. Co. bourne.
Carcoar Cobalt Co ... Carcoar ... ... Cobalt Ore.
White Rock S. M. Co. ... Drake ... ... Silver Ore.
Spiers and Rigg ... .... 76, Pitt-street, Sydney Tin Ore and Associated Gemstones,
Great Oobar Copper-mining 131, Pitt-street, Sydney Copper Ore.
Co.
Lark & Sons ... ... Wynyard-st., Sydney Star and Crude Antimony.
Brazenall, W., junior ... Mittagong ... ... Iron Ores, Castings, &c.
Donnelly, D. C. J. ... ... Cowra ... ... Magnetic Iron Ore.
Hayes, W. G. ... ... Picton ... ... Iron Ore.
Hayton, G. ... ... ... Newbridge ... ... do
Rothery, W. M. ... ... Lyndhurst ... ... do
Australian Agricultural Co. Newcastle ... ... Coal.
Brown, J. and A. ... ... do ... ... do
Burwood Coal-mining Co. ... do ... ... do
Greta Collieries Co ... 63, Pitt-street, Sydney, do
Hetton Coal-mining Co. ... Bond-street, Sydney ... do
Newcastle Coal mining C 0.... Newcastle ... ... do
Newcastle Wallsend Co. ... 12, Bridge-st., Sydney do
Osborne Wallsend Co. ... Change Alley, Sydney, do
Say well, T. ... ... ... 6, Park-street, Sydney, do
South Bulli Coal-mining Co. 78, Pitt-street, Sydney, do
Wallarah Coal Co Catherine Hill Bay ... do


Name. Address. Description.
West Wallsend Coal-mining 7, Exchange, Sydney... Coal.
Co.
Wickham and Bullock Island Pitt-street, Sydney ... do
Coal-mining Co.
Australian Kerosene, Oil, and Gresham-street, Sydney Petroleum Oil, Cannel Coal (Joadja),
Mineral Co.
Do do ... do do do do (Katoomba).
Genowlan Shale Co. ... Victoria Chambers, do do (nearCapertee),
Castlereagh - street,
Sydney.
N.S.W. Shale and Oil ... 162, Clarence - street, do do (Hartley).
Sydney.
Group 44.
Bishop, L. ... ... ... Muree, Raymond Freestone.
Terrace.
Browne, T. ... ... ... West Maitland ... do
Burns, J. ... ... ... Bathurst ... ... Marble.
Lewis, Mortimer W. ... East Maitland ... Building Stones.
Saunders, R. ... ... Amy-st.,Pyrmont, do
Sydney.
Do ... ... ... do do ... Granite (Moruya).
Do ... ... ... do do ... Syenite (Bowral).
K.S.W. Commissioners ... Sydney ... ... Marble, Mullion, &c.
Minister for Mines... ... Phillip-st., Sydney ... Collection of Marbles and
Serpentine.
Do ... ... do do ... Collection of Freestone and Granite.
Do ... ... do do ... Inlaid Table, Marble and Serpentine.
Group 46.
Minister for Mines... ... Phillip-st., Sydney ... Collection of Brick and Pottery
Clays.
Group 47.
Cullen Bullen Lime and 347, 353, Sussex-street, Cement, Cement Materials, and
Cement Co. Sydney. Castings.
Group 48.
Australian Alum Co. ... 12, O’Connell-street, Alumstone and Alum.
Sydney.
Clabby, John ... ... Belgravia ... ... Paint Ochres.
Gordon Emery & Colour Co. P.O. Chambers, Pitt- do
street, Sydney.
KalsomineandMetallic Paint Nelson-st., Annandale, Kalsomines.
Co. Sydney.
Group 67.
Minister for Mines... ... Phillip-st., Sydney ... Geological Map of K.S.W., 1890.
Do ... ... do do ... Maps and Publications.
Commissioners tor K.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Photos, of Cave Scenery.
Do do ... do ... ... Photos, of Broken Hill Mines.
Do do ... do ... ... Catalogue of Mining Exhibits.
Liversidge, Archibald ... University of Sydney. Scientific Publication.
Do ... do do ... Crystal Models and Laboratory
Lamp.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Refined Copper in Ingots.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Refined Tin in Ingot.


DEPARTMENT F.—MACHINERY.
Group 71.
Name. Address. Description.
Hoskins, 0. <fe_S. ... ... Hay-street, Darling Pneumatic Punching and Riveting
Harbour, Sydney. Machine.
Group 77.
Austin, Robert ... ... 362, Sussex-st., Sydney The “ Austin Perfect Patent
Washer.”
MUredie, Arthur Latimer... 250, Pitt-st., Sydney... Patent Rail Switch.
DEPARTMENT G.- TRANSPORTATION.
Group 80.
Commissioners for N.S.W. Macquarie-st., Sydney Two Maps, showing the R.R.
Railways. System of N.S.W.
Do do ... do do ... Sample of Permanent Way.
Do do ... do do ... Series of Miscellaneous Photographs.
Do do ... do do ... Series of Photos., illustrating R.R.
Stations and Bridges.
Do do ... do do ... Series of Photos, of Rolling Stock.
M'Credie, Arthur Latimer.. 250, Pitt-st., Sydney... Patent Rail Switch.
Commissioners for N.S.W. Macquarie-st,, Sydney Samples of Old Ties.
Railways.
Group 82.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Model of Lithgow Valley Zig Zag.
Group 83.
Goodwin, Henry ... ... Valentine-lane, Harris- Squatter’s Wool Waggon.
st., Sydney.
Glencross, C. ... ... M‘Donald Town ... Patent Hansom Cab.
Sydney Omnibus and Tram- Macquarie Place ... Omnibus Wheels,
way Co.
M'Grath, John J. ... ... Pitzmauriee-st., Wagga Improved Riding Saddle.
Wagga.
Fanner, Robert Edmund ... Willoughby-st., North Yacht’s Gig.
Sydney.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Model of the Sutherland Dock.
Orient Steam Navigation Co. London ... ... Model of R.M.S. “Austral,” and
Photos.
Marine Board of N.S.W. ... Loftus-st., Sydney ... Charts of the Coast of N.S.W.
DEPARTMENT H.—MANUFACTURES.
Group 87.
Colemane and Sons... ... Cootamundra... ... Various Eucalyptus Extracts.
Group 88.
Peithman & Co. ... ... 28 & 30, Hopewell-st., Blacking.
Paddington.
Williams, Edward ... ... Bay-st., Botany, near Writing Ink.
Sydney.


Group 90.
Name. Address. Description.
Heiron and Smith ... ... 216, Castlereagh-st., Billiard Table and Fittings.
Sydney.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney Suite of Dining Boom Furniture.
Do do ... do ... ... Suite of Bedroom Furniture.
Do do ... do ... ... Suite of Library Furniture.
Do do ... do ... ... Hall Stands of Colonial Rosewood,
Do do ... do ... ... Doorway of Black Bean.
Group 91.
Committee on Women’s Work Sydney ... ... Three Specimen Tiles, Imitation
Roman Mosaic.
Group 96.
Shakespear, Mrs. Elizabeth Albion-st., Blayney ... Picture Frame of Nuts and Seeds.
Group 99.
Benjamin, Marcus ... ... Care of Messrs. Hardy Patent Watch Movement.
Bros., Hunter-st.,
Sydney.
Group 100.
Committeeon Women’s Work Sydney ... ... White Lace Shawl.
Do do do ... ... Doll, Dressed in Knitted Clothing.
Group 104.
Clark, Miss Mabel ... .. School of Industry, Ladies’Underwear.
Darlinghurst,
Sydney.
OommitteeonWomen’sWork Sydney ... ... Costume in New South Wales Tweed.
Ellis, Mrs. E. J. ... ... Darlinghurst, Sychiey Child’s Frock, smocked in old gold.
Head, Miss Georgina ... School of Industry, Ladies’ Underwear.
Sydney.
Maher, Mrs. ... ... Collaroy, Merriwa ... Child’s Frock.
Orr, Mrs. F. M. ... ... Edgeoliff Road, Cashmere Tea Gown.
Woollahra, Sydney.
Scott, Miss leannie ... Marrickville, Sydney Three Garments—Underwear.
Wiudeyer, Lady ... ... Roslyn Gardens, Ladies’Underwear,
Sydney.
Committee on Women’s Work Sydney ... ... Infants’Hoods—two silk, one cash-
mere.
Macdermott, Miss Ellen ... William Town ... Cabbage-tree Hat.
Keever, Mrs. ... ... Jamberoo, Illawarra... do
M‘Lines, Mrs. ... ... Ivy Lodge, Middle Arm Opossum Fur, Gloves, and Socks.
Group 105.
Grant, William ... ... Rankin-st., Bathurst... Collection of Tanned Fur Skins.
Sunderland, William ... Cooma-st., Yass ... do do
Lockhart, Miss ... ... Sydney ... ... Rug of Platypus Fur.
Wintle, Mrs. ... ... do ... ... ... Mats of Emu Skins.
Committee on Women’s Work do ... ... ... Rug of Platypus Fur,
Do do do ... ... ... Rug of Dingo Skins.
Do do do ... ... Rug of Native Bear.


Name. Address. Description.
Windeyer, Lady ... ... Roslyn Gardens, Rug of Grey Opossum.
Sydney.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Fire Screen.
Committee on Women’s Work Sydney ... ... Boa Cuffs of Red Opossum.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette of Red Opossum.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette and Muffs, Swansdown,
Black.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette and Muffs, Pelican.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette and Muffs, Rock Wallaby.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collar and Muffs,Native Cat.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Muff of Plucked Platypus Fur.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette and Muffs, Swansdown.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Collarette, Mountain Wallaby.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Toque, Platypus Fur.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Muff', Emu Skin.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Muff, Swansdown, unplucked.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Swansdown Muff, plucked.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Muff, Platypus Fur.
Do do ... do ... ... ... Muff and Reticule, Platypus.
Group 106.
Fischer, Mrs. W. Carl ... Sydney ... ... Honiton Lace Handkerchief.
Do ... ... do ... ... Lace Handkerchief, embroidered.
Freeman, Miss Annie ... Montpelier, Randwick Collection of Point Lace.
Guide, Mrs. Harriet ... Goulburn (now of Old Honiton Point Bib, and Cravat
Maryborough, Q.) Ends.
Kendall, Mrs. T. M. ... 28, College-st., Sydney Honiton Lace Handkerchief.
M‘Carthy, Miss ... ... Leinster Hall, Darling- Scarf in Limerick Lace.
ton, Sydney.
Punch, Mrs. Mary ... ... Forbes-st., Sydney Handkerchief of Modern Point Lace.
Scott, Mrs. Annie ... ... Mandurama ... ... Point Lace Collarette.
Vincent, Miss E. B. ... Sand-hill, Neutral Bay Point Lace.
Wisby, Mrs. Harriet ... TJnion-st.,Petersham... Handkerchief in Brussels Lace.
Collins, Mrs. Jane ... ... Milson’s Point, Sydney Crochet in Lace.
Daunt, Mrs. Margaret ... Mount Vincent ... Specimens of Knitting.
Gilmour, Miss Ruby ... Stanmore Road, Stan- Doll’s Outfit.
more.
Moorehouse, Mrs. ... ... Darlinghurst, Sydney Collar in Fine Tatting.
Twynam, Mrs. ... ... Victoria-street, Dar- Hand Knitted Counterpane.
linghurst.
Watkins, Mrs. John ... Llanthony, Gladesville Specimens of Fine Netting.
Windeyer, Lady ... ... Roslyn Gardens, Syd- Embroidery by a lady 75 years old.
ney.
Committee on Women’s Work Sydney ... ... Flow-ers made of Fish Scales.
M‘Myles, Mrs. W. C. ... Bathurst ... ... Flowers made from Feathers.
Palmer and Green, Mesdames Sydney ... ... Australian Native Flowers in
Bullion.
Dobbin, Miss L. ... ... Care of Allen and Allen, Embroidered Book Cover.
Phillip-st., Sydney.
Overman, Miss Fanny ... Willoughby-st., North Embroidered Roumanian Chai
Sydney. Cover.
Reotress, The Rev. Mother... St. Vincent’s Hospital, Pair of Satin Curtains.
Sydney.
Steffanoni, Miss Sophie ... 31, Clarence-street, Australian Arms in Bullion.
Sydney.


Group 108.
Name. Address. Description.
McCarthy, Miss ... ... Leinster Hall, Darling- Fancy Bracket in Leather Work.
ton, Sydney.
Group 110.
Russell, J. E. M. (Mr.) ... John-st., off Stanmore Safety Bullion Bank.
Road, Petersham.
CommitteeonWomen’sWork Sydney ... ... Doll, Dressed in Knitted Clothing
Marsh, Miss Sybil ... ... Care of Mrs. Belisario, Dressed Doll.
Lyons Terrace, Hyde
Park, Sydney.
Group 111.
Grant, W. ... ... ... Rankin-st., Bathurst... Leather.
Ludowioi & Sons ... ... 162, Clarence-street, Belting.
Sydney.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Pump Leather.
Group 115.
M‘Nab, Estate of Robert ... 47,Collins-street,Surry Sets of Bellows.
Hills, Sydney.
Group 118.
M'Eachern, John L. ... Dean-street, Albury .. Sets of Horse-shoes.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Draught, Coach, Hunting, and
Racing Shoes.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Set of Farrier’s Tools.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Horse Sling.
Pitman, William ... ... Bayswater Road, Pad- Specimens of Horse-shoes.
dington, Sydney.
Group 119.
Gross, A. ... ... ... 263, George-st., Sydney Universal Patent Nut Lock Bolt.
Group 120.
Sinclair, W. T. ... ... Parramatta Rd., Peter- Sanitary Plumbing Work
sham, Sydney.
DEPARTMENT K.—FINE ARTS.
Group 140.
Fullwood, A. H. ... ... 88, King-street,Sydney “ How sweet the Moonlight.”
Do do “ The Station Boundary.”
Do ... ... do ... ... ... “ Shoalhaven River.”
Do ... ... do ... ... ... “ Rain and Sunshine.”
Rowan, Mrs. Ellis ... ... Mt. Macedon, Victoria Panel of Lilies.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... Panel, “Acanthus.”
Lister, W. Lister ... ... Paling’s Buildings, Syd- “ After the Shower.”
ney.
Roberts, Tom ... ... Riley Bros’. Buildings, “Eileen,”
Bathurst-st., Sydney.
Do ... ... do ... ... ... “ Aboriginal Head.”
Mosley, Mrs. E. ... ... 133, Macquarie-street, “He who runs may read.”
Sydney.


Name. Address. Description.
Saxby, Miss L. A. ... ... Norton-street, Leich- “ Govett’s Leap.”
hardt, Sydney.
Williamson, Mrs. Weldon ... Summer Hill, near Group of Australian Flowers for
Sydney. Panel.
DEPARTMENT L.—LIBERAL ARTS.
Group 147.
Kerry, Charles H. ... ... 308, George-st.,Sydney Panorama of Association Cricket
Ground, and other Photos.
Holdsworth, Macpherson, & 254, George-st., Sydney Patent Rapid Filters.
Co.
Harding, Miss Fox... ... Surry-street, Darling- Improved Invalid Mattress.
hurst, Sydney.
Group 148.
Carruthcrs, Mrs. Hethering- Sydney ... ... Electrical Medical Appliances,
ton.
Group 149.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Photos, of Public Schools.
Do ... do ... ... ... Report on School Buildings.
Department of Public In- do ... ... ... Specimens of School Work,
struotion.
Public School ... ... Albury ... ... do do
Do ... ... Armidale ... ... do do
Do ... ... Burwood ... ... Specimens of Needlework, and
other Exercises.
Do ... ... Cook’s Hill ... .. Exercise Book, and other Specimens.
Do ... ... Erina ... ... Specimens of School Work.
Do ... ... Forest Lodge... ... do do
Do ... ... Gladstone Park ... do do
Do ... ... Goulburn ... ... do do
Do ... ... Gowrie ... ... do do
Do ... ... Gundaroo ... ... do do
Do ... ... Hamilton ... ... do do
Do ... ... Hillgrove ... ... do do
Do ... ... Kogarah ... ... do do
Do ... ... West Maitland ... do do
Do ... ... Fort-street, Sydney ... do do
Do ... ... Mudgee ... ... Freehand Drawing, and other Speci-
mens.
Do ... ... Muswellbrook ... Copybooks, and Specimens of School
Work.
Do ... ... Newcastle ... ... Specimens of School Work.
Do ... ... Newcastle, South ... Postage Stamps and other Work.
Do ... ... do East ... Freehand Drawing and other Work.
Do ... ... New Italy ... ... Specimens of School Work.
Do ... ... Paddington ... ... do do
Do ... ... Parramatta,South ... do do
Do ... ... Roughit, via Singleton do do
Do ... ... Summer Hi 11... ... Pupil Work.
Do ... ... Thalaba, near Dungog do
Do ... ... Waverley ... ... do
Do ... ... Wickham ... ... do
Slandon, James ... ... Canterbury Public Ornamental Writing.
School.


Name. Address. Description.
Eagleton, August ... ... Clarence Town Public Sketch, Fruit; and Map, Ireland,
School.
Ingram, H. A. ... ... Eschol Public School, Map, S. America; Map, S. Aus-
near Dubbo. tralia.
Fullerton, B. ... ... Fort-st. Public School Album.
Olsen, Y. P. H. ... ... Quandong Public Pen and Ink Sketch, “Cardinal
School, via Grenfell. Wolsey.”
Zeehlke, Herman Wellington Public Map, North America.
School.
Terry, Miss Amy ... ... Woollahra ... ... Specimen of Handwriting.
Eyles, Miss Ethel ... ... Hyde Public School ... Picture, “Dog’s Head.”
Starling, Miss Edith ... West Maitland Public Writing, Mapping, &c.
School.
Architecture Classes ... Technical College,
Sydney.
Carpentry Class ...... do
Technical College ... ... Sydney ... ... Sanitary Plumbing Exhibits.
Mechanical Drawing Classes Technical College,
Sydney.
Manual Training Classes ... do Polished Bookstand.
Art Classes ... ... ... do
Masonry Class ... ... do ... ... Rampant and Pointed Arch.
Industrial Art Class ... do
Taylor, James W do Castings, &c.
Ockleford, George ... ... do ... ... Specimens of Wood Carving.
Johnson, P. W. ... ... do ... ... Silver and Embossed Design on
Glass.
Mueller, E., and others ... do ... ... Ornamental Design.
Hargreaves, Geo. H. ... do Panel Pilaster.
Technical College ... ... Sydney ... ... Calendar of various Classes.
Maiden, J. H. ... ... Technological Museum, A Century of N.S.W. Economic
Sydney. Plants.
Department of Public In- Sydney ... ... Substances used as Food by the
struction. Aborigines.
Do ... do ... ... Specimens of Industrial Work.
Ho ... do ... ... 90 Specimens.
Ho ... do ... ... Collection of Gums, Resins, and
Kinos.
Technological Museum ... do ... ... Collection of Tan Barks.
Maiden, J. H., and Hawkes- Technological Museum, Pamphlet—-Wattles and Wattle
worth, Alfred. Sydney. Bark.
Ho ... do ... Pamphlet—Raw Wools.
Ho ... do ... Pamphlet—Wool Sorting, Classing,
&c.
Ho ... do ... Pamphlet—lllustrations of Types of
Woo!.
Liversidge, Archibald .;. University of Sydney Two Models of Crystals.
Heaf, Dumb, and Blind Insti- Newtown Road, Six Specimens of Industries.
tution, Sydney. Sydney.
Wrench, J. T. ... ... Wallaby Rocks, Painting, “Roses in Bloom.”
Sofala.
University of Sydney (Senate Sydney ... ... Series of Photos, of the University
of the).
University of Sydney (Trus- do Collection of Insects.
teesof Macleay Museum).


Group 150.
Name. Address. Description.
Chief Secretary of New South Sydney ... ... “Geographical Encyclopedia of
Wales. New South Wales.”
Commissioners for N.5.W.... do ... ... “Flora of New South Wales.”
Picturesque Atlas Co. ... Wynyard Square, “Picturesque Atlas of Australia.”
Sydney.
Turner & Henderson ... 16 and 18, Hunter-st., “The Federal Geography of British
Sydney. Australasia.”
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Historic Eeoords.
Sydney.
Eankin, George ... ... Care of Messrs. Turner “British-Australasian Geography.”
and Henderson, 16
and 18, Hunter-st.,
Sydney.
Fraser, Dr. J. ... ... Care of Dr. J. Benvie, “An Australian Language.”
West Maitland.
Coombes, E., C.M.G., M.L.C. Glanmire, near Bath- Reports on School Buildings.
urst.
Campbell, W. S. ... ... Department of Agri- “Silk Culture and Agriculture.”
culture Sydney.
Fairfax & Sons ... ... Sydney ... ... Sydney Mail Sketches.
Myers, Francis ... ... Athenaeum Club, Coastal Survey.
Sydney.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Reports on Crown Lands.
Sydney.
Australian Museum ... College-street, Sydney Catalogue of Mammals.
Minister for Mines and Agri- Phillip-street, Sydney Report of the Department,
culture.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., First Legislative Assembly.
Sydney.
Postmaster-General ... Sydney ... ... Annual Report of the Department.
Potter, C. ... ... ... Government Printer, Report on Tanks and Wells.
Sydney.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., “Geographical Encyclopedia.”
8} dney.
Do ... do do ... Account Books.
Coghlan, T. A. ... ... Government Statisti- “Wealth and Progress of New
cian, Sydney. South Wales.”
Secretary for Lands ... Sydney ... ... Annual Report of the Department.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Lord Howe Island.
Sydney.
Postmaster-General... ... Sydney ... ... Album of Postage Stamps.
Minister for Mines... ... Phillip-street, Sydney Report on the Bulli Disaster, 1887.
Secretary for Railways ... Macquarie-st., Sydney Souvenir of the Hawkesburyßridge.
Postmaster-General ... Sydney ... ... History of the General Post Office.
Minister for Mines... ... Phillip-street, Sydney Report on the Conservation of
Water, and Plans.
Colonial Secretary ... ... Sydney ... ... Report on the Conservation of
Water.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Report of Royal Commission on
Sydney. Conservation of Water.
Coombes, E., C.M.G., M.L.C. Glanmire, near Bath- Report on Technical Education,
urst.
Coghlan, T. ... ... ... Government Statisti- Statistical Register.
cian, Sydney.


Name. Address. Description.
Secretary for Mines and Sydney ... ... “ Forage Plants.”
Agriculture.
Commissioners for N.S.W. Macquarie-st., Sydney R. R. Guide for New South Wales.
Railways.
Fisheries Commission ... Colonial Secretary’s “Fish and Fisheries” of New South
Office, Sydney. Wales.
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., History of the Government Printing
Sydney. Office.
Potter, Charles ... ... Government Printer, “ Commerce and Resources of New
Sydney. South Wales.”
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Report on Government Asylums.
Sydney.
Do ... do do ... “ Australian Orchids.”
Do ... do do ... Blue Book for 1890.
Department of Agriculture... Macquarie-st., Sydney Publications.
Do ... do do ... Reports.
Fitzgerald, Miss M. A. ... 364,80urke-st.,Sydney “ Australian Furs and Feathers.”
Daily Telegraph Newspaper King-street, Sydney ... Sketches, kc.
Co.
Fairfax & Sons ... ... Pitt and Hunter Sts, Vols. of Sydney Morning Herald.
Sydney.
Evening Neivs and Town and Market-street, Sydney Picture of Office, &c.
Country Journal.
Turner & Henderson ... 16 and 18, Hunter-st., Municipal Directory and Govern-
Sydney. ment Blue Book.
Sharp, Alfred ... ... Watt-street, Newcastle Pictures of Christmas Tree of N.Z.,
Banks of the Camden River, the
Vegetable Octopus of N.S.W.
Frost, Douglas James ... Grafton ... ... Map of Clarence River.
Higinbotham & Robinson ... 62, Elizabeth-strect, Series of Maps and Statistical Dia-
Sydney. grams.
Secretary for Lands ... Sydney ... ... Series of Maps.
Group 151.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Series of Photographs (6 awards).
Do ... do ... ... Photographs of Country Town.
Do ... do ... ... Series of Photographs of Defence
Forces.
Do ... do ... ... Photographs of Mountain Scenery
Holden, R. Henry ... ... Kiama ... ... Specimens of Photography.
Newman, J. Hubert ... 316,Georgo-st, Sydney Portraits of Public Men.
Potter, Charles ... ... Bent and Phillip Sts., Photographic Enlargements.
Sydney.
Kitch kCo ... ... Katoomba ... ... Photographs.
King, H. ... ... ... 316,George-st., Sydney do
Government Printer ... Bent and Phillip Sts., do
Sydney.
Kerry & C 0.... ... ... 308, George-st., Sydney do
Turner and Henderson ... 16 and 18, Hunter-st., Heraldic and Commercial Emboss
Sydney. ing.
Do ... do do ... Specimens of Chromo-lithography.


Group 152.
Name. Address. Description.
M'Donald, J. A. ... ... Department of Public Expansion Rollers for Bridges.
Works, Sydney.
Hutchins, — ... ... Sydney ... ... Patent Sash Reverser.
Grice, E. J.... ... ... 71, Hunter-st., Sydney. Design for Ceiling.
Group 153.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Public Statutes of N.S.W.
Lambton, S. H. ... ... Deputy Postmaster- Revolving Stand.
General, Sydney.
Do ... ... do do ... Map showing Postal Stations.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... “ The Prison System of N.S.W.”
Group 154.
Commissioners for N 5.W.... Sydney ... ... Four Pamphlets on N.S.W.
Do .. do ... ... ... Catalogue of N.S.W. Exhibits at the
World’s Fair.
Do ... do ... ... ... History and Progress of N.S.W.
Do ... do ... ... ... Pamphlet: “Coinage, &c., of Aus-
tralia.”
Hyman, Coleman P. ... 187, Castlereagh-street, Loan Collection of Coins, &c.
Sydney
Group 155.
Government Astronomer ... Sydney Series of Photographs of the Moon,
&c.
Royal Geographical Society do ... ... Transactions of the Society,
of Australia.
Watson, A. E. ... ... Circular Quay, Sydney Water colours of Australian Birds.
Hetley, Mrs. G. B. ... ... Sydney ... ... 15 Watercolours of Australian Flora.
Wright, Mrs. ... ... Toile, Bourke-street, Water colours of Australian Flora.
Glen Innes.
Rowan, Mrs. Ellis ... ... Mt. Macedon, Victoria 99Watercoloursof Australian Flora.
Australian Museum, Trustees Sydney Series of Catalogues.
of.
Do ... do ... ... Series of Monographs.
Do ... do ... ... Memoirs.
Do ... do ... ... Miscellaneous Publications.
Commissioners for N.5.W... do ... ... Catalogue of Australian Mammals.
Do ... do ... ... Collection of N.S.W. Birds.
Do ... do ... ... Collection of N.S.W. Mammals.
Do ... do ... ... Series of N. S. W. Birds (Photos, of)
Do ... do ... ... Birds of Australia (Gould).
Maiden, J. H. ... ... Technological Museum, Century of Fruits and Seeds.
Sydney.
Technological Museum ... Sydney ... ... Animal Products (other than wool).
Department of Public In- do Fibres, Wools, &c.
struction.
Commissioners for N.5.W... do Collection of Plants, Fruits, &c.
Committee onWomen’s Work do Flowers painted on Opal.
Do ... do ... ... Australian Butterflies.
Seton, Miss Therese ... Victoria-st., Sydney ... Miniature Portraits on Ivory.
Paterson, Mrs. John ... Rock End, Gladesville Pictures of Australian Flowers.
G


Name. Address. Description.
M‘Myles, Mrs. W. C. ... Bathurst ... ... Flowers from Feathers.
Harris, Mrs. Matthew ... Warrane, Ultimo, Animals Modelled in Wax.
Sydney.
Cohen, Mrs. Victor... ... BillyardAvenue, Eliza- do
beth Bay, Sydney ...
Committee 12 on Women’s Sydney ... ... Specimens of Modelling, Photos.,
Work. Paintings, &c.
Summerbelle, Miss A. M— Double Bay, Sydney... Musical Compositions.
Reese, Miss Ada M. ... 395, Darling-st., Bal- Hand-painted Curtains.
main, Sydney.
Committee on W omen’s W ork Sydney ... ... Collective Exhibit.
DEPARTMENT M.—ETHNOLOGY.
Group, 164.
Board for the Protection of Phillip-street, Sydney. Weapons of the Aboriginies.
Aborigines.
Bowman, H. W. ... ... do do ... Collection of South Sea Island
Weapons, &c.
Commissioners for N.S.W— do do ... Wooden Idols—Male and Female.
Do ... do do ... Collection of Weapons by Stockdale.
Do ... do do ... Collection of Articles of Clothing.
Do ... Sydney ... ... Collection of Articles from South
Sea Islands. (By Wolfe.)
Do ... do ... ... Sixty Spears, “ Obsidian.”
Do ... do ... ... Enlarged Photographs of Aborigines.
Do ... do ... ... Two Photographs of Aborigines.
Do ... do ... ... Series of Enlarged Photographs
Illustrating Aborigines of New
South Wales and South Sea
Islands.
Do ... do ... ... Pamphlet: “The Aborigines of New
South Wales.”
Do ... do ... ... Pamphlet: “The South Pacific and
New Guinea—Past and Present.”
Do ... do ... ... “An Australian Language.”
Hannay, James Blair ... do ... ... Weapons from Richmond River
District.
Ilett, George ... ... Milton ... ... Two Drawings by “ Mickey.”
Jenkins, Lieut. R. L. H. B. Victoria Barracks, Weapons and Implements of South
Sydney. Sea Islands.
Lichtner & Solomon ... Wynyard Buildings, Idols, Implements, &c., of the New
Wynyard Square, Hebrides and South Sea Islands.
Sydney.
Liversidge, Archibald, M.A., University of Sydney.. Collection of Aboriginal Weapons.
G.R.S.
Lumsdaine, Herbert S. ... Bank of New South Drawing by Aboriginal.
Wales, Casino.
Mullen, W. H. ... ... West Maitland ... Collection of Ethnological Specimens
from the South Sea Islands.
The late James E. Wolfe ... Care of Mr. J. D. Pren- Weapons of Aborigines of New
tice, West Maitland. South Wales.


Name. Address. Description.
Committee on Ethnology ... Sydney ... ... Collection of Obsidian Spears.
Do ... do ... ... Wooden Idols—Male and Female.
Do ... do ... ... Clothing, Implements of War and
the Chase, and Tools of South
Sea Islands.
Board for the Protection of Phillip-street,Sydney... Writing and Needlework of Abo-
Aborigines. riginal Children.
Do do ... do ... Weapons of Aborigines of N.S.W.
Do do ... do ... Photographsof Aboriginesof N.S.W.
Moore, Charles ... ... Director of Botanic Handbook of Flora of N.S.W.
Gardens, Sydney.
Cohen, Mrs. Victor Billyard Avenue, Eliza- Animals Modelled in Wax.
beth Bay, Sydney.
Harris, Mrs. Matthew ... Warrane, Ultimo, near Cows and Calf Modelled in Wax.
Sydney.
Seton, Mrs. Therese ... Victoria-street, Sydney Miniature Portraits.
On Lee, Miss Olive Clergy Daughters’ Drawing from the Round.
School, W averley,
Sydney.
Warner, Miss Nellie ... do do ... do do
Shaw, Miss Emmeline ... Sydney Fish Scale Flowers.
Stephen, Miss L. F. ... Enmore, Sydney ... Painting on Opal.
Rohu, Mrs. Jane ... ... GO, William-st., Sydney Two Stuffed Specimens of the
Apteryx.
M‘Myles, Mrs. W. C. ... Bathurst Flowers from Feathers of the
Lachlan.
Australian Museum ... Sydney ... ... Series of Publications.
Ramsay, Dr. E. P. ... ... Australian Museum, Catalogue of Australian Birds.
Sydney.
Technological Museum ... Sydney ... ... Substances used as food by the
Aborigines.
University of Sydney ... do ... ... Rare Beetles and Insects of Aus-
tralia.
Macleay Museum ... ... do ... ... Rare Butterflies and Moths.
Mosley, Mrs. E. ... ... 133, Macquarie-street, “He who Runs may Read.”
Sydney.
Hyman, Coleman P. ... 187, Oastlereagh-street, Book, “Coinage,&c., of Australasia.”
Sydney.
Do ... do do ... Collection of Early Tokens and Cur-
rency of Australia.
Hetley, Mrs. G. 8.... ... Sydney ... ... Watercolours of N.S.W. Flora.
Williamson, Mrs. Weldon ... Care of Mr. H. W. Wil- Group of Australian Flowers.
liamson, 53 York-
street.
Wright, Mrs. ... ... Toile, Bourke-street, Six Paintings of Flora of N.S.W.
Glen Innes.
Palmer and Green, Mesdames Care of the Misses Lane, Australian Flowers made in Bullion.
188 King-street,
Newtown.
Stephen, Miss L. F. ... Enmore, Sydney ... Terra Cotta Plaque.
Weiss, Mrs.... ... ... Sydney ... ... Branch of Plumbago.
Do ... ... ... do ... ... Pointsettia, Painting on Opal.
Halligan, Mrs. Gerald H. ... Eugowra, Hunter’s Hill Original Design for Wall Papers.
Paterson, Mrs. John ... Rockend, Glades ville, Four Pictures of Australian Flowers,
Sydney.


Name. Address. Description.
Saxby, Miss L. A. ... ... Norton-st., Leichhardt, Painting, “ Govott’s Leap.”
Sydney.
Royal Geographical Society Sydney Transactions of the Society (4 vols.)
of Australasia.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... do Nets, Baskets, <fec., made by Abo-
riginal Women.
Group 171.
Commissioners for N.S.W Sydney ... ... Settler’s Bark Hut.
DEPARTMENT N.— FORESTRY.
Group 19.
Breokenridge, J. ... ... Failford ... ... Dressed and Undressed Hardwood
Timbers.
Baker, Frederick Robert ... Fernmount, Bellinger Three exhibits of Timber.
River.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... Sydney ... ... Collection of Commercial Timbers.
Do do ... do ... ... Merchantable Length Timbers.
Do do ... do ... ... Polished Specimens of Timber.
Abbott, Lady ... ... Teraila, North Sydney Cabinet Collection of Wood.
Department of Forestry ... Sydney ... ... Herbarium Specimens of Forest
Flora.
Do do ... do ... ... Seeds and Seed Vessels.
Technological Museum ... do ... ... Collection of Barks.
Department of Forestry ... do ... ... Trophy of Wooden Blocks of
Colonial Hardwood.
Commissioners for N.S.W do ... ... Polished Gunstocks, made from
Native Woods.
Lewis, Mortimer William ... East Maitland ... Specimens of N.S.W. Timbers.
Mazoudier & Co. ... ... 01arinda-st., Parkes ... Specimens of Worked Timbers.
Commissioners for N.S.W. Sydney ... ... Collection of R.R. Ties.
Railways.
Department of Forestry ... do ... ... Collection of Wattle Bark.
Commissioners for N.5.W.... do ... ... Collection of Manufactured Orna-
mental Articles.
Halliday, F. ... ... Railway Tannery, Wattle Bark for Tanning Purposes.
Bathurst.
Raymond & Co. ... ... 77, Pitt-street, Sydney Wattle Bark.
Department of Forestry ... do ... Collection of Resinous Gums.
Do do ... do ... Settler’s Bark Hut.
Commissioners for N.S.W. .. do ... Photographs of Forest Trees.
Minister for Agriculture .. do ... Collection of Woods and Manu-
factured Articles.
Department of Forestry ... do ... Collection of Medicinal Plants.


INDEX.
A
A (Appendix). N.S.W. Commission, 40.
Aborigines, Australian : Proposal to exhibit, in
Chicago negatived, 9 ; cave drawings by, 9 ;
weapons of, 9 ; photographs of aborigines of
Clarence and Richmond Rivers, &c., 13;
anthropometrical data, 18.
Acting U.S. Consul appointed ex-officio Member
of all Committees, 13.
Administrative Committee : Appointment of, 1 ;
resignation of, 4 ; re-appointment of, 5; forms
estimate of local expenditure to submit
to Commission, 8; reports, 9; President
announces his approaching departure for
Europe, 10 ; Committee declines to accept his
proffered resignation, 9 ; instructs Secretary
during absence of President to confer with the
Executive Commissioner on all matters of
importance outside of meetings of Adminis-
trative Committee and Commission, 10 ;
regular monthly meetings, 29; services of, 37.
Advances (Treasury) to local Commission. Adjust-
ment of, 19.
Agriculture and Forest Products, Committee I
on : Reports, 8,9, 13, 16, 19.
Agriculture, Department of (H. 0. L. Anderson,
M.A., Director), assists in procuring suitable
exhibits of cereals, 13, 16.
Anthropometrical data of Australian aborigines,
18.
Application for space form, 2.
Appointment of N.S.W. Commission, 1 ; ditto
of Administrative Committee, 1.
Appointments to staff of Executive Commissioner,
2,4, 5, 14, 18, 19.
Art Gallery (National) of New South Wales;
Loan exhibit from the Trustees, 15.
Art Society of New South W ales ; Exhibits from,
15.
Australian aborigines; Proposal to exhibit in
Chicago negatived, 9 ; cave drawings by, 9 ;
weapons of, 9 : photographs of aborigines of
Clarence and Richmond Rivers, &c., 13 ;
anthropometrical data of Australian Aborigi-
nes, 18.
Australian animals (typical), 13.
Australian Colonies : Proposed combined repre-
sentation of, 5 ; negotiations fall through, 10 ;
incorrect statement of circumstances in Mel-
bourne Age, 12; Executive Commissioner
summaries negotiations, 15.
Australian Museum, Trustees of the ; Assistance
rendered by, in Natural History (Section, 9,
13.
Awards to N. S. W. Exhibitors. Appendix F, 80-100.
B
B (Appendix). Committees of Commission, 44-51.
Balance-Sheet of Commission in Sydney, 34.
Blocks, paving, of hardwood timbers, 8.
Bulk exhibits of refractory ores, 6, 12.
Bums, Hon. J. F. : Appointment of, as Executive
Vice-President, 16, 18 ; President bears testi-
mony to Mr. Burns’ valuable services in
organisation, 21 ; Commission recognises, 38.
c
C (Appendix). Committee XII, on Woman’s
Work, and Report of Lady Windeyer as
President of Committee, 51.
Cameron, Alexander, Acting U.S. Consul for the
United States : Appointed ex-officio member
of all Committees, 13.
Canvassers ; Appointment of, 7 ; regulations for
the guidance of, 8 ; special canvasser for
Ethnological Section, 9.
Carne, J. E., F.G.S., appointed with approval
of Secretary for Mines to collect minerals
from principal mines, 12 ; proposed appoint-
ment as Deputy Commissioner in Chicago, 23,
24.
Cartage tender accepted, 13.
Cass, Geo. E., M.P., Member of N.S.W. Com-
mission ; Commissioners express sympathy
with widow on his death, 13.
Catalogue of N.S.W Exhibits, 26.
Cave-drawings by aborigines, 9.
Caves, photographic illustrations of limestone, 13.
Cedar exhibits, 8.
Cereals, 8, 13, 16.
Chartography : Exhibit from Lands Department,
!8.
Chicago ; Estimated expenditure on N. S. W.
Courts in, 22.
Classification, Sub-committee of, 3.
Colonial marble, exhibits of, 13.
Combined representation of Australian Colonies,
proposed, 5 ; negotiations fall through, 10 ;
incorrect statement of circumstances in
Melbourne Age, 12; Executive Commissioner
summarizes negotiations, 15.
Commissioners for N. S. W. Railways : Concessions
in carriage of exhibits, 19.
Committee I, on Agriculture and Forest Products
Reports, 8,9, 13, 16, 19.


Committee 11, on Wool: Reports from, 6,7, 8,
14 (wool circular) ; wool exhibits to be
under the charge of Mr. Alex. Bruce, Chief
Inspector of Stock, 14.
Committee 111, on Viticulture, Wines, &c., 7, 12,
15, 24.
Committee IV, on Horticulture, 7, 11, 13, 18.
Committee V, on Live Stock : Reports 10 ; recom-
mends that Mr. Alex. Bruce be appointed to
take charge of this section in Chicago, 10;
proposed exhibit of sheep, 15 ; idea aban-
doned, 15.
Committee VI, on Fish and Fisheries, 7,9, 11,
13 ; preserved fish, 13; pictures of edible
fishes, 19.
Committee VII, on Mining : Preliminary report,
7 ; other reports, 8, 11, 12, 13, 22.
Committee VIII, on Machinery and Implements :
Preliminary report, 6 ; other reports, 7,9, 17.
Committee IX, on Manufactures: Preliminary
report of, 7 ; other reports, 8, 14.
Committee X, on Fine Arts ; Reports, 7,9, 11,
!5.
Committee XI, on Liberal Arts : Reports, 7, 9
(bis) : 12 (publications upon the Colony);
13 (assistance of Department of Public
Instruction); 13 (Natural History collections);
13 (photographs of aborigines of Clarence
and Richmond Rivers, &o.) ; 13 (Technical
Education exhibits); 18 (Anthropometrical
data of Australian Aborigines); 18 (Lands
Department, exhibit of chartography); 26
(Catalogue of N.S.W. exhibits) ; 26 (Special
literature on important Colonial subjects).
Committee XII, on Woman’s Work ; Proposed
appointment of, 3; appointment of Com-
mittee, 7 ; services of Committee, 37 ; names
of Committee in Appendix C, 51 ; report of
President of Committee, 51.
Committees of Classification of N.S.W. Commis-
sion : Active work of, 21 ; tabulated state-
ment of meetings, 31.
Committees of Commission : Formation of, 3,4, 5.
Congress recognises the participation of foreign
countries, 30.
Conveyance of exhibits to America, 16.
Copper in ingot, 14.
Cost and disposal of Exhibits purchased and pre-
pared by the N. S. W. Commission, 36.
Cost of previous Exhibition Commissions, 2 ; cost
(probable) of Chicago representation, 4,6;
Administrative Committee forms estimate
(23rd December, 1891) of local expenditure,
8 ; later estimates, 21, 25.
Gumming, Mr. Alexander, appointed Secretary of
Commission, 2 ; services of, 37.
D
D (Appendix). Tabulated list of shipments of
exhibits in Sydney for Chicago, 52.
Department of Public Instruction, 13.
Departure of the Executive Commissioner from
Sydney, 16.
Disposal of exhibits purchased by Commission, 28,
29,
E
E (Appendix). Detailed particulars of all exhibits
shipped from Sydney, &c., 53, 79.
Edible Fishes of N.S.W. : Pictures of, 19.
Entry Form, 2.
Ethnology of Australian aborigines, 9.
Ethnology of South Sea Island natives, 9.
Ethnology : Special canvasser for, 9.
Executive Commissioner’s Duties: Definition of, 3;
relative powers and duties of Executive Com-
missioner and Commission in Sydney, 3,5;
official notification of appointment of Execu-
tive Commissioner, 4; Executive Commis-
sioner announces his approaching departure
for Chicago, 16, 17 ; departure, 17 ; con-
gratulated on success of N.S.W. Court, 28 ;
returns to Sydney, 30; addresses Commission,
30.
Executive Vice-President: Appointment of Hon.
J. F. Burns as, 16, 18 ; services of, 38.
Exhibitors and Executive Commissioner : Rela-
tions between, 3.
Exhibits donated to Imperial Institute, 28.
F
F (Appendix). List of awards to N.S.W.
exhibitors, 80-100.
Ferns of New South Wales : Gigantic, 11.
Final Session of N.S.W. Commission, Journal of,
33-39.
Finance Sub-Committee (of Administrative Com-
mittee) : Resigns, 4 ; is re-appointed, 5 ;
services of, 37.
Fine Arts ; Committee X on, reports, 7,9, 11,15.
First meeting of Commission, 1.
Fish and Fisheries ; Committee V on, reports,
7,9, 11, 13 (ter.) ; preserved fish, 13.
Fish and Fisheries of New South Wales ; Popular
pamphlet on, 13 ; pictures of edible fishes, 19.
Fish : Preserved, 13.
Fish Supply of N.S.W., 9.
Fisheries pamphlets, "9. .
Forest products, 7.
Form of entry, 2.
Freight of exhibits to Chicago : Mr. Robert
Hudson reports that he has concluded con-
tract with Messrs. Speckels Brothers, 22.
Furniture from selected N.S.W. timbers, 8,9, 12,
14, 30.
G
Government Departments, services of, 37.
Government Printer assists by preparation of
enlarged photographs of principal public and
commercial buildings, &0., 11, 23.
Gun-stocks from Australian woods, 9.
H
Horticulture, Committee IV on, 7, 11, 13, 18.
Hudson, Mr. Robt., J. P. ; Announcement of
appointment as General Superintendent, 17 ;
projected departure, 20; reports that has
concluded with Messrs. Speckels Brothers
contract for through freights to Chicago, 22.


I
Imperial Institute ; Exhibits donated to, 28.
Importance and success of N. S. W. representation,
33.
Insurances onexhibits: Secretary submits estimates
for, 20.
J
Journal of the Final Session of the N. S. W. Com-
mission, 33, 39.
L
Lands Department: Exhibit of chartography, 18.
Liberal Arts, Committee XI on: Reports, 7, 9
{bis.); 12 (Publications upon the Colony); 13
(Assistance of Dept, of Public Instruction) ;
13 (Natural History collections); 13 (Photo-
graphs of Aborigines of Clarence and Rich-
mond Rivers, &o.); 13 (Technical Education
exhibits) ; 18 (Anthropometrical data of
Australian aborigines); 18 (Lands Depart-
ment exhibit of chartography).
Lifeboat: Proposal to navigate to San Francisco,
negatived, 9.
Limestone caves of N. S. W. : Photographic illus-
trations of, 13.
Literary Secretary to Executive Commissioner,
2 ; appointment cancelled, 4.
Literature (special) on important Colonial subjects,
26.
Lithgow Valley Zig-zag, Model of, 17.
Live Stock Committee V, Reports, 10; Recom-
mends that Mr. Alex. Bruce be appointed to
take charge of this section in Chicago, 10; pro-
posed exhibit of sheep, 15 ; idea given up, 15.
Local expenditure: Administrative Committee
forms estimate of (23 Dec., 1891), 8.
M
Machinery and implements ; Preliminary report of
Committee VIII on, 6; other Reports 7,9, 17.
Maize in cob: Exhibits of, 8, 12; maize trophy,
12, 13.
Manufactures : Preliminary report of Committee
IX on, 7 ; other Reports, 8, 14.
Marble ; Exhibits of Colonial, 13.
Martin, Esq., M.P., James: Appointed special
Commissioner for manufactures, 2, 4.
Meetings of Commission and Committees :
Tabulated list, 31.
Metals : Suspense account for purchase of, 14.
Meyer, Mr. Oscar : Appointed as organising Secre-
tary on the staff of the Executive Commis-
sioner, 2, 4 ; appointment cancelled, 5.
Mineral show oases, 12.
Mines Department (N.S.W.) to take charge in
Chicago under the Executive Commissioner
of all mineral exhibits whether private or
official, and to assist the Commission in
Sydney in procuring suitable exhibits, 11.
Mining Committee VII : Preliminary report, 7 ;
other Reports, 8, 11, 12, 13, 22.
N
National Art Gallery of New South Wales : Loan
exhibit from the Trustees, 15.
Natural History exhibits : Assistance rendered by
Trustees of the Australian Museum, 9, 13, 28.
Negotiations for space forN.S.W. exhibits, 17,
(50,000 feet of floor space accepted).
Net expenditure of Commission in Sydney, 35.
New South Wales Commission : Appointment of,
1 ; first meeting, 1 ; appointment of Adminis-
trative Committee, 1 ; appointment of Secre-
tary, 2 ; preliminary arrangements, 2; official
programme, 2; relative duties of Commission
and Executive Commissioner, 3,5; formation
of Committees, 3,4, 5; President announces
his approaching departure for Europe, 10;
Commission declines to accept resignation,
10; return of President, 21.
0
Official programme, 2.
Ores : Bulk exhibits of refractory, 6, 12.
Organising Secretary to Executive Commissioner,
2, 4 ; appointment cancelled, 5.
P
Pamphlet on Fish and Fisheries of New South
Wales, 19.
Pamphlets on Colonial subjects, 12, 26.
Pamphlets on Fisheries, 9, 26.
Paving blocks of hardwood timbers, 8.
Photographic (Bromide) enlargements of views of
scenery, &c., prepared by Government Printer,
11, 23.
Photographs, enlarged, of principal public and
commercial buildings of Sydney: Govern-
ment Printer assists by the preparation of, 1.
Plants typical of New South Wales, 7, 11, 13, 18.
Preliminary arrangements of New South Wales
Commission, 2.
Preserved fish, 13.
President announces his approaching departure
for Europe, 10; Administrative Committee
declines to accept his proffered resignation, 10 ;
President, on his return, bears testimony to
Mr. Burns’ valuable work of organisation,
21; resolution of final meeting of Commis-
sion, 38.
President’s report: Introduction to, 1.
Previous Exhibition Commissions : Cost of, 2.
Private exhibits : Sale of, in Chicago, 29, 31.
Programme, official, 2.
Proposal to navigate lifeboat between Sydney and
San Francisco, negatived, 9.
Proposal to show in Chicago Aborigines from
Northern Territory of South Australia,
negatived, 9.
Public Instruction, Department of, 13.
Publications upon Colonial subjects, 12.
Pugh, Mr. Thos., Assistant General Superinten-
dent, leaves Sydney, 23.


R
Railway Freights on exhibits : Concessions by
Commissioners for N.S.W. Railways, 19.
Railway Sleepers of N.S. W. hardwood timbers, 8.
Rantzow, Mr. L. Von ; Appointed storekeeper,
20.
Refractory Ores ; Bulk exhibits of, 6, 12.
Regulations for guidance of canvassers, 8.
Report of President; Introduction to, 1.
Representation of N.S.W. at Chicago : Probable
cost of, 4,6, 21, 25.
Representation : Proposed combined, of Austra-
lian Colonies, 5 ; negotiations fall through,
10 ; incorrect statement of circumstances in
Melbourne Age, 12 ; Executive Commissioner
summarises negotiations, 15.
Resolution of U. S. Congress, recognising the par-
ticipation of Foreign countries, 30.
Returned Exhibits : Arrangements for dealing
with, 29.
s
Sale of private exhibits in Chicago, 29.
Scope of Sectional Committees, 7.
Seals from Seal Rocks, 19.
Secretary ; Appointment of, 2.
Sectional Committees : Scope of, 7.
Selection of exhibits, 21.
Sheep : Proposed exhibit, 15 ; idea abandoned, 15.
Shipments of exhibits en route to Chicago, 12, 24 ;
tabulated list of shipments, Appendix D, 52 ;
Appendix E, 53.
Show-cases for mineral exhibits, 12.
Sleepers : Railway, of N.S.W. hardwood timbers,
8.
South Sea Island Natives : Weapons of, 9.
Space for N.S.W. exhibits, 17 ; fifty thousand
feet of floor-space accepted, 17 ; allotment in
various buildings, 20 ; Secretary’s estimates,
20.
Space-form : Application for, 2.
Special literature on important Colonial subjects,
12.
Staff of the Executive Commissioner : Notification
of appointments by Government of Mr. Oscar
Meyer as Organizing Secretary, and Mr.
Wm. Wilkins as Literary Secretary, 4 ;
their appointments cancelled, 5 ; Mr. Alex.
Bruce, Chief Inspector of Stock, to have
charge of wool exhibits, 14; Mr. Robt,
Hudson, J.P., General Superintendent, 17 ;
general discussion as to appointments, 19 ;
Commission approves of seven appointments,
21.
Storage of exhibits, 15.
Storekeeper to N.S.W. Commission: Appoint-
ment of, 20.
Success of N.S.W. representation, 33.
Suites of furniture from Colonial timbers, 8,9,
12, 14, 30.
Sutherland Dock, Cockatoo Island : Model of, 17.
Sydney Meat Preserving Co. : Exhibit, 11.
T
Tallow-wood exhibits, 8.
Technical College exhibits, 12, 13.
Technological Museum Exhibits, 12, 13.
Tender for cartage accepted, 13.
Timber exhibits : Preparation and storage of, 9.
Tin in ingot, 14.
Tobacco in leaf, 19.
Treasury Advances to Local Commission ; Adjust-
ment, 19.
Trophy of maize, 12, 13.
Trustees of the Australian Museum ; Assistance
rendered by, in Natural History Section,
9 13 28.
Typical plants of N.S. Wales, 7, 11, 13, 18.
V
Viticulture : Wines, &0., Committee 111 on, 7,
12, 15, 24.
w
Weapons of Australian Aborigines, 9; of South
Sea Island Natives, 9.
Wilkins, Mr. Wm., J.P., appointed as Literary
Secretary on the Staff of the Executive Com-
missioner, 2, 4 ; appointment cancelled, 5.
Wine-growers, principal, become exhibitors, 12.
Wines for luncheons, selected, 24.
Woman’s Work : Proposed appointment of Com-
mittee XII on, 3 ; Committee appointed, 7 ;
returned exhibits, 31 ; services of Committee,
37 ; names of members in Appendix C. 51.
Wooden blocks for paving, 8.
Wool circulars, 14.
Wool Committee (II) : Describes preliminary
work, 6; reports assistance of Woolbroking
Association, 7,8, 14 (Wool Circular);
exhibits to be under the charge of Mr. Alex.
Bruce, Chief Inspector of Stock, 14, 25;
mode of display of wool exhibits, 25.
Wool exhibits to be under the charge of Mr.
Alex. Bruce, Chief Inspector of Stock, 14, 25.
Work of Commission and Committees, 31.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB94.
