

BRITISH COTTON CULTIVATION.
REPORT
OF THE
BOARD OF TRADE
ON
COTTON CULTIVATION IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND IN EGYPT
BY
PROFESSOR WYNDHAM DUNSTAN, F.R.S.,
DIRECTOR OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE AT SOUTH KENSINGTON.
Presented to hoth Houses of Parliament by Command of His Majesty.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
By DARLING & SON, LTD., 34-40, BACON STREET, E.
And to be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from
EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, EASR HARDING STREET, FLEET STREET, E.C.,
and 32, ABINGDON STREET, WESTMINSTER, S.W.;
or OLIVER & BOYD, EDINBURGH;
or E. PONSONBY, 116, GRAFTON STREET, DUBLIN.
1904.
[Cd. 2020.] Price 1s.




SALE OP GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.
The under-mentioned Firms have been appointed sole Agents for the sale of Government Publications,
including Parliamentary Reports and Papers, Acts of Parliament, Record Office Publications, &c., &0., and all such
works can be purchased from them either directly or through retail booksellers, who are entitled to a discount of
25 per cent, from the selling prices :
IN ENGLAND:—
For all publications excepting Ordnance and Geological Maps, the Hydrographical Works of the Admiralty,
and Patent Office Publications :— Messrs. Eyre and Spottiswoode, East Harding Street, B.G.
For Hydrographical Works of ihe Admiralty :—Mr. J. D. Potter, 145, Minories, E.O.
Patent Office Publications are sold at the Patent Office.
For all publications excepting the Hydrographical Works of the Admiralty, Patent Office Publications, and
Ordnance and Geological Maps.
IN SCOTLAND:— Messrs. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh.
IN IRELAND ;— Mr. E. Ponsonby, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
The Publications of the Ordnance Survey and of the Geological Survey can be purchased from Agents in
most of the chief-towns in the United Kingdom, through any Bookseller, or from the Director General of the
Ordnance Survey, Southampton, or in the case of Ireland, from the Officer in Charge, Ordnance Survey, Dublin. In
addition, Ordnance Survey Publications can be obtained through Head Post Offices in towns where there are no
accredited Agents.
Ihe following is a list of some of the more important Parliamentary and Official Publications recently issued
Parliamentary i
Statutes—
Boy. Bvo. Cloth. Price 3s.
Public General, Session 1903. With Index, Tables, &c.
iJocal and Personal Acts, Session 1903. Are now published.
Second Revised Edition. A.D. 1235-1713 to A.D. 1872-1883. XYI. Yols. Price Is. 6d. each.
Revised Editions. Tables snowing subsequent Repeals, effected by Acts of 2Ed ward, YH- 1902. Price 6d.
Statutes in Force. Chronological Table of and Index to. 19th Edition. To the end of the Session 3 Edward YII.
(1903). 2 vols. 1 Price 10*. 6 d.
The Statutory Rules and Orders revised. Statutory Rules and Orders, other than those of a local, personal, or
temporary character, issued prior to 1890, and now in force. Vols. I. to YIII. Price 10*. each.
Statutory Rules and Orders other than those of a Local, Personal, or Temporary Character. With a List of
the more important Statutory Orders of a Local Character arranged in classes; and an Index. Roy. Bvo.
Boards. Issued in 1890,1891,1892,1893,1894,1895,1896,1897,1898,1899,1900,1901, and 1902.
Statutory Rules and Orders in force on 31st December 1899. Index to.
Index to Local and Personal Acts, 1801-1899.
Historical Manuscripts. Reports of the Royal Commissioners. In course of issue. ; .
Educational Subjects. Special Reports. Yols. 11. to XI. United Kingdom and Colonial and other Possessions ;
and the Principal Countries of the World. Price (complete) £1 12*. 7Jd. (Yol. I. is out of print.)
[Cd. 1161. Cd. 1152. Cd. 1153.] Port of London. Royal Commission. Report, with Evidence and
Appendices (complete). Price 7s. 2d.
[Cd. 1990, 1991.] Coal Supplies. Royal Commission. Second Report of, with Evidence, Appendix, Flans.
Price 3«. 6d.
Price 10*.
Price 10*.
Price 10*.
[Cd. 1793, 1794.] Highway Authorities and Administration Committee. Report of, with Evidence, &c.
Price la. Id.
[Cd. 1844i] South Africa Commercial Mission. Report upon Prospects of British Trade. Price Is. 6d.
[Cd. 1845, 1848, 1869.] Arsenical Poisoning. Royal Commission. Report, Evidence, Appendices, and Index.
Price Bs. 4|rf.
[Cd. 1868.] Cider-making. Results of Investigations into : Years 1893 to 1902. Report on. Price Bd.
[Cd. 1883, 1884, 1885.] Sewage Disposal. Royal Commission. Contamination of Shell-fish by pollution of
Tidal Waters. Fourth Report, with Evidence and Appendices. Price 17s. BJ d
[Cd. 1894.] Transvaal Labour Commission Reports. , Price 6 d
[Cd. 1916.] Electricity in Mines Committee. Report of, with proposed rules for the Installation. Price 3d.
Price lO^d.
Price 3 d.
Price 3s. id.
Price £3 Bs. l£d.
Price 14s. Id.
Price £2 13s. 4 id.
Price 6 d.
[Cd. 1960.] Musical Copyright Committee. Report of, with Evidence and Appendices.
[Cd. 1961.] British Commercial Travellers. Regulations in force in Foreign Countries.
H.C. 34. Life Assurance Companies. Statement of Accounts,' 1902-1903.
Census, England and Wales, 1901. Population Tables, &c., in separate Counties.
Census, Scotland, 1901. Population Tables, &c.
Census, Belaud, 1901. Population Tables, &c., in separate Counties.
Census, Islands in the British Seas, 1901.
[Cd. 1590 and I. to XL] Mines. Reports of H.M. Inspectors for 1902, with Summaries of the Statistical
portion under the provisions of the Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1887 ; Metalliferous Mines Regulation
Acts, 1872-1875 ; Slate Mines (Gunpowder) Act, 1882, Districts Nos. Ito 12. Complete. Price Bs. hd.
Mines in the United Kingdom and the Isle of Man. List of, for 1902. Price 3*. 2d.
Quarries. Do. do. do. 1902. Price 4s. 6 d.
Mines Abandoned. List of the Plans of. Corrected to 31st December 1902. Price Is.
The following appear periodically, and can be subscribed for:—
Trade of the United Kingdom with British Possessions and Foreign Countries, showing the Quantities
and the Declared Value of the Articles.
Trade Reports of the British Colonies, with information relative to population and general condition.
Trade Reports by His Majesty’s Representatives in Foreign Countries, and Reports on Commercial and
General Interests.
The Proceedings of Parliament in public and private business, published daily. House of Lords, Price Id
per 4 pp.; House of Commons, Id. per 8 pp.


BRITISH COTTOI CTJITIYATIOH.
REPORT
TO THE
BOARD OF TRADE
ON
COTTON CULTIVATION IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND IN EGYPT
BY
PROFESSOR WYNDHAM DUNSTAN, F.R.S.,
DIRECTOR OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE AT SOUTH KENSINGTON.
Presenteb to both Rouses of parliament bp (Commartb of Jftajestg.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
By DARLING & SON, Ltd., 34-40, Bacon Street, E.
And to be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from
EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C..
and 32, Abingdon Street, Westminster, S.W.;
or OLIYER & BOYD, Edinburgh ;
or E. PONSONBY, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
1904.
[Cd. 2020.] Price Is.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Introductory Note iii
Sketch Map op the “ Cotton Belt ” of the World.
DIAGRAMS —(1.) Production of Cotton and Imports to United Kingdom (1898-1902).
(2.) Cotton Imports to United Kingdom (1898-1903).
Report by Professor Dunstan 1
Appendix I.—Note by Sir George Watt ... 34
APPENDIX ll.—Literature on Cotton and its Cultivation 38




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
To the Secretary of the Board of Trade.
Sir,
I have the honour to present, herewith, a Report, prepared in compliance
with your instructions by Professor Wyndham Dunstan, Director of the Imperial
Institute at South Kensington, and by members of his Scientific Staff, on the present
position and prospects of Cotton Cultivation within the British Empire.
This Report, which is illustrated by a rough sketch map of the “ cotton belt ” of
the world, contains a large amount of valuable material —much of it previously
inaccessible to the public,—which throws light on a question of great and increasing
importance, not only to those parts of the British Empire which are capable of
growing cotton, but also to the cotton spinners and manufacturers of the United
Kingdom, to whom the question of opening up new sources of supply of the raw
material of their industry is already becoming a grave and urgent problem.
While, however, the present Report cannot fail to be of interest at the present
time, when so much attention is being paid to the subject, it must be understood
that it is only of a preliminary character, and makes no claim to be complete. As
is pointed out by Professor Dunstan, authoritative information is not available
on the prospects of cotton cultivation in several Colonies and Protectorates, and
much more exhaustive inquiry and experiment are necessary before the economic
possibilities of producing, within the Empire, cotton of quality suitable for manu-
facture, on a scale and at a cost which would make its commercial utilisation
profitable to British manufacturers, can be fully and definitely ascertained.
In addition to such important questions as transport and labour supply, there
are many problems of a scientific character in connection with cotton cultivation
which need consideration, and such study is already being attempted by the scientific
staff of the Imperial Institute, so far as is possible with the limited means at their
command, and having regard to other pressing demands upon their time. I venture
to think that the scientific staff and laboratories of the Imperial Institute, which has
recently passed under the control of the Board of Trade, might be utilised with
advantage for the systematic study on a larger scale of the scientific and economic
aspects of a problem which is of such growing interest to the Empire.
I am, &c..
H. LLEWELLYN SMITH.
Commercial, Labour and Statistical Department,
Board of Trade,
April, 1904.
1500 Wt 27343 & 27646 4/04 D& S 1 17403








REPORT
ON
COTTON CULTIVATION IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND IN EGYPT
BY
PROFESSOR DUNSTAN.
The information as to cotton cultivation contained in this Report has been
collected under my direction by the Scientific Staff of the Imperial Institute and
gives a general account of the present position of cotton production within the
British Empire and in Egypt, together with such details as are available, and appear
to be trustworthy in regard to those areas in British Possessions or under British
control in which experimental cultivation has demonstrated, with greater or less
certainty, the possibility of inaugurating cotton production on a commercial scale.
Much assistance has been rendered in this enquiry by the Foreign Office, India
Office, Colonial Office, the Royal Gardens, Kew, and the British Cotton Growing
Association, and the publications of the Imperial Department of Agriculture of the
West Indies have been of great value.
The information recorded is not, however, by any means complete, owing, chiefly
to the absence of authoritative reports on the prospects of cotton cultivation in
several British Colonies and Protectorates.
In order to make the general question intelligible, a brief summary of the
characteristics of the cotton plant and its cultivation, derived chiefly from
American records, has been included, and also a map showing the “ cotton belt ” of
the world, and the approximate area which falls within British territory, so far as
it can be ascertained from the data at present available, together with two
diagrams which illustrate broadly the principal cotton production of the world
in its relation to the amount taken by Great Britain.
Diagram No. 1 shows the total production of cotton in the United States of
America, Egypt and India during the period 1898-1902, and also the quantities
imported from these countries to the United Kingdom during the same period.
It shows the pre-eminent position of the United States of America in the production
of raw cotton, and the insufficiency of the output from India and Egypt to supply
the requirements of the British market.
Diagram No. 2 shows the imports of cotton from the United States of
America, Egypt and India to the United Kingdom during the period 1898-1903.
The imports from the United States in 1899 were considerably less than in
1898, but during the period 1899-1901 they increased regularly, and this period
may be taken as representing the normal state of the raw cotton trade of this
country with the United States. The smaller imports recorded in 1902 and 1903
are chiefly the result of the deficiency in the supply of American cotton. During
the period 1898-1901 the imports from Egypt declined, but increased imports were
recorded in 1902 and in 1903. There was little or no change in the amount of
cotton imported from India until 1903, when a large increase took place. The
17403 A


diagram indicates clearly that British cotton manufacture is at present mainly
dependent on the United States for supplies of raw material, and that hitherto no
attempt has been made to obtain increased supplies from other sources except when
there has been a scarcity of American cotton.
The statistics available show that whereas in the early days of British cotton
manufacture practically the whole supply of raw material was drawn at first from
India, and at a later stage from the West Indies, the amounts at present obtained
from these sources are relatively insignificant, and that the British cotton industry
is now almost entirety dependent upon the United States for supplies of raw cotton.
This state of things has been brought about by various causes, such as the deteriora-
tion of Indian cotton, the replacement of cotton by sugar-cane in the West Indies,
and the continuous improvement in quality of the cotton fibre produced in the
United States. At the same time, improvements in cotton-spinning machinery
which have been made in this country during the last century, have all been in the
direction of utilising the medium and long-stapled cottons characteristic of America
and Egypt, so that although no actual decline in the production of Indian cotton
has taken place, India now produces but little of the long-stapled varieties
suited to the requirements of the British cotton manufacturer. The position is, there-
fore, in this respect, worse than in the period 1861-1865, when the American
Civil War led to a deficiency in cotton similar to that now brought about mainly by
economic causes. At that time British manufacturers were still able to utilise Indian
cotton, and the deficiency in the American product was to some extent compensated
for by increased imports from India. Some efforts were made at that time to extend
the sources of cotton supply in India and other countries, but the rapid recovery in
the United States which followed the close of the American Civil War
unfortunately led to their abandonment. The present failure in the supply of
American cotton is likely, however, to prove of a more permanent character, since,
even if the cotton monopoly with whose operations the present deficiency in supply
and rise in prices are connected should break down, the continual extension of cotton
manufacture in the southern portions of the United States is likely to lead, in the near
future, to a greater utilisation of the raw material in the country of its production
and to a fall in exports to this and other countries. This may be illustrated by
the fact that the consumption of cotton in the Southern States has increased more
than eight-fold during the last twenty years.
It is, therefore, a matter of great importance to the British manufacturer
that new sources of cotton supply should be established over a wide area, in order
to preclude, as far as possible, the occurrence of unusual deficiencies in supply, either
as the result of climatic disturbances, the operations of speculators, or other causes.
The map which accompanies this Report shows that a considerable area of
British territory lies within what may appropriately be described as the “ cotton
belt,” that is, roughly, the region 40° to the north and to the south of the equator.
In the British territory of this region there is undoubtedly a considerable area
suitable, as regards soil and climate, for cotton cultivation, and large enough to
provide for the present requirements of the British cotton industry, and to keep
pace with its natural increase for many years to come, provided that cotton of a
suitable q/iality can be grown.
In India, and especially in Burma, it is probable that the area under cotton will
be increased especially if the high prices which have ruled recently are maintained,
but as has already been indicated, the bulk of the cotton produced in India at the
present time is unsuited to the British market, and the problem, so far as that
country is concerned, resolves itself into the possibility of cultivating cotton of longer
staple. The efforts which have been already made, and the experiments now being
carried out, with the object of effecting this desirable result, are alluded to in the
special section of this Report devoted to India.
Similarly, as regards Egypt, but little extension of production may be looked
/or since nearly the whole of the area available for cotton appears to have been
already taken up. India and Egypt, with the exception of an insignificant and
somewhat special production in the West Indies and in Lagos, practically account
for the whole of the cotfoh now produced in territory coming within the scope of this
Report.


It is shown in the various .special sections of this Report that in a large
number of British Colonies and Dependencies there exist indigenous cottons
yielding, even in the wild or semi-cultivated state, fibres of a fairly good quality
which, by careful selection and cultivation could doubtless be greatly improved,
and in this cultivation and improvement of native varieties there probably lies,
as a rule, a better chance of success than in the introduction of foreign forms,
although, in some districts, American and Egyptian varieties have been experi-
mentally grown with some success. These experiments, however, in most cases
have, so far, not been conducted on a scale large enough to prove that these varieties
can be acclimatised, although sufficient information has been gained in some
instances to show that exotic cottons can be successfully cultivated.
Among the most promising of these experimental districts are the British
Central Africa Protectorate, Uganda, the West African Colonies and Protectorates,
the West Indies and perhaps Fiji, British North Borneo and Cyprus.
The successful establishment of cotton cultivation in these countries at the
present time will depend to a large extent on the prevailing economic conditions,
especially on the possibility of cultivating other and more profitable crops than cotton,
as well as on the supply of labour and the facilities for transport. Not less important
than these to the successful and permanent establishment of the industry will be the
necessity for continual activity in scientific experiment and in the collection of
information as to the progress being made in foreign countries in cotton cultivation,
and as to the needs of manufacturers for special varieties of cotton.
The actual cultivation of cotton is an agricultural problem, requiring for its
solution chemical and botanical knowledge, in addition to practical experience.
The present paramount position of the United States in cotton cultivation is largely
due to the operations of its well-organised and splendidly equipped Experiment
Stations of the Department of Agriculture, which are continually engaged in the
scientific investigation of the innumerable problems wdiich arise, and in the collection
and dissemination of information. Since the United States will be the principal
competitor with our Colonies, in the cultivation of cotton, it is important that they
should be at least as well provided with the means of scientific experiment and
advice. In the first place, it will be necessary to establish in each Colony one
or more experiment stations, and in many eases seed farms, at which agricultural
experiments on cotton cultivation and improvement may be carried on and where
selected seed may be grown for distribution to growers. These stations should be
in charge of agricultural experts qualified to carry out these experiments and to
give demonstrations of new methods to the native cultivators. There are, however,
in addition, a number of general questions connected with the development of cotton
cultivation the investigation of which could be best directed, and in some cases
carried out, by a central institution in this country, in communication with the
Experiment Stations in the Colonies and with British cotton manufacturers and
brokers.
Among the more important subjects in connection with cotton cultivation,
which require to be systematically dealt with are the following;—
(1) The examination and classification of indigenous cottons and the deter-
mination of varieties.
(2) The chemical analyses of soils from different localities in order to deter-
mine their suitability for cotton growing.
(3) The determination of the kind of manure suitable for different varieties
of cotton, based on the analyses of soils, and on the results of manurial
experiments systematically conducted.
(4) The conduct of experiments and analyses in order to ascertain the
leguminous or other crops which are best cultivated simultaneously
or in rotation with cotton in different districts.
(5) The experimental cultivation in each district of selected varieties grown
from carefully chosen seed.
(6) The investigation of the cause of the deterioration in length and character
of the staple of exotic cottons when cultivated in new countries.
17403 A 2


(7) The investigation of the influence of self-fertilisation in producing the
deterioration of indigenous cottons and their improvement by
hybridisation with exotic varieties and disease-resistant forms.
(8) The preparation of statistical records of cotton cultivation, including
the weight of cotton furnished per plant or per acre by different
varieties under different conditions.
(9) The physical and chemical examination and commercial valuation of
cotton grown experimentally in different Colonies.
(10) The utilisation of the bye-products of cotton cultivation: seeds, stems,
roots, &c.
(11) The study of the chemical characteristics of cotton with a view to
elucidating a number of questions connected with the inferiority of
certain varieties, and the deterioration exhibited under certain condi-
tions by standard varieties of cotton.
(12) The identification and study of the various fungoid and insect pests
which attack the cotton plant, and the investigation of preventive
measures.
(13) The possibility of sterilising seed in order to prevent the transmission
of fungoid or insect pests.
(14) The testing of the germinating power of seed before shipment for
experimental purposes.
(15) The investigation of the influence of moisture and temperature in con-
nection with the storage of seed during the winter season in tropical
countries.
(16) The investigation of the influence on the quality of cotton of tight or
loose packing in bales.
(17) The supply of information as to cottons in commercial demand for
particular purposes, and the specific uses to which each is adapted.
Recommendations as to the new growths to be planted according to
the demand for particular qualities.
The cotton crisis of 1903 has, it must be admitted, found this country un-
prepared, although those who had paid special attention to the subject had often
directed attention to the desirability, especially in view of the increase of cotton
manufacture in the United States, of experimental cultivation in British Colonies.
It is to be hoped now that the nation is alive to the danger of the situation, that
every effort will be made to provide a satisfactory basis for commercial enterprise.
The Government of India is giving increased attention to the problem in that
country, to which we naturally look as one of the principal sources of our cotton
supply in the future, whilst the Colonial Office and the Foreign Office have announced
their intention of providing every facility for cotton cultivation in the British
Colonies and Protectorates. Here, however, as in India, it would be a mistake to
expect that in most cases the problem can be solved at once. The establishment
of the industry on such a footing as to ensure a constant supply of cotton of the
quality demanded by the British manufacturer, presupposes a period of preliminary
experimental cultivation and study before planting on a large scale can be attempted
with any certainty of success. The lesson to be learnt from the history of cotton
cultivation in India should in itself be sufficient to show the importance of making
permanent provision for the supply to those engaged in the industry of scientific
information and advice, based on the results of careful study and research in the
numerous problems which cotton cultivation presents.
The British Cotton Growing Association, founded in 1902, has displayed great
activity in the promotion of the growth of cotton on British territory, and its
action has been supported, and to some extent financially assisted, by the Colonial
Office and the Colonial Governments. The most recent instance of this activity is
the decision of the Association to plant a large area in Southern Nigeria with
cotton, an undertaking that has been assisted by the Colonial Office,which has


arranged with the Board of Trade for the despatch of a member of the Scientific
Staff of the Imperial Institute with special botanical and agricultural knowledge,
for the purpose, in consultation with a local Forestry Officer, of examining the Sobo
Plains near the coast and also the districts adjoining the Niger, and of deciding
upon the area to be planted, in the first instance experimentally, and on the variety
of cotton which is most likely to succeed.
THE COTTON PLANT AND ITS CULTIVATION.
The plants which yield cotton are all included in the genus Gossypium, and
belong to the Natural Order, Malvaceae. Linnseus only recognised five species in
the genus, and Parlatore, in 1866, arrived at the conclusion that there were only
seven primary species, of which the other forms were merely varieties. In 1877,
however, Todaro described as many as 52 species which he considered distinct, and
in the Index Kewensis (1893) 40 species are recognised, but of this number only a
few are of economic importance.
In dealing with the cultivated forms of the cotton plant it is extremely difficult
to determine which are true species and which are only varieties or races, since
changes in the environment or in the methods of cultivation of the plants produce
considerable variations in characters, and, consequently, great confusion has been
introduced into their nomenclature. The determination of the botanical identity of
the cultivated formS-ds further complicated by the readiness with which hybrids are
produced and by the large interchange of seed which has occurred between the
different producing countries. It is extremely important, however, that the numerous
forms of the cotton plant at present known should be carefully investigated and
classified.
The cotton plant produces fruit in the form of pods or “ bolls ” which contain
the seeds attached to and surrounded by the cotton filaments or fibres, commonly
called “ lint.” The “ lint ” is separated from the seeds by a machine known as a
“ gin,” and the “ ginned ” cotton is then machine-pressed into bales which in India
usually weigh four hundred pounds, in the United States five hundred pounds, and
in Egypt seven hundred pounds.
The seeds not required for planting are employed for the extraction of the oil
they contain, which has many commercial uses, whilst the residue or “ cake ” left
after the expression of the oil is used as a feeding stuff for cattle, or, under some
circumstances, as a manure.
Cotton is classed commercially as long-, medium-, and short-stapled. The
length of the fibre in the long-stapled cottons, varies from 1 to 11 in., whilst that
of the short-stapled is from f to f in.
The most important of the long-stapled varieties is the “ Sea Island ” cotton,
which is extensively produced along the shores of South Carolina and Georgia in
the United States. It is usually considered to have originated from G. barhadense.
It may be cultivated in any region having a hot and humid atmosphere, but, as a
rule, the quality of the staple is improved by proximity to the sea,' and it has
been found in the United States that it is seldom profitable to grow this variety
more than 50 miles from the sea coast. Its cultivation, which requires great care,
has been extended to the West Indies, Queensland and other countries. The yield
of “ lint ” from “ Sea Island ” cotton is smaller than that from most other varieties, but
on account of the length and high quality of the fibre, it is adapted for purposes
to which other kinds of cotton cannot be applied, and its commercial value is
therefore higher.
Egyptian cotton, of which there are several forms, is also long-stapled and is
supposed to have been derived from G. barhadense. In commercial value it ranks
next to the “ Sea Island ” variety.
The “ upland cottons ” of the United States, which compose the great bulk
of the cotton produced there, are generally of medium staples and are considered to
have originated from G. herbaceum or G. hirsutum. These varieties have been


introduced into Russia and Turkestan, where their cultivation has been attended
with some success though recent reports indicate that deterioration takes place in
about three years.
The indigenous cottons of India are examples of short-stapled varieties. It
is generally supposed that they are derived chiefly from G. neglectum, G. herhaceum
and G. Wightianum.
The principal demand of the British manufacturer at the present day is for
a cotton of medium staple and this has to be borne in mind in selecting varieties
for extended cultivation. The longer stapled kinds such as “ Sea Island ” though
commanding higher prices at present are in smaller demand.
Cultivation.
Climate.
The region suitable for the cultivation of cotton may be briefly described as
lying between lines drawn about 40 degrees on each side of the equator, or between
the isothermal lines of 60° F.
The development of the cotton plant takes place comparatively slowly, six or
seven months elapsing before the crop is mature, and it is imperative, therefore, that
the warm season of the country should be sufficiently long to maintain the necessary
conditions for this length of time. During the early period of growth the tempera-
ture should be high and fairly uniform, since any check at this stage would arrest
the development of the plant and induce premature ripening. In the later stages
a lower temperature and a greater range between the maximum and minimum
temperatures are desirable in order to prevent an excessive vegetative growth and
to encourage the formation of fruit.
Soil.
The physical structure and character of the soil are of the greatest importance
in cotton cultivation. In order to furnish the best result the plants require
a uniform supply of moisture, especially during the early stages, the ideal condition
being that the soil should be continuously moist but not wet. On sandy soils,
where the supply of moisture is usually deficient the plants are small and their
fruits, which yield a poor quality of cotton, are produced at an early period. On
clay soils, on the other hand, the moisture tends to be excessive and the plants
grow very luxuriantly, but, unless checked at the proper time, furnish only a very
limited amount of fruit. The best soil for cotton cultivation is a deep loam
possessing good natural drainage but able to retain sufficient moisture to furnish
a uniform supply throughout the entire growing period of the plant.
Experiments conducted in the United States have shown that clay soils can
be greatly improved for cotton cultivation by artificial drainage, and that the
excessive vegetative growth of the plants in such soils can be prevented by a liberal
application of phosphatic manures.
The chemical composition of the soil best suited for cotton cultivation cannot
be so clearly indicated, as the subject has not yet been thoroughly worked out.
The general facts relating to the abundance or deficiency in the soil of the chief
constituents of plant-food, namely, nitrogen, phosphoric acid, potash and lipae
are applicable to cotton as to other plants. It is not possible, however, to indicate
the particular percentages of these constituents which would be most suitable for
cotton growing, since they are found to vary considerably in different localities,
and to depend largely upon local conditions. Special experiments will be necessary
in each country in order to determine the nature of the soil best suited for the par-
ticular forms of the plant to be grown there.
The agricultural chemistry of cotton growing is still in its infancy, although
progress is being made in the United States as the result of careful and prolonged
experiments.


The “ Sea Island ” cotton is best adapted for light, fine-grained, sandy soils
containing from 4 to 8 per cent, of clay, 4 to 6 per cent, of silt, and 75 to 90 per
cent, of fine sand. The amount of moisture present in such soils is usually about
5 per cent.
The soils most suitable for the cultivation of “ upland ” varieties contain on
an average from 10 to 12 per cent, of moisture during the growing season.
In Egypt the supply of water to the plants is under perfect control. It has
been found that the amount of irrigation water employed and the times of its
application are most important to the successful growth of the crops. It seems
probable that the moist atmosphere during the flood time of the Nile may favour-
ably influence the production of a long and strong fibre.
Manuring.
Like other crops cotton is greatly benefited by proper manuring. By this
means the maturity of the crop may be hastened and the period of growth so
shortened as to materially increase the climatic area within which cotton may be
profitably grown. Nearly all the information on the subject has been obtained by
the Experiment Stations of the United States Department of Agriculture and of
the Khedivial Agricultural Society of Egypt.
In order to obtain the best results from the application of concentrated manures
to cotton it is necessary that the soil should be previously brought into proper condi-
tion by the mechanical incorporation of considerable quantities of organic
material. This is easily accomplished by growing a fodder plant, such as
the cow-pea, upon the soil and then ploughing in the stubble together with the
manure obtained from the stock feeding on the crop. Farmyard manure and
similar bulky manures are more valuable for their general effect upon the soil than
for their specific action on the cotton plant. The same is probably true of cotton
seed unless it be employed in the form of meal, when it will serve as a nitrogenous
manure. If only small quantities of such manures are available, it is better to
mix them with acid phosphate, preferably containing a small percentage of potash,
than to use them alone.
The fact that cotton can be grown as a part of a rotation system of crops is
of great importance, and, in some instances, it is possible to grow food crops in
conjunction with cotton.
In Egypt artificial manures are at present seldom resorted to. The cotton is
preceded almost invariably by clover, and on this account there is generally a
sufficiency of nitrogen in the soil, especially if the fodder crop has been grazed.
In most cotton fields farm-yard manure is applied to the extent of 10 to 15 tons
per acre, but until recently no artificial manures were employed. The
Khedivial Agricultural Society has, however, conducted manurial experiments at
its model farms in Egypt, and has shown that mixtures of superphosphates and
sodium nitrate may with advantage be applied to cotton.
In India no definite system of rotation appears to be generally practised, but
the land on which cotton is grown is usually manured, and in the districts where
the better classes of cotton are produced it is periodically allowed to lie fallow.
Improvement and Deterioration of Varieties.
The cotton plants of the present day yielding medium- and long-stapled fibres
are, without exception, artificial varieties, that is, they have been produced by the
artificial selection of plants which have varied in the particular direction of
producing an improved fibre. In common with all such artificial plant varieties
these cottons show a great tendency to revert to the original form, and it is this
reversion which is commonly spoken of as the deterioration or degeneration of
cotton, of which many examples are quoted in the course of this Report.
To prevent such deterioration the cotton plant must be continuously stimulated in
the right direction by being grown in a suitable environment as regards soil and
climate. In spite of such precautions it has been found, both in the United
States and in Egypt, that reversion to the primary type still occurs, and in the


former country this difficulty is overcome by sowing seed collected from plants
which show no deterioration in fibre. Any deterioration which may take
place is in this way prevented from becoming general. In India, as the special
section of this Report devoted to India shows, the cotton plants are almost
entirely of a reverted or degenerated type, and Sir George Watt attributes the
spread of this deterioration to the custom of sending all seed cotton to a central
ginning factory, where the whole seed of the district is mixed together and retailed
to cultivators for sowing, no attempt whatever being made to select seed from the
best plants. Other influences have, no doubt, also been at work, chief among which
is the fact that the Indian product though unsatisfactory for British requirements
has a large and not unprofitable market in India and the Far East. But if cotton
suitable for Lancashire is to be grown in India it will be necessary for the Govern-
ment to undertake the establishment of farms where selected plants could be grown
solely for the production of improved seed. In the Colonies in which cotton cultiva-
tion is now being the cultivators should be instructed either to select
their own seed in the jpanner followed in the United States, or to rely for supplies
of seed for planting, on seed-farms specially established.
In introducing cotton cultivation into a country, general experience seems to
indicate that attention should be devoted in the first instance to the improvement of
any indigenous cottons the country may possess rather than to the introduction of
exotic varieties. The continual tendency to reversion exhibited by cotton plants
renders the acclimatisation of exotic kinds a matter of great difficulty. Instances
of the failure of American and Egyptian cottons to grow well when transplanted
are given in the special sections of this Report dealing with India and other
dependencies, and this general experience has recently been confirmed by German
observations in Togoland and Russian experiments in Turkestan.
The conditions under which cotton plants can be induced to produce more and
better fibre have as yet been little studied except in the United States, and it is by
no means certain that American experience can be taken as a safe guide in other
countries, but it seems to be clear that the most important factors to be attended
to are tne suitable manuring of the soil and the careful selection of seed. The
improvement of indigenous cottons may no doubt also be expedited by crossing them
with American, Egyptian or other long-stapled cottons; the hybrids so obtained,
whilst retaining the characteristics of the indigenous plant, also exhibit some of
the desirable qualities of the exotic variety, and experiments in this direction
both in India and in Togoland appear to indicate that excellent results may be
obtained by this means.
In addition to the main problem of producing an improved fibre it is of great
importance to obtain varieties giving a large yield of “ lint.” American experience
seems to indicate that the conditions under which better fibre is produced are also
those under which a greater yield is obtained; thus the Gossyyium herbaceum of the
United States, which furnishes in the uncultivated state seed-cotton
containing about 25 per cent, by weight of “ lint,” the staple of which varies from
f to inches in length, produces under cultivation as “ upland ” cotton, bolls
yielding from 36 to 40 per cent, of cleaned “ lint ” having a staple of from 1-g to
2 inches. This general agricultural experience has been confirmed by a series of
special experiments carried out at James Island, United States, with “ Sea Island ”
cotton.
Commercial Varieties of Cotton.
The commercial varieties of cotton are designated according to the districts
or countries from which they are obtained. The following is a list of the principal
cottons which appear in the British markets :
American Cottons.
“ Sea Island .”—This variety is produced in the islands lying off the coast of
Georgia, in South Carolina and in Florida. The length of staple varies from 1.9 to
2.2 inches, and the average diameter is about inch. This cotton is distin-
guished by its length of staple and by the soft and silky character of its fibre.


“ Upland.'’ —This cotton is produced principally in Georgia and South
Carolina. The length of staple is on the average about 1.1 inches, and the diameter
two inch.
“ Mobile.” —This type of cotton is produced in Alabama and the neighbouring
States. Its staple varies from 0.95 to 1.05 inches in length, and the diameter is
usually about -pgVo of an inch. This cotton is rather firmer in staple than the
“ upland ” kind.
“ Texas.” —This form is obtained from the State of the same name. The staple
varies from 0.7 to 1.0 inch in length, and its diameter is about yaVu inch.
“ Orleans' ’ —This cotton, produced in Louisiana and the Mississippi districts,
is the most regular in staple of all the American cottons. The length of staple is
usually about 1.1 inches, and the diameter , J,,„ inch. The colour is white or
creamy.
American cottons are graded as “ good ordinary,” “ low middling,” “ middling,”
and “ good middling.” Since the beginning of the present year “ middling
American” has been quoted in Liverpool at prices ranging from 7.18 d. to
8.40 d. per lb. During the same period of 1903 prices ranged from 4.90 d. to
5.42 d. per lb., and in 1902 from 4.5 d. to 4.8 d. per lb. for the same quality.
Egyptian Cotton.
A description of the varieties of cotton produced in Egypt is given in the
special section of this Report (p. 10). Egyptian cotton may be either white or
brown in colour. Its staple varies from 1.2 to 1.6 inches in length, and its
diameter is about loVe inch. The brown cottons are soft and silky, and the white
kinds somewhat harsher. Egyptian cotton ranks next to “ Sea Island ” in com-
mercial value. It is graded as “fair” and “good fair.” “Fair” qualities are
at present valued at Bi-f d. per lb., and “ good fair ” kinds at 10 per lb.
South American Cottons.
“ Brazilian Cotton.” —These cottons are usually harsh and give a wiry feeling
to yarns into which they are spun. The principal varieties are Pernam, Ceara,
Maceio, Maranham, and Aracati. The length of staple varies from Ito 1.5 inches,
and the diameter is usually inch.
“Peruvian Cottons.” —These varieties include both hard and soft cottons; the
former resembling “ Brazilian ” and the latter “ Orleans ” cotton. The staple varies
from 1 to 1.2 inches in length, and has a diameter of TaVo inch.
South American cottons are graded into three classes, “ middling fair,” “ fair ”
and “ good fair.” Present prices for South American cottons range from 8.52 d.
to 9.16 d. per lb.
East Indian Cottons.
A list of the principal commercial varieties of Indian cottons is given in the
special section of this Report relating to India (p. 18). The principal groups
of Indian cottons met with in this country are :
(1.) “ Surat,” including “ Saw-ginned Dharwar,” machine-ginned Broach
“ Bhownuggar,” “ Oomrawattee,” “ Bilati,” and “ Machine-ginned Coompta.” The
staple of this class of cotton varies from 0.8 to 1.2 inches in length, and the
diameter is about T tW inch.
(2.) “Madras,” including “ Tinnevelly,” “Westerns,” “Northerns,”
“ Coconadas ” and “ Salems.” These are cottons of short staple containing much,
round or flat, straight fibre.
17403 B


Year.
Lbs.
Value in £.
1888*
266,224
5,157
1889*
632,128
12,902
1890*
945,056
18,267
1891* ...
564,256
9,671
18921
1,188,656
16,605
1893t
392,896
6,215
1894-t
441,280
5,961
1895
909,776
10,665
1896
429,744
5,822
1897
399,952
4,985
1898
289,184
3,288
1899
855,792
10,332
(3.) “ Bengals.” —This cotton has a staple varying from 1.0 to 1.3 inches in
length, and is usually about x3 Vs inch in diameter.
East Indian cottons are graded into three classes, “ fair,” “ good fair,” and
“ good.” During the present year (1904) the price of “ good ” Indian cottons has
ranged from s|d. per lb. for “ Bilati,” to 7|d. per lb. for “ Broach,” the corre-
sponding values for the same period of 1903 being 3 xx d. and 4 per lb., and
for 1902 3 d. and 4 T 3 e -d. per lb. respectively.
Nankin Cotton.
It is stated by some authorities that wild cottons are invariably brown in colour,
and the name “ Nankin ” has been loosely applied to such coloured indigenous pottons.
The cotton produced in Lagos and the Bahamas are of this type.
EUROPE.
Cyprus.
The cultivation of cotton was at one time carried on in various parts of the
island, but is now mainly restricted to the district of Kythroea and the villages
in its vicinity. The land in this locality is usually granted to the cultivator in
exchange for three-fifths of the unginned produce.
Cotton is also grown in the Mesaoria and the Carpas, but only when the rainfall
in the spring and winter is so copious as to render summer watering unnecessary.
The crop obtained under these conditions is irregular, of inferior quality, and worth
10 per cent, less than the produce grown on irrigated lands.
It is stated that during the 16th century 6,600,000 lbs. of cotton were annually
exported from Cyprus. Under Ottoman rule, however, the industry declined, and,
even in 1865, during the American Civil War, only 1,800,000 lbs. were exported,
and in 1871, 1,120,000 lbs. In recent years the amount has still further decreased
owing to the ravages of locusts, lack of water, and want of good seed. Locusts are
now, however, practically extinct, and during the last two years large areas of land
have been properly irrigated. A supply of good seed is still required.
The following table gives the exports of raw cotton from Cyprus during the
years 1888 to 1902: —
* For the twelve months ending March 31 st of the year following that stated,
f For the twelve months ending December 31st of the year stated.


Year.
Lbs.
Value in £.
1900
378,000
6,384
1901
307,552
5,150
1902
303,968
4,443
Austria-Hungary
1,885 cwts.
France
599 „
Greece
218 „
Turkey
12 „
Total ...
... 2,714 „
Year.
Malta.
Gozo.
Area.
Crop.
Area.
Crop.
Acres.
Cwts.
Acres.
Cwts.
1899
1,163
2,871
588
1,340
1900
956
2,979
522
2,233
1901
207
668
530
2,460
1902
161
815
538
2,527
The amounts of raw cotton exported to the following countries during 1902 were
as follows:
A part of the cotton produced is employed in the island for manufacturing a
cloth used locally, and also exported chiefly to Turkey, the United Kingdom, Egypt
and Greece. The total value of the exported manufactured cotton goods in 1901
amounted to £589, and in 1902 to £1,025: these figures include re-exported manu-
factures to the value of £133 and £lO6 respectively.
The native variety of cotton (Gossypium herbaceum) withstands drought, and
is the only kind grown on lands which are not irrigated. Experiments have shown
that by the introduction of American varieties the staple of Cyprus cotton can
be materially improved, and in the irrigated lands the American varieties thrive
better than the native cotton, yielding more and better lint. Among a number
of American varieties recently introduced, that known as “ Peterkin ” has proved very
successful.
Cyprus is able to produce cotton of a high quality. The people are acquainted
with the methods of cultivation, and large areas of land are available, especially if
irrigation is extended. The chief impediments to the development of the industry
are stated to be want of capital and the absence of a satisfactory harbour and of direct
shipment at moderate rates to England. At present a small due of about one farthing
per pound is levied on raw cotton exported. The subject of cotton cultivation in
Cyprus certainly deserves attention.
Malta.
The following table gives the area under cultivation and the crops produced
during the years 1899-1902 :
17403
B 2


The prices obtained for the cotton during 1902-1903 varied from £1 Is. 6d.
to £1 19s. Od. per cwt. The cotton is at present almost entirely used locally, but
it is probable that the area under cotton will be extended shortly, and an attempt
made to start an export trade. Specimens of cotton from Malta were shown at the
Indian and Colonial Exhibition in 1887. One of these was of the Nankin type, and
had a long staple of fair strength and softness; the other was white, with a medium
staple, and was regarded by experts as worthy of attention by British cotton importers.
Information is needed as to the varieties of cotton grown in Malta, the quality of the
fibre produced, and the area of land available for cotton cultivation.
AFRICA.
Egypt.
The cultivation of cotton was commenced in Egypt in 1820. The first cotton
was grown in the delta of the Nile from seed imported from the Sudan, and was
known as “ Jumel ”or " Mako.” This variety was for many years the only cotton
cultivated, but it was ultimately replaced by a new form termed “ A shmouni.”
The latter degenerated after twenty years and has been largely abandoned for
“ Mitafifi” especially in Lower Egypt. The “ Mitafifi ” plant is very hardy, and is
by no means so sensitive to climatic changes as are some of the other varieties.
Its staple is long, very strong, and yellowish-brown in colour. The cotton is easily
picked and can be ginned without difficulty. Another variety which was formerly
extensively grown in Lower Egypt is known as “ Bamia.” This plant is larger and
coarser in growth than the other varieties already referred to, and consequently
requires more water. It is not so hardy as “ Mitafifi ” and yields a fibre which
is darker in colour and not so strong. The length of the staple varies considerably,
but the best grades of this cotton have a fair length. Many other varieties, such as
“ Zafiri” “ A fifi” “ Abbasi,” “ Gallini” and “ Hamouli,” are also cultivated. “ Sea
Island ” cotton has been grown in Egypt for thirty or forty years, but has proved very
unsatisfactory, and is now almost extinct.
The four varieties chiefly cultivated in Egypt at the present time are “ Mitafifi ,”
“ Abbasi,” “ A shmouni” (the cotton of Upper Egypt), and “ Yannovich .” The last
mentioned variety has only existed during recent years, but it is now grown extensively.
Its fibre is strong and silky, and although the yield is usually somewhat less than that
of “ A fifi” or “Abbasi” it is more profitable on account of its superior quality.
Great assistance in the cultivation of cotton in Egypt is being rendered by the
Khedivial Agricultural Society, which is carrying on experiments on the selection of
seed for sowing and on the irrigation and manuring of the land. It has been found
that although the application of farm-yard manure in large quantities tends to
improve the condition of the land, it does not advance the quality of the “ lint,” but
that if this manure is used in conjunction with a suitable chemical manure, the yield
of fibre and its quality are both increased. The Society now undertakes to procure
suitable chemical manures for cotton planters.
The Government contributes to the advancement of the cotton industry by
annually distributing large quantities of seed among small cultivators.
Egyptian cotton usually has a staple Ito H inches in length; it is generally mors
lustrous and “ mercerises ” better than the American “ upland ” cotton, and commands
a higher price, but it is not so long, fine, or valuable as the “ Sea Island ” variety.
The following table gives the cotton crop of Egypt from 1888 to 1901 :


Year.
Amount of Crop
in kantars.*
Raw Cotton imported to United
Kingdom.
Cwts.
Value in £.
1889
2,699,103
1890
3,200,000
—
—
1891
4,100,000
—
—
1892
4,500,000
—
1893
5,200,000
—
1894
5,200,000
—
—
1895
4,550,000
—
—
1896
5,203,650
—
—
1897
5,785,532
—
—
1898
6,513,444
2,46.1,657
5,881,396
1899
5,579,602
3,060,866
7,743,611
1900
6,432,776
2,789,722
9,066,435 |
1901
5,435,480
2,519,039
8,305,758
1902
6,500,000
3,168,697
9,938,484
1903
5,750,000t
2,642,017
9,643,295
j
* A kantar of ginned cotton = 99'049 lbs. f Estimated.
The total area devoted to cotton is said to be 1,249,883 feddans (1 feddan=
1.1019 acres).
Nearly the whole of the Egyptian product is exported.
With regard to the possibility of increasing the production of cotton in Egypt,
Lord Cromer has stated in a recent despatch that “ improved agricultural methods,
carefully selected seed, and the more general use of artificial manure ” might increase
the “ yield on the poorer lands,” but that “ no great increase of the area planted
with cotton in Egypt ” can be expected.
The Sudan.
The prospects of cotton cultivation in the Sudan appear to be very favourable.
It is said that the alluvial region of the Egyptian Sudan, which is situated between
the White and Blue Niles, is even better adapted to the growth of cotton than the
lower parts of the Nile valley, and that the area open for the planting of
cotton is ten times as great as that obtainable in Egypt proper. The industry
is already established on a small scale at Kassala and Sennar, but the primitive
methods of cultivation adopted cause much loss of material. The climate is admir-
ably suited to cotton cultivation, and according to Slatin Pasha’s report of July,
1902, “cotton of an excellent medium quality is even now grown, and there is no
reason why the Sudan should not furnish good cotton for the cotton market.”


In a report on the cultivation of cotton at the Sheridi Experimental Farm,
it is stated that the results of experiments demonstrate that a good class of cotton
can be grown in the Sudan, but that cultivation on a large scale cannot be
attempted until the railway from Suakin to Berber is completed.
At present no information is available regarding the varieties of cotton grown in
the Sudan.
SOUTH AFRICA.
Transvaal and Orange River Colony.
Very little information is available regarding cotton cultivation in these
Colonies, but it is stated that cotton could be grown in the Lydenburg district and
also in Swaziland.
Natal.
Cotton has been grown in this Colony, but no information is available as to
the area now under cultivation. Specimens of cotton, described as “ Sea Island
cotton grown in Natal,” were shown at the Indian and Colonial Exhibition in 1886,
and were stated to be equal to Egyptian cotton in value. A specimen of Natal
cotton has been examined in the Scientific and Technical Department of the Imperial
Institute. It was fairly well cleaned, white with a faint reddish tinge, and its staple
varied from 1.5 to 2 inches in length. This specimen was valued by brokers at 7| to
per lb. (February, 1904).
Cape Colony.
Cotton is grown to a small extent by Kaffirs in the neighbourhood of the Guama
River. No information is available regarding the variety grown or the amount
produced.
Rhodesia.
In the report of the British South Africa Company (February, 1903) it is
stated that experiments in cotton cultivation are being conducted in Rhodesia on
an extensive scale with every prospect of success. Cotton of excellent! quality
grows wild in many district, and samples recently submitted to experts in England
have been most favourably reported on. Some of these samples, although old and
discoloured, were stated to be superior to “ middling American,” and better than
the common East Indian, and were valued at 4d. to per lb. The cotton was
said to be of prolific growth, good hard staple, but not long. The Administration
has secured an ample supply of several varieties of seed, with a view to testing
thoroughly the capabilities of the various districts regarded as suitable for cotton
cultivation.
Samples of cotton grown in Rhodesia have been received at the Imperial
Institute from the Agricultural Department, Salisbury, for examination and com-
mercial valuation. One of the samples, “ No. 1, Mashonaland Cotton,” was silky,
fairly strong, and of average length; it was white with the exception of a small
proportion stained yellow. Properly cleaned specimens represented by the white
cotton were valued at 6d. per lb., but the presence of the stained cotton would reduce
its value to s|d. per lb. The other sample, No. 2, “ Zambesi Cotton,” was strong,


silky, and of good length; it was bluish-white in colour and a little stained. If
properly cleaned it would be worth per lb. A sample of indigenous cotton
from North-Eastern Rhodesia has been also received at the imperial Institute. This
specimen was fairly silky, of a yellowish-white colour, about 1 to 1.3 inches in length,
and was valued by brokers at 4|d. per lb. (June, 1903).
Everything points to the probability that cotton can be successfully grown in
certain districts in Rhodesia.
British Central Africa Protectorate.
Cotton has long been grown in Central Africa, and is found in a semi-wild
state on the Zambesi and elsewhere. A sample of this cotton, which was sent to
England in 1896, had a staple 1.1 to 1.2 inches in length, and was valued at per lb.
Experiments on the cultivation of cotton were commenced in 1900 by the Local
Government. In 1901 it was reported that the plants were doing well, and that a
fair crop might be expected in two years.
A specimen of cotton grown in the vicinity of Zomba has been received recently,
for examination and commercial valuation at the Imperial Institute. The cotton
was somewhat harsh, of a yellowish colour, had an irregular staple of 1 to 1.3 inches,
and was stated by brokers to be worth sd. per lb. (June, 1903). A small sample
of last year’s crop has been forwarded for comparison with that of the preceding
year, and shows a distinct improvement, the cotton being whiter, stronger and with
a staple 1.4 to 1.5 inches in length.
A sample of cotton grown near Lake Nyasa has also been received at the
Imperial Institute from the African Lakes Corporation, Limited. This specimen
is of good staple and was valued at 7d. per lb. Two further samples, grown from
Egyptian seed at Mandala, have also been submitted, the yield in these cases being
probably over two cwt. per acre. These specimens were valued,, in 1903, at 7fd.
to Bd. per lb. and BJd. to 9d. per lb. respectively.
During the year ending 31st March, 1903, the Protectorate exported
692 lb. of cotton (all to the Lnited Kingdom), but this output will probably be
very largely increased in the immediate future, as the high prices which have been
obtained recently have attracted the attention of planters to the product. Accord-
ing to the agricultural statistics for 1902-3 it appears that 580 acres had been planted
with cotton by Europeans, the probable yield from which was estimated at 1,206 cwt.
In a recent despatch from the Commissioner it is stated that so far as could be ascer-
tained about 4,000 acres were either planted or were being sown with cotton in
December last, and that the estimated value of the exports during the coming year
was placed at £25,000. It is thought that if the future price of cotton should remain
above 4d. per lb. there is every probability that cotton cultivation will become the
staple industry in British Central Africa.
Cotton, probably Gossypium herbaceum, has long been grown by the natives,
whilst more recently Egyptian (“ A fifi” and “ Abbasi”) and American cottons have
been introduced.
East Africa Protectorate.
About ten years ago a German firm made experiments with Sea Island and
Egyptian seed near Lamu. Samples of the cotton produced were submitted to
experts and favourably reported on. The samples were classified as “ resembling
lower quality Sea.lsland,” and “between Tahiti and Sea Island,” and were valued
at from 7d. to 9d. per lb. The experiment was abandoned, partly because Lamu
was subsequently included in the British sphere, and partly on account of the


difficulty of obtaining labour. Circumstances have now changed, and the labour
difficulty appears to have been largely overcome. Large areas in the Provinces of
Tanaland, Seyidie, Ukamba, and the Gosha district of Jubaland are adapted to the
cultivation of cotton. Soil and climate are suitable, irrigation would be easy, and
transport to the coast offers no difficulty.
An indigenous cotton is already grown by natives along the banks of the Juba
River and on the Bajoon Coast, where a rough native cloth is made from it. Prom
the latter district 8,000 lbs. of “ lint,” were sent to Lamu in 1902. This cotton is
however of poor quality and valued locally at 3d. per lb. A little cotton is also grown
by Indians near Lake Victoria, with good results.
The experience of cotton growing in the neighbouring German Colony, where
preparations are now being made for the cultivation of Egyptian cotton on a large
scale, confirms the conclusion that this Protectorate deserves special consideration
as a cotton-producing area. This subject is now receiving attention from the local
Agricultural Department.
Uganda Protectorate.
In a recent report on the Uganda Protectorate it is stated that experiments
are being carried out on the cultivation of cotton. A plantation has been laid out
at Kampala, and seeds have been sent to other parts of the Protectorate. It is
found that cotton can be grown successfully, the only difficulty experienced being
in harvesting at the proper period. Experiments are being tried with Egyptian
seed, of which a consignment of several hundredweights has been imported. Cotton
grown in the Botanical Gardens at Entebbe has been valued in London at 4f d. per lb.
whilst the indigenous cotton is worth only 2fd. per lb. If the natives can be induced
to cultivate on a large scale, there appears to be no reason why Uganda should not
meet its own requirements in cotton, and eventually export this product.
WEST AFRICA.
The reports from AVest Africa on the possibilities of cotton cultivation are of
the most encouraging description. It appears to be improbable that large quantities
of cotton can at present be produced in Sierra Leone or the Gold Coast, owing to
scarcity of labour. In Northern Nigeria, to some extent in Southern Nigeria, and
in the Lagos hinterland, there is a vast field. The native population is numerous,
intelligent, and thoroughly familiarised with the cultivation of cotton, which has
been carried on in several localities for hundreds of years in a primitive yet effective
manner. The soil is for the most part suitable; there.is a heavy annual rainfall;
usually a well-marked dry season, and the country is fairly well irrigated.
Messrs. Elder, Dempster and Company have undertaken to carry for two years
all implements, seed, &c., to the coast, and to bring home the first 1,000 tons of cotton
produced, free of all charge. The Government have also undertaken to grant free
carriage on their railways during the same period.
Lagos.
In, 1867 the exports of raw cotton from Lagos amounted to 356 tons, and were
valued in Lagos at £33,191. In the following year 459 tons were exported, and
even more during 1870. Owing, however, to low prices, the natives ceased
to plant for export, but have continued to grow sufficient for home use. The remark-
able decline in exports which has taken place almost continuously since 1869 is
shown by the following tabular statement;


Return
of Raav Cotton Exported from Lagos, 1869-1902.
Year.
Value.
Year.
Value.
Weight.
£
£
Lb.
1869
76,957
1886
1,813
96,980
1870
53,778
1887
2,093
121,735
1871
29,157
1888
4,025
231,484
1872
16,250
1889
8,023
482,950
1873
51,618
1890
6,063
358,830
1874
31,580
1891
4,825
379,300
1875
9,842
1892
564
41,052
1876
13,974
1893
921
71,406
1877
12,436
1894
1,597
148,946
1878
2,756
1895
826
19,851
1879
526
1896
11
1,326
1880
360
1897
Nil
Nil
1881
3,646
1898
856
70,640
1882
8,103
1899
254
13,659
1883
9,388
1900
453
24,080
1884
11,454
1901
154
7,600
1885
5,797
1902
150
12,359
The Egbas, whose capital is Abeokuta, and the other Yorubas, especially those
of Ibadan, which is the principal cotton district of Lagos, are willing to grow cotton,
provided that they can be assured of a permanent demand. They have been some-
what discouraged by their past experience in coffee-growing, prices having gone
down after they had succeeded in obtaining excellent crops of this product. It has
been explained to them that cotton, if cultivated carefully, will always realise a
remunerative price. They have agreed to plant largely, and in the Egba country
alone 4,000 acres will be planted out shortly.
The American planters sent out to Lagos by the British Cotton Growing
Association in May, 1903, have reported that the native cotton has an excellent
texture; the fibre is short, but this will probably be improved in a few years by
cultivation. They also state that both American and Egyptian cottons thrive well
in favourable seasons, but do not withstand drought so well as the native cotton.
In 1903 3,000 acres in the neighbourhood of Ibadan and 1,000 acres in that
of Abeokuta were planted with cotton. These places are connected with the coast
by a railway, and the district is amply supplied with cheap labour and suitable
land. A sample of cotton which was grown in Ibadan from American seed and
picked in December, 1903, has been received by the British Cotton Growing Associa-
tion. It is reported to be of good staple and colour, and equal in value to the average
grades of Texas cotton. Experimental cultivation was commenced in 1903 in the
Meko district, both American and native cotton (Epepo) being planted. The young
plants are reported to have a healthy appearance, and it is probable that the
experiment will prove successful. It is estimated that 20,000 acres will be planted
during 1904.
A sample of seed cotton from Lagos has been received recently at the Imperial
Institute., It is of good quality and of about the same value as ordinary American.
17403 C


The price actually paid for the seed cotton in Lagos is Id. per pound, but it is
stated that those who have bought at this price and imported it to Liverpool, where
it has been ginned, have lost money, although it has been brought from Lagos free
of any charge for freight.
Sierra Leone.
A considerable amount of cotton has been grown in the past by the natives
in those districts in which the manufacture of native cotton cloth is carried on.
The methods of cultivation adopted by the natives are, however, of the most
primitive description.
A sample of cotton collected at Mafweh, on the Bum River, was forwarded
to Kew in 1890. This cotton is not the wild or bush variety, but is planted by the
natives for making the above-mentioned cloth. The sample was reported to be of
good quality and worth at that time about 6d. per lb. It is stated that this plant
is very easy to cultivate, gives a good yield, and could be readily grown on a
commercial scale.
Samples of Egyptian cotton seed which were experimentally planted in 1890
did not, on the whole, yield successful results.
Two American cotton planters and three negro farmers have recently arrived
in the Colony, sent out under the auspices of the British Cotton Growing Associa-
tion. Experiments are being made by them in the Sherbro’ district and along the
railway with American, Egyptian and native varieties. Seed has also been dis-
tributed to native chiefs in the Protectorate, but the results so far obtained in this
direction are not encouraging.
The native cotton appears to be of fair quality, samples recently sent to England
being valued at sfd. per lb. The planters are of opinion that the quality and
staple of the native cotton might be greatly improved by more careful cultivation.
Every encouragement is being given to the natives to take up the industry, the
Government having arranged to accept raw cotton in payment of the house tax.
There is a large amount of land suitable for cotton cultivation available in the
Colony.
Gambia.
A native cotton has been cultivated in this Colony in primitive fashion for
generations, and small quantities have occasionally been exported to the neigh-
bouring French possessions. From this cotton are made the “ pagns,” or native
cloths, for which there is a great demand. The indigenous cotton is of two kinds,
one giving a perfectly white fibre, and the other a fibre of a brownish colour. The
plants are well able to withstand the dry weather, and the materials made from
the fibre are strong and durable.
In 1890 samples of Egyptian cotton seed were planted in this Colony. In
the following year it was reported that the plants were very prolific and apparently
well adapted to the soil. A sample of the cotton received in England was valued
at per lb., but at that period prices were exceptionally low.
Sir W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, Director of the Royal Gardens, Kew, expressed the
opinion in 1901 that it would be more profitable to cultivate Egyptian than Ameri-
can varieties in Gambia.
An American planter who has recently made a tour of the Colony on behalf of
the British Cotton Growing Association reports that the native cotton is of fair
quality, and that there is every reason to believe that it would be greatly improved
by cultivation. The natives are, however, averse to new methods, and this may
prove an obstacle at first. A second planter is now at work in the Colony and model
cotton farms are being started.


Gold Coast.
In 1890 an acre of land at Aburi was planted with Egyptian cotton seed. The
plants grew remarkably well and yielded a good crop of cotton. A specimen, which
was sent to England for valuation, was stated to be worth per lb. at that time
(December, 1890), and to be readily saleable. Another sample of Egyptian cotton
which was grown at Accra at the same period was reported to be of good quality,
clean, and worth 6fd. per lb. (February, 1891).
An expert has also visited this Colony on behalf of the British Cotton Growing
Association, and has sent to England specimens of the native cotton. These are
stated to be of fair quality. The native method of cultivation is very primitive, but
the natives are intelligent and very anxious to learn improved methods.
Considerable quantities of the best varieties of cotton seed have been recently
distributed to native chiefs in the neighbourhood of the Volta river, and an expert
is now visiting in this district with the object of selecting suitable areas for planting
and of instructing the natives in the cultivation of cotton. Owing to the absorption
of native labour for mining operations, it is doubtful whether any great development
of cotton growing is possible in this Colony at present, except, perhaps, on the
eastern side.
Northern Nigeria.
In this country there is a vast territory, much of which appears to be suitable
■ for cotton. Cotton growing has been long in existence, and there is an extensive
manufacture of cotton cloths at Kano.
Mr. F. Dwyer, British Resident at Kontagora, has recently given the following
particulars of the climate and soil in Kontagora province. There are three seasons,
the dry, the wet, and the intermediate. In the first season it is extremely hot in the
day time, but the nights and mornings are cold, and there are heavy night-dews.
In the second, or wet, season, the heat of the day is tempered by cool breezes, rain
falls in frequent light showers, and severe thunderstorms occasionally occur. The
third season is similar to a hot English summer, lasting about six weeks. The soil
to a depth of about 18 inches is of a dark, brick colour; below this there is a light
sandy loam of a rich dark colour, and loose stones are rarely met with.
In the year 1888 the Niger Company considered the possibility of developing
a trade in the indigenous cotton, and samples were sent to England which were
stated to resemble rough Peruvian, and to be worth sd. to per lb. Trials were
then made at various experimental stations with both Egyptian and American seed,
and the results obtained were eminently satisfactory. The Directors of the Company,
having satisfied themselves that cotton could be successfully grown in Nigeria,
postponed any larger experiments, knowing that the labour difficulty could not be
immediately overcome.
At the close of the year 1901 Messrs. Elder, Dempster and Company sent out
a consignment of cotton seed, which was distributed to, and eagerly accepted by,
the chiefs of the different Provinces. The results are being watched with interest,
although judging from the exhausive and scientific experiments on the subject made
by the Germans in Togoland, selected and improved local seed appears to produce
better cotton than imported varieties.
The most serious difficulty is the question of transport, and it seems doubtful
whether cotton can be economically exported from the interior of the Protectorate
unless a railway is constructed from the Niger to Kano.
Southern Nigeria.
Cotton has long been grown by the natives in many parts of the Protectorate.
An expert has recently started work at Nkissi, and has organised experiments with
the object of improving and extending the cultivation of the indigenous cotton.
Previous experiments made with American seed gave inconclusive results as to the
17403 C 2


possibility of cultivating exotic cotton in the Protectorate, but gave evidence as
to the best time of planting, namely, about June.
Samples of cotton grown on the experimental plantation at Onitsha have recently
been received in Manchester, are said to be equal to “ fully good middling ” American,
.and exactly of the quality ordinarily required by the manufacturer. A power gin
has been set up at Onitsha.
The British Cotton Growing Association has now determined to commence cotton
•cultivation in certain selected districts of Southern Nigeria. The Colonial Office
has arranged with the Board of Trade to send a member of the Scientific Staff of
the Imperial Institute to co-operate with a local Forestry Officer in selecting these
areas. The Sobo Plains, near the coast, and the Uromi district, near the Niger,
will be specially considered. It is stated that labour can be arranged for and
that transport is easy.
Mauritius and Seychelles.
Cotton is grown in both these Colonies by the natives for their own use. The
•cultivation is very limited in extent, and no attempt appears to have been made in
recent years to extend it. Efforts, however, are now being made to increase cotton
cultivation in the Seychelles, which, in the opinion of the Curator of the
Botanic Station, will prove very profitable in the outlying islands of the
Archipelago. The variety grown is Gossypium harbadense, but no informa-
tion is available regarding the amount produced. A sample of Mauritius
cotton was shown at the Indian and Colonial Exhibition in 1886; it was stated to
be similar to the “ better grades of Orleans cotton.” A specimen of Seychelles
cotton has been examined in the Scientific and Technical Department of the Imperial
Institute. It was slightly yellow in colour and somewhat harsh to the touch. The
staple varied from Ito 1.3 inches in length; the sample was valued by brokers at
from 7fd. to Bd. per lb. (February, 1904).
St. Helena.
The indigenous cotton is Gossypium latifolium, which is stated to grow freely
and to yield good supplies of fine cotton. A specimen of this cotton is shown in
the Economic Museum of the Royal Gardens, Kew. The area suitable for
■cultivation in the island is small.
ASIA.
India.
The first systematic attempt to investigate the cottons of India was made
more than a century ago, when Dr. A. Hove was commissioned by the British Govern-
ment to study the cottons of the country. Dr. Hove’s report shows clearly that the
product then grown in the Western States of India was much superior to that
now generally produced there.
In the early days of the British cotton manufacture the material employed was
almost entirely of Indian origin, but about the period 1796-1800 the West Indies
appear to have become the source of the best and largest supply, to be superseded
in turn by the United States. The causes of this decline in demand for Indian
cotton in the United Kingdom appear to have been the careless way in which
the Indian cotton was picked and cleaned, and the extensive adulteration to which
it was subject. This state of things naturally led manufacturers to prefer the
clean and uniform American cottons, and the greatly improved cotton spinning
machinery then being adopted in England was modified more especially for the
utilisation of these long-stapled cottons, with the result that at the present time
The great bulk of the cotton produced in India (which is always medium or short-
stapled) is unsuitable for the British market.


Many attempts were made in India to combat the competition of the American
article in British markets partly by means of adulteration laws, enacting severe
penalties against the sophistication of cotton, and partly by attempts to cultivate
American cottons in India. These latter experiments were commenced by the East
India Company, who imported large quantities of American seed for this purpose,
and have been continued by private persons, agricultural societies, and the Govern-
ment of India during the last century with practically no result, owing to the rapid
deterioration in the character of the cotton obtained after a few years’ growth
in India. One experiment of this kind may be quoted as illustrating the difficulties
experienced.
In 1838 ten planters were procured from the Southern States of America
for the purpose of establishing the cultivation of New Orleans cotton in India.
Three of these experts were stationed at Broach, in Bombay, three at Tinivelly
and Coimbatore, in Madras, and four at Doab and Bandelkhand, in Bengal. With
varying success the experts continued their efforts until it became manifest that
no permanent improvement could be effected. Besides many natural difficulties,
much opposition was encountered from the natives. This was overcome in Dharwar
only, and it is remarkable that in this district American cotton has been successfully
established, and although the “ lint ” now obtained is inferior in quality to that of the
original fibre, it is much superior to that of most of the native Indian cotton.
The almost uniform want of success which has characterised these efforts to
introduce American cotton into India has also attended similar attempts to introduce
Egyptian and Brazilian cottons, and during recent years - attention has been
principally directed rather to the improvement of indigenous varieties than to the
introduction of exotic kinds.
Commercial varieties of Indian Cotton.
The Indian cotton of commerce is classified into certain well-defined varieties
distinguished by peculiarities of staple, and designated according to the locality
in which each is produced. It must be understood, however, that these commercial
varieties are not uniform cottons in the sense that each is the product of a distinct
variety of plant. Many of them are produced by what is botanically the same plant,
although the character of the cotton fibre produced has become altered by the
environment in which the plant has been cultivated. The following are the principal
commercial classes recognised in India;
Early Cottons.
These come into the market from October to March.
Bengals. —This class is principally grown in the Punjab, the United Provinces of
Agra and Oudh, Bengal, Rajputana and Central India, and is shipped either from Bom-
bay or Calcutta. The cottons included in this group are stated to be derived principally
from forms of Gossypium herhaceum and Gossypium neglectum with some Gossy-
pium Wightianum degenerated by hydridisation with the two former species. This
class comprises most of the cotton produced in India.
Oomras. —This group of cottons is further divided in the Liverpool market into
“ Oomras proper,” “ Khandesh,” and Bilati.” These varieties are stated to be
principally grown in the Nizam’s Dominions, and to be produced by Gossypium
Wightianum.
Hinganghdt. —This race is peculiar to the Central Provinces, and is stated to
be produced by a hybrid between Gossypium Wightianum and Gossypium neglectum,
although quite recently the variety has been tentatively referred by Professor
Gammie to Gossypium indicum.


Late Cottons.
These come into the market from February to April, although in exceptional
years the crop may be delayed till June.
Dholleras. This form is principally produced in the native states of
Kathiawar, and is derived probably from a form of Gossypium Wightianum (Tod).
Westerns. —This term is used to designate one of the chief cottons of Madras,
Hyderabad and the Deccan. It is obtained from one of the forms of Gossypium
Wightianum. ,
Dharwars. —This is an important Bombay cotton, and is said to be derived from
the American cotton plant, which has long been successfully established, though in a
somewhat deteriorated form, in the Dharwar district.
Coomptas. —This cotton is also produced in Bombay and is, according to
Middleton, obtained from a form of Gossypium herhaceum.
Broach. —This is the typical cotton of Baroda, Broach and Surat. It is prob-
ably the product of a form of Gossypium Wightianum.
Coconadas. —This is a reddish-brown cotton produced in the Kistna district of
Madras, and probably obtained from a form of Gossypium neglectum.
Tinnerellys. —This variety is produced in various districts of Madras, and is
the most valuable of the Madras cottons. It is used to some extent in England for
admixture with American cottons. It is probably obtained from a form of
Gossypium Wightianum.
In addition to the foregoing classes there is a variety known as “ Salems,” or
“ Coimbatores,” which is of little commercial importance except that it is occasion-
ally employed to adulterate the better cottons. This product is stated to be obtained
from greatly degenerated plants of Bourbon cotton, stated to have been introduced into
the Coimbatore and Salem districts about 1804.
The botanical names given in the foregoing paragraphs to the plants from which
these commercial classes of cotton are derived are those in use in Watt’s Dictionary
of Economic Products, and in the Agricultural Ledger (India), but it is probable
that the survey of indigenous Indian cottons, now being made in India by the
Reporter on Economic Products and the Director of the Botanical Survey, and to
which the Government of India attaches great importance, will result in a more
definite characterisation of these plants than is at present possible.
The indigenous Indian cotton plants, according to Mollison, may be broadly
divided into two groups :
(а) Varieties which take at least eight months to mature;
(б) Varieties which ripen in about five months.
The plants of the first group are only suitable for cultivation in the black
cotton soils of Bombay and Madras, and would not grow in the northern
part of India, where the December cold would arrest growth too early in
their development. These late ripening cottons are mainly of the “ Broach ” type.
The varieties of the quick-ripening group are much more widely distributed in India
than the former, and, with the exception of the Hinganghat cotton, produce cotton
of coarse, short staple.
The cultivation of short staple cottons appears to be slowly but surely displacing
that of the better cottons of the Broach and Hinganghat types in India. This
is perhaps to some extent due to the fact to which prominence has been given,
especially by Sir George Watt, that the use of public gins leads to the admixture of
the whole of the cotton seed of a district, so that the whole product of the district is
inevitably brought to the same low level. This particular defect in the agricultural
system might perhaps be remedied by the inauguration of seed farms under Govern-
ment control, from which selected seed could be issued to cotton cultivators. On the
other hand there is evidence that the better class of cultivators are careful to select
their seed, and that the good demand in the Indian market for a short stapled cotton
and the reliability of such varieties in unfavourable seasons has had much to do with
the extension of short stapled cottons in that country.


Improvement of Indian Cotton.
The importance of improving the quality of Indian cotton has long been recog-
nised by the Government of India. Efforts were at first directed particularly to
the acclimatisation of exotic varieties. More recently, however, attention has been
given to the improvement of indigenous varieties, and experiments have been under-
taken at the various Government farms with this object, and also with a view to
obtaining new and improved varieties by hydridisation. An acccount of the results
of experiments carried on during the years 1901-1903 has recently been given in
a report by Mr. J. W. Mollison, Inspector-General of Agriculture in India, which has
been presented to Parliament, with other papers on the subject, and a covering
despatch from the Government of India, under the title “ Improvement of Indian
Cotton.” The following is a resume of the principal conclusions arrived at in the
course of that investigation.
In the year 1902 seventy-seven samples of indigenous cotton seed bearing
different vernacular names were obtained from various provinces in India, and this
collection probably comprised nearly all the native varieties. The seed was distri-
buted for cultivation to two farms in Madras, two in Bombay, one in the Central
Provinces, one in the Punjab, and two in Bengal. The seventy-seven so-called
varieties were examined in the field at Poona by Professor Gammie, and he dis-
tinguished no less than eighty-seven varieties in the various plots, which he tenta-
tively classified. A comparative study of all the varieties growing in their native
districts, and also at the experimental stations, showed that the habit of growth
of any variety, the quality and value of the “ lint,” and the proportion of “ lint ” to
seed, are liable to considerable modification by variations in the conditions of soil
and climate.
It is probable that nearly every indigenous Indian variety of cotton has degene-
rated. This degeneration is due not only to exhaustion of the soil and inferior cultiva-
tion, but is largely owing to the continued use of seed of the same strain for many
generations, and to want of care in its selection. The experiments have demon-
strated that the length, quality and yield of cotton fibre are favourably affected by
superior conditions of cultivation and by selection of seed from the most prolific
plants continued from year to year. It has also been found that new and vigorous
varieties can be obtained by artificial cross-fertilisation. Cross-fertilisation by
insect or other natural agency is regarded by Mollison as probably of rare occurrence in
the cotton plant, each flower being fertilised by its own pollen before it opens. Experi-
ments on cross-fertilisation are now being carried on with the following objects: {a) to
produce from late-ripening varieties hybrids which are more vigorous and produc-
tive than the parents; ( b ) to produce, by crossing the best early-ripening varieties
with the best late-ripening ones, vigorous, bushy, productive plants which will
ripen nearly as soon as their early-ripening parents. The results of these experi-
ments, as far as they have already proceeded, indicate the probable realisation of
the aims in view.
Persistent efforts have been made for many years to introduce exotic varieties
of cotton into general cultivation in various parts of India. An American variety
has been grown for over thirty years in the Dharwar district, but the cultivation,
which was once extensive, is gradually declining. “ Upland ” cottons have been
acclimatised at the Nagpur and Cawnpore farms, but they have not been adopted
by the natives for general cultivation owing to the greater risk involved, the
American varieties being more susceptible to injury by insects and rain-storms.
Moreover, the acclimatisation of foreign varieties is accompanied by general
deterioration, so that in time the “ lint ” becomes of less value than that obtained from
the finer indigenous varieties. The effects of acclimatisation and of unfavourable
conditions of soil and climate have altered the characters of exotic cotton in other
ways, particularly in deteriorating the size of the bolls, the size of the seed, the
proportion of “ lint ”to seed, and the percentage of oil in the seed. Recent experiments
with American and Egyptian seed have shown that although exotic cottons gradually
deteriorate in India, the deterioration can probably be arrested, and possible
improvement effected in acclimatised varieties by controlled cross-fertilisation.
In recent years the cultivation of inferior varieties has extended, whilst that
of certain long-stapled varieties has declined. The most remarkable change of this
kind is the gradual decline in the cultivation of . the “ Bani ” variety (commercially
i known as “ Hinganghat ” cotton) in the Central Provinces, Berars and Khandesh,


Provinces.
1901.
1902.
Acres.
Acres.
Upper Burma
146,000
137,000
Lower Burma
9,000
10,000
Assam
3,000
4,000
Bengal
115,000
106,000
United Provinces, Agra
1,018,000
1,119,000
„ „ Oudh
28,000
35,000
Punjab ...
1,065,000
856,000
North-West Provinces ...
—
20,000
Sind
84,000
128,000
Bombay ...
2,285,000
2,802,000
Central Provinces
1,005,000
981,000
Berar
2,444,000
2,683,000
Madras
1,373,000
1,381,000
Minor Provinces (Ajmere, Coorg and Manpur)
35,000
39,000
Total
9,610,000
10,301,000
and its replacement by the “ Jari ” and “ Varudi ” varieties. Both the latter forms
give a better yield than “ Bani ” in average seasons, are less risky to grow in a bad
year, and, moreover, yield a higher proportion of “ lint ”to seed. In some districts
quick-ripening, inferior varieties of the “Jari” type have been introduced where
previously only late-ripening forms of the “ Broach ” type were grown. The cultiva-
tion of inferior quick-ripening cottons is likely to continue and extend until superior
varieties are found which can be grown as quickly without incurring risk, and will
yield a greater profit in average seasons.
It is stated that an attempt will shortly be made by private enterprise to cultivate
in the plains of the Ganges cotton of the type from which the Dacca muslins were made.
The total area under cotton cultivation in British India in 1901-1902 amounted
to 10,301,000 acres, whilst in 1900-1901 9,610,000 acres were under cultivation. The
areas in these years were distributed as follows:
The cotton crop is most important in Bombay and Berar, bnt every province
and every large state has some of its area under cotton. The area for the whole of
India is returned for 1901-1902 at 14,506,000 acres, and for 1902-1903 at 15,745,000
acres, which is larger than that of the record year 1893-1894, when the cotton area
was nearly million acres. These figures include large areas in Hyderabad and
other native states. Cotton is usually grown in conjunction with some other crop,
such as Juar Sorghum, and allowance has been made for this fact in the general
table of territorial distribution given above. In Bombay the crop of 1899-1900 failed
disastrously, and though the following year showed some recovery, the yield of 1901-
1902 (518,396 bales of 400 lbs.) was little more than half an average yield: in 1903-1904
the output rose to 795,233 bales, or about three-quarters of the average crop.
The total output of clean cotton in India during 1898-1902 was as follows:
Bales of 400 lb.
1898- 2,807,343
1899- 956,540
1900- 2,730,231
1901- 2,645,455
1902- 2,687,813


Exports of Raw Cotton—
Year ended 31st March.
To the
To
United Kingdom.
Japan.
Cwts.
Cwts.
1891-2
710,000
401,000
1893-4
521,000
368,000
1895-6
644,000
856,000
1897-8
206,000
1,311,000
1899-1900
133,000
2,319,000
1900-1901
381,000
634,000
1901-1902
166,000
2,526,000
1902-1903
372,000
1,722,000
A large part of this, estimated at about one-half, is used in the Indian cotton
mills. The exports to the United Kingdom fell off greatly between 1898 and 1902',
but have recovered ground during 1903 : increasing quantities have been exported
to Japan and a good deal is sent to European countries.
The exports of raw cotton have been much affected by the famines and the conse-
quent rise in the price of food-grains, which have caused a contraction of the area
devoted to cotton. But apart from these fluctuations, two notable tendencies are
observable in the records, namely, a great falling off in the exports to the United
Kingdom and a considerable increase in the amount of raw cotton taken by Japan,
and although the export to the United Kingdom recovered somewhat in 1903, this
may be attributed to the present deficiency in the American supply, and would
probably not be permanent under normal conditions.
The check in the Japanese consumption in 1900-01 was due partly to the
financial and commercial crisis in that country, and partly to a deficiency of the
Indian supply. Japan formerly took large quantities of yarn, but now buys the
raw cotton and spins her own yarns. Next to Japan, the largest quantity is taken by
Germany; 1901-1902, 754,000 cwts.; 1902-1903, 1,122,000 cwts.
With regard to the possibility of increasing the production of cotton in India,
the opinion was held some years back that there was little hope of extending the
area under cultivation, but investigations on this point are still in progress and it
appears possible that some extension of the area under cotton may take place. It
is probable that the economic conditions prevailing in India are such that cotton
cultivation under European supervision is less likely to prove feasible and remunera-
tive than independent cultivation by the native “ ryot.”
The Statistical Department of the India Office has recently issued a Memorandum:
on the cotton crop of the season 1903-04, which contains the following particulars.
The areas under cultivation in the Punjab, the Central Provinces and Berar are
the highest on record, and there are large increases in Madras, Hyderabad, Bombay
and Central India.
With regard to the crop, that of the United Provinces is expected to be 44 per
cent, less than that of 1902-1903, and an 18 per cent, decrease is estimated in the
crop of Hyderabad. The crops in the Punjab and Madras have done fairly well. The
17403


Province.
Area
under cultivation,
1903-1904.
Estimated yield of current
year.
Acres.
Bales (400 lbs).
Punjab
1,258,100
276,153
North-West Frontier
35,900
8,424
United Provinces
841,417
183,540
Bengal (early crop)
56,100
12,250
Central Provinces
1,247,405
267,843
Berar
2,845,905
283,011
Bombay (early crop)
1,434,327
211,727
Bombay (late crop)
3,503,728
—
Sind (late crop) ...
201,883
—
Madras
1,414,100
85 per cent, of a normal crop
Burma
134,507
29,162
Hyderabad
2,496,529
63 per cent, of a normal crop
Central India
683,394
179,964
Rajaputana
302,927
75,215
yield of early cotton in Bombay represents two-thirds of an average crop, and the
prospects of the important late crop are good.
The degeneration of Indian cotton necessitates a revision of the Indian method
of cultivation with efficient means for scientific supervision. It is satisfactory to know
that the Indian Department of Agriculture is concentrating attention on this subject
though, as pointed out in the letter of the Government of India, “ the methods of the
Indian cultivator cannot be suddenly changed,” and it will be necessary not only
to develope and establish an improved type of Indian cotton, but to convince the
native cultivator of its value and that it is to his interest to grow it.
Sir George Watt’s personal views as to the possibility of improving cotton culti-
vation in India will be found in the note appended to this Memorandum.
Ceylon.
Numerous attempts have been made from time to time to cultivate cotton in
Ceylon, but the industry has not become firmly established. At present only a very
few acres (in 1901, 40 acres, and in 1902, 295 acres) are devoted to cotton. The
returns for 1902 show 7,858 lb. of cotton produced in the Northern Province, chiefly
derived from small patches grown by the natives for their own use.
There appears to be no reason why a considerable cotton industry should not be
established in North Ceylon, more especially when railway communication with
Jaffna is effected. Experiments are at present being undertaken by the Government,
and valuable help in the supply of seed, machinery and advice is being given by the
British Cotton Growing Association. An area of 150 acres has been reserved under
the newly restored tank of Maha Illuppalama, about twelve miles from Talawa
station. On this land various kinds of cotton (Egyptian, American, and South
Indian) are being planted in blocks of 20 to 25 acres each, and divided by belts of
rubber and cacao, both of which give promise of success under irrigation. It is
also intended to issue seed to the villagers, to buy in the crops at fixed rates for
a few years, and to make grants of land on easy terms in order to encourage the
experimental cultivation as widely as possible.


Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States.
Cotton has never been grown on a large scale in the Straits Settlements, although
the conditions are stated to be not unsuited to its cultivation, with the exception
that the cotton plants grown in this Colony have been found to be peculiarly
susceptible to the attack of vegetable and animal parasites which destroy the unripe
pods.
Tree cotton ( Gossypium arboreum ) is said to be grown to a limited extent in
Perak, but nothing like systematic cultivation has yet been attempted.
A variety of short-stapled cotton known to the Javanese as “ Kala-Kala,” also
thrives and produces crops, but is not cultivated on an economic scale. Suggestions
have been made in the past to introduce from Java “ Kapas-Blanda,” apparently
a variety of “ Sea Island ” cotton. Practical difficulties as to labour had led tu
the recommendation to cultivate “ Kala-Kala,” which produces in the Straits few
pods at a time but is in fruit almost all the year round, in preference to the “ Kapas
Blanda,” which gives one heavy crop.
In brief, there is at present no cotton industry in the Straits Settlements and
the Federated Malay States, and no immediate prospect of one being established.
The conditions are probably not unsuited to the cultivation of cotton, and in the
event of the industry being taken up, the production of a short-stapled cotton would
appear the most probable from the evidence at present available.
British North Borneo.
Cotton is not grown in British North Borneo to any great extent, and hitherto
the native variety only has been produced. This is probably closely allied to, if
not identical with, the “ Kapas-rampit ” found in Dutch Borneo, which is stated
to produce a cotton equal in strength and fineness to the better qualities of Egyptian
cotton.
A specimen of native cotton from British North Borneo has been examined in
the Scientific and Technical Department of the Imperial Institute. It was im-
perfectly ginned and badly cleaned, but was white, with occasional buff-coloured
stains. The staple was of medium length (1.3 inches). Owing to its uncleaned
condition no commercial valuation could be given for this specimen.
It is considered that in the hands of Europeans the quality of the native cotton
could be much improved. The value of the exports of raw cotton from British North
Borneo in 1900 amounted to $618.61.
The British North Borneo Company state that plenty of labour is available,
and that they will give every encouragement to the extension of cotton cultivation.
THE WEST INDIES.
The experimental work now being carried on in the West Indies had the
advantage of favourable initial circumstances. “ Sea Island ” cotton is indigenous
to the West Indies, and “ upland ” cotton, if not actually native, is thoroughly
acclimatised. In 1657 cotton was cultivated as a minor crop on many sugar estates
in Barbados. Early in the eighteenth century it was of importance in Jamaica,
and was also grown in St. Lucia, Trinidad and elsewhere. So important was the
industry in those days that the West Indies were able to furnish about 70 per cent,
of all the cotton used in Great Britain. Subsequently the industry was abandoned,
and in 1900 it existed on a commercial scale only in the small island of Carriacou.
The principal cause of the abandonment of cotton cultivation was the greater
profit to be obtained from sugar cultivation. Owing to the decline of the latter
industry, it appears probable that in some parts of the West Indies cotton may now
be grown in place of the sugar-cane, whilst in other parts it may form a valuable
subsidiary crop, or perhaps be grown in rotation with sugar.
17403 D 2


The problem in the West Indies is thus not the establishment of an entirely
new industry, but rather the revival of an old one under economic conditions different
from those under which it was formerly carried on with success.
The conditions prevailing in the West Indies appear to be favourable to the
re-establishment of the industry. In many of the islands there is land already
cleared, and well adapted to cotton cultivation. Soil and climate are known to be
suitable, and in, at least, some of the islands an adequate supply of good labour,
a factor of the utmost importance, is obtainable at comparatively low cost. On
estates now devoted to sugar the introduction of cotton involves no disorganisation
of the present cultural system.
Recent work in the West Indies dates from 1900, when the Imperial Depart-
ment of Agriculture, with the co-operation of the Local Agricultural Society,
started some experiments in St. Lucia with the object of bringing into cultivation
lands that had once been under sugar, but had been abandoned owing either to
poverty of the soil or the arid nature of the climate. Later in the same year
cultivation was started at the Experiment Stations in Antigua and Montserrat.
The results of these early efforts having proved satisfactory, experiments have
been carried on in many of the other islands. At the present time the most pro-
mising localities for cotton are stated to be the Grenadines, St. Vincent, Barbados,
the south-east portion of St. Lucia, Montserrat, the south-east of Antigua, Nevis,
St. Kitt’s, and the Virgin Islands.
Throughout the experiments the British Cotton Growing Association has
actively co-operated with the Imperial Department of Agriculture, and given assist-
ance in the form of loans of cotton gins and baling presses, grants of money and seed
for distribution free, or at a nominal cost. It has also undertaken to handle, free of
charge (with the exception of brokerage), all West Indian cotton shipped to Liverpool.
The steamship companies have also agreed to make a considerable reduction in
the freight charges on experimental cotton shipped from the West Indies, for the
next two years. An offer has also been made for the direct Liverpool boats to call
at any of the West Indian islands having cotton for shipment in order to avoid the
railway charges in England.
It is officially estimated that by the end of the present planting season there
will be, not improbably, about 4,000 acres under cotton cultivation in the Windward
and Leeward Islands and Barbados, giving an estimated yield of 3,600,000 lb. of
seed cotton, or 1,200,000 lb. of “ lint ” and 2,400,000 lb. of cotton seed. This estimate, it
should be noted, does not include cotton from Trinidad, British Guiana or Jamaica.
“ Sea Island ” cotton has been recommended for cultivation in the richer and
more highly cultivated soils, and “ upland ” cotton in the drier districts with thin
soils. The Imperial Commissioner of Agriculture, Sir D. Morris, K.C.M.G., and the
Superintendent of the Botanic Station, Barbados, Mr. J. R. Bovell, F.L.S., have recently
returned from an official tour through the cotton-growing regions of the United
States, where they investigated the conditions of cotton cultivation. One of the
immediate results of their visit has been to secure for West Indian planters a supply
of seed of the best “ Sea Island ” cotton. An expert ginner from the United States
is now attached to the staff of the Imperial Department of Agriculture.
As the conditions vary greatly in different parts of the West Indies, it will be
of advantage to review separately the efforts made in the several islands.
Trinidad.
Cotton was formerly an important crop in this Colony. It is stated that at
present there are about acres under cotton, some 340 lb. of seed having been
sown, of which 46 per cent, germinated. Recent reports state that on about half
of the estates the cotton is growing well, and on the remainder it is in fair condition.
Samples of Trinidad cotton are at present under investigation in the Scientific and
Technical Department of the Imperial Institute.


Tobago.
Cotton of excellent quality was formerly grown in Tobago. No information
is available regarding efforts to re-establish the industry, but the extensive plains
in the south-west of the island have been suggested as a suitable locality.
Grenada and the Grenadines.
In 1803 Grenada with its dependencies is reported to have produced 4,709 cwts.
■of cotton. There appears to be no prospect of any considerable attention being paid
to cotton in Grenada itself in the immediate future.
This product is at present grown solely in Carriacou, the largest of the Grenadines
(a chain of small islands between St. Vincent and Grenada) which is less than 9,000
acres in area. The island is subject to droughts, due probably in part to the destruc-
tion, for firewood, of the original forests. Cotton is now, and has been for many
years, the only crop cultivated for export.
The cotton industry is mainly in the hands of small growers, and is not con-
ducted on any very definite system. The cultural operations are of the simplest
character; food crops, such as maize and peas, are usually planted between the rows
of cotton. The cotton plants are allowed to remain in the ground for a number of
years and are cut back annually to within a foot of the ground. No tillage is
attempted beyond two or three weedings a year, and no manure is applied.
Two kinds of cotton are grown, known locally as “ Marie Galante ” and “ Sea
Island.” The “ Sea Island ” cotton is more troublesome to pick, as it is readily
blown away by the wind, and if the pods fall it spoils. The pods of “ Marie
Ualante,” on the other hand, are stated to remain open for several days without the
cotton being lost, and if the pods fall to the ground the “ lint ” does not become
•damaged. February is the principal crop season in the hills, and March and April
in the valleys.
The yield is very poor, being, it is stated, less than 300 lb. per acre on the
average, and as low as 150 lb. in many localities. Seven gins were at work in the
island at the beginning of 1903, four driven by steam and three by wind power.
The owners gin and bale cotton at a charge of 7s. per bale of 300 lb., including
cartage, coverings, &c. An attempt is now being made by the local Government to
improve the quality of the cotton and the methods of cultivation, ginning and packing.
Improved machinery has been supplied by the British Cotton Growing Association for
this purpose.
The average export for the five years ending December 31st, 1901, was 2,095 cwts.
of raw cotton and 4,537 cwts. of cotton seed, and the average value, £3,065. In 1902,
the export was 2,212 cwts. of raw cotton and 4,536 cwts. of seed, together valued at
£4,069.
The cotton is of rather poor quality and is valued in the English market at
about 4d. to sd. per lb. It is hoped that owing to the stimulus provided by the
increased demand for cotton in the United Kingdom the export from Grenada may
be raised in the near future to at least the amount recorded in 1803.
St. Lucia.
Cotton experiments were commenced in 1900. In 1902 there were 50 acres
under cultivation, and in 1903 120 acres, with every probability of the area increasing
more rapidly in the future.


St. Vincent.
The reports on the experimental work indicate satisfactory progress. “ Sea
Island ” proved more vigorous than “ upland ” cotton, but both these varieties are now
grown in about equal quantities. 25,580 lbs. of cotton, valued at £328, were exported
in 1901, and 54,016 lbs., valued at £475, in 1902, mainly to the United Kingdom. A
central cotton-ginning factory has been erected. Cultivation by small proprietors is
rapidly extending. The total area under cotton is now 527 acres.
Barbados.
Experiments were commenced in 1902, when 16 acres were planted on various,
estates. For 1903 the estimated area was 1,200 acres, the largest area on any one
estate being 60 acres. “ Sea Island” cotton is the kind principally grown. From
returns available from two estates, the yield is shown to be over 500 lb. of cleaned
cotton per acre.
A central cotton-ginning factory has been erected capable of dealing with
3,600 lb. of seed cotton daily. Cotton grown from “Sea Island” seed has been
valued in England at from lOd. to Is. 2d. per lb. The movement is being actively
taken up by the planters, with the assistance of the local Government.
Antigua.
450 acres were planted with cotton in 1903. “ Sea Island ” seed has been ex-
tensively distributed and its cultivation is encouraged by the Government. The-
cotton grown in the island has been valued at from 7d. to Is. per lb. During the past
year the experiments suffered from drought, but yields of 400 and 500 lb. per acre
were reported. Cultivation is also being undertaken in Barbuda.
Leeward Islands.
Efforts are being made to establish cotton cultivation in these islands. The
Government is advancing £5,000 to small growers for preliminary expenses, and the
British Cotton Growing Association has guaranteed one half of any losses that may
occur.
Montserrat.
About 700 acres were estimated to be under cotton for the season 1903-4.
•
“ Sea Island ” has given the best results as regards both quantity and length
of staple. The minimum valuation of cotton grown in the island was lOd. and
the maximum Is. per lb. 5,000 lb. of cleaned cotton were shipped in 1903 from
one estate. It is estimated that 10,000 acres of land will be available for cotton,,
in a three-year rotation, giving about 3,300 acres available annually.
St. Kitts and Nevis.
324 acres were planted in 1902, and in 1903 one estate had 350 acres. On an
estate which had a considerable area under cotton the average yield of “ lint ” in
1902 was about 400 lb. per acre. A shipment of 12,000 lb. sold at Is. per lb.
The prospects for the industry are stated to be good. A number of gins have been
promised by the British Cotton Growing Association and three ginning factories
will soon be at work.


Jamaica.
Little detailed information is available, but cotton seed has been actively
distributed, and a gin has been erected. Messrs. Elder, Dempster & Co. have offered
to convey raw cotton from Jamaica to the United Kingdom free of charge.
Bahamas.
It is stated that in 1857 about 1,100,000 lb. of raw cotton were imported into
the United Kingdom from the Bahamas. At the present time comparatively
little cotton is grown in the islands and the export for the year ending 31st March,
1903, amounted only to 1,300 lb. Specimens of Bahamas cotton were shown at the
Indian and Colonial Exhibition in 1886; they were of the Nankin type, and were
of fine, silky staple of fair length,
British Guiana.
On the coast lands near Berbice two kinds of cotton, known locally as “ Bush ”
and “ Creole,” grow wild. Samples have been favourably reported on in the English
market, and valued at to Bd. per lb., and it was stated that a market could
always be found for as much of this cotton as could be supplied.
This Colony is stated to possess large tracts of land suitable for cotton culti-
vation.
British Honduras.
Cotton grows wild in British Honduras and recent experiments have shown that
it can be successfully grown there. The question of establishing cotton cultivation
is under the consideration of the local Society of Agriculture and Commerce. In
July, 1903, half a ton of cotton seed consisting of “ Sea Island,” Egyptian and Peru-
vian varieties was sent to the Colony by the British Cotton Growing Association.
Experiments are also being made with the “ Peterkin,” “ Russell ” “ Big 801 l ” and
“ Mississippi Valley ” varieties of American seed. The northern parts of the Colony
appear to be most suitable for cotton growing, and there an extensive area is available,
•especially between the Belize and Hondo rivers.
AUSTRALIA.
Queensland.
In Australia two attempts, each of considerable magnitude, have been made to
establish cotton growing as one of the resources of the country; but in both cases,
after a trial lasting for several years, the industry died away, and up to the present
it has failed to become permanent. Both attempts took place in Queensland, which
possesses a climate and soil well suited to the growth of the cotton plant, as was
proved as far back as the year 1828, in the early days of the Colony, when, under
the direction of Captain Logan, some progress was made in this cultivation, and
r bag of cotton sent to London from Moreton Bay was reported to be of excellent
quality.
The first period was in the sixties, at the time of the American Civil War. In
1862, 14,344 lb. of cotton were exported, of an average value of Is. lid. per lb., and
from that date up to 1871, 8,000,000 lb. were exported; a heavy state bonus on
every bale of cotton exported helped to stimulate the industry. The idea at that
time was that Queensland should share in furnishing the supply of raw material to
the cotton factories of Lancashire. Later on it was decided to abolish the subsidy,
and very rapidly cotton ceased to be cultivated to any but the most trivial extent,
and during the two years 1887 and 1888 not one acre was planted throughout the
Colony.
Then the idea of manufacturing their own cotton fabrics in the Colony came
to the front, and led to the second period of cotton growing. The Queensland
Parliament sanctioned the payment of a sum of money to the first factory which


Year.
Acres.
Produce.
Average yield.
Conditions.
1889
1
Lb.
7 •
Lb.
7
Ginned
1890
16
5,315
332
1891
90
48,746 ;
542
Probably unginned
1892
717
212,370
296
Ginned
1893
491
29,353
154
11
1894
100
54,801
548
Unginned
1895
494
269,110
545
11
1896
280
141,032
504
11
1897
48
19,977
416
11
1898
1
50
50
11
1899
Nil
Nil
Nil.
—
1900
11
11
11
—
1901
11
11
11
—
1902
8
1,600
200
Unginned
turned out a quantity of manufactured cotton. With this inducement a companjr
was formed and a factory established at Ipswich, a town 23 miles from Brisbane,,
and thus, with a prospect of a market at their doors, the farmers of West Moreton
again included cotton among their crops. This revival, however, was short-lived,
lasting only from 1890 to 1897, when financial difficulties brought the operations of
the Cotton Manufacturing Company to an end, and by this misfortune cotton grow-
ing was stopped for a second time in the Colony. It was proved, however, that
cotton could be grown, and experience was gained as to the soils that should be
selected. Errors were made in planting on rich alluvial lands, where the plant
grew vigorously, but produced wood rather than cotton fibre, and on the other hand
soils were also cultivated which were totally unfitted for the crop. The rise, decline
and eventual failure of this effort are shown in the following table, taken from the
Reports of the Registrar-General on the Agricultural Returns, Queensland :
Note.— The Report for 1894 states that Queensland seed-cotton loses about two-thirds of its weight in ginning.
One difficulty attaching to the cotton-growing industry is the amount of labour
demanded in picking, as during the harvest the whole crop requires to be gone
through every day, or, at least, every other day, to cull the fibre as soon as the bolls
are fully open. Although the work is light it involves an outlay of much time, and
this renders the crop only profitable when child labour, or other cheap labour, is
available for the purpose. Hence the labour conditions in Australia seriously affect
the question of re-starting the industry, but hopes are entertained that cotton may
be grown in districts where the white colonist can cultivate it on innumerable small
holdings, capable of being managed by a white family with occasional hired labour.
The chances of finding a satisfactory cotton-picking machine are not great, as,
although numerous forms have been invented in the United States, none seem yet
to have achieved marked success. It is stated that the Government of Queensland
is now collecting information regarding the possibility of cultivating cotton in the
Colony and New Guinea with a view to re-starting this industry.
New South Wales.
In New South Wales the possibility of the successful cultivation of
cotton has been proved by trials in numerous localities, showing that the


Year.
Quantity.
Value.
£ .s', d.
1897
:55 tons
1,615 0 0
1898
17 tons
820 0 0
1899
15 tons
705 0 0
1900
11 tons
70 i;i 9
1901
Xone recorded
— ;
J 902
None recorded
soil and climate of extensive districts are suitable for the purpose, and it
is considered that it would yield a fair remuneration; the reason cotton has not been
grown is attributed to the fact that agricultural labour has found sufficient employ-
ment in connection with other and more remunerative crops. Experiments have been
tried, with satisfactory results, in the northern portions of the Colony, in the
neighbourhood of Sydney, and at artesian bores on the inland plains. The plant is
well adapted to the climate, and has been found to thrive when other crops have
succumbed to drought, and samples of the cotton grown have proved to be of good
strength and staple.
South Australia.
In the Northern Territory of South Australia experiments indicate that cotton
can be grown in certain places. A sample of the produce of a small-scale trial
has been received at the Imperial Institute, and is of good quality, being of satis-
factory colour and fairly long staple. This sample was valued by brokers at
8-|-d. per lb. (February, 1904).
FIJI.
The trade returns for this Colony give the following exports of cotton principally
to New South Wales for the years mentioned;
No information is available regarding the area still under cotton in the Colony,
but it is stated that a very large area is suitable for the growth of this product.
About 1865 considerable quantities of Fiji cotton were imported into this
country where, on account of its silky gloss, whiteness, and long staple it sold readily.
These imports soon ceased as the result of complaints regarding the irregularity
in the length of the staple, and the disappearance of the export trade to Australia
shown by the above table is probably accounted for in the same way. This defect
was probably the result of using unselected seed.
The variety of cotton grown in Fiji is known as “ Kidney the plant yielding
this is a hybrid of Gossypium herhaceum, and is closely allied to one of the forms
of this species widely cultivated in India. A specimen of Fiji cotton has been
examined in the Scientific and Technical Department of the Imperial Institute.
It was a white, soft cotton, with a staple varying from 1.2 to 1.6 inches; this material
was valued by brokers at Bfd. per lb. (February, 1904).
The prospects of cotton cultivation in Fiji appear to deserve enquiry.
mos
li


NOTE ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE BRITISH SUPPLY OF
COTTON WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO INDIA, BY
SIR GEORGE WATT, C.I.E.
The subject of the improvement of Indian cotton has occupied my time and
attention off and on for the past fifteen years. In 1892 the Government of India con-
templated my bringing out a scientific monograph on the cultivated forms met with
in India. In anticipation I spent my furlough of that, and part of the next, year
working up the collections of cotton in the herbaria of the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, the British Museum, and the Linnaean Society, and photographed all the
types. I next went to Paris, Florence, Naples, &c., and specially studied and photo-
graphed the types of Parlatore’s and Todaro’s herbaria. Shortly after I returned
to India, and in 1894 began a systematic exploration of the cotton cultivation of this
country. I wandered from field to field all over Guzerat and Kathiawar, studying
practically the cottons of Western India. Next season I went to Kbandesh, the
Deccan, Berar, and the 'Central Provinces. During these explorations I collected
with my own hands many hundred specimens, and recorded botanical and agricul-
tural notes regarding them.
Unfortunately, however, my studies of cotton had to be pushed on one side,
through the greater urgency of other work that devolved upon me, and the survey
of the remaining cotton areas of India was never specially conducted by me, nor,
I believe, by any other person. During other investigations, however, I visited the
Punjab, the United Provinces, Bengal, Assam, South India, and Burma, and inci-
dentally collected cottons and recorded observations of some value regarding them.
Were I to publish all my notes as they stand, they might form a volume of consider-
able magnitude. But (although my results have, on more than one occasion, been
anticipated) I have refrained from publication, because the more I studied cotton
the more convinced I became that by far the greatest source of failure in our past
endeavours had proceeded from ignorant experiment. I know of no' subject in the
whole field of commercial botany that calls more loudly for systematic study, on
the part of an expert botanist, than that of cotton.
You ask my opinion as to what could be done in this country to forward the
scheme of extended production within the British Empire. I can but repeat what
I have urged time after time, both in India and in this country, namely, that there
can be little or no enduring success until the cotton plant has been 'systematically
studied, and the peculiarities of the cultivated races, in relation to their respective
environments, fully expounded.
In 1889 I wrote the volume of my Dictionary of Economic Products, con-
taining the chapter on Gossypium (cotton). On page 2 you will find the following
paragraph; —“ What would appear to be the foremost and most essential enquiry
has apparently, however, been entirely neglected, namely, a scientific and exhaus-
tive investigation into the existing conditions of Indian cotton. Until this has been
done, experiment can be but blind groping in the dark, which by chance may now
and again fall upon facts of importance, but only after needless expenditure of
time and money. To effect improvement in the indigenous cottons would, of neces-
sity, confer a more lasting benefit to the country than even success in acclimatisa-
tion of exotic forms. To accomplish this, the endemic cottons must be first worked up
botanically. The climatic and other causes which tend to preserve or destroy
good or bad properties must next be thoroughly established. The influences of
hybridisation must be worked out on a scientific basis, by testing the strength of
strain, from this species or that, best suited to the environment ”
“ The establishment of nurseries or seed-farms for this purpose on a more rational
basis than heretofore attempted would, in all probability, prove the greatest reform
possible for the cotton industry of India.”
Now, I have nothing further to say than to endorse these words. We have made
no progress whatsoever during the past fifteen years. Only the other day I was


present at a meeting of the Scientific Board of Advice 'which met in Calcutta. A
proposal was laid before the meeting for extensive experiments to test how far India
might participate in the modern trade in cotton-seed oil. I took the opportunity to
observe that, in my humble opinion, a far more important subject would be the
systematic study of the cotton plant, with a view to the improvement of the staple.
I pointed out that a new evil had arisen in the steam power ginning mills that
have been dispersed over the cotton area. The cultivators no Longer gin their own
cotton, but cart it to the ginning factories. Two consequences ensue—the cotton
of widely different qualities may be ginned together and inseparably and,
since the cultivators get their next year’s seed from the managers of the gins, the
second evil consequence comes into existence, namely, the cultivators are given mixed
seed, and seed very possibly that is utterly unsuited to their fields. Lower and lower
the grade is being pushed and equalised. In consequence, to my mind, the first
and most immediate direction of improvement would be the supply to the cultivators,
free of charge until they have realised its value specially improved and adapted seed.
This, it will be seen, is precisely what I advocated in 1889, and it is to-day (when
the poverty and ignorance of our cultivators are Borne in mind) far more important
than experiments to demonstrate the advantage of superior methods of cultivation
or the value of productive manures. If to the supply of seed could be added some
scheme of state bounty for every advance on average production or quality of
produce, vast improvements would instantly ensue. lam abundantly satisfied that
with the prosperity and education of the Indian cultivators, as fine cotton as any
produced in America might be grown in India. The question is not one of possibility,
but of ability. Our Indian cultivators are too ignorant to appreciate the value of
the changes demanded of them, and too poor to take the required step forward, even
if convinced of its advantages. Their education must, therefore, be coincident with
their prosperity, and a small Beginning would Be preferable to a leap forward. It
was absurd, and is so still, to expect that with the crude systems of Indian agricul-
ture and the defective knowledge of our people, the fine staples of America could
be instantly and successfully acclimatised. Progression in the quality of the staple
to be. enduring must accompany the gradual elevation of the people intellectually
and financially.
But this is not the only occasion in which India has been appealed to for aid.
The history of the cotton trade is both amusing and instructive. The first parcel
of cotton from America to Liverpool, namely, eight bags was consigned in 1784, and
confiscated because it was believed so large a quantity could never have come from
the LTiited States. In 1790, 18 bags of American cotton were received, and in 1800,
the supply had increased to 18 million pounds. So rapid was the development of
the American supply that the Directors of the Honourable the East India Company
soon began to be alarmed.
Some time in 1784 or 1785 a Polish savant (Dr. Hove) was sent out to India,
apparently at the instance of the British Government, in order to study and report
on the Indian cottons, possibly also to procure seed of the most prized staples.
Through some misunderstanding his mission was not viewed with favour by the
East India Company. He lived for two years, he tells us, among the people, the
guest of the native princes and rich proprietors at Gujerat. He returned to Europe
in 1787, and his report was not published until the late Dr. Gibson, of Bombay,
rescued the manuscript, and had it printed in 1851. Sir William Thiselton-Dyer
has most obligingly furnished me with interesting particulars regarding Hove. He
was, it seems, a correspondent of Sir Joseph Banks, who at that time held practi-
cally the position of Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens of Kew. Presumably,
therefore, Hove was sent out as an expert from Kew.
With Hove’s report in my hands, I visited most of the localities, and even the
villages inspected by him fully one hundred years prior to the date of my studies.
I found changes in the stock of plant grown, and in the methods of cultivation
practised, so remarkable as to be difficult of comprehension. The long fine silky
cottons Hove extolled most highly were gone, and their places taken by staples as
inferior by comparison as the methods of cultivation now pursued were slovenly
and degraded. I need give but one illustration. Hove speaks of a red-flowered
field-crop which, from his description alone, one could have little hesitation in
affirming must have been derived from the tree cotton, Gossypium arborexim. But
1710," K 2


his actual botanical samples have, fortunately, been preserved in the British Museum
Herbarium, and may be inspected by any one interested. They are, undoubtedly,
far nearer Gossypium arboreum than are any of the field crops grown to-day in
Gujerat. In passing, it may be added that Hove makes no mention of having seen
any of the so-called American cottons during his tour in India, nor are there any
samples of these in his herbarium. In fact, it is fairly certain that these had not
been introduced until 1811.
So late as 1842 Dr. Burn urged on the attention of the Chamber of Commerce
in Bombay the merits of a red-flowered cotton plant that he had apparently pro-
duced by crossing Gossypium arboreum with the so-called Gossypium herbaceum
of Gujerat. His report was not only lithographed by the Chamber, but accom-
panied with coloured illustrations showing the two ancestors of his plant and the
cross produced. The staple of this hybrid was described as “ very fine, soft, strong
and clear-coloured, superior to the best Broach, and which would compete with the
very best American short staple cottons.” That opinion was confirmed by the experts
of the Chamber.
Dr. Buchanan-Hamilton, in 1809, gave special attention to the cottons of Bengal,
more especially those of the far-famed Dacca muslins. At the same time Dr. Rox-
burgh figured and described these cottons. Dr. Buchanan-Hamilton’s specimens
are in the herbarium of the Royal Botanic Gardens of Edinburgh, and in an admir-
able state of preservation. One is a red-flowered plant identical with Roxburgh’s
figure of Gossypium rubicundum. It is clearly a plant closely related to Gossypium
arboreum. This was known to the cultivators as “ Banga,” and in Buchanan-Hamil-
ton’s words “ Colitur übique in India vulgatissima.” Passing over some fifty years
of silence, Mr. Allan Wise published a long and most instructive report on the indi-
genous cottons of Bengal. He lays stress on a red-flowered field-crop that afforded
at that time a fine, silky fibre, but the plant was not a favourite with the cultivators.
So late as 1876, however, Mr. Easson wrote of the Dacca cottons that there were
three forms, one of which was known as “ Boya-bonga,” and which had “ reddish-pink
flowers.”
Now, so far as I know the cottons of India to-day, there nowhere exists a her-
baceous field plant with red flowers that would answer either to Hove’s Western or
to Buchanan-Hamilton’s Eastern India plant. In the Punjab and on the lower hills
a red-flowered cotton is met with, but it is the Chinese cotton Gossypium Nanking ,
a species, by-the-bye, hardly, if ever, mentioned as being met with in India.
I have given particulars of the herbaceous red-flowered cotton, not that I regard
that as necessarily the source of the finest of the old cottons of India, but purely and
simply as an illustration of the remarkable change that has taken place in the cotton
crops of India within the past century. I might have chosen as my illustration
the appearance and rapid distribution of the low stapled, but highly yielding, form
Gossypium neglectum, known to the Indian cultivators by various names, such as
Vilayati, Khandeshi, Varadi, Khanpuri, &c. This has passed over the length and
breadth of India with a rapidity perhaps only equalled by the growth of the Bombay
and other steam-power factories specially designed to spin low-grade cottons and
lower-count yarns. There would be no difficulty in giving several illustrations of
the spirit of change that has swept over the cotton area of India with the demand for
cheap cotton goods. Every aspect of the cotton trade has changed and changed in
most cases for the worse. And this statement does not rest on theory or on the
speculations of botany. At a Meeting of the British Cotton Growing Association,
held at Manchester in June last, several of the oldest and most experienced spinners
upheld the belief that the best Indian cottons of to-day were far inferior to the Surats
that used some years ago to come to Liverpool.
But to return to the historic sequence. The East India Company, in 1838,
imported into India ten Southern State cotton planters, and hoped that through
their efforts the downward course might be arrested. America’s improved quality
and increased production were telling seriously on the Indian trade. The expert
planters were instructed to cultivate New Orleans cotton, and for this purpose they
were supplied with seed, appliances and grants of money. They were stationed in
Bombay, Broach, Tinnevelly, Coimbatore, Dharwar and Bandelkhand. They failed
everywhere except in Dharwar, and even there their success was only partial, and


due, largely, to the great interest and support given by the then European magistrate
of the district. As already remarked, the poverty and ignorance of the native
cultivator debar him from experiments, as also from expensive methods and appli-
ances. Cotton planting will not pay in India as a European industry, and the
difficulties that the East India Company experienced nearly a century ago prevail
to the present day. Apparently only one of their American experts gave attention
to the indigenous plant. Mr. Blount, the expert in question, wrote a report, in
1845, on the red-flowered field cotton of Mirzapore. This produces its crop,’ he
tells us, in February and March, while the ordinary cotton of the district comes into
season in June or July.
In 1863 a Cotton Commissioner was appointed for Bombay, and in 1864 a
similar post was created in Berar and the Central Provinces. These were high
administrative officers, but under them were placed ten practical gardeners, sent out
from Kew Gardens for the purpose. As a result, vigorous efforts were once more put
forth to improve the Indian crop, but apparently entirely on the old lines, namely,
the acclimatisation of the triumphs of western skill in stock improvement. About
this time, also, was passed the Bombay Cotton Frauds Act IX. of 1863. The outcry
in Europe was against the adulteration, not the low-grade staple. The position
of Indian cotton in the European markets was as a mixing fibre, or as a fibre to be
used in upholstery. The Act was intended to remove the disability of Indian
adulteration, but it was objected to so very strongly, that it might be said to have
injured rather than benefited the cotton trade, and, in consequence, the expert cotton
department was abolished, and all interest in cotton improvement once more rele-
gated to oblivion. The success of western intelligent agriculture over eastern
ignorance and greed was rapidly assured, and in time the Indian cotton fell so low
that it was practically debarred from being imported into Liverpool.
A revival of interest has spasmodically taken place on more occasions than one,
notably during the American War; the record export of raw cotton having been
in 1866. But throughout the entire period of the decline of the Indian, and the
expansion of the American, supply of cotton to Great Britain, there is but the most
accidental allusion to the improvement of the Indian plant by the only rational
process that exists, viz., the gradual development, by selection and hybridisation,
of indigenous stock. On the contrary everything points to the wilful neglect, one
is tempted to call it criminal substitution, of inferior highly-yielding stock, for
the superior grades that had taken India thousands of years to evolve. During
the past twenty or thirty years India might almost be described as having
deliberately developed downwards, and for many years the hands of the Government
were literally withheld by the aphorism, thrown everywhere, that if it paid the
cultivators better to grow inferior than superior cottons it was no part of the
Government’s duty to interfere. By this time, also, it might be said that England
took little or no interest in India’s cotton production so long as the American supply
was sufficient, hence local markets ruled in India until the present state of affairs
had been established.
Now, in my opinion, the first and most rational step, and not for India only
but for the British Empire, is to have a systematic survey made of the world’s cotton
production. I know enough of the botany of the cotton plant to affirm, without
fear of contradiction, that what American scientific writers call by one name
European and Indian authors frequently recognise under another. Who knows
for certain what forms botanically correspond with some of the most commonly used
trade names, such as New Orleans, Uplands, Egyptian, Bourbon, Surats, &c. ? The
botanist working in the herbarium is very nearly helpless, since few, if any, of the
samples before him bear trade names or were collected by persons qualified to give
the specimens their exact trade names. The whole literature of cotton, botanically
and commercially, is in a state of the most abject chaos. It is hopeless, therefore,
to expect to utilise the results and experiences in one part of the world by carrying
these to another. It is equally impossible to indicate with any degree of accuracy
what cotton might be successfully acclimatised in this country or that. The only
solution that I can see is for one person, or a set of persons, to personally inspect
all the chief cotton-producing areas of the world, study the plants on the spot, and
frame a report that would be the basis of future endeavours.


LITERATURE.
The following are the principal sources of information on cotton and its
cultivation :
General.
The Cotton Plant. Bulletin No. 33. United States Department of
Agriculture.
Die Baumwolle. A. Oppel, 1902. (Duncker and Humblot.)
Der Tropenpflanzer, 1902-04.
Le Coton. H. Lecomte, 1902. (C. Naud.)
La Revue des Cultures Coloniales, 1902-1904.
Cotton. By C. P. Brooks, 1898. (Spon & Co.).
Structure of the Cotton Fibre. By F. H. Bowman, 1881. (Palmer and
Howe.)
Descriptive Catalogue of Useful Fibre Plants of the World. By C. R. Dodge.
Report No. 9, United States Department of Agriculture, Office of Fibre
Investigations.
Reports of the British Cotton Growing Association, 1903.
North American Review. Sully. February, 1904.
West African Mail, 1903.
Journal of the Manchester Statistical Society. Work of the British Cotton
Growing Association. J. Arthur Hutton. February, 1904.
Statistical Abstracts for the United Kingdom, 1888-1902. (Cd. 1727.)
Statistical Abstract for the Several Colonial and other Possessions of the
United Kingdom, 1888-1902. (Cd. 1729.)
Reports on Indian and Colonial Exhibition, 1887.
Europe.
Cyprus.
Handbook of Cyprus, 1901, pp. 27 and 28. (Waterlow & Sons.)
Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture. Cyprus, 1902-1903.
Cyprus Blue-book, 1902-3.
Government Reports on Cyprus. (Cd. 1465.)
Malta.
Colonial Office Report on Malta, 1902-3. No. 410. (Cd. 1768-15), and
previous reports.
Malta Blue-book, 1902-3, and previous years.
Africa.
Egypt and the Sudan.
Cotton Cultivation in Egypt. Bulletin No. 42. United States Department
of Agriculture.
Journal of the Khedivial Agricultural Society and the School of Agriculture,
1901-1903.
Kew Bulletin, 1897, pp. 102-104.
Report on Finances, Administration and Condition of Egypt and the Sudan
in 1902. (Cd. 1529.)
Report upon the Administration of the Public Works Department for 1901.
Sir W. E. Garstin, 1902.


South Africa.
New South Africa. W. Bleloch, 1900. (Heinemann.)
Records of South-East Africa, 1903. Vol. 7, p. 261.
Rhodesia.
British South Africa Company’s Report, 1900-1903.
British Central A frica Protectorate.
Parliamentary Paper. No. 1772.
Kew Bulletin, 1896, pp. 118-119.
East Africa Protectorate.
Report of His Majesty’s Commissioner, 1903. Africa No. 5. (Cd. 1626.)
Diplomatic and Consular Reports Miscellaneous Series No. 606.
Uganda Protectorate.
Report of His Majesty’s Commissioner, 1903. Africa No. 15. (Cd. 1839.)
West Africa.
Journal of the African Society, 1903.
Kew Bulletin, 1890, pp. 135-140, 1891, pp. 49-51, 1894, pp. 191-192.
West African Mail, 1903.
Lagos.
Lagos Official Gazette, No. 52, 1903.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 400, and Blue-Books.
Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone Official Gazette.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 389, and Blue-books.
Kew Bulletin, 1897, pp. 304-305.’
Gambia.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 391, and Blue-books.
Gold Coast.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 397, and Blue-books.
Northern Nigeria.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 409, and Blue-books.
Southern Nigeria.
Colonial Office Report, 1902. No. 405, and Blue-books.
Mauritius.
Colonial Office Reports, 1902. No. 412.
Seychelles.
Colonial Office Reports, 1902. No. 395.
St. Helena.
“ St. Helena.” By E. Jackson, 1903. (Ward, Lock & Co.)


Asia.
India.
Statistical Abstracts relating to British India, 1892-1902. (Cd. 1801.)
Annual Statement of the Trade and Navigation of British India, 1902-3.
Moral and Material Progress and Condition of India, 1903.
Agricultural Ledger, 1899. No. 13. Calcutta.
Watt’s Dictionary of Economic Products of India, Vol. IV., pp. 1-174.
Kew Bulletin, 1894, pp. 318-321.
Improvement of Indian Cotton, 1904. (Cd. 1982.)
Ceylon.
Administration of the Affairs of Ceylon, 1896-1903.
Ceylon Handbook and Directory, 1903.
Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States.
Handbook to the Federated Malay States, p. 50.
Agricultural Bulletin of Straits and Federated Malay States. (Vol. 11,
pp. 345-349.)
America.
West Indies.
Jamaica Gleaner, 1903.
West Indian Bulletin, 1902-1903.
Agricultural News (West Indies), 1902-1903.
Report of the Imperial Department of Agriculture on “ Cotton Cultivation in
the West Indies,” 1903.
British Honduras. iiiiiiinii iiiiiii iiiillll 11111111 l
British Honduras Clarion, 1903. II 11 II 111 11 1
The Australian Handbook, 1902. || It I I I II II I
The Seven Colonies of Australia, 1901-1902. 11l 1111 111 I 111 11111
3 1508 00409675 1
Queensland,.
Report of the Registrar-General on Agricultural Statistics, Queensland.
Queensland Agricultural Journal.
Hew South Wales.
The Wealth and Progress of New South Wales, 1900-1901. (Coghlan.)
Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales, 1899, p. 757, and 1902, p. 1011.
Fiji,
Fiji Blue-books.


Trade (Imports and Exports) of the United Kingdom with the Colonies and Foreign Countries Rates of Wages
and Hours,of Labour at Home and Abroad : Customs Tariff; Food Supply, &c., viz.:—
[Cd. 1727,] ■ Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom. . Years 1888-1902. Price Is. 3d.
[Cd. 1729.] Do. do. Colonies. Years 1888-1902. Price Is. 9d.
[Cd. 1796.] Do. do. Foreign Countries. Years 1 891-1901. Price Is. 6d.
[Cd. 1801.] Do. do. British India. Years 1892-1893 to 1901-1902 Price Is. 3d.
[Cd. 1582.] Trade of the United Kingdom. Price 6s. lid.
[Cd. 1735.] Foreign Import Duties, 1903. Price Is. lid.
[Cd. 1811.] Colonial Import Duties, 1903. Price 2s.
[Cd. 1562.] Labour Statistics—United Kingdom. Changes of Wages. 1902. Price 2s. Ojd.
H.C. 179.— F00d Supplies— lmported. Price 4 £d.
H.C. 321.— Wholesale and Retail Prices—United Kingdom, 1902. Report on. Price 2s. Id.
[Cd. 1479.] Germany. Translation of New General Customs Tariff. Price lOd.
[Cd. 1535.] Bounties on Sugar. International Convention. Price IJd.
[Cd. 1612.] Navigation and Shipping Statement. 1902. Price 2s. lOd.
[Cd. 1638.] Trade of British Possessions. Statement during the year 1901. Price Id.
[Cd. 1199.] Memorandum on the Comparative Statistics of Population, Industry and Commerce in the
United Kingdom and some leading Foreign Countries. Price s £d.
[Cd. 1672.] Austro-HunGary. Proposed New General Customs Tariff. Price 9d.
[Cd. 1756.] FoodStuffb. Foreign Legislation respecting Gambling in “ Options ” and “ Futures.” Price s id.
[Cd. 1761.] British and Foreign Trade and Industrial Conditions. Memoranda, Tables, and Charts.
Prepared by the Board of Trade. Price 3s. 6d.
[Cd. 1802.] Bast India. Review of the Trade of. Year 1902-1903. Price 3Jd.
[Cd. 1807.] Treaties of Commerce and Navigation with Foreign Countries. Most Favoured Nations
Clauses in force Ist July, 1903. Price 10$d.
? [Cd, 1981.] East India. Views of the Government of India on the Question of Preferential Tariffs. Price s)d.
[Cd. 1938.] Tariff Wars between certain European States. Price Bjd.
Record Office Publications ■ —
L Calendars. Imp. Bvo. Cloth. Price 15* per vol. ;— J '
England and Spain. Yol. VIII. 1545-1546. Price 15s.
11. Lists and Indexes. No. XVI. Early Chancery Proceedings. Vol. 11. Price 17s.
ILL Privy Council of England. Acts of. New Series. VoL XXVII. 1591, Price 10s.
IV. Chronicles of England.— Royal Bvo. Half bound. Price 10*. per vol.
Year Books of the Reign or Edward lIL Years XVII. and XVIII.
VI. Scottish :
Lord High Treasurer of Scotland. Accounts of. Yol. V. 1515-1531, Price 10s.
Exchequer Rolls of Scotland. Vol. XXII. 1589-1594. Price 10s.
Military ■ —
Administration and Law. Military. Text Book. Price 3s
Clothing of the Army. Regulations for. Part II. —Militia, 1904. Price 6d.
Recruiting for the Regular Army, Militia, and Imperial Yeomanry. Regulations for. Price 6d.
Field Sketching and Reconnaissance. Manual of. Price Is. 6d.
Railways DUKiNG the War in South Africa, 1899-1902. History of. ' Price 4s.
Signalling Regulations. 1904. Price 9d.
Telegraph Operations during the War in South Africa. 1899-1902. History of. Price 10s.
War on Land. Laws and Customs of. By Professor Holland, K.O. Price 6d.
Hydrographical i
China Sea Directory. Yol. 111. Fourth Edition. Price 4s. 6 d.
Japan, Korea, and Adjacent Seas. Directory. Price ss.
Eocal Government Board i
Motor Car Act, 1903. Registering Authorities in the United Kingdom. List of. Price 2d.
Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W., viz.:—
Colonies, Handbooks for. April 1904. Bvo. Wrapper.
No. 1. Canada. 2. New Sonth Wales. 3. Victoria. 4. South Australia. 6. Queensland. 6. Western
Australia. 7. Tasmania. 8. New Zealand. 9. Cape Colony. 10. Natal. 14. Orange River Colony.
15. Transvaal. Price Id. eacn.
No. 11. Professional Handbook dealing with Professions in the Colonies. 12. Emigration Statutes and
General Handbook. ' Price 3d. each.
No. 13. (viz., Nos. 1 to 12 in cloth). i Price 2a
Intending Emigrants, Information for : Argentine Republic, price 2d. British East Africa Protectorate,
July 1903, price 6d. Ceylon, Oct. 1900, price Id. federated Malay States, Jan. 1904, price 6d. Newfoundland,
Jan. 1904, price Id. British Central Africa Protectorate, price 6d. Uganda Protectorate, price 6d. West
African Colonies, Nov. 1901, price 6d. West Indies, price 6d.
Foreign Office* —■ ; . a.
Africa by Treaty. The map of. By Sir Edward Hertslet, K.C.B. Three vols. Price 31a 6d,
Commercial Treaties. (Hertelet’s.) A complete collection of Treaties,&o., &0., between Great Britain and Foreign
Powers so far as they relate to Commerce and Navigation, &c., &c. By Sir Edward Hertslet, K.C.8., &e., &o.
Vols. I. to XXI. Price 16a each.
State Papers. British and Foreign. Vol. 91. 1898-9. ' Price 10a
Soard of Trade Journal, of Tariff and Trade Notices and Miscellaneous Commercial Information. Published
weekly. Price id.
Index to Vols. Ito 14» July 1886 to June 1893. And to Vols. XV to XX. July 1893 to June 1896. Price I*. 6d.
1. IV. 1904.


BRITISH COTTON CULTIVATION.
REPORT
TO THE
BOARD OF TRADE
ON
COITON CULTIVATION IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND IN EGYPT
BY
PROFESSOR WYNDUAM DUNSTAN, F.R.S.,
DIRECTOR OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE AT SOUTH KENSINGTON.
Prcscntcb to both Rouses of parliament bn (Homnumb of |)is iftajestg.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
Bt DARLING & SON, Ltd., 34-40, Bacon Street, E.
And to be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from
EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Steeet, Fleet Street, E.C..
and 32, Abingdon Street, Westminster, S.W.;
or OLIVER & BOYD, Edinburgh ;
or E. PONSONBY, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
1904.
[Cd, 2020.] Price Is.
