

NEW SOUTH WALES RUGBY UNION
REPORT
OF
THE TOUR OF
THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY UNION
REPRESENTATIVE TEAM
THE WARATAHS
1927-28.
PRESENTED TO
THE COUNCIL
ON
FRIDAY, 27th MARCH, 1928.


NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY UNION
REPORT
OF
THE TOUR OF
THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY UNION
REPRESENTATIVE TEAM
THE WARATAHS
1927-28.
PRESENTED TO
THE COUNCIL
ON
FRIDAY, 27th MARCH, 1928.


E. GORDON SHAW
Manager.


THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY UNION
REPRESENTATIVE TEAM.
TOUR OF THE HOME
COUNTRIES, FRANCE
AND CANADA.
1927-1928.
A. €. WALLACE (Glebe-Bal-
main), Captain
C. L. FOX (North Sydney), Vice-
Captain
J. G. BLACKWOOD (Eastern
Suburbs)
M. R. BLAIR (Western Suburbs)
G. BLAND (Manly)
J. W. BRECKENRIDGE (Glebe-
Balmain)
A. J. A. BOWERS (Randwick)
J. L. DUNCAN (Randwick)
J. B. EGAN (Eastern Suburbs)
A. N. FINLAY (University)
C. L. FOX, Vice-Captain.
A. C. WALLACE
Captain.
J. A. FORD (Glebe-Balmain)
E. B. FORD (Glebe-Balmain)
G. C. GORDON’ (Y.M.C.A.)
E. N. GREATOREX (Y.M.C.A.)
B. JUDD (Randwick)
S. C. KING (Western Suburbs)
T. LAWTON (Western Suburbs)
S. C. MALCOLM (Newcastle)
W. H. MANN (University)
F. W. MEAGHER (Randwick)
A. W. ROSS (University)
Dr. W. B. J. SHEEHAN (Uni-
versity)
G. P. STOREY (Western Sub-
urbs)
J. L. TANCRED (Glebe-Bal-
main)
A. J. TANCRED (Glebe-Bal-
main)
K. TARLETON (Y.M.C.A.)
E. J. THORN (Manly)
C. H. TOWERS (Randwick)
H. F. WOODS (Y.M.C.A.)
E. GORDON SHAW, Manager


THE “WARATAHS” MATCH RECORD.
EN ROUTE TO ENGLAND.
July 23. —Victorian Rugby Union .. Melbourne Won .... 19 to 9
Aug. 10. —All Ceylon Colombo Won .... 23 to 3
Points for, 42; Points Against, 12.
PRELIMINARY GAMES.
Sept. 7. —Plymouth Albion Plymouth Won’ .... 21 to 11
„ 13. —Teignmouth Teignmouth Won .... 38 to 8
Points for. 59; Points Against, 19.
THE TOUR PROPER.
Sept. 17. —Devon and Cornwall Devonport Won .... 30 to 3
~ 22. —Newport Newport Won .... 20 to 3
~ 24. —Neath and Ataeravon .... Aberavon Won .... 24 to 5
„ 28.—Abertillery and CroSs-Keys Abertillery Won .... 13 to 3
Oct. I.—Swansea Swansea Won .... 11 to 0
~ s.—East Midlands, Notts.,
Lines, and Derbyshire .. Northampton Won .... 16 to 12
„ 8. —Yorkshire and Cumberland Bradford Won .... 9to 3
~ 12. —Glasgow ■ Glasgow Won .... 10 to 0
~ 15.—South of Scotland Melrose Won .... 36 to 0
„ 19.—North of Scotland Aberdeen Won .... 21 to 15
„ 22. —London ■•. Twickenham Drew .... 0 to 0
~ 271—Oxford University Oxford Lost .... 0 to 3
„ 29. —Leicestershire Leicester Won .... 20 to 8
Nov. 2. —Cambridge University . . Cambridge Won .... 18 to 11
~ 5. —Combined Services Twickenham Won .... 13 to 11
„ 12.— IRELAND • Dublin Won sto 3
„ 16.—Ulster Belfast Won .... 11 to 3
~ 19. —Northumberland and Dur-
ham Newcastle Won .... 14 to 9
~ 26.—WALES ■ Cardiff Won .... 18 to 8
~ 29.—Llanelly Llanelly Won .... 24 to 14
Dec. 3. —Cardiff Cardiff Won .... 15 to 9
~ 8. —Pontypool Pontypool Lost .... 3 to 6
~ 10. —Lancashire 'and Cheshire Birkenhead Won .... 29 to 11
„ 17.— SCOTLAND Murrayfields Lost 8 to 10
~ 22. —Warwickshire and North
Midlands Coventry Won .... 8 to 5
~ 31.—Gloucestershire and Som-
ersetshire Bristol Won .... 13 to 4
Jan. 7. —ENGLAND Twickenham Lost .... 11 to 18
~ 28. —London Twickenham Drew .... 0 to 0
Won 22; Lost 4; Drawn 2. Points for, 400; Points Against, 177.
FRENCH MATCHES.
Jan. 12. —South of Prance • Bordeaux Lost .... 10 to 19
„ 15. —Central France Toulouse Won .... 11 to 3
„ 22.— FRANCE Paris Won 11 to 8
Points for, 32; Points Against, 30.
CANADIAN MATCHES,
Feb. 25. —Vancouver Vancouver Won .... 9 to 6
„ 29.—British Columbia Univer-
sity Vancouver Won .... 55 to 3
March 3.—Vancouver Vancouver Won .... 17 to 0
Points for, 81; Points against, 9.


Games
Played.
Tries.
Goals.
Pen. Goals. F’ld. G'ls.
Pts.
Blackwood, J. G
23
1
—
— —
3
Blair, M. R ..
7
—
—
Bland, G
4
—
—
Breckenridge, J. W
26
2
—
6
Bowers, A. J. A
9
8
—
24
Duncan J. L
8
—
—
_
Egan, J. B
7
3
—
—
9
Finlay, A. N.
24
3
—
—
9
Ford, J. A
24
12
—
— —
36
Ford, E. E
21
15
—
— —
45
Fox, C. E. (Vice-Captain)
13
1
—
— —
3
Gordon, G. C
8
5
—
— —
15
Greatorex, E. N
14
5
—
— —
15
Judd, B
24
1
—
— —
0
King, S. C
19
1
—
— —
3
Lawton, T
27
1
48
7 1
124
Malcolm, S
11
—
—
— —
—
Mann, W. H
7
5
—
— —
15
Meagher, P. W
13
—
—
— —
—
Ross, A. W
29
—
1
1 1
9
Sheehan, Dr. W. B. J.
12
3
3
15
Storey G. P.
20
1
—
3
Tancred, J. L
15
3
—
— _
9
Tancred, A. J
13
—
—
—
Tarleton, K
9
—
—
Thorn E. J
13
1
1
— —
5
Towers, C. H
25
15
—
45
Wallace, A. C. (Captain)
21
11
—
33
Woods, H. P
19
rH 1 00
1 CS
53
8 2
3
432
THE PLAYERS’ INDIVIDUAL RECORDS.
TOUR OF HOME COUNTRIES AND FRANCE.


To the Council, New South Wales Rugby Union.
Gentlemen, —
We beg- to submit our report of the World’s Tour of your representative
team, the “Waratahs,” 1927-28.
The main concern of the Executive entrusted with the management of
the affairs of the team was the carrying out of the spirit suggested by your
instructions prior to the departure of the team.
We understood that it was your desire that the team should conduct
itself, both on and off the held, in such a manner that its presence in
Britain and wherever it travelled would be a pleasure and an interest to
the hosts (the four home Unions), and also to the general sporting public
and, in fact, to every Briton
We believed that above all things we must show that our ideas and
ideals of sportsmanship and general conduct were such as would absolutely
commend themselves to our hosts and indicate that our men were inspired
by the highest ideals of British Rugby, that the tradition of the game at
its best was ou r serious concern, and that we wished to reciprocate every
gesture and expression of goodwill, and imbibe any elements which might
tend to improve our methods of sportsmanship and play.
We understood, too, that with regard to the actual play a certain policy
was to be followed —firstly, that the winning of matches was not to be our
only consideration; secondly, that our type of play should be such that it
indicated a desire on our part to make the game attractive to both player
and spectator and an exhibition of a contest between friendly sportsmen, and
thirdly, that each man was to be played as much as was reasonably possible
in order to extend his experience. This policy suggested by you we have
endeavoured to fulfil in every way. We early realised that such a policy of
team management must be inspired from within the team itself. Tolerance
and goodwill between the members of the team were essential. These, we
are pleased to say, were easily attained. Each man seemed to realise what
his duty was to his Union and his country. Bach went about the task with
unfailing consciousness that his work was important and must be fulfilled in
a spirit and attitude of comradeship. Add to this a likeable temperament
in each and unfailing good humour, and one cannot wonder that the members
of the team mingled happily and in sincere friendship.
It would not be possible for any body of men hitherto unacquainted
to have mixed more freely and pleasantly. Disagreements were almost
entirely unknown and, such as they were, w r ere always overcome with cour-
teous goodwill.
We cannot praise too highly the splendid manner, the general tact, and
the aptitude of every member of the team. No country could ever have
been more fortunate in the selection of men to carry its banner overseas; no
executive could have been blessed with such delightful fellows as were we
to whom the management was entrusted. One cannot help but love them
foT their happy humours and admire them for their adaptability and concern
for their team’s good name.


Back Row: K. TARLETON. S. C. KING, E. B. FORD. G. C. GORDON, C. H. TOWERS, B. JUDD, B. EGAN, W. H.
MANN, M. BLAIR.
Second Row: J. TANCRED, J. W. BECKENRIDGE, G. BLAND, G. P. STOREY, J. A. FORD, A. N. FINLAY, E. N.
GREATOREX, A. TANCRED, A. J. A. BOWERS.
Seated: A. W. ROSS, Dr. W. J. B. SHEEHAN, T. LAWTON. A. C. WALLACE (Captain), E. GORDON SHAW
(Manager). C. L. FOX (Vice-Captain). E. J. THORN, J. G. BLACKWOOD. H. F. WOODS.
In Front: J. L. DUNCAN, F. W. MEAGHER, S. MALCOLM.


Cun we wonder then that these men who left their homes comparatively
unsung and began their tour without any mighty blaring of trumpets even-
tually won their way to the very hearts of the people!
It has been recorded by the press what were our entertainments, and
the nature thereof. To you it must be a source of pride that your repre-
sentatives have been entertained by members of the Royal Family in their
own homes, and have been accepted in friendship by the Empire’s Statesmen
and Sportsmen.
The representatives of the four- home Unions did all for us that could
be done, and that they saw fit to do so much fills us with pride. Union after
Union spent time and trouble to extend our experience and to show us the
wonders of our Empire, and then the entertainment began •.to extend even
beyond the ordinary calls of hospitality.
The Army and Navy and the Air Force were at pains to show us of their
best and paraded engines of war and carried out practical manoeuvres which
will ever be a wonder to us. We are thankful to these men of the Services
for their courtesy and friendship.
We were surprised, not only by the splendid nature of our entertain-
ment, but by the repetition by different bodies in extending to us their
hospitality. One entertainment by the civic body of London, embodied in the
person of the Lord Mayor, would certainly have been a complete recognition
of our status as a body of Dominion visitors, but a second social invitation
from the highest citizen and an invitation to the Old Bailey Criminal Court
(which tradition has attached to the jurisdiction of the City), and then a
second private visit there to the legal members of the team would surely
seem to indicate that at least your representatives had been appreciated, not
only as sportsmen but also as citizens of the Empire and as friends.
Nor can one ignore that gracious gesture when the band at Twickenham
played “For They Are Jolly Good Fellows” and “Auld Lang Syne” as our
team, on the occasion of our last match against London, were leaving the
field. Never in the history of Twickenham had this been done before. One
cannot but feel a justifiable thrill of pleasure and pride in this team of
Waratahs at the words published in the “Bystander,” which were . . .
“as the pavilion hid, for the last time, these fifteen white men from our
sight.”
VV e will not further labour this subject. The press was universal in
acclaiming your team as men in the front rank of sportsmen and gentlemen,
and this in a country famous for its sportsmanship and courtesy.
Our first match was at Melbourne against Victoria, which we won, 19-9.
The standard of play in ’Victoria was very high. Here we had in no mean
degree the first taste of the wonderful hospitality that we were to meet
tlnoughout the tour. We would recommend that any assistance that is
possible be given by our L T nion to this band of sporting gentlemen.
At Colombo we were most graciously and generously entertained. The
match against Ceylon, played at 5.30, and the reception under tropical stars
in the cool of the evening, filled our men with appreciative gratitude. The
game was won by 23-3.
On arrival in England we settled down at Teignmouth in glorious Devon
and set about a systematic course of tactics and training.
We have mentioned that in England your team was not heralded with
a great blaring of trumpets. We had not the advance reputation of the All


Blacks, or the Springboks. We made clear, too, our position and stated
publicly that we came with our minds turned towards an attitude of learning
rather than teaching.
The Plymouth Albion Club kindly offered to give us a run out before our
first official fixture. This match was played—all our players taking part.
Our performance cannot be regarded in any way as meritorious. In fact
the hard rucking Albion forwards rather upset our men. This lowered us
somewhat in public estimation. However, we had had a taste of English Rugby
and our men stiffened in spirit and set about their work in no uncertain
manner. The result was a brilliant victory after an uncertain start against
the Combined Counties of Devon and Cornwall. This match, the manner
in which we went about the play, and the result, at once gave us the standing
of at least a first-class side.
The following match we selected the same team and had another fine
victory over Newport. This was probably one of the finest games that your
team played on the tour. The ground was muddy and the ball greasy.
Newport, too, was a fine team, with bustling forwards and splendid backs
with a good knowledge of defence and attack.
Our forwards in this game were splendid and gave us an insight into
their very great worth, which they were to show in every match of the tour.
The backs on this day, too, played very well, handling the greasy ball with
certainty, running with determination and judgment and defending splendidly.
These two matches had the effect of establishing the team as a good
one. We were anxious to make a reputation of this nature. We felt a
duty to our hosts to field teams which would make the game attractive and
popular.
In the third match, we began the policy of changing our team and
playing as many different men as possible. Our idea from now on was to
pick a team which would be able to win. This necessarily involved difficulties
of judgment, as we could not always have a full knowledge of the calibre
of our opponents.
The game at Aberavon was won easily after a half-time lead of 6-5.
At Abertillery and Swansea we had victories again after a considerable
number of changes. At Swansea we struck really bad conditions, the ground
actually being a sheet of water in most places.
Our next game at Northampton was against a Combined County team.
We again made changes. The back play of the Englishmen was more
advanced tnan that of the Welsh teams we met. Also they had pace, and it
was here first that we began to miss the presence of a speedy back division.
We were determined, however, to persevere with our tactics of heeling the
ball and sending it along the three-quarter line. This seemed eventually to
enable us to win through. Every now and then we would attempt to
break through the English forward line. We found them, however, a little
too clever for us with the ball on the ground and good in tight mauls. We
used the tactics of constant and quick heeling, always with the idea of
tiring the slower English forwards.
At Bradford we again struck a very fine team, selected from the com-
bined Counties of Yorkshire and Cumberland. Here, again, we experienced
opposition fast and resolute, and learned that the Combined Cov.nties could
produce stronger opposition than a single County or a Club. We had at
first believed that the combining of Counties would tend to weaken our


opponents. This proved a fallacy. The combination of good players, who
all played the same type of rugger, we found, produced stronger teams. Our
experience throughout was that a single weak man or two enabled us to
run up points, but a combination of strong men always gave us difficulty;
this due to the fact, probably, that our backs were not sufficiently brilliant
to overcome a good intelligent opposition, and also to the fact 'that it is
difficult for forwards, even when dominating the play to score without first
itrlnging their backs into operation.
Our next fixture was against Glasgow. We found the Scots eager to
welcome us. Nothing they could do was too much. They showed us the
rare beauties of their country and the generous nature of their hospitality
with such courtesy, kindness and good fellowship, made us feel that we had
made very great friends.
Glasgow plaved us at our own game—tight ruck, quick and constant
heeling and quick passing—though probably in a slightly more orthodox
manner. We were finding more and more as the tour progressed that v e
could not score freely with our wings, as the opposition would mark us
man for man, and tackle well and seldom did we have any marked superiority
of speed. It was necessary then to evolve tactics to scatter the defence and
send our attack back again to our forwards. This we found most effective.
After we had made the opposition chase us for a while a gap would generally
appear and we would send our forwards and backs combined to it.
After the match at Glasgow we went on into the border country, which
Scott has made so famous. The beauties of the Tweed ,the Teviot. the
Yarrow and Ettrick valleys will ever live in our memories as a picture of a
veritable garden. Glorious autumn-tinted foliage amidst which nestled
beautiful homes, set off by trickling streams and a background of purple
hills, caused us to gaze in wonder. We marvelled that such soft contrasted
beauty and colour could really exist.
We were taken to abbeys and historical ruins, which filled our minds
with an imaginative picture of the past and a comprehension of centuries
gone that the monkish chronicler could never convey.
At Melrose we had an unexpectedly easy victory over the South of
Scotland. The team played splendidly, but even that can hardly explain
the weakness of a team containing men who on international day were to
cause us no small measure of trouble.
Mr. J. Aikman Smith, who for years has had a controlling influence on
Scottisch Rugby and its ideals, travelled with us to Aberdeen, where Mr. J.
Dallas, the other great man in Scottish Rugby, Sherriff of the City, gave ns
welcome and a confidence at least that we would not suffer too greatly from
the attention of the keepers of law and order.
We saw the River Dee and Balmoral Castle —a day of beauty and
heavenly impressions of Nature’s workings.
Unexpectedly the North of Scotland team was quite a good one, where
we had been led to expect weakness. But we managed to win out. Here
again, for the third time, was the haggis played in with pipers, chef, and
whisky. “A pretty ceremony,” and one to be encouraged was the teams
verdict.
We then made our visit to London to play the London team. On this
occasion we found ourselves treated most royally. The team’s fame had
spread, and the name of the Waratahs and the meaning of the word had


HIS MAJESTY THE KING RECEIVES THE TEAM AT
SANDRINGHAM
CHARLES FOX IS PRESENTED BY MR. SHAW.


come to be known. Our record since we landed had resulted in our winning'
the name of a good team and a popular one. As we have said it was simply
the wholehearted and genuine appreciation and enjoyment of all that was
done for them and the exhibition of the best ideals and resulting traditions
of the game by the men themselves that had tended to win the hearts of
our hosts and the British public.
During this visit we were entertained splendidly, seeing under the most
distinguished tutelage the historical glories of which the Londoner is proud.
The Prince of Wales and members of the two Houses of Parliament
entertained the team, and we were shown the home of Britain’s greatness
by the Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir James Whitely, and the
Secretary of the House cf Lords, Lord Donoughmore.
The match was confined to a wonderful forward struggle, that was a
pleasure to witness —rather from the greatness of the struggle and the
defence than from the attractiveness of open play. The ball was impossible
to handle. This was the first check in our line cf victories. But we could
feel no regret for a pointless draw in absolutely foreign conditions against
a team that would be a credit to any country as a mark of its international
strength.
Our next journey was to play the University of Oxford. The difficulties
of selection of teams were becoming acute. We were to be faced by a
succession of very difficult matches against Leicester and Cambridge (prob-
ably the two finest club sides in the country) and Combined Services and
Ireland. We knew that we would need all our resources as fresh as possible
to win out on this line of games. Our side for the first international had to
be studied and in some cases rested.
Prom every indication Oxford was a weak team. Here we rested many
men who had been played a great deal and who would be wanted for a
strenuous succession of games to come.
The game at Oxford was played under very bad conditions. Fox was
badly injured, and Malcolm had to retire with a dislocated shoulder. This
prejudiced any chance of winning, as our team was giving a most depressing
exhibition. Oxford men were apparently playing above themselves. The
result, 3-0, was our first defeat. It was in this—a disappointing hour of
defeat—that your team showed their greatness as sportsmen and
their sincerity in carrying out your instructions. They remained smiling,
and not a murmur of discontent was heard. Your team offered no excuse
for defeat to the players or to the press, but tried to take it with equanimity
and succeeded.
At Leicester we were sorely pressed, but our men were playing with
great spirit and won a beautiful match in fine style by resolute determination
and unfailing pressure of attacks.
At Cambridge we struck a team well drilled and speedy behind, but won
through.
Next we played the Combined Services. If was on this visit that we
were entertained by the Navy, Army and Air Force. Special manoeuvres
were staged by the land forces, and squadron flying and stunting by the
airmen. We appreciated the compliment of this entertainment and the
friendly spirit and charm of it all.


The match was strongly contested —the Services being a very strong
side, very fit, and supported by clever backs, and we were glad to have
won through.
Our interest, together with that of the public, was now concentrated
upon the coming international against Ireland. It was our first international
test, and as yet we had not proved ourselves. It was a trying week; training
was carried out conscientiously. The Irish officials and people we found
delightful. Unfortunately on account of the serious nature of the game we
could not take a full measure of pleasure from the hospitality and good
fellowship so freely extended.
A notable ceremony was the placing of a wreath on Armistice Day at
Phoenix Park. No more impressive sight, pexTiaps, did we see than the
seventy or eighty thousand people clustered around that noble monument to
the Napoleonic campaigns, throwing high its stately lines and cleaving the
skyline so proudly in Phoenix Park.
Your team selected to play io the international against Ireland comprised
Ross Bowers, Towers, Wallace, E. Ford, Lawton, Meagher, Breckenridge,
J Ford, A. Tancred, Finlay, Storey, Woods, Blackwood and Judd. Finlay
led the pack.
Our object in this match was to prevent the Irish forwards developing
any attacks with the ball at their feet, to keep the ball from their backs, who
were fast and dangerous, and to hux'L attack aftex attack.
Our forwards, by going down quickly or by picking up the ball and making
a ruck, soon took from the Iritfh forwards the encouragement of a good
dribbling rush and by hard strenuous rucking and packing began to dominate
the game. No small credit must be given to them for the splendid manner
in which they did their work. The backs played their part well, |but nearly
every scoring position which developed was spoilt by mistakes in handling.
The max-king on each side, however, was keen and deadly, well judged and
quick too. Both back divisions made many mistakes, and thex-eby a game
sufficiently skillful in tactics was spoilt in spectacular effect. But it was a
great game and a fine struggle—very sporting and very enjoyable.
The winning of this game lent distinction to our name and gave us
marked prestige. Ireland was regarded as a fine international side, and
subsequent events in the international championship proved that the belief
was not erroneous.
From Dublin we travelled to Ulster and again were faced by a strong-
team. Irish hospitality was still much in evidence. The Royal Ulster Yacht
Club, of which the Prince of Wales is Commodore, and which is famous too
fo r Sir Thomas Lipton’s yachting triumphs with the various Shamx-ocks of
America Cup fame, gave us delightful entertainment. This match was won
11-3, the team playing rather more finished football than against Ireland.
At Newcastle we played in bitterly cold and windy conditions —worse,
perhaps, even than those at Aberdeen —and defeated the Combined North-
umberland and Durham Counties after a brilliant last minute rally. This
rally began on our own 25. The ball travelled three times across the field,
and was handled probably by twelve xxxen before the score.
Invitations to view Parsons’ Engineering Woi'ks and a dinner at the
Rotary Club were instances of the widespread hand of welcoxxxe that was
now being extended to your team, wherever it travelled.


Again we set off for Wales. The international was the first fixture and
was hailed in characteristic Welsh fashion by a people who are accustomed
to plainly express the enthusiasm they feel. Our headquarters were made
at Cardiff. Great kindness was shown us by some of the old players, notably
Gwyn Nicolls, Tommy Vile and Dr. Roscce Jones.
The team for the Welsh international was:—Ross, Wallace, King,
Sheehan, E. Ford, Lawton, Meagher, Breckenridge, J. Ford, A. Tancred,.
Storey, Finlay, Woods, Blackwood and Judd.
As against Ireland, the forwards had to be checked. They gave us many
anxious moments by endeavouring to break up and disorganise the solidarity
of our forward play, and to prevent the bringing into action of our back
division. Only for a space of ten minutes in the middle of the first half did
they really look like accomplishing their endeavour. Our men fought them
back steadily and eventually gained command, though, perhaps never to
the same marked extent as in Ireland.
The three-quarters did their work well, and the exposition was generally
acclaimed as being of a brilliant nature. The score was 18-8 in our favour.
Subsequent events in the international series would seem to indicate that
this performance was not devoid of merit. We were entertained at dinner
by the Welsh Union, and it was splendid that Mr. Horace Lyne, their Pre-
sident and representative on the International Board, saw fit to state:
“You have taken us more than any other Colonial Team, and your football
is played in a gentlemanly and sporting spirit.”
Our next expedition was into the Celtic region of Llanelly. It is difficult
for one who has not experienced it to fully appreciate the atmosphere of these
places of West Wales or of the Valleys. Llanelly has always been a stumbling
block to touring sides. Our match was on the Tuesday following the inter-
national.
The people of Llanelly were confident of defeating your team. Your
selectors, however, regardful of your instructions, made several changes from
their international side. It was a risk that we had to take in every match.
The atmosphere of the ground at Stradey, where your own Wallabies
met defeat, was electric. Your team, however, has never conducted itself
more coolly. An early break gave us a 6-0 lead. This was overcome by
Llanelly, due probably, in addition to their fine play, to a certain slackness
on ours. The strain of the international had been great. All through the
second half your team fought strongly, but with twelve minutes to go for
full time we were being led 14-6.
Then began, perhaps, the greatest rally that the history of the game
has known. With rare dash, judgment and grossly impudent initiative, the
Waratahs seemed to fill every corner of the ground. Attack after attack
was levelled and in the last twelve minutes no less than 18 points were
scored. Only those who have seen Llanelly play and are conscious of their
tenacity and spoiling ability can realise how great was this effort. At
Cardiff more changes were made, but a fine rally, producing two tries, settled
the issue when we were playing a man short.
The match at Pontypool was a dismal affair. We did not field a par-
ticularly strong team. Our opponents adopted a spoiling game and were
aided by a greasy ball, which made handling difficult. We took a risk in view
of the approach of the Scottish international and a considered idea that the
match against Lancashire and Cheshire too would be a hard match to win.
We were beaten at Pontypool by a try and a penalty goal to a try.


The “WARATAHS” play Somerset and Gloucester at Bristol in a snow-covered ground. The
"Waratahs" won by 13 points to 4 points.
THE “WARATAHS” PLAYING UNDER STRANGE CONDITIONS.


The arduousness of the travelling and general effects of the tour were
now beginning to tell their tale. Only the unfailing good humour of the
men was enabling us to carry on with enthusiasm. The splendid spirit
of the men after the defeat and the humour derived from it made the task
of the management much easier than perhaps it might otherwise have
been.
At Birkenhead Park, where we played Lancashire and Cheshire, we had
a most delightful game and the team played excellently. Here we had a
rare taste from the home back division of the trouble that might befall us
when England’s international side was to be met.
At the dinner at night Mr. J. W. Baxter, one of the great guardians of
the game in England, and Lord Birkenhead were present and spoke in high
and unmeasured terms of the team.
At Edinburgh we began to experience very cold weather. The beautiful
new ground at Murrayfleld was covered with straw, and the frost was
partly kept out of the ground. The match was regarded with great interest
by the Scots. The Borders and Edinburgh flocked to the ground.
The game will rank, probably, if Scottish opinion can be relied upon, as
one of the greatest struggles ever seen on a Scottish field. To the players
it was a most enjoyable, sternly fought contest.
Our team was:—Ross, Wallace, King, Sheehan, E. Ford, Lawton, Malcolm,
Breckenridge, J. Ford, A. Tancred, Finlay, Storey, Judd, Blackwood, Woods.
The Scottish forwards played magnificently, and for once the speed of
our forwards was not noticeably superior. The former played a clean and
scientific game; their heeling was beautiful. The Scottish backs on the day
were really a treat to watch and from the first moment gave us the most
unusual trouble. Apparently beaten, with the Scots leading 10-5, the
Waratahs made one of those great sustained rallies extending over a period
of almost twenty minutes. One try resulted, and t’hen came that last
glorious ten minutes of thrilling move and counter-move, and with the Scots
almost entirely penned in their own half. We cannot complain that occasion-
ally things just missed in that last great rally. Fortune once or twice had
not favoured the Scot. Thoroughly satisfied, we felt at the end that on the
day the better side had won and won in such a fine way that we, at least,
were prepared to give them all the laurels of victory.
We left Scotland with regret. The atmosphere of their games, their
wholehearted support of amateur Rugby could not but impress us, and, above
all, they were such sporting gentlemen.
We now began to experience bad weather. Excessive cold, with frosts,
snow and ice, troubled us not a little. At Coventry we found freezing condi-
tions. The ground, however, having been protected with a covering of straw
-—a common procedure in a severe English winter —we were able to play
our match against Warwickshire and North Midlands. J. Ford was injured,
but we managed to gain the victory.
Thence to London. The second London match had to be abandoned
on account of snow and ice. We agreed to a replay of this game after our
return from France.
Our next match was at Bristol. It was doubtful until the last minute
whether this match could be played. The ground was frozen in places.
During the morning a snow storm covered the ground. This snow, eighty


men working removed. About 2 o'clock we were opposed to playing. Then
came on another snow storm. This we thought would make playing im-
possible. However, the county officials were eager for us to play; so we
agreed.
The game against Gloucestershire and Somersetshire was enjoyable,
and rightly so, for our team played well under most extraordinary conditions
and had a victory 16-4. A. Tancred had his shoulder dislocated.
We spent the week prior to the English international at Weston-Super-
Mare.
Your team against England was:-—Ross, E. Ford, C. Towers, S. King, A.
C. Wallace, T. Lawton, S. Malcolm, Breckenridge, J. Ford, Greatorex, Finlay,
Storey, Woods, Blackwood and Judd.
Twickenham is a revelation. We found everywhere that the clubs and
unions in Britain worked at a great advantage through having their own
ground. The stands are close to the line, and facilities for seeing games
splendid. These grounds are not used for cricket in Summer. Some are used
for tennis, but no top dressing corresponding to our Bulli soil is put on the
surface.
Twickenham is the last word in Rugby playing field development. Com-
mander Coopper may well be proud of it; surrounded on three sides, the West,
the North and the East by enormous stands, it is a noble arena.
There is nothing in the nature of pillars or posts to obstruct the view.
The new East stand is a double decker. The Southern side is for standing
accommodation. The picture of an international—the towering stands, the
waves of humanity, and the deep green turf present a picture indescribable.
Add to this the white and blue scrum or ruck with the two lines of backs,
and an amazing spectacle is presented.
The feelings of the player on his first appearance here are thrilling. The
atmosphere grips and the excitement seems to permeate the very air.
For the match, the Waratahs v. England, the crowd was a record, and
consequently also the gate.
If the contemporary English critic can be believed, the contest was a
classic. Movement after movement unceasingly; forward rushes and speed-
ing three-quarters. England had the advantage behind in speed. This
produced for them two tries; forward rushes, two. The first three tries were
converted with uncanny accuracy. With thirty minutes of play left, England
led 18-5. Then began, perhaps, the greatest effort made by your team in
international fixtures. For these thirty minutes they literally stormed and
stormed the English defence. Forward attacks mingled with back attacks.
Time and again the line seemed to be at the mercy of the Waratahs, the
defence having been beaten by perhaps eight or ten men handling. Then
would appear from nowhere a speedy English three-quarter or an übiquitous
forward and save magnificently.
Twice in this period we scored. Never did that defence, so grand, relax.
To score we had to beat it down again and again. But never did it break,
and that is why England won. They were a better side, and we cannot speak
too highly of the glorious way in which they played and the courageous way
in which they fought their fight so resolutely to the end and won.
The Rugby Union dinner at night was characterised by the greatest
spirit of amity and congeniality. Eight members of the Rev. Mullineaux’s


team were present. Admiral Royds, in his speech, said:—‘The greatest
hand of sportsmen that has ever visited us.”
The tour to France was under the auspices of the French Federation de
Rugby. Three matches were played. The first against the S.W. of France
at Bordeaux was lost 19-10. The second against the Midi (South) was won
at Toulouse, 11-3. The test at Paris was won 11-8. You were represented
by Ross, E. Ford, King, Towers, Wallace, Lawton, Malcolm, Breckenridge,
Fcx, Greatorex, Finlay, Storey, Blair, Blackwood, and J. Tancred. The
travelling throughout was arduous. The food was not entirely suitable to
us for strenuous exercise. The hospitality shown by the French officials and
the enthusiasm for our visit was characteristically French. It was impressive
and enjoyable.
A week after our return to England the second London match, previously
abandoned, was played. Conditions were appalling, and neither side was able
to score. Enthusiastic scenes marked the Waratahs' final appearance, the
crowd showing their appreciation of the action of the team in consenting to
re-play the game.
During the period of this, our last stay in London, notable receptions
were held.
First in order was a dinner given by the N.S.W. Rugby Union to the
four home Countries, Dr. L. G. Brown (N.S.W. representative to the English
Rug'by Union) being in the Chair. He has already furnished you with a
report of this function.
The next day our visit to Sandringham took place. It was while on our
tour in France we were informed that His Majesty the King
had agreed to receive us. At W olferton railway station two luxui ious
motor drags used by the King when on a hunting trip met us
and conveyed us to the estate, Sandringham, where we met
Mr. Beck, the King’s agent. He introduced us to the Reverend
Fuller (Royal Chaplain), w*ho invited us to inspect the Church. It
is beautifully decorated with ecclesiastical gifts, donated by th. late Queen
Alexandra and their present Majesties. Then Mr. Walker, who is in charge
of the stud, showed us the brood mares and paraded the yearlings for our
inspection. Mr. Cook showed us ever the King’s dairy and through several
greenhouses in which were flowers of every variety and colour, including
many with which we were already familiar. Walking across the green
lawns that provide an exquisite emerald setting for the architectural beauty
of Sandringham House, we were shown York Cottage, which, until the death
of Queen Alexandra, was the residence of their Majesties during her widow-
hood. Luncheon was served in the ballroom at 1.30, following which the
party proceeded to the Norwich Gates, where we met the King, who had
spent the morning shooting. Every member of the team was presented, and
the King expressed regret that he had been unable to attend any of our
matches and conversed about general topics of the day with us all. We then
accompanied the King’s party for further shooting, and at the conclusion of
the day he gave us each a pheasant from the day’s bag and shook hands with
each before retiring. Afternoon tea was served in the same room as the
lunch, and Her Majesty the Queen arrived just in time to wave to us as she
drove past the windows. Before our departure we were presented to Her
Majesty.
The following Saturday we were entertained at dinner by the Honourable
Artillery Company, with Lord Denbigh in the Chair. A novelty (to us) in


connection with this dinner was the bringing in of the Boar’s Head, a
function Just as exciting as the arrival of the Haggis in Scotland.
On Sunday we had a farewell dinner as guests of the London Rugby
Union On the Tuesday, by invitation of the Duke and Duchess of York, we
had afternoon tea with them at their residence in Piccadilly. That evening
the British Sportsman Club and the Olympic Council entertained us at dinner
at the Savoy, the Chair being occupied by Lord Lonsdale.
The departure of the team from London was characterised by the same
spirit of congeniality and good fellowship as had been so noticeable in all
our relations with the Rugby I nion.
Admiral Royds, the President, was present, indicating for the last time,
as he had on every possible occasion, his great interest in the game and, we
hope, a certain esteem for ourselves. We appreciated his many friendly
gestures. Engineer Commander Coopper, Secretary of the Tour Committee,
and Mrs Coopper; Mr. Cove Smith, the Captain of the English team, Mr.
W. W. Wakefield, and Mr. W. J. A. Davies were there too, and we welcomed
their presence. The London Rugby Union was represented by Mr. W. Wilkins,
Mr. Cecil Dickson and Dr. Cargill. We are very grateful for the many and
successful efforts these gentlemen made on our behalf and will not readily
forget their hospitality and many kindnesses. Mr. Southwell represented
the High Commissioner and accompanied us to Liverpool.
Throughout the tour Sir Granville Ryrie had by word and deed done
much to help. Officially we were welcomed to tea at Australia House. Un-
officially never could we be unconscious of the attitude of friendliness and
general interest which constantly marked his conduct, and in a most unos-
tentatious way.
In Canada at Montreal the Montreal Athletic Club and Rugby Officials
gave us welcome. At Toronto the Rugby people and the University enter-
tained us. At these two cities we met with the greatest hospitality and
goodwill.
We were at Vancouver for 12 days. The Rugby people and many of
those (and they were many) who were interested in us as Rugby players,
sportsmen or imperially—made our stay perfect. We enjoyed the games.
Two against the Vancouver Representatives were won; the first 9-6 and the
second 17-0. The match against the ’Varsity was won 55-3. The standard
in Vancouver is good and shows great possibilities of improvement as the
players are keen and have much natural ability. The Mayor of the city
promised a cup, to be given to schoolboys in New South Wales. We would
recommend that assistance be given to the Vancouver Union whenever pos-
sible as the game has a distinct future. 'Mr. Bell-Irving, the President, showed
us many marks of favour and went to much trouble to assist us in every
way. So, too, did the officials, players and the men of the ’Varsity.
The Canadian Pacific Railway treated us with the greatest courtesy and
provided us with every facility for seeing all the beauties of Canadian scenery.
We tender to them our heartfelt thanks.
At Honolulu we were met on arrival by the British Consul, who accom-
panied us to an entertainment given in our honour by the British War
Veterans’ League. At Suva, the Fijian Rugby Union took us for a motor
trip around the beauty spots of Suva and later the Mayor accorded us a
Civic welcome at the Town Hall. Thus our stay of six hours was most
pleasantly spent. At Auckland, New Zealand, Mr. S. Dean, Chairman of
the N.Z. Rugby Union, came in a launch to greet us, and the Union after


entertaining us at lunch took us for a drive by cars to Auckland’s show
places. The next day, after a Civic welcome by tlhe Mayor, we lunched
with the Australian and New Zealand Cricket Elevens.
We disembarked in Sydney 252 days after our departure.
It will be noted that this report is not merely a tabulated statement of
games played and their results, after the style of a statistical register. It
might be thought that we unduly emphasise the social items, and our
excuse for doing so is that they made a vivid and lasting impression on our
minds, not only as regards quality and quantity, but also by reason of the
spirit accompanying and inspiring them. Let it be remembered that in the
first place we left Australia —laying equal accent on every word simply as
an untried team of amateur Rugby football players. At that time our minds
were filled with thoughts of the game, our chances of success in play and
the novelty and interest naturally attached to our venture. If we thought
at all of what might be offered us in the way of amusement or diversion, hll
that we expected was the formal welcome, with customary incidentals, of our
confreres in the countries visited. Instead, or rather, in addition, w T e were
treated by all after the manner that might be appropriate on the return to
a family circle of some much esteemed and long absent member of it. We
were accorded, as a team, by all, from the highest notabilities to the crowds
of spectators who paid to see the games, the most genuine and hearlty
exhibitions of goodwill and appreciation. We realised and fully compre-
hended the trouble taken on our belhalf and that it was in our corporate
capacity, so to speak, that entertainment after entertainment, of bewildering
diversity and intense interest, was lavished on us without stint or restriction.
None of our men who had to leave his studies or business to come with us
lost by doing so; the trip turned out to be highly educational. In fact, we
attended functions, visited places, met people, and saw industrial processes
and other items that we, as individuals, would never come across in a life-
time.
For our own part, we did our sincere best to observe and follow the
etiquette on the field and the civic manners in public places, as might be
in vogue in whatever locality we might from time to time be. If we found
that some ruling of the game was not in accordance with what we had been
accustomed to in our own State, then we fell in with our hosts’ interpretation
without demur. To speak metaphorically, right over the long course of
thirty thousand miles, we endeavoured to ascertain and observe the “rule
of the road’’ as prescribed by the proper authority.
This attitude was easily preserved owing to the unfailing loyalty shown
by the players to the Manager and Captain land consequently to one
another.
We feel, too, that we would be failing in our duty of making a complete
report of our tour, if we omitted to mention the great share contributing to
its success to be credited to the firm of Hamer and Co., which bad charge
of our movements in Great Britain and Ireland. To use a trite expression,
every item entrusted to that firm went “like clockwork.” The ability and
thorough organisation exhibited can only be appreciated by one who bas
tried to travel cn an extended tour on his own responsibility, even in his
own country.
E. G. SHAW.
A. C. WALLACE.




