

fern-
"3 0 I*2.
TASMANIA
REPORT
ON THE
TASMANIAN CYPEESS PINE
(CALL [THIS RHOMBOIDKA)
[IS RANGE, ECONOMIC VALUE, AND CONSERVATION
COL. W. V. LEGGE, f.r.g.s. ( eng.)
(Late F.L.S., &c.).
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by His Excellency’s Command.
[Estimated cost of printing (325) —£22 10s. 6d.]
Tasmania
JOHN VAIL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART
19 11
835866


Cullenswood House,
29tli December, 1910.
In accordance with my promise made to you in the summer of 1910, 1 earned out in August
last an exploration of the areas on the East Coast containing what is now left of the Oyster Bay
Cypress Pine.
With the view, therefore, of recommending its conservation on Government land along the coast,
and its propagation in other parts of the State, I have the honour to forward you my report on this
valuable tree. It has assumed considerable length, but it was thought advisable to deal with the
subject exhaustively, and to embody with it a short notice of the several allied cypress pines on the
mainland which furnish timber of economic value.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
W. V. LEGGE.
Sir Elliott Lewis, K.C.M.G., Premier of Tasmania.


(No. 1.)
REPORT ON THE TASMANIAN CYPRESS PINE
(CALLITRIS RHO.MROIDEA):
ITS RANGE, ECONOMIC VALUE, AND CONSERVATION.
By Col. W. V. LEGGE, F.R.G.S. (Eng.)
(Late F.L.S., &c.).
Distribution of the Genus.
The cypress pines (Calhtris) are peculiar to the Con-
tinent of Australia and the islands adjacent to its
southern coasts.
There is, however, a closely allied tree in North
Africa, which yields in large quantities the ‘ San-
arac,” or resinous gum (so largely imported into
Europe), but which is now separated from our cypress
pines. In this connection it may be mentioned that
this latter yields the same valuable product, but it
has up to now been allowed to waste on the trees.
The cypress pines (genus Calhtris ) have a vast dis-
tribution over the Continent of Australia, ranging
probably over more territory, though with consider-
able interruptions, than any genus, except the
eucalypts, pines (Finns), and a few deciduous trees
of the Old World.
Starting at Port Darwin, where it is the chief tim-
ber used for outbuilding purposes, it is found in that
part of the Northern Territory, and on the Roper
River and its tributaries. Thence round Carpentaria
in places, ranging from Northern Queensland down
the whole east coast and contiguous areas, includ-
ing Western New South Wales and Riverina; thence
more or less round the whole southern coast,
excepting perhaps the littoral of the Bight, to
Western Australia, which has three distinct
species of its own. South of Victoria it is found in
Flinders Island and Tasmania, and also in Kangaroo
Island. Its range in Western Australia runs north for
many degrees, and great forests have been recently
discovered in the far north-west (Kimberley).
Mr. Maiden, Director, Botanic Gardens, Sydney,
in his fine work, “ The Forest Flora of New South
Wales,” enumerates 13 species as being found in Aus-
tralia, to which must be added our Oyster Bay pine,
which makes the total number of species 14.
Some of the mainland cypress pines, like our Tas-
manian tree, produce valuable timber, and are of
much economic value as white-ant resisting woods.
Notably in this category is to be mentioned the
“ White Pine,” which in New South Wales is the
standard softwood timber tree inland from the
Dividing Ranges. A brief notice, therefore, of the
best known and most useful varieties will be found
here as furnishing a suitable introduction to my
memoir on the Oyster Bay pine.
Some half-dozen or more species attain to the
dimensions of a tall and graceful conifer, producing
useful timber, while others, including several of the
West Australian sorts, and one Tasmanian other
than the Oyster Bay pine, are low-growing, multi-
stemmed, and shrub-like. Their beautiful feathery
foliage gives them a charming appearance, whether
found as tall and imposing trees or as smaller cypress-
like forms. Covering vast tracts in the flat interior
districts, or picturesquely clothing the sides of
hills and gullies, they form a marked feature in the
Australian landscape wherever they are met with.
The species of lofty stature and spiral ike shape
are seen at their best when lining the banks of rivers
in romantic gullies and ravines, or standing out as
verdant towers on the crestlines of forest-clad hills.
Notable Species in Australia.
The cypress pines most worthy of notice are:
(1) The White Fine (Calhtris robusta). —This species
is known by various vernacular names, according to
locality, such as the “ Murray Pine, ’ “ Lachlan
Pine,” “ Native Pine,” <tc. Forests of pine recently
discovered in the Kimberley country are said to
belong to this species, and if this authentication be
correct its range over the continent is a vast one.
It is probably the pine inhabiting the Roper River
district. Thence it extends over large areas of
Central Queensland, and is found in the coastal dis-
tricts. Vast tracts are covered with it in Western
New South Wales, and it ranges thence through
Riverina to Victoria and South Australia, where it
extends from Spencer s Gulf far inland. In V est
Australia it is found in the south coastal areas and
in the islands further north.
My personal experience of it is chiefly on the Mur-
ray, where it forms pleasing groups on the clayey
bluffs bordering the river, and enlivens the otherwise
monotonous landscape on the trip from Swan Hill
to Ronraark. According to the district foresters of
New South Wales large trees range from 60 to 80
feet in height, some reaching 100 feet.
Its gregarious habit is shown in the dense thickets,
or pine scrub, which it forms in the interior,
and which cover large areas, and afford a harbour
for vermin. Forester Kidston, as quoted in the
'■ Forest Flora,” estimates that there are 50,000,000
acres covered with this pine between the Murray and
the Darling, and he considers that the pine scrub has
increased since the introduction of sheep, which
“ dibble in ” the seed with their feet. It grows on
any soil, flourishing in sandy places. Efforts are
being made by the Forestry Department to thin-out
the so-called “ whipstick groves,” and thereby rapidly
produce smooth-trunked young trees in the “ pole
stage,” which when further trimmed will give a
“ timber ” tree with bole of commercial value.
The timber of this pine is very valuable. It resists
the attacks of white ants, is easily worked, and takes
a good polish. It is used for fittings of houses, floor-
ing, lining, &c. Thus, when the writer was at Mil-
dura during the formation of the settlement, it was
in vogue generally in all building operations going on
there. It is also used on stations for all outdoor
purposes —wool-sheds, barns, huts; also for fencing-
posts, sheep-yards, &c.. lasting in the ground for
years. It may, in fact, be termed a good all-round
timber for both station and township use.
(2) The Black Fine (Calhtris calcarata) —This
cypress pine is variously known as “ Red Mountain
or “ Western ” pine. It is widely spread over New
South Wales, west of the Dividing Ranges, where it
much affects their slopes, extending thence eastward
on to the New England tableland. It is found in the
Monara district and on the Upper Murray, in Vic-
toria; also in Queensland. It has handsome green
foliage, distinguishing it from its close ally, the last-
named species, which has silvery-green leaves.


As an all-round timber it is inferior to the Whit©
pine tree. On account of its beautiful black and yel-
low wood it is used for indoor work, fittings, &c. As
regards outdoor use, New South Wales foresters
report differently on its durability, the timber appar-
ently varying according to locality. In the low
country of the Western districts it is reported to be
of little value in ground; but Forester Benson (as
quoted in the “ New South Wales Forest Flora ”)
speaks of its timber in a stable erected for 30 years
as appearing perfectly sound. It is used for rails in
fencing, and might therefore be classed among the
cypress pines as the stringy-bark is among the gums.
It is a smaller tree than the Whit© pine, attaining
a height of from 30 to 60 feet when mature, and
with a diameter of 15 inches to 2 feet. It grows in
a variety of soils —sandy to rocky—much affecting
dry and rough stony localities.
(3) The Coast Pine (Gallitris columellaris). —This
beautiful cypress pine is found on the Richmond and
other rivers in the north-east of New South Wales, and
extends in great tracts along the Queensland coast,
including Moreton Island. The chief feature of this
tree, which is one of the most beautiful of the genus,
is the highly “ figured ” grain of the wood, which is
also said to take a fine polish when worked up.
It attains a height of 60 feet, and a diameter of
2 feet at the butt, and is pyramidal in form. It is
stated by various writers, quoted in the “ Flora of
New South Wales,” to resist the white ants when
used for building and fencing; and in the Rock-
hampton district it is used for telegraph poles.
(4) The Port Jackson Pine (Callitris cupressi-
formis). —This is the mainland species having most
affinity to our Tasmanian cypress pine, which is con-
sidered by some authors to be only a variety of the
former.
It is found along the coast of New Stouth Wales,
extending from Sydney, north to the Dorrigo dis-
trict. In the south, about the metropolis, it is met
with in the National Park, on the George’s River,
and about Port Hacking, extending thence south to
Shoalhaven.
In Victoria it is found in the Grampians and
Ovens Ranges (Maiden) ; in South Australia, in the
coastal districts and on Kangaroo Island. The cypress
pine of Flinders Island, said by Hooker to be identi-
cal with the Tasmanian species, may possibly be the
same as the Port Jackson pine.*
It averages 40 to 60 feet in height, individual trees
exceeding 70 feet; the latter dimension being pro-
bably the extreme limit, with a diameter of 2 feet.
The average thickness at the butt is given by
Maiden as 12 to 15 inches. The timber furnishes
planks, battens, &c., and is said to be liable to
splinter, although it was stated in the catalogue of
the Colonial and Indian Exhibition to be “ strong
and durable, and used for furniture.”
(5) The Stringy-bark Pine ( Gallitris macleayana). —
This cypress pine is chiefly a coastal tree in Eastern
Australia, extending from Port Stephens northward
as far as Cairns, in Queensland, growing close to the
coast, and spreading inland to the ranges. It does
not appear to cover any extent of ground in the local-
ities where it is found, some of which are Port Mac-
quarie, Richmond River, and Dorrigo. The “ Stringy-
bark ” pine is a fair-sized tree, attaining a maximum
height of 60 feet, and having a diameter of 2 feet in
specimens 30 feet in height. Its remarkable
“stringy” or fibrous bark distinguishes it from all
other species. Its timber, which is pale in colour, is
stated in the “ Forest Flora ” to be easily worked,
and “ used for indoor purposes, for weather-boards,
battens, and other small scantlings . . . and was
used for shingles in early days.”
• Vide footnote page 5.
The foregoing notice of the five species, chiefly of
economic value, among the 12 recognised mainland
cypress pines will suffice to show how widely dis-
tributed this useful genus is, and to what variety of
purposes its timber can be devoted; and will further-
more, it is hoped, furnish material for comparison
with the many services and uses of the Tasmanian
species now to be dealt with.
Before doing this, however, mention should be
made of a product furnished by the majority, if not
all, of the Australian members of the genus. This
is the “ sandarac,” or valuable resin, which exudes
from the bark, and is identical with the product so
largely furnished by the allied tree in Northern
Africa.
Mr. Maiden, in his “ Forest Flora,” has some
weighty remarks on the subject, which I cannot do
better than quote. As regards a valuable Australian
vegetable product going to waste , he writes, “ I can
hardly cite a better instance than that of Australian
sandarac. Her© we have a product absolutely and
entirely identical in chemical and physical properties
with a well known article in regular demand. The
price of this article is shown by figures readily acces-
sible, while its cost in Sydney is very much enhanced ;
and yet we actually import from Algeria, via London,
at this high price, what is common enough in parts of
New South Wales, and to be had for the gathering.”
Mr. Maiden goes on to say that the industry could
easily be undertaken by children, who would collect
the sandarac from the bark and dispose of it to the
local storekeepers, who would again sell to wholesale
chemists in the cities or towns.
I shall presently refer to this product, which was
exuding freely from all the mature pines on our East
Coast at the time of my recent explorations in the
month of August.
The Tasmanian Cypress Pine.
The Oyster Bay Pine (Callitris rhomboidea)—Geo-
graphical Distribution. —The distribution of this pine
in Tasmania is confined to a comparatively narrow
belt of the East Coast. Although extending up the
rivers named below, it is mainly a coastal tree, like
several of its congeners in Australia, just alluded to.
The furthest inland limit occurs on the Little Swan-
port River, where it is plentiful on the Little Pine
Creek, near Swanston. This tributary of the Little
&wanport River is about 15 miles in a direct line west
from the coast. On the Swan River and its western
branch it occurs almost equally far from the sea.
The littoral belt inhabited by it extends from a little
south of the Douglas River to Bream Creek, which
is climatically a similar tract of country to that
affected by those Australian species which are coastal
in their habitat.
In spite, however, of its being chiefly a warm-
climate tree, it will thrive in colder parts of our
island near the East Coast, as the Black pine does in
New South Wales. Its restriction to the eastern lit-
toral suggests the possibility of its having been pro-
pagated on our coasts from New South Wales through
the washing down to the sea of seed of the Port Jack-
son pine, growing on the southern part of that State.
The so-called “ Queensland current ” would be respon-
sible for this transport ; and from the point of lodg-
ment on the coast an extension outwards during a
long epoch would have spread its range to the pre-
sent limits. On the other hand it may have existed
on our coasts contemporaneously with other coastal
relatives when Tasmania was joined to the mainland.
Whether the Flinders Island species, which is said
to be a smaller tree than ours, is, as Hooker stated,
the same, should I think be a moot point until fur-
ther determination be made. For it is difficult to
understand why the Oyster Bay pine should be want-
4


ing throughout all the stretch of coastal country from
the Douglas River to Cape Portland, and then
reappear in Flinders Island.*
In order to give, if possible, the maximum amount
of information in connection with the life-history of
this valuable conifer, it will be proper, in dealing
with its geographical distribution, to specify the
principal localities on the East Coast where it is now
growing. Such an enumeration will furnish details
as to the description of country and nature of soil
this pine flourishes in, and the situations and alti-
tudes it affects. From the point of view of afforesta-
tion, which is the chief object of this report, this
information should be of use.
Districts in which the Tasmanian Cypress Pine
is Found.
(1) Bicheno District. —Dealing first with the coastal
tiers in the vicinity of Bicheno, pine is found grow-
ing in small patches on the spurs of the hills north of
the Denison, one little group existing on Almond
Creek, 2 miles north of the river, which so far as the
writer can ascertain is its northernmost limit. It
is growing in small groves, and as scattered trees in
the valley of the Denison, and according to residents
there continues along this river through the range
towards its source. It was formerly much used here
by early settlers for their outbuildings, and also in
interior work. I examined a small grove not far
from the main-road, on the north bank of which
were seedlings, saplings, in the “ pole ” stage, and
young trees of 35 to 40 feet in height. The soil was
a yellowish loam with clay bottom. Northward of
the river it exists on the flat land near the old coal
mine, and thence to Bicheno, some large trees being
seen towards the west of the tier growing on very
rocky ground. Going up the St. Albyn’s Valley to
the crossing of the Apsley, scattered trees are observed
on the bare land and on the sides of the hills, the
manifest ‘remnant of the large groves in the early
days, which furnished material for building then. It
is found up this river towards its source, and on the
tier bounding the north bank large trees are still seen
growing along their crestlines.
In the hills constituting Cape Lodi and the con-
tiguous highland it is scarce, being chiefly confined
to the vicinity of the Apsley. STnall patches, how-
ever, exist near the track on the way to Half Moon
Bay, but insignificant in extent until the old estate
of “ Courland ”is reached. Here a typical pine grove
exists, continuing over the boundary to Government
land. Dense clumps of pine scrub, or “ whipstick ”
patches consisting of seedlings, young plants growing
close together 7 to 8 feet high and not 1 inch in
diameter; young trees in the “pole” stage, 25 feet
in height, and inches to inches in diameter,
among which are taller individuals, growing up to
40 feet in height, with branchless stems of nearly 7 to
9 or 10 inches through—supply the features of this
vigorous colony. Here and there a few large trees —
the remnant of the primeval grove —which have acted
as the progenitors of most of the young growth, are
to be seen. One of these measured there was 62 feet
high by 22 inches in diameter, and other individuals
growing more in the light and much branched
measured over 2 feet in diameter. That part of the
“ colony ” growing on Government land will be
referred to later on.
* Since the above was sent to the printer this opinion has been veri-
fied. Cones and leaves of the Port Jackson pine collected by the
writer in January at Middle Harbour are identical with those sent
him at the same date from Flinders Island by Mr. Trooper Archer,
and quite distinct from those of the Oyster Bay pine. Thus a species
hitherto not recognised in Tasmania is now added to the flora of
the country. Mr. J. Maiden, concurs in this identification, which
besides adding a mainland species ( C. cuprestiformit) to Tasmania,
makes the Oyster Bay pine peculiar to this country, in addition to
C. oblonga, the St. Pauls cypress pine.
The road from Bicheno to Apsley passes through
country which shows signs of much pine timber in
early days. Near Apsley Meadows one meets with
a belt on a stony rise running towards the river, and
isolated trees are seen on open, grassed lands. In
the gullies on the high tier west of the road and on
the back slopes of the hill, facing the course of the
Swan River, pines are found singly and in small
groves. About Llandaff the presence of trees (mostly
young) in the forest west of the road testifies to
the former existence of larger supplies.
In this latter area the pine is much associated with
the “ Bull-oak ” (Casuarina suberosa), the same
“ association ” being noticeable in other forest areas
along the coast, where both trees are found.
Soil. —ln the above district the pine now existing
is growing on sandy and loamy soils, but on hilly
sites it is found flourishing on extremely stony and
rocky ground, and in one locality on sandstone coun-
try.
(2) Delta of the Apsley, and Valley of the Swan
District. —The Apsley estate and the adjoining block
of Government land known as “ Pine Hill ” consti-
tute one of the nuclei of pine timber on the coast.
On the estate itself, which was much covered with
this conifer in older times, there is but little left
at the present time. Over the boundary, however,
one of the finest woods of pine that now exists clothes
the hill in question, which overlooks the remarkable
marshes in which the river loses itself. The extent
is about 300 acres, and the ground is broken by shal-
low gullies and low spurs, all of which are covered
by a continuous forest of pines in all stages of growth,
among which are numbers of trees with good timber
boles, acquired by growth under mutual shade.
There is a fair percentage of large trees, and
numbers in the “ post ” stage ( i.e ., 30 to 40 feet in
height, with girths of from 8 to 15 inches), which
would under forestry management furnish splendid
timber. The ground is leased, and unfortunately the
pine forest is in danger of being much spoilt by the
lessee’s annual burning-off, numbers of beautiful
trees having been destroyed in a recent fire,
for which there was no justification, as all tim-
ber in the block is green. The land adjoins “ Coomb
End ” property, on which the pine extends to the
high road.*
In the valleys of the tiers on this latter property
clumps of pine exist, and continue over to the Swan
River watershed. Extending south-eastwards from
Pine Hill towards Moulting Lagoon are clumps of
young trees, but from information received in the dis-
trict the tree is almost absent from the area between
Moulting Lagoon and the coast.*
After passing the “ Cut,” or pass, over the range to
Cranbrook, very stony country is met with, which in
former years was evidently thickly covered with pine
groves, the remnants of which are now seen in scat-
tered clumps, young groves, and isolated trees.
Unfortunately in this locality, owing to the timber
having been “ ringbarked,” numbers of beautiful pine
trees have been destroyed, instead of having been
carefully conserved for shelter on the wind-swept hill-
sides. In the vicinity of Cranbrook there are at
present no pines, but doubtless on the eastern slopes
of the hills facing Moulting Lagoon the ravines and
spurs held their share of them at the time of early
settlement. The same may be said of the now open
country between Cranbrook and the vicinity of Swan-
sea, on which the original supply has been cut out.
A remnant of former growth is seen on the ridge
* Since the above was written I have received information
from Mr, Rodway, Government Botanist, that the Oyster Bay Pine
is plentiful at Cole’s Bay, about “ Meredith’s Fishery,” also south
of Wineglass Bay. Acting on erroneous reports I had omitted
these localities.
5


crossing the road before the Campbell Town turn-
off is reached. On this ground, fronting the
“ Grange ” homestead, is a group of fine trees, and
on the west side of the Main-road the hill contains
much small pine among eucalyptus and other growths.
Returning now to the valley of the Swan, up
which the road to Avoca runs and furnishes a con-
venient approach, one finds the pine scattered through
the peppermint bush on the first rising ground after
leaving Cranbrook, where the soil is very poor, con-
sisting of gravelly and sandy areas, with occasion-
ally rocky ridges. This block of bush continues west-
ward to the valley of the Freestone Creek, which runs
north into hilly country at the back of Brook Lodge
estate, and has pine more or less for some miles.
Some fine pine timber was stated to me to exist on
a block of Government land adjoining the estate, and
rented by the owners of Brook Lodge.
Between the latter place and the “ Waters-meet-
ing ” a few fine, scattered trees were observed, and
on the right bank of the West Swan River many
large examples are in evidence from the road cross-
ing the rocky hills. At the old bridge the scrub lin-
ing the river is thick with young pines, which pro-
bably extend some miles towards the source. In the
valley of the main branch, running north towards
the St. Paul’s River watershed, I am credibly
informed that the tree is to be met with almost to
its source. How far up the tier towards the Divide
with the St. Paul's the pines extend seems uncertain,
but on ascending the road from the bridge for a
distance of 2 miles over stony and rocky ground,
with open eucalyptus bush, fine individual trees were
met with, and were of the symmetrical, cypress-
form type, which the tree assumes where growing
in full sunlight.
Soil in Above District. —Chiefly rocky, stony hills
and gravelly rises; also loamy, poor, gritty soil.
Wherever fine trees were growing on rocky rido-es,
basaltic land was found among the rocks. Some very
fine pines were found in loamy, scrubby flats on the
hills north-west of Cranbrook, with lofty stature and
moderate growth, showing that the species will
flourish in the greatest variety of soils; one meas-
ured was 89 feet high and only 26 inches in diameter.
(3) The Swansea District. —The hill country, inter-
sected by its little group of rivers, around Swansea
forms the focus in the distribution of the Oyster
Bay pine in the central portion of the East Coast
belt. The district for this purpose may be defined
to be between the Wye River in the north to the
termination of the Rocky Hills in the south. It is
important, too, as regards the much-desired conserva-
tion of the cypress pine, as it contains within easy
distance of Swansea the Fine Reserve , which was
taken over by the Lands Department some years
ago.
Commencing in the north, at the southern limit of
the last-considered district, we have the Wye River,
which has a considerable drainage for a small stream,
afid penetrates the ranges to within a short distance
of the Divide, immediately to the west of which the
Macquarie River (north branch) has its source, and
Lake Leake is situated. Pine extends a considerable
way along the hillsides which confine the river,* and
up O’Connor’s Rivulet, a southern affluent of it, thus
extending to a point not far from the timber reserve.
To the north of Swansea the original stock of pine
has many years since been cut out, and the same
applies to any beds, however small, that may have
existed immediately to the south near the course of
* Since thin was written I have received information that the
pine beds extend to the sources of the Wye and on the spurs
forming the head of the valley to within a few miles of the divide,
east of Lake Leake.
the Stony River. Around the township a few soli-
tary trees are still to be seen.
The Redbank estate contains a quantity of good
pine timber, a large bed of pine being situated on
the south bank of the Meredith, less than 3 miles
from the township; while on the north bank another
equally large area lies a little further up the river
and joins the pine reserve on Government land. The
firstnamed bed is growing on hilly country consisting
of stony rises alternating with depressions and hol-
lows with a reddish, loamy soil. The owner, Mr. F.
Shaw, has been careful to preserve the timber, which
has fortunately escaped fire, and though much valu-
able pine has been cut by him during past genera-
tions many fine trees are yet standing, and groves of
young timber in various stages abounding. The bed
on the north side of the river is conterminous with the
forest of pine covering the timber reserve of 350 acres,
and with proper treatment under forestry practice
would be, in conjunction with the latter, very valu-
able. The majority of the trees are in the “ pole ”
stage (i.e., groves of saplings 25 to 35 feet high, by 3-
to 5 inches in diameter, associated with larger smooth-
boled trees of the class cut for posts, 30 to 50 feet in
height, with trunk 6 to 8 inches in diameter). Twenty
thousand hop-poles were supplied for hop-gardens in
the Derwent Valley from the timber reserve, and
three years ago a disastrous fire swept through both
blocks, and must have destroyed 50,000 trees.
The small area of pine country on the O’Connor
River, mentioned above, is an outlier of this large
block, and is situated about a mile and a half from
the latter. Isolated groups of pine exist higher up
the Meredith River, the sources of which are near
those of the Stony River, the next stream flowing
into the bay south of Swansea, and in the valley of
which for 5 or 6 miles inland pine is growing sparsely.
Proceeding south it is next met with at Kelvedon,.
up the creek, running through the tier at the back of
the house. On the Rocky Hills it is sparingly found,
though probably more plentiful in former times. The
road between Rocky Hills and Buxton's Rivulet is.
flanked on the west by rising land covered with
forest, in which, I am informed, pine is growing in
places, but chiefly in gullies and other depressions in
the hills.
Soil in this District. —The areas of pine-clad land
at the Redbank estate and the timber reserve possess
as a rule a loamy soil freer from stony components
than most of that observed further north. Hence
the timber is thicker and better grown as regards
evenness and height. Rocky tracts and stony ridges
in the same localities likewise show a vigorous growth
of the tree, but with rougher boles, and a more
branched habit (Fig. 1).
(4) Little Swanport District. —This district may
fitly be said to comprise the country from Buxton’s
Rivulet to the vicinity of Mt. Murray.
Buxton’s Rivulet, though not an important stream,
drains an extensive valley, and has a fairly long
course rising in the slope of the Divide, not many
miles from Toom’s Lake, on the Macquarie water-
shed. Pine was formerly abundant along its course,
and still exists on the hill-sides in inaccessible places.
The residue of former growth is now seen in scattered
clumps or solitary trees, and some young growth in
places in the open hillsides and coastal belt along the
road to Lisdillon Creek. Up this stream some dis-
tance from the rivulet it is found sparingly, and
extends to the source, which is not far from the large
beds on Mr. Mitchelmore’s land.
The next watercourse met with along the road is
Boomer Creek, which forms a natural boundary to
the extensive pine tract at Little Swanport. Cross-
ing the creek the road ascends a hill studded with
6




Fig. 1. —Pines in Post Stage, showing growth on rocky ridge in
full light. Size: 40 feet high by 12 to 15 inches in diameter.
Young pines with branched habit in background. Redbanks
Estate.
Pig. 3. —Giant Pine, 89 feet high ; in red loamy soil; associated
with eucalyptus ; pines in pole stage near its base. Little Swan-
port.
Pig. 2.— Large Pine; 92 feet high, 3 feet 2 inches in larger
diameter. Soil: stony brown loam. Young pines on ridge just
behind it. Redbanks.
Pig. 10. —Cypress Pine at Cullenswood. About 40 years old;
35 feet high ; girth at butt 7 feet, one foot from ground. On right
of picture Monterey Pine, 15 to 16 years old ; cut off and pruned
back during last two summers.


Fig. 4.-Grove of Pines in Post Stage; similar age; showing
class of tree to be obtained by thinning. Soil brown loam.
Little Swanport.
Fig. 7. —Pine Log Barn ; 50 feet by 20 feet by 48 feet high.
Wall plate above door 50 feet long : single pine. Barn 23 years
old. Completely sound.
Pig. s. —Pine Grove in Post and Pole Stage. Growing in
mutual sbade in alluvial, saggy bottom. Some up to 60 feet
high. Little Swanport.
Fig. B.— Showing Effect of Fire in Pine Grove. Pines in pole
stage, up to 85 feet; some killed, some survived. Little Swanport.




fine pines, which continue on both sides of it until
the settlement is reached.
At Little Swanport the area, covered more or less
thickly with the cypress pine, is not far short of 1000
acres, nearly all of which is situated on one property,
owned or leased by Mr. Mitchelmore. An inspection
of these fine beds, which have through care fortun-
ately escaped any serious fires, and from which much
valuable timber has been cut for a considerable
period, demonstrates the economic value of this use
ful tree. Many fine trees exist now among younge’
groves in all stages of growth. There is much good
soil on this ground, which fosters the healthy growth
of countless trees in the pole stage and upwards to the
size used for telegraph posts. On the south side of
the river adjacent to the old Government road to
Swanston fine mature pines from 70 to 80 feet in
height are growing in soil of poorer quality, and
though mature are in a healthy condition.
Throughout the beautiful valley of this river, as
far as Swanston, pine of large size is persistent, grow-
ing not only on the forest-clad precipitous hills con-
fining the river and tributaries, but also on the
rocky hills adjacent to the “ Sugar Loaf.” My trip
towards Swanston extended only to the Pepper Creek
junction with the river; but beyond that spot pine
is plentiful on the creeks, notably Little Pine Creek
and Pine Rivulet, the latter affluent entering the
river at S*wanston. Up this stream to its source
Mr. J. Wilson, of Ingleston, kindly informs me
there are large quantities of pine at the present time.
This spot apparently represents the inland limit of
this tree.
On the Ravensdale estate there is still some quan-
tity of pine, and at Rocky Waterhole Creek it is
growing on both sides of the road, and on the road
leading westward to the head of the Ravensdale
Rivulet. Along the strip of coast from Point Bailey
to Grindstone Bay it has been formerly plentiful, and
is now found sparingly about the runs, chiefly on the
Gatehouse blocks near Mt. Murray. From Rocky
Waterhole Creek along the main-road as far as the
Rostrevor estate isolated trees and clumps are seen,
chiefly on the eastern side, and the presence of young
patches along the fence proves that it was formerly
more plentiful there. It is said to be growing on
the west side of the low ranges inland from the road,
and probably is found on watercourses thence towards
Swanston.
Soil in Localities Observed. —The same varied con-
ditions as to soil obtain in this district as further
north. But around Little Swanport the soil occupied
by pines is chiefly loamy, giving them a vigorous
growth. At one spot on the course of a creek it was
found flourishing remarkably on rich alluvial soil.
On the road to Swanston it affects the stony, gravelly,
and rocky ground characteristic of these tiers; and
where it is seen lining the steep watercourses, seam-
ing the valley sides, it is no doubt growing in forest
humus among rocks. But time was not available for
verifying this.
(5) Triabunna District. —In the cleared land around
the township the pine, as at Swansea, has disappeared,
although on the Oakhampton-road a patch is met
with on sandy ground after crossing the bridge. Up
the coast towards Mt. Murray it must have been
plentiful, as in 1885 I found, when visiting the neigh-
bourhood, that numbers of fine trees had been killed
by ringbarking. It was a case, too often seen, where
every vestige of tree growth had been swept away by
axe and fire, and the stock left absolutely without
shelter.
The peninsula between the township and Prosser’s
Bay formerly contained pine in small quantity, but
it has been cut out and destroyed by bush fires.
Along the course of the Prosser and some of its tribu-
taries, as well as on the sides of the hills in Para-
dise Pass, it is still growing. It extends to within
a few miles of Buckland, but is not found in the cul-
tivated country around that place.
It has been generally supposed not to grow further
south than Orford, but when at Triabunna I found
from enquiries that it is plentiful in suitable local-
ities much to the south of that spot.
Through the kindness of Mr. B. White, Council
Clerk at Spring Bay, enquiry from residents living
along the coast elicited the fact that between Pros-
ser’s Bay and Johnson’s Point pine is growing in
fair quantities; and south of Carrickfergus Bay, on
the Griffiths River and its tributaries, it is flourishing,
some magnificent pines existing in the gullies there.
Around Cockle Bay, and southward to Cape Bernier,
it grows more sparingly. Between the Cape and
Bream Creek pine is also found, notably at the latter
place, where Mr. Thos. Dunbabin states that it exists
in fair quantities, and at Pine Creek, further north
South of Bream Creek I have no knowledge of its
existence. Climate and soil may not suit its habit;
but as there is little increase in the rainfall until the
Peninsula is reached, further investigation may reveal
its whereabouts on the coast towards East Bay Neck.
Soil in Localities Observed. —The same varied con-
ditions as in districts above named; from extremely
rocky land to loam of various sorts, and also sand.
Physiology.
The details in the foregoing section give ample
information as to the situations, soils, and very varied
description of sites chosen by the Oyster Bay pine
for its existence, and the somewhat corresponding
climate to that in which its mainland relatives
flourish. It now therefore remains to speak of the
tree itself.
Dimensions. —None of the cypress pines on the
mainland, except, the While pine, appears to attain
the same stature and growth as our pine. Although
large pines are met with in stony, barren situations,
the maximum size is not reached unless a fertile
loam intermixed with the stone is present. In deep
gullies also very tall trees with but a moderate girth
are found.
During my explorations careful measurements were
taken of height and girth in the case of trees of all
sizes, together with a note of the soils in which they
grow. The instrument used for height was a simple
right-angled triangle, suspended so as to give a hori-
zontal base and correctly poised hypotenuse.
The loftiest trees met with were in deep gullies,
where, in common with other species, they were
“ drawn up ” in competition with their neighbours
to reach the necessary amount of light. Under these
conditions the greatest height was obtained from a
tree growing with several other pines in the gully at
the Sugar-loaf Pass, on the Swanston-road. This was
103 feet, with a diameter of 2 feet 5 inches. A portion
of one side was burnt out and hollow, but the top of
the tree was luxuriant, showing the great vigour of
constitution, which was evidenced in numbers of
instances elsewhere on the coast. The altitude was.
870 feet above sea-level. The tallest trees met with
in open situations were frequently growing at the
foot of a stony bank, or rocky rise, in loamy soil in
some instances with a clay bottom, and where ample
drainage was received from the sloping ground. An
example of this type is shown in Fig. 2. On the rise
at the back of the object are some fine trees
in the “ post ” stage, 40 to 50 feet in height,
and 10 to 12 inches in diameter. In other instances,
7


too, where giant pines were thus situated, younger
trees were found growing on the rises, leading to the
inference that they are the offspring of the
old tree. The dimensions of this tree were
92 feet in height and 3 feet in larger* diameter.
This pine was on the Redbanks estate. Another
tree similarly situated measured 89 feet in height by
2 feet 10 inches in larger diameter (Fig. 3) : Situa-
tion, Little Swanport. The above examples were
branched with short limbs to within 6 or 7 feet from
the ground. An example of another type found
growing in a small tea-tree marsh in peppermint
bush on the Avoca-road in company with several
other larger trees measured 83 feet, with a diameter
of 24 to 26 inches only. These trees showed a ten-
dency to great height and small proportionate
diameter, and bold, fine boles, with little or no
branching up to 50 feet. Fairly tall gums were
surrounding the marsh, but not near enough to influ-
ence the height of the pines. The surrounding scrubby
growth had evidently stimulated or “ drawn up ” the
young pine plants, and the dark humus soil fostered
quick after-growth, producing a good timber-bole.
Shape, and Growth. —When growing in forest under
moderate light conditions, and in fairly close associa
tion, the Oyster Bay pine assumes its typical shape
as a timber tree, which is that of a sharp cone or
spire, tall in proportion both to growth and expan-
sion of lateral branches. From this form there are
many gradations, passing from the ordinary “ pyra-
mid,” with moderately ample branches, to the umbra-
geous cypress-like tree, growing in open lands, occa-
sionally with an abnormally large butt-limb or small
supplementary trunk. These butt-limbs usually
assume as time proceeds a “ U ” shape with the main
trunk. Large trees with double trunks springing
from the ground are not uncommon in this latter
type, and very occasionally a triple-trunked monarch
of the pine forest is met with.
The type immediately preceding the above-
described tree is the pine, in what is styled the
post ” stage, growing as a lofty, clean-boled tree
among its smaller companions in the “ pole ” stage,
which have assisted in depriving it of light, and
so atrophying its lower branches. Examples in this
stage are seen in Figs. 4f and 5. Those in Fig. 5
are growing on the alluvial bottom at Brushy Creek,
mentioned already. Pines of this size are commonly
used for telegraph posts on the East Coast.
Prior to this latter type in growth is the lofty pole
stage. One may use the word “ lofty ” advisedly, on
account of the great height of the young trees in
proportion to their small girth. Its extreme light-
ness and strength, where put to economic use after
a short seasoning, makes the pine pole for special
purposes as valuable as the timber in other stages
of growth. The “ poles ” are usually found sur-
rounded by saplings of younger growth, which they
have outstripped by seniority or vigour; but not
infrequently large groves exist of young trees
approximately the same age, from among which the
younger plants have been stifled in growth, and grad-
ually perished. Or they may be the product of a
thinner growth after the original whipstick grove
has been destroyed by fire. Immense quantities of
these poles have been used for hops, and had they
been acquired by the purchasers as the result
of judicious thinning, much benefit to the remaining
timber would have accrued.
* Large trees, more especially those in the open, are elliptical in
the bole, vide Fig. 9, Cuts 1 and I’. My measurements in this
report are all 2 feet 6 inches from the ground level. The above
tree was 2 feet 6 inches in lesser diameter.
fThis group of trees originally surrounded by forest—now
cleared away.
The “ Whipstick Grove.” —In finally noticing this,
the earliest stage of pine-growth, it is interesting to
find that the so-called “ whipstick groves ” are a fea-
ture of the W hite pine and other species on the main-
land. Our pine is quite as gregarious as the White
pine, though the scrub formed by these dense masses
of young plants does not cover the same areas as
in Riverina, where vast tracts are occupied by them.
The origin of this peculiarly crowded growth is a
matter for conjecture. A New South Wales forester
of experience (Mr. Kidston, of Condoblin) maintains
that the spread of young pine has increased since
the introduction of sheep owing to their “ dib-
bling ” the seed into the ground with their feet after
rain. The opinion among our East Coast residents
is that they spring up in a wet season after a bush
fire.
Careful inspection was made at various sites on
the coast to test the validity of this latter theory.
In places situated in gum and bull-oak forest, over
which bush fires had previously passed at no distant
date, no close growth was found; but Ihe young
plants were growing usually at intervals of several
feet without crowding. In partly open pasture
country, however, the whipstick groves are a common
feature. They are sometimes isolated from older
timber, and frequently near an old lofty tree which
has shed much seed. Or, again, they are interspersed
in the heart of large groves of trees in the pole stage,
where bare ground has doubtless existed. In all such
positions stock had evidently been running. In the
timber reserve on the Meredith, which was much
devastated by a bush fire several years ago, no sign of
close young growth was seen among the tall pole-and-
post stage trees killed at the time. The ground, on the
contrary, was in many places covered with the usual
moss, and in others quite bare. I am therefore of
opinion that Mr. Kidston’s theory is the more pro-
bable of the two.
The size of these plants varies from 2 to 3 feet up
to 6 or 8, with a diameter of less than A-inch, and
in the space of a square foot half a dozen of such
seedlings may be crowded. In other parts of the
same grove individuals of the latter size may be asso-
ciated in wider spaces with tall, rod-like saplings
12 to 18 feet high. These whipstick clumps near old
“ monarchs of the wood ” are evidently the growth of
seeds shed from their cones. These latter are pro-
duced on the primary branches, and at the base of the
laterals, and remain on the tree throughout its life
until the decay in the stem releases them. In the
whipstick thickets, as also in individual seedlings, cones
are produced at three or four years of age, testify-
ing to the great vitality and vigour of the genus. This
growth is exceptional, however, as a seedling tree in
my grounds, to be noticed presently, did not produce
cones until it was six or seven years old.
Characteristics of the Timber. —Many of the Aus-
tralian species of Callitris are noted for the hand-
some “ figuring ” of the dressed wood, and some have
a distinctive belt of sapwood.
The timber of the Oyster Bay pine is a plain, whitish,
wood, without figure, and with little difference in
colour between the sapwood and the mature layers.
In grain it is hard and close, and though I have had
no means of testing its specific gravity it is somewhat
heavier to handle when not dry than the European
spruce (Baltic pine) and other commercial conifers*.
The wood is highly elastic in its green state. Young
saplings of J-inch to |-inch in diameter can be bent
double, and a small plant of 5/16-inch thick can, if
carefully handled, be tied in a loop, and will grow in
* This pine rapidly loses weight, however, in drying, which
favours easy handling.
8


that position if fastened to a stake to keep the top
upright.* The illustration (Fig. 6), from a sketch on
the spot, demonstrates the strength and elasticity of
the grain. The pine in this case had been uprooted
by the wind and fallen with the head, where it was
only about 4 inches thick, into the fork of a gum.
The upper portion had bent as a bow, to the force of
the fall, resisting the weight of a heavy trunk above
a foot in diameter.
Fig. 6. —Pine fallen into fork of gum-tree; bent on impact and
remained sound many years ; showing great strength of grain of timber.
Sketched on Swanston-road. Forest background omitted ; with ideal
outline of hills.
Vitality and Vigour of Growth The vitality of
constitution is shown in many ways. An inspection
of scores of mature trees throughout the pine area
showed about half a dozen only to be alfected with
decay at the base. Fire had attacked several of these
at the decayed part, and in one or two instances had
burnt out a hollow, but with no effect on the healthy
foliage on the top. A tree of this description 2 feet
9 inches in larger diameter had developed a wide
enough hollow for a man to squeeze into. It was
86 feet high, and still healthy, to the top. Trees
are occasionally found (one of which I have exam-
ined) that have been notched somewhat deeply in the
young stage, and have been thereafter “ sprung ” by
winds, bending them slightly out of the perpendicular,
so that the strip of the trunk above the notch has
projected from the bole. The vigorous growth
of successive years at the circumference has
then caused the sapwood to grow over the
bare part under the outstanding strip. Again,
saplings in the pole stage growing in a deadwood
fence are sometimes partly cut through (as in laying
a hawthorn hedge) to top the fence, after which
upright growth from the “ cut ” and the “ laid ”
branch takes place!
Durability. —The lasting qualities of this pine, both
above and below ground, are of the first order. It
goes without saying that the timber is impervious to
white ants, which, however, is happily a needless
virtue in this country. Its durability is everywhere
exemplified in the present excellent condition of the
material used in buildings 60 years ago, which is still
free from rot or decay of any kind. Posts, rafters,
plates, <fec., in outbuildings are still in their original
condition. The fallen timber is rarely found to rot,
and though charred by fire remains sound and fit for
use, an instance of which was brought to my notice
in passing through a fire-swept tract of forest.
Uses and Economic Value. —The timber of the
Oyster Bay Pine has been the main standby of the
settlers on the East Coast since the earliest days of
* A young plant, experimented with by the writer, has been
growing healthily for the past nine months.
colonisation. The large trees apparently were then
sawn up for inside work, being cut on the more open
lands near the seaboard, where they grew, as shown
by the survivors, with a branched form, and conse-
quently an indifferent timber-bole. In the more
heavily timbered areas further inland, and in the
river valleys, the tall, younger trees came in for the
same variety of usage as in the present day; i.e., fur-
nishing the necessary scantlings for studs, shed and
barn-posts, wall-plates, and tie-beams for timber
outbuildings of all descriptions, also rafters and tie-
beams,* &c., for stone buildings, and finally for posts
and long rails for fences round homesteads, and in
sheep-yards, and also for decking of culverts. All
of the above timber was used in the round, untrimmed
state furnished by wood from a smooth and abso-
lutely straight stem. In the early days entire
huts and all such buildings were erected in
pine, excellent shingles being obtained from
it, as well as all scantlings. Flooring-boards and
door timber are still occasionally seen in the older
buildings, but this is a use to which the Murray
JRiver district pine is more frequently put to, owing
to the absence there of good hardwood.
In some instances medium-sized timber has been
used for the construction of log buildings, as in the
pine districts of North America. The illustration
(Fig. 7) is of a barn built at Little Swanport some
25 years ago by Mr. Mitchelmore. This structure
measures 50 feet by 25 feet, by 13 feet in height.
The logs are simply chocked at the corners, no ver
tical supports entering into the construction, and the
tie-beams are notched into the wall plates, the front
one being a single log 50 feet in length. The light-
ness of the dry timber in this case came in advan-
tageously, as a spar of such dimensions in Tasmanian
hardwood of great weight would have been expensive
to place in position. This quality, combined with its
durability in the ground, particularly if used with
the bark on the sunken portion, makes the Oyster
Bay pine the best timber in the district for telegraph-
poles, some of those standing sound at the present
time having been in position 25 years.
Large numbers of young trees from the thick
groves have, as above stated, been used in the hop-
gardens in the Derwent Valley.
In isolated instances the young timber has been put
to a very uncommon use in building huts, on a similar
plan to the well known “ wattle and daub ” buildings
in India and Ceylon. The walls are constructed of
thin pine-studs placed a few inches apart, and
in-and-out successive courses of “ whipstick ” rods are
interwoven from the bottom to top of walls. These
are afterwards filled in with rough mortar, which
takes ample hold of the plaited structure, and makes
a strong and solid wall.
Sufficient evidence has been afforded under this
heading to demonstrate the commercial value of this
pine as a useful softwood. In other directions, not
cited, its fitness for use, either green or seasoned,
without dressing (owing to its perfectly straight
growth) must be apparent, and will always render it
a useful timber in a rural community.
Sandarae. —Finally, there is this useful product,
already referred to in the case of the cypress pines
of the mainland, to be noticed. The extracts from
the New South Wales “ Florest Flora,” giving the
emphatic opinion of Mr. Maiden, are equally applic-
able to the Tasmanian tree. The quantities of this
resin exuding from the larger pines examined at the
time of my visit to the coast gave ample proof that
its collection by “ children ” would be an easy matter,
and that the industry would pay. Mr. Maiden’s experi-
ments show that the sandarae from all species are
“ precisely similar in chemical and physical proper
ties.” The African sandarae has been spoken of in con
nection with its export from that continent to Europe
9


< z\/o"
>
/ ♦
<■ • A*
>
< 2 '.a"
V
P— A
A
*
Vj
fflT Vi
> V
-/
£
3
and America. It is therefore satisfactory to note
that a scientist, Dr. J. A. Henry, in his “ Investiga-
tion of the Constituents of Australian and African
Saudarac ” (“ Imperial Institute Reports ”), states,
after an examination of these products from the
African and Australian trees, that the resins are
identical in composition, and consist of a mixture
of resin acids and turpenes, separable by steam dis-
tillation. Likewise, two resin acids were isolated
from the sandarac; one being named primaric acid,
and the other callitrollic acid. The research was
made in the laboratories of the Imperial Institute,
London.
It is reasonable, therefore, to state that in connec-
tion with the Oyster Bay pine there is an industry
awaiting development which will bring increased pros-
perity, if only in a small degree, to the East Coast.
Conservation and Propagation.
The decrease in growth of this valuable conifer to
the extent of stopping the supply of its timber for
the many useful purposes to which it is suited would
be a serious loss to the East Coast. The fact remains,
however, that the pine is rapidly diminishing in its
area, and should the present state of annual diminu-
tion continue unarrested for a moderate period even,
pine timber will be reduced to inaccessible gullies, and
the upper waters of the East Coast rivers above men-
tioned.
The chief causes which are leading at the present
time towards extermination appear to be:
(1) That the majority of the pine areas are now on
private property, very few owners of which value the
existence of the tree as much as the improvement of
the pastures. “ Burning-off,” therefore, without any
desire to spare the pine for shelter even on the bleak-
est hills, is a fruitful cause of destruction to such an
inflammable wood.
(2) The frequency of heavy bush fires in the
ranges, which in dry seasons have swept, as in 1907,
through the private runs and Government lands con-
taining forest.
(3) The fact that apparently nothing has as yet
been done by the Lands Department to protect the
pine on either timber “ reserves ” or leased blocks.
In regard to the first cause, there are, of course,
counter influences, such as in the case of two land-
owners* who much value the pine on their estates,
and have for a long time endeavoured to protect it
from bush fires, at the same time conserving it strictly
for their own use. The consequence of this policy is
that they now have a large quantity of pine timber on
their ground, which continually comes in for estate
use. Had their example been followed by other land-
owners on the coast the inference is that the supply
of pine would at the present day be very much larger
than it is.
These conditions, however, tend to show that if
steps are now taken officially to conserve the pine on
reserves and Government leased lands, and if, fur-
thermore, the methods of conservation be applied to
the stock of timber now existing, the supply will be
materially improved and prolonged.
Although highly inflammable, as all coniferous
wood is, it is chiefly the younger trees in the “ pole ”
and “ post ” stages which are killed outright by fire.
Even in such cases, however, the amount of damage
to groves and clumps of pines depends largely on their
environment (Fig. 8). If hampered by dead bush-
growth and forest rubbish so that the fire becomes
intensified and gets a hold of the trees, even larger
ones than the above suffer badly. If, however, they
are standing in clean ground, the fire, I notice,
passes through quickly without doing the groves much
Mr, F. Shaw, Itedbanks, and Mr. Mitchelrnore, Little Swan-
damage. This tends to show that under proper
forestry management the danger to Government
reserves by fire would be minimised.
My observations likewise lead to the belief that
cypress pines of large size are capable of resisting
fire even though endangered by deadwood in their
butts. Instances were found in which the trunks of
mature trees had evidently been enveloped in fire,
with the result that the dead areas in the butts had
merely been charred and no further damage done.
Furthermore, there was little evidence noticed during
my tour that this species often decays in the trunk.
In large trees closely examined, such as that of which
a section is given (Fig. 9, No. 3), the existing dead
spaces at the butt appeared to be the result of fire
which had taken a serious hold at an earlier age of
the tree, for the timber was sound, and the yearly
growth of green wood, as in the case of willows and
other trees of vigorous constitution, was gradually
closing over the dead part.
Fig. 9. — (1) Section showing extreme irregularity in bole. (2 Section
showing less irregularity: a bole often seen in trees crowing in the
open, in contrast to those in forest-like groves, '3' Much deformed
bole of pine-tree, caused by fire at a much earlier stage of growth,
which has quite contracted the development of the shorter diameter.
Sapwood now growing over the dead region. Scale, 4 feet to 1 inch.
Should, therefore, the conservation of the remain-
ing areas of pine on Government land be undertaken
we may take it for granted that the fire fiend is not
likely to prove such an opponent as it is popularly
supposed to be.
If effectual precautions in this direction be taken
by clearing the ground and establishing “ firebreaks,”
in conjunction with the care and improvement of the
dense young growth by periodical prunings and thin-
nings, excellent results are likely to be obtained. The
dense thickets which are produced by this pine, and
which furnish such food for fire, are the best material
to operate upon. In the case of the several New
South Wales species, notably the White, or Murray
River pine, which have the same gregarious habit as
the Oyster Bay Pine, the “ whipstick ” groves are now
being thinned by the district foresters with good
results; and the same treatment will apply to the
cypress pine of this country. From the information
supplied by these officials, young plants and rod-like
saplings, 3 to 8 feet high, are found in the whipstick
groves crowded to the number of a score on a square
yard, which in this condition take years to increase
in size to any extent. If thinned out, however, to a
distance of 6 to 8 feet, they rapidly grow into poles
of useful size.
In the thickets of the pine areas on the East Coast
our pine grows quite as close, and by a like treatment
could be made to produce tall, clean-boled saplings of
30 feet in, say, 10 to 12 years. There are so many
uses to which these poles can be put that it would
pay to cut them for sale by thinning out to 9 feet or
less, leaving the residue to increase to the post stage
for building purposes.
If the existing trees in the pole stage, which are
abundant in the Government reserve on the Meredith,
be carefully cut out for commercial purposes, trees
of larger growth will be the result in a shorter time
than in the case of the younger timber treated in the
thickets. This class of tree, with its smooth bole,
will be much superior to the naturally-grown pine in
the branched and knotty state in open country.
Areas for Conservation. —ln dealing with the dis-
tribution of the Oyster Bay pine, the areas in the
10


various districts more or less under Government con-
trol have been noticed. In other localities, mostly
inaccessible, at the sources of the rivers and their
upper tributaries, pine is also growing on Government
land, but not, so far as could be ascertained, in large
enough quantity to warrant departmental supervi-
sion. The above areas are;
(1) The block adjoining Courland estate, near
Half-moon Bay, containing pine in scrub stage, inter-
spersed with good timber trees, and covering some 20
acres, and also some scattered clumps further inland
towards the Apsley River.
(2) Pine Hill, near Apsley, which is chiefly covered
with this timber, the eucalyptus being in the minor-
ity. This block is about 350 acres. Both these local-
ities are leased.
(3) The Government reserve of about 350 acres,
between the "Meredith and O’Connor Rivers.
Though the firstnamed is of small extent, it is suit-
able for experimental work in thinning and pruning
according to the abovementioned methods.
The second contains much good pine timber, grow-
ing in a quite accessible locality. The trees are mostly
of medium size, up to 18 inches in diameter, but there
is a fair percentage of fine examples up to 80 feet in
height. This small and almost pure forest of pine
lends itself admirably to conservation and much
improvement, as the thinnings from the pole-stage
beds are saleable, and if cut out will allow room for
the quicker production of a good class of timber.
The thirdmentioned area is of larger extent than
Pine Hill, and is almost pure pine forest, and being
in the hands of the Lands Department, is therefore
available for operations. The large contract for
20,000 poles for the Derwent Valley hop-fields a few
years ago, which were cut as the timbergetters chose,
without any supervision, coupled with the heavy fires
of 1907-8, have wrought much havoc among the
younger Trees in this reserve. There appears to be no
“ reproduction ” in the burnt patches, and there is
therefore an opportunity for improving the future
supply by repropagation from seed, and by seedlings
taken from the “ whipstick ” thickets.
Recommendations.
With regard to the two leased areas —“ Courland
and “ Pine Hill ” (Apsley) —I strongly recommend
that these be resumed by the Government at an early
date. Or, failing that, the lessees be notified that the
pine growing on them is neither to be cut nor
burnt. The pine forest at Apsley contains the best
growth of this tree anywhere on the coast, with the
exception of the reserve on the Meredith River, and
if these two blocks were retained by the Forestry
Department, much might be done towards improving
and prolonging the present supply of this valuable
timber.
The reserve is accessible from Swansea by bush
track from that place through the Meredith-Lyne
blocks, and is not more than 4 miles from the town-
ship. I recommend that this area be carefully
inspected, and that the young timber, killed by the
fire mentioned above, be examined as to its soundness,
freedom, from grub, &c., with a view to its being
sold for the cost of clearing; that the burnt areas be
cleared after inspection for that purpose, and
replanted by the methods alluded to. Such measures
may at first glance appear unnecessary, but there is not
sufficient evidence to show that %3edlings come up in
all places after fire, though they may in the vicinity
of mature trees which have shed large quantities of
seed. A small nursery could be formed and enclosed
with wire-netting at a small cost. In conjunction
with this work judicious thinning should be carried
out, and the “ thinnings ” disposed of for fencing.
Propagation on Government Land on North-East
Coast, &c.
As already pointed out in the section on “ Distribu-
tion,’' the range of this pine ceases without apparent
cause at the Douglas River. Furthermore a cypress
pine, as we have seen, is found on Flinders Island.*
There is, therefore, an intervening littoral tract of
country with similar climate and soil extending from
the Douglas River to Eddystone Point from which
cypress pines are unaccountably absent. The range
of our species could therefore be extended north
along the coast to Banks Strait under conditions of
growth precisely similar to those which obtain in its
habitat further south. This would be a most inter-
esting physiographical experiment, and could be
started without difficulty or much expense, provided
the Government consented to set apart certain areas
for such afforestation.
A suitable spot would be the township reserve of
“ Stieglitz,” on the north shore of George’s Bay. This
remote spot is partly cleared, and portions of it are
under fair shelter afforded by the surrounding bush.
Thousands of pines could be grown, if permission be
granted, at the State school, St. Helens, and trans-
planted in the reserve and other suitable places on
the low ranges and on the coast towards Anson’s
Bay. A quantity of seed taken from a tree planted
in the beautiful collection of conifers put out by .the
late Mr. Bernard Wright at St. Helens has been
sown in Mr. Kirwan’s garden near the township;
and the writer will, if allowed the ground, undertake
the planting out of the seedlings raised.
From observation on the East Coast, it is evident
that young pines thrive best in the cultivated dis-
tricts, along the sides of, and actually in, deadwood
and brush fences, where they obtain shelter and pro-
tection from sheep. Against artificial hurdles made
of light brushwood, would therefore be the best mode
of planting until fairly large patches are grown, which
will in their turn afford necessary shelter.
This pine will furthermore thrive in the cold disr
tricts of the Midlands. Care was taken in tracing
up the pines inland to note the elevation where fine
trees were met with, the highest spot by aneroid being
1170 feet, at the Sugar Loaf Hill, on the STvanston-
road. Fairly well-grown trees of considerable age
now exist in the grounds at Merton Yale, in the Mid-
lands, which is 700 feet above sea-level, in a frosty dis-
trict. A beautiful example (Fig. 10) of the branched
type, about 43 feet high and nearly 8 feet in circum-
ference, is to be seen in my own grounds, associated
with oak and elm; while a seedling contiguous to its
base, eight years old, is about 15 feet in height and
much branched. These data (particularly the latter,
from such an ultra-frosty district as the Break-o’-Day
Valley) prove that this pine will thrive in the cold
interior, provided it is associated for the purpose of
shelter with other trees. An ideal locality, with
forest for shelter and a suitable soil and rainfall for
the establishment of pine groves, as a nucleus for
further extension, is Epping Forest. Here, no doubt,
the owners of this barren bush tract would consent to
planting being carried out on a small scale.
In concluding this report, which perhaps has
reached too great a length, it may not be unreason-
able to hope that the information given in it may
prove useful in connection with this valuable timber
tree, when the long-hoped-for “ Forestry ” Depart-
ment shall be organised in Tasmania. This State
stands almost alone among the business communities
of the world in its neglect and non-conservation of
timber forests. European nations, the United States
of America, India, New Zealand, Japan, and finally
the southern and eastern States of Australia—all are
occupied in the work of afforestation, reforestation,
or forest conservation, according as the arboreal
conditions of the respective countries demand.
* See footnote on page 3.
11


A farseeing and unselfish policy, which deals with
the future more than the present, was necessary to
this end; and the respective Governments of these
countries awoke to the necessity for it. And for us
in Tasmania, in order to restore our dwindling hard-
wmod forests and avoid much labour and expense in
making up “ leeway,” it is imperative that the pub-
lic mind should awake to the necessity for safeguard-
ing our timber. It is of small avail that we are now
able to look from our doors on well-wooded tiers and
ranges on which useful timber is still growing, but
which is becoming more and more inaccessible every
day. Even were it easy of access, we should not use it
all, for we should, for another purpose, initiate here
the wise policy of the American Government, and
carefully guard all timber growing round the sources
of our streams, so that they may not run dry * before
we take action.
To compensate for this reservation of hill-forest for
this latter purpose it will be necessary to plant and
conserve, so as to bring back in some measure to the
vicinity of the settlements the valuable timber lost
by the indiscriminate ringing of millions of
timber trees. Such reforestation, which will also
help to restore the lost shelter for stock, combined
with a careful treatment of the exhausted sawmill
areas, with a view to a proper growth of young trees,
would before many years work an appreciable
improvement in present conditions.
In a country like Tasmania, so much covered with
“natural bush,” the inevitable consequence has been
a lack of appreciation of the real value of forests,
either here or in any other regions. Contrary con-
This is happening now near some of the settled districts in
Tasmania.
ditions now obtain in America, whatever may have
originally been the case, and a thoroughly-organised
working Forestry Department has been established
for many years. In spite of the vast lumbering
trade, flourishing now for more than a century, and
the fact that there are still 699,000,000 acres of forest
untouched by fire or axe in the States, strenuous
efforts are being made to repropagate, and keep pace
with the large annual consumption by fire and mill-
ing.
In Tasmania we need to recognise the value of
the forest itself as Nature’s greatest product. Mr.
Gifford Pinchot, the Chief Forester of the United
States, says in one of his books: “The uses of the
forest are numerous ... It reaches its highest
value as a safeguard against floods, winds, snow-
slides (for Tasmania I substitute landslips) , moving
sands, and especially against a dearth of water in the
streams ln another place he writes: “Next to
the earth itself the forest is the most useful servant of
man."
In conclusion I cordially acknowledge the assist-
ance and information given me in the prosecution of
my work by the late Mr. Ernest Meredith, Messrs.
Frank Shaw (Junior), Jas. Wilson (“ Ingleston ”), R
Mitchelmore, Bernard White (Triabunna Council).
Robert Grant (Sorell Council), Arthur Cotton, Roger
Marshall, F. Bowker, J. Hill, and other residents on
the coast. My thanks are likewise due to Dr.
Maiden for verifying my identification of the
Flinders Island pine as the Port Jackson species;
to Trooper Archer, Cape Barren Island, for floral
specimens of that pine from the Furneaux Group;
and to Mr. Rodway for information in footnote page 5.
* The italics are mine. See remark above.
.TORN TAIL
GOVERNMENT PRINTER TASMANIA
12


1
B
A IT 3!
r»
v s y s T JR
Brecuii
■//. i" '
<?> Foster 1<1 'C Light FUxtss
V ’ tyjyS'SWAM !•
a a ar
>5
X Xi
AV
R I N
C A
R 0 0 M
(1
Cs
A r
f
VcaKportlahd 7 X
/ CHA mouiN M- \
1
V HATURHCXSSE f*
/ A
/
7 x..
/^
V*
s^’
.y X
t
” ~ r /
Little. Water fans* f Wai&'Koute P* A \ /
j/L. V Ausuia
coavtV, r , . ,, X
CropfA.es Bog,' j~ . a CAm£ X \ B00BW
rrf%^
4 f 1 , X w
)-X \ fp) f— * J^^teftXatusalisU
UAj n :- \ C >
vvvutf,r Ii;." Dokietts >
gfoWP' \ X
<w£ ' W (1 ,. ( Vs^T’ *Cohhtrs Bocks
u , T ft'ISr M'wiiiiau i
/ •■■■■■ /«v>
x*^
sr .
! ’ s
a, ,fvv /
J
.r .Jr . / ; / yyHOHiJzsi \%
/axihsohs / ; V\l \\
r
f
4jX ;
rv
v_
/
J K L
V, sitwwAvj®.
#V / \ bay A -
J / / K 0 L A * D /=w W**' : 1 fh / 1
- " 1W£ sDy A— . _ .
.*)
n
L ityuyicMitrsh
&& mm
\) .-
V; ,A
1 [/ #
lL a 11 '•- . X VH
UN\ JY AcUDSTONtj V
y W \ \ yl ;
7 4 77 (0) k* A.
' XXv. t / \
,,, wm*ouif\\>f / Xfe / /—^
S y&QY y| .„_ 5 /A.
Jbk.
a
Vr-
A
7
: «:
N r
/L-x
T 4 —
ATy_ edoystome ?
/ V 7 "v \ 'Ajj — —
A/ 2r * /
\ :
X, X ®
■ 1 \ A*' .
« LtUlo
M c Horror
/
A
//•■•••■
y
/ /
/V, \-.
xV ' '\ *B»ors8iAurL
J )
7 PIOjMEER /J VP /
J ■' , A '
; f »S 1
/
*■■•' A /
j»f>K
;. " K
? fV V
/<y^ u * y
b A^ :; 4 M
' V A'
Ctfi
W\
fjv - «A<
„K
Tamt&TkL
X™
LAU$
\i
Glassy SuJ C
Ax/ \
k
ay'; (jiMf isyoo*
A SI \ / V \
mvs/ *-« o*«ui / / ' j
k"™’"' % r C\
iy®
r \ i \ 11 I
r \
'*
,1 \ /cXX- rr ° r %&■-■''
f, X /75 X' '
X-X w £ *wlS>
Lv \ S- |ii*;A""’ ( '■*"LX' W r --X)
I
y\\ BRADSHAWS CBEEK
/ c.;| I nt
s /l 4> J7
/j fydgy
* / y /y t&
X ' c; l N A j [[
£LkJ HX<
BAT OF FIRES /
>< p f ! (ll
j j cp
cqr • 'ik - — ' <
•no*r, j '.
Alpnf/ 4 /7
/A" MRK00 A'a ; %##- /V '
frhj [\ '■■ '* '/A R 1^ ■' '' ; ; v|\J 1
bUs > ,• V'- : /' ; ;IA# •''tf'stag
#\«j|S'r' w "\ A ■- / %
/'%. \\ \ U / \ '■•.«■•'•* !\MSp 7 (
t \ / k t
\ \v . ;3 A\j>vv'COiy *»f /Vi Ciifnd<n.
V / «c°‘ S£ *»»« "-fJ% -v
A \\W -- AAV'
jrk-ak r^Y
'' RussMsJ'Uuns . |A ‘^ 44
'A J$or/5rav Si 1 ’'
M i!A£«MAV ■ 9 ~h^lP
- J f
S \
\ y \s ik ’ UAUR \|
*•, • ruUNC T0>*4 \ A, jrJV/k i«w. s r v/1 * {£•
/ \ T *°*Th} ?£sk tnyCR A
)- C
'•> \. S ' _.. XT •■■■'^"
« 8RfJ L A WNt . (
9'" To
V ?$ \V_3y
• ix >erth tXa
AA t -iVANDAL?: V#
.Sr''' fc*t \ .' SLacK Forest r - ~
W 1 " 4 / X\ V. \*
{ 9.
*” \s^J\rki^y r 17 " ' -^'LN
r 1 V N ,x
Rnicmto / ; V ' « A\ft-
/ \* I RINCAROOMA O b-., .
a • ' ' - 17 kYA
f.W s ;• vWx^
# / s |7\
-X X' A:>•'•'
„ hourly J \ AIBERTOm4.' "
- ''Jy * V
1 ,-X i
/ \ Xm /
rv/^$ 8 " AV,a *
S&ddLebach
f W
ff } .0. , -
\\ ,. U^" 7; " - 1 A y
X #/ — 1
X J \ronjHHL
x:;vte<A %, /M
/X %9
1 ff
i XM %,. w
y % X X jiVi
\ "
w.« •>
IX
\ 1
[iUjk'SOUc^
V
%
yr-
/
|
Wtcri/ \
f-yif M* bhxc.
■j
/
{
r mArsf
..A
h
clr'filAMCAHA
\-» r T .,. /Z' jJ \ fr'xScyit Harbour
•wX Jh /t ' ‘V
—srA x*.
IviLftiW / S
:%gcr<f&Strr -U X& J
)^ £ 4*^f ur ■■•. yJitATON p^>v*«?***'
"'£orxA*n\ M; \ kj
-; /* Vv'-. S
\ 4 , yfvMs*™ . %Mw\ x ’
y A^gW
( yr//f!
/ , / ' y 4 ,/ T
y \
*ty i ® 7
111- /\Vf »
Xl® \ Yjgp /
L V n Xa
1 \ VJ'XX \va*houth ' —XCAMANDER
vK nV / |\
\j(X Vf/ t V
■■• T y) x \ / r_ // l^AFALMOUTH
I \1 vl s"7> /aTi/, Sf / /
/! h •• / i(
/ / (r t , A
j V OtU~r f *U" *1». \. »'*•'■ (
X v^-
Vj yJyJ
• v,.t i.. A -.'V,;.v, .-^-".i
% - ~-
m
X
X ' *a
1: J XxXr<yyX 'iMfiA LAC00NS <
■' J S X'X A&SfclJl' M l Loqvc
J
fO layoon. ' -»..^
' j-|
) L-apocn, XsVL
/ ,,-v y^y
y/ tV JXK.%* ''T\f<7irt4UI±UMs : f iT /
AJA f0RD ./ \
r~y N/ \ \ \/J .
/j rJi Sn4leJta*Ju\ \ l( NJLt
M| / ® 'vL
■“N,
V
h
v > '7'" ’*A 5K</T 1 k/ XXa^WctiOMOMD
s, a-■"" '• J v . 2*£?/ A -W'py
X--5 mll ' v s
t X }
\ • C 1 j j Lonutul j \
y 1 / f.j yy Mu/sAes f
YjZZy&J- ( f X
m£ ...
Av.», . \ V 1 S WOxnnas A
7 Mssfo) ."' -
\
—'%
AiLXAKOMl..
P„
/JP
Break- O A*y i
f ' J
\ Vi NCAL /f 7f
mn StP ft* ;L "■•■-■ ;
Ay, 3 5 \ ; .7
a, .xr
M7aV
iwa
\X \ y-\ y
I \L • v \fWMO'T®HEST(
•/ ..-AcOA "X
N/«T l<y \ vA 7
iy
L \ . 7° V V
w'--, ?
A Buffalo i&Biutni .
? * / \
x . , sr// »
J
\pj(jrmley St *
s ®
-•Mpi S r ?4l/lS DOME
y Dukes Mass * / ****** *°* ••«. mJv
|_X- L«ty /*
ATAAserr JtJJw 1 * ,jj SEYMOUR /
Jfo kPhitUor A _.X/
Xf‘9? X jt &fj
XpCs' f&M'S'-joH* / Douglas
,. y w“ L.-'-'l
Af (QIVa. .. J-i OaOeatU toy
(7
\ Vv y&lvualn-Lafoevk, t-S
Jj \ \ ~~v>\ '\ X»^fc2
V ■- -\ yjlMCfo*
V t LA
-X^VOCA
\
— i
fwy* 3 **
jsz° i itAy
aMa/©*
As raw \ /A%
** ***&£ \ijj /\
V v c\ V
% %lNP%" ,r “"l XL
'vllj TttR*t)f < S'y, \7\
rfA-X
■KWjfpv T /
s)
Rk /
A
i/ \
ir-
-ij,
*f-ivfssi '-., v v***xjm
W«x x ' \ n
\ y^-txnu
felX-kx ■ yjfyj
r i 'X / / <-». jpf (
1 v Vx\ " l <§(. X
/ X? ,if jj
/ l lamda rr 7 j '
) i m ym ?
\ <i i ur&nrrook / '• \’‘f\ r jseUL *
jAaBool \\
%:y^\k
•/ft j r ~ \
fpLdfUke \
%$
' :'\V
*«X-v% :.
£ -
c v -'• • &'.'■*'•**
■S? Jafi* 2h#XcA
\ •
' J *^^\Ci>nios
\m
\>
i\x
\Vr
\^fc
\ li 1
V\ l!
; X
\ k >P
\'| ® )
V /ft\ “ ( ..■•■ 1 , - < 't.>’ n 4?
VfV ,*,/ \
J xJw*mwK
\l l y SLaJitrSnaAr “Vk
Ycamt>bel£town A,
||^
Is "‘"\
3~ —- • -X _jj
(
j
k
(
M ®
»ui [d
yysF*
laAr Boat Harbour
Copt, Lode
BS4
lalFj&fn
Hay
*P*
©f'fivS, >fhi
\3^i
i A|] 7*i<d«. _yv : sSja?Lo<u'
\Jp?Mll uV®, / ""■ -•
X > / &i*lt lasoor.
S)
3/ !/] rj ,?Avv, »- — x . >
/ 11 .*'* V WouifaZC
TtT v Uajshts
rrt
Wi :
v JPesetiotr.
y J y
r»yK * , a .rV.!iF nwu i y
X/ U V t^ y rr~
hr* r I
t/s" J \JSj p J
tt\ / \ \ > (great swSn
5 '■/ >1 /-w'X PORT V?
i
ii
.
'*y \ ;
(T
li
i
Aross ly 1 rv
'%xrs (Busch ST c. ■w
i '
\ le^Vvi
i
N X
# r
\
V \
/WOODS V
/ LAKE L.
SLR VC
\ \ i j& \j£ SS *!Z*yk tA’* Ty '****LIN \
} / /WW * f*c**l.<u?ocrv
-Ji) S 0 R ELL ': >
; j 1) J J <Av' ',
■Wur Js 4 y
/.-- / ( ,'■ X.W,rv-'X N . .w‘J r A/
Je
1 ; ( a*\V v ** i
X U<. %hJU-
-iWwr x $f\cy:
\X. !\C >
y
j Vbr j
w i / Rn
.„
7* / «
>
©• J
\ '
\l } J
s Loruj ALusKr
\Mue Strove Bay
\ cSlkeTHrsr Sisters
rdC ’’ ■Ce£rgafMar.r\ ~.
„.., r , iwwA
s , Sera
AtvsX. MHa
«X- ; tX fit # '') fZJjffiP 1
" / AA A9 XiAAl i / ■
/ L A ft E N T \ J sjtsy&c Sp
! '■•. ,-•■ 1 1 V, [ J S
yJ w
> - s (
v -— y*
p*y
\
%
\ '
9
%
;
I _kd^ r °X /CapeToarvUU
r f 7 / }* Welters I* T ffizjaFrf <,/- 7"X |
yj S/ Jf \^^Jnu nui „ WuittfLass
i /k AJyJ' i:a F*l<‘rxijti&r
V/V
A J
y\^ mm
<5- *-l
fazny Mjpu-Jfacui Jvl 1
/ - a S/n V
UOUHTAIN :V*rtk Motto XIaxs K.. / A |
f wA c < UJivKow f? Ii
i 2ccii 'XiZ <^5
■;-* /•— X-
v*w*j p / A i -
X T> /
T A /iS- i>' , ' , »
tps>u x|\J it
T / ; a a •
(,V : %k^SLL\
's..' looms Lah.jt \ xLl 1
X .7 1
ft •J y t flo/onet
freycinetW insula
*S r \ Cb. *•*..
-V
W}ad/UnjLayoifii
y J
( -) r
\ i A \ At Jte^Tli) ATLAKfl
\5 r%f %
Xt '- y a
■W- / ! h
Crcrur/uluAfOOtv
j QoMaAk L aaoen, • /
A • \ O Ji**™?* Iqfoon. X(
""XX /-' ' -•.. /J{\.. !
_,-*■’ Q-Xiislf f \ /
/ \ \ 1 X
V....A “* A yswAusftM
y .\£y r sauov* \ -5 / y '
%* «“ I .s>«v AV H
M’SETMOUR =C \>
:S:Ml '
kj o Schousten- Passa,<ft
f /"S —Strait
\^rfk.w *« scHoonen| Tc Xisi-and
< 7 / A' p&AnsuyJ
zyrpEtL Af >A'' i \yi
W_a--- A rJ/^P? yX fj\%.
wti. %
&%0*'lmL ‘ x JERICHO A
/}
s t
\
r N -“’
1 f f* 1 ScfweX^Jd-Xrig,
P **^ U , \ (MjOitjBccHJp '"•'fsiets
/y iTasJJxfer Islsts
f Cat*ractO '- v V""- ✓*■-/ / /; .nyiA 1
>
0 b*‘!>x
l\i/
/
V A“'#
v \
i. A * X v
a.CXLM WHiTE£O0RD A <5 (vT*^
A”7 '" / \ ’y a ‘*\ La r > ™
9. )/ / \ -fey p •
jL =!%>/ %fe ? /*..
\ *\ )5=X j *
N ' yv / ? J^5v
1 J \ L /^
v\ 1
'/^SUTriESV
hA>' ‘*7 x
\.
i
i\ °
'•-... Aa Jk i r law-K
™bs&nte~3
nw \^Trc^V«r/A Aforcr O J
W 5 "" Xb w «* A AfP®*
A . Pr" V 1 t*,A I
/
X
X x I— '■-
\ / '
5\ I 7
X ll L.X-
jffcnon.- ' J y ; k 7 v /
\ ' p-
/A \a \
« ® If ii
.., f V p /
J v\ W I
? \\v,i
#
< /
)
A7 Prossers i
NA \
,o ousfatnvtUc
•
\ K
“ < i\ 1 \
X X S A A-y s HE p TOM S
Cc- MV Hmontacuu
0 A\4^cdad
5ELD£RSt!C - X— k \ X
-%€ A\
«;« f #
BROAD AW / '” Ac |.
\ \s>Jyu XX '4
-z ) lh,, ' ; r — <^ v^i/!’'!/vi// p CfuircAy " ■,
cr
% %K^ U J ""“
<!<■,'%&. pkomtARy ■•*•* 1 ‘. v
>«*V (u\
V W VJNORtH B.RIDCt WATER W
i . -AsU^.
ff
X \ VX)«—/
«.*rf ; xy V xx (
rfldaJidrd err Green. /#
~BUuA,JCB
rtWLft ywaterfau-te,
l x i*. f^rBeackuurBay
Tf* ’■“ &s \ r!a
f . XlSLAND
j—/ S*
ji i iTcyi / Cyrjgft C.kEistsiken
/ \ Aoaii
idenujr ( TwerByreamdeil Mock
T F y 4 ''7. elf****- tyaaoAed. RotX,
)qM < *rei lx 0 "''Hard.
Icran vjVie CdLrmn,
" JC
Or
■5
ri
: (Olj
'/tt/Trrx. vV s Vj**‘*‘c!^ , / / 7 (
- /#C
y^%l
tlfruirvt y
UARlKft Am&
\ J /
/A
j v x.
§
yy%:itM)WN u* \ 'X'-
..»/ 'X - IVi >J5.bfc
S "* J y*/‘ o \ /
/' ? 5wkc*"®V / 7
L vA 4% )ir^l
X Xv.y K k S) 3
X* i ' kJvv' i tST x/
Xu/ \ s / ’ '/'f, /NUCF.NT f/X^
Hpwsa 4 1' ® is ir A J
sttCft’WOND X if// y k' .’^
C •v'.A'ov, w\ L/ / /v^. . . / /lr~y 1 U
ii Jr-
1 M '
a
\
%
V
S.yV , \
'S!
—■'■X'.'.y '../-/3so
B. / r* P da. Hessat.
& r f
NEW NORFOLK n .^^'Acv v, 'vy)') X'l 'r 1 'fit CVJ X \ / >/
/ £&. . '7'X7TtV* J S4OULCDUW Av\ LTL J> /
/ AA>P2VW0if.SW,fr<v** C ■ y&VMCuotuO <7 5 Ls/fv L — 'fSaUoch
\ V /X
-v Xfi( 7, ' X^^ FARN .5S^/ ; - 0
./.Xvffi'v,^ > ,"fxXA /V^te Y jViPirptii
1 \ftar<M iff J* r f£fp X
”'A / ,e
‘iX I ' r-spRiNof'^^ T FR]EDE1 cicr hTkry
\ '•• * ) / ',,/§&■* \ BAY
I \ \ ) /? / (Xj • \ , X
V «.i.M/\ «tarocWa->- j \A\
U/ L. ryt ruA-ftsti f* Ih.urt.s P J (~\ * ’•»•• V-
XioNOLtv 'A/ , a
jJ\ Mts£*f y MARION
y KamnE v 'fek'l] bay
X/fc»«cS£?X*v < CREEK
,y^ v copping
.c ii
7- dunalllyVk XV, \ )
\\
X• F-PRE STA R’S
n
\ -. <X
uznvn,
Or tea I *-
C Frederick Hendrick,
nfitiar**
Sffyjiv
V. BtJ.rrpersJHu.ff
J: Yellow Bias f
jrBtfh
/. Hocks
- -
<- j : W
S4#:A /Afe#*A ••^^7
ANftACH „ w . A / j ♦■ { ■■,
V — 7 }*
| / J Afj COaLMOu^ ia
M t-J — ssss^nt. —. ..
tLk 7 >LI‘
SCCVHi PCAK
mCSnrviHe
festers
/AVt <a0nr '•'aa -fl 1 a
-"A W'Zv \ ™jf%r*'\
.k (
\^J*<S-J(-rorur<.™ } ; \ saltwater Riji
X^ 1 —X_/ a BlxuhJa<Xs Ros/h ( K„, 7
y- _ I 1 vy /
NORFOLK / _
X » BAY „
r. y \ Afpruj*
sM:
NECK
or Pirates Bay
* Fass/ls
Hole
W if v^fiJuwy&Spp-s te«gsfe /
f H **% r (»uufia* \ v y '\> */Jr y \
iilUi\ ■&■'£*"* y£*SY MOVHfAt* / / V / A ■ Aa } 1 A- — A C Yf -» T * ,, \
. #/F) A'-k 7^-/ / vi v€J kAA'v 1 N b
Jb£t ik S' a A-r"- s t 0 k m "<tV V P
&&*&; Jy k^5Tr^ w c ■■ r x A - V / >> ~ \ U i\ V / -vy 2 /v /
7gptyh& > &** r ‘ raa V T *» A , /
1 • “AArA
v '/, \ v* -> v'< x w <*, , - <t?wi-Aw4i:* Snn b/it v t ( ! V — -s
A A^A7lonc bay V k l n 1 1 * \ BAY
r j&A V CAPE RAOUL
•A %‘S? 'cfrvUrukUcvy *
uxnsArck
l 2/G
IbffpdWte Rocks
S' — y>sRcfks
JCJBaay
/
\ s
PILLAR
r> gif I- iyhthso txrie.
\-X- t
il ’ISPiityU }'
£
j J \ Boy. yjr
0j JJj*** ff] V Jjf
ioarxna . f , I 1/ //
!fO!£.
%< A50vt« ••/
bC y— 7 ADVENT ORE
y r A
,. > } V j
c I
7 H / i
a
BAY
1
distribution
yy^jSpcitten
j
I
OF THE
i
OYSTER BAY CYPRESS-PINT^
- j
>\ a , if// >—- WEiz
li.Ulli-
\
wdbjfyH V b/J' s 0 V T Hi 7
Y / U / C&ntu&a,
1
OCC, OjtptYOx.t rrta.tz. hcru.TLCi.ex rt' of t?uz
Cufive ss Ptn.es rcatcyt .
PPP. Coasted. re-Qtorz.J’o rest: tier- tar. cl
ucido cU ixtctle. se t/ andas/tecc' i/tr
tAffvlchtfiefTx.ru!. should floxjurCsfi e/
fi)X>fi cifret/e d the' ’« . ‘• 4
i&xsAJ
yCaiU'a- «s«*v
j3^’
y VVf^c^woi
ifS«AA-«
' JimtKft>rt &■
Jt,:-t BLoJT
' *J{U&<Kt K\
•> CttpryilU HU‘cA
/ffitr.uifc j > J‘
X 5 X ; R U N 1 /
vT \X r Ji fe.
r y J]X '. }
L.- 1 ;(o-i^^Kvf 2 / v \bt-Auronr j
Sk i VgrJ vc.'. V
/' , f? . { * &5»ym
Ctrcou. Sw-'X/C-,vi ;/aW VX^^T
>X ; XJ
d'aArftod. JtpcX
ff* '</■ Sca/ryi led
'I
XASMAJT!? H3LAD
jijuLt&an- if
*Zasye P>w (Irif Sat)
\
O . j... Pj^thf
£3
fr?
«9
i
!
{
i
1
I
1
1
i
/J graphed by John Va it Otmrunm* trader Mali- Lurnwnx


