

1917-18.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
CONFERENCE CONVENED BY HIS EXCELLENCY
THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL
ON THE
SUBJECT OF THE SECURING OF REINFORCEMENTS
UNDER THE VOLUNTARY SYSTEM FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE NOW SERVING
ABROAD
HELD AT
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE, APRIL, 1918.
Presented by Command; ordered to be printed, 2nd May , 1918.
Cost of Paper: - Preparation, not given; 1,000 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, 4123)
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullett.
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
No. 75. —F. 5959.—1


INDEX.
*
FIRST DAY ~ PAGE
SECOND DAY ... ...
* * * * * * •• ... ... 1o
THIRD DAY
"• ... ... tO
FOURTH DAY ... ... . _ Q
... ... oy
FIFTH DAY
So
SIXTH DAY n 7
SEVENTH DAY
14i
\


MINUTES. OF PROCEEDINGS
FIRST DAY.
FRIDAY, 12th APRIL, 1918.
The Conf ren;e was opened by His Excellency the Right Honorable Sic Bokau, Ck™ M™no F™*, G.C.M.G..
' Governor-General, at 2.30 p.m., in the State Drawing Room.
Present:
The Rieht Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister for the Navy.
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Millen, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
Senator the Honorable Albert Gardiner.
The Honorable Richard Beaumont Orchard, Minister for Recruiting.
Presid nt Unral Coun il of Employers, S nator G. Fairbairn.
The Honorable Donald Mackinnon, Director-General of Recruiting.
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey).
President, Employers’ Federation (Honorable William Brooks, M.L.C.).
National Federation (Honorable J. C. Watson, representing).
Beeby, M.L.A., representing).
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
„ Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Elmslie.
President, Employers’ Federation, (Mr. E. E Pt ,
President United National Federation (Senator Wm. 1 lain).
General Secretary, United National Federation (HonoralJe J. Hume Coo ).
President. Victorian Branch Australian Labour Part£ (J. H. Scullin.)
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan.
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. E. H. Macartney.
Employers’ Federation (Mr. P. Berry, of Melbourne, representing).
National Political Council (Mr. G. H. Pritchard), President MLC >
President, Queensland .Central Political Executive (Honorable W. H. Demaine, M.L.C.).
South Australia.
Premier, Honorable A. H. Peake.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
President, Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. H. Bakewell).
South Australian National Party (Mr. R. P. Blundell, representing).
South Australian Branch, A.L.P. (Mr. F. W. Lundm, representing).
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. D. Williams).
Western Australia.
Premier, Honorable H. B. Lefroy.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable P. Collier.
President, Employers’ Federation, Mr. Alexander McNeil
President, West Australian A.L.F. (Mr. P. O’Loughlin), Political
Federation of Labour (Mr. A. McCallum, representing), Industrial.
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyons.
President, National Federation (Captain Evans).
T , . Ur. T«a Conference His Excellency said :— I have to thank you for your attendance,
their?! nfeand face the National crisis with a united front. I have taken advantage of this patriotic impulse to summon
this Conference.


The situation you have to consider is extremely definite. The whole mio-Vif nf s„ r a
torn, and calling up every available man of military age not required for war industries ’ W “ idrawln « exem P'
one
may^ stand honotofth“ “ °“ "" S ° * hat Wbc “ P eace comas A "s aa ™
. Country f™ “ tha **»«
not let us waste one word in regretting this or exnlainimr roQO t b f en 4 efinlt ® 1 3 r adopted by the country. Do
to devising means whereby the voluntarv svstem run he ° C declslon - Cefc us rather bend all our energies
for the Western Front . X s ? 3tem oan be successfully worked, so as to produce adequate reinforcements
us of th\lct ld thaMntte St^Hht^tt^wf“StStf ° f “* ° rt • whioh «■**
couple of brigades of infantry under arm! these biing reinforcements for the A I ff 1 whfle^^ * de^ d > hay e but a
is reduced to a minimum. ° e A.1.h., while the training of Citizen Forces
its protectionfit k %*■ V'f but h ° Wever S rea * °ur confidence in
shores by keeping alternate «“ d of
the ^ 618688 ““ T ‘
“ Resolves »***» -cure adequate rein-
“ 601Enable '^^espondtotheT^^^^
and Secretary to conduct the business of the
IEo1 Eo P Mte ate »*
a matter for the Conference to decide forTteeli. conducted but their admission is, of course, entirely
matteralmn ll deoision ° f the Cabi “ et is d °- not
on this occasion and in this crisis it is of outstanding imoorWc & Vn * ’ the cor f e^' stoiie of Cabinet Government, and
tical views as to the best principle to be followed nr +k k* + U ? not a bave entere d this room holding iden-
thing is that you should LSv * be ado P ted ’ but the important
holding the strongest convictions amongst vou the caution n ® u PP°r one definite policy, and I shall address to those
“ I beJeech you i 5 the bow “ to d ™ 6S ° f “ d
rL a r bl he^ erillg 0f tte -P—ip*- *0 b“K
eritica/amomentinouT histOT^.^Th^^atmique^atiherbgcaU^itoue/h ° f AUStra ' i3 ' before haTC " fa “ d "
are looking for you for direction. They expect it § of von g Thcv ■> ? C1 m & uni ? ue J The people of Australia
overcome the undoubted difficulties that confront J . J rit °“ y° ur kryalty to Australia enabling you to
that this most distinguished “? 'T™* eflective P lam confident
renown of His Majesty's Australian Arm.“s wilf be V f ZT tbe honour ’ stre “g‘ b - and
of our country and its Institutions has been won in the field. rlght haS been vmdlc ated, and the security
His Excellency then retired.
duly el Jeted C 0 Pr °° eeded l ° * he a PP°“*“ aa ‘ a President, and the Honorable Donald Mackinnon was


Lieut.-Colonel Sir George Steward was appointed to be Secretary of the Conference.
The President, in expressing the great pleasure it gave him in accepting the position of °
ence, said that before the actual business was opened he would like an expression of opinion on the question of
admission of the Press to the Conference.
The Honorable F. G. Tudor moved, and Mr. F. W. Lundie seconded
“ That the Press be admitted, and that they be free to report all proceedings without 11 ”
by Censorship, except of any matter which would give any military information of assistance to the enemy
The Honorable G. S. Beeby, M.L.A., New South Wales, moved as an amendment, seconded by the Honora e
“1. A shorthand report of the proceedings of this Conference be taken, and a copy thereof be made
available to each member at the termination of the Conference.” < . . 0
“ 2. Censorship of the Report shall apply only to utterances which inay by
to our enemies or which may be offensive to our Allies—such if ay, y
a Committee consisting of the President, Senator Millen, and Mr. Tudor. .
Senator Millen agreed, on behalf of the Commonwealth Government, making or rep at-
Co—ee a, y matter he regards
as objectionable, but the Committee’s Censorship to be final.
The amendment was put to the Conference and passed ,the voting being 19 to 16.


CONFERENCE.
The PRESIDENT. —Before leaving us, His Excel- t
lencv intimated that he had drafted a resolution, which 1
I shall take the liberty of moving. It reads— J
“ That this meeting, recognising the urgent
necessity for united effort in order to secure ade- .
quate reinforcements under the voluntary system (
of enlistment, resolves to consider impartially, and (
with all good will such proposals as may be made
to enable Australia to respond to the appeal tor
men addressed to the Dominions by the Imperial
Government.”
I may be permitted, perhaps, to make one or two obser-
vations regarding my personal experience m connex or
with recruiting during practically the last two yea .
I have been greatly impressed by the fine effort made
bv the people of Australia to meet the demand for ■re-
cru ts Even last year we obtained results which
although, perhaps, not completely satisfactory showed
that Australia was in this war and ““" a " monthly
In the early part of the year we obtained a mont V
average of about 4,700. That average fell to 3,000
oAA during the second half of the year, and for the first
three months of the present year dropped to something
like 2 000 per month. The supply of recruits, there
fore has been on a diminishing scale during the who
of that period. For the fifteen months dating from Ist
January 6 1917, to 31st March last, 48,827 recruits were
obtained: This total does not represent the actua
number of volunteers, which was very large. n
laTr months of the period to which I have referred, the
number volunteering, compared with those actually ac-
cented has been verv considerable m some of the States,
fn some instances, the weekly presentation of volun-
teers has been nearly three times the number of m
accented Without going into the figures, lam fai y
confideni that something like 100,000 men volunteered
during the fifteen months, so that practically on y
ner cent of that number has been accepted. There can
be no-doubt that a great effort has been .mz&e, and
otinnld like at the outset, to acknowledge the obliga
.• wp ore under to all classes of the people. During
the first half of last year we had remarkable assistance
• anv directions. I should like specially to mention
rheTLf ? the Chainuen of
Professor *Mcltre of New South Wales; Colonel
Thvnne of Queensland; Senator Newland of Sout
Australia; Mr. Williams, Mr Ymcent, of
TwTnd olhereTa™ g“n splendid ’service in an
andi havejeft
ahnost°every thing! we have W dramatic^ap-
C& ihU ft. tog™
with me, that to make recrvutinj TOCces«u
to work together. .That « what W causes
Xw'oureehres the luxury
of opinion even in time of , , our existence
all differences of opinion to-day, because oi
as a free people is absolutely in peril
matter what may be his views on the subject of fight-
ing, or the desirableness of living a peaceful life, can
look at the situation without recognising that we are
“ up against it,” and have to fight with the rest of the
Empire We have to throw the whole of energies
into the business of war however distasteful it may be
to many of us as individuals. The point I wish to
stress is that unless we can arrive at some harmonious
working on the part of all classes in Australia we shall
Tai This Conference adequately represents every
political view, every walk of life in the Commonwealth,
and unless we can induce those behind us, those who are
influenced by our opinions, and those who constitute
be strength and vitality of Australia politically,-in-
dustrially! and socially, to work with
fL‘ he I" submit°thU S-d the
li mrt of the whole Empire was absolutely called •
We may be able to do something of which we shaU
always be proud— something towards solving the diffi
cnTties that confront our people all the world over
‘° mThOLMAN.-I second the resolution pro formt
s*i» £sss tsss&sSt*
plans he is formulating to meet the position which you
Mr President, have outlined m your statement 1± he
would do that’we might be in a better position than we
are at present, to discuss the general question.
Mr PRITCHARD— It seems to me that we shpu
fi “ of all decide whether we are going to impartiaUy
nrsi u . r p So ] u t lo n does not bind
usTo any particular line of conduct. It is nothing more
S P r„aon Sf the manner in
wlnVh we can best givd effect to it. Alter me m u
m °Senator MILLEF (Minister for I
should like, on behalf of ft. whi“
dYseusrion much less “ontroW . It i.
mo to which I think delegates, by their presence m t is
nHrSf m


to that unity which I hold to be essential to both the
redemption of the national honour and, I venture to
say, the national safety. For that reason I have plea-
sure in supporting it.
Mr. LEE.—I should like ‘also to support the motion.
I agree with the remark made by Mr. Pritchard, that
it does not bind the Conference to any definite scheme.
It practically affirms our desire to unitedly arrive at
some definite scheme that will achieve the result that
we desire. lam particularly pleased that
this Conference has been called, and called in the way
it has been. About a fortnight ago, when the great
reverse took place, I sent a cablegram to the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth suggesting that he should
call into conference, with himself, representatives of the
fetate Governments, with a view to considering some
definite scheme whereby one big united effort—one big
united appeal- might be made to the people of Aus-
tralia. The step that has been taken I readily concede
is a much better one than I proposed, since it has
brought together in conference representatives of not
only the State Governments, but all the industrial
organizations, and all political parties in the Com-
monwealth. Recognizing the gravity of the situation,
we should be able, with our collective wisdom, to evolve
some scheme by which we can materially assist the
Empire in this its time of great need. I feel sure there
is not one delegate to this Conference - who will raise
a discordant note so far as this resolution is concerned.
We may differ as to the means by which the objects we
have in view can best be achieved. We may have some
cause of complaint regard to matters of the past.
But as to the future I feel sure we can, at any rate,
sfiow that we are m real sympathy with this resolution,
and in complete sympathy with the Governor-General
Til* . sentiment that we desire to co-operate with our
Allies m every way possible to achieve victory in the
great conflict now raging. I trust that the resolution
be unanimously carried.
Mr. BEEBY.—I take it that this resolution is merelv
an expression of opinion that in view of the serious-
ness of the position in Europe we can franklv exchange
ideas as to the future. I support the resolution, mean-
ing personally to carry it out; that is, that any repre-
sentations which may be made as to the things which
must be done to encourage recruiting shall have my
heartiest support. I trust the whole subject will be
sincerely and freely discussed, no matter from wl at
source or interests we may have come. We know
or example, that some gentlemen are in attendance
who will put before us certain ideas. I trust the Con-
ference will consider both those and any other pro-
positions, and that we may be able to clear away all
obstacles to united action. The resolution might well
be _ earned _ without serious discussion from the view-
point that it is merely an expression of the opinion that
we appreciate the gravity of the present crisis, and
that it is such as to justify the fullest exchange of
ideas with a view to taking the best possible action.
Mr. PEAKE^-— I also support the motion. All that
I see in it as affecting myself is that I bind myself to
put out of my mind any preconceived notions regard-
ing what ought to have been done or should not have
een done in the past. It is expressing the opinion
that I am here pledging myself impartially and with
good-will to consider every proposal for bringing about
what is of the utmost necessity. We realize the serious-
ness of the present situation, and are prepared to
furnish the strongest support for any proposals that
may appeal, to us as most reasonable and most likely
to be effective We recognise the call for more men.
VVe recognise, because we cannot help it, the import-
ance of responding to it adequately.
Mr. TUDOR. I think we should have a statement
from the Minister for Recruiting, as suggested by Mr.
Holman. We should know what is in the minds of
the Government. Whatever this Conference may be,
and may do, it is the Commonwealth Government who
are responsible. We want to know how far the state-
ment of Senator Milieu goes with respect to the volun-
tary system.
Senator MILLEN.—I thought I had made that
pretty clear.
Mr. TUDOR.—-Is it that you have no intention of
altering in principle the method of obtaining men for
the Australian Imperial Force? That is wdiat we
want to be quite clear upon.
The PRESIDENT.—You are referring to a certain
great issue which has been before the people?
Mr. TUDOR.—I am.
Mr. STOREY.—Mr. Orchard has been appointed
presumably with the idea of doing something more
than merely revivifying recruiting, and with the inten-
tion of making alterations which shall be of an effective
character. We should know what those plans are before
we proceed further. We are pledging ourselves to do
all sorts of things under this motion—things which,
to my mind, the majority of those present will sub-
scribe. But we should know first exactly where the
Government stand. It would appear that the Govern-
ment are holding aloof in a way that is somewhat
ominous. We should know from Mr. Orchard what
he plans to do, or whether he has just been added to
the Ministry as one more member of Cabinet, with the
idea of further assisting the voluntary recruiting
system.
Senator MILLEN.—First, I would remind this Con-
ference who convened it. The reason why nothing has
been said so far as to the Government’s proposals is that
this resolution is of a preparatory character —one which
may effectively precede our approach to methods and
details.
Mr. TUDOR.—It would be better, if we could arrive
at unanimity, to wind up the Conference with a reso-
luion of this nature, rather than to precede it.
Senator MILLEN.—If we wound up with unanimity
I should say there would be no need to put such a reso-
lution. I cannot see anything in it that any gentleman
here is likely to refrain from supporting. When I
quoted the resolution I stressed the reference to the
voluntary system of enlistment in a way which I had
intended should be understood that the Government
accepted this as a Conference to consider means of
securing men as volunteers. The Government have not
sll £§ es f e d methods which will aim at securing the troops
by other means.
Mr. RYAN. Llave the Government finally aban-
doned conscription?
Senator MlLLEN.—lndefinitelv ? Without limit as
to time?
Mr. RYAN.—Yes.
Senator MILLEN.—I am not prepared to make that
statement. A public man charged with responsibility,
who would definitely make a statement such as that,
would be shutting his eyes to possibilities. But the
Government are not in any way considering any but
the voluntary method. The resolution asks the Con-
ference to consider impartially, and with all good will,
such proposals as may be made to enable Australia to
respond to the appeal for men. If you will look at the
resolution it will appeal to you as one which we can
all freely and very readily accept. The question of
ways and means—of propositions—will come after we
have adopted this preparatory resolution; and in that
circumstance Mr. Orchard will be able to outline the
proposals of the Government. I might add that the
Government are hopeful that the Conference will come
to their aid by submitting other proposals—which will
be considered with an entirely open mind.


Mr. HOLMAN. —What is in my mind is this. I
should like to know what is the actual situation with
which the Recruiting Department is confronted. I
have gathered, from a statement read to us by His
Excellency the Governor-General, that there is an im-
mediate necessity for 10,000.
Senator MILLEN. —Ten thousand men for three
months, and 5,000 afterwards.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Those figures are utterly unlike the
statistics published in the press following upon the
inquiry by Sir Samuel Griffith.
Senator MILLEN.—They are in entire agreement
with Sir Samuel Griffith’s figures.
Mr. HOLMAN. —One set of figures apparently deals
with the position as it is in Europe, while those of
Sir Samuel Griffith evidently relate to the situation as
it stands in Australia. It is an intolerably confusing
state of affairs, and the Government should consider
how far they can tell what is the actual position; what
is the shortage in the fighting line; how many men are
in the camps who are immediately available, if any, to
make up the shortage; what is the probable rate of
wastage; and what is therefore the minimum total of re-
cruits that must go forth from Australia to maintain
our strength. Then we can compare all those particu-
lars with the numbers that have been coming forward,
and thus ascertain exactly how we stand. Cannot all
these points be brought together by some one having
the knowledge, and a clear balance-sheet presented re-
garding the deficit which we are asked to find ways and
means of making up. I have come here with no real
knowledge of what the problem is. That is why I sug-
gest that Mr. Orchard should give us a statement of the
actual problem before we seek solutions of it.
We would all be able to apply our minds to the position
infinitely better if we knew exactly what the facts were.
We might perhaps carry this motion and secure a state-
ment from Mr. Orchard at a later period. But we
should, as early as convenient, get the details I have
indicated.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—If we pass this motion, I ap-
prehend that the information sought by Mr. Holman
would form a subject for debate. We would then know
where we were.
Mr. MORBY. —This motion refers to the voluntary
method of raising recruits. Does Senator Millen consider
it a voluntary method, inasmuch as Senator Pearce has
made a public statement that a census would be taken
of civil employees and that eligibles would be dis-
missed from the service. I take it that that, is a method
to force men to the colours.
Senator MILLEN. —I suggest that that is one of the
schemes which can be considered later. But this motion,
preceding all that, is one by which we merely declare
our willingness to consider any proposition at all. I
believe it is possible to secure unanimity upon the
motion. It is proper to bring details before, the Confer-
ence ; but would they be quite appropriate to this
motion ?
Mr. HOLMAN.— Perhaps not. Possibly they would
come more aonropriately later
Mr. LYONS.—I agree with the suggestion that some
statement should be made bv the Government concern-
ing their intentions. The Government must have some
scheme. They must have some plans for dealing with
the whole proposition as it confronts them. Upon this
motion we have scope for free discussion from eveiv
stand-point. We have come with open minds, and
before going into the general details we have an oppor-
tunity for putting forward all our views. We cannot do
that, however, unless we have some tangible information
and suggestions to begin with. And although the
Federal Government did not call this Conference their
representatives have been invited to attend, and- they
are in the best position to put something concrete before
us. We should have some general idea as to the extent
to which they are prepared to meet those who were
opposed to them on the principle of conscription.
Mr. WATSON. —What objection is there to our say-
ing that we are in favour of helping to increase the
number of recruits under the voluntary system ?
Mr. LYONS. —It is no use passing any resolution
merely because it sounds patriotic. There is no real
sense in doing that unless we first know the facts and
have some idea as to the possibilities of Australia coping
with them. If the Minister for Repatriation is not in
a position to do what has been suggested
Mr. TUDOR. —But the Minister for Repatriation is
Senator Millen.
Mr. LYONS. —I meant to say the Minister for Re-
cruiting. There is no necessity to rush the position.
We ought to afford him the opportunity that has
been suggested, and then discuss this general question,
and his propositions together.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I quite agree with the view
which Senator Millen has expressed, that if we could
carry this resolution unanimously it would be of great
assistance to recruiting in Australia. Personally, I
cannot see any objection to it. It practically binds
nobody to anything at all. It reads, “In order to secure
adequate reinforcements, this meeting, recognising the
urgent necessity of united effort, &c.” Now, .what we
want above all things is united effort. This is. an
exceedingly vague resolution. It pledges us to nothing,
except to the assertion of a desire to discuss. any sugges-
tions which may be brought forward in a spirit of good-
will. Speaking as the President of the Employers
Association, I can say —and I am backed up in my
statement by the representatives who are present from
all the States—that we will discuss this question with
the utmost good-will, because we feel most sincerely
that the nation to-day must be in an exceedingly parlous
state. The fact of our having been called together in
such an unusual way by the. representative of the King,
the head of our great Empire, shows conclusively that
the position must be very serious indeed. It
behoves every one of us, therefore, to do all that we
possibly can to create an atmosphere in which the
recruits so urgently needed will be forthcoming. I
think that, in reality, some gentlemen are straining at
a gnat. If this motion were carried, and if, subse-
quently, we disagreed upon the means of giving effect
to it, that would be the time to express the disagree-
ment. I hope there may be no disagreement, because,
personally—and I speak for all the employers present—
we are prepared to put everything in the background
in order to obtain harmpny, because we recognise that
the interests of the Empire at the present moment are
in an exceedingly perilous condition. . Only by the
securing of harmony can we hope to stimulate recruit-
ing. Mr. Mackinnon has said that he has tried every
means in his power to obtain increased reinforcements;
and I know that he has. His failure to do so has been
brought about by the unfortunate discord that there has
been amongst us. . . ,
Mr. TUDOR —We have different opinions as to how
that discord was caused.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I do not say that you are
right, Mr. Tudor, or that Mr. Hughes is right. But we
are here to-day to endeavour to heal these wounds. I here
are far more important things to consider at the present
time than that of any party breach.
Mr. TUDOR.—I am not speaking of anything poli-
tical ; but I am speaking of something industrial.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I am sorry to hear it. As far
as my influence will go, and as far as the influence of
the employers will go, I repeat that we are prepared to
do anything we possibly can to secure harmony.
Mr! TUDOR.—When we know that men with three
sons at the Front, two of whom have .been killed, have
been victimized, we would be lacking in our duty 1 we
did not put up a fight for them.


Senator FAIRBAIRN.—WiII you, Mr. Tudor, not
say that you desire harmony now?
Mr. TUDOR. —I do desire it; but the carrying of
this resolution will not bring it.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. —If you desire harmony, it is
logical that you should help us to pass this resolution.
If we back it up later by the removal of any difficulties
that are in your way —and this we shall honestly en-
deavour to do —we shall obtain that harmony which is
the only thing that can save Australia. What is the
use of this country if we are going to be ruled by the
Germans? I say for myself, and for those who are
associated with me, that we will do our best to meet
Mr. Tudor in any and every way that we possibly can.
The PRESIDENT. —Perhaps I may be able to ren-
der a little assistance at this point. I have had un-
common opportunities of ascertaining the views of both
political parties throughout Australia, and I want to
say frankly that I am fully aware that there are serious
differences of opinion in regard to certain things con-
nected with the war —differences which will have to
be faced. That is to say, if we are to secure complete
co-operation there are certain grievances which will
have to be considered. I submit, therefore, with all
respect, that I do not wish to press this motion to a
division to-night, because some of the delegates present
evidently think that interests which they regard as of
very great importance might not then have an oppor-
tunity of securing proper representation. There are
matters which there may not be an opportunity of dis-
cussing, and which will have to be thrown aside if the
motion is adopted in its present form. Mr. Lyons has
suggested that there should be a full debate upon the
resolution. I can quite see that the view which he
holds, and which is held by others, is that if we carry
this motion there may not be an opportunity presented
of raising certain questions which they know perfectly
well are regarded as of vital importance by the large
mass of people who are behind them. lam quite aware
of that. It is one of the difficulties in connexion with
the recruiting business that there are certain grievances
which they desire to have fully considered. I think it
is a fair thing that they should be considered, and,
although I regard the motion as a fairly innocuous
one, to press it to a conclusion to-night would place
certain delegates in a position which I can scarcely re-
gard as a fair one. Consequently I suggest that the
debate upon the motion should be adjourned until to-
morrow. In regard to the statement by Mr. Holman
as to. what are the actual requirements in the matter
of reinforcements—of course, it is no business of mine
to interfere in Government matters—l can see no
reason why Mr. Orchard should not be in a position
to give this Conference the information that is desired.
Personally, I know sufficient to realize that the public
has a confused mind upon many of these things,- and I
cannot see why they should not be given the informa-
tion that has. been sought. If we have information
upon this subject, it will assist us to come a great deal
closer to each other than we are at the present time.
I have gone through Australia, and I can honestly say
that there is a tremendous amount of misunderstanding
between the different parties—misunderstanding which,
by the exercise of a little effort, might be dissipated,
thus permitting the parties to come together. I sug-
gest that the debate upon the motion should be allowed
to stand over till to-morrow, and that Mr. Orchard
should thus be afforded an opportunity of procuring
the information desired, if he has not already got it.
1 do not care to press the Governor-General’s motion
when there is not likely to be a unanimous vote upon it.
Senator PLAIN.—I think that we ought to deal
with this motion as early as possible, and as earnestly
as possible, in the interests of the nation. For us to
delay a derision upon it means that we are delaying
the work of the Conference. When the guns are blaz-
ing at the Front and thousands of men are dying, the
sooner we know the minds of the delegates here, and
whether they are upon this side or upon the other side,
the better. Whether they are on my side politically or
upon the other side is a matter to which I pay no
regard.
iSenator GARDINER.—Is that the purpose for
which the Conference was called?
Senator PLAIN.—The purpose of the Conference is
to consider the question of how to raise additional
reinforcements by means of the voluntary system. I
wish to achieve that object without creating any fric-
tion whatever. What I wish to submit to the Con-
ference is that those who are opposed to this resolution
should let us know exactly what is in their minds. If
they say that they desire past grievances to be redressed,
they should let us know what those grievances are.
A DELEGATE.—That is why the President has
suggested an adjournment of the debate, in order that
such an opportunity may be afforded to-morrow.
Senator PLAIN.—Why not now? Now is the hour.
To postpone the consideration of the motion, and to
allow the discussion upon it to drag on indefinitely in
the way that has been suggested by the President may
mean that it will be debated over weeks and months.
T take it that every man who is present has come
here with his mind thoroughly made up as to what
he is going to do.
A DELEGATE.—We have to be guided by the dis-
cussion.
Senator PLAIN.—If that be so, let the discussion
continue. I assure the delegates that I desire to create
no friction. But the times are too serious to postpone
debate upon this motion.
Mr. TUDOR.—Why, we only met this afternoon.
Senator PLAIN.—But we have done nothing. The
Leader of the Government has expressed his views
candidly in regard to the intentions of the Govern-
ment, and if the Leader of the Opposition will frankly
state the views and the intentions of his party, we
shall then be in a position to consider the best way in
which we can meet him.
Mr. STOREY.—We have no guarantee that the Go-
vernment will agree to anything that we determine
here. We have no guarantee that it will not veto every-
thing that we do.
A DELEGATE.—What is the good of carrying the
resolution ?
Senator PLAIN.—It will get it out of the road.
A DELEGATE.—Without being rude to you, sir,
how would it be to drop it and to say that it is out of
the road?
Senator PLAIN.—This motion is one which has been
presented to us by the Governor-General, and I desire,
with all due deference to other representatives, to see
it carried.
Mr. STOREY—-His Excellency did not suggest that
we should carry it. He submitted it only as a basis
around which the whole of our discussion might
radiate.
Senator PLAIN.—If we do not intend to carry it,
let us say so frankly, and pass on to other business.
To postpone the Conference from time to time without
doing anything is the'way in which we shall achieve
nothing.
Mr. WATSON.—I can quite understand Senator
Plain’s impatience, but, after all, it does seem to me
that the mere carrying of a declaratory resolution—
desirable though it may be—will not advance us very
far. It is pretty clear to me from-the fact that none
of our friends have risen to discuss the motion
Senator GARDINER.—Why I sat down in order to
allow you to speak.


Mr WATSON. —I am quite aware of that. I was
inferring to the earlier stages of our proceedings.. It
ouite clear that some delegates have m their minds
an q idea that if we carry this resolution, they will be
committing themselves without first getting rid of some
of the obfactions which they see to it. Now, as the
urimary object of this Conference is to secure some
decree of unanimity—to devise means which will re-
sult in increased reinforcements to our troops overseas
- it seems to me that ive can lose nothing by adopting
the suggestion of the President. It would be most un-
wise to attempt to force a vote until all present are
satisfied on the preliminary issue, which they think
requires elucidation. Therefore, m accordance wit 1
the 1 President’s suggestion., and with a view to allowing
the Minister for Recruiting to put a statement before
the Conference, I move— _
That the debate be adjourned. . .
Mr. ORCHARD.' —We might as well continue this
Mr.^WATSON. —I -am quite willing to do that. I
moved the adjournment of the debate, so that the Con-
ference might decide when to resume. It would be
most unfortunate if, out of a mere desire to carry this
motion, we insisted on its going to a vote to-night with-
out that debate which it is clear some delegates are not
prepared to give to it at this stage, at any rate.
I Mr RYAN —I have much pleasure 111 seconding the
proposal that the debate shall be adjourned. I do not
think there is any doubt that we are all m. favour ot
bringing about that harmony, and unanimity, in u
community which will make for the greatest efficiency
of Australia, as a war factor, in bringing this great
world struggle to a satisfactory conclusion; but I am
inclined to think that, perhaps, the experience
in connexion with the two conscription issues
has made the delegates inclined to scrutinize very
closely the wording of a motion which superficially may
appear innocuous, but which may subsequently prove,
hv the use that would be made .of _ it, to be
loaded. The desire of the delegates to inquire into the
matter has been somewhat accentuated by the statemcn
of Senator Millen, that conscription has not been finally
abandoned. Therefore, I think it is desirable to ad-
journ the debate in order to give the representatives ot
the Government opportunity to make some announce-
ment as to the method which they propose to adopt
to make a success of recruiting under the voluntary
svstem. When that has been done we shall endeavour
to render what assistance we can to make those sug-
gestions more effective or. otherwise deal with them as
we mav think fit in the circumstances. .
Mr. SCITLLIN.—I am amazed at the turn this Pon-
feronce has taken. We are aware of the fact that I is
Excellency could not act in this matter without the con
currence of the Government. The present Federal Go-
vernment have been in power for a considerable time
and know exactly the discord that exists in Australia
and the causes of it. I understand that the main object
of the Conference is to bring about harmony between
all the different sections of the community.
Mr. WATSON.—On this subject? ,
Mr. SCULLIN'. —Yes. And it is appareni that to
bring about that harmony we must re-establish .
such conditions as obtained when the P eo P lc ’ f A.
tralia were rushing to the colours in large
If the Conference insists on putting this motion to a
vote now it will be placing in a false position men who
have come here from all parts o -us *, . .
motion is of such little value, that the onlj object in
taking it to a vote is to get it out of the road let us put
it out of the road, and be done with it The Gove
ment have failed -to do their duty to . 11s
Our very presence here is some evidence 0 ._
ness of our desire to bring about haimony, an
expect that the Government, who have had charge of
the affairs of the Commonwealth during the time that
discord has prevailed, would have come to the Confer-
ence with some sort of olive branch. It was natural
to expect that they would say, “ Gentlemen you repre-
sent all sections of the community, and you speak
authoritatively. We propose to meet you m some mea-
sure.” But the representatives of the Government re-
main silent and look to inexperienced men, like my-
self, to give a lead to a Conference on the most moment-
ous question that Australian delegates ever assembled
to discuss. We can do nothing to-night hut adjourn
the debate, and I suggest that before it is resumed the
representatives of the Government should come pre-
pared to offer some guarantees..
Senator MILLEN.—How can we offer these until we
know what the delegates desire?
Mr. SCULLIN.—The air would be considerably
cleared if the question asked by Mr. Ryan were
answered.' If Senator Millen wishes to know what we
want I suggest that possibly if the debate is adjourned
we may be able to come prepared to state our require-
ments. The Government have summoned m the course
of a few days men from the four corners of Australia,
and they expect representatives of the workers to come
prepared with proposals, whereas members of the Go-
vernment sitting day by day, and m close touch with
each other, are not ready to say what they_ are p
par°d to give. At this stage the only sensible thing
to do is to adjourn the debate until to-morrow.
Senator MILLEN.—Mr. Scullin is in a sense accus-
ing the Government of not disclosing tlieir proposals.
The reason we have taken this attitude is that it seems
to me that the motion submitted by the Governor-General
was merely one in which we pledged ourseUes to ap-
nroach with all good-will any proposals that might be
brought forward to enable Australia to better play its
part ' It did not appear to me that the time had come to
discuss details or methods. The motion is merely'in the
nature of an affirmation by each delegate that he is
prepared to consider impartially and with good-will
any proposals for securing adequate reinforcements
under the voluntary system.
Mr TUDOR. —The very fact that we are here pre-
supposes that attitude.
Senator MILLEN.—Then there can be no possible
objection to the carrying of the motion.
Mr RYAN.—So far, nobody has opposed it.
Senator MlLLEN.—Delegates have not opposed it,
but they have not shown any very hearty desire
carry it I am certain that the motion alone whether
carried or not, will not help us in our ultimate delihera-
tTons but I can see no objection to the-oLor viewing
its terms literally, as a declaration that, P
am willing to consider with an open mind and good-
will any proposals brought forward for the rais^ g
reinforcements under the voluntary system. At the
same time if the wording of the motion
mind of any section of the Conference or
a feeling that there is something m it which I caT >
see it is infinitely better that the motion should he with-
drawn than that we should have a division upon it,
because in my eyes it will have lost all value if it is
rot carried unanimously. Therefore, though I support
the motion, I take this opportunity of indorsing the
course which the President has suggested.
t « we
£ - z
Conference^is°to be conducted the mev as


of the Government. If that is not so, either I under-
state the capacity of my colleagues in the Federal Par-
liament for making those grievances prominent, or I
overrate the inteligence of the Government in listening
to them, because we have been continually telling them
that the methods they were adopting would assist not
to win the war, but to create a division in the com-
munity. It is idle for Ministers to come to the Con-
ference and say, “ How can we discuss your grievances
without knowing what they are.” I am not prepared
to come here day by day to listen to men sparring in
this way. Surely, when the position is so serious, this
Conference is one in which we can drop all pretence.
In saying that the position is serious, I am not much
concerned about the battlefield of France to-day, because
it looks to me as if the Allies have made the cleverest
move that they have made in the war to date, in draw-
ing the Germans out of their concrete trenches, and
I shall await with interest the developments during the
next month. But I am concerned with the fact that
for the last eighteen months Australia, which was united
for the first two years of the war, and which, indeed,
set an example to the world in regard to its war
activities, is now presenting the very opposite example.
Some delegates may not take my view of the cause
of this falling off, but I still hold that I know what the
cause is. I could join with Senator Millen in carrying
a resolution of that kind, but would that link up with
us the hundreds of unionists who have been thrown out
of employment, or the 82,000 unionists who have been
deregistered because of. the action of the National Go-
vernments in combination ?
Senator MILLEN.—That motion, if I support it,
will pledge me to consider the very matters which you
are now bringing forward.
Senator GARDINER.—I am and always have been
willing to do anything to heal the differences, but if
Senator Millen and the party he represents say that I
am not in earnest, and that the description given of
me and every prominent no conscriptionist in the
Labour movement as traitors to the Empire is cor-
rect—
Mr. WATSON.—This recrimination will not do any
good.
Senator GARDINER.—I know it will not, but I say
the case is serious. The Government suggests that
medicines will cure it. I say that the trouble is a
cancer, and must be cut out.- lam willing to pass
over what has been said about me personally.
Mr. WATSON.—Lots of things are said in the heat
of the moment.
Senator GARDINER.—I refer to things said, not in
the heat of the moment, but in cold blood—that I am
a member of the Industrial Workers of the World,
that I am in the pay of Germany. This slander has
been spread so effectively by my opponents that my life
has been threatened in the streets of Sydney. I wish
to put all those personal grievances aside, and to join
our political opponents in organizing Australia. But
we cannot organize Australia when men whose only
crime is that they, as unionists, are driven out of em-
ployment. They say that the conditions cannot be
worse in Germany. Another man says, “ I have been
in. the Government employment for thirty years, and
within a few months of qualifying for a pension I am
driven out of the service because I was chairman of a
strike committee.” This has been done by men who
know the whole of the conditions of the movement
I am not bringing this subject up in order to - create
dissensions. I am merely telling the Conference what
in my judgment, has been the cause of this dissension*
I could quote dozens of cases in which men of our
organizations have been driven from the Public Service
of New South Wales for no other crime than being
unionists. The motion in itself means very little.
I take it that it was put before us by His Excellency
so as to lead up to a discussion. If anything is to be
done at all, those who are in authority, and have con-
trol of the business of this country, should^ indicate to
the Conference in what way they are prepared to meet
the views of those who differ from them.
Senator MILLEN.—Have you any proposal to
make?
Senator GARDINER.—I do not think that I was
invited to this Conference for the purpose of bringing
forward proposals, but to consider any suggestion that
might be made. I can tell the Government, however,
that if they want unanimity in Australia they can have
it by removing the cause of ill-feeling, which I have
dealt with on more than one occasion. No section of
the community is more generous and warm-hearted than
the working classes of Australia. They are willing to
forget and forgive, but it is not reasonable to expect
them to he treated, as our unionists have been treated
in recent times—B2,ooo unionists being deregistered in
New South Wales—and to retain confidence in those
charged with the administration of this country.
A DELEGATE.—And women and children are
starving in Sydney.
Senator GARDINER.—Yes, and the peculiar thing
about it is that all these things have been done by
State and Federal Governments which secured their
majorities on the definite understanding that the one
thing they wanted to do was to win the war. I say
that the fact that we have women and children
starving, and bread-winners thrown out of
employment, in many cases by the very
Government that was elected to win the war,
has made the very name of this Win-the-war Govern-
ment very repugnant, to men who have given their sons
to fight for Australia. It will be necessary, before
good results can be achieved, to remove this feeling of
repugnance towards the Win-the-war Government, and
to secure unanimity throughout Australia. Unanimity
between Senator Millen and myself, or between Mr.
Tudor and Mr. Cook, will not touch the question at all,
because. we are too old to volunteer. We want
unanimity among the. people. My experience is that if
a man is. called a traitor often enough, as has been the
case during recent times, he will become so accustomed
to the abuse that possibly he may not mind becoming
a traitor. Personally, I have been held up to ridicule
so. often, and, indeed, called a traitor, that I would not
mind very much if I were a traitor, so long as I was
fighting for Australia.
Senator PLAIN. Perhaps if you submit some pro-
posal to the Minister he will meet you
Senator GARDINER.—If the Ministers are not
acquainted with my views after all I have been saving
during the last twelve, months, it will be no use detain-
ing the Conference with any outline of them now I
think an. adjournment is necessary. As far as the re-
solution itself is concerned, I see nothing objectionable
unanimity is desired, and it is thought to
obtain this by passing this motion, I think the feeline
would be more genuine if it were carried at the con-
diismn of the Conference. I hope, however, that we
mil close this Conference without any resolutions
being carried because in that way we shall demonstrate
the unity and good feeling of delegates. Hard and
fast motions drafted to meet the occasion will not in
my judgment, bring about unanimity.
Motion for adjournment of debate agreed to.
Conference adjourned at 6.20 p.m. till lO a.m the
roUowmg day.


SECOND DAY.
SATURDAY, 13tii APRIL, 1918
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
The" Right Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister for the Navy.
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Miller, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
Senator the Honorable Albert Gardiner.
The Honorable Richard Beaumont Orchard, Minister for Recruiting.
President, Central Council of Employers, Senator G. Fairbairn.
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
President, United National Federation (Senator Wm. Plain).
Director-General of Recruiting, The Honorable Donald Mackinnon.
New South Wales .
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey).
President Employers’ Federation (Honorable William Brooks, M.L.C.)
National Federation (Honorable J. C. Watson, representing).
President, New South Wales Labour Party (Mr. Lambert). . .
National Association of New South Wales (Honorable G. S. Beeby, M.L.A., representing)
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Elmslie.
President, Employers’ Federation, (Mr. E. E. Keep). n
General Secretary, United National Federation (Honorable J. Hume Cook)
President, Victorian Branch Australian Labour Party (J. H. Scullin. )
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable E. H. Macartney)
Employers Federation (Mr. P. T. Berry, of Melbourne, representing).
National Political Council (Mr. G. H. Pritchard), President. M T n\
President, Queensland Central Political Executive (Honorable W. H. Demaine, M.L.C.)
South Australia.
Premier, Honorable A. H. Peake.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
President, Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. H. Bakewell).
South Australian National Party (Mr. H. P. Blundell, representing).
South Australian Branch, A.L.P. (Mr. F. W. Lundis representing).
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. W. Williams). j
Western Australia.
Premier, Honorable H. B. Lefroy.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable P. Collier.,
President, Employers’ Federation, Mr. Alexander McNeil.
President, West Australian A.L.F. (Mr. P. OXoughlin,) Political.
Federation of Labour (Mr. A. McCallom, representing), Industrial.
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyons;


Mr. OECHAED.—Whatever may be the result of
these discussions, I am sure that I have the sympathy
of the Conference in the difficult role that has been
allotted to me. I feel much like the Thespian who,
having been playing light juvenile lead for years, finds
himself at a moment’s notice cast for Othello or Matthias
in “ The Bells.” Yesterday Mr. Holman kindly referred
to the fact that I had only just entered upon the duties
of the responsible position that I occupy, and, remem-
bering that, you will, gentlemen, bear with me in the
brief outline that I am about to give of the proposals
of the Government. So far, my work has been to investi-
gate the details of the existing system, with a view to
instituting reforms which Mr. Mackinnon has been
hindered from introducing for want of the financial
responsibility which has been intrusted to me. It is
hardly necessary to remind you that at the two refe-
renda on compulsory service abroad, the question turned
almost entirely upon the numerical requirements of the
Australian Army in the way of reinforcements. The
war has furnished many surprises; it has occasioned
many false estimates and mistaken calculations. Two
years ago it was thought that, under modern conditions
of warfare, the casualty rate must be very heavy; but,
as operations have progressed, it has been found that,
while the numbers engaged are enormous, the proportion
of casualties has not been up to expectations. In 1916
the best military opinion was that 16,500 men a month
would be required to reinforce an army of five divisions,
or of 100,000 men, which was to be the Australians’
strength in France, and remains our honorable under-
taking; in 1917, it was considered that 7,000 men a
month w r ould provide the necessary reinforcements. The
British and New Zealand adjustments were made on a
similar scale. The referendum campaign of last year
again raised the question of actual requirements, and
the Government, in order to obtain a generally accept-
able statement on the subject, appointed Sir Samuel
Griffith, Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia,
a Eoyal Commissioner to consider and report upon
the question. His finding has been promptly made
known. Basing his opinion on the ascertained wastage
of 1917, and allowing for a percentage of loss between
the date of enlistment and that of getting to the Front,
he fixes the minimum requirements of Australia at 5,400
recruits a month. He points out, however, that at any
time the casualties may be on a scale which will call
for 30,000 men a month. He states that on the
Ist January, 1918, the reinforcements available in Eng-
land were about 18,500, and in Egypt 1,800, or a little
over 20,000 altogether. On that date, about 16,000 men
were in camp in Australia or on their way to Europe, ’
but these would not be fully available for five or six
months. The actual number which should be available
in England at any given time being about 47,000, there
is a deficiency of 27,000, irrespective of the monthly
diafts of 4,300. To show how accurately the Commis-
sioner must have gone into this question, I would re-
mind you that the private cablegram which His Excel-
lency read to us yesterday practically confirms his
figures.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I understand that 47,000 is the
military estimate of the number that should be kept in
reserve. You. have no knowledge of the authority on
which that estimate is based?
•vf i.* —I understand that General Legge
will be m attendance to give you the actual details on
which the figures were compiled. To raise 30,000
troops to be immediately despatched in order to make up
our strength is, we know, utterly impossible. One
object of the Conference is to endeavour' to get as near
as possible to an understanding of our requirements,
Eecently the Prime Minister gave in Sydney a short
statement of the proposals of the Government in regard
to what was called the new recruiting scheme. It is
proposed to approach the eligibles. As a basis we are
taking the lists that were compiled from the responses
that were made some twelve months ago. These lists
have been kept up-to-date in the various districts as far
as practicable, but, owing to the neglect of many to
reply in the first instance, and to the large movements
of population in the urban districts, they are insufficient.
An effort is therefore to be made to improve them. In
doing this necessary work, the Government is determined
' to avoid compulsion in any shape, respecting the two
decisions of the people that there shall be no compulsion,
even though this may result in imperfect lists. It is
believed that good working lists of eligibles can be ob-
tained by a revision of the existing lists by the recruit-
ing officers and committees, the electoral officials, and
the State police, who have great experience in these
matters. Bolls of those liable for military service in
each area w r ill be made available by the State Com-
mandants, and we intend to send to every eligible a card
headed “ Voluntary ballot enlistment, A.1.F.” On it
will be stated that in Australia the estimated number of
men of military age—that is, between 19 years and 44
years of age—is 836,121 —these figures have been com-
piled by Mr. Oldham, in conjunction with Mr. Knibbs—
and that the number of recruits required per month
is 5,400. In the Eichmond subdivision of the Federal
electorate of Nepean, which I represent, there are 672
eligibles, the annual quota of recruits required from that
subdivision being 52, and the monthly quota men.
This information will be stated on the cards
sent to the eligibles in that subdivision, with a
request to them to voluntarily offer their names for a
ballot. Ihe request will be in these terms:—“ As you
are between the ages of 19 and 44, and one of 672 men
•of military age residing in the Eichmond subdivision of
the Nepean electorate, you are earnestly invited to give
a voluntary answer to the following questions: Have you
offered for enlistment and been rejected? If so,
when, and where? If already rejected, are yo'u willing
to re-submit yourself for re-examination ? “In the early
stages of the war we set a very high standard for the
medical examination, and we rejected men suffering
fl om slight ailments whom to-day we should be very
pleased to accept. This card is an inducement to the
man who has been rejected to again submit himself to
medical examination to see if he can now pass the pre-
sent standard. The card continues—
(3) Will you agree to allow your name (with as
many names as the above number ... as
may volunteer) to be submitted to a ballot for en-
listment, in the order of drawing, in the Australian
Imperial Force, such names to be drawn by ballot
at the rate of . . . . per month ?
“ ( 4 ) Do you agree if any one or more of the
number balloted for are rejected for active service,
to allow your name to be advanced in the order of
drawing accordingly.”
That is, supposing fifty men offer, and, as a result of a
medical examination, only twenty-five are accepted, the
man who has drawn marble No. 35 is asked whether he
will allow himself to be called in his order when others
drop out. . It is my intention to send to each man the
following important notice:—
“ IMPOETANT NOTICE.
“ (1) ff should be realized that in the event of
an eligible voluntarily allowing his name to be sub-
mitted to a ballot, it may be possibly months, or
years, before he is required to enlist, and his ser-
vices may not be required at all.


(2) The above statement is explained by the fact
that only a certain number from your District will
be required each month, and they will be taken in
the numerical order in which their name is drawn
in the public voluntary ballot.
(3) The following example will serve to make
the matter clear: —
In the Sub-division of Richmond, which is in
the Commonwealth electorate of Nepean, there
are estimated to be 672 eligibles and the an-
nual quota of these 52; therefore the monthly
quota is at the rate of men.
For the sake of argument, let us say that out of
the 672' eligibles 222 have agreed to allow their
names to be submitted to a voluntary public
ballot.
Then as the quota required from Richmond is only
at the rate of men per month, the follow-
ing table shows when an eligible from that
place would require to enlist, according to the
number drawn by him in the voluntary public
ballot: —
rf fniinwinsr He would be required to enlist
If the foll '’''' l? before the following periods after
N°. was drawn ballot,
in the ballot,
. 24 . . .. .. 3 months.
• 26 • • 6 months. ‘
39 . . .. 9 months.
52 .. .. 12 months.
66 .. .. 1 year 3 months.
7g _ # , 1 year 6 months.
92 " # .. .. 1 year 9 months.
104 ! ’. .. • • 2 years.
27g _ < .. 2 years 3 months.
730 .. 2 years 6 months.
243 11 .. 2 years 9 months.
156 .. • • .. 3 years.
270 ’ ’ . . .. 3 years 3 months.
7g2 . . 3 years 6 months.
295 . . .. 3 years 9 months.
208 •• •• 4 years.
222 . . .. .. 4 years 3 months.
If a man draws marble No. 14 he will enlist within three
months. If he draws marble No. 26 he will be called
upon within six months. If he draws marble 52 it will
be twelve months before his services are required. It
he draws marble No. 104 it will be two years before he
is called up. It will probably be four years and three
months before the turn of the man who draws marble
222 will come.
Mr. McNEILL. —How do you propose to catch up
the number we are now short ?
Mr. ORCHARD. —I think it is generally admitted
that we cannot catch it up.
Mr. HUME COOK.—If you adhere to the scheme
you have outlined, how do you propose to get the 10,000
men required for the first three months.
Mr ORCHARD. —This scheme was prepared before
I was aware of the cablegram read to the Conference
yesterday.
Mr. RYAN—When did that cablegram come to
hand ?
Mr. ORCHARD.—I do not know. . The first 1
heard of it was when His Excellency read it. The Aus-
tralian lad is prepared to take a sporting risk, and
there is an element of chance about a ballot which we
hope will appeal to men who have not yet seen ht to
eil Mr. HUME COOK. —Admitting all that, how do you
propose to get by the same sporting chance the extra
number which we were told yesterday ought to e sen
Mr. ORCHARD.—I hope that the combined wisdom
of tbs Conference may show me a way out. I under-
stood that it was the desire of the Conference that I
should give an outline of the Government’s proposals,
and I take it that we shall be assisted in improving on
them.
Mr. RYAN. —Apparently the Government have no
proposal in regard to the 10,000 a month.
Mr. ORCHARD. —It was only when we came here
yesterdav that we heard the need for it.
Mr. HOLMAN—It took us all by surprise.
Mr. ORCHARD.—Another proposal of the Govern-
ment is in regard to increasing the allowance to de-
pendants. We have already increased the allowance to
wives from Is. sd. to 2s. per day and to children from
4|d. to 6d. per day. It is purely a matter for this
Conference to say whether or not the amounts are ade-
quate. Any recommendations from the Conference
will be considered by the Government. When we ask a
married men, or a single man with dependants, to enlist,
he says at once, “ What will be the position of my de-
pendants while lam away?” I have always held that
the men who cannot go away and those who have to
stop behind should pay for those who do go away and
fight for their country. In conjunction with the in-
creased allowances which I have mentioned, the _ Go-
vernment are endeavouring to induce patriotic citizens
to raise funds for the purpose of insuring the lives of
men who are going away. In New South Wales Sir
Samuel McCaughey has already accepted a big respon-
sibility in this direction, and I am delighted to learn
that Sir James Burns has undertaken to raise £20,000
in Sydney for the purpose of insuring the lives of 1,000
men at £2OO each. Various bodies in different elec-
torates in New South Wales were prepared to raise
funds for the purpose of insuring the men leaving the
districts, but owing to the fear that their efforts m this
direction would clash with the repatriation scheme, per-
mission to do so has been denied to them by the State
War Council. If permission were granted to these
various local bodies to raise money with this object in
view it would probably induce married men to seriously
consider the question of enlisting.
Mr. HUME COOK.—The scheme should be uni-
versal —not local. . . ,
Senator MILLEN.—A prohibition was imposed
against raising special funds for individuals.
Mr. ORCHARD—Permission was denied because it
was felt that these schemes would clash with patriotic
movements, such as Red Cross work.
Mr WATSON. —Has there been any attempt to as-
certain the cost of a national insurance scheme ? I un-
derstand that something of the sort has been (lone in
America, and that every soldier is being insured for a
definite sum in the event of death; also that any sum
paid to dependants in this way is in addition to the
Government pension.
Senator MILLEN.—The American soldier pays his
own insurance by the smaller pay which he receives.
Mr. ORCHARD.—Our difficulty would be that any
scheme of national insurance would have to be retro-
P Mr Ve WATSON.-It seems so unequal to allow some
men to derive benefit from private benevolence while
other equally deserving are not provided for.
Mr ORCHARD—I quite realize that it seems hard
on the man who rushed to the colours in the early days
that the men who are now enlisting should receive better
treatment.
Mr. BROOKS. —For how long would £2O insure a
lfl Mr ORCHARD.—I understand that £2O is the pre-
mium to insure a man for £2OO for twelve months.
Mr. TUDOR.—The rate is £lO per £lOO.
Mr. WATSON. —That should not be an impossible
sum for a national scheme to provide.


Mr. ORCHARD. —The Million Club in Sydney are
out to raise £2,000 in order to insure 100 men.
Mr. McHELL. —Will the insurance companies take
the risks?
Mr. ORCHARD. —I believe that this is being done
in consultation with Mr. Richard Teece and other
gentlemen connected with the life insurance companies.
Mr. WILLIAMS. —At greatly increased premiums.
Mr. ORCHARD. —I think that the rate is 10 per
cent.
Mr. BROOKS.—There is no guarantee that’ the in-
surance companies will renew the policies.
Mr. ORCHARD. —That is a matter which will be
purely dependent on the funds that are raised during
the current year towards the second year. After a man
has been away for twelve months, it is the intention of
the Government to pay him 4£ per cent, interest per
annum on his deferred pay. I intend to ask the Prime
Minister and the Minister for the -Navy, during their
visit to the Old Country, to deal with the matter of the
delay which occurs in sending out non-effective state-
ments —accounts showing the amount of money the
returned soldier has drawn and the amount coming to
him. Sometimes these statements are delayed for eight
months, and during all that time men have to wait for
a final settlement of their accounts. This causes dis-
satisfaction. One member of the Commonwealth Par-
liament who is now in England is investigating this very
vital question, and I sincerely hope that before long
he will secure the despatch to us of non-effective state-
ments to Australia within a reasonable period after the
return of the men affected by them. We realize that a
good deal of -the military spirit has been on the wane
because we have not made displays with troops march-
ing, or aroused any spirit of enthusiasm on the return
of soldiers, and, since I have been in charge of recruit-
ing, I have made representations to the other Ministers
on this matter. We have been somewhat lacking in
giving these lads the sends-off and welcomes on their
return to which they are entitled. Many have been
deterred from enlisting by the apparent coldness.
Mr. WILLIAMS. —By the ineffectiveness of the re-
patriation scheme.
Mr. ORCHARD. —The Minister for Repatriation
will have something to say in regard to the question of
repatriation and the scheme which has just been
launched. I realize that my task is a most difficult one,
but I also realize that it is a most vital thing in Aus-
tralia that we should send sufficient reinforcements to
our men. It is my intention to visit all of the States
to see if I cannot arouse the people to a proper sense
of their responsibility. We are up against it. A man
cannot take up a newspaper without coming to the con-
clusion that we have been hit, and hit hard. We must
in some way endeavour to secure the 5,400 men, and as
many more as possible, to send forward each month. I
have been considerably handicapped this morning by the
circumstances to w r hich I referred in the earlier part of
my address, but I am in hope that the Conference will
assist me in trying to solve the problem, and also in
removing some of the obstacles operating to-day against
successful enlistment. I believe that it was the object
of the Conference to bring us together in order that we
may try to surmount our difficulties. Any suggestions
which members of the Conference have to put before
the Government that are likely to assist us in solving
the problem of finding reinforcements will, I am sure,
receive their most earnest consideration.
Mr. TUDOR.—I frankly admit that I am disap-
pointed with the statement which has just been made
by the Minister. I firmly believe that we can only
hope to find a solution of the question by trying to
ascertain the reasons why there is a lack of harmony
to-day where harmony previously existed. If that is
not faced, it will be almost a pity that the Conference
was called. I have no wish to deal here with anything
political. I have the opportunity in another place to
do that, and I avail myself of that opportunity. It is,
therefore, not my intention to deal here with the treat-
ment of returned soldiers. I could, of course, give
cases which in my view supply an important reason why
recruiting is not now the success that it was. H might
be permitted to mention the case of a man who is not
in private employ, but in the service of one of the Com-
monwealth Government Departments in Victoria. He
had two years’ active service abroad, was invalided
home, and sent to the Caulfield Hospital. After being
there for some time he was discharged from the Forces,
and the doctor advised him to take a short holiday. He
resumed his work in the Department on the 10th Janu-
ary of this year. Immediately he did so he received
a bill from the Department for the difference between
the insurance premium he originally paid and the war-
insurance premium. He was told then that he could
not have any leave this year, though he started work
on the 12tli January. Although this man had given
up £2so—the difference between his ordinary and his
military pay—and had served the country for two
years abroad, that was the kind of treatment he received
from a Commonwealth Government Department.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—What Department was that?
Mr. TUDOR.—The Post and Telegraph Department.
Mr. ORCHARD. May I point out that the man re-
ferred to had already received his military leave, and
that was considered by the Post and Telegraph Depart-
ment in connexion with the question of leave.
Mr. TUDOR,—I am aware of the position. I do
not intend to deal with these matters here. My friend
Senator Gardiner, has a number of cases which he
might bring forward, and in connexion with which
serious complaint of the treatment accorded to re-
turned soldiers would be justified. I have merely men-
tioned this matter as suggesting some of the conditions
existing to-day which are accountable for the lack of
harmony to which I have referred. I think it will be
a mistake for this Conference to carry any but formal
resolutions, such as that which we carried yesterday con-
cerning the admission of the press. What is to be done,
in my opinion, must be done by the Commonwealth
Government or the various State Governments con-
cerned in the matter.
Mi. lIOLMAH. Surely that does not apply to
' Muntarv recruiting ? It might apply to compulsory
recruiting? r j
Mr. TUDOR. I have been suggesting some rea-
sons which account for the lack of harmony
m . the community to-day. I was asked by Cap-
tain Carmichael, who followed me to South Aus-
tralia recently, whether I would attend this Con-
ference. I told him certain things, and he said that
if it was to be a grievance Conference it would not be of
any use. My reply was that, unless we could explain
the reasons which we know are operating to-day against
harmony in the community, it would be of no use for us
to attend the Conference. I accepted the invitation to
attend it in good faith. Ho one will deny, and least of
all our chairman, who knows the facts, that I have done
my share in connexion with voluntary recruiting. I
did the best I could until I was howled down in the Mel-
bourne Town Hall because I did not see eye-to-eye poli-
tically with certain people. Ido not object to being
howled at for political reasons ordinarily, but I do
object to go where I have not the opportunity of making
any reply. If we are the persons who are standing in
the way of harmony, we should move aside. I pointed
out to Mr. Mackinnon that, in the circumstances, I did


, kit was of any use to ask me to address further
bruiting meetings. ' I found that people attending
.. w ere prepared to make misstatements. I know
■ t ( . el *tain influences exist to-day which liave caused
• split in the community, and it is impossible for this
Conference, by any resolution it may carry, to deal with
that difficulty, it must be dealt wim by me people who
evoated the trouble. I have prepared a statement ol
«ome of the conditions which I think it is necessary
should be fulfilled if there is to be any hope of restoring
harmony in the community. It is as follows:
That this meeting, recognising the urgent neces-
sity for the restoration of harmony amongst all
sections of the community in order that Australia
may discharge its duty during the present grave
crisis, agrees that the lollowing are vital conditions
to secure this end :
1 That there should be a definite pronounce-
ment by the Government that conscription has been
finally abandoned.
2. That there should be no economic conscrip-
tion in public or private employ.
3 R e -registration of. unions de-registered, and
restoration to unions of their former status, restora-
tion to their employment of victimized unionists,
abolition of bogus unions and bureaux set up in
connexion therewith.
4. (a) Repeal of all War Precautions Regula-
tions not vital to the conduct of tl\e war and a
Government guarantee against their re-enactment.
(b) Abolition of press censorship and limitations
upon free speech, except as relating to militaiy
news of advantage to the enemy.
(c) Cessation of political and industrial prosecu-
tions under the War Precautions Act.
(d) The immediate release of all persons —not
guilty of criminal offences —imprisoned in con-
nexion with conscription, peace propaganda, recruit-
ing, and the recent industrial troubles.
(e) Refund of fines and costs in connexion with
all industrial and political prosecutions during the
war period. . , .
5. That immediate and effective steps be taken to
protect soldiers’ dependants and the public gene-
rally against profiteering.
As to the first paragraph :
1 That there should be a definite pronouncement
by the Government that . conscription has been
finally abandoned.
there is no doubt that, up to the time of the first con-
scription referendum, there was more harmony m the
community than there has been since. That, tm ,
must be the first step to restore harmony.
Mr. PEAKE.—Have you considered the possibility
that the people themselves may yet demand conscrip-
tion ? , . .
Mr. TUDOR. —I do not think that they are very
likely to do so. I wish to avoid anything that may lead
to recrimination.
Mr. PEAKE. —Do you think that the people would
not demand conscription in any emergency ? .
Mr TUDOR—I do not want to say anything in con-
nexion with what might possibly happen which it might
be considered advisable to omit from the report of the
Conference. , „ „ A , •
Senator MILLEN.—We have the Defence Act m
Mr. TUDOR. —The Defence Act is there. should any-
thing occur within the confines of Australia. During
the conscription campaign, the press, for P& r y P°
reasons, denounced every one who differed from them
politically. I take it that lam as good an Australian
citizen as is any other man in the community. rea lze
my duty to Australia as a part of the Empire to which
we belong. But the newspapers, for political reasons,
F. 3959.—2
inflame the minds of the public, and say that I and
those who think with me are everything that is bad It
is said so often that some of the people really believe
it We as a party have been denounced as the Lose-
the-War Party.” That term is applied to us in almost
every issue of the newspaper.
Senator FAIRBAIKN.—SimiIar criticism has been
published in the Worker, on the other side.
Mr. WILLIAMS. —We must retaliate in a small way.
Mr. SCULLIN. —The Worker never once has said
that our friends are pro-Germans.
Mr TUDOR. —What Senator Fairbairn is suggest-
ing is that the Ballarat Echo has never said those nice
things about him which it is accustomed to say about
some other persons.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The Worker calls me a “ traitoi ”
once a week.
Mr. TUDOR. —I have mentioned what L consider
the first essential condition to the restoration of har
mony in the community, and that is that there must be
a definite announcement by the Government that con-
scription has been finally abandoned. I come now to
paragraphs 2 and 3:
2. That there should be no economic conscrip-
tion in public or private employ.
3 The re-registration of unions de-registered
and restoration of unions to their former status;
restoration to their employment of victimized
unionists; abolition of bogus unions and bureaux
set up in connexion therewith.
Within a quarter of a mile of where we are sitting
to-day there is a factory in which no person employed
dares be a unionist. I have that information from the
secretary of the union concerned. In another iactoiy
the manager of which was president of th e .L ha mber o
Manufactures in Victoria—l refer to Miller s Rope
Works —a man who had been employed at the place foi
thirty-five years was dismissed because he went on to
an anti-conscription platform. A woman who is a
widow with four children was also dismissed from
another factory. We are asked to work in
harmony in this community, and i is su fl
gested that we should sit down quietly and say
nothing about such things. Mr. Charlton, M.P.,
whose word will be accepted by every one who knows
him, has given the case of a miner whose three sons
have gone to the. war. One has beer, killed, another has
been wounded, and the third is still at the Front, but
this man has been victimized by his employers and is
unable to obtain work. Another man, a coal miner
against whom not one single charge can be brought
except that lie is an official of his union, was compelled
to leave the district in which he had worked all his
life and go to Queensland to obtain employment m the
mines there. He did so, and, as the m 3ult , of
dent, he is blind to-day. I presume that under the State
workers’ compensation law a man must be a certa
time in the State before he is eligible to receive com-
pensation under that law.
Mr PRITCHARD.— It is not a fact that men
have to be employed a certain time, or, if it is, I never
heard of it. If a man is a worker, that is quite enough,
he obtains his compensation.
Mr TUDOR. —I understood that it w r as so, but lam
verv glad to hear otherwise. At any rate, there is the
case of a man who had given his all to the Empire, so
far as his sons were concerned, having to leave the dis-
trict where he had been employed all his life. Ihese
cases of victimization are going on, and are m existence
to-dav It is from tbs class to which these men belong
that the bulk of those who have gone overseas have
come. Other delegates at this Conference as well as
myseif are represented by song at the Front. I d©


not say that all the representatives sitting facing
me have not as many sons as we have at the
tront; but the fact remains that they cannot
point the finger of scorn at us and say that we
have done nothing so far as that aspect of the matter
is concerned The workers feel that they are being
penalized to-day; that advantage is being taken of
them; and when men return from the Front, wounded
and crippled, and find that their parents and brothers
have been treated in that way, they do not become very
keen recruiting sergeants. When they see things of
that kind going on, they do their very best to stop re-
cruiting. The next point •is :
4. (a) The repeal of all War Precaution Re-
gulations not vital to the conduct of the war, and a
Government guarantee againt their re-enactment.
A number of war precaution regulations have been
brought forward that have absolutely no bearing upon
the war. They have been used for political purposes,
and political purposes only. That is the thing that
the people are taking notice of. It is from the very class
who are being punished by those regulations that the
recruits have to come.
Mr. PEAKE.—WouId you mind telling us if your
1 clea is that we shall make a bargain with you; that we
shall be patriotic if you can get all the industrial con-
ditions that you want?
1 said at tbe outset tba t I do
not think it will be of any service to any of us, or to
the community, to carry any resolution or amendment
at this Conference. I am prepared to move this list
trom which I am quoting as an amendment, after cer-
tain words in the motion before us, as an indication tbat
these things must be done; but, after all, what will that
effect. We shall have to go away and wait to see if
these things are done.
then?’ HOLMAN -~ Su PP° sin g they are done, what
Mr. TUDOR.—You will get the harmony that you
have not got to-day.
Mr. HOLMAN.—ShaII we get 20,000 men? That ,
is what we want to know.
Mr. TUDOR.—These are obstacles in the way to-day •
obstacles that have been created by the Government. 1
Mr. HOLMAN.—Supposing all those obstacles are
removed, what is the position then ?
Mr. TUDOR. The thing becomes automatic once
you get harmony in the community such as we had <
before these things took place.
Mr. HOLMAN.— What things? J
Mr. TUDOR.—The de-registration of the unions, the i
victimization of unionists, the introduction of war pre- 1
cautions regulations that are used only one way and s
the misuse of the censorship. That brings me to the t
next item:— r
(b) The abolition of the press censorship, and
limitations upon free speech, except as relating to 1:
military news of advantage to the enemy. 0
On 10th or 11th December the Argus, as the cable centre t
°n- Common w ealt h, received a cable from overseas, V
which they posted upon their board, and, much as I may 1
dislike the Argus politically, I have no doubt as to their ?
honesty and integrity so far as concerns doing anything 5
against the Empire. Ido not think any one here will G
say that the Argus, or the people responsible for it u
would do anything that they thought would be of advan- f'
tage to the enemy or to the detriment of the Allies That bl
nf A,UU‘ S ? ""I throu « hom the length and breadth "
Of Australia to other newspapers, and the censor sent 1
void to another State—l presume he sent it to all the
States, but I got my information from one—that it must
AustralT I*’ 1 *’ Why? l Simp ] J beCaUse {t said the so
Australians were playing football, and taking more l 9
interest m the inter-battalion contests than in the lates? Mr
= wireless from Cambrai. That action was purely poli-
e tical, without the shadow of a doubt. Why does the
t censor prosecute some papers for publishing things
» that others are allowed to publish? Why was the Byd-
r Morning Herald allowed to publish a speech I de-
F ? 6re f Worker was fined for doing the same
tiling? I hat is what we want to know. I say, remove
1 these causes of friction, and let the Government give a
T / au \ deai, and they will remove a great deal of the
F b iere is an amount of suspicion to-day against
the Government in the minds of the people, and the
Government must realize that they will have to be in
iarmony with the people before they obtain any recruits.
* U CHARD.—If these things were removed,
st y cta ared to give any guarautce ° f m ° re
1 J UDO^*— can I give any more guarantee
a you can. I said at the outset that every one of
us could only speak for himself. No one in this Con-
vince can do more than that. That is what lam
doing now. This Conference was called to try to
obtain harmony, and I am pointing out some reasons
-why, m my opinion, harmony does not exist to-day.
Mr. HOLMAN— The real point is, how do those
reasons bear on the question of recruiting? You say
i certain things are done they will restore harmony for
hannv f J ° U and me > wbich 1 should very
nennlp - nj time > and between certain other
noint T h r- q G WT red t 0 f ° lloW ou U P to that
if thl 18 no doubt Wlll ba ve that effect. But
if these things are done, and that measure of harmony
is restored, how will that affect the problem of recruit-
er* TUDOR—It w in p U t us back to where we were
to-day. reCrUltmg WaS mUCh m ° re successful than it is
Mr. HOLMAN .—Do you seriously think that the re-
cruiting numbers only began to fall off after the things
you complain of occurred ? xnmgs
Mr TUDOR.—I say they have fallen off to a greater
extent sincei then than they didjjeforc. 8
th "Vl U; A N ~ You «*nnot tell this Conference
That after these
clear I*' 1 *' t 0 my ! )osition perfectlv
f ' lhe statement I was howled down for inside tb'e
Melbourne Town Hall was this: That vou could
expect the manhood of Australia to be like an in
exhaustible well. You could nnf
of a million eligibles from Australia and hareVe“same
number to draw upon. That statement is true to-dav
rFS = •
ouT th 2“ 150 ' 00 f ° I % »o r uW £•£
out that some, of the rejected have been before
the military examiners over and over a vain an +w
it is not safe to sav tlmf tu ■ ? ’ BO that
150,000 separate individuals T re^ lons number
amue”
well Bu? if in Sv 138 Set fortb tbat P oillt fairly
n 1
-ia'pr-
°- SMz
Claud


,w I believed that Nurse Cavell got her desserts c
when she was shot. He said I believed that the sinking i
of the Lusitania w&s right.
Senator MILLEN.—You personally?
V. JUDOR. —Yes. He said that every anti-con-
scrintionist believed those things. He said that was the
*niti conseriptionists’ creed. We asked the Government
to prosecute him. The Government would not do so, i
I , tliev prosecuted a man who pointed out at a public c
meeting that some one had said those things, and put 1
I - ; n gaol for six months. We ask that there shall be
fair treatment in these matters. We ask for a sane
censorship and a fair deal so far as the W ar Precautions
Act is concerned. There should be no prosecutions for i
industrial offences under that Act. lhere are other i
lets to deal with those men if they are wrong, and l
there should be no prosecutions under the War I recau- i
tions Act for political reasons. '
(d) The immediate release of all persons, not
guilty of criminal offences, imprisoned in con-
nexion with conscription, peace propaganda, re-
cruiting, and the recent industrial troubles.
(e) Refund of fines and costs m connexion with
all industrial and political prosecutions during the
W£ *s *That immediate and effective steps be taken
to protect soldiers’ dependants, and the public
generally, against profiteering. . , ,
I have no intention at this gathering to deal-with the
question of profiteering generally, or with what the
Government should do in regard to taxation. They are
political matters. A lot of the things I have phoned
are semi-political matters; but I have dealt with those
that in my opinion, have created the lack of harmony
that’exists in the community to-day. Right up to t
time of the introduction of the first consc \
referendum, the Labour party was represented on every
Committee appointed in connexion with war woi .
The officials of the Labour party were some oi the most
earnest so far as The recruiting movement was con-
cerned. But when the apple of discord was thrown
into the midst of the public .. i«
Mr. HOLMAN. —Which is the apple of discord .
Mr TUDOR. —The question of conscription—ot com-
pulsioii for overseas service. From that time therehas not
been the same unanimity, nor can there l>e while there
is the fear and dread of that hanging over the heads oi
he people In June or July of last year, during the life
of tile'present Parliament, another Committee was
created as Senator Millen knows. The Committee
passed ’a resolution in September last, hut since that
hue they have never been called together again
’’'senator not that a confidential
Committee, and were not matters discussed there to be
Xr d TIJDOR.-TheyLve been announced in Parlia-
"“senator MILLEN. —After having been disclosed by
members of that Committee to thepublic
Mr TUDOR—I know nothing about that, but i
know that they were discussed in Parliament,• “ _
on that Committee the Labour party
sentation with the Government side
Mr. LUNDIE.— That is more thail ue hate no
10 Mr.'TUDOR—It does not matter to me whether we
have equal representation heie oi n • f erence [ s
be no vote on anything so far as this n
concerned, because such a vote can _ 111 i m ent
will be for the representatives of pnvate e y
for instance, to say wliat they believe so u 0 f
the victimization of unionists an iU 4tration
bogus unions and bureaux L » gouth Wale 9)
ri2rlMnvee there is a union consisting
2 2
of 970 members, and a bogus union consisting of fifteen
members, and while the bogus union is registered the
genuine union has been de-registered.
Senator MILLEN-.—Who de-registered it?
Mr. TUDOR—Judge Rollin, 1 believe.
Senator MILLEN. —Under the State law?
Mr. TUDOR.—Under the State law. lam not say-
ing that all the sins are yours; you have enough to
carry already, particularly if we may judge from what
happened yesterday. . .
Mr. HOLMAN.—What about municipal grievances
—you seem to have forgotten them?
Mr. TUDOR. —I think 1 have said enough to show
what is causing the lack of harmony and the distrust,
so far as the rank and file are concerned. I hope and
trust that the people and all of us are prepared to speak
freely on these matters and circumstances which have
caused Australia not to do so well as she otherwise
would have done. , ,
Mr. HOLMAN. —In the course of Mr. Tudor s re-
marks I was, to my regret, led into interjecting, and I
feel that I must say two or three words in explanation.
I feel that Mr. Tudor is in a very difficult position. He
made a very clear statement, in which, no doubt, and
to my regret, my interjecting may have somewhat em-
barrassed him. First of all, I must express my obliga-
tion to Mr. Orchard, an obligation winch, lan sure,
we all feel, for his very clear statement of the
case. I now see, for the first time, some
glimmer of hope. I think the plan outlined, if
it is discussed fairly and freely, may lead to some
tangible results. I rose for the purpose of making
some comment on a certain aspect of Mr. Tudor's re-
marks—comment that, I feel, should be made at an early
stage. He set forth a string of grievances, many of
which, it must be recognised, are substantial, and all ol
which I am prepared to say should be the subject ol lair
and open-minded consideration by those who, m his
judgment, are responsible. So far, for example, as any
grievances against the State Government of New South
Wales are concerned, the representatives of that State are
present to hear exactly what the position is and to see
how far we can meet those to whom the grievances al-
leged are a stumbling block; and 1 think it will be found
that the representatives of every other State Government
have come here in the same spirit. So far as some of the
grievances are against the Federal Government, I have
some personal knowledge of one or two of ™ att ®
involved, and it supports the view of Mr. Tudor. For
example, the unfair use of the censorship I have seen
instances that I have felt were calculated to create a bad
spirit and raise resentment where there ought to be
harmony. I hope the representatives of the Federal
Government will be prepared to give an undertaking
that they will consider and meet any reasonab -
objections raised. .
Senator MULLEN.— Asking the same consideration
from the other delegates. /»■ j ftiaf
Mr HOLMAN. —Of course. Mr. Tudor will find that
all those who are. in authority are prepared to P edge
themselves individually to use. their share of influe
in the removal of whatever is the stumbling block, or
if it be not absolutely removed, to so minimize it as t
make it cease to be appreciable. But if that is done,
if such an undertaking is given, what is to be the result?
If I, for example, as representing one party wlnch ha
been invited here-the State Government of New South
Wales—pledge myself to urge my colleagues to take a
certain course indicated by Mr. Tudor, because he
thinks that, failing that, there will he a stumblingl.look
i e ft if I pledge myself, as an individual, to do this, i.
Mr Tudoi ? prepared to pledge himself also to urge his
colleagues to take a certain course ? Mr. Tudor or others
later on may tell us in some detail the particular gnev
ancea agaTS the Government of New South Wales, and
Mr. Beeby and myself will undertake to consider each


of them, and let the Conference know before we part how
far we are prepared to go to meet any reasonable objec-
tions there may be to any action to which that Govern-
ment has been committed in the past. Clearly a matter
ol this kind must be reciprocal.
Mr. TUDOR.—The thing will be automatic.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Of course, everything is to be
“ automatic.” We must realize that there is nothing
automatic in the world of public opinion, which does not
rise uncreated and spontaneous from the ground. It is
manufactured by public leaders, and Mr. Tudor is one
of the men who can, probably, do more in this direction
than any other here. Mr. Tudor has told us that
he was an active worker in support of voluntary recruit-
ing, up to a certain point, and that for some reasons,
which I confess I did not quite clearly understand—
possibly because he was subject to some interruption
by myself and others
Mr. TUDOR.—I have been engaged in voluntary re-
cruiting since the conscription referendum.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Quite so; but I understood you to
say, that, at a certain point, you told the organizers
that it was no use you going any further, and that you
ceased to participate. As 1 say, I did not quite gather
what the reason was.
Mr. TUDOR.—Simply because I did not think it was
doing any good.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Supposing these objections are re-
moved or minimized to such a degree that, in the judg-
ment of a reasonable man like Mr. Tudor, they no longer
can be regarded as legitimately affecting public opinion,
what will be the position ? Ido not deny that you
may find those who have no desire to come to an honest
opinion in anything—who can .find a quarrel in a straw
by looking for it.
Mr. RYAN.—You are not suggesting that, surely?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Not in this matter; but supposing
those objections were so reduced in dimension that, in the
opinion of a reasonable man like Mr. Tudor, they fail
to afford any excuse for not doing our patriotic duty,
supposing that state of things could be reached as the
result of a free, fraternal discussion of the difficulties
enumerated, what would happen? It is no use speaking
of things being “ automatic.” What will happen on the
part of that section of the public in Australia which is
wn“ tlve empathy with the prosecution of the war ?
Will Mr Tudor and his colleagues urge their
followers to take action? If so, I am prepared to go
most fully into the grievances enumerated and see how
far my colleagues and myself can meet them; but in
these matters it must be do ut des— something must be
given on both sides. If it be said that if the censorship
is removed or suspended, that if certain members of the
Industrial Workers of the World are released from
TTTnnn r . , • , ... ~
Mr. lUDOR—I am not asking for that. Ido not
e Mr rt. n
Mi. HOLMAN. I the phiase was that if
certain gentlemen who had been convicted of “non-
criminal offences are released Mr Tudor and his
colleagues will forthwith go round and become recruit-
mg sergeants. If Mr. Tudor asks us to imagine that
that will happen, I may say that, although I have been
fairly optimistic, I am not so optimistic as all that,
What kind of an assurance can be given by men in Mr.
Tudor’s position, who held the position of Minister
of the Crown for about two years during the war, and
is partly responsible for many of the steps taken to
commit our men to their difficult positions at the
J. r ° nt? . Wbat is he prepared to do now, supposing the
difficulties which I recognise are in his way are all
\emoved or minimized ? That is a fair question, I think,
and I trust that other gentlemen who enumerate diffi-
culties will tell us what can be done if the difficulties
are got over.
Mr. RYAN.—I have listened with considerable in-
terest to the remarks of Mr. Holman on the views put
forward by Mr. Tudor. I hope that Mr. Holman was
not making any suggestion, as might have been gathered
from one part of his observations, that Mr. Tudor is
endeavouring to find an excuse for those whom Mr.
Holman speaks of as not prepared to actively participate
in bringing the war to a successful issue,
Mr. HOLMAN.—I said that I believed that if we
could not absolutely remove everything Mr. Tudor took
exception to, we could so reduce the grievances that a
reasonable man like Mr. Tudor would say that they
ceased to be a stumbling block; and I also said that
there were other people, no doubt, who were merely look-
ing for an excuse, and who would find quarrel in a
straw.
Mr. RYAN.—Mr. Holman may assume that there is
no one here looking for an excuse not to do all he can to
bring this worlds struggle to a successful issue; and our
deliberations will, perhaps, be more successful if nothing
IS . said that can be otherwise construed. lam quite
willing to accept the assurance that there is no sugges-
on that there is any one here, so far as members have
expressed their views, who is willing to find any excuse
or n °f doing his part. -I take it we are anxious to do all
we can win the war. lam not one of those who have
an y sympathy whatever with those who say that the
war mus t end according to the German view, but rather
do I say that peace should be on some equitable basis,
With that end in view, it would have been better if,
before now, there had been some definite statement of
what our aims are, and what are the terms on which we
are prepared to negotiate for peace,
* Mr. WATSON.—I think Mr. Lloyd George made that
fairly clear.
Mr. RYAN.—At all events, it is something which
should be made clear. There is one way to end the war
and that is not to resist Germany; but no one wants
to do that. We do want to know what our object is—what
objective we are fighting for, and what are the terms of
peace we are aiming at.
Mr. BEEBY.—Mr. Lloyd George said that the
British Labour party had indorsed & his statement
Mr. RYAN.—There have been some expressions made
use of in Australia to the effect that we are out to bring
Germany to her knees, to do which, to many of us, seems
a l most an impossible task. It is, therefore, mudi bet-
ter to have some clear understanding or statement from
representatives of the Government as to what our aims
are, and what is the basis on which peace should be nego-
tiated. Australia, so far, has decided to adopt the volun-
tary system in keeping up reinforcements for our Aus-
tralian troops at the Front. I think it would have been
better if we had had some statement as to what we can
do in this direction. It is all very well to say that so
many men are required to make up a certain number of
divisions; but we ought to know what we can do, what
number of reinforcements we can send to the Front
So far, I have not seen the question touched on from
that point of view. It has been assumed that we are able
to keep a certain number of divisions reinforced. I
regret to say that the proposals put before the people
were intended to provide reinforcements for more divi-
sions than we were actually told of. Mr. Tudor has
made certain suggestions, the acceptance of which he
says, would bring about harmony. I agree with him.
In bringing about harmony, and in removing the ob-
stacles to which he has referred, we should automatically
obtain a better response to the appeal for recruits. The
voluntary system has suffered for the reasons that he has
mentioned. Immediately before the first conscription
referendum was taken Australia was recruiting the
number of men necessary to reinforce her troops
Mr. WATSON.—The number fell to 7 000 a month
before the first referendum.


1W RYAN. I n the light of subsequent events, it is t
lofJ*that when the first referendum was taken a suffi- e
cient number of recruits was then offering to reinforce s
the* troops at the Front. _ , \
Mr WATSON. —The military authorities then were
nf opinion that a larger number were necessary. J
TVfr RYAN. —We admit that; but the statement ‘
made to the people was subsequently proved to be in-
correct and this has led to a general want of confidence (
• ctatements as to the number of men required. We
were told prior to the first referendum that 32 500 men ■
were needed for the first month and 16,500 for every
subsequent month. _
Mr "WATSON. —That estimate was based on tlie
immense losses experienced a short time before.
Mr RYAN.—I do not know on wliat it is based.
During the second referendum campaign we were told
lint 7 000 men a month were needed; now it is sail
that 5 400 men a month are all that are required
wish to know from the responsible Minister whether,
before the referendum was taken, the Commonweal!
Government were not aware, by cabled communication
from London, that 5,400 a mpnth would be sufficient
Mr JOSEPH COOK.—The statement is that 5,400
men a month, plus 30,000 to make up wastage, would
be sufficient. If you distribute that 30 000 over a num-
ber of months you will see that the requirements
average nearly 7,000 a month.
TVfr RYAN Had a communication been received
„riS'to the2oth December indicating that 5,400 men
a month would lie sufficient to furnish tlie necessaiy
reinforcements ?
Mr JOSEPH COOK.—Yes.
Mr RY AN. —That information was not made known
to the public. It was not necessary to appoint the Uuet
Justice a Royal Commissioner to dis'over somrthmg
that had been mentioned by cable before the lele e
dim was taken. I suggest that there has been a want
of candour in the disclosures to the people as to t e
number to fill the gaps. What mus^be > done
is to remove the suspicion that exists, and to restore
confidence to the people in regard to statements as to
requirements, and also in regard to the matters to w 1
Air. Tudor has referred. Tllimhpr
Senator MILLEN.—Do you suggest that the number
of recruits now coming forward is sufficient.
Air. RYAN.—To answer that question I must go
back to the initial inquiry that I suggested, as to what
lustralia can do on the basis of her population. Is it
asked that we start with the assumption that we can
keep reinforced all the troops that we have sent to the
Front* I have not seen that aspect of the question ap-
nroached It has been assumed that we can do this. But
hiw long can we keep doing it I Upon that question
everything else hinges. Does the Minister say .hat
ea SeMtor°MILLEN'.—We can maintain our present
'rYAN Having regard to home defence, which
to by th! Governor-General yesterday,
and to the need of keeping going our lndustnes ’ , at
events, to such an extent that we may e o
part in providing the Empire with foodstuffs and o
supplies, I do not think that the question has been ap
P Z l follra%OK.-T l a n ssure the honorable mem-
beMvaßYAN.—Senator Millen’s statement dM not
indicate that. If it be so, I wish to °
which the conclusion has been reache ■
ticular number required can be kept up-
Minister can supply that. I hope a * j i rppg
would show that we were able to do a giea ’ A ' -p
removal of the obstacles referred to by Mr. Tudoi >
to a large extent, remove the feeling that has militated
against voluntary recruiting. Before the first con-
scription referendum we were getting men more readily
than we are now. The introduction of the conscription
issue—l have said it often in public before—has done
a great deal to interfere with voluntary recruiting; both
sides will admit that. It has created suspicion which
will lead to a close scrutiny of every proposal that may
be put forward here lest our resolutions may subse-
quently be used to support a further conscription pro-
posal Prior to the first referendum, the voluntary re-
cruiting committees were beginning to say that the
voluntary system was a failure, and were spreading
that cry all over the country, m order to make an
argument upon which to found a demand for conscrip-
tion; but we know now that the voluntary system was
U °Mr!°JOSEPH COOK. —Ts it wise to discuss that
matter here to-dav in detail 1 ? ~ ,
Mr BY AN. —I do not wish to say anything likely to
cause'discord, but it has been necessary to mention the
matter as one of the obstacles to voluntary recruiting
which Mr. Tudor suggested could be removed
introduction of conscription militated against olunt
recruiting, and there will ‘be a suspicion outside at
least, that similar tactics may be resorted to agan .
Mr HOLMAN. —The experience of Labour membeis
who had been faithful to their party’s platform but
differed with their fellows on the question of conscnp
tion shows that the grievances are not entirely on one
RYAN. —I do not propose to enter into a discus-
sion of that question. The action of some of the vo un-
tar v recruiting committees in stating that voluntary
bruiting had been a failure, and, in some instances,
in making it appear a failure, militated against the
success of that system. It is due to you Mr. Chairman,
to say that you have done a great.deal m the face
great odds to make the voluntary system a success.■ I
there is any man who can make it a success, I believe
haryou can do so, because you take the trouble to
the grievances and objecUons o . each s.d
and endeavour to remove them. Ido not think tnat
any one here will suggest that you are actuated by
any desire other than to make the voluntary system a
success ■ your conduct throughout has indicated that,
I dissociate your name from v
in reaard to the attempts to discredit the voluntary
system A great deal of bad feeling and bitterness; was
caused by the conscription campaign. Membeis of the
Labour party were accused of being disloyal, and of
conspiring with Germany, and wc are now reaping the
af mT JOSEPH COOK. —You never said a word by
W Mr° f KYAN-I defended myself, but I never charged
with disloyalty or with being a ■
I do not believe that my opponents are disloyal or pro-
; party
: arMJtfasAsa-'w
' RYANc—In political contests many hard things
; PRESIDENT. —Would it not be better to bury
aI M?'RYAN' -yTi merely mention that the charging
• nml barmonv m the community wnicn is
l —£\o Au^r £ Jo play her Ml pajl -
t this great war. Ido not know the first
: .X£. - - »•


Commonwealth Government in particular, is the defi-
nite statement that conscription has been finally aban-
doned. The Minister yesterday was not prepared to
make that statement; in fact, he said that the Govern-
ment had not finally abandoned conscription. Of
course, he may be open to argument on the point. Then
there is economic conscription. I think that we might
get from the representatives of the Employers’ Federa-
tion an assurance, followed by action, that ivould re-
move that stumbling block. Next, there is the re-
registration of unions, which is essential. The members
of the de-registered unions, or a great many of them,
believe that the Commonwealth Government was behind
the employers in the recent great industrial strike.
Mr. TUDOR. —The War Precautions Regulations
were applied to help them.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Is it suggested that the Go-
vernment should direct the Court to restore the unions ?
Mr. RYAN.—The Government can do a great deal.
It cannot, of course, entirely control the press, nor could
it prevent any one from interrupting me in addressing
a public meeting. But there are things that Ministers
can do, and we shall put forward only such things as
can be done. We cannot expect the Government to con-
trol every individual in the community, but it is reason-
able to ask them to do what they can do, and then
automatically, to use Mr. Tudor’s words, the com-
munity will respond to their action in that respect. If
the Commonwealth Government had done what I con-
ceived to be their duty during the lock-out of the
Waterside Workers in New South Wales, they could
have had Inter-State shipping restored long before they
did. The Queensland Government were able to make
arrangements with men in the different States of Aus-
tralia to load vessels, man them, and unload them; and
surely the Commonwealth Government could have done
that. Instead of that course being followed, the ship-
ping companies declined to accept our scheme when we
proposed it, and they said that it was impracticable.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I could not get a man to
work in the Navy Dockyards.
Mr. R 1 AN. It was well known that the men were
willing to return to work for the shipping companies.
The Queensland Government were able to demonstrate
that fact. They were able to make arrangements with
the men in the different States. The Commonwealth
Government had full control of shipping, and could
have done the same thing.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I have never said this pre-
viously, but I say it now, that the unions pulled men off
a collier which was loading a war boat under orders to
go up North.
, Mr. RYAN. But lam speaking of the whole ques-
tion involved. The unionists have no doubt that the
Commonwealth Government were behind the employers
on that occasion, and I agree with them. If the Com-
monwealth Government had done their duty in regard
to restoring Inter-State shipping, the feeling among
the unionists would have been better. We want to
get back to that good feeling which existing previously.
No doubt, the war position is serious. Things are look-
ing a ery critical on the Western Front, no one will deny
it, and it is time to ask the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to rise to the occasion, to receive the criticism that
has been offered here to-day in the spirit in which it
has heen uttered, and to say that they are prepared to
do those things which they can do. Our requests are
reasonable, particularly No. 3, relating to the re-regis-
t rati on of unions, the restoration to unions of their
former .status, the restoration to their employment of
victimized unionists, and the abolition of bogus unions
and bureaux set up in connexion therewith. Another
equally important matter is “ the abolition of the press
censorship and limitations upon free speech, except as
relates to military news of advantage to the enemy.” We
all know the manner in which the censorship has been
exercised. It has made it impossible for the public to
know what is going on politically. Furthermore, it
has been used in such a way as to suppress the views of
those opposed to the Government in power. Our last
request, “ that immediate and effective steps be taken
to protect soldiers’ dependants and the public generally
against profiteering,” is also important. There has
been a great deal of profiteering going on. The balance-
sheets of most of the companies show that they are
making bigger profits now than they were making before
the war. There is no justification for such a state of
affairs. ISTo one should be permitted to make a shilling
out of the war more than he earned before the war.
The Commonwealth Government should be strong
enough to say this, and to act upon their word. The
amount of taxation we are raising is not nearly suffi-
cient to pay the interest on the money we are borrow-
ing. If the Government would show their determina-
tion to raise the necessary money, even to pay the
interest or to pay off Great Britain—l believe that we
owe her something like £97,000,000
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I think we owe Great Britain
about £25,000,000 for the upkeep of our soldiers.
Mr. RYAN.—If the community generally could be
satisfied that the Government would make the sacrifice
fall on every one in proportion to his capacity and would
show that they are prepared to act as well as talk, I am
sure it would lead to a stupendous response. We cannot
ask members of the Government to come to an immedi-
ate conclusion in regard to the suggestions that we have
put forward, but T hold that they are worthy of Com-
monwealth Ministers’ consideration. If our requests
are conceded it will go a long way towards solving the
problems that we have been called upon to solve.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I gather that some of these re-
quests cover matters affecting the Government of New
South Wales. Is Mr. Ryan in a position to say which
of them are supposed to be tbe troubles confined to that
State?
Mr. RYAN.—The New South Wales Government
should be better able to judge that for themselves; but
I understand that No. 3 is a matter more closely relat-
ing to them. No. 4 ( d ) is another matter affecting
New South Wales.
Mr. BEEBY.—I have been waiting with some in-
terest to hear what Mr. Tudor and Mr. Ryan had to say.
Occupying commanding positions in public life such as
they do their utterances will bear considerable weight
with this Conference. I have never doubted Mr. Ryan’s
statement that no man in a responsible position is pre-
pared to consider peace terms which may be dictated by
Germany. No man in a Democratic country holding
a responsible position in it could possibly do so. As the
war stands to-day the great risk is that we may have to
face a German-made peace. That is a matter which
Mr. Ryan might have emphasized. It is useless to fall
back on the optimism of a few months ago, when many
of us thought that there was no doubt as to the ultimate
result of the war. A doubt exists to-day. With
all the cheerfulness we may summon to our assistance
there is not a shadow of a doubt that during the last
month the progress of Germany on the Western Front
threatens complete disorder to the armies of the Allies.
Wherever the Germans have made a thrust they have
succeeded. |
Mr. WILLIAMS.—The more reason, therefore for
granting these conditions.
Mr. BEEBY.—I am coming to that point directly.
It we accept the position that there is an immediate
danger of a collapse of the armies of the Allies or of a
defeat which will put Germany in a position to dictate
peace, then the only question we have to consider in
Australia is, “ Are we going to keep our divisions up to
our full strength?” My Ryan asked how much can we


There can only be one answer, and that is to send
pverv man we can possibly induce to go so that the
Strength of our divisions may be kept up. My sugges-
i on to the gentlemen who have put then* views before us
• xi at they should not assume a stand-and-deliver atti-
ude Some of the requests put forward must be con-
sidered Some of them must be conceded, I fiankly
adrnit For the New South Wales Government, I
mav say that if I thought that a general clean-up of the
aftermath of the last strike would lead to the co-opera-
tion of the Labour party in a big recruiting campaign,
r wou ld ask my Government to call Parliament together
to-morrow and pass a special Bill to do it. But we can-
not face this issue merely on broad generalizations that
if so-and-so is conceded a better feeling will be created.
Recruiting will go on, and must go on.
Mr JELLEY.— If we get on the public platform, do
you say that it will bring about the desired result m
regard to recruits ?
Mr BEEBY.—If, as a result of this Conference, you
co-operate with us in a big recruiting campaign, we will
o-et better results. It is necessary to impress on the
public the seriousness of the situation, and the necessity
to stand to our original pledge to keep up the strength of
our divisions at the Front. Before this Conference uses,
it must give consideration to a scheme of effective co-
operation for the purpose of securing recruits. It. is not
mv intention to go into details at this particulai stag .
I do not think anything is to be gained by recrimina-
tions as to what has happened m the past It, as the
result of this Conference, we can forget the past, and
achieve some new basis, our labours will have good
results. I have never hesitated to say that the censor-
ship has been wrongly used, and that the system should
be completely revised. I have never hesitated to say
that some of the regulations under the War 1 recautions
Act deal with matters not legitimately applying to the
conduct of the war. Undoubtedly that is a matter that
needs reconsideration. If the Federal Government would
be prepared to give serious consideration to any repre-
sentations we may make in regard to these matters, it
will tend to bring about that harmony and mutuality
for which we are all seeking.
Mr. COLLlER.—Several promises in regard to the
censorship have been broken.
Mr. BEEBY.—As I have said, I do not intend to go
into details. We might as well go home if we commence
mutual recriminations in regard to matters of the past.
Mr. COLLIER—The fact that promises were broken
created discord and want of harmony.
Mr. WATSON. —The promises were not broken.
There was a misunderstanding.
Mr. BEEBY.—We may get not only a re-adjustment
of these matters, but also guarantees that may satisfy
us. I do not propose to touch on recriminations as to
personal cases. No doubt there have been individua
cases of hardship in regard to repatriation. What wo
have to consider is the general principle of repatriation.
I have brought cases of hardship under the notice of the
authorities, and they have been remedied. If propei ie-
presentations are made, they are remedied.
Mr. JELLEY.—It should not be necessary.
Mr. BEEBY.—In a huge undertaking of this kind,
hardships occur if officers rely too much on red-tape.
Mr. LUNDIE. —If a man has no backing, he does not
get justice.
Mr. BEEBY.—There are isolated cases, but I ask that
we shall not deal with individual matters of that kind,
and that if we consider any questions relating to re-
patriation we shall deal only with general principles,
matter of some concern to me was raised by Senatoi
Gardiner, in connexion with the late strike in New
South Wales, I submit that this is not an occasion upon
which we should argue the merits or demerits of that
strike. If we are to do so, lam prepared still to
stand -to the position 1 have always taken up, that t ia
strike was one of the greatest blunders ever made by
organized labour in Australia.
A MEMBER. —Will you say that it was un-
-1,1 Mr^BEEßY.—Absolutely unprovoked. But we need
not enter into a discussion of that kind. There is
always a great deal of cleaning up to be done after such
a disturbance, and I say that the Government of New
South Wales are prepared to do whatever may be pos-
sible to bring about in that State the co-operation of
Labour forces by the frank adjustment ot all matters
left over from that strike. I cannot give any guarantee
that everything that is asked for will be granted.
Senator GARDINER.- Gan you give a guarantee
that a man who was discharged, after fifteen or thirty
years’ service without a mark against him, because he
took the chair at a strike meeting, will be restored to his
employment ?
Mr. BEEBY.—I do not know the circumstances
of the case.
Senator GARDINER.—I am submitting a supposi-
titious case.
Mr. BEEBY". —If the facts of the case are as stated,
I say that, in considering the men who ought to be
taken back into the service, the case of such a man
should have consideration.
Mr. MORBY.—Would you be prepared to reinstate
a man in the railway service who came out on strike
during the dispute, who was reinstated in his former
duties, but directly upon the employees working with -
him, recognising in him a valuable asset to them and
presenting him with a gold watch, was again discharged
from the service.
Mr. BEEBY.—I do not know of the case.
Mr. MORBY. —You should-know of it, because it
was brought ■ forward in the New South Whies Pailia-
ment. . e .
Mr. BEEBY.—Surely we are not going to discuss
the future of the war on an issue of that kind, on a
question as to whether a particular man should be dis-
missed from the Government service. Our only chance
to do anything of value at this Conference is to confine
ourselves to broad principles. I admit that there is
necessary a cleaning up of the aftermath of the strike,
and I say that the New South Wales Government are
prepared to consider details of a proposition of that kind
if it will bring about the co-operation of the different
sections of the community in the new recruiting cam-
paign. I have given some consideration to the matter,
with a view to overcoming the difficulty in the New
South Wales railway service, and I am pre-
pared to suggest that, in order to restore
harmony in the service, and put unionism back in
its legitimate position in the Government service, that
all existing unions should be disbanded and the railway
service re-organized; that the new unions should come
together on a new basis, that the railway service should
be re-organized on rational lines, .the traffic branch,
the permanent ways branch, the locomotive branch, and
that, having formed new unions on those lines,. those
new unions should form their own grand council.
Mr. MORBY.—What conditions of membership
would you lay down ?
Mr. BEEBY.—None at all. That would be a matter
for the unions. .
Mr. MORBY.—I am referring to your conditions, not
to the union’s conditions. Is it not a fact that you
will take from the unions the right in the last resource
to strike ? ,
Mr. BEEBY. —That is the general law of the
State.


Mr. MORBY. —And the right to join political organi-
zations.
Mr. BEEBY.—Does Mr. Morby ask me to repeal
the last Industrial Arbitration Act before he will help
us in recruiting? Is that what he suggests?
Mr. MORBY.—The men must have freedom of
action.
Mr. BEEBY.—The law in New South Wales now is
that there shall be no strike in the Public Service. Pre-
viously, the law said that there should be no strike any-
Avhere. The effect of the amendment of the Act was
to restore the right to strike to unions other than those
in the Public Service. I am endeavouring to show that
the Government of which 1 am a member are sincere
in their desire, not to cripple unionism, but, in the Rail-
Avay Department, as a beginning, to have unionism
organized on sound lines, and give the unions absolute
control of their OAvn affairs.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You might mention the recent
negotiations in Newcastle.
Mr. BEEBY.—Some members of the Conference are
aware that I have been engaged for a long time past
in clearing up what has been called “ victimization ”
in the Newcastle district, with the result that the num-
ber of men Avho have been drawing so-called “ victim-
ized pay” has been reduced from 300 to 30 or 40.
Every effort is being made to heal the sore that does
exist in the Newcastle district as a result of the strike.
If those matters are, in NeAv SdUth Wales, an obstacle
in the way, the Government are prepared for a frank
conference with Labour representatives, not for poli-
tical purposes, but for the one purpose of bringing about
co-operation in the new recruiting campaign. I have
said that we should deal with general principles, and,
with a view to some definite issue as the result of this
Conference, I propose to submit a motion. I do not
expect it to be carried in the form in which I submit it,
but I put it forward as the basis of discussion, and as
a motion to which amendments may be attached. I
am prepared to move—
That in view of the critical position of the
allied Armies, this Conference agrees to co-operate
with the Recruiting Authorities in an endeavour
to largely increase voluntary enlistment.
After further consultation, suggestions may be made
upon that motion. It may be suggested, for instance,
that the success of the new recruiting campaign will
depend upon certain things being done. Let us
rationally consider what those things are, and see if it
is not possible for us to arrive at a compromise. But
let us leave this Conference having achieved some defi-
nite result.
Mr. RYAN.—Are you moving an amendment?
The CHAIRMAN.—There is a difficulty. We have
a motion before us.
Mr. BEEBY.—I understood that that motion was
indefinitely postponed. I have no desire to move an
amendment to the motion submitted by His Excellency
the Governor-General. I suggest that that motion be
allowed to stand over indefinitely. The motion I sub-
mit might be put to the Conference, and if delegates de-
sire that,conditions should be attached to it to make
it effective, those conditons may be stated in the course
of the discussion. My object is to bring about a definite
issue from the work of the Conference. If some better
motion be submitted, I shall be prepared, should it be
necessary, to withdraw my motion at any moment.
Mr. TUDOR. —I have said that I do not think we
should pass any motion at this Conference. It would
not bind any one. ,
Mr. BEEBY.—Surely that is the whole object of
the Conference? All that is necessary is that we should
bind ourselves. If every delegate present leaves the
Conference agreeing to support recruiting on certain
lines, we shall achieve the purpose for which the Con-
ference was called together.
Mr. TUDOR. —Do you say we should be doing right
by the men, women, and children who are starving to-
day as the result of unemployment due to the trouble?
Will we be doing our duty if we ignore them?
Mr. HOLMAN.—We do not ignore them.
Mr. TUDOR.—Should we let them suffer in the
meantime ?
Mr. BEEBY.—I am not suggesting anything of the
kind. lam suggesting a motion that the Conference
pledges itself to support recruiting, provided that cer-
tain things are done. Tf, after discussion, Mr. Tudor
and his colleagues, as the result of the decision to which
we come, will go out and help us in recruiting, we shall
have achieved a big thing, not only for the Common-
wealth, but, in my opinion, for the race to which we
belong. All lam aiming at is a resolution that the
Conference pledges itself to assist recruiting, upon con-
ditions. Ido not think it would be wise to put these con-
ditions into the motion and make it a bargain, but the
Conference might agree to support recruiting on the
understanding that certain things, considered essential,
are adjusted by the Federal and State Governments.
Mr. RYAN.—What do you say about conscription ?
Mr. BEEBY.—I say that we are here in an endeavour
to largely increase voluntary enlistment.
Mr. RYAN.—I wanted to know what was your view
on the suggestion that conscription shall be finally
abandoned.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I imagine that Mr. Beeby is not
the final authority on that.
Mr. RYAN.—I was merely asking his view of it.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Perhaps Mr. Ryan will define
his terms, and say what he means by “finally” aban-
doned.
Mr. RYAN.—I tbink that “ finally ” has a very plain
meaning.
Mr. BEEBY.—I make it very clear that we are dis-
cussing only voluntary recruiting. Any undertaking by
this Conference can cover only voluntary recruiting. If
I am asked for my personal view of the matter, I say
that I take up exactly the same position as Mr. Ryan,
and it is that, having chosen to settle this question by
referendum, the only way in which it can ever be raised
again is by another referendum. Ido not hesitate for
a moment to say that. Right or wrong, that is the
course that we have taken.
Mr. RYAN.—I wanted to know whether you w T ere
suggesting another referendum.
Mr. BEEBY.—I am not doing so; but Mr. Ryan
knoAvs that it is utterly impossible for us to say that
the people of Australia Avould, in no circumstances, ever
consent to reconsider the matter. That is something
entirely outside fne scope of this Conference.
Mr. RYAN.—You are not advocating it.
Mr. BEEBY.—Certainly not.
Mr. LYONS.—One of your colleagues declared that
the Imperial Parliament would impose conscription in
Australia.
Mr. BEEBY .—I do not know whether one of my col-
leagues said such a thing or not, but I do know that this
Conference is not going to be affected by any statement
of that kind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It is too wild.
Mr. BEEBY.—It is too wild to be considered seri-
ously for a moment.
A MEMBER.—Do you not think that such state-
ments are very stupid at this juncture, and that they
merely serve to widen the breach ?
Mr. BEEBY.—There are very stupid statements
made by other people. All the stupid statements do not
come from one side.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—Did not Mr. Asquith reply to
that statement m the House of Commons, and charac-
terize it as a wild suggestion?


Mr BEEBY. —I want to make it clear to Mr. Ryan
tiiat T am assuming that this Conference is discussing
“X one question—that of voluntary enlistment—and
that nothing it does will in any way pledge it to any-
thing hut the voluntary system.
Mr TUDOR. —Were we not called together to try
to promote harmony? I take it that that was the
main thing.
Mr. BEEBY.— Exactly.
Mr WATSON. —Harmony without results is not
worth a great deal. '
Mr TUDOR. —Don’t you think that if we had har-
mony there would be results?
Mr BEEBY.— Mr. Tudor, with his long experience
in politics, knows that this Conference will result m
nothing unless both sides can go out and say, On cer-
tain conditions we are going to stand together and sup-
port voluntary enlistment.’’ The point is: Can we
arrive at the conditions which will bring about, that
cohesion of forces? I hope, therefore, we shall seriously
consider the detailed proposals, and see if some arrange-
ment can be arrived at.
Mr. ORCHARD. —As members of the Conference are
aware we are making a special effort in New South
Wales* in conjunction with Captain Carmichael,
crease” our recruiting figures. _We started yesterday,
and I have just received a wire from Captain- Car-
michael that up to 10 o’clock this morning 345 men
had enlisted. . .. , r -d v >
Mr. STOREY.—I disagree with Mr. Beeby s amend-
ment at this stage, because, as Mr. Tudor said, there
is or ought to be, no need for motions which will not
bind anybody to be moved and carried at this Confer-
ence, possibly by -a very small majority. If we could
come to a decision amongst ourselves without motions,
it would be very much more acceptable. It is useless to
talk of carrying a motion that we uncompromisingly
commit ourselves to assist in recruiting work, because,
when the Conference disperses, members generally will
take no further notice of it. It has been our experience
in New South Wales during the last two years that, al-
though we have had numbers of committees, and have
had a recruiting scheme going on, only two or three ot
us from the different Parliaments have taken any inte-
rest in recruiting work. Ido not say that m any way
disrespectfully to those who do not. I merely mention
the fact to show that a motion that we are determined
to go on with recruiting work, and that each of us will
take part, will have no effect after the Conference dis-
perses. Therefore, a motion of that description could
have no value. I am as anxious as most other men,
particularly those who have already spoken, to do what
can be done reasonablv for the purpose of assisting our
Empire in its hour of trouble. I have endeavoured to
do that from the very beginning. I mention this be-
cause there appears to be an impression that we can-
not give assistance to recruiting because we are mem-
bers of a party which has been attacked in various ways
because of our failure to do something. Our opponents
have said we were guilty in that regard, but we know
that that is not true, and Mr. Holman knows that it is
not true. He himself, when in America, pointed out to
the workers of that country that there was no need for
them to become alarmed about what was being done for
the British Empire and the Allies; and that two-thirds
of the men at the Front were members of trade unions.
Two-thirds of nearly 400,000 is a pretty substantial
number, and when you remember that the trade
unionists of Australia will not exceed that total, you
will easily see that the trade unionists, at any rate,
whom we are supposed primarily to represent, are fairly
substantially represented in the war zone. The second
point, and this was raised by Mr. Holman, is: What
would we, as Labour men, be prepared to do in the event
of the proposals which have been enumerated by Mr.
Tudor being carried? My reply is that we, as Labour
men, are prepared to do what I have been doing for
the ’last two years—take every opportunity to point
out to the workers that there is no serious objection to
them doing something to defend this country, which
enables men, like myself and others, to occupy high
and responsible positions in it. I have done that re-
peatedlv. Mr. Tudor did it until he was ridiculed,
not by his own side, but by the people who were opposed
to him saying, “ Tudor, why don’t you do some thing
else? Why don’t you urge the workers of the Irades
Hall to enlist?” The thing became so objectionable
that Mr. Tudor, like myself, became suspected, in quite
a number of quarters, of being allied with the people
who were capable of saying that to him. Let me give
another case to show how we were situated. On the
third anniversary of the war a large meeting was held
in the Sydney Town Hall. Amongst those present were
Archbishop Kelly, Archbishop Wright, and all our lead-
ing citizens. The Chief Secretary, Mr. George Fuller,
a gentleman with whom lam - personally very great
friends, rose at that meeting and deliberately read a
statement of a character that caused everybody in the
hall to look at me at once, and a number of them to
attack me when I rose to speak. Immediately I started
to talk, a returned soldier said to x me, “ What are you
doing here? Why don’t you go down to the Trades Hall
and urge those renegades to do something for their
country ?” If I had been inclined to cause a contro-
versy at that meeting, I could have caused an uproar,
• but it was a gathering of a friendly character, and I
refrained. I was subjected to that insult although it
was known that my boys were at the war, with sixteen
of my blood relations. ' I had to put up with that sort
of thing, yet you expect me to go down and run the
risk of being charged by my own side with being allied
with those who are opposed to us.
Mr. IIOLMAK—Why should you be charged with
that by your own side for urging recruiting?
Mr. STOREY. —For the simple reason that it is pre-
sumed by the workers to-day that they have to find the
flesh and blood for the war, and that their families
have to put up with all the inconveniences associated
with the war, whilst the employing class and other more
comfortably-circumstanced people are able to reap large
profits as a consequence of what is taking place at the
other end of the world. Let me say briefly, without
offence to anybody, as I said to a meeting at "which Mr.
Holman and I were present the other day, that my bo,y3
are there and the chances are that I shall never see
them again. Surely that would be an irreparable loss
to me, but contrast that with what is being done in the
case of the more comfortable classes, .who are being
praised all over New South Wales "because they are
lending their money to the Commonwealth at 4| per
cent., free from income tax. I lose my family, which is
everything to me, although I know there are thousands
of others in the same position
Mr. HOLMAN.—But the comfortable classes have
sent their sons as well. lam not an advocate of them,
but they have sent their sons in as large numbers as the
working classes. It is not a contrast between sons and
money; it is sons in one case, and sons plus money in
the other.
Mr. STOREY. —You asked me what the reason was
why the workers should suspect me because I advocated
recruiting, and I am endeavouring to show that we, on
the one hand, are finding the men, although, of course,
not exclusively, but, at any rate, in the numbers that you
yourself have indicated, and yet we are praising the
persons who, possibly, have sons at the war, but who
have lent their money to the Commonwealth on the
terms I have mentioned. The worker says that when
the war is over, all that money having been spent by
the Commonwealth, the interest on it will have to be


met, uot by those who have lent the money, because they
have to get their interest, but by him. Our State and
Commonwealth debts will approximate something like
£900,000,000 when the war is over. All these things
may be regarded by delegates as extraneous and in-
appropriate at the moment, but they are things that
are in the mind of the worker. Added to that are the
difficulties they have experienced in consequence of the
strike and other conditions in New South Wales,
making it next to impossible for men like Air. Tudor,
myself, Senator Gardiner and my other friends on our
side to go out and ask the worker to volunteer in
greater numbers than he is doing to-day. If this
Conference is prepared to say to me, “ We will remove
these obstacles,” I am prepared to go to our central
executive, and to go on every platform in New South
Wales, and ask the people to unite in sending as many
men as they possibly can. We have come to you with
these proposals in answer to Senator Plain’s question
yesterday afternoon. He said to us, “ What do you
suggest?” So we sat last night and ran these proposals
out. To Air. Holman’s Government we say, “ There are
only two or three things which affect you. The persons
concerned are not very numerous, and it would pay to
give them £I,OOO apiece, and clear them out of the wav,
if they stood in the road of recruiting.” I refer to the
small number of men who have taken the place of the
large'unions for the purpose of defeating the unionists
in their desires. They can be set on one side and
found employment elsewhere, and the unions which
have been de-registered can be registered again. Mr.
Holman and Air. Beeby have said repeatedly that they
hope that harmony will prevail, and that the workers
will get back to normal and forget the difficulties. I
know of hundreds of cases where men with twenty or
thirty years’ record in the Public Service, with two and
three sons at the Front, and whose daughters have been
engaged in patriotic work from the beginning of the
war, because they went on strike with the other men,
have been refused their positions back in the New
South Wales railway service. If this is a time when
we should bury the hatchet, in a common desire to do,
not what we can, but what we ought, for the Empire, the
giving-way has to be reciprocal. If the Conference is
willing, we are prepared to agree to an adjournment
now to allow Senator Millen and his colleagues in the
Commonwealth Government to have a chat about the
matters that we have enumeratted. In regard to con-
scription, the Federal Government speak with so many
voices that they .have got themselves into rather an
awkward postion, though the leaders of the New
South Wales Government, having learnt their lesson
as members of the Labour party, speak with only one
voice. Air. Hughes, at the Agricultural Society’s din-
ner in Sydney, declared emphatically that conscrip-
tion had been dealt with finally, and never again
would be resorted to. This statementNvas repeated in
the morning papers in Sydney, and the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth, we may take it, meant what
he said when, in a very fine and forcible speech, he
made the declaration. That being so, I ask what ob-
jection there is to giving effect to what he said?
Air. WATSON.—None.
Air. STOREY.—So I should say; but Senator Millen
yesterday afternoon left a distinct impression that there
was something in the mind of the Federal Government,
though he quickly said that they could not give such a
declaration.
Air. HOLAIAN.—No Government could give such a
declaration.
Mr. STOREY. Ihe head of the Government has
given a declaration, and if 1 am under a misunderstand-
ing, I ask Air. Beeby to correct me. Air. Hughes said,
“ We are now finally and irrevocably committed to the
voluntary system.”
Mr. BEEBY.—He did say that.
Mr. STOREY.—Then we need not discuss that point
any further. If we get over that difficulty, the Confer-
ence is prepared to seriously consider the proposals of
the Labour representatives. What these are I shall not
weary the Conference by repeating, but in Hew South
Wales they mainly concern the de-registration of unions
and victimization.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Are there, many in gaol as the
result of industrial troubles?
Mr. STOREY.—There are, I may say, two men in
gaol—McChrystal and Riley.
Mr. TUDOR. —I understand from the morning’s
papers that they are to be released to-day.
Mr. RYAN. —They are to be released in a day or
two.
Mr. BEEBY.—But there are tiie cases of men at
Broken Hill who, in connexion with the strike, were
convicted of conspiracy and of pulling the fires out of
a boiler and damaging property. In other cases there
should be no difficulty.
Mr. STOREY.—Let me mention three or four cases,
It may be said that I am going too much into details,
but it is the details that cause all the mischief. A
worker has only his labour to sell, and it is unjust if
that thing is taken away from him and he is put into
gaol for some indiscreet utterance, such as we are all
occasionally guilty of. While looking round this room
I see men here who completely put me in the shade with
the things they used to say in times of peace. I can re-
member that, as a youth, I used to listen to even Senator
Millen very frequently.
Senator MILLEN.—Then you had a liberal educa-
tion !
Mr. STOREY.—When I think of the speeches
which, during the last two years, have landed men in
gaol and incurred deportation, I cannot help comparing
them with speeches made previously by some of my old-
time friends, and I begin to wonder whether, after all,
we are any better off than the Germans. The man
McChrystal, who took part in the Boer war and in the
Gallipoli landing, was a man always somewhat light and
airy in his manner and talk. As a fact, he has made
many bitter attacks and said the most nasty things about
Mr. Morby, myself, and others—calling us “ bugs on
the body politic,” who ought to be “ cracked,” and so
forth—but we understood him and never took any notice.
However, McChrystal went into the Domain and used
similar language, and he is now doing nine months in
gaol. As a matter of fact, his utterances are not those
of a responsible man. Riley was treated in a similar
manner.
Mr. HOLMAN.—These are the men, I think, whom
the Government are releasing. Are there many men
you know of whose offences are not criminal?
Air. STORE! . —There is quite a large number.
Air. HOLMAN.—Without any undertaking to release
them, we shali examine and treat each case on its merits.
Air. STOREY.—There was Tom Barker, a militant
man amongst the Socialists, who declared himself a
member of Air. Hughes’ unlawful association, the In-
dustrial Workers of the World. Prior to that he had
been a regular speaker in the Domain, and there made
attacks on Mr Holman, myself, and others both before
and after the separation of the Labour party. As I
?ay, we. never took much notice, but, under the War
Precautions Act, the vigilant police took action, and
Barker was put in gaol.
Wi• HOLMAN. Is that the Federal Police, or ours?
Mi. STORE! . Barker’s sentence was completed
seven weeks ago, but he is still held in gaol, together with
a laigo numbel of others. While his friends ask why
he is thus illegally held, the authorities say that, under
the Act, they are entitled to hold him for deportation.


Are such cases as these conducive to harmony ? Here we
have a native-born citizen illegally held in gaol with a
view to bis subsequent deportation.
Senator MILLEH. —I think you are wrong; deporta-
tion does not apply to the native-born.
Mr STOREY. —We are aware that such is the Act,
and my friends and myself discussed this point for
two hours last night. ,
Mr MORBY. —I do not wish there to be any mis-
understanding. and therefore I point out that Barker
is not a native of Australia, but of Westminster, Eng-
STOREY. —Then I have made a mistake. How-
ever he is held after the expiration (f his sentence, in
order to be deported; where? Back to England.
Mr. HOLMAH. —That is being done by the Federal
authorities.
Mr. STOREY. —Yes; and there are other cases
that'might be enlarged on.
Mr. BELBY. —I do not wish to interrupt, but m a
ease where a man is a distinct and deliberate revolution-
ary and is preaching revolutionary doctrines in war
time do you say that the authorities are to do nothing ?
Mr. STOR E Y.—Ho. A man who stands up and talks
revolutionarv stuff is as repugnant to me as anybody,
and if he were within reach of my fist at the time he
would get it. What we complain of is that there is
no discrimination used in the administration of the
law. The Federal officials come down, and, in a cast-
iron way, deal with men in a summary fashion, just as
the Prime Minister did when he rushed off the platfoim
at Warwick. I shall not detain the Conference fui.ther,
but wish delegates to understand clearly that my friends
and myself are ready to do anything for the voluntary
system, provided we are given some sort of undertaking
that the men we are supposed to substantially represent
are not to be treated as they have been in the past, but
that, if they are recognised as those from whom the
soldiers are to be drawn, they will also be recognised as
entitled to be treated with respect. If I wished to deal
with the censorship, I could point out hundreds of cases
of, not only positive hardship, but stupidity. In an
ordinary handbill announcing that I, for instance, pro-
pose to address a meeting in any part of Sydney, any
blank of, say, lialf-an-inch in the printed proof is
pointed out by the censor, and the inquiry made, “ What
is supposed to be inserted there ?” When he is told
that it is proposed to insert nothing, we are told, “ Mind
that you do not insert anything, or you will be prose-
cuted.” Every simple handbill from the workers side
has to be submitted to the censor, who always gives
us that warning.
Mr. MORBY.— The censor in Sydney actually set
down the colour of the ink we should use in a cartoon—
he would not permit red ink to be used.
Senator MILLEH.—With regard to the censorship,
I" should like to say that the Commonwealth Govern-
ment is taking steps next week to meet in consultation
the leading journalists of Australia, with the object of
evolving a system satisfactory alike to the press and the
public. v
Mr. STOREY.—Like myself, Mr. Watson knows a
printer, at one time a member of Parliament, who has
almost despaired of getting out any bill at all connected
with politics; he has to continually send the proofs to
the censor, and even a pencilled note in the corner is
the subject of inquiries, and has to be removed, in
another case, seven columns of the Worker weie cen
sored out, although they consisted entirely of r ®P ri^ ts
from a publication, called The Land, contro e Y . 10
farmers and settlers. We have already had the in-
stance before us of matter reprinted m tie m \ei
from the Daily Telegraph, but in larger type, being
pencilled under the censorship. This has gone on o
such a degree that it has been, and is, next to impossible
for us to do anything in the wav of recruiting. Our
President, Mr. Mackinnon, who has done yeoman service
for the country during the last two years, has had a
great struggle amongst the politicians in carrying out
his duties. There was the conflict between the Federal
elections and the State elections, with the postponement
of the latter, and there was also the incident of the
“ Win-the-War ” badge. We, the members of the
Recruiting Committee of Australia sitting in Sydney,
for the purpose of recruiting, a distinctive badge, called
the “Win-the-War badge,” the possession of which was
to guarantee on the part of the owner to help the prose-
cution of the war in some way. However, with that
alertness which characterizes him, Mr. Hughes seized
on the idea, and called his party the “ Win-the-War ”
party. This, of course, destroyed the usefulness of the
badge, so far as we were concerned, because no Labourite
would then wear it. The matter was discussed with Mr.
Mackinnon and Professor Mclntyre, and Mr. Hughes
was urged to discontinue the name, but he did not do so.
Mr. TUDOR. —I wrote to Mr. Mackinnon, protesting
against the use of the term by Mr. Hughes, and Mr.
Mackinnon wrote me, saying that he also protested
against it. Mr. Mackinnon was present when I made
a statement of the kind at a public meeting, but the
papers would not print it.
Mr. STOREY. —It was a good name, which
emanated from a fertile brain in Hew South Wales,
but a more fertile gentleman was hanging on. Every-
thing we have sought to do in the way of recruiting in
Hew South W r ales has been militated against by poli-
ticians, and not Liberal politicians either, but those
controlling the destinies of the country. I, personally,
was wrapped up in the work of recruiting, and worked
as hard as I could to further it; but so great was the
apathy on the part of the Federal Government that it
was next to impossible to get them to do anything. We
secured the services of Mr. Peter Bowling, who has five
sons at the war, and who, we thought, would make a
good advocate in the mining centres; and, as a matter
of fact, he did excellent work. On one occasion lie was
accompanied by two lieutenants, and,, while the
lieutenants, who simply had to do the writing part of
the business, travelled first class with sleepers, Mr.
Bowling, who was doing the real work of speaking, had
to travel second class and sit up all night. At length,
Mr. Bowling said, “ If that is what you think of me
and my recruiting, you may keep your job.” A little
while ago I secured the services of a staunch supporter
of the Labour party, and a returned soldier, and, after
he had addressed one meeting, two lieutenants, who
themselves had been obtaining no soldiers, reported on
his efforts to the effect that he was obtaining no re-
cruits. However, this man was re-appointed, and when 1
inquired the other day as to how he was getting on I was
informed that he was doing excellently. The lieu-
tenants who are brought back are of no use as recruiters.
They merely strut about in their uniforms. I would not
employ returned men to do recruiting work. What are
needed are organizers. There may be a sentimental de-
sire for the employment of returned men, but if men
who are not competent for the work are employed the
Empire must suffer. Civilians who have sons at the
war will do more to secure recruits than can be done
by returned men. Those who appeal for recruits. must
be men past the military age if success is to be achieved.
I mention these matters to show that the Central Poll-
tical Executive is not to be blamed. A large number
of workers have gone to the war, and we have never
said to these men “ Don’t go.” What we have said,
in season and out of season, is, Do justice to. the
soldiers and to the mothers and dependants of soldiers,
and we will do what we can to see that an adequate
number of men are found.” v


Mr. LAWSON.—I understand that Mr. Tudor has
suggested additions to the motion that was before the
Conference yesterday, but I hope that the business will
not go forward in that way.
Mr. TUDOR.—My suggestion is that we should not
take a vote on anything. L am prepared to move, as
an amendment, the proposals embodied in the type-
written statement which has been circulated, but only
if forced into that position, which Ido not wish to be.
. Mr. LAWSON.—I ask whether it would not be pos-
sible to pass the first motion without any addition? It
is merely an expression of opinion, recognising the
necessity for securing reinforcements by the voluntary
system, and indicating that we are approaching the dis-
cussion of this matter in a spirit of co-operation and
goodwill. It does not go further than that. It would be
a mistake, I think, to make the Conference a mere
matter oi bargaining. Possibly the best way to arrive
at finality would be for the members of the Common-
wealth Government and of the Government of New
South Wales to consider how far they are prepared to
meet the objections that have been raised.
Mi. SCULLIN. What about the Government of
Victoria?
Mi. LAWSOI\.- I have not yet heard any charges
against the Victorian Government. Speaking for it, I
may say that we would endeavour to meet in a spirit
of reasonableness any suggestion that might he made
to us. If we have done, or are doing, anything which
is thought to be a hindrance to recruiting, we are will-
ing to consider how far we can go m removing what is
considered to oe an obstacle in the way of agreement.
I think that the best thing will' be, if we can, to agree
first to the motion now before us, though, if agreement
on it would not be unanimous, it would be better not
to push the matter to a division. Having gone so far,
we might settle difficulties by means of compromise and
negotiation. Mr. Beeby has indicated that there are
certain requests which he thinks ought to be granted;
other matters would be the subject of negotiation and
compromise. Agreement might well be arrived at infor-
tnally. There might be a definite understanding that
certain things would be done. We could then leave
the Conference pledged personally and in a representa-
tive capacity to do our utmost to make the new recruit-
ing campaign an absolute success. Ido not wish to
preach to the Conference, but I would say that we
should not approach the consideration of matters in
j™ s P lr *t fhat it is one side or the other that is bein"
helped. This is our country; the country of all of us";
and our war; a Avar in which we are all concerned. In
AAmrking to secure harmony, we are working, not for
the Government in power, but for the country to which
we belong and which we represent. Our concern is not
for the Wm-the-War or the Nationalist Government
but for the interests of the country and the winning of
the war Mr. Tudor is represented at the Front by
Ins own flesh and blood; so too, are Mr. Storey and any
number of others avlio are opposed in politics to the
.Nationalist party. These facts are the best evidence of
I heir loyalty and patriotism. Therefore, we can ap-
proach the consideration of this matter in a spirit of
unity. There must be an agreement as to the need for
reinforcements. We have certain figures as to the num-
bers required, and I think that we are agreed that the
numbers coming forward are not sufficient to meet the
urgent need that has arisen. I wish that I could take
Senator Gardiner’s optimistic view of the present hap-
penings on the Western Front, but I see no justification
tor the opinion that ivhat is taking place is merely a
strategic retirement by the Allies. I fear that there is
leason for the gravest anxiety. Under these circum-
tances, Ave can surely find a basis for unity, and in the
tpint indicated by the motion suggested by the Go-
Jernor-General, we ought to be able to confer informally
with a view to the removal of the obstacles that have
been rpentioned. I understand that the atticude of our
friends is this, “ We will help in every possible way
to secure recruits, but we do not feel that under exist-
ing conditions there is any prospect of success. There
is so much irritation caused by well-founded grievances
that until those grievances are removed we do not feel
that we can give effective service; but, if you make it
possible for us to see that our action can be successful,
we will do what we can.” If there were an oppor-
tunity for an informal meeting of a committee of, say,
representatives of the Commonwealth Government and
the Governments of the States, and Mr. Tudor, Senator
Gardiner, Mr. Ryan, Mr. Storey, Mr. Elmslie, or what-
ever other men might be chosen, discussion between
them should enable us to see how far we can go to meet
one another, and it might be possible at a subsequent
stage to pass unanimously the motion that has been
put before us, and to leave the Conference determined
that each and all of us, so far as we can influence those
we represent, will do all we can to carry out the objects
which His Excellency had in view in calling us together.
Senator GARDINER.—I think that there is a good
deal in the suggestion of the Premier of Victoria. I am
of the opinion—which has been quite hurriedly formed,
because expression has only just been given to the idea
—that some informal conference should take place with
a view to seeing how far parties can meet each other
in regard to the matters that have been discussed this
morning.
Mr. MORBY.—The agreements arrived at would be
brought back to this Conference?
Senator GARDlNEß.—Naturally the results of the
informal committees would he reported. I suggest that
there should be one representative from each State, so
that the committees should not he too large. We are
concerned in ascertaining whether the various Govern-
ments will give way in regard to matters which we say
are an obstacle to unanimity.
Mr. WATSON.—It might he well to have several
committees to deal with different matters.
The Conference adjourned for luncheon. On resum-
ing,
Senator GARDINER.—By discussion in committees
comprising those who hold responsible positions on both
sides w r e should be able to ascertain how far the various
Governments would be willing to go in order 4o bring
about unanimity throughout the community; and this,
I take it, is the one aim of the Conference. I cordially
approve of the suggestion. Having risen to make this
intimation, I desire now to take the opportunity of sav-
Y'S’j perhaps, all I may desire to say at this Conference.
I entirely approve of what the Premier of Queensland,
j. i. Ryan, has said, namely, that the resources of Aus-
tralia and the probable duration of the war should be
considered before we approach any consideration as to
the number of recruits we are to be asked to send. If
it is to be a long-drawn-out struggle, how many men is
it wise for Australia to send per month—is it wise
to deplete the whole male population of Australia
merely because of the emotions of the people for the
time being? Moreover, this is a war in which the re-
sources, not only of man power, but of money, must be
considered. 1 hough I was a member of a previous Go-
vernment which had some responsibility in connexion
with this matter of Australia’s contribution—and if
there is any blame to be attached to that Government T
will take my full share—that is no reason why I should
not invite attention for, and give support to, the
suggestion made by Mr. Ryan. I congratulate Mr,
JfelT l he mam V 3r in wUek he put the position
before the Conference; but, as I have said before, this
war is not a matter of man power only and the issue
may be practically decided before anything we can do
to help the Allies will be felt. Mr. Lawson said this n,or,"


that I was an optimist in my view of the present
I am still hopeful, but I do not wish mem-
I rs of the Conference to think that I am without
nviptv or that I desire to minimize the great danger
t hat confronts us. Although the German Army is
marching past- our outposts on the battle front, I am
Confident that the Allies are still prepared to be driven
further back in order to have the fighting conducted m
the open where they will be able effectively to resist the
nower of the enemy. But lam not so optimistic as I
was twelve months ago, when 1_ thought the war was
more than half over. I admit freely now that I was
uuite unable before Kussia dropped out to come to any
other conclusion than that the war was more than halt
over and I believe it would have been had our
Russian ally maintained his position. We now have
to consider a new phase of the struggle, and when all is
said and done we have not much data to go upon. 11
mv words yesterday indicated to the gentlemen as-
sembled here that I was too hopeful, I want to make it
clear now that, in spite of the disasters that have oq-
cnrred on the Western Front and the losses of tanks and
guns—which, after all, do not affect the strategical
position—the Allies have a great counterbalancing ad-
vintaffe by fighting in the open. I desire now to say
just a word or two with regard to The reinforcements
required as indicated in the statement provided by Sir
Samuel Griffiths. In my judgment there is no magic
about the particular number of divisions which Aus-
tralia must maintain.
Mr. WATSON. —Except that the Australian Govern-
ment (pledged Australia to maintain five divisions.
Senator GARDINER.—WeII, I say there is no magic
about five divisions representing Australia at the
Front. None of us may question the report which has
been furnished by Sir Samuel Griffiths, but I out
that he states that not only, were there five divisions
fighting, but, as a matter of fact, his figures disc ose
that we had six divisions, for, according to jepor,
we had 100,000 men in France and another 16,000 men
on other Fronts. When the military service referendum
was submitted to the people fifteen months ago the Go-
vernment stated that 16,500 men were required to main-
tain the five divisions at their full strength. lam not
in a position to say how that number was arrived at,
but 1 am inclined to think the figures were based on
estimates formed in earlier stages of the war and when,
with one division in the field, those responsible for the
maintenance of that division fixed a very high percent-
age of reinforcements as the monthly quota.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I am able to assure Senator
Gardiner that the monthly quota required was cabled
to the Government before the referendum was taken
Senator MILLEN.—The figures were supplied by
the Imperial War Council.
Senator GARDINER. —I accept the assurance given
bv the Acting Prime Minister (Mr. Joseph Cook), but
I say that the information given disclosed a very serious
oversight on the part of the authorities of the War
Office, because it must have been obvious that reinforce-
ments on that basis would deplete the whole of the av ai -
able fighting forces of this country. It did not require
a genius at that time to know that 5,000 men a month
would replenish an army of 100,000 men.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—If I recollect aright, there
had been a series of battles, and our casualties were close
on 30,000 a month at that time.
Senator GARDINER. —There had been a series of
battles going on for two years, but a air es ima t o
casualties did not show a greater proportion of losses
than 5 per cent. I said at the time t a , ,
month would be sufficient, and we now have Sir Samue
Griffiths’ report informing us that 5,400 men will meet
the military requirements.
Mr. JOSEFH COOK. —State the whole facts, and
admit that we were 27,000 men short.
Senator GARDINER. —I did not mention that, be-
cause the Acting Prime Minister had himself supplied
the information before lunch.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I thought you had forgotten
it, as you had omitted to state the whole of the facts.
Senator GARDINER. —Sir Samuel Griffiths points
out, in his report, that there are occasions when, owing
to severe losses, a great many more men are required
than are provided for in the monthly quota, but I did
not mention the shortage of 27,000, with the idea of
not clouding the minds of the delegates present.
That I omitted to mention it was because the
Acting Prime Minister had himself stated
the facts. I am trying to put before the
Conference, as one of the political party opposed to
conscription, reasons why I think the voluntary system
was furnishing sufficient men for Australia’s needs. I
am still opposed to conscription, because 1 think that,
properly handled, the voluntary system will give
enough men. No member of this Conference will con-
tradict me when I say that for two years this war was
being conducted by Australia as a united people. No
voice was raised against the war in any quarter, or, if
a voice was raised, it was so weak as not to be heard
beyond the immediate vicinity in which the opinion was
circulated; but for the past fifteen months the war lias
been conducted with one section of Australia
distrustfully looking at the other, with
the people driven into hostile political camps.
I use advisedly the word “ driven,” because no
one can regard what has happened since the conscription
issue became the rallying cry, and the conscriptionists
wanted to plume themselves that they were the only
loyal people to the Empire, without coming to that
conclusion. We are now assembled to try and bring
about unanimity, and I maintain that, in view of what
has happened in the political arena during the last
eighteen months, Australia is still doing very well under
the most difficult conditions. We are here to make those
conditions better. Yesterday we were asked to put some-
thing before this Conference. The Conference would
have been a great deal further upon its way if the Go-
vernment could have met us with a proposal as to what
they were prepared to do. The party atmosphere of
Parliament, where men cannot perhaps be brought into
a reasonable frame of mind, should be missing here, so
that we might all discuss the problem as it stands befoie
us. Here we have a gathering of all parties, and we
feel that it is for the principal authority amongst us to
state what is proposed to be done. All of us, however,
must have noticed a reluctance to broach the question.
It is a case of sparring for position, and I want to get
the Conference to come to business. Mr. Tudor has, to
some extent, met that situation. He has brought for-
ward certain matters which we believe should go a long
way towards putting Australia where it was in 1916.
I remember the situation as it was at the close of 11 •>,
when Mr. Hughes was going to England, and when the
recruiting returns had been very heavy. Before sailing
he said, “ We want 50,000 men voluntarily. They came
in three months; and yet we had people crying for con-
scription as though voluntarism had failed.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Is that right? Are your figures
correct ?
Senator GARDINER.—Yes. There were 22,000 m
January, 18,000 in February, and 15,000 m March.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That i 3 remarkable. I have never
heard of it before. ~,,, ,•.
Senator GARDINER.—What is remarkable about it
is this; that a man holding a position such as does Mr.
Holman has evidently been so misinformed-or informa-
tion has been so withheld from him—that he comes


to a Conference to-day and regards this as an astound-
ing statement.
Senator MILLEN.—It was an additional force of
50,000, plus the monthly quota of reinforcements.
Air. HOLMAN.—Did not Mr. Hughes say that he
wanted 50,000 in addition to the ordinary recruiting?
And did you get them?
Senator GARDINER.—I assure you they were all
there—both the monthly figures and the total. You
will find that to be approximately correct.
Air. HOLMAN.—I always understood that the
50,000 were nowhere in sight when the time had passed
in which thev should have been forthcoming; that
was, in addition to the monthly recruiting.
Senator GARDINER.—No; that is quite wrong.
The period fixed for the raising of the 50,000 was set for
the end of June. We had over that 50,000 in the first
three months; and 'the lowest month that we had up to
June was that month itself—when the figures were over
6,000, Speaking from memory, in those six months
in which we were asked to secure the 50,000 more than
88,000 men enlisted. In face of that came the agitation
for conscription. Mr. Hughes was away during those
days when recruits were flowing in in such numbers.
When he returned and we realized what was coming,
notwithstanding those splendid responses to the volun-
tary system, our country was flung into the throes of
that disastrous conscription campaign. Perhaps had
Air. Hughes been here while those splendid figures were
mounting up, we might not have had that campaign.
The press, intent on conscription the whole time, has—
I will not say deliberately suppressed—kept out of the
light facts favorable to voluntarism, and has given all
prominence to everything telling against voluntarism.
It Was the press that has done so much to cause the
disastrous division amongst the people which appeared
in 1916. Those are facts. In the first campaign I re-
mained at my post, in office. It was no desire of mine
to do other than see the Government carried on.
Alonths before, I had openly opposed conscription; but
during that campaign I remained silent, in the hope
of keeping something like unanimity within the Go-
vernment. The Government campaign failed. In dis-
cussing all this, I will admit that it is almost a pity
we politicians are here, because there is always a party
atmosphere surrounding us; and perhaps we are not
approaching the main subject in a way we should. But
what have the present Federal Government done?
Whether it was pre-arranged or not —although I be-
lieve it was—it is a fact that the Win-the-AVar Go-
vernment of New South Wales and the Federal Win-
the-War Government have made a successful attack
upon our unions.
Air. JOSEPH COOK.—Do you say “pre-arranged?”
Senator GARDINER.—I believe it was a pre-
arranged attack on unionism.
Air. BEEBY.—A ou do not really think that?
Senator GARDINER.—With the evidence in my
possession I can think nothing else.
Air. HOLAIAN.—WeII, give us your evidence.
Senator GARDINER.—I will; although recrimina-
tions will not help us.
Air. HOLMAN.—No; but let us have this out.
Where is the evidence of the pre-arranged attack? Is
it like the pre-arranged attack by Belgium upon Ger-
many ?
Senator GARDINER.—No doubt Mr. Beeb'y and
Mr. Holman can see things which they consider should
be remedied in connexion with the Federal administra-
tion ; but when it comes to their own Government, I do
not think they can see any faults, nor are they willing to
give any guarantees. Their Government, which con-
ducted an attack on the unionists of New South
Wales
Mr. BEEBY.—Do not put it in that way, because,
you know, it is not true.
Senator GARDINER.—WeII, reserving to myself the
right of maintaining my own point of view, 1 will say
that the New South Wales Government were forced,
by the unionists into a position in which they had to
attack those unionists
Air. LUNDIE.—Do not put it in that way, because
you know it is not true.
Senator GARDINER.—I am trying to put it some
way or other, so as to get on with my point. Anyhow,
the struggle came, and, like all industrial troubles, it
passed What did the New South Wales Govern-
ment do ? I hey refused to employ any men who had
been prominent in the unions during the strike. The
Government said there had been no victimization, where-
upon I obtained the names ot some halt-a-dozen splendid
fellows—fine men at their work—who had been refused
re-employment, and I forwarded them to a member of
the Government; that was, to Mr. Fitzpatrick. He
sent them along to the Railways Commissioner, who re-
plied as to the first of those men that he had been refused
employment because he was chairman of the strike com-
mittee.
Air. BEEBI. Is this evidence of a prearranged
attack ?
Senator GARDINER.—If it had been something
oiced upon vou, when it was all over would you have
wanted to continue the warfare ?
Mr. TIOLMAN.—Did we attack the unions, or did
they attack us ?
Senator GARDINER.—If I can show the result of
the attack, and that, by their actions since, the New
bouth Wales Government are still continuing to vic-
timize unionists, then I think I can make good my asser-
tion that the original attack was pre-arranged.
Air. HOLAIAN.—You must show first that the ori-
ginal attack took place.
Senator GARDINER.—I will not only show that
1 101 e was an attack, but that it is still continuing. And
am doing this to demonstrate to Mr. Holman and Mr.
Beeby and the other gentlemen responsible that they
must know that, before there can be unanimity, these
grievances must be redressed. In claiming that there
was victimization, I forwarded to one of the Ministers
the names, as I have already said, of about half-a-dozen
men. Afterwards Air. Fitzpatrick sent me the official
reply ot Railways Commissioner. _ It was that one
man had been victimized because he had taken part
m the strike. In another case this individual had been
chairman of the meetings held at Centennial Park.
There was another man who had been prominent in the
strike, and with regard to whom it was said that the
unionists would have returned sooner hut for his in-
fluence. The constitution of our unions is such that we
always fight together. To pick out a man because
his intelligence has raised him to the chair at a meeting
of his fellow unionists, and to say that he must have a
black mark against him for all time, and that employ-
ment will be given to every one but him—well, if the
Government continue that sort of thing, they can never
expect unanimity in respect of whatever they may seek
to do. 17
Mr. HOLAIAN.—You are getting a good bit away
iom the production of evidence as to the pre-arrano-ed
attack. 1 h
Senator GARDINER.—Is Mr. Holman prepared to
give us an assurance—and Air. Beeby, too —that if these
individuals can be produced, and on their merits there
is nothing else against them, they will be restored to
employment?
Mr. HOLMAN. If Senator Gardiner can show that
tins was a pre-arranged attack on the unions of New
South Wales, I will see that every man is restored to
his employment.


Senator GARDINER.—Is Mr. Beeby prepared to
o-ive that assurance, namely that his Government are
Prepared to restore to employment the men whom we
say are being kept out merely because of the part they
played as unionists?
Mr. HOLMAN—If that is going to be a real
stumbling block in the way of unanimity, we will under-
take to reduce it to the smallest possible limits. Many
of those cases of refusal to re-employ were upon their
merits. But, apart from those, we will reduce every
other cause to nothing. Will you now tell us what there
is to justify your assurance that there has been a pre-
arranged attack on unionism?
Senator GARDINER—I shall. But, in discussing
how to link up those unionists who are for the time
being in opposition to the Government which has the
responsibility of conducting this war, I cannot get away
from the fact that Mr. Holman is only prepared to
give a very conditional guarantee in respect to what he
f, asked to do. So far as the whole business in regard
to the last strike is concerned, there is ample evidence
amongst our people to convince them that it was a pre-
arranged attack upon unionism.
Mr. BEEBY. —Give us the evidence of that.
Senator GARDINER.—It was a pre-arranged
attack with a view to creating a position at that par-
ticular time which would give the Governments what
they wanted —a dispute with the unions. My'friends
opposite have asked me for evidence of this pre-arrange-
ment, and I propose to give it, but I will do so m my
own way. The facts are that there arose a dispute in
the Randwick Tramway Workshops. The Railways
Commissioners of New South Wales proposed to alter
the conditions under which the men were working.
Mr LUNDIE.—After promising not to 'do so. _
Senator GARDINER.—This threatened alteration
in the conditions of their employment, was brought
under the notice of the New South. Wales Railways
Commissioners in December. So strong was the case
made out by the unionists that the Commissioners
agreed to allow the matter to stand over until after the
Mr BEEBY. —You know that is not so. You are
not stating the whole of the facts. The Railways Com-
missioners met the men, and were told that the card
system was objectionable. to the men. Thereupon t ie
Commissioners said, “ Very well, we will withdraw it,
but later on we will bring in another system, and they
brought in another system. There was a definite ar-
rangement that the Commissioners were to bring m a
clear system of time recording.
Senator GARDINER.—In December the Railways
Commissioners were asked not to introduce the cai
system. I am not in a position to know that an altera-
tion was to be effected in the card system.
Mr BEEBY.—But the men knew.
Senator GARDINER.—In reply, let me say that 1
' would rather go down with the men with whom I have
always stood —even if they are in the wiong. a 1S
the secret of the strength of unionism to-day.
Mr. lIOLMAN.—That does not prove that we
attacked the unionists. .
Senator GARDINER.—Either there was a carefully-
prepared attack or there is no excuse for the stupidity
of the Government of New South Wales In December
this card system came before the Railways om
missioners, who agreed to postpone its mtro uc ion.
But in July, the system, which was known to be ob-
jectionable, was introduced.
Mr BEEBY—No; but another system.
Senator GARDINER.—That is the position. Here
was labour working during war time urn er cer
conditions, and all that was asked was that urmg e
continuance of the war those conditions sliou ( no , x
disturbed. The employees were propised that those
conditions should not he changed. Of course, Mr.
Holman and Mr. Beeby are quite entitled to their views,
and they think differently from me on this matter. •
If there were reason in December tor not precipitating
an industrial crisis, surely there was equal reason for
achieving the same objects in the following dul\.
Anybody acquainted with the working of large bodies
of men must know that even in connexion with the in-
troduction of beneficial reforms the greatest care needs
to be exercised to prevent those reforms bringing about
chaos. That is not peculiar to our country, or to any
other country—it is the world’s experience. Yet al-
though the New South Wales Government were warned
of this impending trouble in December, when the men
approached the Railways Commissioners and put then-
case before them, in the following July, under a, care-
fully prepared plan of campaign, no sooner did the
men go out on strike than their places were filled.
Mr. BEEBY.—I hope that Senator Gardiner would
not hang a man on such evidence as that.
Senator GARDINER.—I sincerely hope that I shall
never have to hang a man; but if I had to do so, I
would not have to look long before I could find him.
However, I do not think that any good will result
from dwelling upon these facts.
Mr. HOLMAN—If there are any facts, let us dwell
upon them and let us get to the bottom of them.
The CHAIRMAN. —How about dealing with these
facts in Committee?
Mr. lIOLMAN—If this is one sore point, by all
means let us get to the bottom it. Summarizing Sena-
tor Gardiner’s position, it is that the men m December
waited upon the Railways Commissioners and objected
to the introduction of the card system. The Commis-
sioners said, “ Very well, we will not introduce it.
Then in July another system was introduced and the
men went upon strike. That statement represents
Senator Gardiner’s case.
Senator GARDINER.—I have given the salient
points. I repeat that the men were promised that
there would be no change in the conditions of their em-
ployment during war time. I know that Mr. Holman
would simply delight in my bringing forward every
detail with a view to showing that the whole plan of
this campaign on the part of the New South Wales
Government was a most skilfully organized attack
upon unionism-
Mr. lIOLMAN—It is a very miserable shuffle for
you to say that and not say anything further. It is not
worthy of you. You either have some reason for saying
what you have said or you have none.
Senator GARDINER,—I could give a hundred de-
tails in support of my statement.
The CHAIRMAN.—I would suggest that Senator
Gardiner should get back to Mr. Tudor’s list of
grievances.
Senator GARDINER.— Very well. I will deal first
with his statement that 82,000 unionists have been de-
registered in New South. Wales. What proportion does
that represent of the population of that State who have
either real or imaginary grievances—and if the griev-
ances are only imaginary that is all the more reason '
why they should be promptly removed? If, on the othei
hand the grievances are real, they ought to be re-
medied. Are Mr. Beeby and Mr. Holman prepared to
re-register these unionists? How frequently do we find
that an act of generosity on the part of t he conqueror
and we must recognise that the New South Wales Go-
vernment were the conquerors m the recent railway
strike in that State—results in a reconciliation. I
have only to mention the generous act of Britain in
giving to the Boers self government a year or two after
the Boer war. If the position of the Empire to-day is


as disastrous as we think it is, how much the more need
is there for a united Australia? If there are 82,000
unionists in New South Wales de-registered
Air. BEEBY.—'They are not de-registered as union-
ists. Their unions are left intact.
Senator GARDINER.—I am content to. take this one
fact alone, and I say that in itself it is of sufficient im-
portance to warrant men who know unionism as well as
do Mr. Holman and Mr. Beeby, and who know how
generous unionists are in forgetting and forgiving, in
ascertaining for themselves the things which are making
the people dissatisfied to-day—the things which are
giving strength to those who do not desire unity and
organization in Australia—and in saying of their own
volition, “ If these things stand in the way of harmony
w.e will remove them.’’ Now I come to the position of the
Federal Government. They are talking peace now.
This Conference is really a Conference brought about
by the Federal Government; yet right upon the very
eve of its opening the secretary of our party was haled
before the Police Court because he had induced the
Government Printer to do what the latter has been do-
ing ever since he entered Parliament, namely, to reprint
his speeches. Of course he was innocent, but he has been
called upon to pay the costs of the prosecution. The
magistrate said that by no stretch of the imagination
could the words used by him have the effect alleged in
respect of them.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—That was not all that the
magistrate said, was it?
Senator GARDINER.—AII these little pinpricks
have created the impression amongst unionists that there
is a most vindictive class fight going on, and, personally,
lam going to fight with my class. But while I say this
I wish also to say that I am willing to throw myself
heart and soul into anything which will make for the
safety of Australia and the Empire, because these things
are much more important than is class fighting. ■ Yet
only in to-day’s papers 1 read that twenty-eight union-
ists have been discharged from Cockatoo Island because
they have refused to sign an agreement. An agreement
was put forward in regard to the dilution of labour
there, and because they could not conscientiously sign
it they have been discharged. That means that the
bread-winners of. twenty-eight families can no longer
get employment in the Commonwealth service. \et
their friends are asked to enthusiastically array them-
selves behind the Government and to pass over all
these matters as if they were of no concern.
Senator MILLEN.—In addition to Mr. Tudor’s sug-
gestions, do you say that to meet the case of the twenty-
eight men at Cockatoo Island the Government should
tear up the ship-building agreement ? Hundreds of men
are working there to-day under that agreement.
Air. HOLMAN.—What does Senator Gardiner want
in reference to these twenty-eight men?
Senator GARDINER.—I only mention the fact to
show that the war upon unionists is continuing.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We have just been told that
hundreds of unionists have accepted the agreement.
Senator GARDINER.—Because they were told that
they must accept it or be discharged from the service.
It is always the best type of man who holds out for his
principles. Twenty-eight of the best type of engineers
can no longer work for the Government because they
will not sign an agreement which is objectionable to
them.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Senator Gardiner knows that
that particular union is up against all the other unions
in this matter.
A MEMBER. —We know that these twenty-eight
men are prepared to go to work to-morrow, and to do
their work effectively and well, without signing that
agreement.
L Senator GARDINER.—I do wish, the Alinistei
1 f or the Navy to follow me in order that he may get ai
idea of how our men work. The unions consented t(
the ship-building agreement. The next motion whicl
was put before it was that the officers should sign it
Thereupon one of the officers said, “ I hope that mj
right hand will wither before I sign it.” That man
will have to go out of his employment because he will
not sign an agreement which is objectionable to him.
Air. PEAKE.—He wants to work on his own terms.
Senator GARDINER.—I appeal to the Premier of
South Australia whether it is a desirable thing to alter
industrial conditions in time of war?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Why, the industrial condi-
tions in every part of the world have been revolutionized
during the continuance of this war, and Senator Gardi-
ner knows it.
Senator GARDINER.—I have endeavoured to state
as calmly as lam capable of doing.the real grievances
that are preventing the workers showing any enthusiasm
in anything done by Governments in whom they have no
trust. Having stated those views, I simply say to the
Governments responsible that if they want unanimity
amongst the working classes, they must remove those
grievances. If they want the discontent to not only
continue, but become worse, they will allow the causes
of it to remain. Eor instance, one man has been out of
work since last July, and about January he again got
employment in some humble position in the Railway
Department, but, on the 23rd Alarch, he received a noti-
fication that, on account of having been on strike in
July, he was an undesirable servant, and must leave the
employment of the Railways Commissioners. Cannot
the representatives, of the Government understand the
Labour mind on this question, and realize that we resent
such ? The man who received that letter will
say, “ How much worse could things be under any Go-
vernment, ? I have tried this afternoon to get men who
are not moving in Labour circles to understand the point
°f. view of the working man, and to say, “ Let all real
grievances be removed, and imaginary ones made so
clear that the workers no longer imagine vain things.”
We are as earnest in regard to the ultimate result as arei
other delegates, and, that being so, what is the use ofj
sparring tor position, and saying, “We will give you]
as much as we can concede.” Surely, having regard to]
the gravity of the position, the Governments will con-]
cede any legitimate and just claims—and that is all ij
shall ever ask—to accomplish what we have met to
accomplish, namely, the unanimity of the people of]
Australia.
Mr. BEEBY.—The coal lumpers refused to handle
transports and to put coal on a naval ship which was]
in port. We organized a gang of 600 men, who said]
that they would at all times during the war coal anyl
ships that might be in port. Does Senator Gardiner sayl
that we must discharge those men and take back the!
others ?
Senator GARDINER.—Without hesitation or ques-
tion I say that that is the way out of the
ft is just as well to face the facts. While the war is
in progress there are few ships coming to Australia,
and the Government may be able to carry on with the
support of the loyalists, but when the war is over, and
hundreds of ships are coming to these shores, the Go-
vernment will have to seek the services of the unionistsJ
and they.will not work with the others. If the Govern-
ment desire unanimity, they are sufficiently powerful to
place the loyalists in positions where they will cause no
tiouble. I shall not object to that. If they wish to
establish real friendship, they must remove all griev-
ances and realize that they cannot get the unionists to
work alongside the loyalists. Knowing that to be the fact,
what is the use of me saying that we will willingly try
to get unanimity in any other way ? When ships aro


. „nmine to these shores in hundreds, the few men
1 i the Government are working now will have
with wiio nQt recognise the fact now ? The Govern-
ft mav fairly say that, with a view to securing
unanimity amongst the people, they will remove all
winces that have been forced upon the unionists.
111I 11 accepting the view of Mr. Bceby, that the strike
the greatest blunder that the unionists ever made,
Ire the men who blundered to be turned out of employ-
ment and punished eternally ?
Mr HOLMAN. —Those men were not turned out of
their iobs. They all left the employment of the Rail-
ways Commissioners, -and were told that if they re-
turned by a certain date they would be taken back, but
those who did not return by that day would be dis-
charged Those who remained away from work after
that date ended their engagement by their voluntary
a<> Senator GARDINER.— That is a very plausible and
deliberate misstatement. After fifteen years’ service,
mv brother was turned out of his employment, not be-
cause he was on strike, but because he would not engage
in another occupation in the place of a man who was on
strike. He has since been taken back, but given another
Mr. HOLMAN. —If he is back in employment, .he is
not being punished.
Senator GARDINER.—Take the case of Mr Levy.
He was not on strike. He was willing to do las own
work but was told by the Commissioners that there
was Ao work to do. When the strike was over he was
told that he had left the service some weeks before and
lie was no longer required. His friends presented lam
with a gold watch in acknowledgment of las loyalty to
unionism. Is he to be kept out of employment on that
ground ? He and others had continued to do their work
after the strike had been in progress for ten days, but
they refused to do somebody else’s work.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Were any of those men dismissed ?
Senator GARDINER.—To my own personal know-
ledge, three of them —Gardiner, Levy, and Gazzard
were dismissed.
Mr. HOLMAN. —But in each of those cases there
must have been other circumstances as well.
Senator GARDINER. No.
Mr. HOLMAN.—So far as I know, no man has
been permanently dismissed for refusing to take up un-
accustomed work during the strike. Those who have
been dismissed are the men who struck work.
Senator GARDINER.—I understand that Mr. Hol-
I m an was absent from the State when the strike occurred.
Mr. HOLMAN. —You only nave hearsay evidence.
[ You were not in the Railway Department.
• Senator GARDINER.—if Mr. Holman intends to
■ side-step these facts he cannot hope to obtain
unanimity. The facts must be faced. I recognise the
difficulties confronting Mr. Holman and Mr. Beeby, but
L my point is that if the grievances 1 mentioned are real,
we ought to see if there is not some way for us to come
together. Ido not think this debate will go on to any
i undue length if we face the facts that are causing a
1 disruption of the man ana money power of Australia
at the present time.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I wish to say only a few
words in regard to the coupling of the Federal Govern-
i ment and the New South Wales Government m what is
alleged to have been a pre-arranged attack on unionism.
So far as that statement relates to the federal Govern-
ment, there is no shadow of truth in it and no fact that
has been stated to-day appears to make
through the strike, the Government m New South Wales
: were afraid that the Federal Government would inter-
fere in their trouble. Only the other day Mr. Hall
F. 3959. — 3
attacked us bitterly on that score, and said that his
Government were always afraid that the Federal autho-
rity would be interfering in the strike. It seems that
we might as well have done so, because we are dragged
into it anyhow. Whatever we do, we must be hit.
Mr. SCULLIN'—The Federal Government could
have settled the trouble had they tried.
Mr. HOLMAN - . —Hear the voice of Victoria on a
New South Wales matter! One has to go abroad to get
news.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I come now to the reference
which has been made to the Cockatoo Island Dock; but
I do not wish to labour the question, for I feel that, not-
withstanding what Senator Gardiner has said, it would
be futile to do so. After all, he has only succeeded in
showing that there is an aftermath of the great strike
affecting some individuals. As I have heard the case
put to-day by members, it appears to me that the dim-
culty is not insurmountable, and I hope that, before the
Conference closes, we shall have arrived at a means of
reconciling the parties in regard to some of the troubles
referred to by Mr. Tudor and Senator Gardiner. I read
with some surprise the statement in the press that twenty-
eight engineers at Cockatoo Island had. been dischaige
because they would not sign the new shipbuilding agree-
ment. Only the other day some fourteen or sixteen men
had refused to sign the agreement, and we had decided
to simply remove them from the cruiser Adelaide and
give them work to do in the repair shop, in order to obvi-
ate the very difficulty to which reference has been made.
I may tell the Conference that the members of the Amal-
gamated Society of Engineers who are working at the
dock have all signed individually this agreement with
the Government. After the union declining to sign it,
the members individually did so. lam sorry, indeed,
that I have not been able to go to Hew South Wales this
week-end in order to endeavour to compose this new
trouble. I cannot bring myself to believe that it cannot
be composed the moment I can get to close quarters with
the men. There is not, and there need not be, any diffi-
culty at the dock so far as these matters are concerned.
What difficulty there is there arises chiefly from the
fact that there is less work to be done than there was,
and therefore, we cannot take so many men back as
we should like to employ. The Imperial Govern-
ment has taken over the transport work, and has
engaged its own agents in Sydney, with the result that
there is less to be done at the dock. I know of no
victimization whatever there. The men were told
plainly that they could all go back when there was work
for them, and that, is the present position. The question
was raised whether they should be taken back on the
terms and conditions as to wages existing when they
went out, or whether the Court awards should be applied
to them. We pay them Is. a day more than the awards
of the Court.
Mr WILLIAMS. —So you should.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—No doubt it would be very
agreeable to be able to pay them 2s. or 3s. a day more;
but being in the position of trustees of the peoples
money, we cannot do that. I told the managers at the
dock that the men were not to be deprived of anything
that they previously enjoyed, and those that are em-
ployed there are constantly receiving wages higher tha i
the award rates.
The other day we called for tenders for the lighter-
ing of coal, to be used purely and simply for war work.
Two tenders were put in, one by a set of men who had
remained loyal during the strike, and another by coal
lumpers who had taken part in the strike. The second
being the lower, I accepted it. There was no victimiza-
tion of unionists in that action.
Mr. LUNDIE. —Would you have accepted tbs
tender had it been the higher?


Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—No. The lowest offer must
be accepted, other things being equal, when tenders are
called for publicly.
Mr. McCALLUM.—What about the action of the
Coal Board in refusing to supply coal to stevedores
employing members of the Coal Lumpers Union?
i Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—The only function that the
Coal Board had or exercised was the allocation of the
coal furnished to them for that purpose; they had no-
thing to do with questions of labour or wages. Their
sole business was to say where coal should go—to South
Austi alia, Victoria, and so on—and in what propor-
tions. When it was pointed out to me that labour
and other economic considerations were creeping in, 1
promptly told the Coal Board to have nothing to do
with them. That Board has ceased to exist.
Mr MORBY.—The Shipping Board, which is more
brutal, has taken its place.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—The Shipping Board does
not come within my province. Confining myself to
ederal affairs, I challenge any one present to furnish
a case of victimization in connexion with the docks.
.Notwithstanding that certain men went out on strike,
lefusing to send away our troopships, leaving molten
metal m the furnaces, although the moulds were ready
to take it, and committing other offences—not against
the Government, but against the country, and
against those who are fighting for us at the
I rout—every one of them has been taken back
for whom we can find employment. As still further
evidence that there has been no victimization, I might
mention that only the other day an ex-Labour member
of Parliament was given employment at the dock.
Mr. MORBY.—And may I say that he has left that
employment, not finding it sufficiently congenial.
Mr. LUNDIE. It seems to be the usual thing for
politicians to find work for ex-politicians.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Nothing could make me
believe in wanton victimization; but there are cases in
which men have to be punished, not because they are
unionists, but for quite other reasons.
Mr. McCALLUM.—Did you not pass a regulation
taking preference to unionists from the Waterside
Workers ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I am unable to say at the
present moment.
Mr. McCALLUM.—It was done.
Mr. BEEBY. When the Waterside Workers refused 1
to work, their preference was taken away in order that
others might work.
ME McCALLUM. We are told that there was no ]
collusion between the Commonwealth Government and <
the Government of New South Wales, and yet we have
a New South Wales Minister explaining wliy the Com- j
monwealth Government took certain action.
Mr JOSEPH COOK.—My friend does himself no j
good by taking such “ catch-penny ” points. Mr. Tudor t
as made his pronunciamento as to the minimum re-
quirements of his friends before they can be expected e
to work m harmony with us in the matter of recruit- r
mg.
Mr. P. O’LOUGHLIN.—Is that a fair statement, or c
is it what you believe to be Mr. Tudor’s attitude ?
rv JOSEPH COOK.—I understand it to be Mr
I udor s position. 7
Mr. P. O’LOUGHIIN.-Some of us may, perhaps, a
do even more than they have done in the past. The 7
party has never refused to co-operate. It is the rank
and file. ,
Mr JOSEPH COOK.—My impression is that it is
not the rank and file, but that the rank and file have n
turned up well. As to the difficulties in the way of an n
agreement, I am hopeful that the Prime Minister may o
ae here on Monday morning. He expects to be well ti
enough to attend then. Had he not been coming, I would n;
it have tried to say something to-day regarding the matter 1
e referred to by Mr. Ryan, namely, what our war aims
are.
o Mr 'ART.- —I should like to know, also, what it ij
thought that Australia can do; what are her resources?
B r ; JOSEPH COOK. That is not an immediately
q P ra ctical question, if by a statement as to what Aus-
tralia can. do is meant a statement here and now of
our objective.
i EYAJST. I should like the data upon which you
say that we can reinforce nearly six divisions.
r ¥" r '. JOSEPH COOK.—I thought that Mr. Orchard
l had given that information. As I understand the posi-
) tlon > General Birdwood and the Imperial War Council
say that 5,400 men are needed monthly to reinforce
3 our divisions.
Mr. RYAN.—When did they say that?
3 Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Last December or Novem-
) ber.
l Mr. RYAN.—In November, I think.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I think so.
, Mr. RYAN.—Yet we heard it only the other day.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—That is an extraordinary
thing to say. There was scarcely a speaker during the
referendum campaign who did not make the position
clear. We need 5,400 a month as a supply of reinforce-
ments, and about 30,000 in addition to re-create the
necessary reserves. Averaging the number required
at 7,000 a month, it will take sixteen months to get!
what we need.
Mr. SCULLIN,—That was not the statement made!
during the conscription campaign. We were told that I
7,000 a month were needed for reinforcements.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—That included provision for I
the re-creating of a reserve of 30,000.
Mr. HOLMAN. I do not think it was explained I
during the referendum campaign that 2,000 of the 7,000 f
risked for monthly were to build up a reserve.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—That I cannot say. But alii
t le explanations in the world do not affect the require- ■
ments of the situation, which are 7,000 a month, namely 1
5,400 for reinforcements and the balance to make up’ a 1
reserve already depleted. The men are not sent straight I
into the trenches. They go first into the reserves.
Mr. LUNDIE. I have had friends sent into the I
firing line very quickly, while thousands of others were I
kept back on Salisbury Plains.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Men have been rushed into I
the line all too quickly; but what Mr. Lundie speaks of I
is a matter of military detail, which does not affect the I
situation.
. RYAN. How long could Australia go on provid-1
ing 7,000 a month consistent with efficiency here?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Prom my recollection of the I
figures furnished by Mr. Knibbs, the last census showed I
that there were 150,000 single eligible men remaining in I
Australia to be drawn from, and I remind the Confer- 1
ence that in addition to this reservoir, each month 2,000 I
men become of military age. -
SCULLIN. But do not the same number go I
out ? s I
Mi. JOSEPH COOK.—No, not so many. Alto- I
gether the figures show that we could .safely reckon on I
having at least 200,000 single eligible men in Australia I
reservoir f° r our reinforcements at the rate of I
7,000 per month.
Mr. SCULLIN.—Did not Sir Samuel Griffith say I
that was a remarkably small number?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—It is a remarkably small I
number May I suggest to my friends that we should I
not seek to draw upon men such as are coming into I
our ranks to-day while those 200,000 men of mili- I
tary age are available? That is the point. Unfortu- I
nately, to-day the men joining up consist largely of boys I


who have just reached the age of eighteen years, or of
married men with families. Do not forget that fact. ]
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN. —Do you really believe that
there "are 200,000 men available?
Mr JOSEPH COOK. —I say that those who believe
in conscription do not believe it is fair that we should
draw upon the class of recruits at present coming into
the ranks while so many single* eligible men are avail-
able in Australia. But I want,, if possible, to get away
from this question of conscription, and to come to the
matters touched upon by Mr. Tudor and Mr. Ryan. 1
observe that Mr. Ryan has spoken of the “ final aban-
donment,” whatever that may mean, of the policy of
conscription as being necessary to secure the best results
from anv united effort.
Mr. RYAN. —It is a very important matter.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Then I ask Mr. Ryan what
does he mean by the “ final abandonment ” of conscrip-
tion? ) - J
Mr. SCULLIN. —He means final and absolute.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Does he mean that no matter
what calamity overtook our nation, that no matter what
danger might threaten our national existence, his pro-
nouncement must still apply ?
Mr. RYAN. —I must infer from what you are saying
that you think the time has arrived for conscription.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK—I am asking a simple ques-
tion, and I should be obliged for a simple plain answer.
Mr. RYAN. —Then I say the. “ final abandonment
of conscription.” There is a plain meaning to those
WOrds. . o rrn
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —In all circumstances? Then
I can only speak for myself, and I wish it to be dis-
tinctly understood that if Mr. Ryan means that under
any and every conceivable set of circumstances there
must be a final abandonment of conscription, I am quite
unable to give any such assurance.
Mr. RYAN. —Then can you say when you think
conscription will be necessary for oversea service ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I want to say this—and per-
haps it is all that Mr. Ryan ought to expect me to say —
that, so far os this Conference and this recruiting move-
ment aie concerned, there is no thought of conscription
in the mind of the Government. The Government have
accepted frankly and freely the determination of the
people, as expressed last December.
Mr. RYAN. —Is that an answer to my question?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I cannot answer more defi-
nitely, and I do not see how I could be expected to do
so. •
Mr. RYAN. —Well, you pressed and cross-examined
me pretty closely, and I think it is a fair thing to ask
you when you contend that conscription should be
introduced.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I say that, when the country
is in danger of being overcome by the enemy, when the
danger is immediate, then will be the time to again en-
deavour to brine all the available manhood of the -
country to meet the danger.
Mr. SCULLIN. —And are we in danger now?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I believe we are in danger
now.
Mr. RYAN. —Then that is the answer.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —It is not the answer. We
have never been out of danger since the war began. I
think, however, it is reprehensible that we should have
this kind of questioning for the purpose, evidently, of
trying to find debating points, instead of points of agree-
ment.
Mr. SCULLIN.—We are trying to ascertain what is
in vour mind.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Then I will tell Mr. Scullin
what is in my mind. The Government do not contem-
plate conscription, and, so far as I know, has no imme-
diate intention whatever of even thinking about it.
32
Mr. SCULLIN'.—Then you are contradicting your
previous statement.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I am not contradicting my
previous remarks. lam simply reserving for myself
the right to say that the time may come when any and
every effort will be necessary to save our country, and
make it secure.
Mr. SCULLIN'—But you have said just now that
the country is in danger.
lvlr. JOSEPH COOK.—Cannot Mr. Scullin see that
there are degrees of danger ? Be reasonable.
Mr. SCULLIN'. —I am reasonable.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Concerning conscription, 1
make this reservation with regard to the final point
of danger which may threaten our existence as a nation.
Mr. RYAN - .—And I should like the Minister to
understand my position. In the words of Mr. Asquith,
I believe that the additional man-power to be obtained
by conscription would not balance the drawbacks of con-
scription.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Quite so; I understand that;
there is a perfectly legitimate sphere for differences
of opinion on that matter.
Mr. RYAN - . —Oh, yes, of course there are.
Mr.' JOSEPH COOK.—I admit quite freely that
men who are opposed to me on this matter aie jus. as
much entitled to their opinion as I am to mine; but
surely we can reconcile our differences so that we may
reach a common ground of agreement, and by a united
effort do all that is possible to make our Democracy
and freedom sure ? I submit, therefore, that instead
of discussing this question of conscription theoretically
and at its ultimate point, and instead of my friends
asking for the final abandonment of this or that con-
sideration, and emphasizing points of difference, it would
be far better to try to find points of agreement.
Mr. RYAN. —I am only asking the question because
I think the country is looking for an answer.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Could not the Government make
some practical declaration of abandonment of conscrip-
tion by defining the circumstances under which they
may resort to it again? They might say they will not
resort to conscription while the war lasts in Europe.
Perhaps that would satisfy Mr. Ryan.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I say that, short of meaning
for ever, in all circumstances and under all conditions,
the Government has no idea of conscription. Notwith-
standing all the theoretical differences on this subject, I
cannot bring myself to believe that we will be unable
to find some common meeting ground before this Con-
ference breaks up.
Coming now to the matters referred to by Mr.
Tudor, I must say I do not know quite what he means
by his reference to economic conscription. Ido not be-
lieve in economic conscription as a principle. I
believe in economic freedom —as much of it as we can
have consistent with well-ordered government. If Mr.
- Tudor means that there is some idea of the Government
curtailing employment for the purpose of driving men
into the ranks of our army, I can only say that I know
of no such intention. I know of no such circumstances
as to warrant the supposition that thL is a danger.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Are you not contemplating send-
ing a card to every eligible man in the Government ser-
vice ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Is that economic conscrip-
tion ?
Senator MILLEN.—That card is going to men not
in the service as well as to those within.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —May we not ask a man such
a question as is contained on that card ?
Mr. SCULLIN. —There is more in it than that.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—What more is there in it?
There are plenty of eligible men in the Government
service. The whole fact is that they are there; and


that is the answer. As to the question of de-registra-
tion of unions, that has been dealt with by Mr. Beeby
and others; and I do not know that that affects us
very much. I do not see that we can do anything in
the matter. Then there is the question of the repeal
of War Precautions Regulations not vital to the con-
duct of the war and of a Government guarantee against
their re-enactment. All that can be looked into. The
next point, the abolition of press censorship and
the limitations of free speceh, reminds me that the Go-
vernment are calling a censorship conference, which is
to meet on Monday. I think, and hope, it will be of a
representative character. Representatives of Labour
newspapers and of newspapers of every shade of opinion
have been invited.
Mr. SCULLIN.—So far as I know, on Friday the
newspaper which I represent had had no invitation. It
is the only Labour daily newspaper in Victoria.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I know that The Worker
newspaper has had an invitation, and so also should
yours. The intention is to discuss the whole question
of censorship. It is impossible to abolish press cen-
sorship. In the House, only this week, there was a
great deal made of the fact by one of our own members
that we could not release information regarding the
sinking of a troopship. The whole point is that we
could not do so because the Imperial Government for-
bade our doing so.
Mr. McCALLUM.—It is political censorship that we
are concerned about.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I should be quite prepared
myself to see the whole question reconsidered and re-
vised. As to the cessation of political prosecutions
under the War Precautions Act, I do not know quite
what that may mean. But with regard to all these
matters the Government will look into them with an
open mind. If this Conference gets to work on these
problems, and maintains close touch with them, I do
not see that a reconciliation on many of these matters
cannot be brought about.
Mr. RYAH.—We would like to hear you on pro-
fiteering.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I can only speak for myself.
I understand that what is meant by that is profits
made because the war is on.
Mr. RYAN”.—Excessive profits.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I am afraid that by the time
the Government have finished up with those gentlemen
they will not have very much of their profiteering left.
Any profiteering that they may be doing will be fully
required for the purposes of taxation—and that very
speedily. Our outlook is grave in that respect. We
shall need many many millions more to meet the re-
quirements of the war. Any proposals of a practical
nature, with the intention of stopping profiteering and
keeping down the cost of living to the lowest possible
point, will receive the sympathetic consideration of the
Government. I have no sympathy with men who may be
using the war to gain profits to themselves. The Go-
vernment have had persons engaged on this very work,
and for a long time past—men whose sympathies are if
anything, with the bulk of the working men of Aus-
tralia.
Mr. McCALLUM. —The trouble is that you do not
get on to their reports. You pigeon-hole them, or they
are referred back.
Mr. iSCULLIU.—Tes. Take the question of the
meat trade.
Mr.. JOSEPH COOK.—You will admit that there is
more information to be gathered concerning meat.
Mr. McCALLUM.—You have had one Common-
wealth Commissioner in Perth in eighteen months. He
has foiw.aided scores of reports, and there has been one
prosecution only. He says that he does not get the
authority.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I ask you to give me those
cases and I will promise that they shall be thoroughly
investigated.
Mr. SCULLIH.—There are facts brought under your
notice in the press and in Parliament time after time,
and you do nothing.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—There are many opinions
as to what are facts. The Government do not believe
in profiteering, and do* not believe in high prices.
Mr. RYAH.—You will admit that there are high
prices.
Mr. PEAKE.—And there are high wages, too, par-
ticularly in your State.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I know there are high prices.
Any man, like myself, with a family of nine knows that.
Mr. McCALL UM.—High prices may be justifiable,
but it is high profits we are up against.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—'Well, let us have the facts
and they shall be fairly and thoroughly investigated.
If we address ourselves to these matters during the week
end, and try to get to close grips with the problems, I
am hopeful that by Monday we shall see our way to re-
concile most of them * and I would be glad indeed if we
could swing into line solidly and helpfully behind this
new reinforcements propaganda.
Mr. PEAKE.—I have listened with great interest to
the debate, and have tried to get to some foundational
principle. I join with other gentlemen in thanking Mr.
Orchard for having given us information in very great
detail, but those figures do not very much affect the case.
Ihe point is not whether we can estimate our require-
ments in figures at the present time, but how much can
we possibly do at the present time. We do not find
America taking the view that she must send so manv
thousands per month. America’s viewpoint is, “ How
many men can we possibly send at a time when Germany
is pouring all her hordes into the conflict ?” Our need
is to get as many men as possible in the shortest time
possible— to secure and train and send as many to the
Front in as little time as possible. Germany during the
past few months has decided upon an entirely different
method of war tactics. The enemy have now come out
m almost overwhelming masses, and the ideas and prac-
tices which held throughout the days of trench warfare
must be drastically reviewed and altered in these highly
critical times of open warfare. Man power is the
greatest need of the moment, otherwise would Lloyd
George be raising the age limit to fifty-five? How can
we, by settling outstanding differences, arrive at the all-
necessary point of complete unity? I notice from the
very interesting interchange of compliments between
different members from Hew South Wales that a good
many of these difficulties occurred a long time after the
falling off in recruiting took place. Therefore, I do
not think they can be rightly used as an argument for
the keeping back of sufficient reinforcements for our
troops at the Eront. All the trouble of which we have
heard in connexion with the railway strike in Hew
South Wales is six months old, I suppose.
Mr. WATSOH.—It started last August.
Mr. PEAKE.—Then we will say that it is eight
months old, if you like. Whs not the falling off in re-
cruiting very noticeable prior to that time ?
Mr. COLLIER.—It has continued since.
Mr. PEAKE.—But what has occurred after the
strike cannot be used as an argument in respect of what
occurred before the strike.
Mr. COLLIER. If the falling off has increased, it
can be.
. The falling off is bound to be progres-
sne. Mr. ludor pointed that out. Unless the over-
whelming necessity for increased reinforcements presses
upon everybody in the community as a compelling force
it necessarily follows that the number of recruits forth-
coming will be smaller and smaller as time goes by. By


rpnqon of the depletion of water in a well, we cannot
pxnect to get a full bucket every time. Already we have,
loi considerable extent, depleted the reservoir of our
Hffible manhood, and consequently we cannot expect
reinforcements to be forthcoming in the same numbers
they were previously. I was sorry that so much of
A* debate this afternoon has hinged on the squabble m
7?pw South Wales. The subject is very much greater
than that. If the defence of the Empire hinges upon a
number of grievances which certain gentlemen regard
as pin-pricks, we shall bring is down to a very low level
indeed.
A MEMBER. —But those pin-pricks can be removed.
Mr. PEAKE.—After all, they are only pin-pricks,
although I hope they can be removed. But of what im-
portance are these pin-pricks compared with the pre-
servation of the Empire and of Australia?
Mr. WILLIAMS. —Why not remedy them ?
Mr. PEAKE.—Let us first see if every one of them
is in the nature of a case which ought to be remedied.
If it is, let us get to the remedying it as quickly
as possible. But when the question of the imprisonment
of a certain number of men, or the refusal to employ a
certain number of men, is put forward in this connexion,
I want to know positively what were the reasons for the
imprisonment or the discharge of those individuals. I
have a right to know the reasons, because these men
were convicted of breaches of the criminal law.
Mr. COLLIER.—Not criminal.
Mr. PEAKE.—I regard it as a crime for any man
to have assisted in any movement for the prevention
of the supplying of munitions from Broken Hill, or
of the departure of troopships or wheat ships from our
shores. I regard it as a crime against the Empire.
Mr. COLLIER—No matter what the “ other fellow
did to him?
Mr. PEAKE.—Who is the “ other fellow ?
A MEMBER. —The Government.
Mr PEAKE.—No, the “ other fellow ”is the Empire.
A MEMBER.—He is to submit to everything the
Government choose to put upon him without protest,
and unless he does so he is a criminal! That is your
argument. . . ~ ,
Mr. PEAKE.—No; it is not, My argument is that
as I am in ignorance of the grounds upon which Senator
Gardiner urged that an amnesty should be granted to
all these people, I have a right to know what they arc
being punished for. That involves an investigation of
every case upon its merits. For that reason I say that
it is useless to bring forward a lot of general cases which
would necessitate an investigation into each _ We have
heard from Mr. Tudor a statement m which he for-
mulated grievances which he urged ought to be re-
dressed before he as one of the leaders of his party
could call upon the different unions to rally to the
colours in greater numbers than they have been doing.
When he presents his case in that way, we have a rigm
to ask him whether, if all these grievances are remedied
on reasonable and substantial grounds, he and those
who act with him are prepared to recommend to every
one of their unions that they . should become en-
thusiastic in the cause of recruiting ?
Mr. COLLIER.—Many of us have been doing that,
notwithstanding those grievances.
Mr. PEAKE—I have no doubt that is so.
Mr. COLLIER. —But our work would be much easier
if these grievances were removed. m i
Mr PEAKE.— Exactly. Seeing that Mr. Tudor
complains that these are the reasons why greater effort
has not been made to secure recruits if the grievunces
bp Ins mentioned are removed, will the whole streng
of his party be exerted to secure
ments? Despite what we have been told of the reasons
which have operated against success m recrui mg,
was cheering to hear the statements of Mr. Orchard
this morning that Captain Carmichael has succeeded in
so re-awakening the people of New South Wales to a
sense of their duty that 350 volunteers have already
responded to his appeal. That fact evidences the true
spirit of our people if they are properly led. Wo
should endeavour to remove, as far as possible, every
substantial grievance that exists. But as the grievances
which have been enumerated here appear to be limited
to New South Wales, they ought not to have militated
against the success of recruiting throughout Australia.
A MEMBER. —They have done so because the Labour
body is one throughout the Commonwealth.
Mr. PEAKE.—From that interjection we are led to
understand that loyalty to the unions is of greater im-
portance than loyalty to the Empire.
A MEMBER. —If you had no union you would have
no Empire.
Senator MILLEN. —Aon may reverse that statement,
too.
Mr. PEAKE. —I am taking the argument as it ap-
pears to me it must stand—that loyalty to the unions
is of greater consideration than loyalty to the Empire.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—You say that, notwithstanding
that 75 per cent, of our troops fighting at the Front
are unionists.
Mr. PEAKE.—I am not speaking of those who are
at the Front. They have done their duty nobly, and are
still doing it. They have come from all classes ot the
community. ,
Mr. LUNDIE.—AII their brethren here are fighting
you in order that they may have good industrial con-
ditions here when they return. ~, .
A MEMBER. —That is the kind of statement that
Mr Peake expects will bring about unity.
Mr. PEAKE.—No. I have heard quite a number
of statements made here to-day which are not calculated
to produce very much unity. If Senator Gardmei
wishes us to understand that, irrespective of whethei
they are right or wrong, he will stick to his mates—
that he will support those with whom he is associated
for the reasons which have been put forward here as
grievances, and that he will put those grievances before
even the question of reinforcing our troops at the
Fl Mr. McCALLUM.— Politically you stick to your
mates, right or wrong. .. ~i .
Mr. PEAKE.— Fortunately, lam able to stick to
them pretty often, because they are generally right. We
have heard a good deal this afternoon m regard to
profiteering, and Mr. Joseph Cook was asked to speak
specially upon that matter owing to the high price of
meat. But there is profiteering—and very substantial
profiteering—on the part of the worker as well as on
the part of the employer. I have been informed, o
authority which I cannot doubt, that the men employed
at the Brisbane Meatworks are earning £2 per day.
Mr. McCALLUM.—What do you get per day*
Mr PEAKE.—I get what I deserve, I think.
Mr! McCALLUM.—So do they. • ,
Mr. PEAKE.— Nobody will contend that £2 a clay
is a normal wage in Australia.
Mr. McCALUJM—Yours is not a normal wage..
Mr' PEAKE.—I wish to know whether profiteering
is confined to the class as represented by the employers
Mr. SCULLIN. —Do you say that £2 per day is the
general wage? ~ .
Mr. PEAKE.—I say that it is the wage which is
being paid to men employed at the Brisban; Mea -
works.
Mr. SCULLIN.—An extremely isolated case.
Mr PE AKE —This afternoon we have heard of a
good manv isolated cases, which seem to me to have
brought this question down to a very low plane. Until
the very last pin-prick has been removed, and until •-


• grievance mentioned by Mr. ludor lias been
remedied, I understand from him that there can be no
help expected in connexion with recruiting from those
who have been raising these objections.
Mr. COLLIER.—He did not say “no help.” That
is a very unfair way of putting it/
Mr. PEAKE.—In their remarks, Mr. Tudor and Sena-
ter Gardiner dealt with very trivial instances. We can
readily grant that there may be, in the mass, a consider-
able weight in the objections that have been formulated;
but when delegates relate to us individual cases of
widows and children, and workers in a particular
place in Hew South Wales, we are asked to pass a judg-
ment which cannot properly be delivered without heat-
mg the evidence of both sides. I ask both Mr Tudor
and Senator Gardiner if they cannot put before the
Conference a general principle rather than individual
eases, or cases affecting only a small number of people,
With regard to victimization, those of us who have been
m the hurly-burly of politics know that victimization is
not limited to any one section of the community. It is
practised by both. Thousands of men have been vie-
t.innzed, and not allowed to work, because they would not
.lorn the unions, and we have a right to state that fact
when we are told that others have been victimized
because they are members of unions.
Mr. LUNDIE.—I never heard of that happening, and
I have been amongst the workers a good deal
Mr. PEAKE.-lt is commonly knoV that people have
been made the victims of the unions because they would
not become trade unionists.
Mr. LUHDIE.—That is nonsense.
Mr. PEAKE.—Mr. Lundie knows, as well as I do
that numerous, strikes have taken place because men
working alongside unionists would not join the unions
Senator MILLEH.—The law courts will furnish evi-
dence of that.
™ r * TGDOR.—T do not know of any instance of it.
Mr. PEAKE.—Strikes have been called because of
the discovery that some miserable man with strength of
conviction did not belong to a union, and would not be
compelled to join. However, having regard to the mat-
ters brought forward by Mr. Tudor, I should not regard
them as presenting an insuperable difficulty if they are
taken m the mass, and an endeavour is made to arrive
at a broad principle. We should not be asked to deal
with individual cases, in which, possibly, the punishment
meted out to a particular man was well deserved. Mr.
Tudor expressed the hope that no attempt would he
made to carry any motion. I ask him whether he thinks
the Conference is likely to carry any weight, or have
any influence, unless it does make some resolution, even
though it be of a general character? Unless the Con-
eience does resolve something, public opinion will be
justified m thinking that our deliberations have been
absolutely ineffective; that we cannot arrive at an
agreement or express a hope to arrive at an agree-
ment. I am not so much concerned about carrying the
motion suggested by the Governor-General, because,
a . er a ’ value ! of our deliberations will be indicated,
not so much by the carrying of that motion, as by the
fact that we have or have not been, able to arrive
at r useful determination. The motion is an ex-
pression of opinion, as to the way in which it.might be
desirable for this Conference to work, but the Confer-
ence will be judged not by carrying 4at is merely an
expression of hope, but by the work that is done. There-
fore, I ask Mr. Tudor to reconsider his suggestion that
no atterupt should be made to carry a S
• Mr TUDOR.—r think that action is required rather
than the carrying of a motion.
Mr. PEAKE.— I think so, too. But we shall be doing
a great deal to advance the objects of the Conference if
It" , ead f rs of different actions of the people, can give
a loßd to those whom we represent,
Mr. LUHDIE.—Some persons present are represent-
ing nobody.
i\/r„ -pi? a in? t a * i r i
T u d ° ? ot know of any such person.
* have n ? desir ®. to crit + I( uf the action of the Governor-
General in sending out the mvrtabons. X presume he
?°‘. ™ beat advice obtainable as to who should be
l™., to th ® Confe . ren fe, and I feel certain that every
email who received an invitation was regarded as
KTtbi Zw S ° me i?T ° V 8 i ?
£ thmk that we shall achieve any valuable result
W ® concentrate . °ur attention upon the question as to
sta + t ed fi S u + r . es > can b * ■“**>“
Tf ■ time. But we shall have
? g eat deal mdeed lf > in tb e face of the national
s°me general agreement that in
“ iS A* duty
utmost to alonle nubile 1™ • our^. h ? m f and do our
tent L* ill-info™*? 1 *» ! ’ i a a J ge eX i
the wa? lit mb. .bl * f,b tr P ° S , ,° f
situation is™ th V g f ‘i PU u a and 3ay ft 0
for Re time heinl lb. dfff ™ M compelled to put aside
us ™ ? i" 5 "' 8
and to tocomise if n ™ T”. ratnnl 1 ater ’
the thf Em to™ a P j f.* 1 * 7 t 0 f all J
beli«™ : ,??“*• And let us say that we
we rjalize thTaLlnto nil! -T f ldl ? g P . nnol J >]e that
thimrs we desire to , j 7 -° f the many
whthTilfLd° to bff ‘° about
war endeavours h 1 1 d better results m our
_ _ ut**vuurs-
. ‘ MORBY. I wish to get down to bedrock and to
amve M the reason for convening the Conference. I
J v l lth J W 0 words mentioned in the motion sub-
mittod by the Governor-General, namely, harmony and
g° odwill > and upon them I shall concentrate my re-
marks. I say quite frankly that there is no possibility
successful to any extent in Hew
es while the present order of things continues,
™ lsl l adthe Terence, or to betray
in piVplpTiV, 18 Wlt ?m me > but I happen to move
nf ® mto close contact with the class
• r whlch hope to draw their
2?* We have heard a good deal to-
qiwI l duS l m Position obtaining, not only in
A q r ”T ial ® s ’ but throughout the Commonwealth,
Hew slfwi' 7 conversant with the conditions in
p n lTt pf l* - eS ’ &nd - aS , tbat State from an industrial
other State7t ?! “ T or f im Portant than any
fe^yu" 1 J? 111 l 5 e A tliat 1 ! hould to the Con-
I know i/will I Condltlons that exist there,
f re elv the feeliiT dlfl l cult fo . r ? ome delegates to realize
r Mw W.i? convmtmns of organized labour
tinent and extreme! ; Hcdma . n P ut a very per-
“ Suppose that th J m P ortant Question when he asked,
TemXd i„ V) 3 gn f ?™ ce ? vbicb at present exist are
sS J’’ TW how will recruiting be as-
prepared to sav tbat^ 10 ?, st ? uld be [ answered, and lam
inasmuchafit assist in bruiting,
in the minds of oro- t i! e we J l ' founded conviction
thateco^ornll or^a . ni^ ed ! m Hew South Wales
Ido not thM^p 011 18 m operation in tbat State.
sible for thlt" W Governme . nt entirely respon-
those whom • US consider the effect upon
of tbp nn authorities expect to rally to the colours
mef Pea ™ that all
the Federal ? f CG De P artm eut will be discharged If
If A ~a l Gov crnment feels that that is a good moihnrl
° f gflttlng r “™ i ‘ s . ‘l> a t is thoir business ® h ° d
T , Mr - JOSEPH OOOK.-Arc von sure that <t ,
Pearce said that? ' S 1 6th ' Senat °r
Mr. MORBY —I did net 1,.
b, M I am sure that it! statement made,
Nomine, Herald and in the" Sydnef/) f Sydne^
tu- TTrrvrkT> n- ydnev Daily Telegraph.
Mr. I UDOR. Has it been denied?


IVT • MORBY. —I have not read a denial. Such a
, 7' llt not only creates bitterness wherever it reaches,
iTSve! the men who are affected good grounds for
nersuading other men from enlisting.
M • JOSEPH COOK. —I think that what Senator
TV-n-ce said was that temporary men—men who after
i earce sa l nt have to stand down—would
"given re-employment in preference to returned
P ° Afr MORBY. —I shall not press the point. 1 under-
i ml that Senator Pearce made the statement, but 1
am prepared to accept any correction. Let me give
practical reasons why under the present condition of
Sings we cannot get a sufficient number of recruits m
Nev? South Wales. Ido not wish to dwell too much on
He recent industrial trouble, which is becoming ancient
history; 11 but in the presence of Mr. Holman and Mr
Beeby I wish to state certain facts, so that, shou c
tfiev not already be in possession of them, they may
know them, and furnish some explanation of them lhe
organization which I represent m New South
wiles a membership of approximately 160 000. No
doubt ’ the statement that Mr. Holman made m San
Francisco, that they form a large source to- draw upon
is correct should the men be willing to enlist. But, as
things are to-day in New South Wales, if a man de-
cided to enlist, and were making his way to the Vic-
toria Barracks or the Hyde Park depot, he would
before reaching his destination, come across the case of
some other man who had been victimized for the part
he had played in the recent dispute, or meet some man
who was suffering from want of employment as the
result of a new order of things brought about by the
employing classes. Let me give an illustration. Shorty
after the war commenced, those who enlisted were p -
mised that on their return they would, if capable o
performing the work, be restored to the situations th t
they had left, and subsequently it was suggested that
among the aVenues of employment to returned men
attendance upon lifts would provide for a certain num
ber. Many men who were lift attendants abandoned
that work to go to the war. Afterwards a section o t e
community appeared in the Arbitration Court m Syd-
ney and Mr. David Hall, the present Attorney-General
of He State, pleaded on behalf of the employers for a
reduction of the award for lift attendants so that the
work of looking after lifts might be done by women at
27s a week. The Court agreed to that alteration and
to-day women are running the elevators of large firms
in whose yards recruiting meetings are held, while re-
turned soldiers are walking the streets without employ-
ment. These are facts of which the people know.
Mr. ORCHARD. —Many of the women who are
attending lifts arp soldiers’ widows.
Mr MORBY.—And do you expect to get recruits
by going to the Arbitration Court for the reduction of
the wages paid to lift attendants to take advantage of
to —ic position of the uddows of soldiersi who
have fallen? I have no desire “
the way of any woman gaming a livelihood, but 1 say
that for equal services equal remuneration s ™
given. Mr. Orchard’s, intersection makes the posit
worse than I thought it was.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —No returned soldier need
walk the streets. Employment wdl be found for >i .
and something to live on given until he can get
—I am prepared to admit that, the ad-
vanced scheme of repatriation will do . tmnend
to provide an escape from-the conditions that obtained
previously. I regret that an applica ion attendants
Court for a reduction of the wages of lift attendan a
so that the widows of soldiers might be employed
wages less than those received by 71 V n ’ _ y (
duties that they perforin are exact y ie
now to the proposals that have been submitted by Mr.
Tudor, which are the result of a meeting that we had
last night. I am not bound to do so; but I pledged
myself to those proposals. I say that unless we get a
guarantee from the Government that conscription has
been finally abandoned, it will be useless for me to
try to influence my people in New South Wales to take
an active part in recruiting. But the abandonment
of conscription is not everything. We have heard, oi
the de-registration of unions and of the registration
of other unions in their places. Ido not know that that
is a vital matter. I know of unions that care nothing
for this de-registration, and I am not sure that the
Federal and State Government will not find the cost
of their various Departments reaching so high a figure
that they will he forced before long to re-consider the
position. But there are matters that cannot escape
notice. Beyond any shadow of a doubt, the present
victimization must cease. Mr. Mr. Holman,
by interjection, have insisted that the men who are out
of work left their employment. They ask if wc expect
them to provide homes for those men. I should be mad
if I expected anything of the kind. During the dispute,
thousands of men came from the country to take the
places of those who were out, and I wish to know what
method, if any, was adopted when the strike was over
to persuade those so-called loyalists to don khaki and
fight for the country as they declared they had worked
for it. There are hundreds of members of the fcydney
Coal Lumpers Union who to-day are not permitted to
work. I could give you sworn affidavits from other
men who, owing to their economical condition and
the wants of their wives and families, have been forced
to work under assumed names, and to stoop to otfier
subterfuges to obtain employment. But whenever
these men are found out, an order is given for their dis-
charge. As recently as the 10th April a stevedore
received instructions to discharge .seven men who were
found to be members of the Sydney Coal Lumpers
Union. This order came through the Shipping Board,
which we are told is now carrying out the functions ot
the Coal Board. In the last analysis, it is the poor
who help the poor, and in Sydney to-day there are
in the Hocks’ area, women’s committees who, to assist
those who are suffering as the result of the recent
industrial upheaval, attend the markets at 5 o clock m
the morning, and get from Chinamen fruit and vege-
tables, which they push in hand carts to the Bocks, an
distribute among those who are m want. I ins ob-
tains at the present moment, when we are discussing
how to get a recruits. Unless this condition of things
is ended; it will not be possible to obtain any substan-
. tial number of recruits in New South Wales.
Senator MILLEN.— And if it is altered?
Mr. MORBY.—If it is, a new atmosphere will be
created.
Mr. BEEBY. —And you will then help us to get re-
cruits ?
‘ Mr. MORBY.—I say to you, “Do it,” and I will give
[ you my answer. .
" ' Mr BEEBY.—That is not a reply to my question.
1 Mr. MORBY.—We are asking that certain disabii-
, ities shall be removed.
1 Mr. BEEBY.—If they are removed, will you under-
’ take to support this movement? You dare not answer
my question. , ,
Mr MORBY.—There is nothing in the world that l
I dare not do. There are things which it would not pay
i me to do, but there is nothing that I dare not do. II
{ these disabilities are removed, and grievances remedied
. I say that, so far as my personal influence goes, lam m
? duty-bound to carry out the wishes of my organization
e Mr. BEEBY. —That is what I thought. You will
e have to get permission to do that.


Mr. MORBY.—I suppose I can compare my position
with yours, Mr. Beeby. You have to get permission
from your colleagues in the Cabinet before you can take
definite action on certain matters, and the only dif-
ference between our positions is that I have to obtain
permission from a larger number of colleagues than you
have. There is, however, another difference: I have to
make my living, working hard at the bench. lam not
here as a permanent official, but have to work hard for
my living, and could only afford my spare time for any
campaign.
Mr. BEEBY.—You must remember, though, that you
hold a responsible position in Sydney, and a word from
you in support of recruiting would mean a lot.
Mr. MORBY.—I admit that, and I reiterate that I
should be laughed at, and looked upon with scorn, if I
asked those people who have been suffering so much to
enlist while the present order of things continues.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But suppose those grievances were
removed, what, then, would be your personal attitude ?
Mr. MORBY.—You know, Mr. Holman, that when
you have a difficult question put up to you, you very
often desire notice in order that you may consult your
colleagues. And, just for the same reason, lam entitled
to ask for notice now. I want, however, to place my
views before this Conference, and my personal convic-
tion is that, under any circumstances, the authorities
will not get an extraordinary number of recruits from
the recruiting campaign. As an illustration of what I
mean, I remind the Conference that, on Good Friday,
there was a record crowd of 109,000 people at the Royal
Agricultural Show in Sydney, and, notwithstanding that
elaborate measures had been taken to obtain recruits,
when the signal was given for recruits to come forward,
only one man responded. To me that incident suggests
that the people of Australia have become war-weary.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Suppose the Allies also became war-
weary of protecting Australia, what, then, would be the
position ?
Mr. MORBY.—I will be quite frank with the Con-
ference, and say that a worse condition, under our bit-
terest enemy, could hardly exist than obtains at present
in some industrial circles in Australia.
Mr. BEEBY.—Do not talk nonsense like that.
Mr. MORBY.—I am not talking nonsense. lam
face to face with the facts.
Mr. PEAKE.—Do you think the women of Australia
would accept such an alternative?
Mr. MORBY.—It is not my alternative. I was
asked a question, and I have answered it. Ido not
want the Conference to understand, however, that I
prefer to be under German rule. Not at all. German
rule is no good to me. 1 have seen it in operation in
Germany.
Mr. BEEBY.—But do you suggest that it is as good
as the rule we have here in Australia ?
Mr. MORBY.—I never said so at all, and Ido not
thank any member of this Conference for putting words
like that into my mouth. I said, in reply to Mr. Hol-
man’s interjection, that whatever enemy took this coun-
try, with the same older of things existing to-day in cer-
tain sections of our industrial life, the conditions could
not be any worse. lamin a position to prove what I
say.
. Mr. HOLMAN.—But would you compare our posi-
tion with that of Belgium or the East End of London
after an air raid?
Mr. MORBY. I have said that I have no desire to
1 e under German rule, because I have seen it in opera-
tion.
M r - MOLMAN .—May I put a further question to
you? Great Britain has put over 14 per cent, of her
entire male population into the field. Why, if we have
become war weary, should we expect protection by Great!
Britain when we have put not more than 8 per cent*
of our population into the field ?
Mr. TUDOR.—More than 8 per cent, have gonei
from the mining fields.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But not from several other indus,r
trial centres.
Mr. MORBY.—So far as I can judge of the Aus|
tralian spirit, it is entirely different from the spirit}
of the people of Europe. Australians seem to be easjl
in nature, and governed by a disposition not to dd
anything against their will.
Senator FAIRBAIRN, —If we have German rulJ
they might be obliged to.
Mr. MORBT.—I am not so sure about that. if
should say, from what I know of the Australian, therj
would be something doing if anything like that were'
attempted.
Mr. IIOLMAN.—But do you think we could do any!
more than the Servians did ?Is there any race in the!
world to equal them for their fighting qualities. They!
came under German rule, and had to give up.
Mr. MORBY.—I want now to come to bedrock on*
the question of prosecutions under the War Precautions!
Act, which is of immense importance as affecting the!
recruiting movement. I realize, as much as anybody!
that it is absolutely necessary for a country when at}
war to have certain protective laws, but the War Prel
cautions Act has been so distorted in its purpose that
men have been and are suffering unjustly. The Act has!
been used for the conviction of men for the most trivial!
offences, and there is now a strong feeling of resent-}
ment against the Government among the Labour organi-l
zations of New South Wales. This feeling, like a snow!
ball, has gathered strength as the days passed by. It
has had a most important influence on the huge mining!
population of my State, and I remind the Conference}
that men drawn from that section of the community!
have rendered very valuable service indeed on the
fields of France. I believe, indeed, that the ai’thoritiesl
would be extremely glad to augment their particular!
battalion from the same class of men. A feeling of I
bitterness in regard to the War Precautions Act°ad-I
ministration rankles in the minds of Labour over the!
prosecutions of Cavanagh, Willis, Thompson, and!
Buckley. It is true that they were given their liberty}
because the jury disagreed, but the case cost us £2,429. |
The money was required to meet the costs of pro-}
secutions initiated by the Government as the result of I
the recent industrial crisis, and the men cannot get this!
fact out of their heads. Things like these are in thel
minds of organized Labour in New South Wales. 11
realize that Mr. Holman and Mr. Beeby can scarcely!
to-day pledge their Government to remedy those grie-|
vances; but I must repeat, without the suggestion of a I
threat, that until those grievances are remedied thel
hope of securing any particular strength of recruits ini
New South Wales will be very small.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—In spite of all these grie-1
vances, New. South Wales seems to be doing quite as I
well in recruiting as any other State just now.
Mr. MORBY.—It is up to the Federal and State Go-1
vernment to remedy these things which have been* sub-1
nutted, to them. I am opposed to the suggestion of a I
Committee, because I cannot see what good may result. I
Mr. PRITCHARD.—How otherwise could we come I
together ?
Mr. MORBY.—What I would prefer, as against the I
idea of a Committee, is that the whole business stand I
over so that representatives of the various State Go- |
vcrnments, along with those of the Federal Government [
here, may have a full opportunity of considering the |
proposals which we have placed before them. They |
could let us know on Monday what they are prepared |


to do We, m return, must men be in a position, with-
out hesitation, to sav wneiner we are prepared to indorse
and accept those offers or to turn them down.
Mr TUDOR. —Before the Conference adjourns, I
trust it will not be tnougnt that I am putting a proposal
to the Federal Government and State Premiers which
I should not put to tnem; nut surely they can meet at
some time between tins and Monday. They can confer,
iust as we have done, ana it they do not desire that the
results of their deliberations should be placed in the
official report, we could hold our meeting on Monday
without even tne snortnaiui reporters being present to
record what may be said.
Mr. PRITCHARD.— I have drafted a motion, which
might be altered to suit Mr. Tudor’s proposal. If it
should be deemed the Detter way, the proposal could be
taken rather as a sujegesuon than as a motion, or in the
form of an invitation, to the representatives of the
Federal Government and the State Premiers. It is to
the effect that a Sub-Committee consisting of the two
representatives ot the Commonwealth Government and
the Premiers of the several States be appointed to at
once confer on the subjects put forward by Mr. Tudor,
to endeavour to find a via media , and report to this
Conference.
Mr. ELMSLIK. —I support the suggestion as a sug-
gestion. There is no gening away from it; there are
two bodies here. One has come in a most frank and
open manner, saying wiiat it believes should be done
in order to secure harmonious relations. The time has
now arrived when me other section should state how
they view our proposals.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—The people who should confer
are those in whom the power reposes of doing something.
1 move that —
“ The two representatives ot the Commonwealth
Government and the Premiers of the several States
be invited to at once comer upon the subjects put
forward by Mr. T udor, with a view of endeavour-
ing to find a via media , and report thereafter to
this Conference”
Mr. ELMSLIE. —I am afraid I cannot second the
motion in that form.
Mr. WATSON.—Is it not rather unnecessary to
carry a resolution such as that? If representatives of
both sides were to get together as a committee, and
thrash out how far each could go in the direction of
unanimity, it would be a much better plan.
The PRESIDENT.—Do I understand you to sug-
gest the appointment of a Joint Committee?
Mr. WATSON.—That is my idea; hut the suggestion
has been made previously. I do not think that we shall
achieve anything by the two sides remaining aloof. -
Senator'FAlßßAlßN.—When do you suggest that
the Committee should meet?
Mr. WATSON.—If the proposition is agreeable to
the Con ference, I would say on Monday morning.
Mr. JELLEY.—I desire to support the suggestion of
Mr. Pritchard. My own side has put forward certain
proposals. T regard those proposals as the minimum
which we are prepared to accept. If the representa-
tives of the various State Governments and of the Com-
monwealth Government will consider them, and tell us
exactly the position which they take up in respect of
them, we shall obviate a good deal of by-play. We have
placed all our cards upon the table.
Senator MILLEN. —Except one.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I do not think that you have
lost much by doing it.
Mr. TELLEY--There is not one proposal amongst
those which have been set forth by this side of the Con-
ference which cannot be acceded to. If we have reached
the stage in our history when we believe the Empue is
in danger, and there is anything which can he done to
assist it, we ought to be prepared 10 do it, I therefore
have v ,iy great picasure in suDDortine the motion.
Mr. LEE. —So far as tne sutr&rtmion lor a lomt Con-
ference of both parties is conceriiea. i ao not think it
will ca v iy us very much more lorwartl tiian we are. I
quite recogoise that the representatives of the Labour
side havu put their cards upon the table, and have told
us very distinctly what they want. As the Premier of
one of the States, I am not disposed to approach this
question from the bargaining stand-point: but I believe
that it would be a gopd thing lor umj representatives of
the Federal and of some of the State Governments to
get together
~ A MEMBER.—Why not say all the States?
Mr. LEE. —I purposely leave out Mr. Ryan, because
1 recognise that he is associated with the other party
and represents their views.
Mr RYAN. —I am willing to concede all the requests
they make.
Mr. LEE.—My desire is that we snouia get together
and very freely and frankly discuss this question. As a
State Premier, I do not know all that is in the mind of
the Federal Government. To a certain extent, I resent
the fact that we are not taken into the confidence of
Federal Ministers as fully as we ought to be. We have
met here to consider a very important issue, and, before
anything further is done, I think that both Federal and
State Ministers should get together and discuss the
question very fully and frankly. We should then be able
to debate it in open conference afterwards.
Mr. TUDOR. —The Conference need not carry a
motion for that purpose. Representatives of the State
ai d Federal Governments can confer amongst them-
selves.
Mr. LEE. —1 am quite aware of that. I hope that
Federal Ministers will extend that invitation to State
Ministers, and to the representatives of other interests
if they deem it necessary to do. so.
Mr. HOLMAN".—I agree with the greater part of
what Mr. Lee has said; but I want to impress one thing
upon Mr. Pritchard and Mr. Tudor. A suggestion has
been made that the responsible heads of the various
Governments of Australia should either meet or, even
without a meeting, individually consider how far they
can do certain things. What are those things? How far
can they modify the deliberately adopted policy for
which they at present stand ? The Government of New
South Wales, and, no doubt, the Government of West-
ern Australia and the Commonwealth Government
have, rightly or wrongly, up to the present moment,
on the best information available to them! taken up a
certain attitude. Mr. Tudor has suggested that that
attitude should be modified. Clearly, when a Govern-
ment is asked to modify its attitude, it must have
some reason for doing so. A very good reason is
that if certain modifications were made some tangible
support would be given to our armies in the field _ which
is lacking at present. That is the only reason which can
justify us in abandoning our own deliberately-adopted
attitude. That is why I support the proposal of Mr.
Pritchard. Let us appoint a sub-committee of four or
five members from either side of the Conference. I
understand that the Governments of Victoria, New
South Wales, and Western Australia are those affected.
The Government of Queensland, of course, stands high
and spotless above all other Governments at present.
The Governments of Tasmania and South Australia
have apparently, more by the mercy of God than any
inherent virtue, escaped. I suggest that representatives
of the Governments which I have mentioned, and of
the Commonwealth Government, together with three or
four gentlemen who represent what I may call the
critical faculty, should meet together and talk the
matter over. There has been absolutely no grievance


enumerated as affecting our Government which we are
not prepared to remove if it is worth while to remove
it. But there must be some visible result forthcoming.
That is the object of it. Perhaps the members of the
Conference would rather think the suggestion over until
Monday, and, if so, it would pay the Conference well
to adjourn. Consequently I suggest that we should not
carry any motion at the present moment, but should re-
consider the matter on Monday morning.
The PRESIDENT. —I have listened to the debate
attentively, and I ask you, gentlemen, to get together in
some way in order that the Conference may achieve
good results. I am afraid things have been said to-day
which are not calculated to have that effect. This is a
matter of the utmost importance to the whole Empire.
The eyes of the world are upon us, because the issue
before us is the most momentous that the race has ever
faced. Therefore, think the matter over until Mon-
day, and then come along and say in an entirely friendly
way “ that if Mr. Tudor, Mr. Ryan, Mr. Morby, and
~ representatives of the Commonwealth and State Govern-
ments were to talk this matter over quietly amongst
themselves we should be more likely to bring about satis-
factory results.”
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—It has been said that the
employers’ representatives had been keeping silent.
That was not our intention. The fact is that we have
not been able to get in a word edgeways. I desire to
say, after discussion with my co-employers, that if the
representatives of the Government and the Labour
bodies come together and arrive at any agreement,
there will not be so far as I can see any trouble with
the Employers’ Federation. At present the great dis-
pute appears to be between the Governments and the
labour organizations.
Mr. TUDOR. —There are others. The steam-ship
owners have not been very fair in their dealings with
the men.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—You cannot cavil at any
action taken by the employers’ organizations officially,
and as to what may have been done unofficially we shall
do our best to put things right.
7 be C>< «/ .ence adjourned until Monday at 10 a.m.


THIRD DAY.
MONDAY, 15tii APRIL, 1018.
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
The Right Honorable Wm. M. Hughes, Prime Minister.
The Right Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister fof the Navy. _
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Millen, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
Senator the Honorable Albert Gardiner. . .
The Honorable Richard Beaumont Orchard, Minister for Recruiting.
President, Central Council of Employers, Senator G. Fairbairn.
Director-General of Recruiting, The Honorable Donald Mackinnon.
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey).
Employers’ Federation (Honorable William Brooks, M.L.C.), Presiden .
National Federation (Honorable J. C. Watson, representing).
President New South Wales Labour Party (Mr Lambert). . .
National Association of New South Wales (Honorable G. S. Beeby, M.L.A., represen mg).
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Elmslie.
President, Employers’ Federation, (Mr. E. E. Keep).
President, United National Federation (Senator Wm. Plain).
General Secretary, United National Federation (Honorable J. Hume Cook).
President, Victorian Branch Australian Labour Party (J. H. Scullin).
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan.
Leader of the Opposition (Mr. E. H. Macartney).
Employers’ Federation (Mr. P. Berry, of Melbourne, representing). -
National Political Council (Mr. G. H. Pritchard), President. __ _ _ _ ~ ~
Queensland Central Political Executive (Honorable W. H. Demaine, M.L.C., President).
South Australia.
Premier, Honorable A. H. Peake.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
President, Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. H. Bake well).
South Australian National Party (Mr. R. P. Blundell, representing).
South Australian Branch, A.L.P. (Mr. F. W. Lundie, representing).
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. D. Williams).
Western Australia.
Premier, Honorable H. B. Lefroy.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable P. Collier.
Employers’ Federation (Mr. Alexander McNeil), President. >
President, West Australian A.L.F. (Mr. P. O’Loughlin), Political.
Federation of Labour (Mr. A. McCallum, representmg), Industrial.
National Labour Party and Federal Council National Labour Party, Mr. <3. W. J. Commino
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyons.


Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—On Saturday evening the
desire was generally expressed that there should be
some Committee consideration of the proposals which
had been set forth by a section of the Conference, with
a. view to seeing how far the requirements of that sec-
tion could be met by the other section. It is a pity
that there should be sections in a Conference of this
kind, but so it is. Having considered this matter
during the week-end, we have come to the view that the
proposal is reasonable, and I therefore suggest that this
morning should be occupied in the consideration by a
Committee, consisting of members of the Common-
wealth Government and of the Premiers of the States,
after which we shall be in a better position to get to
close quarters.
Mr. RYxlN.—You do not suggest, I suppose, that
the Premier of Queensland should be a member of the
Committee.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—The honorable member
himself must answer that question. I understand he
assisted materially in the preparation of the very intel-
ligent set of propositions placed before us by the other
section of this Conference. Far be it from me to wish
to place any prohibition upon him; under the circum-
stances it is for him to consider what his attitude
should be. Perhaps it would meet the circumstances
were the President to leave the chair until 2.30 p.ra.
Mr. MORBY.—WiII the morning provide sufficient
time for the consideration to which the honorable
member has referred?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—The Censorship Confer-
ence meets to-day for the first time, and, in view of
that and other business that has to be undertaken, I
think that the Conference should resume at the hour
that I have mentioned.
Senator FAIRBATRN.—WouId it save time to any
extent if, in addition to the Committee meeting sug-
gested by Mr. Joseph Cook, the representatives of the
employers and employees’ organizations also met in
Committee? My own opinion is that the crux of the
position is an agreement by the Commonwealth and
State Ministers with the party led by Mr. Tudor. Such
nn agreement is almost a condition precedent to action
by either the employers or employees’ representatives.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I do not think that we
should at the present time gain anything by the adop-
tion of that suggestion.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I do not think that we
should.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—The representatives of the
Governments of the Commonwealth and the States
having considered the proposals that have been sub-
mitted, a. way should be open for the whole Conference
to deal with them. Ido not see that we can get finality
until we have come together and threshed out the
points of difference.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—That is my own view. I
mentioned the matter of a second Committee in order
that the Conference might, if it thought fit, express an
opinion upon it.
The Conference adjourned until 2.30 p.m., and
having resumed,
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—This morning, conformable
to the arrangement made here, a conference took place
between the Prime Minister and some of the State
Premiers. After discussing the situation and the list
of propositions that have been submitted to us by Mr.
Tudor, we think there would be everything to be gained
and nothing to be lost by a Committee discussion repre-
senting both sides of this question. The suggestion I
have to make is that Mr. Tudor and his friends should
nominate, say, seven of their number to meet a similar
number on the other side so that we may get at close
quarters with the propositions made and learn wliethr
some via media cannot be found. We could then mee
here to-morrow morning, or at any time desired by th
Conference, and report the result. I this" pro
position believing that great good will come out of it.
Mr. TUDOR.—We have put our proposition on th
table. Have the State Premiers and the Common
wealth Government any propositions to submit?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Yes; a similar set of proposi
tions will be laid upon the table the moment the pro
posed committee meets. The Prime Minister is nov
en £ a o e d in drafting a set of proposals to put befor
that committee.
Mr. LTJNDIE.—We are here to do business. Win
not submit them here?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—It is for my friends to sai
what they will do in regard to the suggestion, which ]
think first came from the other side.
Mr. TUDOR.—No, the suggestion came, in the frs
place, from Mr. Lawson, Premier of Victoria.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Well then, it was supported
by Mr. Tudor and his friends.
Mr. TUDOR.—No.
Senator GARDINER.—I supported it, but only as
an individual.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I make this proposition, and
sincerely hope my friends will agree to it. We shall
then get to close quarters. The resolutions arrived al
will be reported to the general Conference, and the
whole matter will then, as now, be open for considera-
tion.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I submit that the suggested action
would be unprecedented in connexion with a confer-
ence of this character. We have been summoned here
as representatives of all the conflicting sections of this
community, and I do not think there has ever assembled
in Australia a more representative conference. It is
not an unwieldy one; having regard to the interests it
represents it is remarkably small. We met last Friday
and found there was nothing to place before us except a
motion which its sponsors said meant nothing and had
only to be carried to be put out of the way. We, on
this side, were then asked to place before the Conference
our own views. That was the request made to us,
although we are not in power and do not represent
either the Federal or a State Government. We agreed
to it, however, and put forward our views in earnest.
I venture to say that the whole object of this Confer-
ence has been misconceived by our friends on the other
side. For example, when Mr. Tudor was speaking on
Saturday morning, he was asked by some one on the
other side, “ Are you asking us to bargain with you as
to whether you and the interests you represent are
going to assist in securing enlistments ? ” Mr. Holman
subsequently asked a question indicating that he wa:
prepared to bargain. That is an entire misconception
of the purpose of this Conference. We are not here
to indulge in bargaining or huckstering. The question
involved is far too serious for anvthing of the kind!
We have placed before the Conference clearly and
flankly the views we hold; but we are not here to
bargain. It would be absolutely wrong to enter into
any bargain on such a question as this. What is more,
we have no power to make a. bargain. We have been
summoned from all parts of Australia, and, after a few
minutes discussion as representatives of the organized
labour of this country, we have stated our views. We
were summoned here to meet the Governments and
employers of Australia, because it is known that there
is a lack of harmony. The Government summoned us ]
Mr. TUDOR.—Not the Government. Had it been
a Conference summoned by the Government, I would
not have attended it. T attended it simply because it
was called by the Governor-General.


Mr SCULLIN. —I can only say that the Governor-
General has done nothing in Australia without the
advice of his responsible Ministers. Before Mr. Cook
•md his colleagues ask us to appoint a Committee to
meet in secret conclave, the proceedings of which will
not be reported, they should declare in open Conference
what their proposals are, and let us have a discussion
upon them. That having been done, we could then con-
sider the appointment of a sub-Committee on details.
That is the usual procedure. The proposal now made
!tous is not frank. There is a lack of candour about it.
I Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Do not say that.
Mr. SCULLIN. —I say it because T think it.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.*—You have no right to.
The PRESIDENT. — To say that there is a want of
candour will not help us to arrive at the harmony we
f I j dosir6.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Let me make my statement in my
own way.
The PRESIDENT. —So long as it does not defeat the
; object for which we have met.
Mr. SCULLIN. —I submit that our object is to se-
cure harmony outside, even at the risk of discord here.
If our only object is to secure harmony here, then we
might as well move a vote of thanks to each other, shake
hands all round, sing “ For lie’s a jolly good fellow,”
and go home. We have a serious position to face. We
cannot expect the people whom we represent to come
together and arrive at harmonious relations merely be-
■ cause we here work in harmony. However, I am
not going to indulge in recriminations; it would be idle
to do so. My earnest desire is that the Conference shall
get to close quarters. If we hope to arrive at any result
vve must be frank. Let us say what is in our minds.
It matters not whether we come into conflict ourselves
so long as we secure harmony amongst those whom we
represent. I would ask the other side to put before the
open Conference any propositions they have to make.
We will then discuss them frankly, and, I hope, fear-
lessly, and, if necessary, later on we can appoint a Com-
mittee to go into details. I emphasize the point that I
; am not here to bargain, for the simple reason that I have
no power, and believe that it would be wrong to enter
into any bargain.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You have power over your own
’ personal activities.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Yes; but we have no power, and
1 no right, to bargain. Discussing the question for which
j we have met, let me say that we all know that recruit-
! ing in this country has fallen off. It has been recog-
nised by the Government that throughout Australia
there is discord, and that the conflicting sections are, to
a large extent, at enmity with one another, at a time
when there ought to be no such feeling. I am pre-
| pared to give every man credit for sincerity until I
| have reason to think otherwise, and I ask the members
lof the Conference to do the same. I earnestly desire to
see Australia return to those days of harmony that
| characterized the early years of this war. If any pro-
feosions are necessary—and having regard to what we
have heard again and again about pro-Germans, it
would seem that they are —let me say at once that I do
| uot wish to see a German victory or a German peace.
I believe a German peace would mean a German
victory, and that a German victory would be a victory
for militarism, which would be a curse to civilization
and Democracy. I desire no triumph for militarism
!in any country. That is one reason why I opposed
conscription so bitterly and fiercely as I did on the
last conscription campaign. I want peace, but I do
not want a German peace or a German victory. We
are here to frankly and openly give the Conference the
■benefit of our knowledge of the men we represent, to
express to the Conference, as far as we can, the feelings
entertained by those men. We have endeavoured to
express them in the list of obstacles to the harmony we
desire, which was put forward by Mr, Tudor. We can
do no more. We can only tell you what is in our
minds. For nearly three days we have been in con-
ference, but we have not yet learned what is in the
minds of our friends on the other side. We have not
had from one of them a concrete suggestion. We have
had from them nothing further than the promise, “We
will consider,” or “We will re-adjust.” We want
action. I hope that I shall not be regarded as offensive
when I say that anything short of action will not
satisfy the people we represent. There have been
already too many assurances, and too many pledges
that have not been worth the breath expended on them,
or the ink used in their signing. If the other side aie
in earnest —and I give them credit for being sincere-
in the desire to see a restoration of that harmony which
existed throughout the first year of the war, then let
them retrace their own steps and undo the things
which gave rise to the discord.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Both sides.
Mr. SCULLIN.—We represent that class of the
community from which 80 per cent, of Australia's
soldiers must come, and from which 80 per cent, of
those already enlisted have been drawn. Notwith-
standing that fact, that section of the community has
been treated by the Federal Government of the da;,
and by the employers of Australia, in such a way that
the onus is upon that Government, and upon the
employers, to remove the existing obstacles to
harmony. Let them do that, and we shall have
harmony. There are other questions, also, to be con-
sidered. Let us see if we cannot arrive at a decision
as to what is responsible for the falling-off in recruiting.
It has been said that 'the well is running dry. That
is true, and for it no one is responsible. It is also true
that there is in this community a feeling that we are
asked to drain Australia of her last man, while other
parts of the world are holding back. '
Mr. PEAKE. —That was promised on your behalf by
Mr. Fisher.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I am not concerned with what Mr.
Fisher promised.
Mr. PEAKE.—But he was your leader.
Mr. SCULLIN.—The promise made by Mr. Fisher was
one of those rhetorical phrases that are sometimes in-
dulged in at ejection time even by the honorable gentle-
man himself. -If Mr. Peake’s interjection infers that
Australia has not done her duty in this war, I give
it an emphatic denial. I hold that she has, and that,
compared with other Allies, she has done more than
her part in this war.
Mr. HOLMAN. —What other Ally, for instance?
Mr. SCULLIN. —America, for example. She has
been in this war for twelve months
Mr. HOLMAN. —America has carried conscription.
Mr. SCULLIN. —America has been twelve months
in the war, and what has she done ? Before she had
equalled the performance of Australia, she would, in
proportion to her population, have to send an army oi
7,000,000 men to France.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Nothing like that; about
5,000,000.
Mr. SCULLlN.—Further, tjiere is a growing feel-
ing that we have not been frank in regard to our war
aims.
Mr. HOLMAN. —What about the other Allies?
Mr. SCULLIN. —I am not going to allow you, Mr.
Holman, to interrupt my speech as you do the speeches
of other delegates. I ask the President to say that
you will have an opportunity of answering me after-
wards.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I do not want to answer you.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Then do not interrupt me. I am
not in the witness box for you to cross examine me,
and I ask you not to interrupt.


Mr. HOLMAN.—Do not run away from your state-
ment. Tell us to which Allies you refer.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I am not here to debate that as-
pect of the question at all. I am merely running
through some of the causes of the lack of harmony
which are in the minds of a large section of the people.
There is also in this country a growing feeling that we
might well have stated our whole aims long ago —that
we should have made it quite clear to the world that
we are not fighting for territory for anybody, hut that
we are fighting the battle of liberty, of freedom, and
of democracy. That should have been made very clear
from the beginning.
Mr. PEAKE.—It has been made clear.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I quite agree that the speech re-
cently made by Mr. Lloyd George was a good one, but
there is a general feeling abroad, and one not without
warrant, that it was made twelve months too late. Had
it been made earlier in the war we should have had
peace to-day. The Paris Conference was one of the
worst things that has happened, so far as we are con-
cerned. I repeat that there is a growing feeling in the
community that this dreadful carnage could have been
ended, favorably to us, by negotiation, without our
being; asked to drain ourselves of our last man in order
to win back for France Alsace-Lorraine, which we
tolerated being in the possession of Germany for fifty
years, and the return of which should be the subject
of negotiation without the spilling of a drop of blood.
I come now to the concrete proposals put forward by
Mr. ludor. I have no desire to lay the whole of the
responsibility for the position of recruiting in this coun-
try to-day upon our opponents. But the grievances
ventilated by Mr. Tudor most certainly constitute one
factor in the sum, and a factor which can be removed.
We did not submit them to the Conference in a spirit
of huckstering and bargaining, but we say that conscrip-
tion, military and economic, is the one thing which
has done more to promote discord than has anything
else.
The PRESIDENT.—Pardon me for interrupting
you, Mr. Scullin. How do you say we can arrive at
the exact meaning of Mr. Tudor’s statement without
coming to it and discussing it? Do you suggest, for
example, that we should say in reference to certain of
his proposals, “We agree to this and to that, but
disagree with that?” Is that your idea, or should we
say, “We will take the lot, and thus settle it ? ” With
all due respect to Mr. Tudor’s proposals there are quite
a number of matters outside of them which ought to
be discussed.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I would suggest that if you, sir,
are going to follow that line of conduct you ought to get
out of the chair and do it. I represent 100,000 organ-
ized workers in this State, and I have a right to put
their views before the Conference.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Hear, hear; and I would
suggest that you should do it respectfully.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I will. I have the greatest respect
for the gentleman who occupies the chair. He is one
of the very few men holding different views of politics
from those which I entertain who, in regard to con-
scription, has acted throughout in an absolutely im-
partial way. But I submit that I have a right to put
my case in my own way.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—But you have no right to
ask the President to get out of the chair for all that.
Mr. SCULLIN. —The President was debating the
question.
The PRESIDENT.—I was merely making a sug-
gestion, because I would like to see the thing come to
a head quickly.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I would have got along more
quickly if I had not been interrupted.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I rise to a point of order.
Immediately the Conference re-assembled I rose and
made a suggestion. I should like to know exactly
where the Conference is in regard to that suggestion.
Are we to understand that Mr. Scullin, on behalf of
other members here, has brushed it aside?
Mr. TUDOR.—I ask Mr. Cook to put the results of
the discussion which took place this morning between
the State Premiers and the Federal Government on the
table of this Conference in the same way that we
put our proposals there.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—If that is your opinion, the
next thing for you to do is to tell us that you refuse to
go into the proposed committee appointed from both
sides.
Mr. TUDOR.—I have not said that.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Mr. Scullin jumped in im-
mediately I sat down, and, apparently, brushed the
suggestion I made off the board. I would remind him
that he may do that with the 100,000 people whom he
represents, but I hope he is not going to do it with this
Conference.
The PRESIDENT.—I understood Mr. Scullin’s
arguments to relate to the question of whether the sug-
gestion made by Mr. Cook should not be referred to a
joint committee.
Mr. STOREY.—I would like to know the position
into which we have got in regard to the discussion of
the proposals put forward by Mr. Tudor. Mr. Cook
has intimated that the other side have no answer to
make to those proposals, but has suggested that repre-
sentatives from our side should meet representatives
from his own side in conference. Is that an indica-
tion that any one of these proposals is likely to be
accepted ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—We think so.
Mr. STOREY. —The President has intimated by in-
terjection that some of them are of a controversial
character, which might be dealt with in this Confer-
ence. Would it not be wise to let us know those upon
which we can agree, and to allow the balance to become
the subject of negotiation? I would like to know the
precise position. I would like to know what are the
proposals in respect of which Mr. Cook desires to meet
representatives from our side.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Apparently Mr. Scullin has over-
looked one fact, and you, Mr. President, have also over-
looked it. It is that we adjourned this morning in
order that a meeting might be held between the State
Premiers and the Commonwealth Government, with a
view to submitting a report to this Conference. Surely
Mr. Scullin will not claim that he is entitled to continue
the general debate until the report of that committee
has been dealt with.
r - TUDOR. It has not yet been put before us.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes; Mr. Cook submitted it, and
suggested that a committee from both sides should be
appointed to deal with the proposals. Mr. Scullin
however, resumed the interrupted debate on the main
question before the situation which arose this morning
had been dealt with. Mr. Cook's proposal should be
either adopted or amended.
Mr. JELLEY.—Mr. Scullin objected to Mr. Cook’s
proposal and then proceeded to debate the question
Mr. HOLMAN.—He should not have been allowed
to do that. 1 have been wondering when Mr. Scullin
was going to make his remarks relevant to the business
that is m hand.
. TUDOR. While Mr. Cook was speaking I
interjected that, on behalf of the gentlemen upon this
side of the Conference, I had submitted certain griev-
ances which we believed stand in the way of the re-
storation of harmony. Now I think the Premiers of
the various States and the Commonwealth Government
should place before the Conference their answers to


those grievances. I certainly understood Mr. Cook to
say that he was quite willing that replies to those griev-
ances should be presented. .
Mr. RYAN.—Did he not say that the Prime Minister
was now engaged in preparing replies ? .
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I said that the Prime Min-
ister was preparing a basis for the discussion. If my
friends opposite are not in favour of the proposed joint
committee, that will be an end of the matter.
Mr TUDOR. —Until we have replies from the State
Premiers and the Commonwealth Government to the
list of grievances which I presented on behali ot this
side, I take it that we cannot properly proceed.
Mr SCULLIN. —I take it that Mr. Cook came to
this Conference with the replies of the Committee.
Mr Tudor asked him whether he would place those
suggestions on the table of the Conference, as we placed
our suggestions there? His reply was, Yes. The
Prime Minister is now drafting them. I then pro-
ceeded to resume the debate, pending their preparation.
Mr JOSEPH COOK. —I said that the suggestion
of the Committee, which met this morning, was that
the other side should appoint seven representatives to
meet a similar number from our side, and that the
Prime Minister was now engaged in making a dralt
for submission to that joint Committee.
Mr SCULLIN.—Do you say that we should ap-
point representatives to meet representatives from your
side before your replies to the grievances submitted by
Mr Tudor have been placed before us ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—That was the suggestion.
If you think it wrong, say so. .
Mr SCULLIN.—I certainly do think it wrong.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Did this Conference ask you
to submit such proposals?
Mr. SCULLIN—Yes; Senator Millen asked us.
The PRESIDENT.—The point of order has been
raised that Mr. Scullin should not debate this matter
in the way that he has been doing. As I understand
the position, he objected to the proposal to submit
this matter to a joint Committee. I understand that
he was attempting to adduce reasons for his objections,
and I think he is entitled to do that. .
Mr. SCULLIN. —I want to be fair to the Confer-
Cn Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—If my friends simply say
that they are opposed to the course which I have sug-
gested there is an end to it.
Mr. McCALLUM.—You are asking us to appoint a
Committee to deal with something of which we know
nothing. , , , ,
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I see your point, and I take
it that you all object to that course.
Mr. RYAN. —We desire to see your proposals on the
table first. , r t
Mr. LEE. As one who attended the Conference ol
Premiers this morning I wish to explain that the
the position we arrived at was that whilst we
had Mr. Tudor’s proposals before us, they were
of a very general character, and it was felt that it
we appointed a Joint Committee such as has been
suggested, we might get down to actual details, arrive
at conclusions on those details, and thus be in a better
position to discuss them. If the representatives so ap-
pointed could narrow down the points at issue, they
could bring to this open Conference a proposal upon
which it is more likely that we would arrive at finality
than by Conference continuing the open discussion at
this stage That is how I understand the position. I
think it would be helpful if an equal number of repre-
sentatives were appointed from each side to discuss m
detail the matters referred to, and see how far, and to
yhat extent, a compromise may be arrived at. lake,
for instance, the request with regard to the War Pre-
cautions Regulations. I presume it is desired not that
the whole of them, but that particular regulations
should he repealed.
Mr. RYAN. —We do not ask for the repeal of all
the regulations.
Mr. LEE. —Then I think that discussion by a small
committee could arrive at a decision as to what par-
ticular regulations should he dealt with, and so arrive
at a basis for compromise. The Government might
say that certain regulations were vital, while members
of the Opposition—if I might so term members repre-
senting the opposing view—might urge that they were
not vital; but the issue could thus be narrowed down,
and the committee would probably arrive at a solution
of the difficulties much more quickly than would be
possible in a big Conference such as is now assembled.
I want to assure the members of the Conference that at
the meeting of the representatives of the various Go-
vernments this morning there was no desire to take any
undue advantage of those representing the other side,
but it was felt that it would be possible to arrive at a
definite basis for final settlement by considering in com-
mittee the questions that have been raised. That was
the sole object we had in view, and I really believe that
members of the Conference would be well advised to
agree to the suggestion, so that we may get down to
definite facts upon which there may be differences of
opinion.
Mr. RYAN. —May I ask if you are prepared to re-
peal some of the War Precautions Act Regulations?
Mr. LEE. —I am not in a position to speak on behalf
of the Federal Government, but I believe that each
Government
Mr. RYAN. —It would be necessary that we should
know that much, at all events.
Mr. LEE. —I can say, in answer to Mr. Ryan, that
the feeling this morning was that we should meet, as
far as possible, the views of those gentlemen who,
through Mr. Tudor, have placed their proposals before
the Conference, and I venture to say the Conference
would lose nothing by agreeing to the appointment of
the proposed committee. I might add that I am
in agreement with many of the matters put forward,
and I think if we could define the particular matters
objected to, some good would result.
Mr. TUDOR.—The regulations to create this fric-
tion in the community should never have been passed.
Mr. JELLEY.—It seems to me that the representa-
tives of the various Governments should view the mat-
ter in the same spirit that Mr. Lee has shown. If w"-
had an assurance from his colleagues in Conference a>-
to what they intend to do when we discuss the pro-
posals seriatim, there would be some prospect of agree-
ment by the Conference. At present we do not know
what is in the minds of Ministers representing the
Federal Government and the States, and I, for one,
think we ought not to agree to the appointment of a
committee until we get some information on that point.
Mr. BEEBY.—How is it possible for us to deal with
these' matters except by the appointment of a com-
mittee for their discussion ? Take, for instance, proposals
affecting the New South Wales Government. It has
already been stated by Mr. Holman that there as not
any shadow of a doubt that we can go a long way to
meet the views of delegates to bring about harmony, but
that is a particular matter which can best be settled m
committee after detailed discussion. I am sure the
members do not for a moment contend that the type-
written proposals submitted by Mr. Tudor must be ac-
cepted absolutely—that they have not taken up a staud-
and-deliver attitude on these matters.. It seems to me
that these are matters for compromise. Take as au


illustration the question of deregistered unions, and the
registration of certain new unions. It may not be pos-
sible to meet literally the views of members represent-
ing those sections of the community, but it may be pos-
sible, by detailed discussion in committee, to arrive at
a basis of compromise. Take, again, the War Precau-
tions Regulations. How 7 is it possible for this Confer-
ence to give any undertaking in respect to them until
those members wdio object to the regulations put before
the representatives of the Governments particulars of
the regulations to which objection is taken. When this
is done, and discussion takes place, we may be able to
ascertain wdiether or not compromise is possible, and
perhaps the representatives of the Governments may be
able to convince other delegates that certain regulations,
in some modified form, are essential. Everything will
depend upon committee discussion on these various
matters. I can assure the Conference that there, was a
desire on the part of the Government representatives
to reconsider these matters, but it v 7 as thought that a
common-sense way out of the difficulty would be to con-
sider them in committee, and then come back to open
Conference.
Air. TUDOR.—Last year about 340 new regulations
were made, and all I can say is that if any officials have
details of all these regulations at their fingers’ ends
they are marvels.
Air. HOLAIAN. —But you know which regulations
you object to.
Mr. STOREY. —AVe object to a number of regula-
tions, among them those limiting freedom of speech.
But we do not know 7 what particular regulations deal
with all the matters we object to. We do know,
however, that Mr. Hughes has said that he has powers
greater than those contained in Alagna Charta. How
can w 7 e define the regulations which cover all these
powers ?
Mr. BEEBY.—There may be differences of opinion
as to whether a particular regulation does really inter-
fere with freedom of speech, but I ask the dele-
gates what greater assurance can possibly be given
than the statement that the representatives of the
Federal Government want to discuss these matters in
detail? AVe cannot in open conference undertake to do
any of the things set out in the detailed list. These
are matters for discussion, as suggested, for the purpose
of arriving at a compromise, if possible.
Air. RYAN. —A compromise on what?
AIi 7 . PRITCHARD. —On points of view.
Air. SCULLIN. —AVe have told you what things are
necessary according to our views.
Air. AIORBY. —Are we to understand that the terms
now being drawn up by the Prime Minister will be the
counter proposals to those submitted by Air. Tudor on
our behalf? If that is so, would it not be better to
await their submission to the Conference. Afterwards
we may determine whether they are of sufficient value
to justify the appointment of a Committee to give them
consideration.
Air. BEEBY. —I do not know what the Federal Go-
vernment propose to do, but I do not see how it is
possible to submit counter proposals.
Mr. PRITCHARD. —That matter is a basis for dis-
cussion.
Air. BEEBY. —I can only speak of matters of which
I have some personal knowledge, and with which I
have some personal concern. AVith Air. Holman, who
spoke on behalf of my Government, I do not believe
that the breach on New 7 South AVales matters is one
that cannot be healed, but these and other questions now
before the Conference can only be settled by reasonable
and friendly discussion in Committee on the actual
details. I do not want to dolay the Conference, but I
urge that this is the only sane way in which we can
get down to a definite basis of agreement.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I might say, in reply to an
interjection by Mr. Morby, that the Prime Minister
is on his way to the Conference.
Mr. SCULLIN. —I have no desire to proceed with
my remarks, and I suggest that we should wait until
the Prime Minister has placed his views before the
Conference. We can then proceed to discuss the mat-
ter, and come to a decision.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I understand that Mr.
Cook has made the suggestion that a Committee, of an
equal number of representatives from each side, be ap-
pointed to look more closely into the proposals sub-
mitted by Mr. Tudor. Those proposals are very vague,
and, I think, are difficult to understand. The adoption
of Mr. Cook’s suggestion might save the Conference a lot
of time, and good should result, provided we can get
some understanding from the Labour representatives
that they will, to some extent, fall in with the recom-
mendation from the Committee. If they will not give
an undertaking
Mr. TUDOR.—Do you say that the decision of the
Committee will be binding on any one ?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—If the report of the Com-
mittee is to be open for the discussion of each proposal
seriatim, I should say we will be here for six months
at any rate. In such circumstances I can see no end
to the discussion. Mr. Scullin was going along at a
furious pace a little while ago, using exactly the same
arguments that we have heard all through the Confer-
ence . We have heard Labour representatives after
Labour representatives speaking; the representatives
of the employers have hardly said a word at all. The
great majority of the discussion nas come from the
other side. I only want to -get some finality, and I
would like to have some assurance in regard to sug-
gestions from the Committee that our friends on
the Labour side would give mem serious consideration,
so that we would not have to go over the whole matter
again.
Senator GARDINER.—The suggeation for the ap-
pointment of a Committee Drings anout a peculiar situa-
tion. Mr. Tudor, on behalf of our party, nas put certain
proposals before the Conference, and I understand from
Air. Beeby, and other speakers, mat there is a desire
011 the part of those representing the other classes
in the community to meet mose proposals. But
we have nothing before us to show tne direction in which
they are prepared to meet those proposals or the direc-
tion which any alterations of them are intended to take.
Having discussed one set of proposals and agreed to
them, how can we appoint a committee of seven to con-
fer, and, if need be, to compromise on matters that
have never been before us ? Let me tell Mr. Cook and
Mr. Holman, as one who has favoured irom the begin-
ning the committee proposal, what the position really
is. There is one set of proposals beiore us, and evi-
dently there is in Mr. Cook’s and Mr. Holman’s minds
a desire to try to meet us on those proposals. They
ask us to appoint a committee oi seven so' that some
compromise may be arrived at, out we cannot appoint
individuals on a committee of that kind without having
some indication irom those gentlemen as to tlje accept-
ance, rejection, or alteration of our proposals. There is
no need for the Conference to stumble over a little
matter of that kind. It is simply necessary for the
representatives of the Government to say, “ We cannot
accept your proposals, but we think that if a committee
is appointed we may be able to do so and so.” Then
there would be no difficulty in the way. Let Air.
Cook and Mr. Holman put another set of proposals
before us, and when those have been thrashed out I
shall certainly support the appointment of a committee.


Mr. HOLMAN. —I take it that we are here as a
body of men considering the great national problem how
to deal with the failure of recruiting. Ido not imagine
that any member has come here to achieve any other end.
We have come here to find a method of increasing the
volume of recruiting. Certain gentlemen with a very
special representative knowledge of the opinion of cer-
tion sections of the community have told us, “ One of
the difficulties in the way of recruiting is this series
of industrial troubles.” It was proposed that the re-
presentatives of the Governments should meet and con-
sider what could be done to minimize those industrial
troubles. We did meet and consider them at the Con-
ference of Premiers this morning. We come back to
the Conference and say to it, through Mr. Cook, “ \\ e
could carry on our deliberations very much more profit-
ably if seven of the gentlemen who have brought for-
ward these proposals could join us in order that we may
discuss them in detail.” Surely that is a reasonable
suggestion. The Conference meets to consider the
whole question. Mr. Tudor says, “ Here is the qbstacle;
let the representatives of the Governments consider it.
We considered it for an hour this morning, and now
we say, “ On general principles we are in agreement,
but we must consider the matter further in detail.”
The only people who can supply the details are Mr.
Tudor and his friends.
Mr. SCULLIN.—Now we are told that Mr. Hughes
is drawing up another set of proposals.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Because of the irrational objection
taken by Mr. Scullin and others to the course suggested
by Mr. Cook, we cannot get any further forward
towards the consideration of those details. Of course,
if one cannot get the most reasonable* course, one must
take a less reasonable. The course suggested by Mr.
Cook was reasonable, and springs absolutely logically
from the attitude taken up by Mr. Tudor and those who
support him. We want them to tell us precisely where
the shoe pinches, so that we may see if it is not possible
to let the shoe out at that spot. Mr. Tudor objects
to do this, and affects to believe that the proposal con-
tains some sort of trap. Apparently Mr. Tudor, Sena-
tor Gardiner, and others cannot come -and tell a Com-
mittee of fourteen what War Precautions Regulations
they object to, or what deregistered unions should be
re-registered.
Mr. DEMAINE. —We do not know what club we are
going to be hit with.
Mr. HOLMAN.—There is no question of any one being
hit by a club. lam here to find a way of getting larger
forces sent to the Front, and if other gentlemen are heie
for that purpose it is very little to their credit that they
should decline to sit on a Committee such as has been
proposed.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN. —We have not declined yet.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Some have done so. I assure mem-
bers that there is no trap in the offer.
Mr. PEAKE. —We have been told by speakers on the
other side that they have not refused to meet seven from
this side on a special Committee. Some did decline, or
expressed their disinclination to see such a Committee
appointed.
The PRESIDENT.—I understand that they want to
know a little more about what fresh proposals are likely
to come before such a Committee, or how far their pro-
posals have been accepted.
Mr. PEAKE. —We have never yet come to the point
of deciding whether such a Committee should be ap-
pointed. No concrete motion to that effect has been
moved. It came before us simply in the form of a sug-
gestion, and we. cannot discuss a suggestion and expect
to arrive at finality on it. To put the matter definitely
before the Conference, I am prepared to move
Mr. HOLMAN. —Mr. Cook has withdrawn the sug-
gestion, and is asking the Prime Minister by telephone
to come down and address the Conference.
F. 3959.—4
Mr. WILLIAMS.—He said that if we objected that
was the end of it.
Mr. PEAKE. —We are told by some gentlemen on
the other s.de that they do object to it, but the expres-
sions from the other side are not definite and not unani-
mous. We ought to decide first whether the Conference
agrees or not to the appointment of the Committee.
& Mr. HOLMAN. —Mr. Cook says that if any substan-
tial section of the Conference objects that ends the
matter.
Mr. SCULLIN. —It is not quite accurate to say that
we have objected to the appointment of a Comm ttee,
but it is true that some of us have emphatically.objected
to the submission to a Committee of anything that
has not first been discussed in the open Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The only thing discussed by the
Premiers to-day was Mr. Tudor’s proposals. In order
to discuss them further in detail, \ye want Mr. Tudor
and his friends to be on the Committee. That was
the idea in suggesting the joint Committee. It is true
that after that we shall have to consider certain proposi-
tions, which would have to be submitted to the Confer-
ence. Surely there can be no objection to Mr. Tudor
and those who think with him joining the Committee in
order to thrash Mr. Tudor’s proposals out in detail.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Although this may seem a big Con-
ference to some, it is numerically very small m com-
parison with the wide area it covers. Each man comes
with certain special considerations to put forward on
behalf of those he represents. It is suggested that all
these things can be thrashed out by a Committee of
seven from each side. But there are fifteen or sixteen
of us here, / each of whom has a special knowledge of
certain special grievances; and I do not know that you
are going to get any further forward by reducing the
size of the Conference. For instance, certain industrial
questions have to be considered. I know something
about that matter, and there are certain others here
who have a special knowledge of it, so that even aftei
the proposed committee had met, you would have to
come back here and get the benefit of their knowledge
of the subject. Therefore, you would probably have
to appoint a further Committee. I was under the
impression that Mr. Cook said that the Prime Ministei
was coming down with some fresh proposals.
Mr. HOLMAN.—He did say that, but those proposals
are not on this point. They are on the second point—
that of aiding recruiting. They have nothing to do
with Mr. Tudor’s own proposals. I do not think Mr.
Cook made that clear.
Mr. SCULLIN. —My main objection was to asking
a committee to discuss something that was not discussed
at the Conference.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I would suggest that the
President leave the chair for half-an-hour to enable
the Premiers to see the Prime Minister regarding the
proposals which we are told .ought to be submitted to
this Conference.
Mr. TUDOR. —We have no more desire to dictate to
you what you should do in that half-hour than yon
have to dictate to us what we should do.
Mr. RYAN. —There seems to be some misapprehen-
sion as to the manner in which the Conference has been
summoned, and I feel concerned about the matter
myself. It has been suggested that it was summoned
by His Excellency" the Governor-General without refer-
ence to his responsible Ministers. I take it that that
is not so, and would like to know 'from Mr. Cook
whether or not the Conference has been summoned on
the advice, or, at least, with the concurrence, of the
Commonwealth Government.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Is it not rather late to raise
a question of that sort ?
Mr. RYAN. —It is never too late to get to the
foundation of things.


Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I am in the happy position
of being able to tell you that I do not know very much
about the genesis of the Conference. 1 came into it at
the last moment, and without any preparation of any
kind, only because the Prime Minister felt sick. Wb
the honorable gentleman leave that matter over, also,
for the time being?
Sitting suspended from 3.£5 to 5.25 p.m.
The PRESIDENT.—I express, I think, the feeling
of the members of the Conference when I say that we
are glad to have Mr. Hughes now with us. . We are
sorry that during the past three weeks his health has
been so indifferent, and we hope that before long it
will be completely restored.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is well, I think, that I should
set out the views of the Commonwealth Government
and of the Premiers of the States^except the Premier
of Queensland —upon the position that has arisen in
the Conference, and that this may be done shortly and
concisely, I shall read the following statement that has
been prepared:
This Conference, representing all political parties
of the Commonwealth, has been called in order that
the reinforcements imperatively needed for the
safety of the Commonwealth and of the Empire
may be insured. The gravity of the present crisis
cannot possibly be exaggerated: mere words will
not serve to set it out. Everything is at stake.
Our very existence as a free people is in dire and
imminent peril. The interests of all sections
depend upon victory, and victory can be made
possible only if every man throughout the Com-
monwealth, setting aside all differences, puts fox,
his last ounce of strength and effort to secure
reinforcements.
His Excellency has invited us here in order that
we may agree upon the best means of securing
reinforcements, and that there may be a deter-
mination by the Conference to secure them.
A motion, setting out the urgent need for rein
forcements, suggested by the Governor-General,
has been duly moved and seconded, and is before
the Conference. Mr. Tudor and others have
stated, on behalf of the Labour party, that in order
to promote harmony, and make united action
possible, certain undertakings must be given,
involving changes of the policy of the Federal and
State Governments in regard to the deregistration
of certain industrial unions, the repudiation of
loyal unions, prosecutions and penalties under tl: -
War Precautions Act, press censorship, &c.
Though it has not been so stated directly, it i~
understood that the acceptance of their proposals
is a condition precedent to co-operation in the
recruiting campaign by the Labour party; that,
unless they are agreed to, such co-operation
is not to be expected. Such a view is, in t
opinion of the representatives of the Federal and
State Governments concerned, quite incompatible
with the duty which all citizens owe to the Com-
monwealth in this great crisis. But, quite apart
from this, the proposals themselves do not rest
upon facts.
We do not for one moment agree that the fall-
ing-off in recruiting is due to any of the circum-
stances alleged by Mr. Tudor; we believe that it
due to other, and quite different, reasons. We
are firmly of opinion that the action of unions in
striking during war-time, thus generally impairing
the efforts of the Commonwealth to do its duty tc
the Allies by despatching troops, foodstuffs, &c.,
has deserved the severest condemnation. De-
registration was the inevitable penalty for such
unpatriotic conduct, and the blame for whatevei
consequences followed from it must rest upon thos*
responsible for the strike.
As for the assertion that the War Precautions
Regulations have been used for political purposes,
we declare this to be without foundation. Certain
elements in our midst—the so-called Peace party,
those opposed to recruiting, and others—have under
one pretext or another been playing the enemy’s
game in endeavouring to hinder the war policy oi
the Federal Government.
That Government would have been guilty of the
grossest neglect of public duty if it had hesitated
to deal with these sections so far as its powers and
the circumstances made possible.
Being firmly convinced, however, that co-opera-
tion by the Labour party and all sections of the
community is essential to securing such reinforce-
ments as the present circumstances make impera-
tive, the Federal and State Governments are pre-
pared to meet the Labour party in every reasonable
way, and to consider its proposals in a favorable
spirit. But it is to be quite clearly understood
that they do so only because they most earnestly
desire the cordial and complete co-operation of the
Labour organizations: it is to that end, and for
that reason only, and in return for this complete
and earnest co-operation, that the Commonwealth
and State Governments are prepared to make such
changes in their policy as will substantially satisfy
the requirements of Mr. Tudor and other represen-
• tatives. It is, of course, quite understood that the
representatives of organizations cannot now pledge
their respective bodies to any course of action, but
they can express their own approval of it, and
strongly urge its acceptance upon their organiza-
tions.
In order that we may know precisely what the repre-
sentatives of Labour desire should be done by the Com-
monwealth and State Governments, and that in turn we
may make known the lines along which we desire their
co-operation to run, I suggest that a Committee consist-
ing 01 seven representatives from each side be chosen to
discuss details, and report to the Conference.
Questions have been asked, I understand, about the
attitude of the Commonwealth Government in regard
to conscription, and I therefore quote from the Sydney
Morning Herald what is an accurate transcript of the
remarks that I made on the subject when speaking at
the Royal Agricultural Show in Sydney a few weeks
back. I said:
The people have decided that there shall be no
compulsion in recruiting ! Good, the Government
will accept that. But the Government calls upon
every citizen to do everything within his power to
give effect to the policy that alone remains. Volun-
tarism has been nailed to the mast. Let it be so;
but let us have no hypocritical humbug about it.
Let every citizen do his utmost to make voluntar-
ism a success. So much we owe to our country, to
our soldiers, and to those who have died, to those
who to-day rush into the jaws of death.
The attitude of the Commonwealth Government to con-
scription is thus perfectly clear; the statements just
read should satisfy every citizen as to our policy in re-
gard to it. It will be best for me to refrain from
further observations just now, and so that the definite
offer of the representatives of the Commonwealth and
State Governments to meet the objections that have beeD
put forward on behalf of the Labour party may be
dealt with, I move —
That a committee to consist of two representa-
tives of the Commonwealth Government, the Pre-
miers of the various States, with the exception of


Queensland, and seven representatives of the Labour
organisations be appointed forthwith to discuss m
detail the proposals put forward by Mr. Tudor.
When this has been agreed to, we shall be able to
ascertain exactly what are the regulations objected to,
what action is desired in the direction of the deregistra-
tion of unions, and, in short, to ascertain generally
what it is thought should be done to obtain that com-
plete and cordial co-operation without which volun-
tarism must necessarily fail. The object of my pro-
posal is that we may get down to business by trying to
find out whether we cannot meet each other fanly and
honestly in an endeavour to secure the harmony that we
desire
The PRESIDENT. —I would remind members that
there is a motion before the Conference.
Mr HOLMAN —My suggestion is that the considera-
tion of the motion put before us by His Excellency
should be postponed until a later stage. Wliat Mi.
Hughes now proposes is the direct result of the meeting
of the Committee which sat this morning.
Mr. SCULLIN. —I move “That the debate on the
general question be postponed.”
Mr. PRITCHARD—I second the motion.
This was agreed to, and the following debate took
place on the motion submitted by Mr. Hughes, which
was seconded by Mr. Holman. .
Mr. JELLEY. —I rise to oppose the motion for the
reason that, in ordinary parliamentary procedure,
every member has an opportunity to express his opinions
on the subject-matter before the House, before that
matter is referred to Committee. It is* now suggeste
that a Committee, consisting of about only one-third
of the members of this Conference shall be appointed,
and shall proceed at once to discuss certain proposals
which have been made. In that way we are. asked to
depart from the usual parliamentary practice under
which every member has an opportunity to voice bus
opinions before the question is dealt with in Commit-
tee. If the motion be agreed to,. it will mean that the
Committee will proceed to consider, the matters sub-
mitted to it without knowing the opinions of the Con-
ference as a whole. I think we should, first of all, hear
what objections, if any, members of the Conference
have to the proposals made by Mr. ludor, or the
counter proposals of the various Governments con-
cerned.
Mr. HUGHES—We are making no counter pro-
posals.
Mr JELLEY. —There is a possibility of counter pro-
posals being made by other than Government repre-
sentatives. We have, for instance, representatives of
the employers, who might suggest a way of overcoming
various difficulties; they might make suggestions that
would be of great value to the Committee. Then again,
when a House of Assembly goes into Committee it is
a Committee of the whole, and not, as m this case, a
Committee consisting of only a section of it. dims
every member has in Committee an opportunity to
express his desires and opinions. If this motion were
agreed to, the effect would be to reduce the number
of members of the Conference to take part m its de-
liberations. I do not think we shall save much time
by adopting this motion. Every matter to be discussed
by the Committee should first of all be considered m
open Conference. If we had proceeded from the open-
ing day of the Conference with a full dress debate,
every member would have had an opportunity to speak,
and we should now be in possession of. the views of the
Conference as a whole. The Committee would thus
have been fortified in its deliberations, and would have
been able to come forward with concrete proposals that
might prove acceptable to the Conference. I. suggest
that we have a general debate, and then, if desired, let
the Committee come into operation. We should then
have the opinions of members in print, and it any
doubt arose as to the desires or opinions that had been
expressed by representatives, we should he able at once
to refer to the Hansard report of our proceedings. 1
do not think any good purpose would be served by
carrying this motion.
Mr HOLMAN—I desire, by leave, to make a short
statement. It is not fair that the Conference should
be carried on with certain information m the possession
of some members, and not within the knowledge o±
others. I think the Prime Minister will permit me to
say that he received this afternoon an official cablegram
which he showed the State Premiers who were m con-
ference with him. If it could be given to the Confer-
ence in camera I do not think Mr. Hughes would object
to read it. The Conference, I think, ought to be m
possession of the contents of that cablegram. a ’
have ascertained, is the opinion- of every one of the
Premiers who heard it read to-day. We have not had
a chance to discuss this point with the Prime Minister,
but I think if the cablegram were read it would shorten
the debate.
The PRESIDENT.—The matter is entirely m the
hands of the Prime Minister.
Mr. RYAN.—If the Prime Minister has some official
cablegram that ought to be communicated to the Con-
ference I am surprised that he has not already men-
tioned it. Apparently something has been communi-
cated to the Premiers in conference with the I rime
Minister, which Mr. Holman suggests should be given
to this Conference. He says, that if it were read it
would dispose of any further debate upon the Pume
Minister’s proposal.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I do not say that. I say it would
probably shorten the debate.
Mr RYAN.—I am unable to see how it would have
that effect, but if it would I certainly cannot congratu-
late the Prime Minister on the conciliatory tone of the
statement he made to the Conference. This Confer-
ence I understand, was summoned by the Governor-
General on the advice—or, at least,'with the concur-
rence—of His Excellency’s Ministers, because they
found some difficulty in carrying out what they con-
sidered should be the war policy of the Government
with regard to the number of recruits that are required.
Finding themselves in a difficulty in that respect, they
summoned a Conference consisting of representatives
from all parts of the Commonwealth for the purpose, I
take it of giving them some assistance in carrying out
what ought to be the war policy of the Commonwealth
Government in the circumstances. I—and lam speak-
ing for myself, although I take it that I voice the
opinions of quite a number of those present have
always stood by the voluntary system—the system which
the Commonwealth indorsed when it went, into this
great world-struggle to assist Great-Britain and its
Allies. We have always stood by that policy;, we have
never deviated from it. I have never avoided any
occasion when I thought it was my duty to take the
public platform in advocacy of voluntary recruiting.
When you, Mr. President, at. the Melbourne Town Hall,
opened the recruiting campaign after the first conscrip-
tion referendum, I think I was the only State Piemiei
who sat with you on that platform. The .Prime Min-
ister suggests that there is some. implication that the
Labour party will not co-operate in assisting voluntary
recruiting if certain concessions—which have been put
forward by Mr. Tudor on behalf of Labour represen-
tatives here —are not made. As I understand the posi-
tion Mr. Tudor, after conferring with his colleagues
put forward certain suggestions for the removal of what
in his.and their opinion were obstacles m the way of
voluntary recruiting being the success that it would
4 2


otherwise be. Ido not admit that it is a failure —I
say “ the success it would otherwise be.” If these sug-
gestions are acceded to by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment, and the others concerned, I believe that fact in
itself will materially assist voluntary recruit-
ing. But there is no implication in those suggestions
that I, or those associated with me, have in any way
departed from the system for which we have stood from
the first —the voluntary system, under which Australia
has done so much, and under which, in my opinion, she
will continue to do her duty in this great world struggle.
I, therefore, think the position is being approached by
the Prime Minister and those associated with him from
a wrong aspect, since they imply that we have done
something to hinder voluntary recruiting. We meet
here to give the Government all the assistance we can
in the way of suggestions for the removal of obstacles
which they and those associated with them have placed
in the way of the movement. We have put forward
those proposals, and I certainly protest against any
suggestion of “ hypocritical humbug.” I want to make
it clear that I will not have the suggestion made that
I, or any one associated with me, has refrained from
promoting the voluntary system. We have assisted it
in every way, and I do not intend to alter my attitude.
The suggestions I have put forward are made with a
view of assisting the Commonwealth Government to an
understanding as to the ways in which they can remove
obstacles that have arisen from the policy adopted by
them. Even those opposed to us will admit that a
great deal of the bad feeling that has arisen in the com-
munity has sprung from the conscription issue. The
great meetings that have been held in Melbourne lately
are an altermath of the conscription issue. We must
all admit that it is deplorable that we should have
thousands of people assembling in public meetings on
the one hand, and thousands meeting on the other hand,
and that we should have such statements as I have seen
printed in the public press. It is a deplorable posi-
tion. The trouble must be removed, and can be re-
moved only by our meeting together in some concilia-
tory way rather than in the spirit in which I conceive
the Prime Minister’s remarks to have been delivered
this afternoon. That position has arisen from the
policy of the Commonwealth Government with regard
to conscription and war regulations. I have no hesita-
tion in expressing the view that the War Precautions
Act has been used for political purposes. No doubt the
Prime Minister feels that he has repudiated that idea.
He is entitled to his view, just as I am entitled to mine,
but I protest against any suggestion of “ hypocritical
humbug,” or against any suggestion that I have re-
frained from attempting to make the voluntary system
the success that I desired it to be, and have always en-
deavoured to make it. What applies to me will apply
also to other members of the Conference.
Mr. TUDOR.—I have already placed before the Con-
ference certain definite grievances which, I believe in
common with those associated with me, have militated
against recruiting being as successful as it otherwise
would have been. Ido not think there is any person
present who will deny that those grievances exist. I
can cite numerous reasons why voluntary recruiting has
■not been successful, and I challenge anybody to point
to a single actibn of mine in opposition to the voluntary
system. You, sir, were present at two meetings at
which I was subjected to anything but a pleasurable
experience, because, when I attempted to speak, I was
howled down. Mr. Ryan has already emphasized- that
this Conference must have been called by the Governor-
General, acting on the advice of his Ministers. If
that be so, I have been placed in an altogether false
position.
Mr. HUGHES.—You ought to wait until you hear
the facts. You ought not to assume that what Mr.
Ryan alleges are the facts.
Mr. TUDOR.—If what Mr. Ryan states be true
Mr. HUGHES. —You ought to wait, and ask me if
it is true.
Mr. TUDOR.—At any rate, I shall have an oppor-
tunity of asking for the information in another place.
A MEMBER.—Perhaps the Prime Minister can
give it to you now.
Mr. TUDOR.—If I do not get it here I shall get it
elsewhere.
Senator MILLEN.—That is conciliatory.
Mr. TUDOR.—If we have arrived at that position,
we have practically created a super-Parliament to do
certain work. I am sure that the State Premiers pre-
sent, and the representatives of State Parliaments,
would not countenance the existence of such an institu-
tion at the present moment. If I knew that what Mr.
Ryan alleges were true, I should have been induced to
come here by means of a subterfuge, and I would de-
cline to remain a moment longer. I want an absolute
denial of that position from the Prime Minister, or any
other Minister who may be dealing with it. We have
been told that we have put forward a number of state-
ments which may be more or less accurate, and we have
also been assured that the War Precautions Act has not
been used for party political purposes. I say unhesi-
tatingly that it has. As a matter of fact, the mem-
bers of one section of the community were prosecuted
for holding an unauthorized procession .in Melbourne,
whilst another section not only held an unauthorized
procession, but that procession was actually addressed
by the Prime Minister. If that is not an instance in
which the War Precautions Act was used for party
purposes, I do not know of one. Personally, I doubt
very much whether any good can result from the ap-
pointment of the committee which has been suggested.
There is not a single word in the statement read by the
Prime Minister in reference to many of the points
which were mentioned in my statement. For instance,
there is not a single word about the censorship.
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes, there is. I say that it deals
with all your proposals.
Mr. TUDOR.—While some of the matters mentioned
by me were given special prominence, others were com-
pletely ignored.
Mr. HUGHES.—None have been ignored.
Mr. TUDOR.—If I have the privilege of being ap-
pointed to the proposed Committee, I shall certainly
press for the redress of the grievances which I have
enumerated—grievances the existence of which I can
prove.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is what we want.
Mr. TUDOR.—When that Committee submits its re-
port to this Conference there will be nothing to prevent
any member here from traversing the whole ground
again. Consequently I do not think that we shall save a
moment’s time by adopting the procedure that has been
proposed. The principal reason which induced me to
attend this gathering was a desire to arrive at harmony.
If it be not possible to achieve that object, it is idle for
the Conference to continue in session longer.
Mr. WATSON.—Why not appoint the -joint Com-
mittee and see ?
Mr. TUDOR.—In my judgment it is idle to appoint
any such Committee. There are delegates present who
represent industrial sections of the community and
others who represent political sections, and it is inevit-
able that some of these will be excluded from such a
Committee. Mr. Scullm has already remarked that if
recruits are to come forward in adequate numbers, at
least 80 per cent, of them will be drawn from the class
that we represent to-day. I do not think that any good
purpose will be served by the appointment of the joint


Committee proposed, and I am of the opinion that in-
stead we should have a full and open discussion m this
Conference.
Mr. HUGHES.—I desire to say a few words by way
of explanation in reply to the statement made by Mr.
Ryan as to how this Conference originated. I am
astonished that he should have made such a statement
when he could easily have asked me how it did originate
That I have not been present previously has not been
due to reasons over which I had any control. But now
that I am here I shall be- very glad to explain exactly
how this Conference came to be called. The facts are as
follow: —His Excellency the Governor-General was
approached by persons outside the Government, aiid T
believe outside of any of the Parliaments of Australia
certainly outside of the Commonwealth Parliament —
and it was suggested to him that he might with advan-
tage convene a Conference of all sections in order that
the community might lake united action to insure the
success of voluntary recruiting. It was suggested to him
that as he stood outside the suspicion of party, he could
with advantage, and very properly, call such a Confer-
ence. His Excellency was favorable to the suggestion,
but because he is the representative of the King, m a
self-governing Dominion, he could take no action except
with the approval of his responsible advisers. Be there
fore asked me whether I had any objection to his con-
vening a conference of this kind. I said “ No. The
position, therefore, is that the Government did not
originate, did not suggest, and took no part whatever in
the origination of this Conference. But His Excellencv
having been -moved by certain citizens to do what lie
conceived to be his duty, and having before him the
very excellent example set by the King himself in re-
ference to the Home Rule trouble before the war, asked
his responsible advisers whether lie should call this Con-
ference. I told him that I should have no objection
to his doing so. That is the position, and I submit that
it is one to which no exception can be taken. I am
sure that my friend Mr. Ryan, and my friend- Mr.
Tudor, will acquit the Government of having attempted
through His Excellency to call this Conference, there-
by avoiding responsibility for something which it ought
to have done itself. It did not do so. I am sure that
I should have been wrong, and that my conduct would
have been open to the gravest censure, if, when His
Excellency made the suggestion, and asked my advice,
I had given him any other answer than that which I
did. That is the position. For the rest I can only say
that I am very sorry —probably, owing to the fact that
I read what I had to say this afternoon, because my
health would not permit me to make my speech—that
I should have so- ill-conveyed my meaning to the Con-
ference. So far’ from my speech being lacking in the
spirit of conciliation, I had imagined that because I
had conceded that which had been asked, it was redo-
lent of that spirit. But Mr. Ryaji and others have sug-
gested that there are certain obstacles to harmony in
the community.
Mr. TUDOR. —Don’t you admit that?
Mr. HUGHES.—I do." I deny, however, that they
are those to which Mr. Tudor has alluded. That is all.
But I have not indicated what those obstacles are.
Mr. RYAN.—But you do not think it is very con-
ciliatory to talk about “ hypocritical humbug?
Mr. HUGHES. —That phrase was contained in the
speech which I made at the Show Ground in Sydney,
and I quoted it to illustrate what was the attitude of
the Government on conscription. That is all. It was
no part of my speech here to-day.
Senator MILLEN.—And you quoted it because a
reference had been made to your speech at the Show.
A MEMBER. —Mr. Storey made that reference.
Mr. HUGHES. —I do not know whether or not Mr.
Storey was present on the occasion in question?
Mr. STOREY.—Yes; and I do not disagree with
one word of what you said. It is correct.
Mr. HUGHES.—I merely gave an excerpt from that
speech in order to show the attitude of the Govern-
ment on conscription. I did not cut anything out of it,
because it might then have been alleged that I had
omitted some words Avhich it contained.
Mr. HOLMAN.—And the phrase “ hypocritical
humbug” had no reference-to anybody in this room.
Mr HUGHES— Absolutely none whatever. It
was made long before this Conference was suggested,
and had no reference to it whatever. It was merely
intended to show that people who were in favour ot
voluntarism should show that they were by voluntary
co-operation. ,
Mr. TUDOR.—That speech was delivered on the
Wednesday preceding Good Friday. Now I was in-
terviewed on the Friday previous to that, and asked it
I would attend such a Conference if it were called by
the Governor-General. .
Mr HUGHES.—I cannot say whether that is so.
Mr. TUDOR.—I was interviewed by a gentleman
from Sydney. T
Mr. HUGHES.—You may have been. All 1 can
sav is that I was not approached. Very likely the
person who approached you did so to ascertain whet er
vou would be prepared to attend such a gathering
before he approached His Excellency the Governor-
General to learn whether he would consent to convene
it. I know what Committees are, and what a body like
this is. I know that every man will feel himself m
duty bound to say what he thinks. It is a most im-
portant matter, and we have no right to shut any_ man s
mouth. But I think that the statements made by Mr.
Tudor—and I speak of him because he voices the
opinions of his friends—are altogether of too general
a character. When he, and those associated with him
ask us to do certain things, we have a rig
to know exactly what they want us -to do.
Because of that, we think the appointment of a Com-
mittee is the better and speedier way of arriving at
something like finality. This Committee would submit
its proposal, and ask for your approval- Yes or
“ ]ST 0 ■’ —and members could express their opinio s
or against the suggestions or recommendations made.
Mr. RYAN.— Might I ask if you are able to say
that you are prepared to repeal certain of the War
Precautions Act regulations? f
Mr HUGHES.—I am prepared to repeal any oi
them; or the whole lot if, by doing so, we can
secure that earnest and complete co-operation by the
Labour party which is so much desired There is no
reservation on my part. And, on the other hand there
must be no reservation on the part of the Labour
P Mr. RYAN. —We have always stood for the volun-
Mr —Let there be no misunderstanding.
When I say that there must be no reservation on the
part of the Labour party, I do not mean merely those
who are gathered in conference m this room, but the
Labour party, with its great organizations and ramifi-
cations all over this continent. You gentlemen here
represent certain organizations whose earnest co-opera-
tion is essential. This co-operation is worth every-
thing The War Precautions regulations, the censor-
ship, and everything else are but means to an end,
and that end is victory for our cause. If the co-opera-
tion of the whole community can be secured so that we
march forward as one man, is that not better than ail
the laws?
Mr JELLEY.— That is our contention.
Mr. HUGHES.—Very well. The Government—and
I am authorized to speak on behalf of the State Govern-
ments as well as my own—say to you that these thmgs
may be considered. The Government of Hew South


Wales have, of course, plenary jurisdiction over some
of the matters to which my friend Mr. Tudor has
referred, and therefore, without their co-operation and
approval we could not by ourselves do what you want.
We ask you to move forward with us in a spirit
animated solely by the desire to co-operate, forgetting
everything else but that we are citizens of the Common-
wealth, and that the Commonwealth is in danger.
Thus we ask you to appoint certain members to meet
us in committee in order that we may do the very
things which you say—and I am not denying it, from
your point of view—will clear away those obstacles
which you think are a hindrance to active co-operation.
You will admit, however, that, in order that we may
do this, we must know what it is you want us to do.
Mr. RYAN.—We have given you a very good idea.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is not sufficient to approach a
body of employers or employees and say, “ Will you
agree to so-and-so?” That is not sufficient. We must
agree in particular as to what should be done. The
organizations that stand behind the representatives of
the Labour delegates must lend their powerful co-opera-
tion, because without it the assistance of members
present would be of no more value than our own indi-
vidual efforts. Unless this can be secured, the Con-
ference would be simply a waste of time; and it is in
order that the co-operation of these forces may be
secured that the Government now put forward their
proposals.
Mr. RYAN.—You must admit there is some founda-
tion for our views, although you said in your type-
written statement there was not.
Mr. HUGHES.—One moment. If we are to get
“ any forrader,” do not let us dwell upon that. I
have stated our position quite clearly. Ido not admit
that any falling-off of recruiting is due to the cause
outlined by members representing the Labour organi-
zations. f do admit that there is a most deplorable
lack of harmony between the two sections of the com-
munity. I do not care whether the cause is well
founded or not; it is sufficient for me to know that one
section of the people believe the cause to be well
founded. The Government say to you—“ Come, let us
reason together and see if we can walk hand-in-hand for
the time being without prejudice to any of our opinions;
act together, and by that means make every effort in
all earnestness, without reservation or qualification of
any kind, to help our Empire.” I make this statement
without any reservation, and Ido so on the distinct
understanding that there must be no reservation or
qualification in your co-operation; but that you, like us,
shall go into the campaign having equal voice with us,
doing that which we do, and urging your followers and
supporters, as we shall urge our supporters, and en-
deavour, so far as is humanly possible, to secure such
reinforcements as will enable us to say that at this
supreme hour in our history we did not betray Aus-
tralia through lack of whole-souled and united effort.
The Government have suggested that there should be
seven delegates from each side in this committee.
There is no virtue in seven. On the face of it, there
could not very well be less than seven, and it is well
known that a larger committee is unwieldy, but if
members representing the various organizations find it
impossible to have adequate representation with seven,
the matter could be easily adjusted by increasing the
number.
The PRESIDENT.—In order to clear away any mis-
apprehension, I might explain what was my personal
connexion with the Conference. A certain dis-
tinguished soldier, Captain Carmichael, upon his re-
turn from England, came to me and said he thought the
time was ripe for a conference between the parties in
Australia in order to secure co-operation in the matter
of reiuforoements. I had had experience of recruiting
throughout Australia for fifteen months, and had come
to the conclusion that without harmony between the
parties it would be impossible to get anything like the
proper response from Australia. I may add that I had
endeavoured myself to bring about a conference of this
sort, so when he came to me I suggested that he should
go to Mr. Tudor, as Leader of the Labour party, and
find out his views on the subject. I myself interviewed
a number of gentlemen, including Mr. Ryan. Captain
Carmichael then saw His Excellency the Governor-
General, who considered the matter and, I presume, in
the ordinary course of events, consulted his advisers.
The idea, however, originated with myself, although
Captain Carmichael moved in the matter and gave it
a distinct fillip.
Mr. TUDOR.—You will admit, Mr. President, that
the attitude I took up was a correct one; namely, if
the Government called the Conference they should not
have done so through the Governor-General.
The PRESIDENT.—The initiation of the Conference
came from me. Captain Carmichael and I saw the Go-
vernor-General, and, quoting the precedent of the Con-
vention for Irish Home Ride some time ago, asked him
to take action. I assume that His Excellency then con-
sulted his advisers as to whether it would be advisable
for him to adopt the suggestion.
M r - TUDOR.—I would be the last to reflect upon
Ilis Excellency the Governor-General, but I want to
make it clear that Captain Carmichael saw me on or
about the 23rd March as to whether I would attend
such a Conference. I think it was the Friday before
Easter.
Mr. HUGHES.—Now, I can easily place the date.
On that date I was in Melbourne; and, as the idea
initiated in Sydney, I could not have known anything
about it.
Mr. RYAN.—I do not suggest that the Prime Min-
ister initiated the idea at all, but in the course of my
remarks I said that I presumed the Conference had
been called with the advice, or at least with the con-
currence, of the Government. There is no reflection
upon His Excellency the Governor-General in anything
I have said, but as the result of his action we are as-
sembled for the -purpose of formulating some kind of
policy with regard to recruiting. After all, this is a
Government matter, but in a sense responsibility is
being thrown upon us to formulate some kind of policy
to bring about harmony in the community. I remind
the Conference, however, that we have no executive
power to carry out the decision of Conference. We can
only make suggestions, and we, for our part, have made
suggestions with regard to what we consider are ob-
stacles to recruiting. I have always stood for the volun-
tary system, and there is no foundation for the sugges-
tion that we will not co-operate to make it a success, if
we are met by the Government with regard to our pro-
posals, although I think the Prime Minister, in his
first statement, suggested that there was some implica-
tion that, if our suggestions were not adopted, we would
not.
Mr. HUGHES.—What I said was that we could
deduce, from Mr. Tudor’s remarks, that unless the pro-
posals were accepted your co-operation would be in-
effective.
Mr. RYAN.—I do not admit that at all; but the re-
sult would not be so good. These obstacles had to be
removed in order to make the voluntary system a suc-
cess. That was my contention, and that I maintain
still.
. Mr. STOREY.—I cannot quite understand the posi-
tion we are in now.. At the beginning I think it was
myself that Captain Carmichael saw first about a
Conference. He asked me if I would join in a Confer-
ence, if it could be brought about, and I said, “Yes,
provided you can secure the attendance of Mr. Tudor,


who represents the Federal party, who are more directly
concerned.” I think it was on account of that state-
ment that Captain Carmichael came to Melbourne and
Adelaide and saw Mr. Tudor and other gentlemen.
Senator MILLEN. —Captain Carmichael, in a state-
ment to the press, intimated the individuals he proposed
to see the first time you speak of. There was no secrecy
about it.
Mr. STOREY. —I think the idea emanated from
Captain Carmichael, and if he secured the services of
His Excellency the Governor-General we take no excep-
tion to that at all, nor do I think that Mr. Ryan in-
tended to convey that we did.
Mr. RYAN.—I take no exception at all. I simply
wanted to point out what the effect was.
Mr STOREY. —Mr. Hughes has now. deliberately
said that he does not admit one of the things that we
were invited by Senator Plain and others to put before
the Conference as indicating what we. thought were the
reasons that militated against securing , the necessary
recruits. We submitted those things m a perfectly
bona fide way. The Prime Minister now comes to t e
Conference and says, “We do not admit any of them
nnd we should have been recreant to our duty if we had
!iot done all the things we have done.’ We have never
said that what has keen done should not have been
done. We think so; but we simply say that these
things are seriously militating against reci-uiting.
the Empire is in danger—and from Mr. Holman s in
teriection it would appear further in danger to-day
whit ought to stand in the way? It is not the mdm-
dual but the community that is going to benefit or
suffer now. It is the Empire, and yet we are quibbling
over a matter of this sort and told that we must go
into Committee to deal with things that if the Empire
is in the position indicated by Mr. Holman, oug
be swept to hell in order that we may do He weak:
imposed on us. I am beginning to think I have wasted
my time in coming to Melbourne, and am sorry I. came.
I was of opinion this morning that we. were getting on
so well, that when we referred these things to Ministers
for their perusal they would come back and say, io
instance, “ Nos. 1,2, and 3 we disagree with and can-
not touch; the others we will accept.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That is what the Committee is toi.
Mr. STOREY. —The Committee is quite unneces-
sary ’ We did not submit our proposals to a Committee.
Mr HOLMAN. —You had a Committee meeting first.
You did not draw the proposals up in open conference.
Mr. STOREY. —Other members may know, altnougn
the Prime Minister may not, that when we met on the
first day, we sat here like so many automatons, eac
one afraid to speak. Some of us perhaps, a little
more impudent, made some slight ref.3rences to> the cir-
cumstances, and then Senator Plain and Senator M len
and I think Mr. Watson, said, "What do you fellows
propose? What suggestions have you to make W a
do you think is militating against recruiting? Wha
can we come to a common groun upon,
moment we had nothing prepared. We sat that night
and drew up our proposals. On the Saturday we brought
them to this open conference. We told you exactly
what was in our minds. We put it m type, and gave
each member a copy, and discussed it for il Col * d
time Then a suggestion was made by Mr. Pritehaid
and others that the Ministers of the States, together
with the Commonwealth Ministers, should retne an.
consider those proposals, if they believed there was any-
thing in them, and then come back and tell us what they
agreed with, and what they disagreed with, so that we
might have a basis for negotiation. That, is the. stage
at which we had arrived, yet, now the Prime Minister
askl us to go into Committee, but not to deal with
those things which we asked Ministers to consider, be-
cause they decline to consider them. They reject them
in globo, and then ask us to go into Committee, and do
together that which we invited them to do separately.
That is an impossible and stupid position to come to.
We have laid our cards on the table; we have told you
what we believe. There may be nothing in our pro-
posals, but consider them and tell us whether there is
or not. Cannot the Prime Minister say, “ There are
certain things it is impossible for me to repeal. The
other things I am prepared to concede ? ” The only
two other matters, which affect the New South Wales
Government, have been discussed by Mr. Holman and
Mr. Beeby. They are very simple to rectify if our
country is in jeopardy. Of course, if there was nothing
out of the common happening, and if there was no need
for such a Conference as this, the normal laws of the
country ought to operate. But if we are in the dire posi-
tion that we believe we are in, we think very little of
our country if we cannot say, u If these are the ob-
stacles, we will sweep them away,, and come to a com-
mon ground, so that we may adjust our differences.
There is the simple way out of the difficulty. I± you
gentlemen are anxious that these things which we have
indicated, together with anything else that may arise,
should be partially or wholly swept away, then the
reasons for my remaining, perhaps, aloof from doing
that amount of recruiting which I might do disappear.
Unlike my friends who represent organizations, I nave,
in a limited way, a bigger responsibility;. but I am pre-
pared, if you sweep away those objections, to go on
every platform in Xew South Wales mght and day,
while I have breath in my body and ask people to go to
the war.
Mr. BEEBY.—You say that, but Ido .not think any
other member has said what he will do df we agree to
these proposals.
Mr. STOKEY.—Perhaps they are more discreet
than I am, because I have been interested m recruiting
work, with Mr. Mackinnon, for two years. My Hiends
here are only waiting to know what you people think.
Mr. HUGHES.—I have a doubt whether I shall be
able to be here to-morrow, and because what Mr. Storey
is saying is very pertinent to the point, I shall ega
if he will allow me to interrupt his speech m order to
make a few remarks.
Mr. STOREY.— Certainly.
Mr. HUGHES.—Let me point out. where I think
Mr. Storev has overlooked the real point of difficulty.
It is this:'We are asked to do certain things which you
say are hindering recruiting. Very well. We are
people who, when we say we will do things, can do
them. What are we asked to do these things for ? io
secure the co-operation of whom? Of those who are
alreadv with us ? Ho I think for one moment that any-
thing I can say or do, or fail to say or do, would pre-
vent Mr. Storey going on the platform and advocating
recruiting? No. lam perfectly certain that he
would do what he thought was proper in regard to re-
cruiting, War Precautions Act or no War. Precautions
Act. He might not do it in as good a spirit, but still
he would do it, because he puts his country first. It
is not Mr Storey’s co-operation that we want, or Mr.
Rvan’s or Mr. Tudor’s, because those gentlemen have
assured us that they will give us their co-operation.
But it is the co-operation of the. tens of thousands of
men who are governed by the attitude of their organi-
zations. None of you gentlemen is able to speak as to
what those organizations will do. We, as a Government
. are able to say what we will do.
Mr. STOREY—So far you have positively re-
frained from giving us the slightest indication as to
whether you will do any of these things, and so we
must be somewhat discreet in what we say.


Mr. HUGHES.—We Avant you who represent the
great, organizations of labour, both political and in-
dustrial, first, either through a committee or generally,
to say Avhat in your opinion would secure the cordial
and complete co-operation of organized labour through-
out Australia. When you have done that, and when
you have gone back to your organizations and said,
“ Gentlemen, if you will give that co-operation com-
plete and cordial that the Commonwealth and State
Governments require, then all these things to which
you are now taking exception, all these hindrances, will
be SAvept aivay ”
Mr. WILLIAMS.—That is the Avrong Avay about.
Mr. HUGHES.—I want to put my own vieAV in
order that the point upon which Mr. Storey Avas
speaking may be cleared up. I know organized labour,
perhaps, as well as any man in this room. I know
Avhat you gentlemen say here has its Aveight in your
organizations. I know you are able, by what you say,
to materially influence their action. To what extent
you can do so you are to search your oavii experience
on former occasions, and to*consider the circumstances
in which you find yourself to-day If Ave on our part are
able to come down now and say, “ Yes, Ave will do this
thing,” we are not speaking for somebody 0A r er Avhom
vve haA T e no control, or for some organization that avc
cannot answer for. We say, “ Give us this cordial
co-operation, and all these things shall be added unto
you.”
Mr. RYAN.—And we say, “ Give us all these things,
and you will get the co-operation automatically.”
Mr. HUGHES.—Nothing that I or any one else could
say or do would prevent Mr; Tudor or Mr. Storey
doing all they can to get recruits. But I say also plainly
and distinctly that the great organizations of labour
are not putting their full Aveight into the collar.
Mr. TUDOR..—Why?
Mr. HUGHES.—You say it is because of so-and-so,
good.
Mr. RYAN.—I do not admit it at all.
Mr. HUGHES.—If your arguments are mutually
destructive, how do you expect me to reply to ?
Mr. Tudor has set down, in his opinion, why that is the
case. Very well, we say, “ You give us that cordial co-
operation of labour, and these things which you say are
preventing it will be SAvept away/’
Mr. TUDOR.—I say, “ SAveep them away first.”
Mr. HUGHES.—But you are not in a position to
guarantee us one man or one organization.
Mr. MORBY.—But we are in the position, if they
were swept away, to give you a guarantee that we would
use our influence in so doing, and at least that is of some
value.
Mr. HUGHES.—Therefore, I wish'you to meet us in
Committee, so that you may set out exactly what you
want, and we may tell you in detail what it is that we
can do. lou can then return to your organizations, and
inform them as to the position, using your influence as
you may think proper. In that way, and in that Avay
only, shall we by this Conference advance by the least
the cause that Ave have at heart.
Mr. STOREY.—The position put by Mr. Hughes is
the reverse of that which we have put. We say that we
will do certain things if you will give us some sort of
a guaiantee. I have no desire to say anything that mav
be to members, but there is in the mind of
the public, particularly of the workers, as a result of cer-
tain happenings, that I do not wish to enter into, a feel -
mg of distrust. This being so, we who represent Labour
Avish to be able to say to the workers, “ In our opinion’
the great obstacles to co-operation in the recruiting move-
ment the things that you and we believe to be uniust
have, been removed, or the Government has given a
positive assurance that they will be removed ” Under
such circumstances I, at any rate, will take the respon- !
! sibility of saying tbat I would be prepared to go to my
organizations and ask them to co-operate in the manner
i desired. Tf I can go before the members of an organiza-
[ lion, and say, “ The Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth has promised that what we consider obstacles to
l co-operation will, in the interests of the Empire, be
, swept away/’ I can tell them that I want them as
workers to recognise that our country is in danger of
i becoming subject to a foreign Power, and ask them to
do their level best, wherever reasonably possible, to urge
more men to throw in their weight to keep back the
hordes of Germany. Ido not know of anything that I
am not ready to do if you can give us a guarantee that
the workers will not continue to suffer what they con-
sider to be the infringement of the rights that they have
hitherto enjoyed. What can we say by way of con-
trast to those who feel that their conditions are no
worse than they would bo under German rule? Every
worker is not blessed with the powers for close reason-
ing possessed by others more favorably placed. Men
loow at things according to their lights. The Prime
Minister has been among the workers"all his life. He
las been one of those most concerned in bringing to-
f P .' ier JTleil °f different opinions, and has succeeded in
this probably more than any of us. ButAf the guaran-
.PoS for which we ask are not given, it must create the
impression that he has got into a groove, and has ceased
(o understand the sentiments of the working classes.
He knows that I and Mr. Morbv and Mr. Lambert
cannot go back to our organizations and ask them to co-
operate with the Government unless we can tell them
mat the country is in so dangerous a position that the
Government is prepared to sweep away all the things
that we consider wrong i n order that we may join in
Hie common fight against the common enemy. If the
government will not give us the guarantees that we ask
toi, i say that the country is not in danger. If the
country is m danger, what should stop us from doing all
that will help to save it ? Should a disaster of great
magnitude occur on the other side of the world it
would be calamitous to us. What would become of our
financial equilibrium? Can it be urged that there
should be kept from us information of the character of
that which the Government, according to the indications
\ Holman, is in possession? How are we to'
fnTN f 6 we are expected to arouse 1
m the interests of the Empire if we are not told what is
occurring. Lot it be known that something has
happened that is likely to be disastrous to the Empire
and will any of us go to the picture theatre or other
place of amusement? Will we not rather set about
thinking what can be done to stem the disaster? There
is a demand on us to exercise the discretion which is 1
required of us m the responsible positions that we hold
Why should we fuss about small matters such as the
irrational utterances of two or three men like
McChrystal, who, m the Prime Minister’s day, if he rose
to address a union, would be put aside as an imbecile?
j o-day the existence of men of that class is regarded as
a reason for the application of regulations which are
doing much injury to the cause that we have at heart,
When I address a meeting at Balmain it is at the risk
of being told that I am in league with Mr. Hughes and
Mr. Holman. lam among The most respected of men
because of my attitude towards recruiting. Therefore
T ask men who have had wider experience than myself,
and a larger knowledge of the world, to exercise com-
mon sense m these matters, and to see whether we can-
not come to a reasonable adjustment of our differences.
Mr. MORBY. I listened with deep attention to the
statement of the Prime Minister, and I took it that
ie is prepared to accede to the requests that have been
made, and take the responsibility of granting them
I am not quite certain whether that is also the position
• r rermers the State Governments. What I
wish to do now is to make my own attitude quite clear,


so that there may be no misunderstanding concerning it,
I have not up to the present moment asked a single
man to enlist to fight in this war, because I felt that
I could not ask any one to do what I was incapable of
doing myself. But I feel now that the stake is so big!
and the responsibility so great, particularly to the
members of my own organization, that the prize is
worth the throw of the dice; and if we can have effect
given to our requests, and when effect has been given
to them, I give you my word of honour that I shall use
my influence with my own particular people to get
them to throw their weight in on the side that you
desire. I cannot give any guarantee that they will do
that, though I feel certain that they will agree with
the attitude that I am adopting. When effect has been
given to these requests, I shall, as I have stated, use
my efforts to bring about the desires of the Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If the proposal to meet in Com-
mittee to consider the statement of Mr. Tudor be not
acceptable to members, I shall gladly see its with-
drawal. But before it is put aside, members should
know why it was made. The representatives of the
Labour organizations drafted their statement of re-
quests in committee, and it was proposed that the
representatives of the Commonwealth and State Govern-
ments should consider this statement in Committee.
We did that. The statement presented to us
amounted to a series of censures on the policy of the
various Governments. It can readily be understood
that while my views, for example, may coincide with
Mr. Tudor’s regarding certain acts of the Common-
wealth Government, perhaps because I know little
about them, I feel that his criticisms are not entirely
just, so far as they affect my Government. Similarly,
Mr. Hughes may see the mote in my eye, and possiblv
be unconscious of the beam in his own. After talking
matters over for a while, we came to the opinion that
until we had alongside us the framers of the statements
that we were considering, for an informal talk upon it
in Committee, we could make no progress; and it was
suggested that seven representatives from each side
would form a useful Committee for ascertaining what
could be done towards making a definite proposal t
the Conference. Some members of the Conference
seem to think that a trick was to be played on them,
and that they were to be asked to bind themselves to
proposals arrived at by star-chamber methods, for
which they were not responsible. All that we desired,
however, was a free and frank talk, man to man, to
find out what was important in the matters raised by
Mr. Tudor, and what was not. We have been charged
with not being frank, but the moment that Mr. Tudor’s
proposal was put forward I said that, so far as the New
South Wales Government was concerned, we were pre-
pared to throw everything overboard to secure co-opera-
tion. But except for Mr. Morby and Mr. Storey, not
a word about co-operation has been heard from the
other side. It is not possible to do this work without
the co-operation of all.
Mr. JELLEY.—You have not given us an oppor-
tunity to speak yet.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If members will not enter into a
Committee, we shall have to thrash out our differences
in the Conference, and I, for one, am prepared to stay
here until that has been done. It would take very
much longer to deal with these matters in Conference
than it would in Committee. Members wall recognise
that the way to an understanding would be much
shortened if we had a meeting of seven representatives
from each side, and representatives of Labour were
able to say to us—this, of course, is only by way of
illustration—“ The first of our proposals is vital. The
second is not so vital; we are prepared to accept
two-thirds of it. The third is not to be a general rule,
but is to apply only to individual cases.” Then again,
when complaint is made in regard to the war regula-
tions, we must have in concrete form precisely what is
wanted. Having met in Committee and considered
these matters, if we could not then come to the Con-
ference and say what we were prepared to do, our
labours would have been in vain. I beg members to en-
deavour once and for all to get out of their minds the
idea that in agreeing to the appointment of this Com-
mittee they Avill be conferring a favour on any Go-
vernment or the representatives of any Government.
T beg of members not to take up the attitude that they
. decline to go into a Committee, the only purpose of
which is to forward the general work of this Confer-
ence. It it will help us to a solution, why should
gentlemen who enter this Conference, sincerely
aiming at a solution of the difficulties, refuse
a step that is suggested absolutely bond .fide.
If the representatives refuse the appointment of this
Committee, then we are entirely in their hands, and
yve shall have to adopt the ordinary course. Do not
imagine, that I object to threshing out the whole
matter in the light of day. I da not; but with a
round-table Conference we could settle in a few hours
what it would take us several days to deal with in Con-
ference. Why, for the sake of a mere matter of pro-
cedure, take up an attitude of resistence to the
progress of the work of the Conference? I admit it
is a mere matter of procedure, and, because it is, I am
prepared to give way absolutely, and to accept what-
ever course is preferable to the gentlemen who have
been discussing this matter. I urge them, however, to
remember that, after all, it is only a question of pro-
cedure. That being so, they should reconsider their
position, and see if they cannot join with us in the
suggestion to appoint a committee.
Debate (on motion by Mr. Scullin) adjourned until
10 a.m. the following day.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Will the Conference allow
me to read the following letter from Senator Pearce
relative to .a statement made in Conference on the last
day of sitting? It was then said that Senator Pearce
had alleged somewhere and at some time that it was
the policy of the Government to put out of Government
employment every eligible man. I asked my honorable
colleague to-day whether he had made such a statement,
and this is the letter he has forwarded me: —
Melbourne, 15th April, 1918.
Dear Mr. Cook.—l deny that I have at any time
said that it is intended to discharge all eligible
men from the Defence Department. What I have
said is that wherever possible, in regard to tem-
porary or casual employment, eligible men would
be replaced by returned soldiers. This is, as you
know, in accordance with the Cabinet decision on
the subject. I have also said that where eligible
men in the permanent employment of the Depart-
ment. apply for permission to enlist, such permis-
sion is to be given to them wherever it is possible
to spare their services.—Yours faithfully,
G. F. Pearce.
Mr. MORBY.—Since I make the statement referred
to, I should like to explain that what I said was that
it was reported in the Sydney Morning Herald, and
the Sydney Daily Telegraph that the Government pro-
posed to take the action in question. Senator Pearce’s
letter does not in any way conflict with the statement
I made.
Mr. HUME COOK.—But you accept his denial ?
Mr. MORBY.-—Certainly I do.
The Conference at 7.5 p.m. adjourned until 10 a.m.
the following day.


FOURTH DAY.
TUESDAY, 16th APRIL, 1918.
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
The Right Honorable Wm. M. Hughes, Prime Minister
The Right Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister for the Navy.
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Millen, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Prank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
Senator the Honorable Albert Gardiner. • . x -d
The Honorable Richard Beaumont Orchard, MuustCT for Reormtmg.
President, Central Council of Employers, Senator G. Fairbairn.
Director-General of Recruiting, The Honorable Donald MacKinnon.
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Trader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey). ..
SfiTS WfttSt Beebe, M.L.A., representing,.
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Ei^lie.
President Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. E. Keep}.
President’ United National Federation (Senator Wm. Plain).
r nernl Seoretarv United National Federation (Honorable J. Hume Cook).
Stot wSkn Brnnch Australian Labour Party (Mr. J. H. Scullin).
, Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan. Macartney).
Employer s^FederaLon 0 (hi r ■ RBerry, of Melbourne, representing).
National Political Council (Mr. G. 11. Pritchard), President.
0
South Australia.
Premier, Honorable A. H. Peake.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
President Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. H. Bakewell).
Presiacm;, -cnni J /y[ r> p p p LUNDELL) representing).
South Australian J p Lundie, representing).
South Australian Branch, A.L.i . (Mr. b. vv , p
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. D. Williams).
Western Australia.
Premier, Honorable H. B - Befro Y p CoLLIER
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable P. Collier.
-p 1 r tq’ Ppf}pration Mr. Alexander McNeil, President. .
Employers lederato , _ p o’Loughlin,) Political.
■ ... «• » n
National Federation, Mr. William Leslie.
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W.H. Lee. T _
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyons.


Mr. HOLMAN.—I desire to draw attention to a
paragraph in the statement read ,by Mr. Hughes yester-
day and published in the official report. At page 50
of that report there appears the statement —“ As for
the assertion that the War Precautions Regulations
have been used for political purposes, we declare this
to be without foundation.” If members will read the
statement they will see that the word “ we ” in the
sentence I have just read could be taken only to refer
to the Prime Minister and the State Premiers. I am
bound to say that the use of the word in that way is
without authority. I heard Mr. Hughes read this state-
ment, but did not quite grasp the sense in which the
word was used, otherwise I should have taken exception
to it while he was here. Ido not wish at this stage to
discuss the regulations under the War Precautions Act,
but say quite definitely that I was not aware that Mr.
Hughes was going to use the particular form of words
he has employed in this sentence, nor, do I think, were
-the other State Premiers aware of that intention. Mr.
Lefroy will, I think, agree with me.
Mr. LEFROY —Yes.
Mr. WATSON.—The Prime Minister evidently in-
tended to use the word “ we ” as referring to his own
Government.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I think he did, but the sentence as
it stands would include the State Premiers.
Mr. TUDOR.—\Vas not the Prime Minister’s state-
ment read to you before he made it here ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Not that part of it.
Mr. RYAN.—The main point is that we may infer
from your remarks that you consider there is foundation
tor the assertion that the War Precautions Regulations
have been used for political purposes.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I will not say that at this stage.
1 have an opinion, which I think Mr. Ryan knows, but
that, like all other opinions, is subject to modification.
I am prepared to hear discussion, and explanation. 1
have already expressed my opinion on the consorship,
but not with regard to the War Regulations, I desire
only to point out that it would be an error to construe
the phrase to which I have referred as an expression of
opinion by the State Premiers. It certainly is not so,
as I, and I think Mr. Lefroy and Mr. Peake, are con-
cerned.
Mr. WATSON.—Mr. Hughes said that certain ver-
bal alterations of his statement would be necessary.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Quite so. I desire only to make it
clear that I take no part in such a declaration.
Mr. JELLEY.—The Prime Minister perhaps meant
to refer only to himself and not to his colleagues.
Mr. HOLMAN.—As to that I cannot speak.
The PRESIDENT.—His Excellency, in his opening
speech, made one or two points of which I should like
at this stage to remind the Conference. I think you
will all agree that there is a great deal to be said for
the view expressed in the motion suggested by His
Excellency that we are here “ to consider impartially
and with all good-will ” such proposals as may be made
to enable Australia to respond to the appeal for re-
iruits. Ido not think there is any difference of
opinion with regard to that phrase. The position is
(.hat a number of these proposals have been made
proposals which it is urged would lead to harmony
in the community, and therefore to better results being-
obtained so far as Australia’s contribution to the con-
duct of the war is concerned. Those proposals we are
now discussing. His Excellency in his opening speech
went on to declare what I think is the whole spirit of
the Conference—
But unanimity is, after all, the corner-stone of
Cabinet Government, and on this occasion, and in
this crisis, it is of outstanding importance. You
may not all have entered this room holding identi-
cal views as to the best principle to be followed, or
as to the best practical measures to be adopted,
but the important thing is that you should leave
it whole-heartedly determined to support one de-
finite policy.
His Excellency also urged that promptitude was de-
sirable. I draw attention to this because I fear there
may be a tendency to discuss at great length the pro-
posals that have been made, and I should be very glad
if an arrangement could be made, since it is not pro-
posed, I understand, to go into committee
Mr. WATSON.—I thought the proposal to go into
committee was still under discussion.
the PRESIDENT.—Then we might have an ex-
pression of opinion as to whether the suggested com-
mittee should be appointed. There may be some other
method ol shortening the proceedings so that we may
get on with our work with all promptitude. We have
had before us one set of proposals, but I would remind
the Conference that there are other and most valuable
proposals with regard to recruiting which have yet to be
considered. All who took part in the debate yesterday
declared that they were behind the voluntary principle
and were anxious to give it every help. Some urged
that certain steps should be taken which, in their
opinion, would have the effect of assisting the work of
v oluntary recruiting; but all declared that whether
they were taken or not they would still do their best,
as they haa done in the past, to assist the voluntary
lecruiting movement. They expressed the view that
the work would be immensely facilitated if certain
alterations were made in conditions resulting from
political differences and the great industrial crisis of
last year. But I would impress upon the Conference
that, in addition to those already submitted, there are
a number of proposals which the Government and those
responsible for recruiting have yet to make, and that
we aie not getting to them. They are proposals upon
w r hich 1 am sure we shall all be agreed, "whereas those
upon which we have so far been deliberating appear to
give rise to some differences of opinion.
Mi. JELLEY. The Prime Minister said yesterday
that the Government had no counter proposals to those
submitted by the Labour Party, thus inferring that
the propositions which we had submitted were the only
ones to be considered.
The PRESIDENT.—That is not so. The Conference
wall remember that the Minister for Recruiting (M *
Oichard) said on Friday that there were certain pro-
posals to be made. He made a very short speech, an? l
those further proposals were held in abeyance. I ask
the Conference to endeavour to arrive at some arrange-
ment whereby we can arrive at a prompt decision.
I his is a very important Conference, from which a v - |
immense result is expected bv the people of Austral V j
and it is right that we should endeavour to do
promptly with the work before us.
Mi. TUDOR. Y ester day Mr. Cook, in referring to]
the propositions submitted from our side, said, as~V
ported at page 44 of the official report, “ A similar set
or propositions will be laid upon the table the moment
the proposed committee meets. The Prime Minister is
now engaged in drafting a set of proposals to put be-
fore that committee.” We have not heard of them.
Mr. PEAKE.—I am glad, Mr. President, that you
have raised this question, because I am afraid that
unless our proceedings are expedited some members of
ie Conference will have to leave before our labours
are concluded. Mr. Tudor is correct in his statement
as to what Mr. Cook said would be done. It has not
yet been done, however, and I am not certain that it
win be. The position, as we find it to-day, is- that
~ r ' Tudor has submitted certain proposals, and that
the meeting of Premiers yesterday was not able to
accept those proposals in their entirety. Some of these
will need amendment and certain modification. That
reing so can we not expedite that part of our pro-
ceedings by appointing a committee to deal with them ?


It would take a very long time to do so in open confer-
ence. There are many points which in committee could
be quickly dealt with, whereas when a man rises to
speak in open conference, his remarks generally extend
into a lengthy utterance. Unless something can be
done to expedite our proceedings I fear that the Con-
ference may be reduced in numbers before very long.
Many representatives are here at great inconvenience
and have urgent calls.
Mr. TUDOR. —Some have already returned to their
homes.
Mr. PEAKE. —We do not want the Conference to
lose its weight by losing its numbers; I therefore agree
with the Suggestion that, if possible, we should arrive
at an agreement to appoint a committee which will at
least be able to put before the Conference concrete pro-
posals for its consideration.
Mr. LUNDIE. —The position is that we, on this
side, have put forward certain propositions to remove
what we say are obstacles in the way of recruiting. Mr.
Peake has said that while the Premiers may to
some of them, others may need to be modified. Why
does he not start with the first of the propositions here
and now, and tell us what alterations the State Pie-
miers require ?
Mr. HOLMAN.— We will do that when we go into
committee.
Mr. LUNDIE. —Why waste time?
Mr. HOLMAN. —We are not wasting time. We are
simply discussing the best way to expedite the business
of the Conference. .
Mr. LUNDIE. —We have wasted so much time that
I shall be compelled this afternoon to leave for my own
State; others, I dare say, will be in the same position.
We are not all gentlemen of leisure or members of Par-
liament who are masters of their own time.
Mr. TUDOR. —Members of Parliament are not
masters of their own time.
Mr. LUNDIE.—There is too much parliamentary
procedure about this Conference. During the last
parliamentary elections, I heard a great deal about
I.W.W.’ism and sabotage, and about the go-slow busi-
ness, but I have never struck another Conference and
I have attended a good many —where the go-slow’
policy has been practised to such an extent. 1 appeal
to the gentlemen here to be frank as to their views, and
to proceed at once with the discussion of the first clause
of the proposals submitted by Mr. Tudor. Let them
say where they stand in regard to the matter of con-
scription so that we may once more secure that flow ot
recruits which we had before the Prime Minister and
his friends retarded it by bringing in proposals for
conscription.
Mr. TUDOR. —We have considered this matter and
hold that no time will be saved by sending our pro-
posals to a committee. We believe that the whole
matter should be discussed openly. If we had admitted
the press, as I proposed, it would have expedited our
proceedings. My proposal was defeated. It was said
at the time that there would be a complete record oi the
whole of the proceedings, but if any matters are to be
referred to confidential committees, then the spirit ot
that undertaking will be broken.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I would agree with those who wish
to oet down~to committee work upon these proposals, ii
there was anything in them for reference to a com-
mittee. Certainly one or two matters might be made
the subject of a sub-conference among a few men, but
there is nothing in the first proposal for reference to a
committee, and we could easily get it out of the way in
open conference. Speaking as the representative of a
large section of the community, I say that the possi-
bility of the imposition of conscription is the biggest
stumbling-block to harmony.
Mr. PEAKE. —Are you not satisfied with tne stau
ment made by the Prime Minister ?
Mr. SCULLIN. —No. If there is .any assurance to
be given, or if any detailed statement is to be made, it
should be done here in open conference, because it
would have no value in committee.
Mr. HOLMAN. —It would have to be given here
afterwards, even if the committee decided as to the
form it should take. *
Mr. SCULLIN. —If we could dispose of one or two of
the ‘main clauses in open conference it would go a long
way towards attaining the object of the Conference.
On all sides there is an earnest desire to restore
harmony to this community. It is well known that the
first discord arose at the advent of the conscription
proposals. Prior to that time we were getting 13,000
recruits per month, and there was absolute unanimity
in Australia. We were getting twice as many enlist-
ments as there were casualties when the statement was
made that the voluntary system was unfair. When I
came here I thought that there would be an unqualified
abandonment of conscription, and my continuous inter-
jections on Saturday, when Mr. Joseph Cook was
speaking, were made with the object of securiug from
the honorable gentleman an absolute assurance in that
regard. We know what occurred. We could not ge:
that assurance. Mr. Ryan met with the same difficulty
in interrogating Senator Millen. Mr Peake has asked
me whether I am not satisfied with the assurance given
by the Prime Minister. lam not. I have a recollec-
tion of a speech made by the Prime Minister at Bendigo
when he said that never again would conscription be
brought forward until the British Navy was scattered
and the Empire was reeling under a staggering blow.
Mr. WATSON'. —The Empire is reeling under a
staggering blow.
Mr. SCULLIN.—But the British Navy is not
scattered; and, moreover, when the second referendum
came along we were holding the Germans well, and
Germany was offering to negotiate for peace.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Do not say that.
Mr. SCULLIN.—The people we represent would
laugh at us if we went back to them and said that
conscription was gone because the Prime Minister had
made a speech in which he said it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The difficulty lies in the use of the
word “ finally.”
Mr. COLLIER.—If we could only discuss the matter
we would scon come to a conclusion upon it, but you
refuse to discuss it in Conference.
Mr. BLUNDELL. —Would it bind future Govern-
ments ?
Mr. SCULLIN.—It is meant for all time.
Mr. HOLMAN. —If it is meant for all time and all
circumstances, then it is more than any Federal Mini-
ster could say.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Our position is that conscription
for service overseas should be “ finally abandoned in
regard to this war or any other war.
Mr. WATSON.—Surely you do not wish a pledge
now in regard to any other war.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I do not wish to split straws about
the matter. We want to see conscription for service
overseas finally abandoned for any war.
Mr. WATSON. —I quite agree with you as to the
desirability of saying there should be no more con-
scription for service overseas in regard to this war.
Mr. SCULLIN.—The things said during the con-
scription campaign are pressing on the minds of many
people. Political epithets during an election campaign
are soon forgotten, but there are thousands of people
in our community with loved and dear ones at the
front who will take many years to forget that they were
accused of being pro-Germans or of being bribed with
German gold, and it would be well if there was a frank
admission by this Conference that the conscription issue
would be finally abandoned. The Prime Minister s
words in this regard would be taken least in the com-


munity. There are other Ministers in the Federal Go-
vernment whose word would be accepted first. If
Senator Milieu or Mr. Joseph Cook gave their assurance
on the point it would help considerably to bring about
harmony. I have opposed Senator Fairbairn in Par-
liament, but I know that if he gave his assurance that
he would be absolutely opposed to any further talk of
conscription it would bring about harmony. I know
that he would stick to his pledge. We want to take
the assurance from this Conference to those we repre-
sent. We want to be able to go back to them and say,
“We really believe it is right this time.” That is not
a matter for Committee discussion; it is a matter for
debate in open conference.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—WouId Mr. Joseph Cook’s
assurance give you what you want '!
Mr. SCULLIN.—It would not be sufficient for the
people outside. There is also the question of economic
conscription. I would draw Mr. Lawson’s attention
to a paragraph apjiearing in this morning’s Aye stating
that the intention is to “comb out” eligibles in the
Victorian Railway Department. That sort of thing is
not going to bring about harmony. We remember the
way m which people were insulted and badgered in the
early days of the war. There are many who are now
dead in Flanders who at one time received white
feathers. Our President will remember the resolution
adopted on the 20th March by the Conference of Re-
cruiting Committees and Recruiting Officers that every
eligible in a public service should be obliged to enlist
or sulfer dismissal, and that pressure should be brougm
to bear on men in the Public Service who had eligible
sons. We want an assurance from State Premiers
and from representatives of the Federal Government
that this course of action shall not only not be done,
but also repudiated. I want Mr. Lawson to say that
he repudiates what has appeared in this morning’s Aye.
I know that the representatives of the employers here
cannot pledge the employers of the Commonwealth, but
we want them to promise that economic conscription
will cease, because it is creating discord. Another
matter that stands out is that of regulations under the
War Precautions Act. We are asked to form our-
selves into a sort of Cabinet and deal with a whole list
of regulations in an hour or so covering matters that
have been complained of during the past few years.
If I am asked what regulations I wish to have re-
moved I reply that Ido not know their numbers. All
I know is that there are certain regulations which have
caused dissatisfaction. I am anxious to meet my friends
who are opposed to me in discussing these regulations in
Committee; but suppose we do so, and return after an
hour or so and say that we have drawn up a list q!
regulations which should be withdrawn, and that the
Government have agreed to our proposals, we may still
omit a dozen of the worst, and will be held responsible.
I am not a believer in permitting lying statements to
be made at election time, but every one will make
mistakes. People were jirosecuted for making the
statement that there was a Sixth Division of the A.1.F.,
although we had a man in Ballarat who was in the
Sixth Division and wore the colours of the division.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —He was in one of two
battalions of the Sixth Division. There was no Sixth
Division. My son was in the so-called Sixth Division.
The PRESIDENT. —All this has nothing to do with
the question of economic conscription.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I am pointing out that the regula-
tion dealing with false statements is one that should
e .viped out, and that it is useless for us to go into
Committee on these matters. Let us have some definite
statement as to the main proposals before the Con-
ference. Any points of difference might be remitted
to one or two sub-committees. So far, we have been
two days discussing things, and have made no progress.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—We have taken a most
undue time in discussing the method of dealing with
Mr. Tudor’s proposals.' The whole of yesterday after-
noon was occupied in debating as to whether there
should be a Committee of the whole, or a small Com-
mittee. If either of those methods had been adopted,
considerable time would have been saved. I favour the
appointment of a small Committee, but I notice that
our friends are not prepared to grant it, and therefore
there is no' use discussing the matter further. We
must have harmony. Therefore, I suggest that we
should follow Mr. Scullin’s proposal, and take the
clauses item by item. The employers’ unions do not
admit that there has been any economic conscription;
nevertheless, they are quite prepared to advise their
members to discontinue it. The law of the country is
that no man shall be conscripted for overseas service;
and we do not want the employers to be put in the
position of the Government, to bring about conscrip-
tion in an underhand way.
Mr. -COLLIER. —They are doing it.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I do not admit it.
Mr. COLLIER.—It is publicly advertised by all the
large firms in Perth.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. —No case has come under my
knowledge. No employers’ union has done anything
officially in that regard, but if it does exist, it will
advise its members not to continue it.
Senator PLAIN.—What about the position of
returned soldiers ?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—His position is quite clear.
Where a job is vacant, we are going to give it to a
returned soldier.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —A great deal of time has
been wasted in debating this matter of a Committee.
If delegates do not wish to go into Committee, there is
nothing for it but to turn the Conference into a Com-
mittee of. the Whole, and proceed with these matters
just the same. There never has been any idea of avoid-
ing a thorough discussion of all the proposals submitted.
The reason why a counter set of proposals has not been
submitted is because it is felt that these are real griev-
ances which have been set forth by the other side, and
they might form the basis of discussion.
Mr. JELLEY.—Have not those on your side found
any stumbling blocks in the way of recruiting other
than those which we have suggested?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —There are all sorts of hind-
rances to recruiting, war weariness, apathy, and many
other causes that are irremovable. We need a war
atmosphere in Australia at the present time, and it is
our duty to revive it in some way or other. It is with the
hope of doing that that we are inviting your co-opera-
tion, and proposing, so far as it is possible, to remove
all the obstacles which you suggest are grounds for the
inharmonious relations which obtain at the present
time. The Prime Minister, who will be here shortly,
is of the same opinion as the rest of us, and that is that
if we cannot get the smaller Committee, we should pro-
ceed with the work of the Conference by threshing out
these matters here.
Mr. RYAN.—Up to a certain point, at all events.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Quite so. I feel confident
that as we proceed to discuss the proposals in detail we
shall more clearly see the need of the smaller Committee
that has been suggested. I hope that we shall proceed
to the discussion on'the proposals without further waste
of time.
The PRESIDENT.—I understand that the desire
now is to take up the discussion of the conditions in
the order in which they have been presented by Mr.
Tudor.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I hope, sir, that you will allow me I
to put my own position first. I feel that the time has
arrived when-we should get to close grips with these
proposals. The loss of yesterday is rather inaccurately


ascribed to debate, as it was due really, to an effort to
carry out what appeared to be the desire of the Con-
ference that these matters should be considered by a
Committee of Federal Ministers and State Premiers.
In my view, it was impossible to do that. I or
instance, a grievance affecting my own State, the
circumstances of which are known probably only
to myself and my colleagues, and those affected by it m
a personal way, could not be discussed with the 1 re-
mier of Western Australia, for example, who would
know nothing whatever about circumstances specially
applicable to New South Wales. There were certain
delays in the afternoon of yesterday for which the
Prime Minister was, to some extent, accountable, but
the greater part of the delay was due to the efforts
made to bring about the consideration of these matters
by a Committee, in order to carry out what appeared
to be the will of the Conference. The idea of a Com-
mittee not being acceptable to Mr. Tudor and his
friends, we must now do the best we can as we are.
That I feel, is an unfortunate position; but I quite
frankly accept it, and am prepared to say. two or three
words, not merely on the proposals submitted directly
as they affect my Government, but on other points, on
which 1 hope I shall not be regarded as wasting the
time of the Conference. The first proposal was natu-
rally the subject of discussion by the Committee yes-
terday afternoon, and I wish to. say at once, m the
sincerest possible way, that I think there is no real
difference of opinion amongst us as to the necessity for
a sufficiently convincing statement on the subject of the
abandonment of conscription. . ,
Mr LEE. —I am sorry to interrupt on a point of
procedure, but the question of the appointment of a
Committee, judging from Mr. Holman's remarks, seems
now to have been definitely dropped.
The PRESIDENT.—At present; though the need
for a Committee may appear as the discussion goes on.
Mr. LEE. —I want to put the point that the Opposi-
tion have met, and decided upon a certain course of
action. , , „ . x . ,
The PRESIDENT.—Who are the Opposition ?
Mr. LEE. —I refer to the representatives of Labour
organizations. They have met -and decided upon a cer-
tain course of action. We have not done so. It is
true that yesterday a promise was made that, we would
table counter-proposals, but at our meeting it was de-
cided that we should come back to the Conference and
endeavour to secure the appointment of a Committee.
We have not yet considered what attitude we shall
adopt, or what proposals we shall put forwaid.
want to point out that if we now enter upon an open
discussion of the whole matter in the Conference, Mr.
Holman may put forward his views as representing
the Government of New South Wales, Mr. Cook may
speak as representing the Federal Government, and i
may put my views as representing Tasmania, with the
result that we may have a hopeless conflict, and no
finality from the labours of the Conference. I think
it would be far better that the Nationalist representa-
tives in the Conference should meet and determine how
far they can go. If we are to have an open discussion,
I am afraid that there will be no finality. I hat is
something I have no desire to see, because I do hope
that some decision will be arrived at by the Conlei-
Mr. RYAN. —Are you suggesting that the National-
ists will be in hopeless conflict with each other? . .
Mr. LEE.—I am afraid that there may be a division
of opinion expressed.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Do you think that by a meeting
of Nationalists any more could be done than was done
]yf r- LEE. —I certainly think so. I do not believe
in any bargaining about this matter at all. There arc
certain things which ought to be done. If they are
r i ff ht, they should he done, whether our friends who
differ from us ask for them or not. By a conference
such as I suggest amongst ourselves,, we could discuss
how far we can go in certain directions, and consider
what things should, in our opinion, be. done. We
could then come hack to this Conference in a position
to definitely take a certain course, and let the 1 ederal
and State Governments stand to that course, and take
the consequences, whatever they, might be. I do not
like this fiddling with the question If each member
of the Conference is to get up and express his own
views on the proposals that have been submitted, 1 am
very much afraid that we shall achieve no results, lor
instance, our friends in opposition to us say that they
will not allow any resolutions to be passed.
A MEMBER.—No.
Mr. LEE.—Mr. Tudor said that he would not allow
any resolution to be passed at. this Conference.
Mr. TUDOR. —I hardly said that; I said I did not
think there might to be any resolution passed.
A MEMBER. —There should not be much discus-
sion on the first proposal.
Mr LEE —There would not be, so far as 1 am con-
cerned; but I feel it my duty to put. the position as 1
regard it. I am sadly afraid that if the course now
suggested is adopted, the Conference will arrive at no
result
Mr’ WATSON.—What Mr. Lee has said seems to
me to be an additional argument, for Committee work.
He has said that those on his side have not yet con-
sidered the proposals in detail.
Mr. STOREY.—That is not our fault. .
Mr. WATSON. —That may be so; but the fact re-
mains that they have not considered them m detail,
nor have they considered how far they can go.
Mr. RYAN. —Then why prevent Mr. Holman from
making his statement?
Mr. WATSON.—I hope that Mr. Ryan will excuse
me while I put my position. I. am in the happy posi-
• tion of not having any responsibility as the holder of
a Ministerial office. Mr. Ryan knows quite as well
as I do that it is a most awkward thing for a man,
having committed himself publicly as a responsible
' Minister to a definite statement, to be compelled by cir-
cumstances later to swallow his words Mr Lee has
said that if things are right they should be done;, but
it is possible that some things, though they are right,
should not be done. Delegates holding views opposed
to those expressed by Labour representatives may be-
lieve that certain propositions put forward. by the
other side are not right, and yet I say that, m order
to secure co-operation and increase the number of re-
cruits, those things with which we may not agree may
still require to be done. Even though a certain regu-
lation may-be right in the opinion of one side, it may
still, in the circumstances, be necessary to make con-
cessions, in order to secure that unanimity which is
so urgently required at the present - time. In my view,
it would be most unfortunate if, in the presence of the
press, a Minister were to say something without con-
sultation with his colleagues as to what should be done
if, later on, his colleagues might be able to point out
that a different course should be adopted.
Mr. JELLEY.—WIhat is the difference between say-
ing it and doing it?
Mr. WATSON.—There is a great deal of difference.
Mr. Jelley must know that public men do not care to
have Hansard brought up against them to show that
they have gone back upon a certain course, even though
it should appear to them to have been necessary after
fuffcher consideration. It is not convenient to have on
record a placard of your convictions if, later, on, you
discover, by further argument, that it. is wisdom to
alter those convictions. Personally, I think that nearly
the whole of what the Labour representatives have
asked for should be granted.


Mr. HOLMAN.—Have we agreed to go into Com-
mittee, in the absence of the press, to consider details?
Mr. Y\ AT SON.—I have no objection to going into
Committee.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—There is an objection to a Com-
mittee.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Not to a Committee of the Whole?
Mr. WATS ON.—I believe that every representative
of Labour in the Conference is anxious to get these
things through in some satisfactory shape. If they are,
wJiat possible objection can there be to our going into
Committee of the Whole, having a discussion, of which
no report will be published, and then meeting in Con-
ference again to put forward the propositions as they
have been agreed to in Committee, surely there can
be no objection to that? If there is, I am very much
mistaken as to the point of view, and cannot under-
stand it. 1 ersonally, i regard conscription as abso-
lutely de^.a, the people have twice pronounced against
it, and it would, be most improper on the part of any
(Tot ernment, no matter how strong, to attempt to en-
ioree it in any shape or form, or by any means.'
Mi. JELLEY. fjie Holman Government took up
that same attitude, and yet supported conscription later
on.
Mi. WATSON. That Government said it could not
raise the question, and obviously it could not.
Mi. HOIMAN.—I must ask Mr. Jelley not to in-
terfere in New South Wales affairs that he does not
understand. ,
Mi. vvAISON. If you are not satisfied with an
assurance, what is the idea of putting that question
iorward now ? It is only wasting the time of the Con-
ference. All these matters resolve themselves into a
question of form. There are only two courses which
can result in any real progress; one is to let the repre-
sentatives of tne Governments and those associated with
them those whom, for want of a better term, we call
Nationalists meet and decide how far they can accept
tne proposals of the Labour delegates; the other is for
the Conference to go into a Committee of the whole in *
the aosence of the reporters, and decide on each of the
points in rotation.
Mr. RYAN.—What objection is there to Mr Hol-
man proceeding to make the statement h e desires to '
make ?
Mr. WATSON.—Mr. Ryan knows quite well that if
one ol his colleagues in Parliament made a statement
on a subject that had not been decided by the Govern-
ment, that colleague would be hauled down. In the
present instance no one is able to haul down Mr Hoi
man.
Mr. RYAN.—Do I understand that you are endea-
vouring to haul down Mr. Holman?
Mr. WATSON.—The suggestion of Mr. Lee, which
i support, is that, before any individual expressions of
opinion are given, there should be a meeting in Caucus
such as the Labour delegates have already had on two
or three occasions.
Mr. TUDOR.—We shall meet as often as we like.
Mr WATSON.—The idea is that the Nationalists
should have a meeting to see how far they can meet the
proposals of the Labour representatives, or, on the
other hand, that the Conference should go into Commit-
tee of the whole.
Mr. MORBY.—Mr. President—
-1 RESIDENT.— I understand that Mr. Holman
has the Chair.
Mr. HOLMAN. I take it that these gentlemen are
speaking on a question of procedure.
Mr. MORBY.—I merely wish to say that I think
there is a way out of the difficulty. There is a dif-
ference of opinion regarding the interpretation to be
placed on the proposals as to the re-registration and de-
registration of unions, to the repeal of War Precautions
Regulations, and to profiteering. I suggest that we
should be able to agree in open Conference regarding
conscription, including economic conscription, on the
matter of the abolition of the press censorship, the
political and industrial prosecutions and the remission of
lines. If these are the matters on which you are pre-
pared to give way, I see no technical difficulties attached
to them.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—We wish to know what you
mean by one of these propositions. Do you mean the
complete abolition of all censorship ?
Mr. MORBY.—No, the proposal is qualified.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—It is not.
Mr. COLLIER.—Mr. President
The PRESIDENT.—I think that Mr. Morby was
addressing the Conference.
Mr. COLLIER.—I rise because it seems to be tlit
accepted practice for one speaker to break in upon
another.
llie PRESIDENT.—I must ask you, Mr. Collier,
to kindly resume your seat.
Mr. MORBY.-—Mr. Cook, if he carefully looks at
the proposals, will see that a qualification is attached
to the censorship proposition, which is confined to mat-
ters that might be of advantage to the enemy. Both
Mr. Cook and Mr. Holman know that the press cen-
sorship has been misused—that is a point we are all
agreed upon.
Mr. PEAKE.—Do you want the censorship lifted or
modified ?
Mr. MORBY.—We want to treat it exactly as i>
suggested in the proposal.
Mr. PEAKE.—Exactly—just as you put it forward !
Mr. MORB\. —It will be seen that the proposals re-
garding prosecutions and fines do not touch criminal
prosecutions, but merely those of a political and indus-
trial character. those who closely follow events, as
they affect the people we represent, must realize that
there are continued unjust and unwarranted political
and industrial prosecutions.
Mr. COLLIER.—Have we resumed a general dis-
cussion ?
Mr. MORBY.—I am endeavouring to get the Con-
ference to clear certain of these proposals out of the
way, but, of course, if that is not desired, it does not
matter to me.
Mr. ELMSLIE. Certain gentlemen have expressed,
and I believe they felt, profound regret at the loss of
time there has been; and \ve ought certainly now to
do somtliing practical. We find ourselves drifting
again over the whole field that has already been dis-
cussed, and surely it would be advisable to get to the
items and discussi them.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I was about to do that,
n.^ r ’ ELMSLIE. That is what I understood—and
there was then to be some scheme by which we could
discuss the details. Here we have a set of proposals
submitted by one section of the Conference. Let us
take them item by item, and if we can agree, well and
good; if not, I am quite prepared to submit them to
a Committee, or take some other course in order to
arrive at finality. If we are to continue as we have
begun this morning, I think I could spend my time
much better by walking away altogether. We are
engaged in a «eriou s business, and are in earnest; and
we ought not to hear the same arguments, and the
same reasoning in speeches over and over again. The
second-reading stage, as it were, has passed long ago,
and we ought now to follow the practice of Parliament
and take clause by clause.
Mr. PEAKE.—WiII you propose that?
Mi. ELMSLIE. I do not wish to propose any
resolution.
Mr. PEAKE.—WiII you propose that the Confer-
ence resolve itself into Committee ?
Mi. RYAN. I wish to avoid all this humbugging
and discussion, and to at once proceed to the discussion
of these proposals seriatim.


Mr. HOLMAN. —You cannot take them one by one
they are a whole, and we must approach them as a
whole. We may take them seriatim at a later stage.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —I think that stage has passed.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It has not begun yet. We have
been trying to find a method.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —We have had days of discussion on
conscription, de-registration of unions, the censorship-
every proposal excepting the last one on the list has
been discussed by nearly every speaker at one stage or
another. Why go through it again ? How are we to
get explanations of details unless we confine ourselves
to the items devoting to each a reasonable time. If
we cannot reach a conclusion on any point, let us lefei
it to a Committee, or somebody; but in God s name
let us get to a conclusion.
The PRESIDENT. —I do not wish to interrupt, but
the discussion appears to be getting very discursive.
I think it might be advisable for two of the leaders —
say, Mr. Tudor and some other gentleman —to arrange
a modus vivendi, or otherwise the debate may prove
interminable. It has occurred to me that this stage
should be treated as going into Committee on the list
of suggestions which have been made, and treating
it just as a Bill is treated in Committee in
Parliament. To that, however, there seems to be
some objection, and I must ask the Conference to make
itself responsible for some plan, if we are to reach
finality. I certainly think it very desirable for, say,
Mr. Tudor and Mr. .Cook, or Senator Millen, to ha\e
a short consultation, and arrange some mode of pro-
cedure. Mr. Holman’s view is that the whole list
should be taken together, but that, I think, would
mean that every point would be debated over and over
again. Promptitude is the essence of this business;
and delay is unfair to Australia, the Empire, and to
those with whom we profess to sympathize.
Senator PLAIN. —There are one or two little matters
that have not been touched on. If we had only to
consider the Labour representatives who are here, I
believe that every delegate on this side would be pre-
pared to concede the whole list of proposals. However,
we are dealing with men who represent organizations
that have not empowered them to bargain in any way,
so far as these proposals are concerned. I think we
ought to have some understanding that if these pro-
posals are agreed to, the representatives of the
Labour party here will declare their intentions regard-
ing them. . . .
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN.—That is opening up the whole
discussion again.
Senator PLAlN.—Quite so; but it is a reasonable
request; and if the Labour representatives can give a
honest reply which will be favorable to the work of tie
Conference, they will have no further opposition from
me. But we have a right to know, when we have
conceded everything they ask, what their intentions
are. Will they call their organizations together and
say, “ Gentlemen, we put certain propositions before the
Conference, and it conceded everything we asked, with
one understanding ”
Mr. WATSON. —Mr. Morby has already said that —
last night.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —We cannot have a Salvation-Army
testifying meeting in that way.
Senator PLAlN.—Unless the Labour organizations
are prepared to give some idea that they are m
sympathy with the propositions of the Conference, we
cannot consider the requests made by them. I simp y
ask whether it js the intention of Labour representa-
tives to call the organizations together, and ask them,
in their turn, to pass resolutions to do their utmost to
carry out the will of the Conference ?
Mr. WATSON. —Mr. Morby has already said that
that is the intention.
Senator PLAIN.—If that is so, the proposals shall
have my support.
F. 3959. — 5
Mr. RYAN. —I rise to a point of order. I under-
stood that Mr. Holman was addressing the Chair when
he was interrupted. A certain amount of discussion
has taken place since, and I submit that Mr. Holman
is now entitled to proceed. Mr. Lee suggests that Mr.
Holman should not go on because, if he does, he will
disclose great differences of opinion between the
Nationalists. If they have any fear of that, they
should ask for an adjournment to adjust their differ-
ences; and, in the meantime, Mr. Holman might be
allowed to> go on.
Mr. TUDOR. —There is no objection to that. lam
anxious to go on with the business, and have occupied
as little time, probably, as any one here. If those of
the other side —and I use those words in no discourteous
sense —desire to meet and arrive at a decision on any
points, we on this side have no objection to an adjourn-
ment of the Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I ask leave to postpone my speech.
I think it would be unwise of me to further proceed,
feeling as Ido at present. I am bound to admit that I
have-been very much irritated by the events of the
past half-hour, and I will, therefore, leave it until a
later occasion to conclude what I had intended to say.
Mr. PEAKE. —I move —
That Conference go into Committee to consider
these proposals seriatim.
A MEMBER.—And that the official reporters be
excluded ?
Mr. PEAKE. —If it is so desired.
Senator EAIRBAIRN. —I second the motion.
Mr. LAMBERT.—I oppose the motion. My .reasons
are principally that, prior to this Conference going into
Committee and dealing with the advice tendered by our
side, members such as myself should have an oppor-
tunity of stating our views. If we go into Committee,
I understand there is to be no report of what occurs
there. That being so, delegates on this side may. not
get a square deal so far as the publicity of the business
transacted here is concerned. 1 represent an organiza-
tion of practically half-a-million people. The policy of
that organization has stood for the voluntary system
right through, and is up against conscription in every
form. We do not admit that the voluntary method has
failed. It has not failed. There is no sensible man
who could say that a country like Australia, after re- .
cruitiug close on 400,000, and after having offered
some 600,000 or 700,000 men, including rejects, has
failed in its voluntary efforts. One of our initial desires,
therefore, is a definite guarantee, so that the suspicions
of the people whom I represent can be allayed, that
conscription has been finally and definitely abandoned.
We are not coming here to make demands or in the
endeavour to strike a bargain with another party. We
are here as delegates at the invitation of an independent
gentleman, namely, the Governor-General, and we are
present to tender our advice, as we have been requested
to do. We say there are things which are hindering re-
cruiting. Our advice is that they shall be removed, and
the harmony which we all desire will then follow. Mr.
Beeby said it was hardly to be expected that we could
ask the representatives of the Governments here to
upset their policy. He will not say that the policy, of
his Government is victimization, or the de-registration
of unions, or the bursting up of unionism generally,
Mr. BEEBY. —Its general policy is to uphold the
law.
Mr. PEAKE —On a point of order, I ask whether a
general discussion on the whole question is in order on
a motion to go into Committee?
A MEMBER. —How can you raise a point of order
before a body which has no rules or orders?
The PRESIDENT. —This speaker has not expressed
his views before, and is explaining his reasons why he


desires to state his case before the Conference goes into
Committee. I can only ask that he will do so as briefly
as possible.
Mr. LAMBERT. —Before Conference goes into Com-
mittee, there are certain points which I feel I must put.
Mr. Beeby endeavoured to make it appear that the
people representing the Labour organizations were wholly
responsible for the recent industrial upheaval. That is
not correct. It is the strongly grounded conviction of
the rank and file of the people in the State from which
I have come that the industrial trouble there was de-
liberately engineered by the Government.
The PRESIDENT. —Is that endeavouring to help
us to arrive at unanimity? .
Mr. LAMBERT. —I am only replying to statements
which have already been made. Why did the State
Railways Commissioner, under the instructions of the
Government
Mr. BEEBY. —You know that is not true. The Go-
vernment had absolutely nothing to do with it.
Mr. LAMBERT.—The Commissioner is subject to
the will of the Government, irrespective of all Acts
upon the statute-books.
Mr. BEEBY. —You know that the Government gave
no instructions.
Mr. LAMBERT. —Well, the Government stood by,
anyhow. If you were so anxious to secure the neces-
sary harmony in our community in these times of stress
and danger, then even if the Government were net
actually instructing the Commissioner, they should
have stood between him and his purposes.
Mr. BEEBY.—Your big union knew that the strike
was wrong, and refused to come in, and it advised other
unions to stand out.
Mr. LAMBERT.—The circumstances with regard to
our position were taken into consideration, and if by
our action we thought we would be doing more to assist
our comrades who were fighting, then probably we fol-
lowed the wisest course.
Mr. BEEBY.—They were calling you “ scabs ”in
the middle of the strike.
Mr. LAMBERT.—Those were only individual
voices. Now as to the matter of political prosecutions
under the War Precautions Regulations, during the
election and conscription campaigns scores of our men
were intimidated. It was impossible for a Labour man
to make a speech with any safety.
Mr. PEAKE.—Do not forget that it was impossible
for some of Us to go out, even recruiting, without being
pelted with eggs.
Mr. LAMBERT.—We say that this kind of persecu-
tion under those regulations has created discord, and
our advice is that it should be stopped. The working
people say, “ They ask us to enlist, to fight for liberty
and freedom, and yet these same people are endeavour-
ing to turn this Australian democracy into an autocracy
and to take our liberties away. We say that our
liberties should not be interfered with. Let them
return to us those liberties which we enjoyed before
the war, and harmony will again prevail.” It is the
other side that has created the discord, and it is the
other side that can remove it.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—I support the motion. The
last speaker has referred to the War Precautions Act.
We are not living in normal times. This War Pre-
cautions legislation has been absolutely necessary; the
grievance is in the administration of it. I remind
Mr. Lambert that it was his own party in politics
which introduced the measure. Is not the War Precau-
tions Act merely on its trial ?
A MEMBER.—Yes, and it has been found guilty.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—But by a jury of your side
only. I do not think that any law ever made has been
found to be perfect. The proposals of Mr. Tudor are
distinctly in general terms. For instance, who is to
decide as to what is vital with regard to the conduct
of the war? Must it not be the Government of this
country, or some authority constituted by it? It is
a thousand pities that the Committee which has been
suggested for two days has not been permitted to get
down to business. It would be a calamity if, after
sitting here for days, we should fail to bring about
some definite conclusion. As the President has said,
the eyes of not only the Commonwealth, but of the
whole Empire, and, I believe, of Germany, are upon
this Conference. We shall besmirch our reputations
if, merely because we cannot agree as to details, we
disperse without doing something.
Mr. LYONS.—I should like to know whether it is
intended to force this question to a division. A sec-
tion of the Conference is certainly opposed to it, so
that unless it is to be forced to a division we are
merely wasting time in discussing it. I am personally
opposed to the proposal to go into Committee, for the
reason that I think that, since we, on this side, have
placed our proposals openly before the Conference,
we are entitled to ask the other side to do the same.
Mr. Watson has said that a Minister might make a
declaration in opposition to one of our proposals and be
convinced subsequently that it was advisable to approve
of it, so that if the matter were discussed in open Con-
ference he would be placed in an awkward position.
Mr. WATSON.—It might be quoted against him.
Mr. LYONS.—We on this side are in exactly the
same position. We represent organizations through-
out the Commonwealth that have taken up~a very
strong stand on the proposals we have submitted.
Mr. WATSON.—Are you not taking up a stand-and-
deliver attitude?
Mr. LYONS.—Not at all. If, having made our
requests in open Conference, we agree later on in open
Conference to modify any of them, we shall run the
same risks with our organizations that a Minister
in the same circumstances would run with his Govern-
ment.
Mr. WATSON.—There is no indication so far that
your side is prepared to modify anything.
Mr. LYONS.—We are prepared to take the risk of
dealing with the whole of these matters in open Con-
ference, provided the other side will do the same, and
tell us to what extent they are prepared to go in respect
to each item.
Mr. IIOLMAN.—Do you suggest that there is any
parallel between the case of the man who asks for
something, and may afterwards say, “ Rather than get
nothing, I will take half of what I have asked,” and
the man who has the giving of what is asked for, and
who may say in public, “ I will give a certain propor-
tion of what you ask,” but subsequently finds he cannot
do so ? So far your side have made, not proposals, but
demands.
Mr. LYONS.—There is a parallel between the two
cases. That is admitted in the Prime Minister’s state-
ment. Mr. Hughes said, in effect, in his statement,
“ We do not admit that these causes are responsible
for the falling off in recruiting, but, as we want your
co-operation, we are prepared to meet you.” Since
he has seen fit to go so far, surely no individual mem-
ber of a Government will run any danger in following
his lead. I am opposed to the proposal to go into Com-
mittee.
Mr. TUDOR.—iSpeaking at an earlier hour this
morning, I mentioned that we at the outset urged that
the press should be admitted, but that Senator Millen
promised that the Commonwealth Hansard staff would
be in attendance and take an official report of the pro-
ceedings. That staff is in attendance, and we consider
it advisable that statemeiits made, either for or against
any of the propositions we have submitted, should be
recorded. We have not made any series of demands.


We have not approached this Conference in a bargain-
ing spirit. . .
Idr. WATSON. —“ Bargaining ” would imply that
you were prepared, if necessary, to give up something;
but, so far, there has been no indication of that.
Mr. TUDOR. —We believe that certain things have
to be done to secure that harmony in the community
which this Conference was called to bring about; but
I fear that the longer we sit the further apart we are
inclined to drift. ,
Mr. HOLMAN. —Every suggestion made by us is
resisted by certain of your supporters as being in the
nature of a trap. All that we say is, “ Let us have a
friendly talk without the presence of the reporters.”
We asked, in the first instance, for the appointment of
a Committee of seven from each side; that was objected
to and we now ask for a Committee of the whole.
Mr. TUDOR. —Unfortunately, Labour has no pub-
licity agents to scatter abroad what we have said or
done. Unlike those on the other side also, we have not
the press behind us.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Have we met here to consider that?
Mr. TUDOR. —No; we have met to try to restore the
harmony that existed in the community during the first
eighteen months or two years of the war. We have'
put before the Conference, not demands, but sugges-
tions, believing, as representatives of Labour, that their
adoption will help in the desired direction. Rather
than go into Committee, I think it would be better for
the Conference to adjourn, to enable the other side to
say how far they are prepared to go in connexion with
these matters.
Mr. BEEBY. —If we did that, what next? Would
every one of the representatives of Labour be prepare. 1
to say, “ We will go out and support voluntary recruit-
ing ” ?
Mr. TUDOR. —When I was doing all in my power to
assist the recruiting movement, I was howled down by
the other side.
Mr. BEEBY. —I, too, have been howled down at a
recruiting meeting; but that fact does not affect me in
this crisis.
Mr. TUDOR. —I do not object to any one taking
exception to my political opinions, but when I am doing
my best, as I have always done, to assist voluntary
recruiting, I resent being howled down, and being told,
as I was, that my assistance was not worth having.
I have only to say, in conclusion, that if, in addition
to the exclusion of the press, we are not to have the
official reporters present, we shall be placed in a false
position.
Mr. O’LOUGIILIN. —The proposal to go into Com-
mittee is not likely to be accepted, for the reason that
a great many delegates, who have not had an oppor-
tunity to voice public opinion as they believe it to be
in their own State, are opposed to it. What harm can
there be in dealing in open Conference seriatim with
the suggestions that have been made? We could begin
with item No. 1, and ask the representatives of the Fede-
ral Government to state their views with regard to
it. That having been disposed of, we could discuss
item No. 2, “ Economic conscription.” The representa-
tives of the employers have already announced their
attitude with regard to that question, and there is no
reason why the representatives of the Commonwealth
Government should not do the same. If we reached a
deadlock with regard to it, we could defer its con-
sideration, and proceed to deal with the third sugges-
tion. As it is, we are likely to be here all day discuss-
ing whether or not we shali go into Committee. There
are grave objections to our going into Committee, since
there are many members of this Conference who have
not yet given expression to the views held by their
organizations. There has been a sufficient discussion
of this proposal, and I suggest that we proceed at once
5 2
e v
5 2
to deal with the propositions that have been submitted
on behalf of the Labour organizations. The third of
these affects the representatives of New South Wales
alone, and they might discuss it as they please.
Mr. LEE. —In view of the fact that, for the time being
at all events, the proposal to hold a joint Committee
is impossible, inasmuch as the representatives of the
organizations of Labour have declined to take part in
it, and we on this side would not attempt to force them,
we are brought back to the question of whether we
ought not to discuss the propositions in the way just
suggested, or whether we should adjourn to enable
the representatives on this side to determine what posi-
tion they are going to take up. I suggest that Mr.
Peake should withdraw his motion, and so enable
them.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Yes; I would suggest that Mr.
Peake withdraw his motion.
, Mr. PEAKE. —I desired to ascertain what was in
the minds of the Conference, and believed it was
anxious to go into Committee to discuss the propositions
in detail. The proposal for a sub-Committee having
been abandoned, I thought we might, in Committee of
the Whole, get down to these questions at once.
Mr, Rif AN.—You do not wish the official reporters
to be present in Committee ?
Mr. PEAKE.—No, because we should all be speaking
to the reporters. I recognise, however, that it would be
useless to press my proposal, and I therefore withdraw
it.
Mr. PEAKE’S motion for a Committee of the Whole
was accordingly withdrawn.
Mr. LEE. —I move—
That the Conference adjourn until 2.30 p.m.
to enable the representatives on this side to meet
and determine what proposals they can place be-
fore the Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I dissent from the proposal em-
bodied in this motion. Mr. Lee, for instance, cannot
help me to determine what proposals I should lay be-
fore the Conference on behalf of the New South Wales
Government. As we are all citizens of the Common-
wealth, we might help the Prime Minister to determine
what he should do; but I do not think he wants our
assistance. He wants to consult with his own col-
leagues, and has done so, just as I have consulted
my own colleagues. Consequently Ido not think tbe
appointment of a sectional Committee would be of any
value. A joint Committee would be quite a different
thing.
Mr. LEE. —But these questions affect all the State
Governments.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not see that. I know fairly
well what position we can take so far as New South
Wales is concerned. Mr. Lee’s Government, how-
ever, is not directly affected; no request is made by
the other side for action by him and his colleagues.
The suggestions made by the other side affect the Go-
vernments of Victoria, Western Australia, and New
South Wales, and the Government of the C on-
wealth.
Mr. LEE.—But unfortunately your actions affect
not only yourselves but the whole Commonwealth.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We hope that our actions in this
matter will do so, because we desire to create a condi-
tion favorable to recruiting throughout the Common-
wealth. I think we should proceed now in open Con-
ference with the discussion of Mr. Tudor’s requests.
The PRESIDENT.—Taking them item by item ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Personally I do not approve ol
that method.
The PRESIDENT.—They are like the clauses of a
Bill. You can get no finality otherwise.
Mr. HOLMAN.—They are all separate propositions.
The PRESIDENT.—I am very anxious that some
working scheme should be arrived at. The first item


is clearly disconnected from anything else. In moving
about Australia I have heard from all kinds of people
the difficulties they encounter in connexion with recruit-
ing work, and I know that the possibility of conscrip-
tion being raised again has unsettled them. People
will not throw themselves into the work. 1 have
found that so in Tasmania, Queensland, and in South
Australia. I have not been in Western Australia.
Mr. Hojman takes the point that if it is agreed
to sink personal views in regard to conscription,
which under certain circumstances is perhaps desirable,
on the other hand there should be some assurance in
return. Conscription is entirely a matter for the Fede-
ral Government, and I understand that Mr. Hughes
will be here during the course of the debate.
Senator MILLEN.—Iie will be here in a minute or
two.
The PRESIDENT. —Suppose we adjourn that mat-
ter and proceed to the next item. There may be
unanimity upon that, and then possibly we may come
to a point upon which we can go into Committee. It
will be a deplorable confession of lack of Australian
capacity if this Conference is unable to deal with these
proposals before it. It may be a tedious task, but we
ought to be able to do it. I fully appreciate Mr.
Holman's argument. He is anxious that the recruit-
ing movement should get the full benefit of enthusiasm
and harmony on the part of all concerned, and he
realizes that unless the new condition of affairs has the
benefit of all parties behind it, his giving way on cer-
tain points against his will and better judgment will be
of little use and may possibly lead to failure. He is per-
fectly entitled to put forward that view. If we could
go through these proposals and deal with them item
by item we might arrive at some conclusion.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If we were in Committee, and had
to submit a report of our proceedings to the full Con-
ference, we would be adopting a better method, but we
are not in Committee, and our friends will not deal with
the items in Committee. In those circumstances we
must deal with them as a whole. One man might give
us his views on one item, and others„may deal with other
items. That would be unbusiness-like, but gentlemen
who will not adopt a business-like method of doing
things must permit others to be unbusiness-like.
The PRESIDENT.—I do not see how we can arrive
at finality by any other method. After all these items
have been gone through, and some conclusion has been
arrived at, there is no reason why counter proposals
may nob be put forward. Some decision has to go away
from this Conference as a whole. There is urgent
necessity for the restoration of harmony, and it is vital
that there should be some definite pronouncement from
this Conference. Eor instance, in regard to economic
conscription there should be opportunities for any
counter proposals to be discussed, and general unanimity
arrived, at, before anything goes out to the public. It
be made conditional on giving support to one
proposal that a counter proposal might be discussed at
a later stage. Certainly, in the discussion of a Bill the
clauses are all directed to one object, though many
Bills deal with different matters. It seems to me that
these are matters that can be dealt with seriatim. The
first is a concern of the Federal Government, and could
be dealt with at once. If it is dealt with then there
might be a tendency to go into Committee on many
of the other items.
Mr. COLLIER.—There is a tendency to go out of
the Conference if some headway is not made.
Mr. WATSON.—Is that a stand-and-deliver atti-
tude ?
Mr. COLLIER.—No. We are day after day listen-
ing to the same speeches.
The PRESIDENT.—I think that a little patience
would not be inappropriate. It seems to me that some
modus operandi is possible.
Senator MILLEN.—Every one in this Conference
will cordially support the contention that, with the Ger-
mans within 40 miles of the Channel ports and getting
a little nearer, it "would be little short of a ghastly
calamity and shame on ourselves, individually and col-
lectively, if we allowed a matter of procedure to deter
us in the slightest degree from proceeding with the
mission that brought us here.
Mr. RYAN.—No one is suggesting it.
Senator MILLEN. —We have been spending the
morning discussing procedure only. I appreciate Mr.
Holman’s position. I would have preferred to discuss
these matters in Committee seriatim; but, as that pro-
posal has been defeated by the Conference, with a view
to meeting Mr. Holman’s objections I suggest that those
who feel as he does, and as I do, can still safeguard our-
selves. These matters have to be taken as a whole, and
viewed and judged as a whole, and I should feel prac-
tically safe, and Mr. Holman should be equally safe,
if, after dealing with the matters item by item, each
of us reserved his final decision until he saw the effect
of the results as ultimately adopted. I am prepared to
subscribe to some of the items provided that we can
achieve the object which brought us here. If, after
considering the items in detail, it is found that we have
agreed to nine and that the tenth is one to which we fire
opposed, we should not be held to the nine. I agree to
the proposal to take the items seriatim, but always with
the reservation that, after we have dealt with them in
that way, we shall be individually free to say whether we
can accept the result of the Conference in globo. Mr.
Holman would be as safe as I would be in adopting that
method.
Mr. LEE.—In open Conference?
Senator MILLEN. —Yes.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It is no fear of the official reporter
that deters me from speaking. I can say nothing unless
I know Mr. Tudor’s attitude towards the statement con-
tained in the latter part of the Prime Minister’s speech
yesterday, which I repeat, as follows:
But it is to be quite clearly understood that they
do so only because they most earnestly desire the
cordial and complete co-operation of the Labour
organizations; it is to that end, and for that reason
only, and in return for this complete and earnest
co-operation, that the Commonwealth and State
Governments are prepared to make changes in
their policy as will substantially satisfy the require-
ments of Mr. Tudor and other representatives. It
is, of course, quite understood that the representa-
tives of organizations cannot now pledge their re-
spective bodies to any course of action, but they
can express their own approval of it, and strongly
urge its acceptance upon their organizations.
It is definitely understood that we are prepared to go
as far as possible—and we hope sufficiently far—to meet
the position, provided we get an assurance of that kind.
We do it for that reason, and that reason only; but,
except from Mr. Morby and Mr. Storey, who did very
frankly rise to the invitation given by 'the Prime Min-
ister, there has been no word of that assurance forth-
coming Mr. Tudor says that he puts his cards on the
table. Let him put that card on the table and tell us
what his position is.
Mr. RYAN.—Have we not always stood for volun-
tary recruiting?
HOLMAN. There are three alternatives.
Ir. RYAN. I do not propose to be drawn into a
false position.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The three alternativ es are—com- I
pulsory recruiting, voluntary recruiting, and no recruit-
ing. May I ask what is the actual business before the


Conference at this moment? Are we still considering
the motion for adjournment submitted by Mr. Lee.
Personally, I hope that he will not press it, because it
would only delay the Conference.
The PRESIDENT—The motion was that we should
pro into Committee with the official reporters excluded.
That motion was withdrawn, because it was found that
it was not acceptable to certain portions of the Confer-
ellMr. HOLMAN—Mr. Lee has moved another motion.
The PRESIDENT. —I understood that he had with-
-1 LEE —1 am not prepared to withdraw it. My
proposal is that the Conference shall adjourn in order to
enable representatives on our side to meet together tor
the purpose of seeing how far they can go m the. direc-
tion of making a definite proposal for submission to
the Conference. On the other hand the suggestion is
that we should discuss the items in Mr. Tudors pro-
posals seriatim in open Conference, and my contention
is that we would give divergent views upon them, that
there would be no unanimity on our. part, and that
there would be no likelihood of reaching finality,
we adjourn for a little while before lunch, we can meet
and discuss the position among ourselves freely, fully,
and frankly, and see how far it is practicable for us
to go. We can then come back to the Conference with
a complete concrete proposal to put before it. . By that
means finality may be reached much more quickly. I
do not feel disposed to withdraw my proposal, because
its adoption will expedite things and put .us m a P OSl_
tion of having some show of unanimity, instead of ex-
pressing separate views.
Mr HUGHES.—I have heard only what was said
by Senator Millen and Mr. Lee, but I think I under-
stand the position fairly well. It does appear to me
that we are likely to lose a good deal of time, and
perhaps land ourselves in much confusion and uncer-
tainty, if we deal with these proposals seriatim, with-
out first in our different sections considering them be-
tween ourselves in order that we may know exactly
where we are. I take two points to illustrate what 1
mean. The first proposal is—
That there should be a definite pronouncement
by the Government that conscription has been
finally abandoned.
If the Conference is prepared to accept my statement
at the Show dinner, as read by me here, as
statement on that point, well and good, and then that
proposal would not serve as an illustration of the
difficulty to which I refer. But suppose the . Con-
ference does not accept that statement as sufficiently
definite, and believes that something more precise and
detailed is required, then I submit that, because we
are all involved in this, I cannot on the spur of the
moment lay down a formula which will bind the Com-
monwealth Government, and, of course, in
members of the different State Governments. It would
be absurd to suppose that they, being present, must
be committed to some ex-cathedra statement of m ,
and should have no opportunity to carefully co ““® r
the right formula to adopt and to reduce it to words.
If the Conference requires something more de-
finite than the statement I have made ° n the subject
—though how it could be more definite and why they
should require something more definite I do not know
—then I say we must have an opportunity to reduce
the matter to writing and put it in such a form as may
be satisfactory to all parties.
Mr HOLMAN.—On that illustration let. me say
that when you have drawn up your formula .f it were
done by a committee representative of the Federal
Government and the Governments of the States or of
those on the Nationalists’ side, you would not. have
1 remotest guarantee that the formula would be
agreed upon generally or would be acceptable to the
other side.
Mr. HUGHES.—No, certainly not.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then unless we have a joint com-
mittee representative of both sides the deliberation by
a committee would be of ho use.
Mr HUGHES.—I am only now assuming that the
proposal for a joint committee is not acceptable. The
proposal for a joint committee seems to me incom-
parably the better, but if we cannot have that I say
that we are driven by preference to Mr. Lee s suggestion .
rather than to discussing the matter at large m Con-
ference. Coming to another point, Mr Holman this
morning read an extract from a speech m which 1
made it perfectly clear that the Federal and State
Governments are prepared to do certain things because
they most earnestly desire the cordial and complete
co-operation of certain organizations. In return lor
that co-operation they are prepared to make such
changes in policy as will substantially satisfy the re-
quirements of Mr. Tudor and other representatives ot
Labour. I do not know whether any attempt has been
made to deal with that point. I have gathered from
what Mr. Holman, Mr. Storey, and Mr. Morby have
said that it has not been dealt with. I can speak tor
my colleagues and for the State Governments when 1
say that what we require is the. assurance of the
organizations themselves. I say without in any way
reflecting upon representatives of Labour organizations
here that although their co-operation is most valuable,
it is not all that is required. Mr. Morby might say
that he would be prepared to stand on the same plat-
form with me in this matter, and I would say. All
right, come along; that will be something done. Mr.
Storey might say that he would be prepared to come
along and speak with me on different platforms, and
I would say, “ That is a very good thing, so far as
I am concerned as a man, and I will do anything
can to make it easier for you to make your co-opera-
tion effective.” But I am speaking here, not for my-
self, but for the Federal and State Governments. We
are to do certain things that involve fundamental
changes of policy, and therefore we must have these
assurances, not from individuals, but from organiza-
tions Now, I have had too much to do with organiza-
tions not to know that the prophet,. upon his return
from a far country, is not received with obeisance and
his representations accepted always as if they were
the w'ord of God. I know to the contrary. You gentle-
men are all right, and you may say this or that and
then go back to your organizations and, as Mr Storey
says, they will say that you have been got at, that
you are no longer to be relied on.. They will put
your resolutions in the waste-paper basket and say
that they decline to have anything to do with it.
Mr. STOREY. —I do not remember that.
Mr. HUGHES—But if you could say that the
Sydney Trades Hall or the New South Wales. Political
Labour Council, so far from talking and passing reso-
lutions about peace where there is no peace, will say,
«This organization pledges itself to do all things
within its power to further recruiting, and urges upon
its members to take the platform where possible, and
further urges all its members of fighting age, who are
able to do so, to join the Commonwealth Forces, that,
would be something great, and we should have ad-
vanced. I should be prepared to do that. If I were,
as I once was, president of the Wharf Labourers Union
or secretary to the Sydney Wharf Labourers.- Union,
I would go down and move such a resolution at a
meeting of the union to-morrow, if they threw every-
thin* in the place at me. You gentlemen know that
very well. I would not care what they did. I was
doing those things when they were at least as unpopular


as they are to-day. That is what we want done, and
nothing less than that will satisfy us.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Of course, that is understood.
Mr. HUGHES.—We can chat together, and settle
one or two things, and see where we are. Gentlemen
representative of the Labour organizations can settle
whether they are prepared to go back to their organiza-
tions and face the music by telling them the truth,
namely, that it is touch and go with Australia. For
that is what it is. We may talk about the Labour
movement, industrial or political, but it is touch and
go with us. You can go back and tell the organiza-
tions so. Y ou can say, “Never mind about the
National party, the Labour party, or any other party
now, because it is touch and go with the people of Aus-
tralia, and all of them now must pull together.”
Mr. HOLMAN.—They can also say that if these
terms are accepted, a measure of concession, which we
can agree upon, will be made to them conditionally and
simultaneously. J
Mr. HUGHES.—Certainly; forthwith.
A MEMBER.—And be laughed at.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Why should you be laughed at?
A MEMBER.—I will explain that later.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not see anything to laugh at
in that. I say that the men who laugh in the present
situation may live to do something very different from
laughing in the very near future. You gentlemen
need to go back to the organizations and tell them the
truth.. You can say, “You see these things that are
pm-pricks, or, if you please, the stabs of daggers; but
the Governments, without prejudice to their opinions
and to their views as to what was or is the proper
policy, but because they realize that it is now a matter
of life and death, are prepared to throw their lot in
with vou, make a tabula raza, and start again. I am,
therefore, of opinion, that we can at this juncture have
a short chat between ourselves. Those who differ from
us may do the same. It cannot possibly do any harm.
Then when we come back to the Conference again, you
can say what, in the circumstances, you consider to be
the best course to adopt. I agree with Senator Millen
that the wasting of time in the discussion of procedure
is perfectly absurd. The Federal and State Govern-
ments have, at any rate, done something to show their
bona ficles. We are willing, I say that without qualifica-
tion, to meet you*in any reasonable way, and to remove,
as far as is humanly possible, all things that stand
between us and complete co-operation. On the other
hand, it must not be a one-sided affair: it must be
reciprocal. We expect from you the same treatment
that we give. We want from you the same assistance
that we are prepared to give. My experience of confer-
ences leads me to-believe that we have come to a stage
where we might do a good deal of good by having a
chat amongst ourselves. You can suggest how long
the interval should be.
Mr. RYAN.—The adjournment should be until 2.30
p.m., at least.
Mr. HUGHES.—Very well. I must be understood as
supporting Mr. Lee’s motion, but at the same time i
bringing it to the point that I am suggesting that we 1
should suspend the present discussion with a view to ;
meeting again at 2.30 p.m., when, after each section 1
has discussed the situation, we may be in a position to 1
come to close holts. * .
Senator GARDINER.—I know the risk any one 1
runs in restarting the discussion, but there is a word
or two that I should like to say. I agree with the *
Prime Minister that it would, perhaps, he better for 1
each party to get together and see if some understand- 1
ing cannot he arrived at; and I should like to offer the £
suggestion to your side that you draft a resolution by £
which the Conference might terminate its proceedings c
without creating any unnecessary uneasiness that it had
failed. i ’ j
id Mr. TUDOR. —That is the position we are nearly
at now.
Senator GARDINER.—I regret very much that the
Prime Minister, owing entirely to the fact that he has
, n n °t been present during the whole of the proceedings.
l e absolutely misunderstands our position. We have not
said that we are willing to help if you will do this or
that; we hold the ground that we. all through have
} r een willing to help, and have helped; but we recognise
[r that the fact of these obstacles being in the way has
d made it difficult to get people to realize that they ought
i. t° help. I have no desire to re-open the discussion, but
ie I think that the Conference, by means of some such
y resolution as I have suggested, could close decently and
3- i n order, without conveying any idea that it had failed.
If that aspect of the matter be considered before we
n i eet again, I think we might speedily terminate the
discussions.
Mr. TUDOR.—There will be very little time for the
party I represent to arrive at a decision by 2.30 o’clock.
The speech of the Prime Minister meant, if it meant
anything—and the honorable gentleman knows the fact
as well as any one does —that each man on this side can
speak only for himself. The right honorable gentleman
told us that it is for us to get back to our organizations;
t and that, is why I hope there will be something done
t on the lines suggested by Senator Gardiner. I have
! been very much afraid that the Conference might lead
l t 0 something we all hope will not eventuate; and I
3 hope it may not be open to any one to say that the
5 wllole thing has been a failure, and has left us further
b apart than when we met. In saying this, I think lam
} voicing the opinion of every man here of whom I
. happen to be the leader, owing to my position as Leader
. of the Federal Labour party. That must not happen;
and if we have to meet as separate parties, the sooner
we do it the better.
i Mr. HUGHES. I suggest that we leave the hour of
resuming at 2.30, and that if either side is not quite
ready, another room in the House may be found in
which thev can meet, while the others wait.
Mr. TITDOR.--The points or proposals which I laid
before the Conference in my opening speech do not
appear m the. official report in tabulated form, and I
I ] l 1S desirable that they should. I therefore sug-
gest that they be inserted, and that the President,
Senator Millen, and myself, decide as to where thev
snail appear. J
1 J 5 ? 6 Z R ? Sunderst and this matter is
' member's.— Hear, 6 SUggeSt<>i -
Mr. ELMSLTE.— There is a certain portion of the
Pi ime Minister s speech on which I am not at all clear
at the present time.
wbln e w PRE T you not deal with that
when we meet again?
Mr. ELMSLIE No ; because it will have a great
feS °Do f a 4 oT>t ’con-
anhPunderstand the Prime Minister to re-
n Id! Ilf h ? d ° le " a I tes on thls side shall not only
r the decisl . ons arrived at, but must
go back to the various organizations that they repre-
rrAr g v\ en \ with T ail i, ° wer ?£*»,*>
£‘‘ h " also* Am Ito understand that, not only
tivls hut thiflil p!< Y a - represents,
are “* the organizations to which we report
movement? 7 resolutlons t 0 forward the recruiting
Mr. HUGHES.—Clearly the first thin* is that von
decisions, anf cleaHyVour ‘
will not do d 1,8 lnd ° rsed b.y your organizations,
open for your ? discussion™ “ not Cl ° S6d ’ klt 18 Still
V^and, ad}aUn ' td lmUl IS °


Mr. HUGHES. —I have to apologize to the Confer-
ence for having delayed it somewhat, but that has been
unavoidable. We have considered the position in gene-
ral and in detail, and in the light of what has been
said during the discussion here, particularly since my
statement of yesterday. In order that a decision might,
be assured and expedited, we have considered m detail
the matters set out by Mr. Tudor, so that we might
be in a position to supply a particular statement m re-
gard to each of them, rather than a general statement
in regard to all of them. Although it is probable that
in what I am about to say I shall not cover all the
ground, perhaps any information which I omit may be
elicited either by way of interjection or of question. 1
shall be glad to'fill in any of the gaps. I come now to
Mr. Tudor’s proposals as they were presented to the
Conference. His first proposition reads—
1. That there should be a definite pronouncement
by the Government that conscription has been
finally abandoned.
Upon that point we are of the opinion that the state-
ment which I made at the Agricultural Show luncheon
in Sydney is sufficiently clear, explicit,, and unam-
biguous. If members do not regard it in that light,
I ask them to say exactly where it falls short, and 1
shall endeavour to meet their objections. The second
proposal put forward by Mr. Tudor was
2. That there should be no economic conscrip-
tion in public or private employ.
The Government are prepared to accept that. His
third proposal reads —
3 Re-registration of unions deregistered and re-
storation to unions of their former status ; restora-
tion to their employment of victimized unionists,
abolition of bogus unions and bureaux set up m
connexion therewith.
The deregistration of unions is a matter which falls
wholly within the jurisdiction of the State of N
South Wales, and I am authorized on behalf of t
Government of that State to say that it will re-register
those unions by special Act. In regard to the rest, of
the proposal the attitude of the Governments is that
no workman is to be refused employment in any occu-
pation by reason of his connexion with the late general
strike, members of old and new unions to have equal
opportunitv for any employment offering.
Mr TUDOR.— What about the abolition of bogus
unions? Do you think that your answer covers that
Mr. HUGHES.— Yes. That is my answer, lhe
fourth proposition submitted by Mr. Tudor reads—
-4 (a) Repeal of all war precautions regulations
not vital to the conduct of the war and a Govern-
ment guarantee against their re-enactmen .
Our reply is—
(a) The Federal Government are prepared to
favorably consider the repeal of-all war regula-
tions not vital to the war. The Labour represe
tatives to state which regulations are objected to.
Paragraph (b) of proposal 4 submitted by Mr. Tudor
rcctcls
(b) Abolition of press censorship and limitations
upon free speech,, except as relating to military
news of advantage to the enemy.
In regard to that the Government say —•
(b) The Press Conference is now sitting, as a re-
sult of which it is confidently anticipated that a
modus vivendi will be resolved so far as the press
is concerned. Free speech to be permitted other
than statements of advantage to the enemy or pi
judicial to the Allies.
Then paragraph (c) of proposition 4 reads—
(c) Cessation of political and industrial prosecu-
tions under the War Precautions Act.
Our reply is—
(c) The War Precautions Act will not he used
for political and industrial prosecutions.
Paragraphs (d) and (e) of proposition 4 read—
(d) The immediate release of all persons not
guilty of criminal offences —imprisoned in con-
nexion with conscription, peace propaganda, re-
cruiting, and the recent industrial troubles. .
(e) Refund of fines and costs in connexion with
all industrial and political prosecutions during the
war period.
The Government, having considered these proposals, de-
sire to say, in answer to paragraph ( d ) —
All persons, if any, who are confined as a result
of matters arising out of the referendum cam-
paign or the last general strike will be released.
In regard to (e), we say —
All outstanding penalties to be abandoned.
The last proposal by Mr. Tudor reads —
That immediate and effective steps be taken to
protect soldiers’ dependants, and the public gene-
rally, against profiteering.
The Government agree to that. In this connexion we
desire to say that the Governments have given, and will
continue to give, every attention to this matter, the vital
importance of which they fully recognise, and they will
welcome any practicable suggestion from the Conference
to this end. These are our answers in detail to the re-
quests that have been submitted, and I venture to say
that the members of the Conference, after having offered
such observations as they may wish to offer with. a view
to clearing up anything which is ambiguous, will now
be able to pass such a resolution as will enable us to go
out of this chamber with the assurance that we have
behind us the whole of the organizations of both the
political parties which are represented here. Ido not
wish to say anything more, except to again refer the
. Conference to the statement which I made yesterday,
that while I do not admit that the causes enumerated
by Mr. Tudor are those which are responsible for the
falling off in recruiting, “ being firmly convinced that
co-operation by the Labour party and all sections of the
community is essential to securing such reinforcements
as the present circumstances make imperative, the Fede-
ral and State Governments are prepared to meet .the
Labour party in every reasonable way, and to consider
its proposals in a favorable spirit. But it is to be
quite clearly understood that they do so only because
they most earnestlv desire the cordial and complete co-
operation of the Labour organizations; it is to that
end, and for that reason only, and in return for that
complete and earnest co-operation, that the Common-
wealth and State Governments are prepared to make
such changes in their poliev as will substantially satisfy
the requirements of Mr. Tudor and other representa-
tives.” I shall content myself with what I have said,
and, with the permission of the Conference, will avail
myself of an opportunity to replv by way of explana-
tion to anvthing which may be said bv wav of criticism.
Mr. TUDOR.—I want to say, at the outset, that
these suggestions were made by me on behalf of the
Labour members present. We have been, and still are,
supporters of the voluntary svstem. Our proposals
were not put forward as conditions in relation to which
we would do anything different from what we have
been doing; they are suggestions outlining what,
in our opinion, were some of the disabilities which were
in the wav of securing co-operation, or which prevented
our obtaining that harmony that all of us he 1 ieve should
exist to-dav. As the Prime Minister said this morn-
ing, and yesterday afternoon also, those of us who are
here representing organizations must renort to those
bodies. The only pe'rsons whom I represent are the


members of the Federal Labour party. I shall report
back to that party, because, as a party, its members do
not know what are the suggestions laid before the Con-
ference. Some of them, of course, I have stated in
Parliament during the recent no-confidence debate. I
do not say that they were as complete or as elaborate
as they have been placed before you, or that they were
so clear and definite as at present.
So far as the replies outlined by the Prime Minister
are concerned, the answer to the first point is that Mr.
Hughes’ statement in Sydney is to stand.
Mr. HUGHES.—I added to that that if a clearer
statement were needed, I would be prepared to give it.
Mr. TUDOR.—That is so; and some of the other
members present may desire from the Prime Minister
a clearer utterance as to that position. We have had
in Conference a statement by Senator Millen, and one
also, I think, by Mr. Cook, to the effect that no
Government could definitely pledge themselves that
they had finally abandoned conscription. That will be
one of the difficulties in the way. So far as the people
are concerned to whom we report, if they feel that
there is danger of conscription being brought up again,
it will necessarily make a great difference in the atti-
tude which they will probably adopt. We have to
remember that the whole of the dissension in the com-
munity has occurred since the time of the first
conscription referendum. While we agree to differ
upon that issue, there will need to be a clear and
definite statement on the matter, and I will welcome
it from the Prime Minister this afternoon, if possible,
or, at any rate, before the Conference closes. That is
a statement that we should have a clearer pronounce-
ment upon.
Mr. HUGHES.—Perhaps you will indicate in what
ways it falls short of clarity.
Mr. TUDOR.—I cannot understand why you take
any exception to the word “ finally.” Both Mr. Cook
and Senator Millen took exception to that phrase. We
might go back to our organizations and give them your
reply, and, no doubt, the official reports will be avail-
able to members of Parliament, as well as to outsiders.
After the Conference is over, I hope that the reports
will be available, for they will be closely scanned by
the people who sent us here. Thev will want to know
what has been done in this Conference. With regard to
the second point in the reply—no economic conscription
in public or private employment—the Prime Minister
announces that the Government are quite willing to
accept that, and that there shall be no economic con-
scription. lam very glad to hear that, because it
would have worked very hardly. I will give one
example. There is a man in Melbourne whose only
eligible son has been to the war, and has returned
wounded ; and he is very much afraid, being temporarily
employed, that he will be put off and a returned soldier
put in his place.
MY HUGHES.—How could that be economic con-
scription? I assume that the person to whom you
refer is over the military age. It cannot be economic
conscription to sack him.
Mr. TUDOR.—If he is sacked and someone else is
given his place.
Mr. HUGHES.—It may be a hardship, but it is
not economic conscription.
Senator MILLEN.—Is the man likely to be sacked
or will his term of service expire under our Public
Service Act?
.Mr. TUDOR.—His term will have expired, but he
will then have no future chance of employment.
Mr. HOLMAN. —After all, has this anything to do
with the matter?
Mr. TUDOR.—Yes, because it is typical. This man
has twenty-two blood relations who have gone to the
war, and five have been killed.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is hard, but it would not be
economic conscription.
Mr. HOLMAN". —If he fell down a lift and broke
his neck it would be a hardship, but no more economic
conscription than would be the case as you cite it.
Mr. TUDOR. —No, but he thinks that possibly he
and people like himself will be shunted out of the
way, and that generally there are things being done
which are prejudicial to their interests and which they
do not favour. Therefore, I hope that in relation both
to public and to private employment men will not be
put off simply because they are getting old; and
married men dismissed, and single men who are re-
turned soldiers put on in their places.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is the very negation of economic
conscription to employ a young man and sack an old
man. Economic conscription is to sack the young man
and to employ the old in his place; or, if I put off a
man and employed a girl, that would be economic con-
scription. -Ai/v-fr
Mr. TUDOR.—I am just making this reference be-
cause there is a fear in the community that things like
this will be done; and there is not the same oppor-
tunity for married men to seek re-employment as
there was before the trouble started. Concern-
ing the third point, the New South Wales
Government say they will re-register the unions by a
special Act. I am very glad to know that they are
going to do so. But if you re-register, for instance,
the wool and basil workers, with their 970 members,
you still leave the bogus union.
A MEMBER.—CaII it the new union.
Mr. MORBY.—What else is it but a bogus union ?
Mr. TUDOR.—Very well; the new union, with its
fifteen members. Unless the union having the 970
members can obtain the advantages of the Court
awards
Mr. WATSON.—They will, if they re-register.
Mr. HUGHES.—Suppose that you are not in favour
of economic conscription, and suppose that you re-
register the Basil Workers’ Union and put them on,
and sack all the members who are eligible for military
service in the bogus union—as you call it. If that is
not economic conscription, then what else is it ?
Mr. TUDOR. If the two unions are given a fair
field, there is no doubt as to which will go under.
Mr. MORBY.—It is not necessary for the fifteen
men who are working for the syndicate to be put out
of employment. AH they have to do is to forsake the
scab ” union and join the legitimate one.
Mr. TUDOR.—In regard to the restoration of the
unions to their former status, the rights of certain sec-
tions of the Waterside Workers’ Federation, with which
the Prime Minister was connected, have been taken
away under the War Precautions Regulations.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is true that the work formerly
done by members of the Waterside Workers’ Federa-
tion is now being done by members of other unions
who have “ scabbed ” on them. I know that is a fact,
because a deputation of the union with which I was
connected waited upon me and told me so. There are
no non-unionists “scabbing” to-day. Those who are
scabbing ’ are men who have “ratted” from their
own unions and taken the work of others.
Mr. MORBY —They are not the kind of unionists
l a . y°n would have tolerated when you were president
of the Waterside Workers’ Federation.
Mr. HUGHES.—I have exactly the same feeling for
them as I always had.
WOU ! d not be tolerated in any
part ot the world for five minutes.
ihoW TO**T*», there ™ an . y of those men in
the Wool and Basil Workers’ Union ?
Mr. TUDOR.—None.
Mi. HUGHES. On the wharfs in Sydney to-day
amTJT COa l ”t mers ; J ailwasr workers, boilermakers,
and others who hare left their unions and are taking


the bread out of the mouths of the poor devils on the
wharfs.
Mr. TUDOR. —The Prime Minister must not think
that lam going to side with those men. Ido not think
he would do so.
Mr. HUGHES.—No, I will not.
Mr. TUDOR. —In regard to the paragraph which
provides that no workman shall be refused employment
in any occupation by reason of his connexion with the
late general strike, I should like to know how far that
promise goes. At the present time there are black
lists abroad.
Mr. BEEBY. —Can you produce one black list?
Mr. TUDOR. —I cannot at this moment, but Mr.
Page, M.11.R., a gentleman who is respected by every
member of the Conference, was black-listed through-
out Australia on account of his connexion with the
1891 strike. '
Mr. BEEBY.—What has that to do with the pre-
S6iit strike ?
Mr. TUDOR.—The same sort of thing may occur
again. A man applies on a vessel for employment, and
he has to wait while the company finds out if his name
is on the black list. This paragraph provides that the
members of the old and new unions are to have an equal
chance. I desire to be sure that the chance of each
will be equal, and that the men who were loyal to
their unions shall not be victimized on account of their
loyalty. "
Mr. HOLMAN. —The promise is offered without re-
servation. Where there is any reservation in regard
to any of these points it is expressed.
Mr. HUGHES. —So far as the Government are con-
cerned, or-so far as our influence goes, that promise
will be observed without qualification.
Mr. TUDOR. —The members of the old and the new
unions are to stand on an equal footing ?
Mr. HUGHES. —Hear, hear!
Mr. TUDOR. —I have no doubt how that will work
out. The old unionists will have the best chance if they
are judged by their abilities, and if the promise of equal
opportunity is without reservation. I wish it to. be
distinctly understood that there is to be no reservation,
mental or otherwise, and that the. employing delegates
shall pledge themselves that they will oppose any unfair
discrimination. lam glad to hear that, in connexion
with the Pelaw Main Colliery, most of the men who
were victimized have been reinstated. Those men
belong to a district in which the greatest number of
recruits was obtained.
Mr. BEEBY. —Their reinstatement is the result of
the action of the Government of New South Wales.
Mr. TUDOR. —I am glad the Government have re-
pented. Actions by employers have been taken, or are
pending to deprive certain organizations of their pre-
vious status. There is an action before the. Law Courts
at the present time to deprive the Waterside Workers
Federation, at ports where there was.no trouble at all,
of the status they had before the industrial dispute
occurred. Because theire was trouble in Sydney, why
deprive the men at Wallaroo and Burnie of the advan-
tages they enjoyed? Mr. Burrows, the secretary of
the waterside workers in Burnie, has been penalized,
and is unable to obtain employment to-day. We desire
to ventilate these matters, so that there shall be no
further victimization of these men. In Melbourne a
bureau has been established by the Ship-owners Fede-
ration for the engagement of men for work on the
wharfs. The purpose of the bureau is to give certain
favoured men employment, and to penalize others. The
Labour members of this Conference stand for fair
treatment all round, and I object to one man being
given employment for twenty-four hours on end, when
another man can get no employment at all.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Are you not wasting time in dis-
cussing things that are admitted?
Mr. TUDOR. —I wish to know whether the bureaux
that are in existence to-day are to continue.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Not if they operate to prevent men
of the old and new unions from having equal oppor-
tunities.
Mr. TUDOR.—I shall he satisfied if that point is
conceded. In regard to the promise of the Federal
Government to consider the repeal of all war regula-
tions which are not vital to the war, I shall he pleased
to confer with my fellow members in the Federal Par-
liament, and let the Prime Minister know which regu-
lations are objectionable in our opinion. New regula-
tions are being constantly turned, out, and it has been
aptly said that two men, the Prime Minister and the
Government Printer, are governing Australia. On the
11th April, the day before the Conference assembled,
I received a fresh budget of regulations. I notice that
one is an amendment of nine other regulations; another
one amends thirty-eight others, and yet another has
twenty-three sub-clauses. Many of those regulations
that are not necessary for the carrying on of the war
should never have been imposed.
Mr. HUGHES—You show me any which are not
necessary, and I shall knock them out.
Mr. TUDOR.—I accept that promise from the Prime
Minister, and I shall be pleased to consider the matter
with the members of the Parliamentary Labour party.
Regarding the censorship, does anybody believe that
the Press Conference is the proper body to point out
in what respects the censorship is unfair? All that the
press representatives will be concerned 'about is the
extent to which the censorship affects them. They will
not concern themselves about the effect of the' censor-
ship on public men. Labour men are subjected to a
double censorship—the censorship of the newspaper,
which excludes all matter that is not helpful to its
policy, and then the restrictions imposed by the official
censor. I should like this paragraph to be further con-
sidered by the Government. However, I am glad to
know that free speech is to be permitted.
Mr. HUGHES.—If you have free speech, what more
do you want?
Mr. TUDOR. —We do not desire the suppression of
free speech, and I am suggesting that the Press Con-
ference is not competent to pass an opinion on the
censorship, so far as it affects public speakers.
Mr. HUGHES. —The concluding words .of paragraph
(b) should read “or prejudicial to the Allies or recruit-
ing.”
Mr. TUDOR. —I do not think we have gained much
from the Government on that point. It is not very
pleasant to have men standing close by, taking a note
of every thing that we say, with a view to prosecution.
Mr. COLLIER. —In Western Australia, instead of
a shorthand writer, you have an illiterate policeman.
Mr. TUDOR. —I hope that the Government promises
will be carried out. The War Precautions Regulations
have been used for political and industrial prosecu-
tions. The Government also promises that all persons,
if any, who are confined as a result of matters arising
out of the referendum campaign or the last general
strike are to be released, and all outstanding penalties
to be abandoned. If it is right to abandon outstanding
penalties, why should not fines that have been imposed
be remitted ? *
Mr. BEEBY.—We do not admit that it is right to
abandon these penalties, but we offer to abandon them
in order to secure harmony.
Mr. TUDOR. —If I did not think that it was right
to abandon them, I would not do so.
Mr. WATSON. —Not even to secure harmony in
respect of recruiting?


Mr. TUDOR.—The outstanding penalties may not
amount to much, but I know that some extraordinarily
heavy fines have been imposed. These fines should be
remitted, and costs should be paid for the persons
prosecuted, in all cases that have been dismissed by
the magistrates. We are told that the Government
has given, and will continue to give, every attention
to the matter of profiteering, and will welcome any
practical suggestion to that end.
Mr. BEEBY.—Now give us some.
Mr. TUDOR.—Taxation is a subject with which
some of us will have an opportunity of dealing in
another place. I say that when a company can pay
a dividend of 33 per cent, and put aside £130,000 to
meet war-time profits taxation, the present taxation is
not effective. The Prime Minister spoke of men posing
as patriots after. giving £5O to a patriotic fund and
robbing the public of £5,000. The public should be
protected from such men. I would tax them up to
100 per cent, of their war-time profits. That is the
only way in which you will put an end to the making
of war-time profits. I object to men being allowed to
charge any prices they like, the Government merely
going halves in their war-time profits.
Mr. HUGHES.—When you were in office with me
and Mr. Fisher—and you held office for a good time
after the war began—l did not hear you say that you
would take 100 per cent, of any war-time profits.
Mr. TUDOR. —Senator Gardiner, who was a Minis-
ter at the same time, knows what I was prepared to
vote for then. My action as a Minister will stand the
fullest investigation. It must be remembered that it
is over eighteen months since I left office. The longer
the war has continued the more the profiteer has been
making out of the community.
Mr. HUGHES.—It must be taken that we do, or
do not, agree with you. I take it that a tax of 100
per cent, on war-time profits is your one remedy for
profiteering.
Mr. TUDOR.—Not my one remedy. Price fixing
could have been extended much further. I know the
difficulties in the way, but I know, too, that directly
the Commonwealth Government said that it intended
to deal with the price of meat, and to fix it at the
price at which that commodity was sent overseas, there
was an outcry from the persons interested. When
Mr. Piddington took evidence on the subject in Sydney,
no fewer than five sections of the meat industry were
represented before him by ten or a dozen barristers,
the cost of which the people will have to pay in the
end. The Government should take effective means to
deal with price fixing all over Australia, so that the
public may not suffer as they have done in the past.
Senator MILLEN.—WiII you help us by indicating
what the “effective means” are?
Mr. TUDOR.—One thing would be to give the local
authorities greater powers than they have; to have
local boards for the fixing of prices instead of having
price-fixing centralized as in the past. The State
Boards were doing good work, and their abolition was
a mistake. I do not see why the State Boards could
not have greater powers and work in harmony with
the Federal Boards. I shall take back to those who
I represent the answers of the Prime Minister.
Mr. RYAN.—We have now a statement by the Prime
Minister which is the result of‘ a Conference between
him and the Premiers of ther States—excepting myself
—and the representatives of the employers’ organiza-
tions on the proposals put forward by Mr. Tudor. The
position that should be taken up by me and by the re-
presentatives of Labour organizations also is becoming
more and more apparent. We have been summoned
to this Conference to make suggestions that will enable
the Government to more successfully carry on the sys-
tem of voluntary recruiting, but our power is only
that of making suggestions and of offering advice; we
have no executive authority. The other side, if I may
so term the members who compose it, wish to saddle
us with responsibility for some plan which we shall
have no executive authority to carry out. I have
never wavered from my adherence to the voluntary
system. I see that there are certain obstacles in the
way of that system becoming the success which it
would become if those obstacles did not exist. We have
stated what some of these obstacles are, though there
are other obstacles which have not been mentioned.
I agree, however, that the obstacles mentioned are some
of the chief that militate against the voluntary system
being the success it would be if they did not exist, and
they can be removed, but only by the action of the
Commonwealth and State Governments and em-
ployers’ organizations. When they have been removed,
members of the other side will have gone a long way
towards making the voluntary system of recruiting per-
fect, and it will certainly be a greater success than it
is now. In proportion to the advance along the track
that we have suggested should be followed will the
voluntary system benefit. If you are prepared to go
only half way, you will assist recruiting only to that
extent. The answers given to our proposals by the
Prime Minister on behalf of the Commonwealth and
State Governments and the employers’ organizations
seem to me to go hardly any distance. No doubt the
right honorable gentleman will claim that he has done
all that is possible to prevent profiteering, but I do
not admit that that is so. Mr. Hughes said that his
Government has been giving, and will continue to give,
every attention to the matter.
Mr. PIUGHES.—And we ask you for suggestions as
to what more we should do. If a practical suggestion
is made, I, speaking for myself, will adopt it.
Mr. RYAN.—I say that the Commonwealth Govern-
ment has not done its duty in the matter of the pre-
vention of profiteering. We are told that it will wel-
come any practical suggestions from the Conference to
that end, but while we are asked to make suggestions we
cannot give effect to them. Our position would be
different if we were in the position of an executive hav-
ing continuous control of the matter. As it is, I
might make a suggestion which those affected would
counter, and it would be necessary for effective action
for me to make a second move.
Senator MTLLEN.—If you make a practical sugges-
tion, the giving of effect to it will be the responsibility
of the executive.
Mr. RYAN.—But we can suggest only in general
terms. It is for you to find ways and means. We say
that profiteering is not being prevented. There are
several suggestions that I could make. Eor instance, I
could suggest that the recommendations of the Inter-
State Commission should be carried out, and the price of
live stock fixed. It is useless to attempt to fix retail
prices until you have fixed the wholesale prices; Fur-
ther, to control wholesale prices, you must control im-
portations. Commodities are now sometimes sold two or
three times over on their way here from overseas, with a
profit on each sale. If the Commonwealth could control
importations, and see that goods are landed here at a
price at which they were shipped, plus freight, and re-
tailed accordingly, a good deal would be done to stop
profiteering. You must go down to the foundations if
you wish to prevent profiteering.
Mr. WATSON.—To do what is suggested the Govern-
ment would have to appoint import agents.
Mr RYAN.—No single State could do that; it can
only be done by the Commonwealth.
Mr. PEAKE. One State Government blocked meat
coming into South Australia.
Mr RYAN.—The Premier of South Australia is ap-
?RTtllie Z rm S to the Queensland stock embargo.
Mr. PEAKE.—Hear, hear!


Mr. RYAN. —He is trying to draw me off the track;
but I would remind him that when we offered him, or
his predecessors in office, some thousands of tons of. meat
they were unable to get it into South Australia owing to
the local Abattoirs Act, and the South Australian
Government would not repeal that Act.
Mr. PEAKE.— You would not let your live meat
come into South Australia.
Mr. RYAN. —We would. I was always prepared to
let it go into the other States, provided the Governments
of those States would fix the price somewhat on a
parity with that obtaining in Queensland.
The PRESIDENT. —What has this to do with
3 RYAN. —A great deal. I have been asked for
suggestions, and lam giving them. Some members of
the Conference, perhaps, do not like them.
Mr. HUGHES.—They are very fine, but are they
practicable ? .
Mr. RYAN.—They are. If the price of cattle in
the other States had been fixed on a parity with that
ruling in Queensland the effect would have been to keep
the price of fat stock all over Australia on something
like a par with the price in Queensland. But had we
raised the embargo without that fixing of price, there
would have been a tendency to lift the price in Queens-
land to that prevailing in the rest of Australia. I miglu
(five some suggestions, but I cannot in a few moments
fay down a complete plan for controlling profiteering.
It needs to be dealt with by a Cabinet which can recon-
sider it from time to time. . .
Senator PLAIN.—WiII you tell, me how it is pos-
sible to produce meat on land costing £BO per acre at
the same price as the people in your State cun produce
it on land for which they pay a rental ot about £1
per 1,000 square miles?
Mr. RYAN—Queensland can produce enough meat
for the whole of the requirements of Australia.
Mr. HUGHES.—You are suggesting that we should
fix the price of meat for local consumption at the ex-
port price, or, in other words, below the market rate.
Mr. RYAN. —I suggest the adoption of the recom-
mendation of the Inter-State Commission.
Mr HUGHES.—AppIy that to sugar. Since we
have been in office we. have raised the price of sugar
for the producer by quite a considerable amount. Are
you suggesting that we should reduce, that price,
understand that you wish to see me in regard to the
price of sugar. . . -u m
Mr. RYAN—I am not suggesting that you should
reduce the price.; so long as a reasonable price is main-
tained, lam satisfied. . ,
Mr HUGHES. —You are asking that the price ot
sugar’ shall be fixed at £24 per ton, whereas before the
war it was £l3 per ton.
Mr. RYAN. —I have not yet asked for anything.m
regard to that matter; I have not had an opportunity
to discuss it with you. .
Mr. HUGHES.--T read something m the press as
to your intentions. ,
Mr RYAN. —But we have not had an opportunity
to discuss the matter. When the opportunity offers you
will hear my views. My contention is that in a Con-
ference of this kind we can do no more than lay down
general suggestions. We cannot prescribe the details
for giving effect to those suggestions.. I should be
laughed at, and would look ridiculous, if I returned to
Queensland and said, “ The Commonwealth . Govern-
ment have told me that they will continue to give every
attention to the question of profiteering, the vital im-
portance of which they fully recognise. The people
would sav that I was a simple child, who had come
down to “ Melbourne apparently prepared to swallow
1 HUGHES.—Whereas you have come to Mel-
bourne to have the price of sugar fixed at £24 per ton ?
Mr. RYAN". —No; I have come to Melbourne to
attend this Conference at the invitation of the Go-
vernor-General. The Prime Minister need not try to
side-track a big issue by referring to sugar. If the
Commonwealth Government deal with the question of
profiteering, they will materially assist recruiting.
Mr. HUGHES. —Hear, hear! We are prepared to
do so. * . . .
Mr. RYAN. —You say that you are, hut the people
want to see the subject actually taken in hand. I have
offered some general suggestions as to how it may be, at
all events, approached. So far as the wholesale vendors
of goods are concerned, you cannot deal with profiteer-
ing merely by controlling the retailer. The people will
be the judges of whether you deal with the question,
and it is by them that the effect will be felt. I come
now to our suggestion in regard to conscription. I put for-
ward that suggestion only to indicate to the Common-
wealth Government that, if they can satisfy the people
—and they may not be satisfied by a mere pronounce-
ment —that conscription has been finally abandoned, the
effect will be to assist voluntary recruiting. The Prime
Minister has referred to a statement made by him in
his speech at the Royal A'gricultural Show, Sydney,
during Easter week.
Mr. PEAKE. —Does it occur to you, Mr. Ryan, that
the greater success you can make of voluntary recruit-
ing, the less will be the need for conscription ?
Mr. TUDOR. —That is not necessarily so.
Mr. RYAN. —I know, and I think Mr. Peake knows,
that it was the introduction of the conscription issue
that originally militated against voluntary recruiting
being the success it otherwise would have been. Ido
not admit that voluntary recruiting has failed.. I have
always stood for the voluntary system.
Mr. BERRY. —Does that mean that you' have tried
hard to secure recruits?
Mr. RYAN.—I have.
Mr. HUGHES.—Mr. Ryan will admit that conscrip-
tion was proposed, whether mistakenly or not, because
the voluntary system had not produced the number of
recruits required.
Mr. RYAN. —I do not admit any such thing.
Mr. HUGHES. —Of course you do not.
Mr. RYAN. —I am entitled to my view.
Mr. HUGHES. —But that is our view.
Mr. RYAN. —It may be the view of the Common-
wealth Government, but I am here to tell you how I
think you can assist voluntary recruiting, and I sav
that one means of assisting it is to remove from the
minds of the people the fear that an attempt will be
made to introduce conscription.
Mr. HUGHES. —I have endeavoured to do that, and
if you will show where my speech at the Royal Agri-
cultural Show, Sydney, falls short, I will try to make
it quite clear and definite.
Mr. RYAN.—I cannot understand why the exact
wording of the suggestion put forward by Mr. Tudor in
regard to recruiting is not accepted.
Mr. WATSON- —Do you mean to say that the
Government must promise that conscription will not be
imposed during our lifetime and the lifetime of the
next generation ?
Mr. RYAN. —Mr. Watson is trying to place on our
suggestion a fantastic construction. It deals only with
the present war and with conscription for service over-
sea. If the people can be satisfied that for this war
and for service oversea there will be no compulsion,
that will go a long way to encourage recruiting.
Mr. WATSON. —Why not put forward words that
will convey that idea? The word “finally” does not
convey what you desire.
Mr. RYAN.—We are not dealing with 100 or 1,000
years ahead. The wording of our suggestion is plain
and unambiguous, and any member who attempts to
give it a fantastic meaning shows that he is not
approaching it in the spirit in which it is made.


Mr. HOLMAN.—Supposing there is a bond fide
objection to the phrase referring to conscription in
your suggestion—l do not know whether the wording
is yours or that of Mr. Tudor—will you still insist upon
it ?
Mr. RYAN.—It is a joint suggestion.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If a bond fide objection to it can
be shown, are you, and those who think with you, so
committed to that phrase that you cannot suggest an
alternative ?
Mr. RYAN.—We are not committed to that phrase,
but we want something that means the same thing.
Mr. HOLMAN.—There is a real objection to the
phrase, which I shall point out later on.
Mr. HUGHES.—I have said that we accept the ver-
dict of the people unreservedly. They have said, after two
efforts on our part to bring about a change, that there
must be voluntarism. That being so, we have nailed
voluntarism to the mast, and because of that His Excel-
lency has summoned us here, in this crisis in our his-
tory, so that we may endeavour to make voluntarism
the success we desire it to be.
Mr. RYAN.—I cannot forget—and I am afraid a
large number of the people do not forget—previous
pronouncements made on the question of conscription.
I do not want to sound a discordant note or to be
offensive to any one, but in the past there have been
a number of pronouncements which the people of Aus-
tralia believe were departed from. In other words,
they believe they were deceived. Consequently there
must .be some unequivocal pronouncement on the ques-
tion if they, are to accept it in the spirit in which I
should like it to be accepted. I am anxious to have
it impressed on the minds of the people that there is
no fear of conscription.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—WouId you object, in a
case of extreme danger to the Empire, to the people
being again asked for their opinion as to the introduc-
tion of conscription?
Mr. RYAN.—Yes; I adhere to the wording of our
suggestion. I think that any additional number of
recruits that you might get by conscription—if you
could get any additional number—would be more than
counterbalanced by the drawbacks to that system.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Supposing public opinion
outside changed, and became unmistakably in favour
of conscription?
Mr. RYAN.—Who is to be the judge of whether
or not public opinion has changed ? The Common-
wealth Government can clearly say that so far as the
present Administration, at all events, is concerned there
will be no conscription—that • they would go out of
office rather than introduce it. Something of the kind
was, I know, said before, and it was described as a
mere idle threat.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—Do not you think it conceiv-
able that circumstances might arise under which the
question might be open to review.
Mr. RYAN.—I cannot conceive of any set of circum-
stances in which the question of conscription for service
overseas could be open to review.
Mr. HUGHES.—You are in favour of arbitration
for the settlement of international disputes?
Mr. RYAN.—Yes.
Mr. HUGHES.—Without any qualification?
Mr. RYAN.—Carry your argument further. I want
to see what your next proposition is.
Mr. HUGHES.—Of course, but the principle is on
the Labour platform.
Mr. RYAN.—I believe in the adjustment of inter-
national disputes in that way.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is on the platform, therefore
you must believe in it.
Mr. RYAN.—Proceed.
Mr. HUGHES.—Supposing you were asked to sub-
mit to international arbitration by any tribunal on
this earth the question of a White Australia, and to
abide by its decision, would you do it?
Mr. RYAN. —That is quite a different matter. If
the Government say, “We are not prepared to finally
abandon conscription”
Mr. HUGHES. —I do not say that we are not.
Mr. RYAN. —Well, say where you are.
Mr. HUGHES.—I say that we have accepted the
verdict of the people, and have nailed the policy of
voluntarism to the mast. Having done that, we call
upon the people of Australia to make it a success, and
that is why we are here to-day.
Mr. RYAN.—Does that mean that conscription for
service overseas is finally abandoned during this war?
Mr. HUGHES.—I can conceive it possible that there
might arise circumstances in which you would be one
of the first to take the platform along with me to advo-
cate conscription, and do even more than that.
Mr. RYAN.—You must speak for yourself.
Mr. HUGHES.—WeII, that is my opinion. You do
not know the circumstances I have in my mind, and,
therefore, you cannot tell what you would do. I say I
do not believe for one moment that such a set of cir-
cumstances would arise; but I say quite candidly that
some recent events have shattered my whole belief in
the possibilities, of the future. If any one had told me
thalt the conditions of this war would have changed as
they have changed, I would not have believed him.
Mr. STOREY.—Suppose public opinion alters as the
result of the circumstances to which the Prime Minister
refers,, then any undertaking about finally abandoning
conscription would be valueless.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—The trouble is the Govern-
ment would be committed to the final abandonment of
conscription; and no living man can say what the
future has in store for us.
Mr. RYAN—I am endeavouring to make my atti-
tude clear in this matter, and I express the opinion that
a clear and unambiguous statement that conscription
has been finally abandoned would materially assist in
making the voluntary system of recruiting more suc-
cessful. 1 do not intend to labour the point, and I
hope the Prijne Minister and those associated with him
wil see their way clear to give us a definite statement
such as we have asked for. With regard to our objec-
tions to the War Precautions Act regulations, I do not
think we can do any more than make general sugges-
tions, such as have been made by Mr. Tudor, that there
should be a repeal, and a guarantee against re-enact-
ment, of all War Precautions Act regulations not vital
to the conduct of this war.
' Mr. HUGHES.—Mr. Tudor has promised to go into
that matter with me, and try to indicate the particular
regulations objected to.
Mr. RYAN. It seems to me that Mr. Tudor has
undertaken a somewhat difficult task in attempting to
set out in detail all the regulations to which we take
exception. In a general way, I desire to indicate that
these regulations and restrictions should be confined
entirely to war purposes. It is generally admitted that
the War I recautions Act regulations have, in the past
been used for political purposes, and we maintain that
tins policy should.be discontinued. When I spoke
previously I mentioned some questions to which the
returning of satisfactory answers would greatly assist
recruiting. I might add that some reply to them from
the Government is looked for by the people of Australia
\ am . <l mte sure > for that a definite declara-
tion is expected as to the war aims and the basis upon
which peace should be negotiated for, as well as some
declaration concerning the resources of Australia in
relation to this war.
r - ™TpiARD.-Not at this stage.
—I do not wish to be misunderstood. I
db? n make C w r that we must not ha ve a German-
dictated peace. We are all at one upon that point


But the people of Australia —or at least the larger pro-
portion of the people—would like to have something
very definite as to our war aims, and the basis, in gene-
ral terms, at all events, upon which negotiations tor
peace should be conducted. I am sure it will be of
great assistance also if we have some reliable calcula-
tion or statement as to what Australia could do.
Mr. HUGHES. —As to our war aims, I can say that
they are (those laid down by Mr. Lloyd George and
President Wilson. « T
Mr. RYAN. —And about the other matter l lam
asking for a statement in all sincerity, because I think
it would be of very material assistance to Australia it
the people knew the basis of peace negotiations.
Mr. TUDOR. —There is not so much difference be-
tween the declaration made by Mr. Lloyd George and
President Wilson and that adopted by the New South
Wales Conference in June of last year.
Mr. HUGHES.—If that be so, there ought to be no
objection to your accepting it. .
Mr. RYAN. —I think it is very desirable that, bear-
ing in mind the needs of our home defence and indus-
trial efficiency, a calculation should be made of tle
resources of Australia in relation to this war
Mr. PRITCHARD. —Such a calculation would mean
a long investigation.
Mr RYAN. —I dare say it would, and I am not
asking that the Prime Minister should supply the
information immediately. It is, however, a matter
to which I think attention should be directed in older
that some pronouncement may be made.
Mr. HUGHES. —Then I will say without demur
that the statement of policy made by my predecessor
(Mr Fisher), that the resources of Australia to the last
man and the last shilling are at the disposal of the
Empire, stands to-day. We were elected upon that
policy in 1914. ♦ . ~
Mr. TUDOR. —But we have had another election
since then.
Mr. HUGHES. —And we were elected again upon
it. That is the policy of the Government.
Mr RYAN. —Then the suggestion is that every man
shall leave Australia’s shores. Does the Prime Min-
ister mean that?
Mr. CUMMING.—Every fit man. _ -
Mr. RYAN. —We must look at these things in a prac-
tical way. We want to carry on certain industries
here, and maintain our own efficiency, so that we may
do all that is possible to assist the Empire in this
struggle. When we are asked to supply reinforcements
it is, surely, important to know for how long we may
be called upon to supply the men in the numbers sug-
gested. This is a question which is being asked by the
people outside. . . ,
Mr PEAKE^—Can you put a limit on the number
until you know the absolute point of exhaustion to
which any of the Allied nations may be brought?
Mr. RYAN. —I say I will be prepared to do ail
we can. That is the only limitation I would put to our
efforts.
Mr. HUGHES.—Hear, hear!
Mr. RYAN. —We must do what we can.
Mr' HUGHES. —Yes, all we can do. We do all we
RYAN. —This issue must be faced in a practical
W& Mr. HUGHES— Let me put it in this way: Suppose
you and P said, “ We will do all we can to clear this
room,” I do not know how far we would get, but we
would do all we could. . . ,
Mr. RYAN. —If the Prime Mmister*phooses to make
a joke of this matter, well and good, but I am regard-
ing it as serious. We require an investigation as to
our capacitv with regard to sending men.
Mr. HUGHES.—We certainly have not exhausted it
,yC Mr. RYAN.—I am not suggesting that we have.
Mr. HOLMAN. —But a good many people do.
Mr. RYAN.—We are still advocating recruiting.
This afternoon, without waiting for the deliberations
of this Conference, I have sent a message to the Queens-
land press for publication, and that message asks for
recruits.
Mr. HUGHES.—Hear, hear! Now you can say
what you like.
Mr. RYAN. —I am going to say what I like, whether
the Prime Minister appreciates it or not; I am going
to refer to the statement that he has made —that he
can do what he says he can do. I doubt very much
that he can do what he says he can do. We know that
he cannot. Is he doing all that he can do with regard
to profiteering, or with regard to the taxation of the
big wealthy interests? I do not think so. If he can-
not do more than he is doing, I would like him to
understand that we are right behind him in any attempt
that he may make to see that the big wealthy interests
pay more taxation than they do.
Mr. CUMMING. —Something more than merely an
insurance for the protection they receive.
Mr. RYAN. —Profiteering is still going on, and the
Commonwealth are not raising enough in taxation to
pay one-third of the interest*; on their loans. Such
a condition of affairs should not obtain. I am sure that
if the people should see that the Commonwealth Go-
vernment were determined to come down on the foices
behind them, and see that they did their share, it would
have a great effect in making their response more
ready. There is too much inclination to borrow, too
much of an inclihation to say we will borrow for what
should be paid for out of revenue. The big wealthy
interests should be made to understand that they must
do their part now, not later on. It will be an assist-
ance if that is done. I have noticed the following para-
graph in the Argus of 11th inst.: —
Sydney, Wednesday.—Addressing a meeting of
the City Mutual Life Office to-day, the chairman of
directors (Mr. George Crowley) complained that
no serious attempt was being made by the Federal
Government to meet conditions that must arise out
of the unparalleled addition to the debt of .Aus-
tralia. Even without any further loans, he said, it
would be found necessary, in order to pay interest
alone, and without attempting to redeem one
penny-piece of the principal, to double, If not
treble, the taxes which the people were now paying,
heavy as they were. He would say to the Govern-,
ment, “ Don’t treat us like children, but take us
into your confidence. We have intrusted you with
plenary powers as our trustees, but, unless you are
faithful to that trust, disaster must overtake us
all.”
A great deal can he done by making these big interests
behind the Prime Minister understand that they must
do their share, and must not put it off.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Of course, the Prime Min-
ister represents a business that is not taxed.
Mr. RYAN.—Does the Minister, for the Navy deny
the truth of the statement that we are not raising
enough taxation to pay interest on our loans ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I do deny it; it is not a
fact.
Mr. RYAN. —How much are we raising; are we
raising enough to pay interest on the loans ?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Yes, and more.
Mr. RYAN. —The Minister may say so, but there
is a very general impression among the people of Aus-
tralia that the big interests are not being taxed suffi-
ciently, and I am sure that the Prime Minister will do
a lot if he follows what I think should be his natural
inclination in (that respect. He must have spoken
feelingly at Bendigo when he resented any pressure
that might be brought to bear on him, and said that he


would rather have that pressure exercised by his
Old. friends than by his new-found friends. If
action is taken in the direction which I have
indicated, and if those behind the Prime Min-
lstei v ill understand that this will be so, it will
go a long way towards bringing about that unanimity
and readiness which is desired in the community at the
present, time for the purpose of assisting voluntary
recruiting. I have stated in a general way my ideas
in respect to the matter. We are only here to advise.
If all we advise cannot be accepted then it cannot be
accepted, but the more that is accepted the more
will be done towards assisting in bringing about that
harmony to which I have referred. If all is accepted,
a lot of good will be done. If only half is accepted,
only half that good will be done. If we have merely
a promise, and what is promised is not done, we shall
go no distance at all. Lnless a definite pronouncement
is made on the matter of conscription, there will be an
impression in the minds of some people that if 10,000
oi 5,400 reciuits per month are required and the num-
ber is not reached, that will be seized upon as a reason
.for re-introducing the conscription issue.
Mr. HUGHES. I can give that an unqualified and
unreserved denial.. The Government have accepted
without qualification of any sort the verdict of the
people, and we are not saying, “Come along and help
us m i.eci uiting, in order tthat if you do not do so you
may gne us a handle for introducing conscription.
Mi. RYAN. If only half the number asked for be
raised, will that lead to conscription 2
Mr. HUGHES.—No.
Mr. RI AN. It is necessary to have something
stated definitely.
Mi. HUGHES. I have stated it definitely.
Mr. RYAN. But I am not satisfied, and I am sure
the people outside will not be satisfied. The important
point is to satisfy, not myself, but the people of Aus-
tralia.
TX 7, r ’ Is it not rather the other way?
If the Prime Minister could satisfy you, the vast num-
ber, of people throughout Australia would accept your
satisfaction and be satisfied in their turn. How are
they to be satisfied except by the advice of responsible
leaders such as you and me.
• ■7 I’' 1 ’' We must tell them what the position
is but .first we must be satisfied. Is Mr. Holman satis-
fied with the statement by the Prime Minister before
the Agricultural Society in Sydney?
Mr. HOLMAN.—It was sufficiently clear to any one
like myself who knows the situation. I admit that it-
might not. be sufficiently clear to any one not knowing
the .situation. If Mr. Ryan can suggest any way of
adding to the assurance without putting forward anv
impossible phrase I shall gladly see it accepted. 7
Mr. RYAN.—I cannot suggest anything but the
foirn. in which it now appears, that there should be a
definite pronouncement by the Government that con-
scription is finally abandoned.
. Mr. HUGHES.—We cannot get any further forward
m that regard. I have stated definitely that the Go J
vernment have abandoned the policy of conscription
vithout any reservation. 1
, "v? 6 + 7 R ? SID^ N T:— is ess ential that we should
decide the hour of adjournment.
tt 7 r ; W* may not Permit me to
attend at night Nevertheless, I urge the Conference f
to conclude its business to-night, because the Common- *
wealth Ministers cannot have a Cabinet meeting if the
Conference is resumed to-morrow. We have been dis V
cussing many things and have accepted responsibilities t
without consulting our colleagues. We should be given t
f 'e opportunity to consult them in Cabinet i
s Mr. HOLMAN.—We cannot expect members to ac-
f cept our schedule of propositions in the course of a
e few minutes. We have heard only two speakers upon
- them.
1 Mr. LUMDIE.—I move —
That the Conference do adjourn at 6 o’clock
p.m. and meet again at 7.30 p.m.
7 I Lave come a long way to this Conference. There
are others, who like me, find it necessary to get away
• to-morrow. Parliamentary duties will take many
away., ft means that there will be a fag end to-morrow
5 and the Conference will break up without anything
- having been done. If we are interested in doing what
’ v ' e came heie to do we should sit to-night and possibly
; we may fini sh our labours to-morrow. There is a
chance that some of us may have to consider matters
sepai ately, and even if it should be necessary to sit
up to midnight to do it, I should not mind doing so.
I ha\e done it before. Mr. Holman laughs, but I can
remember when he was not above doing that sort of
thing over twenty years ago. I have been at confer-
ences with him, and we have sat until late in the
evening dealing with details in order to lay them before
a lull meeting on the following morning. If this con-
ference is all-important, as every one says it is, we
s lould finish its proceedings to-morrow morning.
Mr. HUGHES. I will agree to meeting to-night
Cabinet m ° rroW * postpone tlie meeting of
Mr. MORBY.—And finish to-morrow at lunch time.
Mr. COLLIER. Whilst I am as anxious as is any
other member of the Conference to bring its delibera-
tions to a close at the earliest possible moment, I point
out that, though we have been sitting for the past three
c ays, we have practically made no headway whatever,
and it is only within the past hour or so that we have
settled down to anything like a definite and concrete
discussion of the important matters which we came here
to consider. In the circumstances, it would, in my
view, be an absolute mistake to attempt to rush the
discussion, and deal with those matters within the space
of a few hours’ sitting to-night and to-morrow morn-
mg. It is far better that ample time should be afforded
for our discussions. In passing, I may say that I can-
not be accused of having delayed the Conference, as this
is the first time I have been on my feet. Let me say
that the manner in which the questions under considera-
tion affect Western Australia has not yet been put
before the Conference, and no member of it from other
States is aware of the way in which Western Austraiia
is ahected by the proposals that are made. I have been
wil ling to devote the whole of my time to the business
of the Conference, but representatives from Western
Australia have made other arrangements for to-night.
Whilst I do not urge that as a reason Why the Confer-
ence should not sit to-night, I think it would meet the
convenience of members of the Conference generally
if we adjourned over to-night. Notwithstanding tlm
inconvenience which might be caused to Federal Minis-
ters, I believe that ample time should be given to-
Z7,°T 7 co “ f ? n I . uance of debate on the im- *
cussing! WG are n ° W enga " 6d in dis -
Mr. McCALLUM —I move as an amendment—
that the Conference adjourn at 6.30 p.m. until
10 a.m. to-morrow.
Amendment agreed to.
Mr. HOLMAN. I wish now to devote myself for a
IrLn’out „f rt T 7 * on ° f the P ° sitio " that has
. out of statement presented by Mr. Hughes
, ls afternoon, and the criticism of it we have lu<=t
heard from Mr. Tudor and Mr. Ryan. I had intended
to ask leave to submit a motion, but I shall not attempt
later in’ /l, th ‘ S ' sla * e , There may be an opportunity
later in the sotting, i( rt be sufficiently prolonged, to


submit that motion, which I will put before Mr. Tudor
first, and which will be of a more or less formal charac-
ter. I beg of members of the Conference who are not
on my side in connexion with the conscription issue
because, after all, that is the only thing which divides
me from any members of the Conference sitting to the
r ight of the Chair, since there is no other point of poli-
tical difference between us—l beg of them to realize
that I have not come to the Conference with any idea
of shuffling out of my own share of responsibility or of
involving any one else in an unfair share of responsi-
bility. Mr. Tudor has said of certain things that have
occurred at the Conference that it looked as if they
were done with the purpose of involving gentlemen
holding the anti-conscription creed, I will say for the
sake of simplicity, in some share of responsibility that
is not fairly theirs. I disclaim any intention of the
kind. I feel, however, that we are all involved in a
certain responsibility. Every member of this Confer-
ence is already involved in this responsibility that,
apart from all conditions, he is bound to do what in
him lies to forward the defence of his country, that
is not a subject for conditions. It is an absolute duty
resting alike upon Democrat and Conservative, con-
scriptionist and anti-conscriptiomst. It is, perhaps, an
impertinence to re-state so elementary a proposition,
but it has been lost sight of occasionally m the course
of our debates. We have not been able sometimes to
see the wood for the trees. I recall the attention of
Mr. Tudor and of Senator Gardiner to that proposi-
tion, not with the idea of singling them out in any
way, but because they were for two years Ministers of
the Crown, guiding the affairs of Australia and its par-
ticipation in the war, and were specially responsible for
sending over 100,000' of our men to the Front.
Senator GARDINER.—There were 266,000 men
sent to the Front while we remained in office.
Mr. HOLMAN.— That is before you resigned office.
The exact proportion of that number who were union-
ists is open to dispute. But undoubtedly of that num-
ber 100,000, at the lowest estimate, would be unionists,
and probably many more. Mr. Tudor sent them there.
To-day every one knows that those men are being
worked to death, and are being killed, because they have
not received proper reinforcements. Every one who
knows anything about the military situation is aware
that those men are being subjected to conditions that
are absolutely indescribable, because they have not suffi-
cient reinforcements. Our brother unionists are theie,
sent there by the action of their brother unionists here
—Mr Fisher, Senator Gardiner, Mr. Tudor, and
others and they are left there without sufficient rein-
forcements. I say, therefore, that, apart from the gene-
ral and absolute responsibility of citizenship which de-
volves upon every one of us, there is a special and
personal responsibility devolving on Mr Tudor and
Senator Gardiner to see that the work which they began
is not left half finished. But it is the duty of all of
us to ascertain how reinforcements for our soldiers at
the Front can be increased. There was one sentence in
Mr. Ryan’s Speech—and I say at once that I entirely
agree with it, in order that I may not be misunder-
stood as criticising it —to the effect that the Govern-
ment were not dealing with the problem of profiteering
forcibly enough. But to go on, as I do not say Mr.
Ryan did, but as some other men might do, and say,
“ And therefore, I will not deal with the problem ot
recruiting,” would be an utterly indefensible attitude
for any man to take up, and doubly and trebly indefen-
sible for any man who has borne the responsibility ot
a Minister of the Grown.
A MEMBER. —You do not suggest that any of
us are saying that?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I hope not. But it has been, sug-
gested here again and again that that is the attitude
adopted by large masses of the people outside. What
is the meaning of the phrase, “ These things are ob-
stacles to recruiting ” ? Why are they obstacles, unless
some people, no matter whom, say, “ Because things 1
object to are being done here, I am going to leave my
brother unionists to perish in the trenches, and I shall
not send a man to relieve them, though they may have
been eight or ten days under arms ”'(
Mr. RYAN. —We do not say that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not say that you do, or that
any one here says that.
A MEMBER. —We must face the fact of the influence
those things have on the public mind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I ask why it is that in any part
of the public mind a failure on the part of the Govern-
ment sliould be regarded as a justilication for visiting
that failure on the heads of the unfortunate men now
fighting for us at the Front ?
A MEMBER. —It does, nevertheless.
Mr. HOLMAN. —How lias that come about? There
is no doubt that it does, and I say that it is a cie-
duty resting upon every member of this Conference
Mr. PRITCHARD. —To rectify it.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Yes, to rectify it. That is a duty
which is not dependent upon obtaining any conditions
from the Frime Minister or from any one else. It is
an absolute duty resting upon the members of this Con-
ference to rectify that, and to say to the young men
walking about our streets to-day, “ It may be true that
you have certain grievances and complaints; that your
mates have been discharged ’ ’ —this, that, and the other
may be wrong—but we are under an obligation to say
to those young men, “ Your place is at the Front.
That is what we have to do, every one of us. It we
do not do that we shall be failing in our duty not
merely as leaders of the public, but as citizens of the
Commonwealth in its hour of peril. lam quite sure
that wliat I have said so far has the entire approbation
of every member of the Conference. No one*will dis-
sent from these propositions. They are fundamental
and must, I believe, commend themselves to all.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—They are the final test of
citizenship. . .
Mr. HOLMAN. —Now, what is the situation; we
meet here, first of all, as citizens, and, secondly, as
leaders of public thought, to deal with the amazing fact
that certain political complaints have by some extraor-
dinary alchemy been transmuted into reasons for leav-
ing our soldiers unsupported. That is the problem that
laces us to-day. If we had the time, and could do
so without raising matters of controversy, it would be
interesting for us to examine how that problem has
come about. It has been suggested—and Ido not say
there is not a good deal in the suggestion that the pas-
sionate feeling aroused by the conscription referendum
is partly responsible for the remarkable change that
has taken place. While I may agree that there is pos-
sibly some truth in that, it is right that I should say
that passionate feeling was shown by both sides. I
wish, in passing, to remind members of the Conference
that some of us whose conscientious conviction was that
conscription was necessary, and who belonged to a party
that had not made a formal declaration on the subject,
were expelled from that party in defiance of our rights
as members of it, and when no allegation against our
fidelity could be made.
Mr. MORBY. —Excuse me, Mr. Holman, that is not
correct. .. , .
Mr. HOLMAN —Very well, if there is a difference
of opinion, let us not go into it.
Mr. LUNDIE. —No man
Mr. HOLMAN.—I will not be interruped by Mr.
Lundie.
Mr. LUNDIE.—No man was expelled.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Mr. Lundie is a man whose pre-
sence in the Conference is an insult to many of us, and
I object to being interrupted by him.


Mr. LUNDIE.—You have no more right to be here
than I have.
Mr. HOLMAN.—-If it were not out of respect to our
host, there are things which might have been said before
now.
Mr. LUNDIE.—I will interrupt you as you have in-
terrupted other people.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I want no insolence from Mr.
Lundie. I am not going further into that matter since
it has given rise to dispute. But I will content myself
by saying that if there was bitter feeling it was not
wholly on one side,
Mr. SCULLIN.—But one side raised the question of
conscription.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Do you not think that men who,
because of their belief in conscription walked out of a
party to which they had belonged for twenty years
rather than give up their belief, were as conscientious as
those who took the other side?
Mr. SCULLIN.—It was your side who threw in the
apple of discord.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Can you believe that Mr. Watson
and I broke our connexion with the Labour movement,
with which we had been associated from its inception,
without believing in the principle which led to our
separation from it?
Mr. SCULLIN.—I am not saying that you did not
believe in it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—A party that regards the expression
of a conscientious belief upon a matter not upon the
party’s platform, as a reason for persecution, punish-
ment, and expulsion must take a large share of respon-
sibility for any resulting bitterness.
Senator GARDINER. —You and Mr. Watson were
the first to introduce the principle into our Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That bitterness exists, and we have
to face it to-day. Mr. Tudor and his friends come for-
ward here, and, having analyzed the matter, have, to
the. best of their powers, told us that the reasons for
political dissatisfaction, which have in some mysterious
fashion become reasons for military inefficiency, are
summed up in the five propositions which Mr. Tudor
presented to the Conference. I feel little doubt that
Mr. Tudor and Mr. Ryan, who drew the document up,
are as fully representative, or sufficiently representative,
at all events, of that large section which is affected, as
to know better than anybody else precisely where the
shoe pinches, and what changes ought to be achieved in
order to put an end to the political and industrial
dissatisfaction which to-day is holding men back from
offering their services to the Front. After a good deal
of difference of opinion as to the best way of going for-
ward with our business here, on which, I regret to say,
the greater part of yesterday and to-day have been, I
do not say wasted, but certainly occupied, we are now
in a position to present to Mr. Tudor, and those who
speak with him, the best answer we can see our way to
make at this moment. We say that if these points
have been sufficiently potent in the past to blind men
to their duty as citizens, to blind them to their duty
to their comrades who are shedding their blood at the
Front—and I say that without the remotest effort at
sentimental appeal, but as a plain statement of fact
we are now prepared to join with those gentlemen in a
final effort to sweep those stumbling blocks out of the
path.
Mr. MORBY.—Which, do you sweep away?
1 £° through them, and show
you. The first one I think we ought to be able, with a
little careful consideration, to sweep away entirely. I
entirely agree with those who say that there should
be complete and satisfactory renunciation of conscrip-
tion by the Government.
Mr. HUGHES.—You said before that my statement
was quite clear to you who knew the position, but it
might not be clear to persons who did not.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That is so. I come now to pro-
position No. 2: that there should be no economic con-
scription in public or private employment With that
we are entirely in accord. I may say that, in my own
State, we have done what has not been done in any
of the other States—that is to say, we have been paying
our public employees, in all the different branches of
the Service, their civil pay while they have been serving
at the Front.
A MEMBER.—You mean that you have been
making up the difference between their military and
their civil pay ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes. We have been making up
that difference to them, and, in some cases, it has been
an extremely heavy difference. Men at the Front wJio
were in receipt of £5OO, £6OO, and £7OO a year have
continued to draw those salaries.
Mr. PEAKE.—New South Wales is not the only
State which has done that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Nobody can suggest that a Go-
vernment which has from the beginning adopted that
attitude, has exhibited any leanings towards economic
conscription. So far as we are concerned, we are pre-
pared, if certain things can be done, to entirely
abandon all forms of economic conscription. The Go-
vernments will not use it, and the Employers’ Federa-
tions will direct their members not to use it. As a
matter of fact, it has been used only in a very few
isolated cases by individual employers.
Mr. COLLIER.—It is entirely general in our State.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Is it? Well, we are prepared in
the State represented by Mr. Collier, as in other States,
to use the influence of the Employers’ Federation with
a view to seeing that there is no economic conscription.
Mr. MORBY. —Will you pardon me for a moment?
Is it within your knowledge that arrangements are being
made by the Water and Sewerage Board in Sydney to
put economic conscription into operation ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—It is not.
Mr. MORBY.—WeII, it is a fact.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The Water and Sewerage Board is
a public body for which we are responsible. We are
now laying down what will be the definite policy of the
Governments of Australia in the future, and if there is
anything going on of the kind suggested by Mr. Morby,
it will be stopped. Upon these two important points
there is really nothing left to do. When I say that, I
mean that there is nothing left to concede so far as the
Governments are concerned. There is, of course, some-
thing further to do, because a satisfactory declaration
will have to be drawn up on the question of legal con-
scription .
A MEMBER.—Some of us think that the two
propositions with which you have dealt are not so im-
portant as is the next one.
Mr. HUGHES.—You will, I hope, make it clear to
the Conference that we do not admit that there is
any ambiguity in the statement which I made on behalf
of the Federal Government.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Of course. Ido not criticise Mr.
Hughes’ statement. It satisfies me, though it may be
desirable to have a somewhat fuller statement. I come
now to the proposal for the re-registration of unions that
have been de-registered. That is purely a New South
Wales affair. None of the spokesmen from that State
have laid very great stress upon it, but we believe that
the unions in question can be re-registered as the result
of an application to the Court by the Minister. My
colleague, Mr. Beeby, understands that he can achieve
that result by an application to the Court, but if we
cannot do so, we will undertake to call a special session
of the New South Wales Parliament to deal with the
matter.
Mi. MORBY. In the new industrial law, did you
not take power to deal with the re-registration of
unions?


Mr. BEEBY. —We can do that only with the con-
currence of the Court, but I am certain that the Court
would grant concurrence in these circumstances.
Mr. STOREY. —There is nothing to prevent you
appealing to the Judge to rescind the decision at which
he has arrived? Q
Mr. HOLMAN. —Nothing whatever. But it there
should be any obstacles in the way, we are prepare.,
to call Parliament together forthwith, and to pass a
short measure giving the Minister the necessary power
in these special cases. .
Mr MORBY. —I take it that you have noted in to-
day’s’newspapers the remarks made yesterday by J udge
Heydon upon the application for re-registration of the
Bricklayers’ Society in Sydney ? He stated that the Act
adopted by your Government has made it much mere
difficult to secure re-registration than it was before.
Mr HOLMAN. —That may be so; but if there are
any unforeseen difficulties in the way, we can meet them
by means of legislation, and we undertake to do so.
Now I come to the proposed restoration to unions ot
their former status. That is a matter which comes
under the War Precautions Act.
Mr. TUDOR. —I am not sure about the position in
Western Australia.
Mr HOLMAN. —That is where I feel that a discus-
sion in Committee would have been so valuable. The
next proposal relates to the restoration to their employ- .
ment of victimized unionists, the abolition of bogus
unions, and the setting up of bureaux m connexion
therewith. Upon these points our proposal is to meet
the substantial request preferred in the document pre-
sented by Mr. Tudor by a method which will secure
to the members of new and old unions alike absolute
equality.
Mr. BEEBY.—And which will pave the way to an
amalgamation of those unions.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Yes, a method which will. ulti-
mately abolish the new unions by reason of their ab-
sorption in the old unions. On this matter, which
arises in my own State
A MEMBER. —And in other States, too.
Mr. HOLMAN.—So far as I was aware, this par-
ticular point was confined to New South "W ales. So far
as it is a matter which affects that State, the requests
which have been made to us there have been that we
should deal with it on the very lines now suggested
by Mr. Beeby. That is to say, we were asked to extend
no preference to new unions, but to give old and new
unionists alike the same treatment
Mr. MORBY—By whom has that request been
made? It is news to me. . , n, t ,
Mr. BEEBY.—It has not definitely been made. It
is a move that I was initiating in the Railway Service.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If the proposals made by the Go-
vernment on this point are not entirely satisfactory,
let it be referred to a committee of delegates the
States interested. Mr. Morbv, Mr. Lambert, and otneis
might, perhaps, meet Mr. Beeby, myself, and others
for the purpose of endeavouring to come to a moie
satisfactory formula than has been suggested. What
we have put forward, however, represents the best solu-
tion of the problem on the information that is before us.
Mr. MORBY.—Some of the employers have estab-
lished a system of engaging the men. altogether apart
from the Government. In one particular avenue ot
employment, before being engaged men are called upon
to sign a statutory declaration that they will resign
from, or that they are not members of, any trade union.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I have no doubt that that is so.
But I beg members to realize that there is no trap, in
this proposal of the Government. It is not a question
of finding how little we can do. We will undertake to
say that these points of soreness shall be absolutely re-
moved. The precise length to which we are. prepared
to go we cannot say. But in removing victimization, it
F. 3959. — 6
is understood that we shall not undertake fresh vic-
timization. I make this offer on behalf of the Govern-
ment of New South Wales as a contribution towards a
happy solution of the difficulty that is before this Con-
ference. The next proposal of Mr. Tudor was for the
repeal of all War Precautions Act regulations that are
not vital to the conduct of the war. The Prime Minis-
ter has agreed that any regulations which are not so
vital will be repealed. Clearly there is room for an
honest difference of opinion as to whether a regulation
is vital or not. That, however, is a matter for discus-
sion in Committee.
A MEMBER. —Who will decide it?
Mr. HOLMAN.—It can be settled by mutual agree-
ment between the leaders —between Mr. Hughes and
Mr. Tudor.
Mr. COLLIER.—It is the way in which the regula-
tions are administered of which we complain. We may
consent to allow a regulation to stand, and. use may
afterwards be made of it that we did not anticipate, and
to which we object.
Mir. HOLM AN.—I understand that. I have smarted
as much under the wooden-headed administration of
the Commonwealth Government as has anybody. But,
knowing something about governmental methods, I have
never attributed the fault to Ministers. With their
vast Departments, they must rely upon the carrying out
of their orders on a host of officials, who frequently
never see their chief at all.
Mr. COLLIER. —I know of specific instances in
which Ministers are responsible.
Mr. HOLMAN Prime Minister has given his
assurance that such cases will be dealt with. I hey are
matters for discussion. Mr. Tudor’s next proposal re-
lates to the abolition of the press censorship and limi-
tations upon free speech. In regard to the press cen-
sorship, the Press Conference now sitting has been re-
ferred to by the Prime Minister, and I am bound to
sav, after what has fallen from Mr. Tudor and Mr.
Ryan, that we might go a little farther than bas been
decided by the Government in that connexion. The ob-
jection to the censorship that has been urged by Mr
Tudor and Mr. Ryan is not the same objection that will
be taken to it by editors and proprietors of newspapers,
and both views ought to be fully considered and. fully
accepted by the Government before remedial action is
defined. 1 have seen illustrations of the work of the
censorship in New South Whies which seemed to be
quite indefensible and quite unnecessary. I think .it
would be better for all of us if we could get a definite
assurance from the Government that no. censorship ex-
cept that which is really essential for military and dip-
lomatic safety will be permitted,, that is to say, the cen-
sorship which prevents information reaching the enemy,
and which prevents insults being directed at our Allies.
If we can confine it to that, it will be better for every-
body. I strongly urge the Prime Minister to take into
consideration what his friends have said to-night, and
after this Conference has come to conclusions upon these
matters to see whether those conclusions meet the objec-
tions which have been urged by Mr. Ryan and Mr.
Tudor. We cannot let the charter of our liberties be
defined for us by a group of pressmen. We must have
something more than that.
Mr. HUGHES.—I quite agree with you generally.
But if you mean that persons may go about on so-called
peace propaganda, preach rebellion or. sedition, and
advocate things which will prevent recruiting, that can-
not be permitted. But, subject to that, everything neces-
sarv that can be done will be done.
Mr. HOLMAN. —There is a common law which pre-
vents sedition, and which, I think, speaking without
special legal consideration, would render liable to
punishment any man using language likely to deter
others from joining the King’s Forces. I would urge


on the Government to rely more and more on punish-
ments administered in open Court, after free and fair
trial, than upon the censor. If I am engaged on mis-
chievous propaganda, bring me before a magistrate and
send me to gaol. But the censor is prosecutor and
judgment-pronouncing magistrate in one. He stops my
voice, and I have no means of protesting. There is
nothing which arouses men more than that sort of
thing. I, therefore, advise the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to meet our friends fully and openly on this point.
As the Prime Minister said in council to-day—and I
am sure he will permit me in the circumstances to re-
peat it —whatever the value of censorship may be, it
cannot be compared to the value of a general reconcilia-
tion of all the forces represented here, and to a steady
stream of reinforcements coming in under the voluntary
system.
Mr. HUGHES.—I repeat that, but will add that of
all the means resorted to by Germany to effect her pur-
poses, none has been so successful as propaganda.
A MEMBER.—In Russia, particularly.
Mr. HUGHES. —Yes. In Italy the demoraliza-
tion of the Italian armies is going on now by German
propaganda, and it is no good bringing people into
Court, such as 8010 and Caillaux, after they have taken
the 30 pieces of silver. Their mouths must be closed
before the damage is done. I will not sit still while a
man puts a torch to this building. If I see him, I will
take him before the torch can be applied to the place.
A MEMBER.—Is the case a parallel ?
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes, for there is propaganda going
on in this country to-day which is being carried on by
German money.
Mr. MORBY.—If you know that, you should give
us the information, because you have charged a lot of
us with that—myself included.
Mr. HUGHES.—No.
Mr. MORBY.—Yes. In a paper issued to the men
in the trenches, a copy of which was sent to me by a
friend there, you denounced us all as being in the pav
of Germany.
Mr. HUGHES.—That is absurd.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I want to interpose here, before
we are dragged off by things like that, that no one who
knows Mr. Morby would imagine such a remark could
be applied to him.
Mr. HUGHES.—It is not so; it is absolutely untrue.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I reply to what Mr. Hughes has
just said. I accept his statement that he has informa-
tion concerning dangerous propaganda being carried
on in Australia, and I entirely concur that there is ex-
actly similar propaganda in Italy, certainly also in
America.
Mr. HUGHES.—And in Russia, of course.
Mr. COLLIER.—AIso in France.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The remedy for that is the secur-
ing of an intimate knowledge of the parties engaged
in it. Once this information has been obtained, the
persons can be arrested and brought to their trial. The
more publicity attached to such trial the better, since
it is in itself a warning to other people, whereas the
remedy of the application of censorship is not only less
efficient in itself, but has to be paid for with so much
irritation that I am very doubtful if the remedy is not
almost as bad as the disease.
Mr. HUGHES. To a large extent censorship does
not apply to peace propaganda in a country like this,
although it did m France, because we are told that one
of the methods used was the purchase of a French
newspaper.
Mr. PEAKE.—Suppose 1,000,000 copies of a cir-
cular had been circulated
Mr. HOLMAN.—Exactly. 'By that time the censor «
is out of court. He cannot do anything after the i
pamphlets have been printed and circulated in defiance <
of the censorship, for then no further action can be i
taken. The individual responsible may be unknown,
and you can neither censor nor punish him. I repeat
that prosecution in open Court is the principal remedy,
l and one which I believe in itself to be more efficacious
l than censorship, since it has no unpleasant secondary
r consequences. That is my definite view after having
s been forced most reluctantly to give a great deal of con-
sideration to the question in New South Wales.
Mr. HUME COOK.—The Morel case in England is
against your argument. He issued pamphlets in thou-
sands without punishment, and then he was discovered
to be a German spy, and was interned.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Just so, but it shows that during
the whole of his period of propaganda the censor had
evidently been doing nothing in the matter of bringing
him to book. On the whole broad issue the first neces-
sity is a good Intelligence Department, by which these
agents can be identified and discovered.
Mr. TUDOR.—In one instance here the censor has
advised against a prosecution, but the Defence Depart-
ment has gone on with it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Do not let us drag up individual
cases like that. Surely at a time such as this the
safety of this country is not going to depend on an
error of judgment on the part of one official or Depart-
ment.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN. Do you believe there are
people in Australia to-day who are taking German
gold?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Mr. Hughes has just said so.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN.—Then the Conference should
be told about it.
Mr. HUGHES.—Yesterday when I offered to tell the
Conference something of infinitely more importance
they would not hear it. Of course, you would hear
this; but you would not hear something on which the
fate of the Empire depended.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—If you disclosed this now you
might cut off your source of information.
Mr. HUGHES.—You may rely on this, at any rate,
that the Prime Minister has taken action in the matter.
Mr. HOLMAN.—With regard to the two items (4 a)
and (4 b) dealing with the repeal of all war precau-
tions regulations not vital to the conduct of the war,
a Government guarantee against their re-enact-
ment, and the abolition of press censorship and limita-
tions upon free speech, &c.—with relation to the first,
the offer made by the Federal Government is, in my
judgment, sufficient. That is to say, the Federal Go-
vernment states:—“ We do not want to maintain any
regulations which are not vital to the prosecution of
the war.” Clearly, though, that is a matter where
difference of opinion might honestly arise. But, if
it is an honest difference of opinion, I do not suppose
that my friends will make the repeal of two or three
regulations which they may deem not vital, but which
the responsible authorities may consider highly vital,
an excuse for leaving the recruiting movement in the
lurch. As to the abolition of press censorship, there
is a feeling m my mind that something more may be
done than has been done by the Prime Minister.
• JELLEY. -Nobody proposes to leave recruiting
m the ur ch even if you do not agree to one of these
proposals.
Mr. PEAKE.—Actively or passively?
Mr. JELLEY.—I am just as active in that regard
as you are. • ®
Mr. PEAKE.—I believe that.
Mr. HOLMAN. It is very fine and gratifying to
hear various members of this Conference on either side
one after another, indicating their whole-hearted sup-
poit of the continuance of the recruiting movement. I
was asked by Mr. Morby, in opening my remarks, to
say how far the Governments have met the task of re-
moving these obstacles. I am now trying seriatim to
show how far. There is something more to be done
with regard to the abolition of press censorship and the


Question of limitations upon free speech—something
uiore which I hope will be further considered. Respect-
ing the items (4c) —cessation of political and industrial
prosecutions under the War Precautions Act—there is
a definite undertaking to meet that request m its en-
tirety; so that nothing more remains to be done there.
Then comes (4 d) —the immediate release of all persons
(not guilty of criminal offences) imprisoned in con-
nexion with conscription, peace propaganda, recruiting,
and the recent industrial troubles. The answer given
is that “ all persons, if any, who are confined as a result
of matters arising out of the referendum campaign or
the last general strike, will be released.” That leaves
peace propaganda and recruiting. I urge gentlemen
on this side not to press for those two points. A man
engaged in peace propaganda may be either a harmless
crank or an exceedingly dangerous traitor. Such a man
knows that he is running the risk of bringing himself
within the law of sedition; and, if he oversteps the
mark, even unintentionally, his blood is on his own
head. In the Boer War I was a pro-Boer. I felt
that it was an unjust war, and said so on many oc-
casions; and I knew that in speaking I was inviting
an interference with my own liberty. I was, therefore,
most guarded in my language. I was a member of the
House at the time, and spoke in terms which, I hope,
were becoming to a member of Parliament, yet which
were the views of one holding an opinion contrary to
those of the majority of his fellow citizens. But I knew
that when the country was at war the ordinary safe-
guards of free speech were to some extent suspended,
and I did not go about howling for every right of free-
dom which I considered I possessed in times of peace.
I made my protest, and I bowed to the will of the
majority who wanted the war, and who were fully
entitled to put me in gaol if they deemed fit. I re-
cognise the greatness of the principle of liberty of
speech. But to-day I recognise also that the situation
is a hundred thousand times more critical than in those
clays; and any man preaching peace at such a time
as this knows that he is running the risk of playing the
game of the enemy. The enemy is urging peace without
annexation and without indemnity. As a matter of
fact, he is probably demanding more at this moment.
But the Germans were doing that, and those who urge the
same claims here take the risk with their eyes fully
open. The same remark applies to recruiting. Any man
who uses language which, even unintentionally, takes a
form that can be construed by an ignorant hearer into
an appeal not to join the army, takes that risk with his
eyes open. He takes upon himself a responsibility
which he must shoulder. One cannot be a leader, and
have the privileges of a leader, without accepting also
the responsibilities. The man who undertakes to in-
struct his fellow citizens at meetings on the street cor-
ners becomes a leader to that extent, and if he makes
mistakes he must pay for them. All over the world, in
America, France, and elsewhere, all lands of freedom
like Australia, war is war. Therefore, I ask members
not to press these two points.. They are being met on
the other two, and there will be a complete amnesty
offered to them in respect of the referendum campaign
or the last general strike. The two other matters are
not offences arising out of excitement,. but are offences
committed on a man’s deliberate volition.
Mr. MORBY. —Suppose that an Australian-born man
whose whole interests up to now you knew to be in the
interests of this country, spoke in favour of peace, and
gave intelligent reasons for his view that Australia had
clone sufficient, and that no charge could be proved
against him of being in the pay of, or in sympathy with,
Germany, would that man be prosecuted?
Mr. HOLMAN. —If his language were of such a
character as to be likely to deter men from offering
their services for the Front, he would be prosecuted,
and, in my opinion, rightly. You must remembei that
this is a democratic country, in which the majority pre
9L KT KJX
62
vail The majority have said that they will have war.
As an individual, I am entitled to exhort the majority
to change their opinion; but if I choose to employ
language which may be construed into saying that
though the majority say there shall be war do not
you as an individual, obey the majority and help m
the ’war, I am liable to be punished.
Mr MORBY. —I am not referring to the man who
says that he does not desire any further men to enlist.
I refer to the man who states the position of Aus-
tralia, as affected by the war and you -say that that
man would rightly be punished. If that is so lie
trend of events leads me to the conclusion that the
time is not far distant when the Government will have
to extend their prison walls
Mr. HOLMAN—I said that if a mans language
could be construed into an effort to dissuade men
from recruiting, he could be punished.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN. —It is so easy to construe a
man’s language in that way. ,
Mr. HOLMAN.—Of course, hard cases make bad
laws. A man may say to an audience, While this
war is on, it is our duty, as citizens, to support it.
While the authorities determine to pursue the war,
mv advice to you is to volunteer in as great numbers
as possible; but it seems to me that the moment is
arriving when we ought to consider whether the war
is necessary at all.” A man who spoke in that way
would safeguard himself against the suspicion oi de-
siring to interfere with recruiting.
Mr MORBY. —If a man says to the people he
addresses, “ I desire you to come forward as recruits,
and then adds, “ hut it is up to you to consider
whether the time has not arrived to consider peace.
\ n d if they do consider that the time has arrived tor
peace, that militates. against the obtaining of recruits,
and a prosecution will result.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The first necessity of a nation at
war is recruits, and any man who interferes with the
obtaining of that, necessarily places himself m jeopardy.
He may argue about the interests of Christendom, o±
civilization, of humanity, of the brotherhood of man,
without militating against recruiting, and it so he
commits no offence, and runs no danger.. Y, j t ®
does say things with the deliberate intention of deter-
ring men from enlisting, he renders himselt liable to
punishment. I think that will be conceded as a gene-
rally accurate statement of the law as it stands. In
regard to the refund of fines and costs, .1 beg the
Labour representatives not to press that point.
Mr O’LOUGHLIN Some of the fines are very
unjust. Only recently our leader was fined £25. for
an offence which he is alleged to have committed eight
months ago. ...
Mr. COLLIER—Do not worry; I have not paid it
y6 Mr HOLMAN—We have in the New South Wales
Parliament a gentleman whose name is probably
familiar to all present—Mr. Percy Brookfield—and
he owes me, as Colonial Treasurer,, fines totalling
about £4OO. So far I have not received one penny
of it, and I do not expect to get a penny. However,
so far as the New South Wales Government are con-
cerned, if any case of special hardship or injustice
can be pointed out, we shall have it carefully inquired
into. We are constantly remitting fines which have
been imposed where reasons can be advanced whic 1
were not obvious to the magistrate at. the time of the
trial. But a general refund of fines is a thing which
all my instincts as Colonial Treasurer revolt against.
Mr. MORBY. —If your Government instituted
against a union a prosecution in which you failed to
prove your case, and the union was mulcted in heavy
costs in proving its innocence, would it be unreason-
able to ask you to refund costs incurred as the result
of your bad judgment?


Mr. HOLMAN.—I admit that Mr. Morby voices a
very real hardship, more particularly in regard to those
quasi-political cases, in which an offence has been com-
mitted in order to test a particular law or regulation.
Mr. Morby is speaking of cases in which the punish-
ment consists of the costs paid by the successful party.
While we cannot lay down a general rule, Mr. Morby
knows me well enough to be aware that I am always
prepared to listen to representations regarding any case
of hardship. As to profiteering, Ido not know that I
can add anything to the admirable remarks which Mr.
Ryan has made on that subject. On that point we are
all at one. , The only question is as to the methods to i.e
employed, and I suggest to Mr. Ryan that his Treasurer,
Mr. Theodore, and I should put our heads together, in
order to see if we cannot get some of the excess profits
that have been spoken about. It is proposed that the
Commonwealth Government shall take only 75 per cent,
of the war profits, leaving a balance of 25 per cent, un-
taxed, and any unworked field like that fills me as
Colonial Treasurer of New South Wales with the joy of
stout Cortez when, standing upon a peak in
Darien, he viewed the Pacific for the first time.
In conclusion, I ask members to approach the
consideration of the obstacles from this point of
view. Suppose we are not able to add anything to
the schedule which Mr. Hughes read to-day, it may
then be said that the obstacles are not entirely removed,
but what remain are so trifling that if there had never
been anything more than that trifling remainder, it
would never have been suggested by any sensible man as
a reason for abandoning our duty to the soldiers at the
Front. Therefore I ask members, is it not their clear
duty as public men to go back to their followers, who
rely upon them for guidance, and say, “ Gentlemen,
there is now so little outstanding that you have no justi-
fication for failing to do your best to swell the recruit-
ing figures ? It is not those of us who are present
who require to be spoken to in that fashion, but is it
not our duty to address that appeal to those whom we
represent? Mr. Jelley has most courageously said that
“'even if nothing be done by this Conference, I shall
continue my duty in the matter of recruiting.” Mr.
Storey has said practically the same thing elsewhere, and
we all know what he has been doing. The Labour re-
presentatives present are the advisers of great organi-
zations, presenting a great field for recruiting, which
gave generously in the early stages of the war, but
which latterly has given less in the harvest of recruiting
than it should. Before this Conference breaks up
there should be some agreement that these things that
have been mentioned shall be done by the Government
concerned, and that every man in this Conference will
go forth as a recruiting agent from the moment he leaves
this building. The position is serious. Unless we are
able to make new and unheard of efforts we shall be
beaten, and all that means for the future of humanity
and for the future of the Labour cause is so clear in my
mmd that I, as head of a Government which is said to
be responsible for much of the trouble, am prepared to
meet the wishes of Labour absolutely as my contribution
towards getting more recruits. If I can do further ser
vice by speaking on the platform, I shall do it but my
voice is of no avail unless it is supported by the voices
of men representing the opposite view in politics We
are all prepared to do what has been promised, and quite
conceivably as a result of further discussioA, we may
feel ourselves prepared to do a fraction more 7
My feeling is that we should not haggle at all, but
should meet freely any request that may be made the
meeting of which could remove an obstacle to our pur-
pose. The Prime Minister obtains information day by
day of what is happening on the other side of the world.
Some of that information he made known to those of us
who were in Committee with him yesterday, and he
would have made it known to the Conference but for
an untoward incident. I have come more lately than
any one else in this room from the centre of operations.
I have been in the firing line, and in London, and in
New Y ork, and have had opportunities of conferring
with all the leaders in France, in England, and in
America. I say without exaggeration that unless we
can hold our ground until America comes in, and hold
it very much better than we have been doing so far, we
shall be defeated before the American Force can
materialize. I do not mean that Britain will be invaded,
but the British and French Armies may be divided
and France subjugated—Paris being laid in ashes
as a means of compelling the submission of France—•
and Italy overcome. England would then take some
sort of refuge behind her island shores, and three years
later some millions of men might arrive from America,
by whom the fortunes of the world might be restored
when the war flickered up again. If the Germans suc-
ceed m this offensive, the war will probably continue
01 four years longer. England and America will be
opposed to the Central Powers, who will have the
navies of France and Italy in their hands, and will
thus command a greater naval force than that of
England. If the enemy can reduce France and Italy,
it will demand the navies of those countries as part of
the terms imposed upon them, and will then be able
to keep the British Navy at bay until America can
build an ironclad fleet sufficiently strong to rout the j
fleet controlled by the Central Powers. It may be
asked, M hat can it matter under such circumstances
Aether we get a few thousand men from Australia or
not. I say that, unless every unit in the Allied group
exerts itself to the utmost, the Allies will fail. If each
group looks to the other to act, failure is a certainty.
We must exert ourselves to the utmost. France has
already done that. When in London I learned from the
British authorities that, according to the official figures.
16 per cent, of the total population of France had then
passed under the colours. That percentage does not
include the workers in the munition factories, though
it includes the dead and wounded. Of the population
of Great Britain, 14 per cent, had then passed under
the colours. From Australia we have sent about 61 per
cent. Those are the official figures.
Mr. SCULLIN.—-It must be remembered that many
of the men. m the French Army were sent back to do
the harvesting.
. Mr ‘ HOLMAN.—I do not suggest that our position
is on all-fours with that of France. The enemy is at
e gates of Frahce; it is 12,000 miles from our gates.
But if you had seen a little of France and a little of
elgium as I have seen those countries recently, you
would reahze what an infinitely better thing it is to
here the enem ' 7 12,000 miles awa .Y than to fight him
The Conference adjourned at 6.50 p.m. until 10 a.m.
on Wednesday.


FIFTH DAY.
WEDNESDAY, 17th APRIL, 1918.
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
The Rioht Honorable W. M. Hughes, Prime Minister.
The Eight Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister for the O-
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Milled, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman. q _
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Store ).
“Sir
strs"" beebv ' mla ’
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson.
President, Victorian Branch Australian Labour Party (J. H. Scu .)
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan. Macartney)
N.tLh Political Cmncll (Mt. 0. H. Pane.*.), IPcPf
South Australia.
Premier, Honorable A. H. Peake.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
Sent, B—^ptesenting).
South Australian Nationa J ( Lundie, representing).
South Australian Branch A.L.P. (Mr f Williams)
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. D. Willia ).
Western Australia.
Premier, Honorable H. E. Ebfroy
Resident .
Employers federation, p o’Loughlin,) Political.
National Federation, Mr. William Leslie.
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyon. .


Mr. ELMSLIE.—It is not my purpose to detain
members for any great length of time, because I think
it necessary at this stage to confine my remarks almost
entirely to one particular view-point. I should like, at
the outset, to refer to one or two statements made
yesterday by Mr. Holman. It seems to me that Mr.
Holman has gone to very great pains on more than
one occasion—and he emphasized the position again
yesterday—to show that he wanted the representatives of
Labour here to disabuse their minds of any fear that
some trick was being put upon them, because over and
over again he gave us an assurance that we need fear
no trick of any kind. I take it that he desires us to
understand clearly that the assurance given by him
and those with whom he is associated may be accepted
in the very best faith.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I hope so.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—I do not know of any trick to
which he might refer, and so far as I am personallv
concerned, I unreservedly and without hesitation accept
the assurance given both by the Prime Minister and
by Mr. Holman that they will do all they can to give
effect to their undertakings. Further than that, I want
to say that one or two members of the Conference
appear to have thought it their duty to appeal to the
patriotic side—if I may put it that way —of other
members of the Conference to do what was believed to
be their particular duty at this juncture. As far as I
am concerned—and I believe I speak with the know-
ledge of those with whom I am associated—there is no
reason whatever for any such appeal. I feel sure that
each and all of us are animated by a desire to do the
right thing, although we may disagree as to the
methods. Ido not propose to- take up the time of the
Conference any further with this aspect of the matter.
We have heard, almost from the start of the Confer-
ence, suggestions that we should seek to compromise
regarding the proposals that have been submitted, and
I want to say, as briefly as possible—and I ask each
member of the Conference not to forget what I am
saying when arriving at a determination as to how
they will accept our proposals—that the suggestions
submitted to this Conference by Mr. Tudor already
represent the effect of a compromise. Speaking for
myself, I can say that there are many things which
I regard as essential to bring about harmonious rela-
tions, but which, in our desire to secure unanimity,
were not pressed. Many other members of the Con-
ference also hold strong opinions, but have not pushed
their particular views for the same reason ; and there-
fore I claim that what we have submitted is really the
result of a compromise, and that we should not be asked
to go too far in that particular direction, because what
has already been suggested by other members of the
Conference has already been done by our side. As an
indication of what has been given away, I can say
that if I had consulted my own personal feelings, I
would not have entered into this Conference unless,' as
a preliminary, we had had an unreserved withdrawal
of the vile slander which I have so strongly resented
on other occasions, and which has been a powerful
factor in framing my course of action for a considerable
length of time. I resent as strongly as a man can
resent the slander and insult which has been levelled
at those with whom I am associated, without any dis-
tinction between individuals, and suggested in the most
callous and brutal manner, that the brand of traitor-
ship rests upon that section of the Labour party which
is opposed to conscription. My personal view i s that
it is essential there should be a complete withdrawal of
that slander in order to produce those harmonious
relations which we all so strongly desire.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I can say that during the cam-
paign I never once made use of that slander, or sup-
ported it in any way. My speeches are on record. Do
you attribute the matter to the Prime Minister ?
Mr. ELMSLIE.—It has been stated bv the Prime
Minister. Yesterday there was an attempt to some
extent to justify it, and my own view is that this feel-
ing of resentment can be removed by a complete with-
drawal of such suggestions. In saying this, lam
voicing, not only my own feelings, but the feelings of
tens of thousands of people in this country.
Mr. TUDOR.—Of people, many of whose sons have
been killed in the war.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—I do not want to lengthen the
debate by saying too much on this subject; but even
now I think that, after the statement made by the
Prime Minister yesterday, we should have some indica-
tion of the quarter in which German gold is being
accepted and used against the interests of our country
and Empire. Another very important matter that is
occupying public attention at the present time, and
which has played a prominent part in the history of
our community, is a widespread fear—how far and to
what extent it is justified I cannot say—that the policy
of deportation is being carried on x with the result that
Australian citizens are being sent away from the land
of their adoption to other parts of the world.
Mr. McCALLUM.— Without trial.
Mr. ELMSLIE.-—-Without even an attempt to justify
or explain the position.
Mr. HUME COOK.—That is not happening to any
Australian-born citizens.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—I do not want to split straws. I
said they were being deported from their adopted
country. r
Senator PLATN.—Are they enemies of the Empire?
. Mr ; ELMSLIE.—These things should not be done
m this way. At all events, such decisions should rest
upon the judgment not of men who may be stirred up
for the time being by passion or hysteria, but on the
judgment of a fair and impartial court, so that any
men concerned may have an opportunity of preventing
the brand of traitorship being placed upon them. It
vmuld be far better if such persons are guilty of anv
offence against our laws that they should be imprisoned
here instead of being sent abroad. This policy involves
a principle which was fought for and won in this par-
ticular State more than half a century I have
mentioned thqse subjects in order to s how° that while
strong opmmns are held by members of the Conference
with whom I am associated, they have not been pressed,
and that, therefore, our proposals submitted are to a
great extent a compromise. Another matter to which
L attach considerable importance is that referred to by
r~ r * oft-quoted statement made by
Mr. Fisher that we were in the war to the last man
and the last shilling. I cannot conceive that any man
who looks at this matter in a practical way could really
and truly believe that the then leader of our party
meant what he said in its literal sense.
Mr. PEAKE. It was only a figure of speech.
Mr. ELMSLIE.-Of course it was; and I take it
that there should be a perfectly impartial inquiry
made as to what the promise actually does mean, taking
into consideration all the circumstances of the case. It
is essential, and goes without saying, that without
this careful investigation the expenditure of our last
man and last shilling might have a worse effect on the
community than if we were actually conquered
Mr. WATSON.—Hardly that.
Mr. ELMSLIE. lam merely stating my own views
Mr. WATSON.—Just so.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—We must keep some men here to
carry on the business of the country and provide for
the sustenance of our people.
Mr. PEAKE.—But if we were conquered, we would
have no business.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—Does the honorable gentleman take
the view that we are assembled here to do something to
prevent our being conquered ?
Mr. PEAKE.—Yes, I do.


Mr ELMSLIE. —We must look at it in another
wav If Mr. Peake believes that to he the proper £
attitude to take up, well and good. I can respect him. i
The point of view I take is that we are here to stimu-
late recruiting for our reinforcements, to fill up the
gaps in our Army. Ido not claim for one moment that
the whole safety of our Empire depends upon Aus-
tralia’s efforts, and Australia’s efforts alone. 1
Mr. PEAKE. —No one thinks that; hut we stand
or fall with the flag. : j
Mr ELMSLIE.—I do not wish to stress that point
any further except to say that I think the time has
come when we should understand how far we can go, if
we can go any further, in the direction of sending more
men while, at the same time, taking into consideration
the desirability of maintaining efficiency and order m
carrying on the ordinary work of the country. I wish
now to touch upon a delicate matter. If we are to
fence and hesitate to express our opinions on mailer,
which might be considered delicate, if we are fearful to
give offence or displease in this direction or tje o e r
we will not make very much progress; hut, thoug
may give offence or displease some one, I am gomg
take the risk of mentioning one matter I knowj a .
will not give offence to members of this Conference,
because they will recognise that there is merit m saying
somethin v which ought to he said, and. dealing with
the matter from that stand-point. I say that some actio
should be taken to condemn in no unmeasured ternm
and to prevent as far as possible the stirring up of t
dirty, miserable, pitiful, and damnable sectarian strife
that is going on at the present time. That is one of t
propositions which should have been submitted to this
Conference for the purpose of securing harmomou
efforts in the direction required. It requires i
perience in the ordinary social or political Ueto knw
that one of the greatest difficulties m
true political and other opinions of the comn
apart from religion is this continual stirrmg up o
sectarian strife that, after all, should not c annot
have any material effect upon the ultimate solution ot
the trouble facing us.
Mr COLLIER.—It has a harmful effect.
Mr ELMSLIE. —It has. Of what use is it to ask
the other fellow—our party, for instance, who are not
smirched with that kind of thing-to sink every differ-
ence in order that we may become a united party and
we are making that effort bv attending this Conference
—while this strife exists. In the interests of bringing
about harmonious relations there is every Justification
for taking some stand upon this matter and entering
some effective protest against xt T \ attention
matters at this juncture because I think that
should be drawn to them, and because I wish the mem
bers of the Conference to remember that the suggestions
put forward from our side are already the v - .
mum that we unitedly, as ooHeaeues, thm s
accepted. Before we cease our deliberations I hope th
it will be recognised all round that we are not he e
bargaining. As representatives of Labour we
nothing more to gate individually than members who
represent other parties have. We are all oi
fo °Mr. 2 HUME COOK.—If it is not a bargain what
would you call it? 4-p A
Mr. ELMSLIE.— Advice if you like. I know the
spirit which is behind those who have submitted
suggestions. If there is one thing we have tnedte
avoid it is anything in the nature ° . . ;
into a bargain, because we recognise that at this
any attempt to bargain would drag the position t own
into the mLd. If we tried to utilize the present position
as an opportunity for bargaining for some material g
for a section of the people it would stamp us at once as
unfit to take part in a Conference such as tins.
Senator MILLEN.—It would do so if the object were
to secure a gain for a section of the peop e,
‘uat vt
Zl dis beliavmg m 1
hone that we will raise this Cmifereuce to a higher levd
+1 P it would have if we adopted such a mean, paltiy
than rt would have raph 0 f our sug-
waL ° , read J-" That immediate and effective steps be
Sen" o proS soldiers and the public generally aga.nst
profiteering ” We are all anxious to bring about har-
pronteeri 8- . that endeavour we should
we mat arrive at some final solution, I have also made
a compromise as regards
L U t^tTer;’"soue,'l Ambers of the Con-
ference to consider whether we would not roach the *>l o
■ !L for which we are seeking »»» ««««* £ JVgJ
not use unequivocal language and said that
as possible, an attempt made to pro
rare" f
prices^ which has not been justified
VrTTCHARTX—Has that not been the history
0f M V r E LMST C IE has been in
Mr ,. EL f; i lip mst is -no justification for it* con-
operation ml the P Thft maioritv of T>eonle be-
ETi-S ;t he thi, T whk* aro Riding
th "
T PRTTOTAKH-m; r vour suggestion in .
addition to the existing machinery for dealing wi
™TRe PRESIDENT.— If interruptions »re allowed this
Conference will go on for an interminable .
Mr. ELMST.IE.-t am endeavouring b
Conference the important bearinv that t •
on bringing about h™ o;
In discussing the war one of the earl.est t'emarks one
hears from anv individual, man or woman.
nlaint ahout the ever-increasing stru.-
Tlroer hate keening his familv in
in? decency and comfort, althouv 01S
all the time. It cannot he diluted that those who
, have not a due sense of their duty to tl j e
- or to the Empire ha.ve increased prices, an
, hold the opinion that these increases can he preven ,
; and that action should be taken in this E°r
, instance, take wheat. As the res f
effort bv any particular individual or
i SualsT but Y bec P anse of a gift from nature or nrovi-
dence. we have had the most botmtaW barrat ™ h ®
, ever had, and an increased yield of 12 per cent.
S r °Senator MILLEN.—Are you urging that the price of
r wheat should he reduced 1 . . , ~ , rmestion
Mr ELMSLIE. —I am not pome into that questio ,
befit te a matter that should be taken into considera-
£on I can sav what T said in Parliament when the
i question of the Wheat Board was first brought urp
s bold the belief that it was the correct thing when there
was an abundant harvest that those peonle who had ac-
e • rented certain responsibilities of a heavy
character and stood behind the farmers ,n the form of a


guarantee should not, by their patriotic action, have an
infliction placed upon them in the shape of a heavy
Si:. the ? ost ° f t Wdstuffs. I ask now that the
Wh tlon , S 1 ? U i d be ln( l uired mto so that we might
that T re i Gf ! h ? Uld not be S iven in the direction
n ba ; e indlcate d Whatever may be the position
Ttio °^ er n me nt, there are other bodies concerned.
• Z 7ll i 6l s ’ 01 mstance, have banded together and
said t° the bakers, “ Even though you can do so at a
profit Yon must not sell your bread at a price less than
that which we fix.”
Mr BEEBY.— Action wasi taken in that regard in
thal S ° Uth Wa es; tbe y were prevented from doing
M 1 *' vYS-c?™ 14 is still . S oin S on in Victoria.
Y • ' J YYY i g point which I was ap-
proac mg. Vlnle the carrying of resolutions and the
framing of laws will bind honest men, unless the ad-
ministration of those laws is complete and the people
who break them are punished, it is of very little use
passing e laws. I have had on more than one
occasion to fight for the right of a baker to sell bread
at a profit for 6d. per loaf, because the millers insisted
that he should charge 7d.
Mr. WATSON.—The Government should take action
m such a case.
M.r. ELMSLIE.—I believe that they should. We
want more than an assurance that legislation to pre-
vent these things will be passed. We want, also, the
assurance that the administration of those laws will be
as een as he circumstances of the position warrant,
i am glad that we have come to grips at last in a prac-
.ca e oi t to solve the problem which we came here to
so ve, and I think I can best express my appreciation
of the present position of the Conference by refraining
from speaking at greater length. s
Mr. PEAKE.—I wish to say but a very few words
in this debate, because I think that after Mr. Holman’s
speech last night most of us on this side will consider
tha, his eloquent exposition of our case leaves verv
-ittie for us to say. Another reason why I shall
content myself with very few words is that I take it
that we are going to make a verv earnest effort to
conclude our proceedings to-day. The members of the
Conference have become fewer, and they will be fewer
still. We know that members of the Federal Ministry
as well as Mr. Tudor and other members on his sidT
must get away this afternoon. As the members of the
Conference become fewer, any resolution that mav be
come to will possibly have less weight. I have taken-
a very few notes of Mr. Elmslie’s speech. Ido not
wish to do him any injustice, but I think it would be
ha?r at / lty lf ’/! he a PP eare d to suggest, after we
have endeavoured to meet a certain number of stated
objections from the other side, the list of those obiec-
tions is to be constantly added to.
A MEMBER.—He never suggested that.
Mr. PEAKE.-—lt seemed to me that he did by
brm ? m ? forward several other objections which were
not included m those referred to in Mr. Tudor’s pro-
pOSellS. *■
Tbe PRESIDENT.—I think that Mr. Elmslie was
merely indicating other things which he would like to
have seen attended to in order to bring about harmony.
~ t}l ink that he asked that they should be con
sidered now. cuu "
Mr. EPMSLIE.—No.
Mr. PEAKE.—It seemed to me that he mentioned 1
S e of tbe Conference 13 “ SUbjeC * S the considera-
asont * hink y ° U may ”*“* those 1
Mr. PEAKE,-Verv well. I should like to say, in V
reference to Mr. Elmslie’s contention, that the i
proposals already submitted from his side are the result i
o compromise, that he would be Quite wrong if he
assumed that the counter proposals from this side are u
h not also the result of compromise. No one can fairly
y consider that those counter proposals are such as could
e be readily agreed to by this side, were it not for the
t feeling in the minds of our members that they must
a give away very much in order to secure something.
1 That feeling operated very powerfully to make our
counter proposals as wide and generous as possible,
i Now as to “ the last man and the last shilling,” no one
1 con ceived for a moment that Mr. Fisher, when he made
l hat famous declaration, intended that it should be
taken literally. He intended, rather, that it should
i e considered as an indication of the spirit in which we
> e JP the Mother Country in the time of war.
While I have the greatest respect for Mr. Ryan’s
opinion, I do feel that, until we can know fully what
is o be the end of the struggle in which we are engaged,
1 lt 13 impossible for us to suggest anything like an
actuarial estimate of the sacrifices we shall have to
make to meet it. Mr. Ryan said that we ought to know
w lat our resources are, and what we can afford in men
and money. How can we know that until we know
w , a ls k 0 the end of the- struggle, and the measure
of those resources which must be sacrificed to meet it?
i°] 11€ u Woldd have believed, some time ago, that it
would be necessary to impose the amount of taxation
that is now imposed, and that probably will have to
e still further imposed on the people in consequence
of the war. Yet who can sav. until we know the end,
what will be the full amount of taxation that must be
borne by our people? I cannot see any limit to it until
we know what is to be the end of this'struggle.
Mi. RYAN. The Commonwealth Government are
uot now raising enough to pay interest on war loans.
Mi. HUME COOK.—Mr. Joseph Cook said yester-
day that they are.
Mr. PEAKE.—If they are not, it only means that
they must raise more.
Mr. RYAN. I say that they should do it now, from
the big wealthy interests.
Mr. PEAKE.—I do not care what interests may be
concerned, so long as the sacrifice is common, and equal
according to the means to bear it.
Mr. RYAN. I do care what interests the taxation
comes from.
Mr. PEAKE.—I should not single out any section
of the people, and say that the taxation imposed should
be of such a character as to drag all down to one level.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—Give us equality of sacrifice.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is what I believe in.
Mr. TTJ.DOR.—And wealth is paying only Is. 2d.
in the LI to-day.
Mr. WATSON.—No, a great deal more than that.
Mr. PEAKE.—I have urged these matters, in reply
to Mr. Ryan s suggestion that we should formulate our
resources and see what we can do. I say that we do
uot know what we can do until we are called upon to
do it, and we must do all that is possible to prevent
U6l6ciu.
Mr. RYAN.—What I suggest is that we must be
practical.
Mr. PEAKE. I have heard Mr. Rvan say more
than once that he desires to be practical.
Mr. RYAN.—And you say that you do not.
Mr. PEAKE.—No, I do not say that.
Tbe PRESIDENT.—I am afraid that the matter
which is now being debated is not a part of the pro-
posals before the Conference.
Ti* plMTnJi,™ ar(l tbe raatter as very important.
emb h d-^ R - ES Ji DE ? T '~ That may be SO ’ bnt h is not
dl6 r VL tbe , document which contains the sugges-
tions submitted by Mr. Tudor.
ba^ l bpf EAK i E; ~i Wa9 re P lyin ? to arguments that
have been used m the course of the debate, and which,
it appeared to me, were likely to affect the minds of
members of the Conference.
u plu^rnttf S ' ~ lf ar^UTnents are to be used
upon matters which are not within the four corners of


the document under consideration, every member of the
Conference may wish to debate them, and we may be
here until the war is ended.
Mr. PEAKE. —I am prepared to accept your ruling,
sir, but it appears to me that if I do so I shall be
unable to reply to anything which has been said before,
and which was said for the purpose of influencing the
minds of members of the Conference.
The PRESIDENT.—I do not wish to unnecessarily
restrict the debate, but it occurred to me that the
matters which were being discussed were not included
in the document under consideration.
Mr. PEAKE. —I intended to say something on the
question of the cost of living, but you apparently think
that I should not deal with that question.
Mr. RYAN. —I should like to hear you on that.
Mr. HOLMAN—Is not that a part of “ profiteer-
ing”? „
Mr. PRITCHARD.—CaII it “ profiteering, and
you can get it in.
Mr. PEAKE.—I do not wish to get in anything by
way of a subterfuge, but I am thankful for the suggestion
about “ profiteering,” because I think that what I wish
to say will fairly come under that term.
The PRESIDENT.—Yes, I think that “ profiteer-
ing ” is certainly before us.
Mr. PEAKE. —We have heard a good deal about the
increased cost of living which, it is alleged, has been
brought about by profiteering. The price of meat
is unquestionably higher now in almost every State in
the Commonwealth than it was some time ago, but in
most of the States that is due not to profiteering, but
to the terrible drought which swept over this country a
few years ago, with the result that our flocks and heids
have not yet recovered from its effects. When a country
has been so depleted of stock as this country was by the
drought of 1914-15 it takes a good many years to bring
its flocks and herds up to the numbers they had
formerly reached.
Mr. WILLIAMS. —Yet we are slaughtering heifers
to-day.
Mr. PEAKE. —I want to sound a note of warning
that it will be useless and ineffective for us to try to
fix the price of meat at such a figure that it will be no
longer profitable to produce it. To do that would be
to defeat the end we have in view.
Mr. SCULLIN. —We do not propose that. The ex-
port price as suggested by the Inter-State Commission
is what we suggest.
Mr. PEAKE.—We do not quite know what our
friends propose. It has been said that there has been
profiteering in connexion with wheat, but the price of
wheat to the producer is very little more than sufficient
to pay him for producing it.
Mr. BROOKS.—He complains that it does not pa
him.
Mr. PEAKE.—In individual cases it may not, but
I am speaking in general terms.
Mr. RYAN.—The suggestion is that it is better to
have the people eat it than the mice.
Mr. PEAKE —That may be granted readily, but
there is another consideration. Is it fair to take from
the wheat producer the article his labour has produced
in order that it may he given to other people at a price
less than it cost the producer to produce it?
Mr. RYAN.—No one suggests such a thing.
Mr. PEAKE.—Mr. Elmslie suggested that there has
been profiteering in connexion with wheat. I ask hint
to consider that in the same year, 1914-15, many of
the farmers were reduced to the lowest point financially,
and forced into debt pretty well up to their necks in
order to carry on ; and even in the two or three years
that have succeeded, many of them have not been able
to get out of their difficulties. It is useless to aigue
in general terms, and say that wheat is too dear, unless
we also take into consideration the conditions of the
men who have to produce it.
Mr PRITCHARD. —You must work on an average.
Mr. PEAKE. —That is so; you cannot judge by years
of plenty or by lean years alone, but must arrive at an
average There are several other points that might
prove"interesting, but which, according to your view,
Mr. President —and I quite agree with that view we
must not attempt to deal with if we are to reach a con-
clusion of the Conference in decent time. Many of the
points that have been referred to in the- course of the
discussion I regard as very unimportant in view of the
main question which we are gathered together to discuss
That question is, what can we do to help at this most
critical period in the history of our own people, ot
civilization, and our race. It is no use fiddling over
little points when Rome is burning. We could stay
here for any length of time discussing, as we have been,
very small points, compared with the great issue we
are' called upon to meet. I accept with absolute
sincerity the assurance that the gentlemen who repre-
sent the other side have not come here for the purpose
of making any bargain, but to set before us certain
things which they believe have operated against the
success of recruiting. It is the desire of members on
this side to meet those objections fairly and reasonably
as' far as we can. If we can arrive at a decision on
what has been offered from the other side, it will help
very materially 'to remove objections to recruiting.
Some of these objections I can hardly believe have been
strong enough to have had the effect on recruiting we
have heard described, though some of them, of course,
are important. I should be glad if we could get an
indication from gentlemen opposite that they, witho.it
waiting for the removal of the last thing they 1
an objection and an obstacle, would be prepared to ac-
cept the removal of what they believe to be .substantial
obstacles and difficulties, and would go out and honestly,
fairly, and enthusiastically try to do what they canto
further recruiting. I feel certain that if, that
trial has been made, it can then be shown that there
are still some obstacles, this Conference wi 1 gladly re-
assemble and endeavour to remove these also. In tne
meantime let us take what we can get, without trying
to get the last ounce of what we believe we ought to
get, but what the other side believe ought not to be
Granted. Let us, with the means now at our command,
try for that harmony for which we all say we are wor
ing and hoping.
Mr. JELLEY.—I take it that the Conference was
called together to give all sides an opportunity o
placing before us what they consider to he obstacles
to recruiting. Since we have assembled it seems to
me to be very apparent that members on the side op-
nosite to that to which I have the honour to belong
are placing practically the whole responsibility on this
side to show what the obstacles are. I do not know
that that is unite a fair attitude to tahe because it
must be within the minds of members that
some things other than those we have put forward that
have constituted obstacles to recruit-in oll . - or us ance,
honorable members opposite must realize that the atti-
tude thev have taken up towards Labour and i«
representatives has materiallv affected, tv nu ic
mind. aud. as a couseonence, has materially affected
harmony in the community.
Skater "PLATTST.—Tn what way?
Mr. JELLEY. —Let me cite one point only. We
have had it spread broadcast throughout Australia
that to vote for Tudor or Lundie, in South Australia,
was to vote for the Kaiser.
Mr. PEAKE. —Was that an individual expression
of opinion ? That was not an expression by our
Pa . Mr. TUDOR.—Thev said that I believed in the
murder of Nurse CNveil! ,
The PRESIDENT.—Order! Will you proceed,
Mr. Jelley?


Mr. PEAKE. —Who said it?
Mr. BERRY.—One member of the Conference has
said that that was said by our party.
The PRESIDENT.—I suggest that Mr. Jelley
proceed without referring to events of the kind that
have passed.
Mr. JELLEY.—Senator Plain asked a question,
and Mr. Peake interjected, and I must ask to be
allowed to point out that if we fail to impress the
minds of members present that there are what we con-
sider other obstacles to recruiting besides those we
have tabulated, they may possibly leave the Confer-
ence with the idea that they can connect the Labour
movement and the workers generally with Germany,
German gold, and so forth, without creating any discord
in the community. I wish to impress on them that
that kind of thing does not tend to harmony.
Mr. PEAKE.—It is from your side as well.
Mr. JELLEY.—I admit that. On the sth of this
month, the day before the election in South Australia,
the party to which Mr. Peake belongs issued a circular
sending broadcast statements which had been made by
Mr. Higgs and Mr. Brennan, in the Commonwealth
Parliament, at Melbourne, and which were considered
to be disloyal to the Empire.
Mr. PEAKE.—I never saw the circular.
Mr. JELLEY.—I had copies pushed into my hands,
and I saw boys pushing them into the hands of all
they met in the streets.
Mr. PEAKE. —Who printed and authorized the
circular ?
Mr. JELLEY.—On this occasion the circular was
in the English language, but on a previous occasion
a circular was in German, and appealed to the Ger-
mans for their votes.
Mr. PEAKE.—Who authorized it?
Mr. JELLEY.—The Secretary of the National
party—l think it was Mr. Page.
Mr. PEAKE. —Mr. Anstey is secretary of that
party.
Mr. JELLEY. —No matter; it was issued with the
concurrence of the party. Does Mr. Peake say that
he does not believe in that kind of thing.
Mr. PEAKE.—I do say that; indeed, I say that,
so far as the National party is concerned, it was never
issued.
Mr. JELLEY. —I saw it.
The PRESIDENT. —I must ask Mr. Jelley to pro-
ceed.
Mr. JELLEY. —I did not think that auy man from
South Australia would have dared to contradict what
I have just said, or I should have brought proof.
Mr. PEAKE. —You have to do more than that;
you have to prove who said it.
Mr. JELLEY. —I did not take the trouble.
Mr. PEAKE. —Recrimination is very easy on both
sides.
The PRESIDENT.—PIease go on, Mr. Jelley.
Mr. JELLEY.—However, we on this side have
placed before the Conference a list of what we con-
sider are obstacles to recruiting. Our first sugges-
tion is that an indication be given that conscription is
finally abandoned during the term of this war, and such
an indication ought to be given. There are thousands
of men and women in Australia who believed that con-
scription was intended here for industrial purposes.
Our opponents say that we are wrong—that it was not
intended for industrial purposes. But we cannot even
now think that that assurance will clear the doubt from
the mind of the community, because we have only to
have regard to certain incidents. If we look at the
newspapers we find that in New Zealand conscription
certainly stands for industrial conscription.
Mr. O’LOITGHLTN. —And in Western Australia,
tOO. i : ._ _ . ~A ,„ M
Mr. JELLEY.—In the newspapers of the 15th of this
month we are told —
Wellington. —In the House of Representatives
the Finance Bill was read a third time after with-
drawal, owing to Labour opposition, of a proposed
new clause providing for conscription of labour foi
national service when necessary. This will pi o-
bably be introduced separately in an altered form.
Mr. PEAKE.—Have they not that sort of thing in
England? May we not be compelled to come to it
here ?
Mr. JELLEY. —But one strong objection of the
workers to conscription was that it would be for indus-
trial rather than for defence purposes. Here is an-
other point to which I desire to call attention. If an
attempt is made to introduce conscription in Australia,
we, as a factor in the war, are going to be less effective
than we. are under the present system, meagre as the re-
turns may be from voluntary recruiting. We should
probably come to a state of affairs when we would have
Australians shooting down Australians rather than Aus-
tralians shooting down Germans.
Mr. WATSON.—Conscription is abandoned; what
is the use of labouring it?
Mr. JELLEY.—Is it abandoned? That is what I
want to know. If we can give the public an assur-
ance that will leave no doubt in their mind as to con-
scription having been abandoned, it will have a very-
beneficial effect in bringing about united effort on the
part of Australians.
Mr. WATSON.—You had that assurance yesterday.
Mr. JELLEY.—In regard to the likelihood of re-
bellion taking place, I wish to draw attention to what
the New York Times has to say in regard to the pro-
posed attempt to conscript the people of Ireland. Tile
following is an extract from a letter written to the
Age of 15th April:—
.... It is time the men who talk so much
about liberty took a part in the defending of it.
There is reason to doubt the of this
cable
That refers to a previous item, and it goes on
for in a recent leading article headed “ Bad
Advice,” the New York Times criticised Colonel
Repington’s contribution, which had appeared in
its columns, in the following terms: —“ Colonel
Repington, military critic, unmuzzled and unafraid,
runs amok when he calls for conscription for Ire-
land, a most delicate and embarrassing question. It
might prove to be the spark in a powder magazine.
A condition confronts the British Government, and
it must deal with that condition soberly and with
circumspection. ’ ’
This is what the New York Times finally says —
If Berlin could be consulted, it would advise
Irish conscription at once by all means.
If we could fathom the public mind of Berlin, we should
find that the feeling there is—“ Leave the public mind
in Australia in doubt as to whether they are going to
have conscription or not.” Mr. Peake has pointed out
that he would be very loth to increase the burden on a
section of the community to which we are directing our
attention, because he is afraid that it would mean a
levelling down.
Mr. PEAKE.—I did not say that.
Mr. JELLEY.—Mr. Peake said he did not want to
have taxation that would put the community on one
level.
Mr. PEAKE.—I said that I fully subscribed to the
principle of equality of taxation.
Mr. JELLEY.—You added that.
Mr. PEAKE.—You did no<t allow me to finish.


Mr. JELLEY. —If it be a burden on that section of
the community, who we say have been exploiting the
working classes, to contend that there shall be no more
profits made in war time than in pre-war times —if that
is a burden on that section, the sooner that burden is
imposed the better. We are asking for nothing more
than that persons shall obtain no more profits out of
their business in Australia than they obtained prior to
the war.
Mr. HOLMAN.—What about my suggestion yester-
day, that if there is any gap the State Governments
shall undertake to fill that gap by additional war taxes
on increased profits due to war conditions, and nothing
else.
Mr. PEAKE.—There is the higher cost of pro-
duction.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That diminishes profits, and we are
only speaking of profits.
Mr. JELLEY. —I am heartily in accord with the
suggestion of Mr. Holman. I do not say it is the
policy of the rest of the members of this side, but to me
it appears to be the only way in which we can effectively
prevent profiteering; and if we do not prevent it by
that means, we shall have the satisfaction of knowing
that the whole of the war-time profits will revert to the
public Treasury, and, therefore, be a relief to the com-
munity in that direction. So far as the community is
concerned, it matters very little whether the present
kings or captains of commerce, if I may so term them,
make extra profits so long as these profits revert to the
public Treasury and give relief to the public in that
way.
Mr. McNEIL. —What about those who have been
ruined by the war?
Mr. JELLEY. —I can provide no remedy for them.
It will be for Mr. McNeil to put forward a scheme to
place them on the footing they were on before they
were ruined. Now comes the question whether we can
go out and tell our followers that what they consider
stumbling-blocks will be absolutely removed. We
have to look back over the recent history of some of
those who have given an undertaking that those
stumbling-blocks will be removed. I am loth to
remind members that it is not very long since the
Federal Government, upon whose shoulders the respon-
sibility of carrying most of these proposals into effect
will rest, distinctly told the people that unless a certain
situation obtained in Australia, they would not attempt
to carry on the government of this country. They
failed to keep that pledge. When, yesterday after-
noon, Mr. McCallum interjected that if we went back
to our followers and told them that all those grievances
were going to be remedied because a certain gentleman
had promised it, we would be laughed at, he was not
exaggerating the situation one iota. If the representa-
tives of the various Governments intend to remove
these obstacles, I say to them, “ Do not hesitate to do
it. Consider whether this Empire is worth the sacri-
fices we are asking you to make, and worth removing
the injustices we are asking you to remove. If the
Empire is worth it, get to work and do it. If they
will do that, we, on the other hand, even though we
have been termed disloyalists, are prepared to say to
our men that this country is a great improvement on
that Germany can give them, because these
obstacles, which in the past quite a lot of them have
said made this country not one whit better than Ger-
many, have been removed. Members must realize that
men have had a lot of provocation; thev have found
very great difficulty in making both ends meet, and,
being intelligent men, reading in the newspapers
balance-sheet after balance-sheet of financial and indus-
trial concerns here making profits that were hitherto
unknown to them, they said, “ What am I to fight for .
You ask me to sacrifice my life, and at the same time
you are closing your eyes to that condition of affairs,
and making no effort to prevent it.” It is from that
stand-point that we, as representatives of the people,
are asking those in authority to place this matter
beyond doubt. If they are in earnest, if they are
going to make this country a better country to live in,
and if they are going to provide more freedom in it, let
them do so. When the men went away to the front in
1915, they left in Australia a Labour Government in
every centre except Victoria. In their absence, the
people have had their liberties filched from them bit
by bit, with the result that a number of those men who
went to the Front distinctly showed the opinion they
had of the conditions in Australia when they voted
”No ” at the referendum. They took all the risks,
and distinctly and emphatically voted against compul-
sion for sending recruits to their aid. It was, I believe,
because these men felt that in their absence their
liberties were being taken from them, and that their
wives and children were finding it more difficult to
live from day to day
Mr. HOLMAN. —But that is true of all the com-
batant nations. It is more difficult for wives and chil-
dren in Belgium, France, and, I dare say
if we knew the facts —in Germany itself, than it was
before the war began.
Mr. STOREY. —Surely the cases are not parallel.
Mr. HOLMAN. —No; because we are not making
half the effort that those other nations are.
Mr.' STOREY. —But foodstuffs are here in abund-
ance; there they are not.
Mr. JELLEY. —In comparing the situation in Aus-
tralia with that in France, Germany, England, or any
other country involved in the war, Mr. Holman must
recognise that if it could be shown that no more profits
were being made in Australia since the war began than
before it, his argument would hold good. It cannot be
contended that there is any justification for increasing
the cost of the necessities of the people if increased
profits are shown in the process. If profits are kept
down to the pre-war rate or lower, then it can be
argued, with a good deal of logic, that the people are
being treated in the same way as they were prior to
the war. We say there must be no war profiteering.
We have been asked to show how profiteering condi-
tions can be stopped. Well, we say if we take the
leading men from each State, as the Premier of each
State ought to be, and is in most cases, and take the
representatives of the Federal Government, all men
with vast experience, and remember, also, that the
head of the present Government said in 1915 that if he
was given the power he was asking for in the way of
amendments of the Federal Constitution, he would
regulate the cost of living in Australia, and bring it
down to a sane and proper level
Mr. PRITCHARD.—But the people did not give
him that power.
Mr. JELLEY.—Quite so; but he has the power now
under the War Precautions Act. It is very difficult to
imagine anything that Mr. Hughes could not do under
that Act, although there are several things we know he
has not done. Unquestionablv, he has not handled
the question of the cost of living in Australia. He
and the State Premiers can do so. Let them do it
now. Ido not feel inclined to take up the attitude of
advising one of my fellow-workers to go along and help
the men at the Front, especially seeing that the great
majority of the men who have gone to the Front are
members of our industrial community. It has been
inferred, even during this Conference, that we are not
prepared to ask our men to go and assist their one-time
mates. So far as lam concerned, that is not true;
and so far as I have been able to learn, no united
action has been taken by Labour to prevent men going
away to assist those who are already taking the risks
at the Front. I have never taken, that attitude.


Mr. HOLMAN.—Was not there a resolution carried j
in Melbourne by a Labour organisation declining to <
accept the Governor-General’s invitation to be repre-
sented at this Conference?
Mr. JELLEY.—I believe there was.
Mr. HOLMAN.—What do you think dictated that
attitude, and do you personally concur in it?
Mr. JELLEY.—I was not present when it was
carried, but what I believe actuated the men in coming
to that conclusion was that they recognised the existence
of these obstacles and believed that those who came to
the Conference would get promises and nothing more.
If they took up that attitude, and quoted some of the
broken promises made from time to time since the war
commenced, it may be said that they had some reason
on their side.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But is not that a decision to leave
the men who have gone to the Front there, and wash
their hands of them in the face of the public?
Mr. JELLEY.—No.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then how do you interpret that
decision ?
Mr. JELLEY. —I interpret it to mean that the men
who arrived at it have decided that, a purely voluntary
system does not necessitate the likes of myself getting
on the public platform and “ coercing ” others to do
something that ought to be voluntary.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That is not the point. Do you
not feel that the needs of the men who have gone in-
volve your getting on to the platform ?
Mr. JELLEY.—Probably it does appeal to me in
that way.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then does that decision of the
Melbourne Trades and Labour Council represent the
same frame of mind as yours?
Mr. JELLEY. —It may do so.
Mr. HOLMAN. —You said that so far as you knew
no Labour party had dissented from your own general
attitude, and I have shown you one that appears to
have done so.
Mr. PEAKE. —The Trades and Labour Council in
Adelaide refused to go on even a recruiting committee.
Mr. BLUNDELL. —They have put a delegate on
since.
Mr. JELLEY. —We are getting now on to the ques-
tion of men refusing to go on to recruiting committees.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is another matter altogether.
Mr. JELLEY.—I do not think it is a different
matter. Mr. Holman is quoting the action of certain
men meeting in Melbourne and deciding to keep aloof
from the recruiting movement. Mv reply is that those
men believe the voluntary effort should be voluntary,
and that no one should try to coerce others into enlist-
ing.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —They place no obstacles m the way
of any man who likes to go on such committees.
Mr. JELLEY. —That is true, but they say the
voluntarv effort should be left voluntary.
Mr. HOLMAN.— That is to say, if you see a man
drowning your attitude is, “ If any one likes to go and
re-cue him he may, but I am not going to urge any-
bodv to do so.” . , ,
Mr. LTTNDIE.—'The answer is, “ Why not do it
yourself ?” * ,
Mr. JELLEY. —The men take up this attitude : that
the legislator who gets on the public platform, and
who is to all intents and purposes, so far as the eye can
fndff© fit to go away and do the business himself,
although he may not be eligible, is going to do more
h*rm than good to the recruiting movement. T have
gone on the platform, and have been immediately
availed with the question, “ Why do you not go your-
self?” Now, if that question is m the minds of some
men who utter it, it, mav be in the minds of most of
thom who remain silent, and, unconsciously, I may be
doing more harm than good to the recruiting move-
me.it by associating myself with it. We have hoard
good deal about giving back this and that, but the
only thing which I have to give hack since I took part
in the recruiting movement is a punch in the jaw
which somebody gave me on one occasion, lie was
one of the “ Win-the-waritesand because I had dared
months previously to offer an opinion on conscription,
while my back was turned he came up and struck me.
As he was an old man, that ended the incident. ia\e
referred to this matter because I wish members on the
other side to disabuse their minds of the idea that we
have more responsibilities to carry in connexion with
the obstacles to recruiting that they have. From that
side men who are eligible for service abroad have gone
on the public platforms and urged other eligibles to
enlist. That ought to be stopped. If a man is not
prepared to go to the Front he should keep on i m
platform. If he is too old to go there is, of course,
some justification for his presence on the public plat-
form. But to my mind this matter of recruiting
should be left, as far as possible, to those men who
have been to the Front, and have incurred the i isks
attendant upon service there. If they cannot make
appeals to the workers of Australia sufficiently con-
vincing to induce them to rally to the colours, the
politicians will do more harm than he will do good.
Mr. BLUNDELL.—Some returned soldiers are the
worst speakers in the world. They call everybody scabs
and blacklegs.
Mr. TUDOR.—They have done a lot of injury to
the recruiting movement.
Mr. JELLEY. —The worst speaker in favour of re-
cruiting that I have heard was a parson, who described
the character of the people left in Australia to-day.
He exclaimed, “ Fancy this community reproducing
its kind ! What sort of mongrels shall we have here
Yet, after indulging in language of that sort he ex-
pected men enthusiastically to rush to the colours. I
have no desire to prolong this discussion. I feel that
it has achieved some good, because the main object of
those who entertain similar views to myself was to
point out the obstacles that exist to recruiting. The
responsibility for removing those obstacles rests upon
the other side. To all those who believe that the
Empire is worth making a sacrifice for I say, “ Get
in and do your hit by removing some of the obstacles
which we say can be removed.”
Mr. COLLIER.—I hesitate very much to intervene
in the discussion at this stage, because I recognise that
we have reached that point in our deliberations when
very little further assistance can be rendered by speech
making. Nevertheless, I venture to occupy the atten-
tion of members for a few minutes whilst I discuss
some of the matters which have been under considera-
tion so far as they affect the State of Western Aus-
tralia. But before doing so, even at the risk of weary-
ing members, I should like to* reiterate fh© statement
which has been made by many of my friends here that
we have not come to this Conference with the intention
of bargaining in any way. I am not here to ask for
concessions in return for support. My attitude will
not be changed in any way by any conclusions which
might be arrived at by this Conference. Whether the
proposals submitted by the governmental authorities
he conceded or not, my attitude in the future will be
the same as it has been in the past. I stand exactly
where Mr. Ryan stands. I have always supported the
voluntary system of recruiting, and intend to continue
doing so.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Does that mean that you oppose
conscription, or that you will use your influence to
urge those who may be swayed by it to volunteer?
Mr. COLLIER. —It certainly means that I oppose
conscription. But I took the recruiting platforms
until I was practically driven off them by the attitude
of the Minister for Defence. As a matter of fact,


whilst I had two summonses in my pocket at the be-
ginning of the year, I received a pressing invitation
from the officer in charge of recruiting in Perth to
address a public meeting in that connexion m the
Perth Town Hall.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Summonses for what?
Mr. COLLIER. —For offences against the War Pre-
cautions Regulations. One summons was for having
made statements likely to prejudice recruiting, and the
other was based upon a drag-net regulation under which
almost any man in the Commonwealth may be prose-
cuted. I went to the officer in question, and told him
that I should be very pleased to accede to his request,
that 1 had been addressing recruiting meetings ever
since the commencement of the war, but if there was
any justification for the prosecutions which had been
launched against me, my presence on the platform
would have the very opposite effect to that which he
desired. In other words, I should be hindering, latliei
than assisting recruiting.
Mr. TUDOR.—What was the result of the prosecu-
tions ?
Mr. COLLIER. —One was, dismissed, -and upon the
second charge I was fined £25. Whilst upon tin
matter, perhaps I may be pardoned for giving mem-
bers some information. The prosecution arose out of
a meeting w T hich was held on the 16th July of last
year. Upon that date a meeting was held at Kal-
goorlie, at which about 1,000 people were present, for
the purpose of protesting against profiteering, or the
high cost of living. The gathering was addressed by
Mr. McCallum and myself, and notes were taken of
our remarks. Th§ statements we were alleged to have
made were presented to the officials upon whom rests
the responsibilities of taking action if there has been
any breach of the law. They decided that there was
no cause of action. That decision was arrived at
about three weeks after the meeting was held. Thus
matters remained from the first week in August until
the middle of December last, when Senator Pearce
arrived at Kalgoorlie on his way to Western Australia
to take part in the referendum campaign. Upon his
arrival there these notes were revived, notwithstanding
that the military authorities and others had previously
set them aside. Upon their presentation to him —and
I make this assertion notwithstanding that he has
denied its accuracy —Senator Pearce , without re-
ference to, and without the advice of, the Common-
wealth solicitors, issued instructions that summonses
should be taken out, and that prosecutions should be
instituted.
Mr. TUDOR. —Five months afterwards?
Mr. COLLIER. —Yes; and right in the middle of
the referendum campaign. Mr. Holman and other
members of the legal profession will, 1 think, admit that
it was part of the duty of the Commonwealth solicitors
to frame the charges against me.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Ordinarily that is so.
Mr. COLLIER. —But, in this case, the charges were
drawn up and handed to the solicitors, who were in-
structed to “ Issue summonses against Collier, and these
are the charges to be laid.” The solicitors had nothing
to do with the matter beyond handing the summonses
to me. That is the assertion which I make, and which
I can prove. I challenged Senator Pearce in Western
Australia to prove otherwise, but he failed to do so. In
a statement which he subsequently made to press repre-
sentatives here, that gentleman said, “ The remarks
that Mr. Collier made were shown to me, in addition to
which a newspaper report of his speech was presented
to me, and I read it.” Now, as a matter of fact, not
one line of what I said at that meeting appeared in any
newspaper in Western Australia, and I challenge Sena-
tor Pearce to produce any newspaper containing such a
report.
Mr. HOLMAN". —Perhaps he had seen a report which
had been suppressed by the censor.
Mr. COLLIEIi. —That is impossible, because no
shorthand reporter was present, and no notes of the
speech were taken. The Commonwealth solicitors were
instructed to get out these summonses the intention
being that the hearing should take place prior to the
20th December last, the day upon which the referendum
was to be taken. However, the authorities weie
unable to locate me in time, as I was travelling about the
country, and as the hearing could not be fixed before
the 20th December it was fixed for the 21st December.
But having failed to get the cases heard before polling
day, the authorities evidently said “We need not
bother about the matter at all now,” and the hearing
did not come on till March of the present year. When
I inquired what was the cause of the delay, I was
informed that the matter had been referred to Mel-
bourne. Prosecutions against other men charged
with offences under the War Precautions Act have
been launched within a few days after the commission
of the offence. But my case wets referred to Mel-
bourne, and on the Bth March last I was fined £25 for
an alleged offence which was committed nine months
earlier
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Who fined you?
Mr. COLLIER. —A magistrate; but Ido not wisli£
say anything about that. se
Mr. MORBY. —You have not paid the fine yet?
Mr. COLLIER. —NTo; I have lodged an appeal to s
High Court, the hearing of which will not come on t.
October next. In the meantime we may be able to
arrive at some amicable arrangement. I wish now to
come to the case of Western Australia. As members
know, w 3 were outside the great storm centre during
the recent industrial disturbance consequent upon the
great strike. It affected us only in one aspect, namely,
in regard to the wharf lumpers. The wharf lumpers in
Fremantle went out on strike with the rest of the wharf
lumpers throughout the Commonwealth, and a body of
new workers took their place. There is no doubt that
quite a number of those who filled the places of the men
on strike were actuated by the highest motives. Men
left other occupations, and went there for the time
being, believing that they were doing a necessary and
patriotic service. lam prepared to say that that was
unquestionably their view. WLen the strike was over
they Avent back to their former occupations. There are
none of them there now; but Mr. Holman and other
gentlemen here will bear me out that, when men take
the place of strikers, there is always an undesirable
element among them —a type who practically do no
work at any other time, and only come in on such occa-
sions when there is a chance of taking the place of men
who are out.
Mr. MORBY.—They are professional strike-breakers.
Mr. COLLIER.—Yes. Among those men who went
in was the West Australian hangman, for example; and
he is still there. The point I wish to make is that tL
Bureau of Registration of National Volunteers should
have been immediately closed when the strike was over,
in that there wasi sufficient labour; but it is still open,
and even to-day men can register as national volunteers
and they will get preference of employment over the
lumpers who were there formerly. When we he
patriotic speeches concerning what men have done ii
the war we should hang our heads in shame since we
have to say that in our State the order of preference is
national volunteers first, returned soldiers second, and
the original wharf lumpers third. These national
volunteers have another name, by the way, but I will
not pass that on to the Conference. Among them are
sixty-seven foreigners, besides a good many others who
are naturalised. There is also the hangman. You will
find among the foreigners Greeks who are single men
with no responsibilities, no families; also Swedes, and
other fellows of foreign nationalities. Meanwhile, there


are wharf labourers with large families, men of Britiso
blood and breed, and as good Britishers as any other in
the community notwithstanding that they went out on
strike through a sense of loyalty and comradeship to
their fellow unionists. The first twelve women who
went up for relief while the strike was on were the
mothers of 84 children. Those twelve mothers and
their 84 little ones are suffering privations to-day, while
the hangman and his foreign associates are getting the
work on the wharfs. I suppose that the terms agreed
to by the Prime Minister mean that those wharf
labourers will now come upon an equality of employ-
ment with the men at present engaged. But, knowing
how these things operate, I am not too cheerful.
Mr. MORBY —Do not forget, the agreement was,
“ All things being equal.”
Mr. COLLIER. —I wasi going to add that. I have
had too much experience as to how these things operate.
They say that the preference to the new unionists will
be wiped away; but we know how it operates and how,
I fear, it wiil continue to do. Those responsible can
select the labour that they require from the men at
present at work, who are the so-called national volun-
teers. That is how it will act largely all over Aus-
tralia. While they say, on paper, ” You have been
placed on an equality,” there is not now sufficient work
fiering to employ these—the former workers. The
S ° \ult will be—l am very much afraid —that, while
anally they are on an equality, preference will con-
' ue to be given to the members of the new union.
T kr. JOSEPH COOK.—In Sydney all they have
,i ked for is an equal chance. r lhey say that their
superior workmanship and their other qualifications will
do the rest.
Mr. COLLIER. —I am afraid that will not give them
equal chances in the selection of the men required.
Mr. SCULLIN. —Cannot we go over there, and hold
a series of recruiting meetings among the national
volunteers, and get the young eligible* to go to the
war ?
Mr. COLLIER.— WeII, I can say that among our
old unionist wharf lumpers there are no single eligibles
left. , ~
Mr. LESLIE. —There are only 250 members ot the
new union.
Mr. COLLIER.—But they are still coming in.
Mr. LESLIE. —There are numbers who registered,
but have not applied for employment. I know I did so
myself.
Mr. COLLIER.— WeII, they are still coming m on
the one hand, even if they are passing out on the
other. I will concede that they may not be coming m
at the same rate, and the point is that it should be
stopped altogether. Now, lam afraid that the choice
will still be for the men who to-day are in possession
of the work. What I want to know is, what is pre-
venting the individual employer from making his own
selection. Who is controlling the employer that he
may not take on whom lie pleases ?
Mr LESLIE. —The foremen are selecting the
labour, and the majority of the foremen are members
of the old union.
Mr COLLIER. —Well, we need not at this stage dis-
cuss the details. I will go on to refer to another strike
in which the Western Australian Government
were concerned. Early this year a strike occurred
among the men handling the wheat harvest. It
lasted for a week or two, and was then broken down.
Men from the country came in, and took the place of
the strikers. This was controlled by the Government,
Onlv a few hundred persons were involved, but the
Government, right up till to-day, have victimized those
who went on strike, and they refuse to employ any of
them They are members of the Australian Workers
Union Ido not know whether, as a result of the
decision arrived at by the Premiers here, that embargo
will now be lifted. Probably it will be.
Mr. LESLIE.—The undertaking must be carried out.
Mr. COLLIER.—I hope that will be the case. Now,
as to the question of the War Precautions regulations,
there are a few which should be repealed, but it does
not matter very much as to the number of them. The
cause of complaint really lies in the administration—as
to how far they are put into effect. The regulation,
for example, dealing with the creation of disaffection
may be highly desirable. It may be important that it
should not be repealed, but it depends on what use the
Government put it to.
Senator MILLEN. —That invitation to yourself and
your friends to indicate those regulations which you
regard as objectionable will also cover any suggestions
you may make regarding the administration.
Mr. COLLIER. —Thank you for that, since it is not
the regulations so much as the use that is made of them.
You may have a regulation—as Mr. Holman has pointed
out, I think —which it may not be necessary to bring
into operation in 999 cases out of 1,000. Yet there may
arise a thousandth case where it is essential that the
Government should have the power, and should have the
regulation at their disposal. So it is all in the adminis-
tration. Under the regulation dealing with the causing
of disaffection, you may drag half the people in the
Commonwealth into the Courts. The question of what
is disaffection is left to the discretion of the magistrate,
and some of them are possessed of queer idiosyncrasies.
While we are promised that there will be no economic
conscription, I accept that absolutely so far as the
Governments are concerned. It is in operation, how-
ever, in Western Australia, and, along with the other
States, I trust that it will be entirely abandoned. But
I should like to have some definite statement from
members of the Conference who represent the employers
of Australia on that point as well. They might indicate
to us what efforts or steps they propose to take in order
to give effect to the undertaking.
Mr. WATSON. —They have promised to communi-
cate with their organizations, and to urge that it
should be done.
Mr. COLLIER. —It would help if some representa-
tives of the employers here would indicate the power
possessed by their organizations to give effect to the
terms.
A MEMBER.—Yes; let them indicate to us the
control they have over their members, and the extent
of their influence.
Mr. WATSON. —They can only urge it—the same
as you will be doing with the bodies that you repre-
sent.
Mr. COLLIER. —That is so. I know that they
cannot interfere with the liberty of the individual
employer; but I point out, for example, that there
are large firms in Perth which are actually using it
as a business. They are making use of it for advertis-
ing purposes. They announce that they refuse to
employ eligible men.
A MEMBER. —I think Senator Fairbairn remarked
yesterday that an assurance of the nature you desire
could be given.
Mr. COLLIER. —He did state it somewhat in those
terms, but I was not assured of the definiteness of it.
Mr. BROOKS. —We will give you those assurances.
Mr. COLLIER. —Thank you ! As to the conscrip-
tion issue, I think we have got as far towards unan-
imity as it is possible for us to agree to. I come now to
the subject of profiteering. When some of my friends
were speaking of this, they were asked for specific in-
stances. It is difficult for us to give such instances
now. Had I come to the Conference furnished with
all the information which is in my possession, I should
have been able to meet the request for instances,
though I do not know that much would be gained by
doing that, because here we can deal with the subject


only on broad general lines. There is conclusive evi-
dence of profiteering, of the fact that excess profits
have been and are being made. That evidence is con-
tained in the balance-sheets of many of the big com-
panies that have been published since the war began.
If you compare the profits of the shipping companies
in pre-war days with their profits now, you will see_
that since the war began they have doubled and trebled
their earnings. 'Some of these companies—those that
are doing business with Western Australia —have also
increased the fares for the voyage from Fremantle to
Melbourne by £3, or £6 for the return journey. To
the average man in the street, this is conclusive evi-
dence of profiteering. Then, last year, the directors
of the Tobacco Combine informed their shareholders
that the profits of the year had been £575,000 or
thereabouts, and they intimated they were about to
increase the price of tobacco.
Mr. BEEBY.—That has been stopped.
Mr. COLLIER.—If they had been permitted to in-
crease the prices of tobacco there would be a
further rise in their profits of ,£900,000 per
year. I am glad that the proposed increase
in the price of tobacco has been prevented.
The pastoral industry, again, has done better during
the war. We have been told that in dealing with the
rural industries we must not take account of the re-
sults of one year alone. The pastoral industry, how-
ever, has had two or three good years in succession.
In support of that statement 1 refer members to the
official organization of the pastoralists, the Pastoral-
ists Review. The industry has made millions of
pounds since the war began. This the public regards
as profiteering. We have heard a good deal of the
famous rhetorical phrase of Mr. I isher, expressing
Australia’s readiness to contribute “ the last man and
the last shilling.” Whilst on many occasions stress
has been laid on the need for carrying out his promise
in regard to the last man, very few and far between
have been the statements concerning the contribution
of the last shilling. Are we contributing the last shil-
ling when we ask the public to subscribe to war loans
carrying 4-J per cent, interest, and exempt from
Federal and~ State taxation ?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—The Labour party insti-
tuted that system of borrowing money.
Mr. COLLIER. —That is not material now. The
fact to which I direct attention is that in every imagin-
able fashion the people are being begged to subscribe to
loans at 4-£ per cent, free of taxation. Mr. Holman told
us that France has sent 16 per cent, of her total popu-
lation to serve under the colours, and he has contrasted
France’s contribution of men with Australia’s con-
tribution of 7 per cent. Let me similarly contrast oui
contribution of wealth with that of the European
countries engaged in the war on our side. Ours has
fallen immeasurably short of theirs.
Mr. HOLMAN. —But is it not apparent that the con-
tribution of man power must determine the contribu-
tion of funds? What need is there for raising more
money than is required to equip the men sent away?
Mr. COLLIER. —Have we raised enough money to
meet our war requirements ? Are we not financing out
of loan many things which should be paid for out of
revenue? If the burden of taxation borne by the people
of Great Britain is contrasted with that borne by the
people of Australia, it will be seen that, our taxation is
disproportionate to that of Great Britain.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. —I am prepared to show that
it is just as great as that of Great Britain.
Mr. HOLMAN. —When I last made a calculation on
this subject, I found that, adding Federal and State
taxation together, Australian taxation was but little
lower than the taxation of Great Britain, excepting the
large fortunes.
Mr. SCULLIN. —You dc not include local taxation ?
Mr. HOLMAN. —I am speaking of State and Federal
taxation. Roughly, they are equal; with a slight advan-
tage on our side at present. The difference in no way
corresponds with the difference between 6 arid 14 per
cent., which is the difference between the contribution
of men by Australia and that of England.
Mr. COLLIER. —The last time I had the figures
analyzed they showed that there was a greater dis-
proportion with regard to taxation.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Those figures were misleading, and
probably you were not taking State taxation into ac-
count. I think you did not quite understand my
original interjection. What I said was that if we had
a smaller army to maintain, surely a smaller tax would
be imposed upon individual citizens. If the army is
small in proportion to a given community, clearly a
lower rate of taxation will be required to maintain it.
Mr. COLLIER.—That may be, but there is un-
doubted evidence that war profits have been made in
Australia. I know, as a matter of fact, that when I
was Minister for the Crown in Western Australia, dur-
ing the first two years of the war, profits were doubled
and trebled in some of our industrial enterprises. This
information oaime to me quite properly, and by means
of returns which these organizations were required to
furnish, so there is nothing hearsay about it. Naturally,
the people feel some resentment while this condition of
affairs exists, and while those who are making these
high profits go on raising the cost of living against the
people. I am not going to say that members of the
Government are wholly responsible for this condition of
affairs, because, having been a member of a Government
for a few years, I know that innumerable grievances
for which members of the Government cannot be held
responsible arise out of the action of departmental
officers; but, broadly speaking, there is solid founda-
tion for the belief that the Government have not
grappled as seriously with this question of profiteering
as the circumstances demand. As an illustration I can
quote the price of butter. In the East it was fixed
at Is. 6d. per lb. and it was decided by the authorities
that Id. per lb. would cover the cost of transport and
handling to Western Australia; but the price fixed by
the Board controlling Western Australian prices was
Is. Bd., notwithstanding a statement from one of the
biggest butfer merchants in that State that Is. 7d. gave
an ample profit. This advance to Is. Bd. meant a differ-
ence of £2,000 per week to the people of Western Aus-
tralia. Thus the business of profiteering goes on with
its ramifications through all sections of the community,
and as a result the bulk of the people are suffering the
hardship of high prices. Mr. Holman has said that he
cannot conceive that any man would refuse to do his
duty by his country in this war because the Govern-
ment had failed to do all that was possible to check
profiteering. Now that may be perfectly understand-
able to Mr. Holman and other members of the Con-
ference, but it seetms to me that if in the conduct of
the war the Government, by virtue of their position,
make appeals for recruits, it can easily be understood
that a great number of the people who are not so well
versed in the conduct of public affairs should attach
some personal aspect to the appeal. It may be under-
stood, for instance —though I do not indorse the view—
that the people, regarding the appeal in a personal
sense, should feel aggrieved that the Federal Govern-
ment have failed to do certain things, and say, “ Damn
the Government! Why do they allow So-and-so to do
this? ” They view these matters from a personal stand-
point, and men with families living below the standard
of comfort enjoyed prior to the war have their hostility
raised when they have evidence on all hands of over-
flowing wealth and luxury.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —While other people may pay £5,00Q
for a racehorse. •


Mr. COLLIER.—Yes, or even set aside money for
the painting of their own pictures. These are the things
that irritate the great mass of the people in times like
this. lam not exempting myself or accusing anybody.
I am merely pointing out that this is one of the things
that arouse the hostility of the people. I hope, there-
fore, that these matters as they affect the people of
Western Australia will be attended to, and before the
Conference disperses I should like to have some state-
ment from the gentlemen who represent the employers
on the question of victimization, economic conscription,
and the other subjects to which I have referred.
Mr. LEFROY.—I have come here, as, no doubt,
many other members of the Conference have, at much
inconvenience to myself. With my friends from
Western Australia, I have travelled 2,000 miles at
twenty-four hours' notice from His Excellency the Go-
vernor-General to take part in the deliberations of this
Conference. We came, all of us, from a sense of duty,
and, as I have said, I came at much inconvenience to
myself, because my Parliament is sitting, and members
of the Conference must know how difficult it is for a
Premier to be absent at such a time. Still I felt, as
I am quite sure all other members of the Conference
did, that at the present crisis in our history it was our
duty to respond to the call made by His Excellency, so
that we might devise some means of arriving at a com-
mon understanding to meet the present needs of the
nation. I have not much time at my disposal, and it
is not my intention to delay the Conference, as I must
return to Western Australia this afternoon in order
that I may come back in a week’s time to attend the
Premiers’ Conference in Sydney. I feel confident that
in the hearts of all members of the Conference there is
but one feeling, namely, a feeling of loyalty to the Em-
pire, and a determination to do all that is possible to
help our country in the present crisis. With regard to
the remarks made by Mr. Collier, I should like to say
that in regard to the personal matters referred to, I be-
lieve honestly that that gentleman has been misunder-
stood. Knowing him as I do, I feel sure that he is just
as loyal a citizen as I am, and I yield to no one in my
loyalty to the Empire. I should like, therefore, to
brush aside any other suggestion, and I trust Mr. Col-
lier will come safely out of the little trouble in which
he has been involved. I want also to assure those mem-
bers of the Conference who are ranged on the other side
of this room that those who met on this side of the
Conference to consider the proposals submitted by Mr.
Tudor did so with the distinctly honest desire to come
to some mutual understanding, so that we might all
leave the Conference in accord, at any rate, on the
great question upon which we have been asked to
deliberate. There was a perfectly honest desire on our
part to devise means to meet the views of the gentlemen
opposite, so that we might all go forth as missionaries
in the great cause of encouraging—l will not use the
word recruiting—the eligibles of this dear country of
ours to take up arms for the protection of Australia
and the Empire. I think myself that the differences
between us are not great. This is, in my judgment,
the most important Conference that has ever been sum-
moned in the history of Australia—more important
even than those Conferences which were held prior to
the inauguration of Federation. I trust, therefore, that
we may go forth from it in complete accord, with a
desire to bury some of those differences that have
existed in the past, and determined to assist in the one
common cause. I believe—indeed, I know—that it is
the intention of the Federal Government to do all that
is possible towards this end. I know, also, that it is the
desire of my brother Premiers to do likewise. Speaking
for myself and the State which I represent, I can assure
Mr. Collier that I am prepared to loyally stand by the
decisions of this Conference, and that as a Government
we shall do everything to give effect to the arrangements
that may be made here. I am quite certain that any
differences that may exist can be brushed aside.
Mr. COLLIER.—There are fewer differences in our
State than the other States.
Mr. LEFROY.—Yes, and I should also like to say
that the employers must also come together, and they
must feel as we do, and as you do in this great crisis.
It is necessary that we should make some sacrifices with
regard to our views and opinions. Although we may
look at matters from different view points now, for the
purposes for which we have come together it is necessary
that we should concentrate on one point of view only.
Since my boyhood, I have been working alongside the
workers of Western Australia, and I have learned to
respect them, as I believe they have learned to respect
me; and knowing what I do of the people of my own
State, who have trusted me now as their parliamentary
representative for the last twenty-six years, I feel con-
fident that if we ask them to come together in this
common cause, we will have no difficulty in arriving at
that consummation which we are all so desirous of
reaching. There is no need to beat about the bush in
xegard to this matter. In his address the Premier of
New South Wales has placed our feelings before the
Conference so admirably that I may say he expressed
the views of the Premiers of the different States; and
I hope that the deliberations of the Conference need not
last much longer. I know that the question of con-
scription has been the great bete noir which has kept
l lie people of Australia apart for so long. I have
always been a believer in compulsory service. 1 con-
sider that it is the duty of every man—he was born into
the world for that reason—to take up arms in the
defence of his country, if need be that he should do so.
At the same time the question has been submitted twice
to the people of this country, and in a great Democracy
such as Australia is, we should loyally stand by their
decision. Therefore, though I may be in favour of com-
pulsory service, those are my feelings, and I do trust
that those who leave this Conference may go forth as
missioners. They have great power. The gentlemen
who represent the great organizations in Australia have
gieat power with their fellows; otherwise they would
not be in the positions they occupy. Therefore I be-
seech them, in the great cause which we have before us,
to use their power for good in the near future. If
they do so, I am quite certain their fellows will respond
gladly. I am sure that I can honestly feel that the
Premiers of the different States will not only endeavour
to, but will actually, carry out what this Conference
decides shall take place in the near future to bring
forth that which we so much desire. There is mucn
on which one might speak concerning this great sub-
ject. The interests of our country are at stake. God
forbid that we should ever fall into the hands of an
enemy. Every effort must be used. There must not
be an eligible man left behind. We have all to make
our sacrifices. We must do all we possibly can to main-
tain the country to which we are so proud to belong,
and to which I am certain every man in this room is
thoroughly loyal. I need say no more than to give the
assurance that no effort shall be spared on my part to
bring about all that is necessary to create that consum-
mation which we all so much desire.
Mr. HUGHES.—The different Houses of the Com-
monwealth Parliament will meet this afternoon. They
are discussing Supply, and it is essential that we should
get Supply to-day. Therefore it is necessary for
Federal Ministers to attend Parliament. This Con-
ference must go on until it finishes its labours, and I
and my colleagues would like to know what are the
views of members. It is unfortunate that we cannot
adjourn until after Supply has been granted by Par-
liament. I am quite willing to admit that this Con-
ference is more important than Parliament, but we
must have Supply. I make no suggestion of any sort
I do not suggest that the Conference should cease its


deliberations because Federal Ministers cannot attend,
but as we are vitally interested in the matter, and as
members will bring up questions which we alone can
answer, it is most desirable for us to attend. All 1
can do by way of an off-hand suggestion is to say that
we will endeavour to have a Minister here. I do not
know whether Senator Millen can be present or not.
Senator MILLEN. —Not from 3 o’clock to 4 o’clock.
Mr. HUGHES. —I have to speak in Parliament this
afternoon, and how long it will take me I do not know,
I know that the Conference expects that the Federal
Government shall be represented. Upon Federal Min-
isters is thrown the responsibility of conducting the
war, and they are responsible for many of those tilings
with which our friends on the other side have asked
us to deal. Therefore, we must be here to answer
questions, and to say exactly what we are prepared to
do. All I can say is that we shall attend the Conference
at the earliest possible moment when our parliamentary
duties will permit us to do so. I have a great deal to
do. I have been ill, and I have some important Minis-
terial work to overtake. I have to receive a couple of
deputations at my office, one from a meeting which
some 120,000 citizens attended, which wishes to tender
its views, and another to be received immediately after-
wards from a meeting at which some 20,000 citizens
attended, which wishes to present entirely different
views. *
Mr. HOLMAN. —When do you propose to receive
those deputations?
Mr. HUGHES. —They are supposed to be received
to-night. But perhaps the Conference will suggest what
it thinks ought to be done.
Mr. TUDOR. —I take it that the proceedings, of
the Conference should continue without interruption.
It is true that some of us must necessarily be absent
this afternoon. I desire to be in my place in Parlia-
ment to hear what the Prime Minister has to say, and
it is quite possible that I may have occasion to utter a
few words in reply. I do not think that the Senate
will sit long.
Senator MILLEN.—I must be absent from the Con-
ference from 3 to 4 o’clock this afternoon.
Mr. TUDOR. —No doubt Senator Gardiner, who
must also be away for a brief period, will return to
the Conference as soon as possible, and I shall most
certainly do likewise. Ido not think that the proceed-
ings here should be interrupted on account of our
absence. We must recollect that Mr. Lefroy, the Pre-
mier of Western Australia, has travelled a couple of
thousand miles to attend this gathering, and the same
remark is applicable to Mr. Ryan. The very fact that
we have put before it certain suggestions to which the
other side has replied constitutes an advance much
greater than some members here imagine.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I am in favour of the Conference
proceeding, because I know there are some members
who have not yet spoken, and whose views we should
like to hear. At the same time, a gathering of this
character cannot continue indefinitely. I have not
squealed at all, because I am most anxious to see some
tangible results from our deliberations. Ido not
know whether members recognise the measure of in-
convenience to which I have to submit by remaining
in Melbourne. The affairs which are dealt with by
the Government of New South Wales are quite as
voluminous as those which are dealt with by the Com-
monwealth Government.
Mr. MORBY.—Mr. Fuller dealt with them for
eighteen months, you know.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Yes. I can re-organize affairs
and leave a machine which will work efficiently dur-
ing my absence; but I do not adopt that course when
I contemplate being absent for only three or four days.
My attendance here will impose a heavy tax upon my
F. 3959.—7
energies upon my return to Sydney, and, like the
Prime Minister, 1 have only just recovered Irom a bed
of sickness. The difficulty with which we‘ are now
faced appears to be mainly a difference between those
who criticise the actions of the Prime Minister and
those who criticise the Federal Government. In re-
gard to matters affecting the State of New SoutJi
Wales they might, perhaps, have a conference, say,
between Mr. Morby and myself
Mr. MORBY.—I only wish to say that I gave a
pledge to this Conference the other evening, subject
to certain conditions, or, rather, subject to effect being
given to our suggestions. Now, effect has not been
given to those suggestions. The only State Govern-
ment which has done anything at all practicable is
that of New South Wales. In my judgment the
Federal Government has done absolutely nothing.
Mr.' HOLMAN. —To some extent that bears out
what I am saying, that the difficulties which are now
in the minds of members are difficulties affecting the
Federal Government. What I would suggest is thai,
as far as possible—but I wish it to be distinctly under-
stood that I have no desire to deprive other members
of their right to contribute to the discussion —we
should get down to a detailed criticism of Mr. Hughes'
proposals. For instance, he says in regard to the War
Precautions Act regulations, that the Government will
abandon any that are not vital. That is a general
statement. Let us ascertain the precise regulations
which he will agree to abandon. The sooner that is
done the nearer we shall be to finality. 1 know, too,
that there are criticisms current in regard to Mr.
Hughes’ statement upon profiteering.
Mr. HUGHES.—It was not so much my statement
as the statement of the and those on our
side.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I mean your statement on behalf
of ali of us. Let us come to close grips upon that
question. A similar remark is applicable to the censor-
ship. If we can arrive at an agreement on these three
points, and settle anything that may be outstanding
between Mr. Morby and myself, we shall be so much
nearer our goal. But I feel that a general discussion
will not advance us very far unless the Prime Minister
is present, and can bring certain matters to an issue.
Surely to-morrow we can come down to something defi-
nite in regard to what is not satisfactory in the Pr.me
Minister’s statement. I feel that the onus lies on Mr.
Tudor, who presented the original statement, to say
how far and in what details the answers made to that
statement do not satsify him. An honest effort has
been made to meet his original statement. But in cer-
tain features I gather the answers do not satisfy.
Mr. TUDOR. —I understand the reply of Mr.
Hughes to be that if the Labour party at any time
point out that a regulation framed under the War
Precautions Act is being used for a wrong purpose
the Government will alter or amend it as far as they
can.
Mr. MORBY. —We will accept that assurance.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then that ends the matter. The
acceptance of the Prime Minister’s assurance to my
mind constitutes a very great advance. I had under-
stood that Mr. Tudor was not satisfied with that as-
surance.
Mr. TUDOR. —There are some regulations to wh’ch
I could point now, and to which we take strong excep-
tion; but I do not see that any good purpose would
be achieved by specifying them. If the Prime Minister
gives me his assurance that these regulations will not
be used in the way that they have been used, and that
regulations which are unnecessary to the conduct of
the war will be abolished, I shall be satisfied. I under-
stand that he has done that.


Mr. MORBY.—I would like an assurance from Mr.
Hughes that he is satisfied that that is the case.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But there are other matters out-
standing. These must either be settled by a personal
conference between Mr. Tudor and Mr. Hughes, or by
a committee from both sides, or in open conference.
Therefore, I would urge that to-morrow, as far as pos-
sible, Mr. Tudor and Mr. Hughes should come to
close quarters on these matters.
Mr. TUDOR.—We desire a definite assurance upon
the question of conscription. In regard to the censor-
ship, Ave hold that the Press Conference is not the tri-
bunal to determine that matter.
Mr. HOLMAN.—My suggestion is that the Confer-
ence should continue to sit until half-past 6 o’clock this
evening, and that to-morrow, beginning punctually at
10 o’clock, should be devoted to a close consideration
of the points still outstanding. In other words, we
should make an honest effort to meet the critics of the
statement made by Mr. Hughes.
Mr. PEAKE. —Can you give us any indication of
when the Conference is likely to close?
Mr. lIOLMAH.—You, Mr. Peake, are in the same
position as myself. We all recognise that the Prime
Minister cannot be present this afternoon. Let us have
a definite understanding that to-morrow Ave shall do
Avdiat I have suggested.
Mr. MORBY.—Could we not proceed after lunch on
the lines that you indicated?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Unfortunately, Mr. Hughes can-
not be present. That-is the difficulty. Therefore, I
suggest the continuation of the general debate this
afternoon, and that to-morroAv’s sitting be devoted to a
close consideration of the matters that are still out-
standing.
Mr. HUGHES.—I wish to make the position per-
fectly clear. When I original statement, I
said that we would do certain things in return for that
complete and cordial co-operation by the Trade Union
organizations Avhich is necessary to the success of re-
cruiting. lam bound to say that that point, which is
the crucial one, seems to have been touched upon but
very lightly. I should like my friends to.say exactly
what they propose to do. Ido not wish to exaggerate —
indeed, words cannot exaggerate —the position in which
the Commonwealth and the Empire stand to-day. To-
day, in France, the enemy are at a place Avhich, in
relation to the Empire and France, is as though the
German legions, flushed with victory, had pressed o:
until they stood midway between here and Geelong.
And so England herself is now in the same deadly peril
as Melbourne would be in such circumstances. They have
captured a junction which is the feeding junction of the
northern Army; I refer to Bailleul. They have not only
captured Bailleul, but they are behind it, and are
still advancing. We are fiddling while Rome is
burning. I do not suggest for one moment that anything
Ave can do can stem the tide of battle. But we should
certainly kindle in the minds of our felloAv citizens a
recognition of the deadly peril in which they stand.
We are not on a conscription or anti-conscription plat-
form.. Exaggeration cannot serve our purpose or help
either of us. Mere words seem poor indeed to express
the actual position. What I desire to knoAv is what
you gentlemen are going to do to make your organiza-
tions so realize the position that they will give us that
co-operation which will be of immense value to the
morale of the Empire. The guns of the enemy are
firing on Paris from a distance of 40 to 60 miles.* It
may be that the Germans to-morroAv will haA T e captured
a place from which they can shell England, or from
Avhich they can control the English Channel and use it
for submarine bases. Once they have done that, Avhere
shall we be? Do not run away with any false idea as
to what we can do. I say with all earnestness that
we have as much power to put back the hands of the
clock of time as we have to arrest the inevitable conse-
quences of a German conquest of France and Britain,
so far as Australia is concerned. We cannot of our-
selves do anything by sending trained men who will
be of use in this great battle. But yet we can do some-
thing : we can do our duty and we can face this
crisis as a united nation. Britain is facing this
appalling danger anxious hut, as the cables tell me,
calm. It would surely be something if we could send
to the Old Land a message that a Conference of all
political parties in Australia had decided unanimously,
without respect to what has been, to do its uttermost
by way of moral and general support to help Great
Britain and France in their hour of danger. I know,
gentlemen, how strong your Labour organizations are.
I know the difficulty of your own position. But I know,
too, that no organization of Labour in this country
could stand against your united “ Yes” in this matter
They could not, and would not, try to do so. They see, as
Mr. Collier has said, what is happening in regard to
profiteering. Ido hot deny that it is going on. lam
not going to say it is as bad as it was; but there are
some people in Australia who do not care a damn about
this Avar. Some are rich, and some are poor; we are
all tarred with the same brush. There can be no-
thing that would so galvanize the public of Australia,
apathetic, half dead, into action and earnest endeavour
as would a unanimous declaration by this Conference
of the peril in which we stand, and of the determina-
tion of all sections to do their uttermost. That is the
position, and I want to knoAv what you will do. You
know my position perfectly well. You know its strength
and its weakness, just as I know your own. I am not
marching at the head of troops who will, if I merely
hold up my finger, do this or that without regard to
their oavh interests. A either are you. I am going,
however, to speak for myself. Whatever is necessary 1
Avill do, as far as, speaking for myself, it can be done.
1 ask you to do the same. Never mind Avhat the con-
sequences may be to you as individuals. Never mind
lioav your organizations may differ from you, I ask you
to face the music.
Mr. STOREY.—CouId you not assist us, Mr.
Hughes, in some way ? That part of your speech in
which you have pointed out the close proximity of the
Germans to a vital spot in France has, I am sure, made
a profound impression upon the Conference. Could you
not assist the public to a proper appreciation of the
position by stating publicly the iimminent danger we
are in?
Mr. HUGHES.—I may say something in Parliament
this afternoon; but there, as you know, we are armies
drawn up in hostile array. Here, after three or four
days of discussion, there is not much between us. We
are not, at all events, drawn up in hostile array. There
is no party here in the sense that there is party in the
Houses of Parliament. It may be that what I shall say
in Parliament this afternoon will be discounted. It
may be regarded as some political move. Be that as
it may, I shall speak. It is action on your part, how-
ever, that would lend support to any statement I might
make; it would convince the country of the gravity of
the position. You, and you alone, can do that. I can
do my part, and, whatever the consequences may be,
I shall do it. I ask you to do the same.
Mr. JELLEY.—Might I suggest that if the Prime
Minister desires, as he says, to galvanize the people of
Australia into a full sense of their responsibility, he
could best achieve it by outlining, in the course of his
statement in the House this afternoon, what the Federal
Government are prepared to do to remove what have
been conceived to be obstacles in the way of recruiting.
I think that the information the Prime Minister has just
given us as to the situation at the Front should go to the
people side by side with a statement as to the removal
of these obstacles to recruiting. The people would then,
I think, realize at once the gravity of the situation.
They would realize that the Federal Government are so
fully seized of the seriousness of the situation and of
their responsibility that they are prepared to act upon


the suggestions that have been made by the representa-
tives of Labour, with a view o*f removing difficulties in
the way of recruiting. lam sure that such a statement
would have upon the people the effect that the Prime
Minister desires.
Mr. TUDOR. —Before the Prime Minister replies to
that suggestion, I should like to point out that the
adoption of it might place us in a difficult position. 1
have purposely refrained from allowing any person out-
side this Conference to know of the representations we
have made here, and I do not think that such informa-
tion should be given to the public until we have com-
pleted our labours. As soon as the Conference has con-
cluded, we shall be at liberty, I take it, to use the
official report, and to show what representations have
been made, and how they have been dealt with. 1
think that we should not do that until we have com-
pleted our deliberations.
Mr. HUGHES. —I am rather inclined to agree with
Mr. Tudor. I think it would be a mistake at this stage
to say what lias been done in Conference. We cannot
say everythin? and if we stop short of saying every-
thing we might as well say nothing. However, I believe
that what Mr. Storey has suggested might, to a certain
extent, be done. I do not wish to get at loggerheads
with the press of this country, which no doubt is doing
its best; but it is not so much the press censorship that
is mainly responsible for uninformed public opinion in
regard to the war. The trouble is that the press, in
spite of obvious facts, allways endeavour so to colour
those facts that the people of this country live in a fool’s
paradise. How can the man in the street know what
the fall of Bailleul means? What does the bare
announcement of its fall convey to him ? But when
we translate the position into Australian terms, the
people can understand it. If I were to say the enemy
is at Essendon or at Fremantle, at Parramatta, Port
Adelaide, or Launceston, they would appreciate at
once the actual situation.
Mr. COLLIER.—Do you not think, Mr. Hughes,
that if the press were to make the situation clear to
the public it would have an awakening effect ?
Mr. HUGHES. —I know no way of securing that
except by making a statement, and putting what I
know to be the facts. Even while I have been sitting
here I have received two or three cablegrams which,
if they had not followed on the heels of others at least
as bad, .1 would consider to be absolutely appalling. I
think that Parliament and the country should know
what the position really is.
MEMBERS. —Hear, hear!
Mr. HUGHES.—If I may say so, I think it will
also help my friends on the other side in the difficult
position which they, like I myself, occupy. I and my
colleagues, Mr. Joseph Cook and Senator Millen, have
acted here without consulting Cabinet. Not one of our
colleagues know anything we have done in this Confer-
ence, nor has our party been consulted. I need not
tell you that that party is not one that follows me
blindly. You know that perfectly well, and, therefore,
I am taking just the same risks and facing the same
difficulties that you are. If public opinion begins to
realize where Australia is to-day it may be easier for
us all. Whether the people can be brought to
realize the position by any words of mine, I do not
know; but I am very certain tlfat if my words are sup-
ported by a plain declaration of this Conference, that it
is so convinced of the gravity of the position that it
will go abroad waving the fiery cross, and urging all
men of military age to rally to the standard, then 1
think the people of Australia will understand. I shall
endeavour to come here during the day if it is possible
I shall certainly attend to-morrow morning.
Mr. LAWSON.—If the Prime Minister is to make a
statement in the House to-day with regard to the war
situation its effect on the general community would be
greatly increased if it were accompanied by a report
showing that this Conference, realizing the position,
JIKJL I, V’
72
had determined unanimously that all parties should
co-operate to secure the necessary recruits. To that
end I ask the Prime Minister whether it is indispensable
that he and Mr. Tudor must be in their places in Par-
liament this afternoon. If we could go on with our de-
. Operations now, and come to a decision before the
dinner adjournment to-night, and if the Prime Minister
could make the statement as to the vitally critical nature
of the war situation, and add to it an indication of out
united determination to work for the securing of
sary reinforcements, then I feel certain that the
combined announcements would have a truly startling
and awakening effect on the community. Ido not wish
to curtail any speeches here, but it seems to me that
we have had'enough of the general debate. We now
know the general temper of the Conference; we know
what is wanted. I will indicate what I have done with
regard to myself and Mr. Elmslie, and I suggest that
the same plan could be followed in the case of each btate
Premier and Leader of the Opposition. There were a
few things of which I was unaware, and as to which
Mr Elmslie says the Victorian Government were
o-uilty—which things were obstacles in the way of re-
cruiting. I invited Mr. Elmslie to place the facts be-
fore me, and added that we would then work together
to see how far it might be possible to meet his views
and remove the obstacles. I feel that if we could estab-
lish between the Prime Minister and Mr. Tudor, not
only co-operation in regard to recruiting, but upon the
broad general principle that if there could be brougn
about a spirit between them which would enable them
to confer with one another in an effort to do the veiy
best possible for Australia and the Empire, there would
not only follow the removal of those obstacles now exis -
ing, but probably the prevention of other hindrances
which might arise. If only the -situation could be
brought about whereby Mr. Tudor might be enabled
to say “ I can trust the Prime Minister, and can un-
reservedly confer with him in striving for complete
amity,” we would have gone a long way m the best in-
terests of our country. Then, if we could only get■ Mi.
Lyons to confer similarly with Mr. Lee, and Mr. Stoiey
with Mr Holman, and the other State leaders also, all
these details could be worked out after the various State
Premiers had gone back, and we had returned to our
ordinary Ministerial duties. It seems that we may talk
on the general question for another two days, and pio-
bably be no nearer finality. I realize the inconvenience
that it must be to visiting Premiers to be so distant
from their work; I know that from a consideration of
my own position. But all our ordinary work sinks into
insignificance beside the duties we are engaged on here,
if we can only achieve practical results. While the
general debate has been necessary so as to arrive at a
proper understanding of what is in the minds of one
another, we realize now the position. In view of the
statement which the Prime Minister has just made we
must all feel that this is no time for parley and debate,
but for action. Cannot the Prime Minister arrange to
pair with Mr. Tudor if there is any critical position in
the Federal Parliament this afternoon, so that they
might be here, and so that Mr. Hughes might be able
to make his statement to-night, after we have come to
some decision ? It is only m this way that
an earnest and honest effort can be made to re-
move obstacles and settle differences. Let us endeavour
to join hands and secure the results which are not
merely desirable, but are absolutely essential at this
moment of crisis. I ask the Conference to get to grips.
I ask the Prime Minister if it cannot be possibly
arranged for him to remain this afternoon, so that a
statement might be made to-night to the general effect
that the Conference has been a success, and that we have
determined to unite to secure the recruits which our
country requires. Let the things which have stood in
the way, and have led to misunderstanding and ill-
will be forgiven and forgotten; and let Mr. Hughes tell


the people that that is what has occurred. Of course,
we can continue to have our political differences and
our fights in normal times. But now let us sink them,
and go forward, not as parties, not as political oppo-
nents, but as Australians all—trying to see that our
country shall do its share and its best to carry the bur-
den which is falling upon all liberty-loving and demo-
cratic peoples. We ought to be able to get to some such
agreement before this evening. Then let us get back
to our work, and permit the various organizations re-
presented here to be approached. And let that spirit
go throughout the community, and there will be a rich
harvest to be reaped as the outcome of this Conference.
Mr. LYONS.—I hope the suggestion of Mr. Lawson
will not be adopted.
The PRESIDENT. —That depends, of course, upon
Mr. Hughes, whether he is in a position to do as sug-
gested.
Mr. LYONS. —It also depends on us.
The PRESIDENT.—I quite realize that; but if
those gentlemen are not able to be away
Mr. TUDOR. —The position is that a no-confidence
motion has been moved in the House, and it is usual
for the Leader of the Opposition to be present on
such occasions. Mr. Hughes also, I dare say, desires to
be at the House to say something with regard to state-
ments concerning himself and his Government. Ido
not attach such importance to any resolution going
out from this Conference as I would if I could say to
my party, whom I am representing here, “ These are
the things which we laid before the Conference, and
here are the answers to them.”
Mr. WATSON.—Is there no chance, if the details
are fixed, that we might get a resolution to the effect
tliat we are all agreed to stand by recruiting?
Mr. HUGHES.—We are not getting to the point as
to what we are to do. I see many advantages to be
gained by not making a statement at all to the public
before I am able to say something of what the Con-
ference has done. It occurred to me after I had sat
down that it might be said, “ If the facts of the war
situation are as you have stated, have you made them
known to the Conference?” Then, if I said, “Yes,
and more,” I might be asked, “Well, and what has
the Conference done?” If I answered, “The Con-
ference is still sitting,” it would be considered a reflec-
tion on all of us. Here we are talking when, if half
of what I have said is true, we should at least have
agreed to do something —never mind if it is only so
much.
Mr. RYAN.—What can we do to affect the immediate
situation ?
Mr. HUGHES. —There is nothing that we can do
here; I admit that. But do you not think that a
nation that requires to be aroused from its slumbers;
that needs to be stirred; a nation that is in deadly
peril, is entitled to be told of it plainly by yourself
as well as by myself ? I know the men with whom I
have been associated all my life. They are talking
on the wharfs now about the fact that somebody has got
their jobs. That is what fills their minds at this very
moment. Other men are talking about the high cost
of living; others about the War Precautions Act, and
the rest of the community about nothing at all in rela-
tion to the war.
Mr. SCULLTN.—These things also fill their stomachs
as well as their minds, and many of their stomachs are
empty.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not deny that. That is all very
well, but they are entitled to be told the truth, and
they can compare the infinitely little with the infinitely
great, and choose which they will have. So it appears
to me that I had better say nothing to the Parliament
this afternoon in relation to this matter.
Mr. MORBY. —As to the Conference business?
Mr. HUGHES. —Neither in relation to the Con-
ference, nor with respect to the war. I had better re-
serve wliat I have to say until the Conference has come
to a decision. And I do not agree with Mr. Tudor that
a resolution from this Conference would be of no ser-
vice. I would give all I have by way of political oppor-
tunities or worldly wealth if I could help us to come
to a decision. I do not want you to think that I am
asking for more than a walking together hand in hand,
without prejudice to anything you may have to say
against me. I do not ask for anything more than
that, the Empire and Australia being in danger, this
Conference recognises it, and urges every man to do his
duty. That would be a tremendous advantage. I
know that, at the bottom, whatever men may do or
say, 99 out of every 100 of our fellow men are right.
We have to pierce through their prejudices and their
party armour, but at the bottom they are right. They
are for Australia. Tell them the truth. I suggest that
you go on this afternoon, and I will come along as soon
as I can, and we shall endeavour to get to finality at the
earliest possible moment.
The PRESIDENT.—I suggest that the Conference
accept Mr. Hughes’ views. If he could announce
through Parliament that we had come to such a rela-
tionship, it would positively hearten up the British
people. The very fact that the whole of the parties in
Australia had come together in this way, and were
giving unanimous support to a cause which is in an
undoubtedly desperate condition, would be a measure of
enormous moral value to the Allies. Australia bulks
largely in this war, and if such a message could be sent
out, it would be very valuable; more valuab.e, almost,
than recruits at this moment. But I do not think that
that can be effectively carried out to-day. We have not
yet arrived at that stage. If you will allow me to make
a suggestion, it would be better and wiser to go on
this afternoon.
At 1.30 p.m. the Conference adjourned until 3 p.m.
Mr. McCALLUM.—I approach this question, Mr.
President, with a full desire to remove any of the
obstacles that stand in the way of making the volun-
tary recruiting system that success which we all desire
it to be, but I cannot agree with the attitude adopted
by the Prime Minister. I listened very carefully to
all that he had to say, and I noticed that after his
speech he turned to us and said, “ Now I want to
know what you intend to do.” Our position is, we
want to know what he is going to do.
Mr. WATSON.—He told us that this morning.
Mr. McCALLUM.—Our proposals have been before
the Conference for some days, and it is obvious that
if they are not accepted, we cannot expect to make
recruiting a success. We want, therefore, to know
what the Government intend to do to meet the position.
It appears to me that if the situation is as serious as
Mr. Hughes has presented it—and I have no reason
to doubt that it is so —surely there is nothing in our
proposals to which objection can be taken, and, in
view of the peril in which this country stands, why
does not the Prime Minister say that the Government
agrees to the whole of them ?
Mr. WATSON. —That is a stand-and-deliver atti-
tude.
Mr. McCALLUM. —There is no question of that at
all. It is the Prime Minister who has taken up the
attitude of “ stand and deliver.” We want to know
exactly what the Government propose to do. Before
dealing with the various items as they are set out, I
want in my own way to show where the proposals put
forward by the other side will not remove all the diffi-
culties in the way; but before doing so, I want it to
be clearly understood that, although we have not up
to the present dealt with the statement made by Mr.
Orchard, it must not be taken as accepted or that we
approve of the policy he outlined. Personally, I do
not approve of it, and I can see that the distribution
of the cards as proposed, asking for answers in reply


to certain questions, will raise a very great deal o£ {
strife in tlie country. . , i
Mr RYAN. —I understand tlie Conference is no
committed to any statement made by the Minister.
The PRESIDENT. —We are here to . discuss any
proposals made in a reasonable spirit, with a view o
improving voluntary recruiting.
Mr McCALLUM.— I want that point to be cleared
up Up to the present there has been no criticism 01 ,
discussion of the scheme suggested by Mr Orchaid.
Personally, I do not think it will do any good.
Mr RYAN—I understand the Government are
entirely responsible for the proposal, and that it has
not been put before us for consideration or alteration.
Mr McCALLUM.—So far as my own State is con-
cerned, I can say that the Labour members of Parlia-
ment have done the bulk of the speaking in favour
voluntary recruiting, and I have had testimonials from
Mr Burkett, who is in charge of the recruiting mov-
ment in our State, that for weeks on end he would
not have been able to hold recruiting meetings at all
had it not been for the assistance rendered by Labour
members of Parliament. .
Mr. PEAKE.—I think you have done very well m
W Mi' 6l McCALLUM.— These results show the value of
co-operation by representatives of
ment. Up to a certain stage, practically tlie whole ot
the work was being done by our members.
Mr LESLIE. —Oh, no! .
Mr] McCALLUM. But at a certain stage our
lpader (Ur Collier) was haled before the Court, ana,
as he explained this morning, was charged with making
seditious 1 statements recruiting. Me
bers of the Conference can quite understand
effect a charge like that would have on the rank and
file of the organizations, and m view of subsequen
events I am confident in stating that the Common-
wealth Government did not believe m the justice of
thecase they put up against Mr. Collier, or-they would
not have invited his co-operation here to help the
voluntary recruiting movement.
Mr LESLIE. —The Government did not ask m
co-operation. He was invited by the local recruiting
° ffi Mr McCALLUM.—But we have had the Prime
Minister and the other Ministers asking for his assist-
ance. And after all it is no use splitting straws about
matter of this kind. I say that the Governmentidd
not believe for a moment m the charge they laid
against Mr. Collier for his speech m Kalgoorlie. I
was speaking in Kalgoorlie on the same uay, and from
35 same platform. The charges were trumped up.
They were used for political purposes, and they vere
left hanging over his head for eight months before he
was brought before the Court. Although it hue not
been laid down as a condition, I think we only require
to mention that, in order to secure the best“
future efforts, the recruiting machinery, the depo
and organizations, should not be used as pcPtical -
ganizadons, as has been done right throughout West-
ern Australia in the past.
Mr RYAN.—And in Queensland, too.
The PRESIDENT—That was absolutely contrary
to my instructions. £
Mr. McCALLUM. —I am giving the Conference a
few concrete cases. Witnesses against Mr. Colliei i
the Kalgoorlie trial *mt into the box and stated
they called at the recruiting office and tferc fun.i.hed
with typewritten statements of the evidence they were
required to give. If that kind of thing is to continue,
how can the Government expect the Labour organiza-
tions to link up their activities in the desired direc
tion? Hitherto the whole of the recruiting machinery
has been used against our people.
Mr HOLMAN. —That was in regard to political
questions, was it not? Apart from that wh at do you
mean by saying that they were used as political
agencies? I should like an illustration.
Mr. McCALLUM.—I am not a politician Mr Hol-
man hut just a common secretary of a Labour move-
ment, and 3 1 am not accustomed to interjections. I am
trying to put my views and my case before the Con-
ference. I am a man in charge of the industrial or-
ganizations in Western Australia. I know the iorces
I have to meet and the quarter from which our oppo-
sition comes. I could give instance after instance ot
recruiting depots being used in opposition to our people.
Mr WATSON. —Therefore you have given none.
Mr. McCALLUM—I have given one definite in-
HOLMAN. —1 did not interject in any hostile
spiritj hut merely because I desired to get at the facts
The PRESIDENT. —If you, Mr. McCallum, will
bring any matter of that sort under my notice, so long
as I occupy the position of Director-General of Recruit-
ing, the gentlemen responsible will he asked to send in
their resignations. *
Mr McCALLUM.—I will take advantage of your
offer sir, if I see anything of the kind m the future. „
Mr. COLLIER,—Why, they broke up an election
meeting in Western Australia. .
Mr. MoCALLUM. —I can cite another instance m
which one of our members, who had just returned from
the Front, was sent by the Recruiting Committee from
F'erth to the Boulder. He was immediately asked to
appear on the National platform. . He consented to
speak from it conditionally upon his being allowed to
speak from the Labour platform. There was some de-
mur, hut he resolutely declined to speak from one plat-
form unless he was permitted to speak from the other.
This permission was eventually granted, but, as soon
as his first speech had been delivered, he was told,
- You can now go back to Perth.” -So far as the in-
dustrial situation in Fremantle is concerned the pro-
position which has been put forward m reply to onr
statement will not remove the evils which exist the .
When war first broke out, there was quite a number o
German and Austrian members of the Fremantle
Lumpers’ Union. The men working with them, alter
hearing their conversation, came to the conclusion that it
was dangerous to allow these foreigners to deal with the
transport work of the country and accordingly they
asked that these enemy aliens should he amoved The
authorities took no action. Then the men declined to
work with them. The newspapers at once raised a cry
against the Wharf Lumpers’ Union there Its members
were called disloyalists, and every abusive epithet
imaginable was applied to them. Hdmduals were
singled out for prosecution, with the result that t
union was mulcted in damages and costs
£2 000. Three months afterwards the Commonwealth
Government gazetted a regulation which achieved prac-
tienllv the same result. „ ,
i Mr BEEBY.—Was it not the place of the unions
to wait until the Commonwealth did that.
Mr MoCALLUM.—The unions had approached the
authorities in the matter, hut the latter had refused to
act If the Commonwealth desired to work harmoni-
ously with these men, the least it could have done
was to have refunded to the union the expenditure which
R had incurred. But, although application m that
direction was made, no response has been
I repeat that all the abusive epithets conceivable have
been heaped upon the wharf lumpers at
i When war first broke out there were more than 600
members in that union. Four hundred of these have
: since enlisted." Yet these are the men who have been
classed as disloyal and branded as pro-Germans. To-
r day there are more than 70 naturalized and over 60
unnaturalized foreigners working m Fremantle who


are being granted a preference over the members
of the Wharf Lumpers’ Union. Just before
I left Western Australia one of my little children
brought to my home another youngster to see
if we could give hin\ a little lunch, because his mother
had told him that it would be idle for him to expect any
in his own home. That youngster’s father was an
officer of the Wharf Lumpers’ Union who has been
■blacklisted. He has been told that he is disloyal, and
that he should put his country first. Yet the country
is employing foreigners in preference to him,
and these foreigners were actually used during
the recent strike to defeat the unionists. That is abso-
lutely true. These foreigners, who do not spend a
penny in this country, are actually getting a preference
over men whose wives and families are in need of food.
How can we expect such men to be enthusiastic in the
cause of recruiting? The members of the bogus union
are given the first preference whenever any employ-
ment is offering, the returned soldiers come next, and
then, if any work remains, it is given to the members
of the old Fremantle Lumpers’ Union. lam sorry
that Mr. Lefroy is not present, because I know that
he is anxious to keep any promise that he may make.
But I presented this very case to him in his office in
Perth, and he agreed that a wrong was being done which
should be stopped. But it has not been stopped. Then
Mr. Angwin put the facts before the Parliament of
Western Australia, and member after member protested
that something should be done to remedy the evil.
Thereupon, the Colonial Treasurer gave an undertak-
ing that the existing conditions should be altered. But
they have not been altered. In these circumstances,
what is of us going back to our unions with a
mere promise 1 If I returned to these men and said,
“ 1 have a promise that this will be done, or that will
be done,” in view of what lias occurred in the past I
should simply be laughed out of the hall. It is idle to
attempt to stimulate enthusiasm in the cause of recruit-
ing unless I can obtain performances. There has been
too much promise and too little performance. When
men are being engaged at Fremantle, they first have
to procure a disc at the bureau. When they have ob-
tained this, they go down to the wharfs. There, the
numbers of the men whom he is to choose are handed
to the foreman, who simply calls them out. In exist-
ing circumstances there is no chance of good feeling
obtaining amongst the industrial workers of Fremantle,
and the same remark is applicable to the Perth wharfs.
It is useless for us to say to our associates that, because
a promise has been given that the members of the
new and old unions shall have an equal opportunity of
securing employment, the two unions can exist side by
side. Mr. Hughes and Mr. Holman both know, prob-
ably better than I do, that no two unions engaged
in the same class of work —especially when they have
previously been fighting each other—can exist har-
moniously side by. side. There can he only one union
—the genuine union. Consequently we say that the
unions must be restored to their old status.' The posi-
tion, I know, is somewhat different in some of the
Australian ports. Tn some places the conditions have
been prescribed by awards of The Arbitration Courts,
and in other ports agreements have been arrived at'
with the employers. Under a former award, preference
was granted to unionists. Later on, Mr. Hughes
brought forward a regulation striking out that prefer- ■
ence. That must be remedied.
Mr. WATSON.—His excuse was that it was im-
perative we should get our transports away, and the
men were not offering themselves.
Mr. McCALLUM.—That is the position so far as it
affects Fremantle. I see no hope of our securing the
whole-hearted enthusiasm that we desire unless the
unions are restored to their old positions, Nothing
short of that will satisfy us. The proposals submitted
in reply to our demands do not affect the wheat lumpeys.
We all know that a little while ago there were members
of the Australian Workers’ Union working on the wheat
stacks. These men came out on strike, and the Colonial
Secretary of Western Australia has said that not one of
these men will again obtain work on those stacks. He
appealed to the farmers to come in and take their places.
A few responded, but tons of wheat have been spoiled.
It is the declaration of the Western Australian Govern-
ment that no member of the Australian Workers’ Union
must be given employment on the wheat stacks.
Mr. WATSON.—That was not the statement of Mr.
Lefroy.
Mr. McCALLUM.—AII I understood Mr. Lefroy to
say was that he would agree to the decision of the Con-
ference. There is no proposition before us affecting
that.
Mr. CUMMING.—What have you to say
Mr. McCALLUM.—I do not wish interjections from
you. T take up the same attitude towards you as Mr.
Holman yesterday took up towards Mr. Lundie. I
resent your presence here. If I had known that you
were to be present I would not have attended the Con-
ference. There is another aspect of this question that I
wish to be considered. It is that the Government ought
not, either by any legislative or administrative act, to
interfere with trade unions so long as the war continues.
Mr. McNEIL.—WiII you give us a counter under-
taking that there shall be industrial peace?
Mr. McCALLUM.—When war broke out our execu-
tive—l acted ag its mouthpiece—declared an industrial
truce. We declared that as long as our organizations
were not attacked bv the other side we would observe
an industrial truce. We were loyal to that pledge until
we were attacked, but we then had to protect ourselves.
We now understand that representations have been
made to the Government of Western Australia to bring
in legislation this session affecting the government of
trade unionism in that State. Our opponents wish to
determine for us how we shall dispose of our funds. If
any attempt of the kind be made harmony cannot be
expected. We want from the State Government a defi-
nite promise that nothing in that direction will be
done. Without such a promise I, in turn, can promise
nothing on behalf of the organization I represent.
Mr. LESLIE.—Your party was not attacked in Fre-
mantle when the trouble began there.
Mr. McCALLUM.—I was not in Western Australia
at the time. Whatever difference of opinion there may
be as to the cause of that trouble, it cannot be denied
that the position in Fremantle to-day is deplorable.
No representative of a shipping company can tell me
that the men now employed by them on the wharfs
there are comparable with those who were previously
employed. The men employed by them on the wharfs
to-day represent the riff-raff and the “ counter-luncheon-
kings ” of the district. Gaol birds and convicts, the
common hangman, and, in short, all the bad elements
of the country are employed on the wharfs, and are
members of the new union. If preference is given to
those men how can we expect harmony ?
Mr. McNEIL.—It is said that the cost of handling
cargo has not gone up.
Mr. McCALLUM.—We have the actual records. We
know how long it takes nowadays to load a vessel, and
how many men are employed. During the hot weather
I saw gang after gang knock off because the work was
too much for them. The gangs now consist of eight men
instead of five, as before. An Inter-State vessel has been
at the wharf from Tuesday until Monday, whereas she
used to come in on the Thursday and leave on the
following Saturday. The "flap-doodle” that we read
in the press in regard to this matter does not affect me.
since I have the actual facts asi to the position. I wish
now to refer to the breaking up of a street-corner meet-
ing in Perth last Friday. This meeting was called by


the Labour Federation to discuss profiteering and land
taxation, and, according to the Argus tins ™° rn ™ g ’
was broken up, and the platform was rushed by the
Mayor of Perth, Mr. Lathlain. The Argus writes
It appears that an open-air gathering to discuss
profiteering and land taxation was held under « e
auspices of the Federation last Friday night.but as
the speakers received a poor reception the meeting
was abandoned. At this stage the platform was,
according to the Federation officials, rushed by M .
Lathlain, and turned into a recruiting demonstra-
tion. Mr. Lathlain states that he did not arrive on
the scene until a few minutes before the last speaket
finished, and feeling that with the large crowd pre-
sent the opportunity to appeal for recruits s
good to be lost, he took the platform when the
meeting was abandoned.
A telegram from my assistant in Perth, dated Friday
last, states that—
A Labour Federation meeting, carrying proper
permit, Murray and Barrack-streets, to-mgh ,
broken up by hostile crowd, including Mayor
Lathlain, who mounted the platform and addressee
recruiting meeting.
I ought to explain that these Labour Federation meeh
higslre held with the full authority of the Perth City
Council, from which we hold a permi . » harmony’
this kind likely to assist in the promotion of harmony .
Mr PEAKE. —Who composed the hostile crowd .
Mr. McCALLUM.— I cannot say.
Mr. HOLMAN.— Does your assistant speak as
67 Mn^McCALLIJM.—He would probably be one of
the speakers at the meeting. p + i Mr
Mr. LESLIE.—I heard the mayor of Perth, Mr.
Lathlain, speak against profiteering. f
Mr. COLLIER. —But he should get a platform
his own ;he ought.not to rush our platform. broken
Mr. McCALLUM.—If our meetings are to be jokei
up by advocates of recruiting, we can only expect ho.
tilitv to be aroused. + n
Mr. PEAKE. —Would it not be rather difficult
get a hostile crowd in favour of profiteering. ,
Air McCALLUM. —There are in our State peop
wh“ are agafnst anything being done They would have
us lie down and allow them to. walk over us They
wave flags and talk about winning the war, hut do
no The” PRESroENT'-B'this not a matter for com-
plaint to the recruiting authorities? If a ”X reCrl ” n ' ng
authority is failing to do his duty, «>m P la.n at once,
bv telegraph, to the Director-General of Recruit n g.
Y Mr McCALLUM.—I understand that the mayor of
Perth, Mr. Lathlain, is chairman of the local recruit-
ing committee. I propose now to refer to an industrial
position on the gold-fields, which is giving rise to a
good deal of bitterness amongst the workers, and wi
have to be removed. I do not know how this Confer
ence can deal with the grievance, but the State G° v
ment could certainly cope with it. I refer to the fac
that a new miners’ union has been formed, and that it
has the full support of all the mine-owners, business
people and that element which has always opposec
trade unionism and the Labour movement Jh es e people
are “boosting” it up, and. there is a feeling that it
was originated by the National element in Wester
Australia. The Chamber of Mines is also giving it M
support The creation of this new union leads to a
great deal of argument amongst the men m the
and at street meetings. The two elements are in d r
conflict If industrial peace is to be disrupted tl •
way Tt is useless for us to go out and preach harmony
If we could go hack, and say to our unions, \om
position is secure. We have an undertaking that youi
old status is to he restored, and that you are no o
attacked,” I am sure that it would go a long way to
wards the restoration of harmony among the workers.
Mr McNEIL. —I think you should mention that a
new union must apply for registration to the Registrar,
and be registered, before it can actually exist Mr
Lefrov who is absent this afternoon, mentioned this
me. end said that his Government had
made it a point to keep away from such matters We
can accept that statement and recognise that l •
Lefroy would not dream of telling the Re g wl ® h
the Government were favorable or unfavorably > ‘° o rHe
registration of this Union. A new union Kalgoorlm
can be registered only after application ha » b ««”
to the Registrar and an opportunity given . . objec-
oliject to it to appear before him, and stat i .
X 1 in Western S
many contrary decisions are given by the Kegst ,
however, that we do not feel too safe Thu n ta.
lodged its application for castrationto prevent
matter, I think something should he.done to P
the press from slandering our people as they
since the conscription campaign. lam not sugg 5
any further war regulation, but in almost every news-
ii id Western A-tridm wiU
to Labour organizations or Labour lead .
described as disloyalists, ?c;f e the
so forth. Let me give an .llustration of this. • Atter t_^
conscription campaign our committee arragd„ {
Sunday outing down the river. . arrangements
committee, fixed the date and ni JJpavh came
On the following Monday even™ U the
out with an article headed chosen
Kaiser’s Birthday.” It turned out that I
for the picnic was the BJ3l** J 31 ** date 0 f the
selected it I had no more President.
Kaiser’s birth than I have f the Kaiser
This newspaper went on to say that n had
would he very pleased to learn that his rummy
been kept up by the anti-conscriptioniste ofJ>
The PRESIDENT.— I should like to see some
dealing with offensive criticism of members of
m Mr. McCALLUM.-We do
ZZ'ZZZZ.'SSZ. “rS
cLtetwiftmtX K- to brand myself and
. have charged ns with
• Mr. mTcALLTIM-There is no charge so offensive
! ns that of disloyalty. lam anxious to
I to clear away misunderstands N o one
ve q rs of the war Australia did magnificently.
other side will not meet the case.
• ppnrjY The last speaker touched on a mat-
-1 JfiSttt P~ Jti&s*sts-—S
s arrive at a resolution in t things that have to
1 attached to it some statement
e Ge done to bring ahm '' oach the matter as
t different factious. But if we a PP™ a ““ a stateme nt
a has the last gentleman, ™ t h a t, whenever
, „f the position. He; asks os and
a men go out on strike, . , 0 s t a t.e that
• should carry no c(m9eauence 0 f the
t position, and to sav tic y . ™«trQia during the
s strikes, that have J,^®V ? r g^ oved without compromise
r - war shall he immediacy who have taken part
t or negotiation, and th t -l ii he returned to
r in strikes for the period »«ta™a *•» I we™tout. If
,e exactlv the same position as hefo poggib ilitv
” gentlemen will meet us, and


frankly say that there are some proposals made which,
in their entirety, cannot possibly be granted, in order
to arrive at a compromise, then there will be a
chance of reaching a settlement. I have avoided
throughout the Conference going into details; but I
slab have to do so now to meet points which have just
been raised. I invite the attention of the Western Aus-
tralian and Sydney members to the matter of the wharf
labourers. In 1914, Mr. Justice Higgins made an
award, giving the whole of the waterside workers a sub-
stantial increase in rates and improved industrial con-
ditions generally; and they, for their part, undertook
not to strike for three years. Within three months,
lowever, a long series of strikes began in every port in
Australia. Whatever Mr. Justice Higgins had refused
to give them under their original claim they attempted
to enforce by localized strikes. In Sydney this be-
came an absolute menace to the port, and nobody knows
that better than some of the gentlemen here represent-
ing Labour organizations. They knew the absolute im-
possibility of conducting the affairs of our port con-
currently with the strikes that took place. For ex-
ample, I was asked, as Minister, what to do in the case
of three transports which were being held up because the
men demanded that a watchman on one of the wharfs
who had been placed there to detect cases of pilfering
and had nothing to do with the work on the wharfs!
should be dismissed. What could we do ? 1 said tna
as they were transports, and the whole matter was of
great urgency, they would have to dismiss the watch-
man. hat was done, and the men resumed work.
Soon after, however, came the big strike, and the wharf
labourers and the coal men followed behind the original
strikers. Can these men say in absolute detail that
the whole of their claims shall be conceded? If they
take that stand we can never arrive at an agreement.
My Prenuer and myself have accepted a serious respon-
sibility in agreeing to the re-registration of the de-regis-
tered unions. 6
Mr. JELLEY.—Is there any likelihood of your not
y-u” pr ° mise into concre te form when
HOLMAN.—We will do what we undertake to
Bi^r+l? EEBY p T i, Wil i ask Mr< R y an this 9^stion.
bmee the war he has had a strike in North Queens-
and. Does he say that the men were justified, and
that, because they went out on strike, there shall be
no consequences?
Mr. RYAN.—We did not victimize anybody. I
always held that they were wrong, but we used con-
ciliatory methods.
de“ r „ded EEBY '~ By giVing * he me " wha ‘
Mr. RYAN.*— The Commonwealth refused us Mr.
Justice Higgins—a most arbitrary thing to do.
Mr. BEEBY. lou admit that the men were wrong
Every honest man knows that they were wrong in
many of the strikes conducted. The attitude of tlm 1
men on the coal transports at our port reached such 1
a stage that it was essential for safety to or-anize ’
way ’ 80 ,hat we CoUld des r a “ ;
Mr. RYAN.—Every man in North Queensland got 1
his position back. There was no victimization. 1
Mr. BEEBY.—You can always settle a Strike bv *
giving men what they demand. 3 *
Mr. RYAN.—We did not do that. J
wZ BEEKy -~ Bufc you had a strike against your r
arb tration award ; and I point to it as an illustration l
of the general principle that if men can go on strike f
anti there are to be no consequences, then what is to be 7
the aftermath? All I am urging is that we, in the «
J? er ”»£* Mr ; Holman, have gone a long way «
Mr. Morby knows that we have gone to an extent which k
h, will impose on us a difficult task in seeing that it is
er carried out; but we are satisfied that we can guarantee
a that it shall be undertaken in our State. It may be
sd possible to meet the position generally, with some other
I slight concessions. I urge that the only way to get at
st them is by the New South Wales members meeting Mr.
s- Henman and myself for half an hour or so in consulta-
rf tion, so that we may be able to return here, and say
m that, as far as New South Wales is concerned, “these
fc>-. are the only reasonable concessions that we can insist
l- shall be granted.” If we can arrive at that, we may
>k teach some reasonable basis so that the addendum to
s, be attached to any resolution going from this Con-
.n reience shall be satisfactory to all parties. I ask mem-
id ers present, do they say that before we can get a
d unanimous resolution through we must accept in abso-
e- lute de ail every one of those typewritten proposals?
Mr. JELLEY. Would it not be a better proposition
to consider details first—boiling the whole tning down
so that we can then see where we stand, and what we
l - can do ?
ie r ' BEEBY. The attitude of the last speaker was
e a . n uncompromising assertion that so far as Western*
's Alls tralia is concerned all the aftermath of +he strikes
, must be immediately removed.
h EOLLIER.—Rather than holding cut for every
detail he took the view, I think, that we must have
f action and not promises. Mr. McCallum and T both
eel that it is no use going back and telling our or-
.. ganizations that we have a promise. We want to see
f doiie> That is the line of argument Mr.
1 McCallum took.
j , EEEBI .-—1 es, but all we can do is to guarantee
that certain action shall be taken.
; Mr. COLLIER.—The difficulty is that if we went
back to the Fremantle lumpers and said, “We
have a promise that this will be done,” there
Have been so many promises -broken that the
' men llave reached a stage where they will not
accept promises. But if we could say, “ This thing
( an ,j , as a result we advise certain
I ®?’/ * ere wouU difficulty. Or if we could
£ here "TV BV ! d - ence that such an<l was
bemg done our difficulties would be removed.
Mr. BEEBYI—If what has been submitted by Mr.
ludor is a basis for negotiation let us negotiate. But
f without variation it is hopeless,
ina that^^ \ would have no objection to say-
gtb V 1 t d g r back and ur S e both harmony and
lS e n i°u ; i but 1 would achieve nothing unless I
could definitely say that the things requested had been
Prime M EE ? Y - + 7 r am inclined t 0 agree with the
im9ter that a resolution should go out from
that C tb nfe t i:enCe u that We regErd tbe crisis as 80 seri °us
3 tbe has come to sink past differences and
work together; and then a schedule of the things that
j be done to hnng about that harmony could be
wouW bnv SUC U / L esolution > wit h its addendum,
would have a marked effect on recruiting. I will give
an illustration of the difficulties in which State Go-
el nments are placed Take the position of the coal
miners in New South Wales. You gentlemen will
- tb ?n w’' T i UgbeS a PP oint ed a special tri-
T a - d f tbe W ar Precautions Act, The net result
was that the men got what they asked. They secured
their eight hours’ bank to bank and their 20'per cent
increase m wages, and they received also other im-
provements in their condition. On their side thev
?ave an undertaking most solemnly that in return for
T ( \ se concessions it was a bargain made with the
ii ge—they would undertake not to strike during the
Tet when the big strike occurred they broke
meir bargain; and can you expect that, in cases of that
kind there shall be no after results?


Mr MORBY. —Would it not be as well if you told
the Conference that a promise was made to Govern-
ment employees that there would be no altered condi-
tions in their employment during the war, and tha
that promise was broken; hence the whole trouble.
Mr. BEEBY.—It was not broken.
Mr. MORBY.—It was.
Mr. BEEBY.—Not a man’s wages was touched, nor
a man’s hours of employment interfered with. 1 here
was not the slightest interference of any sort. AH that
was done was the institution of a time-recording sys-
tem in the workshops; and on a pretext of that kind
the men violated their promises.
The PRESIDENT.—I ask, gentlemen, that you wi
adopt a conciliatory attitude with one another, so ilia
we may get on to what we all desiie. .
Mr. BEEBY. —It is not fair to say that any Go-
vernment, after an upheaval of that kind, <Jan rest Jl re
exactly the same conditions as existed hitherto. Mr.
Storey, with his ministerial experience, know? that
I hope that we shall try to reduce the matter to
something definite, so that when we meet again to
adiust our resolutions we shall have absolute agree-
ment. There is only one other matter to chich i
desire to refer, and that is the question of profiteering,
which was raised by Mr. Elmslie. We have to realize
that profiteering and the high cost of livingl «re> two
entirely separate things. No one disputes that the e
shoukUoe some device created under which every penny
of extra profit that a man makes as a result ol the
war may be used for war purposes. The question of
the cost of living, is, however, an entirely different
matter We have to face the facts. First of all, there
“ no country in the world 90 little affected by the war
as is Australia. There is no other country m which
the cost of living has been kept down as it has been
in Australia. It must be admitted that some of the
increased cost undoubtedly arises from war conditions,
and nothing can control that. Beyond that, what can
be done to limit prices and cut down the cost of living
is a matter for legislation and administrative action.
I take wheat for the purpose of illustration. In New.
South Wales we have quite recently fixed the price oi
wheat at 4s. per bushel. We did that after full in-
quiry, and upon being convinced that the farmers of
the State could not possibly produce wheat profitably
at a lower price than 4s. nett per bushel delivered at
the nearest railway station, the Aew South Wales
Government have agreed to guarantee that price to
the farmer in order that the same area of land may
continue to be occupied in the production of wheat.
Now I wish it to be understood that so long as the
price of wheat remains at 4s. per bushel the public
cannot expect cheaper bread. Every one, I think, ad-
mits that. , . , . , . . £
A MEMBER. —Do you not think that in. view ot
the fact that the factories of Australia have guaran-
teed that price to the wheat farmer for his wheat
they have a right to expect that the 10 per cent, of
the crop required for local consumption shall be ob-
tainable at a lower rate? . , - . Wnl eml
Mr BEEBY.—The amount required for local con-
sumption in New South Wales would be considerably
more than 10 per cent. . ,
A MEMBER. —That is the amount required m
Western Australia. . „ ~
Mr BEEBY. —That would mean that some of the
farmers would have to accept less than 4s. per bushel
1 MEMBER. —Do you not think that they_ might ,he
asked to do so in order that the people might obtain a
cheaper loai. —if p ool gellg some of the wheat at
less than 4s. per bushel, it is clear that all the growers
interested in the Pool must accept less than 4s.
A MEMBER. —But the growers have been given a
guarantee of a price which they never had before.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—The member might approach
the Pool with his suggestion. It is not a matter that we
can settle here.
Mr. BEEBY.—I think it is begging the question. 11
4s. per bushel is the lowest price that will pay the
farmer, it would be of no use for us to try to compe
him to take less, as that would mean only a reduction
in the area under wheat, and I say that so long as the
4s per bushel basis lasts there can be no reduction in
the price of bread. In those circumstances it is,, mmy
view, wrong for any man to urge upon the public that
there is some way of securing cheaper bread for them
at the present time.
Mr. STOREY.—I agree in the main with what you
sav My friends are not complaining about what the
farmer is getting. What we say is that bread was con-
siderably cheaper when wheat was at 3s. 3d. per bushel
than -it is now. What we are trying to determine is,
who gets the difference between the price of bread when
wheat was at 3s. 3d. per bushel, and the present price
of bread when wheat is 4s. 9d. per bushel.
Mr. BEEBY.—Mr. Storey must know that the cost
of the production of bread has been very largely in-
creased since the time when wheat was at 3s. 3d. per
bushel There are higher wages, higher cost of material,
and increased cost of transit and distribution to be con-
sidered I say, frankly, after an investigation of the
matter, that the man who delivers bread to the citizens
does not make as big a profit to-day on the , I c ” rre ”J
price as he did on the price ruling when wheat was at
3s 3d per bushel. I have quoted wheat and bread as
an illustration to show that in some cases the reduction
of prices must tend merely to limit production. _ I his
would bring about a shortage and inconvenience in an-
other direction. These are matters which the State and
Federal Governments and Parliaments must conside .
There is undoubtedly occasion for a strong protest
against profiteering, and wide room for ac tmtv m °
the Legislatures on that ground, but I repeat that price-
fixing is in an entirely different category, and must be
dealt with without the laying down of any principle by
The Commonwealth might do a great
deal by acting as importers. .
Mr BEEBY.—Mr. Ryan reminds me of his own ex-
periment in connexion with meat, which I have been
watching with the greatest interest He has the advan-
tage that in Queensland, with a huge area of cheap
land, he can rent grazing propositions from which to
supply his meat shops. But the other States dov-
possess those great areas of unoccupied land We do
not possess such areas in New South Wales Land
which Mr. Ryan may be able to get at a capital value
of ss. per acre, we could not secure for £6 pel acre,
so that that class of remedy for high prices is barred
to the New South Wales Government. We have to
look in other directions for a solution of the prob ein.
I am trying to urge upon members of the Conference
that we cannot lay down any general rules on the matter
of price-fixing. But if we confined ourselves to t e
question of profiteering, I believe that we could by
pressure, have that matter finally cleared up, estab-
lish the principle, which should have been establi, i •
at the beginning of the war, that no man should ma e
a penny profit as the result of the conflict
Mr STOREY.—In 1915, when Mr. Hughes was
Prime Minister, or was assisting Mr Andrew Fisher
he asked that there should be an alteration of the
Commonwealth Constitution for the purpose of dealing
with something which he then definitely contended was
in operation in Australia, namely, great combinations
controlling the foodstuffs of the people, and, as he said,
making huge fortunes out of the war. Believing that
what he said was true, we say that that evil exists o-
day in a hi ore intense form, and we ask that something


to remedy it should be done by this gentleman, who is
now occupying the same position, though with greater
powers than he ever previously had to deal with these
things. If we could say that he now intends to deal
with them in the way in which lie himself suggested,
it would go a long way to satisfy the people who are
furnishing the men who are fighting the country’s
battles in the war.
Mr. BEEBY.—That is a matter which should be sub-
mitted to the Prime Minister.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Mr. Storey and I joined in carry-
ing a Bill in the New South Wales Parliament to trans-
fer all those powers to the Commonwealth Government.
Mr. STOREY. —That is so, but the Parliaments of
the other States did nothing in that direction.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—Yours was the only Parliament
that did it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes, New South Wales was the
only State that exhibited the Federal spirit on that
occasion.
Mr. BEEBY.—I am concerned that on the matter
of price-fixing we should not delude ourselves or the
public. I do not speak of present rates, but, at the
time referred to by Mr. Storey, every shilling of the
profit made by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company
might have been taken from it, and, if distributed over
the whole of the sugar used in Australia, it would not
have made a difference of per lb. to the consumer..
There is something in the contention that it is wise
to destroy monoply, but, so far as the practical result
to the consuming public is concerned, the remedy pro-
posed would not have amounted to much at that time.
Mr. COLLIER.—But a reduction of -£d. per lb.
here and Id. per lb. there makes a lot of difference to
the man with a small income.
Mr. BEEBY.—I grant that that is so.
Mr. STOREY.—I am credibly informed that to-day
the freezing accommodation of the whole of the butter
institutions along the North Coast, from the Tweed to
Newcastle, is so overstocked with butter stored for the
purpose of holding up prices that the proprietors do
not know what to do with it.
Mr. BEEBY.—I do not know whether that is so or
not, but I do know that the price of butter to-day is
Is. 6d. per lb, and that is as cheap as it was before the
war. •
Mr. STOREY. —I know that it is, but ought there
not to be some means of utilizing that butter? People
are paying 4s. per lb. for it in England.
Mr. BEEBY.—Does Mr. Storey say that the butter
should be sold at a price that would be unprofitable to
the producer?
Mr. STORET. I do not. But I say that these in-
stitutions during the last year or so have been putting
their money to reserves in order to cut down the per-
centage of profit.
Mi. BEEBY. I do not know whether the dairy-
farmer is making any undue profit, but I do know that
it cannot be said that there is any undue inflation of the
price of butter when it is not more now than it was
before the war.
A MEMBER.—The whole point is that if prices
could be reduced there would be no demands for in-
creased wages.
Mr. BEEBY.—I am not so certain about that. I am
not objecting to demands for increases of wages. Those
are inevitable in every community. I am not discussing
that point, I am suggesting that in the matter of price
fixing we are responsible for seeing that the position
is not exaggerated, and that hopes are not held out to
tbe public which neither Mr. Tudor nor Mr. Storev
if they were in office, would be able to redeem.
Mr. STOREY.—I do not suggest that, all these diffi-
culties could be overcome in a day, but I say that if
men are in a position in which they may make use
of means of relief, and do not do anything in the direc-
tion which they previously asserted to be necessary, it
is not unnatural that the worker should note the incom-
patibility of their conduct. Although it may be said
that Mr. Ryan is in a favorable position in Queensland,
he is doing something in that direction. Whether what
he is doing will turn out well or badly remains to be
seen.
Mr. BEEBY.—I am merely saying that it is wrong
to hold out hopes to the public in the matter of price
fixing which cannot be fulfilled. I have stated, as an
illustration, that while the price of wheat is fixed at 4s.
per bushel there can be no reduction in the price of
bread. However, T do not wish to be drawn into an
economic discussion.
The PRESIDENT.—I am afraid that that is what
Mr. Beeby is now engaged in, but our business is to
secure harmony in order to obtain more recruits.
Mr. BEEBY.—I suggest that, it is necessary to sepa-
rate profiteering from the question of the cost of living,
if they are to be conditions attached to any resolution
carried by the Conference. I say sincerely, and I am sure
that Mr. Holman will authorize me to say, that the New
South Wales Government will use every endeavour to
clean up every after-result of the strike. We are pre-
pared do say that the thing is over, and we should agree
to forget it now in view of the common disaster that
threatens our country. As rapidly as we can we will
do all that is possible to disperse all ill-feeling arising
from the strike. Every reasonable man will appreciate
the difficulties of the members of the Government carry-
ing responsibility as against those of the mere critic,
and I believe that if Mr. Storey and a few more of us
came together _we could without difficulty agree to a
basis upon which it would be possible to clean up the
whole of our differences in New South Wales.
Senator FAIRBAIRNw —I rise to reply to Mr. Col-
lier s request that the employers shall again—because
they have already done so—state their position on the
questions of economic conscription and victimization.
Before I do that I might be allowed, in the interests of
harmony, to refer to the remarks which fell from Mr.
McCallum and the interjection of Mr. O’Loughlin. I
believe that represented the worst rock which we have
met during the whole of the long trip in this Confer-
ence. These two gentlemen represent two unions of
waterside works at Fremantle, and I appeal to them
to go back to those wdiolm they represent and say, 11 We
are at war; the nation is in peril; can you not now
sink your differences?” and so bring those two unions
together.”
Mr. MoCALLUM.—No, I shalljnot undertake to do
that. I shall not ask men to let the hangman and men
who have been inmates of our gaols Into their union.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I suppose that even the
hangman is British, though at times he may be placed
m a somewhat invidious position; outside of his job
he may be a very decent fellow. It is certain, in any
case, that he will never hang Mr. McCallum. If we
aie not to secure harmony in the way I have suggested,
how is it. to be secured? If we cannot get harmony
between two unions who are fighting like Kilkenny
cats against each other, I do not see how it is to be ob-
tained.
Mr. O’LOITGITLIN.—WouId you agree to the re-
registration of the old union and allow all to join up
with it ? -it
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I would agree to anything
that Mr. O’Loughlin and his unionists would agree to,
because, as far as I can see, the only way to bring about
larmony would be by de-registration of one union with
the object of amalgamating all the unionists of the two
unions in one body.
Mr. O LOUGHLIN.—One union has recently been
legistered. Would you agree to the de-registration of
that body?


Senator FAIRBAIRN.—That is a question I could
hardly be expected to answer.
Mr. HOLMAN. —If there were a condition providing,
for the admission of members of the new union into the
old union, would you agree to that?
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN.—Yes.
Senator FAIRBAIRN—The reply of the employers
to the question of victimization is
No workman to be refused employment in any
occupation by reason of his connexion with the
late general strike. Members of old and
unions to have equal opportunities for any emp oy-
ment offering.
I understand that there are two hostile unions in Fre-
mantle, and that the new union is
other is not. I think it is quite possible to bring them
together. Of course, there may be some °bjectiona
men in the new union, and I dare say even the g
men,” as members of the new union are .called, thi
there are objectionable unionists m the other orgamza
Uon But R seems to me to be perfectly feasible that
they, as good Britishers, could be brought togetlw, an
persuaded, to drop all their differences. -know that
after the great, shearers’ strike m Queensland, ,
I used to nod to shearers along' the roads, but y
" cut me ” for two years. However, they all apeakto
me now, and among them are some of my g . g
friends. We agreed to bury the hatchet and
what we should do now. At the P r< f> nt st ™l7a
should be no enmity between anybody m 1
Everybody should be for the Empire We all ought to
keep one thing in view, and one thing only namely
the success of our Empire in this terrible ordeal. I have
replied to Mr. Collier’s request about economic con-
scription, and have told the Conference that we, aa re-
presenting the Employers Federation all over Australia,
are willing at the termination of this Conference o go
back to our various bodies, and advise our members
strongly that they must not sack any men who may be
eligible and fit to go to the war.
Mr O’LOUGHLIN.—Or refuse to employ him.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.-Such men, of.course won d
not be given preference over returned soldiers,
we are entirely at one on that point. I repeat that
we say that no workman shall he refused employment m
any occupation by reason of his connexion with the
late general strike, and that members of the old and
new unions shall have equal opportunities for any em-
ployment offering. We will advise our members as
Britishers in this time of trial to bring about harmony
again by giving an absolutely fair and square deal to
everybody* We will ask them not to consider whether a
man is a unionist or non-unionist, but to give every
man a fair right to employment m every possible direc
tion I would like also at this stage to refer to the
question of profiteering, and I want to point out that
there are two kinds of profiteering. One concerns the
production of a commodity the coat of which because
of the war, has risen in value. In such cases, a y
profit will come under the scope of the War Time Profis
Act The other class of profiteering is that by which
a man takes advantage of the war to increase prices
against the community. This class of man is as bad
as a traitor. During the recent campaign I was con-
tinually called a profiteer, and naturally I resented the
accusation just as much as Mr. Elmslie objected to
beiim called other names. But I think that we now
ought to bury the hatchet. Let us come together again.
The times are serious, so let us be all on one side.
Let us drop all our differences, and make a fresh stait.
Mr. RYAN. —Did I understand you to say that m
cases of profiteering in which a commodity has risen m
price as the result of the war, the war-time profits tax
operates ? ,
Senator FAIRBAIRN.— It does.
Mr. RYAN. —To what extent?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.— For the first year, 50 per
Mr. RYAN. —That is to say, the Act will take half
the additional profit?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.— Yes.
Mr. RYAN. —Do you think that is enough?
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I point out that in th "
second year the tax will take 75 per cent, of the excess
profits. When we discussed this matter m the Feder
Parliament, and resolved upon the reduced amount for
the first year, it was thought that, as two yeais had
crone by, it would be a hardship to take . 5 pei cent, o
the profits in the first year, because a man might have
spent it in the meantime, either m fresh o
in additional machinery or plant, so that in all pr
bility the money would have been gone. We decided,
owever, that for the second year 75 per cent, of the
excess profits should be taken. We kept m mind that
quality known as human nature, and came to t e
elusion that if we took the whole of the P^ s a l
would have no incentive, and would not take any addi
tional risks. That is to say, if a man did not have a
chance to make a bit for himself he would do nothing
at jJ r RYAN. —He would not be very patriotic then.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.-I quite agree with that but
we have to deal with human nature as it is, and realize
that if we take the whole of the profit a man would
„of have any inducement to take extra nsks m busmesa
ell Mr Prl ßYAN,—Wliat extra risk, for instance, would
a sheen raiser take if the price of wool goes up •
Senator FAIRBAIRN.— There would be no risk, an
in that case the profit would be taken.
Mr. RYAN.—The whole of the extra profit.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. No, 75 per cent That .s
to sav he would come under the operation of the war
to say, ne w ™ know prett y
time profits tax. xou ana ±, xyxi. j -rnbablv
well that in such circumstances a man P margin
not stock so heavily, but would keep a Ukel A e
to meet possible adverse seasons. It is q J
would not run a greater risk unless he could ft e Zal
thing out of it. At all events that is how the Federa
Parliament looked at the matter, a " d { th
a good deal in that point of view. Estiina
amount to be received under this scheme of taxatm
show that it will only amount to about £ ) ,000.000
The Treasury officials are now dealing with the matter
Jo we shah know before long what the amount will be
but I understand that the authorities esUmate that for
the two years the tax of 50 per cent, m the firstyear
sod 75 per cent ill the second year will yield about
f l non 000 because the Treasurer’s estimates are very
fiariv This would -an Wore
that profiteering had been indulged in “““‘ l
about £2,000,000 in one way and another during t •
tW Mr. 6 RYAN. —But the war-time profits tax does not
deal with war profits, does it? oa
Senator FAIRBAIRN. —This tax is known as the
war-time profits tax, and it will touch every conceiv
able profit over and above what a man made hefo
1 fin 1
1 M> a pRTTCHARD.—It is aimed at excess profits.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.— Yes.
' Mr RYAN. —Do you believe in the enforcement o
; the tax? There is some suggestion that it will not
Senator —For myself, Ido not care
verv much I always said on public platforms when
I was standing for the May election that I won
have no objection to the Government taking the whole
: lot? but I drew attention to the ejections to that
C °Mr e ’ JELLEY. —Has any of the tax been collected
yet?


Senator FAIRBAIRY.—Yo, but the returns are
in, and the officials of the Department are now dealing
with the assessments, which, I suppose, will be out
before many days are over. As I have already shown,
ail the excess profits amount to only about £2,000,000,
and against that we have to remember that many of
our industries have been ruined through the war. The
fruit industry may he quoted as one illustration.
Mr. RYAY.—It does not help a man who has been
ruined very much to know that some one else is mak-
ing money.
Senator FAIRBAIRY.— I quite agree with that.
Mr. Ryan said that a certain amount of discussion was
being caused because employing interests had not been
sufficiently taxed.
Mr. RYAY. I referred to the big capitalistic in-
terests.
Senator FAIRBAIRY.-Yes, I take it that Mr.
Ryan referred to direct taxation, and objected that
tins form of imposts on property ought to have been
increased by the Federal Government in order to meet
interest on war loans. That is a fail* way of looking
at it, and I find upon examination that the Federal
e T Cted t 0 yield *2,110,000; the income tax,
£5,Jlo,000; the special income tax, £500,000: the suc-
cession duties, £900,000; and the war-time profits
tax ’ , i £ 1 : 000 ’ 000 (estimated), making a total of
£10,425,000. That is the amount which capital
will contribute this year up to the 30th June. Now,
in ( U I f n o tereSt 01 } OUr war loans for the year
. th j 3 ? tb du y ne ’ is esti mated to amount
to £7, 68 9 940, and the sinking fund at per cent.,
to £77i W 2ao Wl ?i °-n r loans , in * hi W y ears ’ comea
to £771,260. It will be seen, therefore, that the sink-
ing fund and interest together total £8,461,200, and
as against that taxation on property from income tax,
f d p ax ’ war-time profits taxes, which will return to
tile Commonwealth Treasurer £10,425,000.
Mi. RYAY.—But a lot of that money is used for
carrying on ordinary work, is it not?
Mr- PEAKE.—Yot very much of it.
Mr. RYAY.—How much of this taxation was opera-
tive before the war? F •
Senator FAIRBAIRN.-We had no Federal income
tWnf°l? f he , war - What I ™nt to make clear is
that the Federal income tax for amounts on the higher
scale total 6s. m the £l, quite apart from State income
taxation, so it cannot be said that wealth is not bearing
a considerable share of the financial burdens caused by
the war. J
Mr. RYAY.—Are we raising enough from revenue
to pay interest on our loans and carry on the business
ot the Government ?
Senator FAIRBAIRY. —I think so. Yo money is
being spent out of loans to carry on the ordinary busi-
ZTa-°1 he n oU m rj - But ce , rtainly > if Mr. Holman’s
prediction should prove to he anything like correct
and this war should continue for another four years
Mr. LIOLMAIS .—I said in the event of certain con-
tingencies.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. — ExactIy. If, for example
we were to lose the Channel ports, and the war con-
tinued for another four years, .1 have no douht that
every shillinfv m the £1 would be taken by the Com-
monwealth in taxation.
Mr RYAY —Do you challenge the accuracy of Mr.
Crowleys statement, which I quoted yesterday? He
complained that “no serious attempt was being made
by the present Government to meet conditions that must
arise out of the unparalleled addition to the debt of
f Even without any further loans,” ho said,
it would be found necessary, m order to pay interest
alone, and without attempting to redeem one pennv-
piece of the principal, to double, if not treble, the taxes
inch the people were now paying, heavy as they were.”
Senator FAIRBAIRIS’.—Yes, I challenge that state-
ment. I say that the present taxation is sufficient to
* meet all the interest that is payable on our loans. But,
as a financial man, I have always taken up the position
that when the Labour Government brought forward its
first war loan, and exempted from taxation the income
derived from investments in that loan, it took an abso-
lutely wrong course. Yo Government ought to exempt
from taxation any portion of the wealth of the country.
It was similar action which landed the French Govern-
ment in untold trouble. In my opinion, Mr. Watt is
going to adopt the right course. He says that the
next loan must be floated without any exemption from
taxation being granted to subscribers to it.
Mr. RYAY.—You think that the subscribers to all
our war loans ought to be liable to taxation ?
Senator FAIRBAIRY.—Yes.
Mr. RYAY. Even subscribers to the loans which
have already been issued?
Senator FAIRB AIRY.—T would not be a party to
breaking a contract.
Mr. HOLMAY. -But you would give subscribers to
previous loans the right to convert?
Senator lAIRBAIRY.—Yes. That would prove a
test of their patriotism I admit. Coming to the ques-
tion of profiteering, Mr. Ryan advocated that the Fede-
ral Government ought to have fixed the price of meat.
1 think he has forgotten th’at the Federal Constitution
prevents the Cpmanonwealth Government from fixing'
one rate of tax in one State and another rate in another
State.
Mr. RYAY. Cannot the Commonwealth fix the
price of bread at different rates in different States?
Senator FAIRBAIRY.—I do not think so. The
Constitution provides that there must be no differentia-
tion as between one State and another.
Mi. HOLMAY. I do not think that that provi-
sion would be an obstacle in this case.
fw ei !u tol FAIRBAIRY.—Mr. Ryan’s suggestion was
that the price of meat should be fixed at the London
parity.
Mr. RYAY.—On the basis of the f.o.b. price in Aus-
tralia. Ido not know that that is the London parity.
Senator FAIRBAIRY.—I understand that Mr.
van advocated the fixing of the price of meat at what
the London buyer was prepared to pay for it f.o.b. at
risbane or Sydney. That is the price which he said
ought to be fixed . Doubtless such an arrangement would
suit Queensland all right, because the great beef barons
there would completely escape. 1 have known these
men for 40 years. I knew them when they could not
buy a bag of flour. For 35 out of those 40 vears
they have had a really bad time of-it, but during the
AT St .I 6 years . they bave ex P eri enced a splendid time.
Aow the position is that these men possess immense
herds,, and the London parity is still the prevailing
price in Brisbane. But a very different condition ob-
ams in Victoria, South Australia, and Western Aus-
tralia. I do not think there is anybody in Victoria
who owns 1,000 head of cattle.
Vi^ria R « YAISr '~ mat ' S the price of meat ! "
PAIRBAIRN.—It would bo considerably
less. In 1914-16, it must be recollected, 40 per cent
of our milking cows died as the result of the worst
drought we have ever experienced
in Vict^aV"" 1 Whatl9 the fo b - P»«¥» of meat
as^M« t 0; V 8 Ver y “>»<* same
as it is in Queensland.. The London price regulates
would here ’ does in Queensland. But it
would be a great injustice to ask Victorians, South
price Tho WeStern Australians to accept that
price. The cattle owners there are all small men who
we Ve a,kpd Ch tr d their h *tf S 0n an abnormal basis. If
we asked these men with their few head of cattle—


which are nearly always purchased from the dairy herds
—to reduce their price at present, we should do them
a great injustice. . n , •
Mr. RYAN. —You are arguing lor the small dairy-
me Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I am arguing for the
owners of cattle all over Victoria.
Mr. RYAN. —It is like the poor widow and the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—I think that if the workers
in the towns knew that, in order to get their meat a
half-penny per lb. cheaper than they are now obtaining
it would inflict a cruel injustice on the farmers who
have just passed through a terrible drought, they would
not ask their representatives at this Conference to
pursue the matter. I do hope that, if we can arrive at
an amicable arrangement before we disperse, the
presentatives of organized Labour here will be at &o
nains to point out these things to those whom they re
present, and thus endeavour to allay the intense friction
that has existed between us. T
Mr LYONS. —I am sure that no one expects that l
shall attempt at this stage to traverse the whole of the
debate upon the proposals that have been pdt hefore t
Conference. I do not intend to occupy the time of
members at any length. As a matter of fact Tasn J
the State which I represent from the Laboui stai
point, is in the happy position of not bomg dnfectly
affected by these questions as are some of the other
States represented here to-day. Although our position
in this regard is better than that of the other States,
however, we are indirectly affected by wliat takes place
there The workers of Tasmania are in unity with the
workers throughout the rest of Australia; any nijiistme
done to their brothers in other parts of the Common
wealth is resented by them, and must have some effect
upon recruiting results. It has been demanded by
speakers on the other side that we, representing Labour,
shall give some assurance as to what we will do
suggestions are complied with. I represent on this
occasion, not only the Parliamentary Laboui party
of Tasmania, but the political Labour organiza-
tion of the State, including sections of the in-
dustrial workers, since Mr. Belton Indent
the political organization, has asked me to speak
for him. I am prepared to go back to thos
organizations, and to endeavour to create a bettei fee :
ing than is existing at present, provided that the con-
cessions granted by the Government and the employers
representatives are sufficient, in my opinion, to satisfy
these organizations. If I were to promise to go back
and to put to them the seriousness of the Empire s posi-
tion-to appeal with any little ability I may possess to
them to fall io line with you-I am
absolutely fail if they could say to me, But you have
come back empty handed so far as any offer on the part
of the Commonwealth and State Governments andl h
employers’ representatives are concerned,
candidly admit that I do not think the Governments
have gone far enough with regard to that
we put before the Conference at the outset, I am hope
ful that, when we have concluded the general
and are able to come to close quarters, we shall have
something fuller and more definite from the representa-
tives of the Commonwealth and State Governments and
the representatives of the employers than is contained
in the statement read to us by Mr.
Fairbairn has said that we should leave other
with the determination to cease calling each other
names; that we ought to make an effort to forget the
past, to start afresh, and to bring about a filing of
amitv among all classes of the community. I agree with
Cfand I hope he will give that advice*.those whom
he represents here. I hope, indeed, that all the _iep r
sentatives of the other side will do likewise. I trust
they will make an effort to induce their supporters, and
particularly their press supporter., to dropJflS
paigu of abuse aud vilification which has teen carried
L right up to the time of the calling ot this Con-
ference.
' Mr. COLLIER— There is a sample of it in to-day s
Argus. . ,
Mr LYONS.—Yes, but I have in mind now more par
ticularly what has occurred in my own State I accepted
the invitation to attend this Conference without want-
iuß to consult my organization, but I did not public y
announce that fact. On the day following the issue o
the invitation, a section of our press which does no
diinoort Labour devoted a leading article to the aim.
and objects of the Conference, and made an attack upon
the Labour representatives of Australia. Th
illustration of what has taken place up to the present
me I ask the representatives of the other side whether
Inch conduct is likely to lead to good feeling in the
“sZaW^FAIRBAIRN.—WiII you ask the Worker
also to drop the same policy to some extent.
M r T YONS —The Worker merely says, as the lion-
JS* senator himself admitted to-day, that there are
Pr is only a mild statement.
Mr' LYONS.—And what is more, it is true, whereas
thecharges that have been levelled against us and our
InliportS, Mat we are pro-Germans, and t .at soma of
Zirr P Th^ a art?he m kind e ™st n arments to which we
aU object I mention them for the reason that we are
quite prepared to meet the other side if it is at all p
and to endeavour to forget the past Ido not
think any member of this Conference will in future
indulge in personal attacks upon opponents. You wn
represent other interests, as opposed to ourown,Jhavi
L].; nower to influence the conduct of your follower ,
and particularly your press supporters in Australia, an
11s P ab olute yisential that a stop should be pu to
this conduct if we are to work together m the futort #
As to the details of these suggestions, I wish to make
only a brief reference to them, since, with one or tw
exceptions, Tasmania is not affected, except m irec y,
bv them Coming to the first of these, the proposal fo
the final abandonment of conscription, despite what has
been said, I hope a pledge in that d ; r “‘ lon "J 11 tinkler
After listening to the arguments of the Erime Minister,
Mr Holman, g and others, we may be satisfied to accept
the undertaking that conscription will not be brought
forward again, but it must not be forgotten that we
are here representing large organizations- ,
Mr. RYAN. —I am not prepared to accept the under
tA Mi’ g LYONS. —I do not say that I am. I came here
quite prepared to freely discuss these matters, but my ex *
perience is such that I am not too ready to accept pledges
from people who have broken pledges. We want some-
thing that will satisfy those whom we represent that
thev are not going to he taken down. I hope that some-
thing more definite than the statement contained m
£ Hughes’ speech at the Roya Agricultural Show,
Sydney will be given to'us, and those whom we repre-
sent Y Again, I ask our friends on the other side not to
be latisfied merely to give us Mr. Hughes statement,
but to endeavour to persuade the press who support
them, and the Governments of Australia* to drop the
C °M?^McNElL.—That would involve some press
cel^ 01 S^T, YONS. No; I think we could influence the
uress without suppressing it. I do not want such a
regulation of the press as Mr. Holman suggested a litt e
while ago; I think that sufficient influence could be
brought to bear upon our newspapers to secure what
we desire. It might be pointed out to f heir
pledge has been given that conscription shall be dropped,


and that if they continue to urge the adoption of con-
scription the workers will feel much alarmed. Poli-
ticians, including a Minister of the Crown, within the
last few days, have made statements showing that con-
scription has not yet been banished from their minds.
As I said by interjection at an early stage of our pro-
ceedings, a New South Wales Minister a few days
ago made the statement that, in his opinion, the
British -Parliament ought to impose conscription on
Australia. Mr. Beeby replied quite passionately that
no sane man would make such a proposal. I did not
say that this man was sane; I merely said that he was
a member of a National Government, and I cannot
answer for him. He is reported in the Age , on Saturday,
as having made that statement, and being applauded by
those present. We want to be sure that there will be no
agitation for conscription. Without a definite assur-
ance it is no use my going back to my organization
and telling them that conscription lias been dropped.
In regard to the question of economic conscription,
that is accepted under cover of the one word, u accept.”
We want something more than the statement of Mr.
Hughes and the representatives of the Employers’
I ederation that they will make a definite effort to
carry it out. In my State there are private employers
who refuse to employ eligibles. Even an important
local governing body early in the war, when there
were no returned soldiers here, made a public and
definite announcement—and their policy to-day is the
S f m nT that tlley would refuse to employ single
eligible men. I appeal to the Premier of Tasmania
that not only will he agree to the abolition of economic
conscription, but that when he returns he will help me
m denouncing it, whether it is carried on by private.'
employers or by a local governing body, which, although j
not directly under his control, is to a large extent de-f
pendent on the Government financially. We must have!
these definite things. So far as the re-registration of
unions is concerned that does not affect us directly
but we are m very much the same position as Western
Australia. The only union I know of that was affected
by the general strike throughout Australia was the
Wateiside Workers Union, and its members are still
emg victimized and kept out of employment. Bogus
?hl°?.b haVe - bee " worki “S si <le by side wit),
the old unions, and though they are not registered!
under our State law, as in New South Wales andW
Western Australia I tell the Conference this, that iufc
Tasmania the members of the bogus union get an abso-f 1
ute preference over those of the old union. By the! I
bald statement as we have it before us, we are leaving?
it to some one outside who may fail to carry out the
agieement made here So serious is the situation that
at Burnie, for example, the secretary of the old asso-
ciation does not work on the wharf, because if he" did
so he would be depriving another member of his union
from getting employment; and the secretary scrapes
along on the pittance which lie is allowed as an offidal
f T Union ; / e OU S ht t 0 be ab k to say that this
soit M thing shall not continue. In regard to flip
War Precautions Regulations which are not vital to
the war, I cannot understand why some of them were
brought into existence. We have had the Prime Min-
ister admitting that, there must be some that can be
cut out. Why were, they introduced at all ? One would
think the Commonwealth Government were not so
anxious to get recruits when they impose conditions
on unions which could only be resented by the union-
ists. Such actions are bound to lead to disaffection
among the people. There is a section of this com-
munity affected by one .of the latest regulations, and
these People of Irish descent in Australia have hitherto
m,” ryf r '~;~;7 80 * ar a ® Volunteers are concerned.
I he bulk of those of Irish blood amongst us resent
and regard as an insult that regulation dealing with
Sinn Fern. There is no real Sinn Fein in Australia,
although there are not a few who sympathize with the
Irish people and with the Sinn Fein in Ireland in the
fight that they are putting up. So far as Australia
is concerned—in the sense that Sinn Fein people put
their country first—we should put ours first also.
I here is no Sinn Fein to suppress here, such as there
was with regard to the Independent Workers of the
World, and it can only be taken as an offence to a
large and worthy section of the community that such
'a regulation should be put into force. It ought to
go out immediately, seeing that recruits are our main
object, and that the people who consider the regula-
tion an insult to themselves have been most worthily
prominent in that respect.
Mr. RYAN.—They allow Sinn Fein representatives
m the Imperial Parliament.
Mr. LYONS.—That is so, while here they are sup-
pi essed as an illegal association. It is absolutely ridi-
culous, and its effect must be to reduce the number
of recruits. As to the phrase in the next item, “ out-
standing penalties to be abandoned,” does it mean
that those who promptly paid the penalty shall have
no redress, while those who appealed or delayed pay-
ment of their fines are to go scot-free? We ought to
put all on the same footing, and penalties paid should
be refunded.
A MEMBER.—WouId you condensate those who
have been imprisoned ?
Mi. L\ONS.—I would, because it would put them
on a proper footing with those who will have been freed
from imprisonment under this agreement. Having lis-
tened to the Prime Minister to-day, and realizing the
senousness of our national position, I assure you that
f l / * wei 'f in the Pri me Minister’s place I would come
ijt® tile Conference, and not only say, “ You can have
j every damned regulation as he said—but I would
give every concession you asked so as to bring about the
Übest feeling amongst the people of Australia. Apart
liirom whatever may or may not be conceded or agreed
|| u pon iere, I shall be prepared to put the seriousness
lot the position before my organizations when I return,
Uand 1 shall endeavour to create a better feeling, no
Imatter what may be the result of the Conference. But
Imy statement of the case must to a large extent fail
| uni ess you are prepared to go the whole way, too, and
■give the concessions that are asked for on behalf of the
|workers of the whole of the Commonwealth. Bad feel-
ling has been created in Tasmania owing to the prosecu-
Htion of a member of our party, Mr. Dicker, following
Jon the first referendum. He was prosecuted, and fairly
jheavily fined; his costs were heavier still and he was
.found guilty on the evidence of a couple of travelling
actresses, who overhead a conversation in a hotel with
M gar n ir tie War ‘ Tt reminds me of the position of
Mr. Collier m one respect. At that time he had a
letter in his pocket asking him to take part in a recruit-
ing meeting In Mr. Dicker’s case he was negotiating
with a lecruitmg council to arrange a recruiting cain-
paign which was to cover the whole district, when the
prosecution was brought against him on the ground that
he had prejudiced recruiting. Not satisfied with the
successful prosecution of Mr. Dicker, the Tasmanian Go-
vernment brought him to a second trial; that is the
matter was raised in Parliament, and he was expelled
iwTa°r P i' WlC u or f ks S° mmittee He wa *> made to
pay a second penalty for the one alleged offence-whicl,
is not British. I know that the pressure brought to
who\° U H l and k. is colleagues came from® those
who tned to make political capital out of the whole
affair, namely, the press outside. I give credit to Mr
Lee for the way m which he handled the matter But
wiU k «™ e Mr re DiV f TaSmani f fOT a S uara “ tee that he
Will give Mr. Dicker an opportunity of taking his place
upon the Public Works Committee /he so dl
sues and I will guarantee, on our side, that the man
put up by us afterwards to take his place will stand
down for Mr. Dicker. If that*were done it would have


a goad effect throughout the whole community 1 agree
with Mr. Beeby that profiteering and price-fixing are
two separate questions, and if they are dealt with at all
must be dealt with independently of each other. 1 en-
tirely disagree, however, with some statements made
Sr in our proceedings one, I think, made by way
of interjection by Mr. Pritchard—to the effect that t
excess profits would be a fine field for taxation.
Mr. PRITCHARD. —If some one does not make
profits we cannot get revenue from taxation.
Mr LYONS. —Undoubtedly that is so, but I say
that if we took the whole of the excess profits by way
‘f taxation we should not then be relievmg m any way
the position of the workers. If we tax the who
the excess profits we admit the right of the profiteers to
raise prices in order to make those profits That kind
of thing “going on all over the country in connexion
with almost every item that is absolutely essential to
the life of the community.
Mr JELLEY.—ShouId we not destroy the incentive
to make profits if the Government said that they weie
prepared to take them all by way of taxation
Mr LYONS.—To some extent we should, but wkat
I am suggesting is not that we should get at the profits
to the extent of 75 per cent, or even 100 per
they had been made, but that we should so fix things
S it will not be possible; for any one to make sud
huge profits as are now being made. What does it
matter to the worker and his wife and kiddies to leai
that if excess profits are made they will be the subject
of taxation while in order to provide those profits they
fJZ oXmanil t"e S c”st of living
I much as £2 per day. That may be true of a very
ana” action of “The workers, but we have to consrder
the whole of the workers of the Commonwealth,
sly Tor Tasmania that the biggest increase m wages
there that I know of has been Is. per d Y> „
woiei buys a couple of pounds of beef his increase of
Ts is once, without counting anything else that
he mav use The bulk of the workers of Tasmania are
not uTw receiving a single penny more m wages tha
thev did before the war started. Will any one arg
that the cost of provisions and clothing has. n °‘ ‘Takers
in the meantime! Hard as the position of the workers
was before the war it is infinitely harder to-day
Senator FAIRBAIRN. Is it the case that they
not receiving more wages now than before the war .
Mr. LYONS. —That is the position in Tasmania.
Mr LEE. —It is not. ,
Mr LYONS.— Then perhaps Mr. Lee will tell th..
Oonference the industries in which increased wages have
be”u7aid during the progress of
of increase. If he mentioned any he could deal y
with a very small section of the workers. £he statone^
of the Government in this connexion is that I he uo
vernment hS given, and will continue to give every
vernmen s , ~ A p j can sa y i s that if they
C Jfv n e» to it in the past their efforts
have vlry badly failed. It is beyond argument and
doubt that the increase in the cost of living as eei
enormous during the past three or four years. If tha
be so whatever attention may have been given by tl
Government to the matter, the effect has not been sa s-
faMrryPRITCHARD.—It is a very difficult subject to
6, LYONS. —I grant that, and it has been ad-
mitted by others on this side, who know more about i
than I do, but I still say that it must ho possible to
make the position better than it is to-day. Senator
Fairbairn said that it would be very difficult to deal
with the question of the price of meat in Victoria be-
cause the price is high now. He said that it was a.
right in Queensland. But why is it right there? Is it
not because Mr. Ryan has made it so t
Mr. WATSON. —Because the facilities existed tliere
to make that possible, owing to the great number 01
stock in Queensland.
Mr. LYONS. —The price of meat might have been
dealt with in the earlier stages of the war all over Aus-
tralia, and the position then in the other States might
be to-day, if not as good as it is m Queensland, at least
very much better than it is in those States now.
Mr. RYAN. —They attack us for what we have done
Mr. PRITCHARD. —What does Mr. Lyons claim
lias been done in Queensland. . - ,
Mr. LYONS.—What has been done m Queensland
so far as meat is concerned, may be gathered from t e
fact that the people of that State can obtain mea a
half the price which we have to pay for it in Tasmania
at the present time. That is something real which the
people can appreciate. *
Mr. WATSON. —Because there are many times more
stock in Queensland than in Tasmania.
Mr LYONS —When discussing the question ot tne
cost of living, it has to be borne in mind thatnc.com-
parison can be made between an increase of id. or Id.
in the price of the loaf and the increase m the price of
meat. When you come to consider the weekly expenses
of a family, the cost of bread is nothing as compared
with the cost of meat. So I say that something tangible
has been done in Queensland by keeping down the price
of meat. The price which has to be paid for meat in
Tasmania is more than twice the price winch Mr Ryan
mentioned as ruling in Queensland. I should like to
say that, apart altogether from the proposals we make
there are many ways in which the Government might
further recruiting if they were determined m the matter.
In-his statement at the beginning of our proceedings,
the Minister for Recruiting referred, amongst othei
things, to the insurance of members of our Forces. An
objection was taken by some that ™ der con-
ditions some members of the Forces would be insured
aM , a result of the efforts of private individuals, and
others 1 would not. I remember that Mr “ by
interjection, said that the insurance of the Forces was
something that the Government of the Commonwealth
should be able to undertake.
Mr. WATSON.—Hear, hear!
Mr LYONS.—I hold, as a matter of fact, that it is
wrong that private individuals should be asked to do
this work at all. If the Commonwealth Government
were to undertake the insurance of the Forces in t e
way suggested by Mr. Watson, it might involve the pay-
ment of a very large sum each year, but the price would
he one which the people of Australia should be prepared
to pay in order to improve the conditions of those who
they ask to fight their battles The Governmeiitdid
not hesitate at the cost when they decided to give 4 2
per cent., free of State and Federal income taxation,
to the money-lenders of Australia. They did not say
that the cost was too great in that case, and 1 contend
that we should not say that any cost is too great to
improve the conditions offered to those whom as
to enlist, and to improve the provision for their wives
and children if they should happen to be lost £ them.
If we applied ourselves m directions such as these, we
sLlld meet with success, The only tenable .proposal
on the matter of recruiting which 1 bemrd Item M .
Orchard was that which was concerned with the
vention of the possibility of returned
soldiers. That was justly a ma e making pro-
grievance for a long time, and now we are making pr<
, vision, either to find employment for them, or
i them a decent allowance until they get it. y _
that will lead to infinitely better results than any which
we can hope to achieve by merely making appeals to


people. If the conditions which we have suggested are
conceded, we require a definite and real guarantee that
they will be carried out. Mr. Hughes said, “ 1 am in
a position to do the things 1 say." But it lias been
admitted by Senator Fairbairn and the representatives
of othei interests in the Conference that it is no more
t possible for them to guarantee that these conditions will
be fulfilled than it is for us to guarantee that those whom
we represent will fall in absolutely with the views of the
Conference.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—ShouId not the assurance be
reciprocal ?
• •k TONS.-r-What is the use of Mr. Hughes say-
ing, “ We are in a position to do these things " ?
Mr. WATSON.—He was referring to the Federal
Government.
Mr. DyONS. That may be so, but 1 again remind
the Conference that on the question of profiteering we
have the vague assurance that the Government will in
the future, as they have done in the past, give the
matter every attention. In view of what they have
done in the past, I say emphatically that the workers
whom I represent will not be satisfied with that vague
assurance.
Senator MILLEN.—If it is indefinite, we have asked
you to assist in making it definite.
Mr LTONS.—The Government want us to assume
the whole responsibility of moulding a policy. Mr
Ryan has dealt with that most emphatically. He saidj
meet one phase of the question with a certain
proposition, and immediately another crops up, and
you have to meet it with a further proposition." We
are not in a position to do that. We can only suggest
to the Government that they must deal with these things
in the future in a more effective manner than they have
done in the past. When we find that the cost of living
has gone up so much more than the increase in wages!
the position is becoming worse, and I, therefore, say
that there must be something absolutely wrong which
requires to be remedied. lam prepared— not to go
upon a recruiting platform to deal with all sections of
the community, because I have my own views with
regard to the effect of that—but to do what Mr. Hughes
and others have said is of infinitely greater importance,
and that is to secure, or try to secure, the good will and
co-operation of the organizations I represent. Ido not,
any more than did any other meniber of the Conference
on my side, to make a bargain, but I am stating
the things which I think will bring about a better feel-
nug, and lead to better results in the matter of recruit-
i n /- 1 a ™. sure tliat they would lead to better results
if these things axe conceded, it will then be possible for
me, when I go back to the organizations, to put a case
before them. If they say to me, " Have the Common-
wealth Government, the State Governments, and the
employers’ federations agreed to drop their fight against
us, and their feelings of ill-will?" and I am able in
reply, to point to the fact that the things we asked’for
in the first place have been conceded, I shall be in the
position to back up any recommendations that I mav
make to them, and I think they would be prepared to
eccept the recommendation. But if, when I back
I ain able oniy to S ay, “ These were the obstacles in
the way of our falling in with the other side, and in
the way of unanimity, and we asked that certain con-
cessions should be made to you, and what we have tmt
are these vague statements in reply," I do not think
thejesult will be as satisfactory as we should like it
Mr. PRITCHARD. Were not the suggestions put
forward by your side equally vague. P *
Y(^ NS -~ No - 1 take > for instance, our sug-
gestion in the matters of conscription and economic cob
scription. The Government shies at giving a definite
statement that they have finally abandoned conscrip-
Mr. WATSON.—We have agreed to what you asked
iu the matter of economic conscription.
Mr. LYONS.—It is admitted by Senator
and others that you cannot give us a real guarantee
in that matter. Unless you are prepared to do what I
suggested to Mr. Lee, and that is to stand out with us
against those who have been guilty of economic con-
scription in the past, and say that you do not agree
with it, and that you condemn it, and so create putuic
feeling against it, there will not be anything gained.
Senator lALRBAIRN.—We intend to do that.
Mr. LYONS. If Senator Fair bairn and Ins friends
aie prepared to do that, it will improve the position.
But the whole matter is, so far as I am concerned, not
as satisfactory as I should like it to be.
lhe PRESIDENT.—Neither is the war position.
Mr. LYONS. That is so ; and that is why I say lam
piepaied to go back to the organizations in my State
and put before them the war position as it was placed
before us by the Prime Minister. Mr. Beeby said
in the beginning of this Conference, these are small
things, are we going to settle the fate of the Empire
upon them ? If they are small things, why not wipe
them out of the way altogether? Why, in such circum-
stances, argue about individual viewpoints and details?
If the Government grant these concessions, I am sure
the result will be satisfactory to Australia and to tne
Empire, because it will be satisfactory to Mr. Mackinnon
as Director-General of Recruiting.
Mr. LEE.—I have listened with a great deal of in-
terest to the discussion that has taken place on the
proposals submitted in the first place by the representa-
tives of the Labour organizations, and in the second
place by the Prime Minister on behalf of the Federal
and State Governments, and the employers’ organiza-
tions lepiesented at this Conference. I was one of those
who suggested, and strongly believed, that we would
moie quickly reach finality if we had a very clear and
candid statement of the position by both sides. It ap-
pears to me, from the speeches that have been made,
t lat, notwithstanding protests to the contrary, there has
been a tendency to get into something like a spirit of
bargaining as to the respective proposals. I find that,
on the one hand, there are representatives of the other
side who say, in effect, in relation to their’ proposals,
this is the minimum that we are prepared to accept
before we can give any assurance of co-operation with
the Government in regard to the matter before the Con-
ference. ’ And 1 find, on the other hand, that there
is a tendency on this side to say, “ We have gone into
these matters, and this is as far as we can go.”
Apparently, therefore, we have reached the position of
debating whether we can effect any further compromise
or gam any f urther advantage as the result of this dis-
cussion. As a representative of the orphan State—
sometimes referred to as ” the Speck it would ill
become me to attempt to lecture such capable and re-
presentative men as are assembled here to-day- but it
does appear to me that the gravity of the situation is so
r . . taat Conference should lift itself above all
spirit of bargaining or bartering to get an advantage
either on one aide or the other. I strongly urge the
Federal and State Governments to clearly state that if
there is anything in the proposals put forward* by the
other side, and which it has been stated have militated
against .recruiting the Government should just as
candidly state that they will be removed, whether they
get co-operation from the other side or not. Ancf 1
venture to say that the Government, through the
Prune Mimster, have taken this course. Thl New
- th Wales Government also have certainly been mag-
nanimous m regard to this matter, because they have
taken upon themselves the very serious responsibility
of * h ? t ? ey 1 are P r ®P ared to remove the causes
of all the industrial trouble in that State. The Com-
monwealth Government, it must be borne in mind have
»po en with a full sense of their responsibility, and as


an Executive authority are prepared to bind themselves
to do certain things. This responsibility by Executive
authority is not on my friends on the other side at all.
Mr. RYAN. —The Government have not offered us
much.
Mr. LEE. —That is merely a matter of opinion. I
know Mr. Ryan is not satisfied, but I again say that
the Governments have made material advances in
order to meet the views of our friends opposite. It
is true that they may not have been able to give all
that was desired, but it must be remembered that the
Commonwealth and State Governments have to con-
sider the question of protecting the interests of the
Commonwealth, of Great Britain, and of her Allies,
in this great world struggle.
Mr. RYAN. —And have we no regard for that?
Mr. LEE. —Members of the Conference must not
overlook the fact that it may be possible that in granting
all the concessions asked for, and in giving them liberty
to do what they think from their point of view is
right, this liberty may in certain circumstances be
taken as licence to do things which may be detrimental
to the Commonwealth and to the interests of our Allies.
That is the position.
Mr. McCALLUM. —That is a declaration that you
do not trust us.
Mr LEE. —I do not wish to cast any discredit upon
any of my friends opposite as suggested.
Mr. RYAN. —But your suggestion includes that.
Mr. LEE. —Our friends on the other side have asked
that the War Precautions Regulations, or at least those
of them that are not vital to the conduct of the war,
should be abolished. Now the Prime Minister and
his colleagues, speaking with inside knowledge, may
say that certain regulations are vital, just at this
particular time. And who is to be the best judge ?
There can be no question about a matter of this kind
at all. No matter what we may say in a general way,
this question will ultimately have to be determined by
the Government of the day with a full sense of re-
sponsibility and a knowledge of the facts which, if
not regarded, may lead to more harmful results than
the regulations themselves.
Mr. JELLEY. —But Mr. Hughes has suggested a
way out of the difficulty by promising to confer with
Mr. Tudor.
Mr. LEE.—Exactly, and I am obliged to Mr. Jelley
for the interjection, because I was just goipg to remind
the Conference that the Prime Minister has made a
generous effort to meet my friends opposite by under-
taking to confer with Mr. Tudor, and to mutually de-
termine which of the regulations may be repealed and
which must stand as being vital to the conduct of the
war. Can anything be more candid or more generous?
Surely you gentlemen do not wish the Government to
sacrifice the interests of the Commonwealth or the
great cause in which we are engaged by blindly ask-
ing that certain regulations, which perhaps afford
necessary safeguards to the nation, shall be repealed ?
Mr. MORBY. —We have never asked that.
Mr. LEE. —I am putting the extreme view of the
case.
Mr. RYAN. —You are talking about something that
has not been asked for.
Mr. LEE.—But I think, Mr. Ryan, you went a
long way further than the position as indicated by the
Prime Minister, and I say that the Prime Minister’s
undertaking to confer with Mr. Tudor is a generous
step towards meeting you. The Government have stated
their position clearly. I have followed the whole dis-
cussion very carefully, and I know that members oppo-
site —particularly Mr. Tudor, who is the leader of the
F.3959«— 8
Federal Labour party—have expressed a very large
measure of satisfaction at the proposals put forward
on behalf of the Government. Mr. Tudor took them
one after another, and expressed his pleasure that
they had been granted up to a particular point. Now,
what is there to hinder us from coming to a united
and unanimous decision on this question —the great
question that we have been considering during the last
few days ? Is it, as some of our friends have put it,
that the statement made by the Prime Minister on
conscription is not sufficiently explicit and valid? It
appears to me that we are only playing with words
after all. Have we not had an indorsement of the
Prime Minister’s undertaking by every Premier in
the Conference? And have not these undertakings
been approved by the representatives of the outside
organizations? We all say, in unison with the Prime
Minister, that we recognise that it is no use talking
about conscription in face of the fact that the people
of this .Democratic country have said on two occasions
that they will not have it.
Mr. RYAN. —We remember the Bendigo pledge.
Mr. LEE. —I will come to that question presently.
In ordinary circumstances in outside business life,
and, indeed, in ordinary political life, a statement
made by a responsible person would be accepted; but,
apparently, in regard to this question of conscription,
the statement made by the Prime Minister is not to be
accepted. Mr. Holman and Mr. Beeby, in the most
clear and emphatic manner, have stated that they will
undertake to re-register unions that have been de-
registered in New South Wales, and an undertaking has
also been given that, as far as practicable, there shall
be equal opportunty for members of old and new unions
in all employment offering. It has been agreed that all
men shall have an equal chance of getting a livelihood
in the community in which they are living, and that
their past shall not be remembered against them. That
is clear enough. In regard to the War Precautions Re-
gulations, has anything been said that would prevent
this Conference coming to a decision ? Mr. Hughes has
clearly indicated what he is prepared to do. We come
now to the question of censorship, and I want to say
I regret very much the principle—or want of principle
.—employed in connexion with the censorship through-
out this war. It would have been infinitely better if
news which we should have had, had been allowed to
come through. It would have been infinitely better for
this country if there had been a little more freedom,
and if too many harassing restrictions had not been
imposed on public speakers. It would have prevented
a good deal of the unnecessary friction that has
occurred. I think that in a great many cases the pro-
secutions which have been instituted from time to time
have been ill-advised. But, after all, these things are
not iif themselves—in view of the statement which has
been made by the Prime Minister on behalf of the re-
presentatives upon this side of the Conference —sufficient
to warrant us in breaking up this gathering without
first arriving, if possible, at unanimity upon the matter
in respect of which we have been called together. What
is the real difference between us ? I am sorry to .say
that it appears to be very largely one of distrust on the
part of our friends opposite in the promises that have
been made by the Prime Minister on behalf of himself,
the various Governments, and the representatives of this
Conference.
Mr. MORBY. —That mistrust is based upon
experience.
Mr. LEE. —It is apparently based upon some real or
fancied failure to honour certain pledges that have been
made.
Mr. RYAN.—Do you think that the Bendigo pledge
was honoured ?
Mr. LEE.—I do not intend to enter into a discussion
on that question.


~ I® RESIDENT. —Do you not thinkj Mr. Lee,
tiiat it is more advisable that we should endeavour to
get rid of that mistrust ?
Mr. LEE. That is the very thing which I desire to
o. 1 do not regard the other matter as so im-
portant—
Mr RYAN. I think it is very important, because I
do not trust the Commonwealth Government, seeing that
they did not honour that pledge.
Mr. LEE.—-Probably Mr. Ryan at some time or other
has found himself in a position in which he was not
able to give effect to a promise which he has made, and
through no fault of his own. I say that even if any
promise has been broken we should endeavour to break
down the barrier of mistrust that exists between us.
Even if we have failed as public men—as many of us
undoubtedly have done—let us bury the hatchet, and
m the face of the vital crisis confronting us, refrain
from indulging in recrimination. Let us, realizing
that our very existence is at stake, that the privilege!
w nch we enjoy as democrats are at stake, bury the
hatchet so far as broken promises and mistakes are con-
cerned, and let each one of us go forth from this Con-
ference determined to do what he considers' to be the
right tiling, namely, to recommend to the various organi-
zations which he represents that past differences shall
be blotted out On behalf of the Government of
Tasmania I wish to say that that is the spirit in which
1 intend to return to my State. During the conscription
campaign I did not descend to some of the tactics which'
"ME*. by i m Z °PP° ne L nts b y saying hard things
about them simply because they differed from me upon
Hat occasion. But very hard things were said about
thr! andsom ® persons m the dead of night actually
hrew bricks through the windows of my house when
my wife and children were alone.
in/ Ir ’ OR ® Y -— The bricks would assist you in build-
ing another house. J
am n i t 3 bloated capitalist, and can-
ot afford to have my house broken down for the mere
T I! 16 t° f r f aildll ;? Some people asked me why
JfIWJ not de T tectlves on the job and prosecute the
offenders. But I recognised that we were living in
noT consent T 8 W6re inflamed > and 1 would
lot consent to prosecute persons who, in a heated
moment, had done something for which probably the v
were afterwards sorry. But if we are going to do our
duty as citizens of this Commonwealth, and be true to
the traditions of the race from which we have sprung
we must come closer together. It is i n that Spirit
that I am going back to my Government to put b/fore
them the decisions arrived at by this gathering T ]
have been urged at various times to dfspense w ith 1
eligible men in the Tasmanian Public Service b/t I 1
have refused to do so. I said that the people’ of he 1
Commonwealth had decided that there should hi
conscription, and I was not going to in rod h° t
any back-door method. But on the other hand T h
intimated that men in the Service who desireV t 2 a
the Iront must not be held back. All restrictions o
upon our civil servants have been withdrawn excen h
at r ®g ard t(3 a few mdispensables, such as for c
example, the manager of our hydro-electrical works "
tion r th a ? YA^T IS lereI ere ai N ground for the sugges- 11
tion that men have been held back? Bges w
Mr. LEE.—I am sorry to say that there has been t(
and I am not too sure that there is not to-day Econ’ "
omic conscription, so far as local governing lin'd lr
concerned, has been mentioned by Mr Lyons J ci
what he has said is quite true, and I shall immedkWv “
make representations to those bodies that to ' J
eiple must be abandoned. It will Z t my If™- b(
meet the organization of employers in mv own C . C
place before them the views of this Conference and
urge the immediate adoption of those views I think “
e, I can confidently say on behalf of those employers that
0 my lequest will be most readily granted. Mr. Lyons
has touched upon another matter—the Dicker case—
to which created a good deal of trouble in our State,
i- and, incidentally, caused my colleagues and myself a
great deal of anxiety. But Dicker was prosecuted by
I e -federal authorities lor having uttered words which
it were deemed to be prejudicial to recruiting. He was
tiled in a British Court of Justice and convicted. He
>r a PP ea tou to a higher Court, and his appeal was
t quaslied. His retention on the Public Works Com-
d was f ese uted by a large number of members of
e asmanian Parliament. Mr. Lyons has said that
k !i was resen ted by the press. So it was; but it was not
>. Pressure of the press, that moved the Government
s p p 1 0 actlou - it wa 9 the resentment of members ol
i 1 arliament who had sons fighting at the Pront. In
i ~ ne cas . ea man > whose son had made the supreme sacri-
g said to me > “if you do not remove that man we
s Wlll n °t act on the Committee.” Members of Parlia-
-3 m „ en f said they would refuse to carry on the work
ft i l6 i ommi ft ee un less definite action was taken.
- Under the pressure of strong feeling, and moved by
3 L e cncumstance. that this man had been convicted in
- f Uourt of Justice of making statements prejudicial
i to recruiting, the Government declared that he was
; p ot a and P ro Per person to be on the Public Works
Committee. Even members of Mr. Lyons’ own party
t ® aid that m view of what had happened it was abso-
i Utely im P oss ible for him to remain on the Committee.
Mr. LYONS.—Oh, no!
Mr. LEE.—But I know different. They did not
hke the method that was adopted to remove him but
there was no other way, and eventuallv he was re-
moved by Act of Parliament. He can 'only be rein-
stated by the repeal of that Act.
Mr. LYONS.—The important point is that Dicker
was punished twice.
-LEE.—His second punishment was accom-
plished by an Act of Parliament. I recognise thatXs
ac ion created a good deal of friction. I have aW
but I am Wlt h Dicker or with his utterances,
tlmt th^ P g h°^ g n baCk t 0 Tasmania to toll my colleagues
fl • n e f has beeil a generous disposition exhibited by
tins Conference towards men who have been convicted
offences during the referendum campaign. lam
going to say to my colleagues, “ This is a matter which
,Tnf must col J slder - We must decide whether we shall
ask I arliament immediately upon its reassembling
to consider Hie removal of the ban which has been
placed upon this man. It will then be for Parliament
to decide whether he shall be restored to the position
from wind l he was removed by Act of Parliament, and
not by any executive act on the part of the Government
the M H O a e ? LMAN - WaS tWs of
™ r - L u EE t YeS - That is th ® spirit in which lam
approachmg tins question to-day. t realize the gravHy
°n rbaTtoT’ pVt?' 1 *° l uite frauk open
m regaia to it. But Ido want mv fr-ienrio j.„ •
cate in the same spirit. It is useless for them teTly'
We cannot accept the Prime Minkfpr’a , j
not accept Mr. Holman’s word or ronlZrJ ”
word of the employers, and therefor/ a ’ i° r
to a g ree to do anything.” I n the name I j’ 01 ??
us remember what is transpiring at +i ■ , od ’
in Flanders and moment
citizens of this great Empire in a t ??? 38
more favoured than any other’part tT7 whlch .i s
superior to the consideration fW l f the Em P lre > rise
strength in tS
matters can be remedied thev will'}™ 1 J- ? these
- give effect to the spirit oftS b^


the hatchet; and let us as one man do our duty to the
common cause. Let there be no interference with our
common duty to the Empire, to which we owe our
existence at the present time. If we approach the
matter from that stand-point, we can arrive at only one
decision, namely, to unanimously pledge ourselves to
stand by the Empire, and to do our best to encourage
recruiting in every possible way. If there be any
failure on the part of the Federal or State Governments
to effectively discharge their responsibilities, I venture
Hi
to say that the people who are their masters will in no
unmistakeable voice declare what they think of them,
and that the offending Governments will have to give
way to men who will rise superior to the difficulties
which confront us, and do their duty to the Empire in
its time of stress and struggle. I hope that, at an early
stage, a resolution will be carried affirming the attitude
of the Conference in this connexion.
The Conference adjourned at 6.25 p.m. until 10 a.m.
the following day.


SIXTH DAY.
THURSDAY, 18th APRIL, 1918.
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
THp Piaht Honorable W. M. Hughes, Prime Minister.
The Honorable Frank G wynne Tudor, M.P.
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey).
SfiTS “- A - —•
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson^
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Elmslie.
President Employers’ Federation, (Mr. E. E. Eeep).
President, Victorian Branch Australian Labour ra y (,
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan. Macartney)
National Political Council (Mr. G. H. Peitchabd), President.
South Australia.
lZlble J. Jkeoev.
Prudent, Employers’ federation^j^'-^’^'^^^^^representing).
Sde"^:rL n :Mncil (Mr. E. D. WmnuMS).
. Western Australia.
National Federation, Mr. W illiam Leslie.
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyo .


Mr. MACARTNEY.—I am glad of the opportunity
to say a tew words at this juncture, as my position is
somewhat different from that of any other member of
the Conference. I have come from Queensland as the
representative of the National party and as the Leader
ot the Opposition in the Parliament of that State. My
position, therefore, is essentially different from that
occupied by the Leaders of the Opposition in other
states. I have come down here to shake hands with
my i lend, Mr. Ryan, and to endeavour with him to
arrive at some mutually satisfactory arrangement
under which we can appeal to the people to furnish the
recrmts that are so urgently needed for the prosecution
ot the war. I have approached the Conference en-
tirely m that spirit. I have hitherto refrained from
entering into the discussion in the hope that in the
dire circumstances, so clearly related by the Prime
Minister yesterday and the day before, we might come
to a definite resolution. Ido not propose to traverse or
reiterate the arguments which have been adduced
in support of or m reply to the points that
have been raised by Mr. Tudor and his friends.
It seems to me that the Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth and the Premiers of all the States,
other than Queensland, have been carpeted by the Con-
ference in connexion with offences which they are
alleged to have committed, and have been pressed to
iemo\e certain obstacles which are said to constitute
a hindrance to recruiting. Mr. Ryan is not in the
Premiers P0 q tlol ] that . ls occu P ied by other State
, f , 80 f ar he has . not been carpeted, but
P • _ _ akcn his part m the carpeting of the
harmony and , oth f s - M y OWn idea is that if
amoup-sf oil b< i resp)r f d amon g us it must be restored
to dav L U rank %° + f 1 th f community. In Queensland
o-day by reason of the fact that a Labour Government
whit ’ he , em P lo / mg classes are suffering from
and eonaTlv C °i nSld r ? exceedingly harsh legislation
and equally harsh administration. They are also suf-
hS r ° m Wkat tkey re S ard as_excessive taxation, and
that s ra uge^te l me, in view of such complaints,
that Mr. Ryan should have urged upon the Prime Min-
is er mci eased taxation by the Commonwealth. The
employing classes in Queensland, too, are suffering
N? 1 ? Socia ! lst / c experiments. I confess that I have
not been able to rid myself of the impression that what
has taken place here has been somewhat in the nature of
bargaining. Ido not wish to impose conditions or to
thITTvT h !? g l y n ay ° f bar g ainin g> but Ido think
rontriW fin ? nd . 3 , the Government of Queensland should
contribute to the creation of harmony by their ab- ■
stention from mere party legislation 7 Socialistic j
axation ' taxation in '
that State is tending to hamper the Commonwealth in
connexion with its finances. Ido not wwTtoded *
further with this matter, nor do I desire to say anythin* <
which would engender discord in the «
1 • r - things of which you are com- £
plaining have just been approved by the people of
Queensland by an unprecedented majority P
Mr. MACARTNEY.—I entirely disagree with my C
honorable friend. In the most unmistakable fashien
rtf Queensland have indicated their disagree- h
ment with the things that have been done by Mr. Ryan’s t(
o ernment. But owing to circumstances to do e:
not wish to refer lest they might create disced that
Government recently obtained a greater \o
it ever had before. However, not“ t ?Qed bv
entering into a discussion of that kind. lam firmß of C
he opinion that Mr. Ryan should use his Sfluence in
tte d^t on E^pi P ;err s l U ”lt 7 h a T BSt “ 0
the Prime Minister that sufficient has noTbeeTdotk P °”
regard to profiteering. It has bin said n support V
that the meat question has been satisfactorily solved ? D m;
ty Queensland, and that such furnishes convincing proof
is that the whole question is quite capable of solution
oi by the Commonwealth Government. In that respect
le nothing has been done to reduce the cost of
or lvmg m Queensland further than follows upon the
_y act that there is a greater production of the article
it Hi that fetate, added to the assistance of price fixing.
iv here has been another item which has, perhaps, helped
h m Queensland to keep down the cost of living. That is,
'° a between Mr. Ryan, representing the Im-
it Perm Government, and the Meat Companies, under
e w nch they supply to the State shops meat at a cheaper
n P ricc tan that paid by the Imperial authorities for
i- the use of the forces abroad.
_ Mr. RYAN. That is not under that agreement; it
e is a separate agreement.
e Mr - MACAKTNEY.-It is under the general
r anan gement made between the meat companies
and the Queensland Government; and in that
t ] a section of the people, at any rate,
ft ,°b tained a certain advantage. It must
e be ded uccd from that, however, that, in Queensland,
, ®™ g to the existence of a Labour Government, the
- rt?v f IVl £ g t S been reduced > because that is not the
3 Fht tt n ‘ + gol . ng t 0 & buse the privilege of
) inf A PPor um yof addressing the Conference to enter
) f stateme nt of our grievances. Our friends are
> cFnd tionF 11 an u 0n tbe elaboration of those
s t• l ? i W6 a 1 might ver y well adopt tbe
_ attitude which has been already expressed by members
> FernFL f nf T?n e re P. resen £ in g the Commonwealth Go-
, vernment and the various State Governments and em-
ployers throughout Australia, who are prepared To
cStFf t6rS - 0f V6ry great P rinci P le on which they
thai the gl u n Way Ur^ er an ? otber circumstances
trust i POS Tw Which the Em pi re stands. I
’. lerefoie, that we can come to some final
baTZZ reS ° luti ° n Wbich Will enable us all to get
back to our respective States and put into operation
thus* things which we are called upon to do P
f 0 RP I CHAI ? D ' —Cer * ai “ caus6s lla ™ been ad-
ced to show why recruitilig has fallen .off T
propose to set out Ye position if Queens Ind It has
grSfaf: s tit T r S °»«. Wales” industrial
4 t re r Ped ™ n the most acut e form
ot any pait of Australia. These few figures will indi
rate how recruiting stands in Queensland. In thf Ist
Mil tury District, during 1917. the enlistment ft the
re months were as follows :—602, 930 615 629 618
415, 426, 415, 299, 284, ,848, and 325; and for the fiS
three months of 1918 the returns were 264, 26? td m
We havf"'f„P° W 5 consistent and gradual falling off.'
aA . e a labour Government m Queensland A poo
?au 6 i a s Of a theTlV 0f a T“ ent has ** en Wteredaslo the'
Mr. PRITCHARD.—Yes- Ido Rm if* *
be thought that these sourcS of grievances tV°
to S particular State, or that
le “ r „„™™.y7 g M;. OUrSe ’ are ° there l '—
Y *
Collier had a good S y "a°s tTXTttY Mr '
rththip P Yn “


of the Commonwealth. It has been said that the Com-
moil wealth Government have not done anything in that c
regard—-have not done anything like what they should
have done; and this particular item of shipping was e
rin*led out as the pivot of Mr. Collier’s argument. But
steps have already been adopted to take over the s ip-
ping. I desire to have it placed on record that pos
siblv some of these complaints against the Common-
wealth Government, in the matter of dealing with pro
fiteering and other things, have been exposed in the
superlative degree. Let us leave it at that. g
deal has found expression with regard to t g *
stalking horse of profiteering m general. I defy anybody
to devise a scheme whereby, under war conditions, we <
can meet every conceivable case. It is not possib . i
us take drapery, for example. The cost has gone up ,
immensely, but so far no attempt has beer l made to fix
prices. It has been more particularly directed to food ,
SCULLIN. —We would have got cheaper cloth-
ing if they had looked after the wool. , t
Mr PRITCHARD.— That is an exporting product,
and for the surplus wool which we produce we are surely
entitled to accept the world’s price. You are only look-
i„g at It from one angle. If wo do not stimulate produc-
tion we will not he able to pay our debts, and any un
due interference with the primary producer will
b °Mr er BEEBY.—If we accepted the. principle that
everybody is entitled to the world’s price, what would
PpUlgiUrD-Tml is the first time on record
where we get a surplus we are entitled to sell
RYAN. —Would you be satisfied with London
Pa M/ PRITCHARD 7 -! would he delighted. I lay
it down as 1 a good, sound principle that, as tosugar,
wool, wheat, and any other commodity, Aus
tralian requirements have been supplied, we are
titled to enjoy whatever advantage we can ge
norting our surplus production. I have been delighted
to see lately that New South Wales has shown a most
distinct advance in the stimulation of manufactures
and enterprise generally. During the debate
able complaint has been made regarding the treatme
meted out to returned soldiers and
have had complaints to make. I Lave what I belie
an excellent proposition. It is that ‘here should be
r i nmr»l“lints Committee appointed m each btate cap la
to reSve dTscusa, and tSnsmit to «>e proper quartm-
any complaint or suggestion of any nature wh J
citizen may make regarding real or fancy Stances
against the military; such comimMco to I
hnuorarv and to consist of a business man selected ?•>
the State Premier, a business man llt ±e felecfed by
loader of the Opposition, a representative selected uy
the Recruiting Committee, and another by the lie
patriation Boa S rd, together with a secretary, who would
I,O Mr "mORBY.—Do you not think it would be better
to forward that proposal to the Minister for Re-
P!I Mr at PRITCHARD.—It may he so but on “ore
than one occasion during the course of this debate it
has been complained that redress cannot obtained.
We have already recruiting officers m ,
Stntes to whom these complaints are made, but that
States, townom If^we had an honorary Board
of bellow-citizens to whom complaints could go there
would he a deal more satisfaction.
The PRESIDEDT. —To assist m tne nmneranoe ui
our procedure here, may I say that that is one of the
valuable suggestions laid before us during the Con er-
ence: and I propose that Mr. Pritchard let us have his
scheme in writing. Suggestions such as that are
hardly appropriate to our discussion at this stage, but
they might enable us to get better results eventually m
the matter of recruiting. I hope, therefore, that, after
we have dealt with our present obstacles, we may at a
later stage be in the position to consider proposals laid
before us by various gentlemen present m regard to
improving the recruiting campaign. ,
Mr. PRITCHARD.—I accept your suggestion. It
seemed to me that the grievances of returned soldiers,
and the relatives of soldiers, were urged as a reason for
the decrease in recruiting, and as hindrances to recruit-
ing and I thought that it would be pertinent to sug-
gest what I think would be found to be a remedy lor
those grievances. ,
Mr. RYAN. —What complaints would the suggested
Committee deal with? . ~T
. Mr. PRITCHARD.— Complaints, for instance, witli
' regard to pensions and complaints of the relatives of
sol^ rS p EA KE—Any complaints that might he held
■ to miiitate against recruiting?
i Mr. PRITCHARD.—Just so. I have made the sug-
gestion because it seemed to me to have been contende
t that the complaints -I have referred to have militated
1 against recruiting in the past. Dissatisfaction at tie
way in which they have been dealt with has alienated
1 the good-will of people and lessened enthusiasm lor
s recruiting. It cannot be said that I have- taken up
- much of the time of the Conference, but, m view of the
3 admirable general exposition of the views cf our side by
t the Premier of Hew South Wales, I consider it quite
e unnecessary for me to go at length into the matters
which have been dealt with. Ido wish to say, however,
n that unless we can touch the souls of the people ol Aus-
tralia we shall get no response whatever to any recom-
y inendations which we may arrive at here. In common
", with others who have spoken I express the hope that
5“ we shall all agree to .regard what may have been sai
i- during the strike, or during the elections, as ancient
d hl A° MEMBER.— Unfortunately, we cannot do that,
jjt Mr PRITCHARD.—My friend must know that re-
-3s criminations will not help the recruiting movement II
r- we are to put personal grievances above our duty to the
it Empire, then God help Australia. Though y
■y not have proclaimed our grievances so loudly Irom the
l house-tops as those on the other side have it
a must be remembered that we have frequently had occa-
d Son to resent very strongly reflections which have ton
n- cast upon our side. Mr. Ryan constantly reminds us
ry *of the supposed awful profiteering hahits of a section of
l the community. There is, however, a very great deal
lv of nonsense talked on the subject of profiteering,
w Mr RYAN. —I cannot get rid of my responsibilities,
n'l Mr PRITCHARD.—I do not suggest for a moment
W that vou should. One or two references have been
l made to a leaflet that was circulated ini South
Id but every man who has been in politics is aware that
that kind of thing is part of the game.
er Mr. MORBY.—Whose game?
Mr PRITCHARD.—The game of every party in
politics. I venture to say that I know quite as much
re about that business as does my friend, Mr. Mor y.
it Mr. RYAN. —I can testify to that.
>d The PRESIDENT.—I am afraid it will not assist
us us very much if we go into the recriminations of elec-
iat tion contests. . ,
rd Mr PRITCHARD.—I agree with you, sir, but as
ire objectionable things have been charged against us m the
course of the debat'd by rfepiWatftattTW of the Latonr


ganizations I thought it was up to us to remind them
that the matters© referred to are part of the ordinary
game o po ltics, and that similar objections should be
raised by our side. My point is that the objections re-
e?edt ° ca . nn °t be fairly brought forward as reasons
which have interfered with recruiting. I cannot conceive
that the leaders of public thought and representatives of
industries in the Commonwealth can assemble at the
invitation of the Governor-General for the express pur-
pose of endeavouring to devise a workable scheme for
stimulating recruiting and leave this Chamber without
coing- something of a practical nature to achieve the
object lor which we have come together. But if we are
w d V°,7 e . nra * in - mj °P inion > forget and forgive.
We should bear m mind that many of the grievances
which have been mentioned are purely political. I hope
that we shall raise our conception of duty to a higher
plane The suggestions submitted by Mr. Tudor have
been fairly and squarely met from our side, and a de-
nite attempt made to bring both sides in the Confer-
ence together.
shall nofc detain the Conference at
any iiu Y 7 d , ealll £ generally with the points at issue,
l shall deal only with two points which directly affect
the position m New South Wales. I refer first of all
to the question of conscription, and incidentally express
11 fhi, eXCeedmgI ' 7 keen disappointment at the ambiguity
of the announcement made by the Prime Minister in this
connexion. Really the Federal Government, have
granted us nothing on our request. I have tried my
best to see whether they have granted us anything, and
thing 6 J6t t 0 dlSCOver tbat the y have granted a solitary
Mr. PEAKE.— Had we not all this before?
Mr. MORBY.—I think that the matters to which 1
leter are of sufficient importance to warrant a little
reiteration.
Mr. PEAKE.—Then we must reply to you again, and
there will be no end to the discussion.
Mr. MORBY— You may have had this before, but
not from Eew South Wales. It has been hinted, but
I desire to express my conviction that if we analyze the
• Position closely the Federal Government have granted
the workmg-class representatives in this Conference
absolutely nothing at all. It will be for Mr. Hughes
anything^ 1 Va ’ Wh6re they have S rante d us j
men f t r 'of P^l^ GHAßD i~ Can yOU SUggest amend- 1
ment of their proposals. \
Mr. MORBY —lt is too late for amendments. 1
Senator MILLEN .—One of the proposals submitted ]
as been accepted without any qualification. I refer to 1
the second proposal. Am I to understand that as you
affirm that the Prime Minister has granted nothing you
M Wlth r6gard t 0 that second Proposal ? • o
I th[nk V h° RBY T all respect t 0 Senator Millen b
I think he is not entitled to place that interpretation h
say n th?t y ecn atem - nt ' ? ederal Government may b
lwf / °! niC conscription shall no longer exist t]
Senator in ‘? reBtin S statement made by *,
Senator Fairbairn, in which he said he will do 1% »'
r omiccon - t
ad d ;t ta d : a th r daia f v ad «
themselves whether they act unon mv t 0 please st '
do not get much further If E “ ad mce or not, I te
hind Je as a to d '
advice shall be acted upon it 2 2 ST T “y oc
mem Z thM IE 116 ' aSt analySis tI l 6 U G„ve“n: °"
conscription 1 ™ erel ' V glV ' : " a " ti ‘ CCorioTr| i c of
“ ln Senator FAIRBAIRN.—Can you tell us what more
r y we can do?
, e - • Mr ; MORBY.—No, I cannot, lam not complain-
■ns about y° ur position at all. I say that it is abso-
ve luteiy correct.
of HOLMAN. \ou think that the Governments
he ought to guarantee that.
r_ i i , MORBY Yes. The Federal Government
or should be and I think is, a reflex of public opinion,
ut hour** HOLMAN.— as R changes from hour to
16 JSI 1 mean as ex P resse d when the
e. people return the Government on certain issues. When
es Senator Millen refers to the promise of the Federal
Je overnment m the matter of economic conscription I
iy am reminded at once of the position taken up by
” e Senator Fairbairn, who merely says that he will re-
e- commend it to the employers. I say, therefore, that in
i- is matter the Federal Government have done no more
man to give anti-economic conscription their blessing.
it r PEAKE.— That is all that we ask you to do with
3. regard to recruiting. y
n r ’ MORBY.—No, it is not.
M r< —'lt is, absolutely.
l y per S ona^ RßY '~ YoU are not merely appoalin B to me
* Fa“baim EAKE '~ JUBt “ yOU appealed to Senator
1 thS^V* 1 my appeal is t 0 certain interests
through those who represent them here. If you appeal
o me only personally I may not ask any one to assist
m carrying out wnat you desire.
Mr. PEAKE.—We ask you to put it before the
people you represent.
roiw MORBY.—On the question of conscription, I
epeat that lam keenly disappointed. At the rein-
o— referendum the majority for “ No ” in New
bers of m a ! e r Wa | approXlmatel 7 Hb,ooo. I ask mem-
tbp C ° nference t 0 exercise a little judgment in
the matter I represent men who look at things from
a haid cold, matter-of-fact point of view. How can I
through T Federal Government,
W d6Clded that consc ription is
ead, that the voluntary system is nailed to the mast,
and we now go on hand-in-hand ? I cannot do that. I
j a J®JV XPre t S !i hat whl . ch 1S wit bin me, and the habit
has made me both enemies and friends, and I am here
madpTv tt "Y that { d ° not value the statement
made by Mr Hughes at the Agricultural Show. Mr
m ° re d ° fi ” ite prior *° th< >
S’ MOPBV~i nd during the last cam Paign.
Mr. MORBY.—As a matter of fact, Mr. Hughes said
on one occasion that under no circumstances would he
be a party to sending a man out of this country against
us Will. But lam willing to forget all that. There is
however one thing which I cannot forget, and that Ts
the speech of the Prime Minister at the Sydney Agricul-
“ha°dd r r n r de “ * With ‘ he “ y wMcli
BUgBeSt 3 fOTmula ia
Mr. MORBY.—I can. Ido not like to criticise unless
I can suggest something by way of a n ,1 *<-1.
out undue reiteration I say that I do 1
statement made by the Prim© Minister at all th !
tell the people of New South w i a ! L ? Cannot
dead on the promise of a man who, on °three P spedfic
promise that you question! ° W made the


Mr. MORBY. —I am going to suggest a way out of
the difficulty.
The PRESIDENT. —Your suggestion is a valuable
one, no doubt, Mr. Morby, but Mr. Hughes has put for-
ward his answers to Mr. Tudor’s suggestions, and I
would suggest that any further proposals you may make
should be submitted as an addendum. I do not want to
stop you, but I think the suggestion I make would prove
more convenient.
Mr. MORBY. —I am not going to waste many words
over what I have in my mind. I feel that the people
of this country would be, as far as is humanly possible,
satisfied if after this Conference, and when the Prime
Minister makes his war statement in the Federal Par-
liament, and a statement in regard to the findings of
this Conference, he also made a statement on the flooi
of the House, declaring on behalf of the Federal Go-
vernment that conscription was finally abandoned din-
ing the life of the present Parliament. What more
could any one ask ? Good heavens! if a man is not pie-
pared to give that
Mr. PEAKE.—He offered that the other day.
Mr. SCULLIN.—But he might resign and be sent
for again.
Mr. MORBY. —Mr. Scullin has overlooked the fact
that I referred to the present Parliament; not to the
present Government.
Mr. SCULLIN.—But he could dissolve Parliament
in five minutes.
Mr. MORBY.—Yes; but no one believes that the
people of Australia would respond to any order for
compulsory military service obtained by a subterfuge
of that kind. Anyway, that is my suggestion. I want
now to come to a matter that directly affects not me
personally, but the people I represent- the question of
the re-registration of de-registered unions, and the de-
registration of what we term the u bogus ” unions. I
fully appreciate the attitude taken up by Mr. Holman
on behalf of the New Soutlj Wales Government, and I
say here and now that his undertaking was the only
definite pledge that we had from any of the State Pre-
miers at this Conference. Mr. Holman’s statement com-
mitted him and his Government to a definite line of
action. _ . . ..
Mr. BEEBY.—Subject, of course, to a definite line
of action from the people you represent.
Mr. MORBY. —I am allowing for that, of course.
That is understood. All the other State Premiers have
said they feel that the proposal is a good one, and that
they will do their best to recommend their colleagues
to take a certain line of action. But Mr. Holman, on
hehalf of the New South Wales Government, has de-
finitely pledged himself. I want, however, to point out
that, in New South Wales, there are about fifteen of
these de-registered unions, and, although I have not the
exact figures at my disposal at the present moment, I
think there are seven registered bogus unions. Now a
point made by the Prime Minister yesterday, at this
Conference, was most important. He said that, as a
general rule, the members of these bogus unions com-
prised men from other unions who “ scabbed ” on their
own pals. Members of the Conference will note I have
not used the phraseology .adopted by the Prime Minister.
Now there is a lot of truth in the Prime Ministers
statement that many members of these new unions were
members of old organizations, but a large number of
them were forced by economic conditions to take up that
attitude. I am offering no excuse for any man who
goes back on a principle laid down by an organization to
which he himself has subscribed. These men are there
in the bogus unions, but they do not make up the
majority. The men who comprise the majority of these
bogus organizations are those who on all and every occa-
sion have proved themselves to be at the disposal of the
employing classes. In the main they are men not over
anxious to subscribe to the principle for which organized
labour stands, but like vultures they are watching for
their prey, and whenever circumstances are favorable
they swoop down and endeavour to benefit by the tem-
porarily weakened condition of the other section of the
community. Ido not know that there will be any ex-
treme value —I am only saying this because I will have
to be guided by the feelings and decision of my col-
leagues in Sydney—attached to the re-registration of the
present de-registered unions, without the de-registration
of the bogus unions. Mr. Beeby asked —or, I think,
perhaps, it was an interjection by Mr. Holman —if we
would be prepared to make members of the bogus unions
eligible for membership of the old unions in the event
of the de-registration of the former ? Of course, I can-
not answer that. It is purely a matter for the unions
to decide for themselves.
Mr. PEAKE. —Would you recommend it?
Mr. MORBY.—You have asked me a pertinent
question, Mr. Peake, and, quite frankly, as far as I
am personally concerned, I say “ No.”
Mr. BEEBY. —But in the new railways union in
New South Wales there are 4,000 men. Do you say
that they should be deprived of all union rights—that
they should be deregistered, and not allowed to join the
old union ?
Mr. MORBY.—Deprived of union rights, did you
say? I should like you to explain what you mearn
Mr. BEEBY. —Suppose we deregistered that union,
which you call a bogus organization, would you allow
its members the right to go into the old union?
Mr. MORBY. —I have stated that that is purely a
matter for the local people. I cannot decide that
question.
Senator PLAIN. —You said personally that you
would object.
Mr. MORBY.—Yes, I was then replying to a ques-
tion asked by Mr. Peake, and I said that personally I
certainly would not have anything to do with them.
Mr. PEAKE.—Then what would become of them?
Mr. MORBY. —I am not concerned with what be-
comes of them, for the reason they were not concerned
with what became of the men, women, and > cliildien
whose places they took.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is paying them in kind.
Mr. MORBY. —I am not concerned what becomes of
them. They can go to hell. That is the only
position
Mr. PEAKE.—WouId you send 4,000 men to hell?.
Mr. MORBY. —I am a comparatively new chum in
this country, but I have not wasted my time. I have
spent much of my time in research, and if I chose I
could quote statements made by our illustrious Pre-
mier (Mr. Holman) bearing on exactly the same pro-
position, and not many years back either.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is not the point. Would you
send 4,000 men to hell because they would not agree
with you?
Mr. MORBY.—No, not because of that, but because
they are vultures on society.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is only a figure of speech.
Mr. BEEBY.—There are 4,000 men who refused to
leave their work on the railways in New South Wales.
Do you say they are vultures?
“"’Mr. MORBY.—Does that number cover the whole
of the railway service, mechanical and traffic branches,
in New South Wales?
Mr. BEEBY. —I will not interrupt you again. You
will not answer my question.
Mr. MORBY. —I am answering your question.
Mr. BEEBY. —Then I ask you if you say that these
4,000 men are vultures because they refused to leave
their work?


Mr. MORBY.—How could I say otherwise? You
know that. You are begging the question. I tell you
that 1 am here this morning to say that the working
classes, in endeavouring to better their conditions, can
never be wrong. But I qualify that by saying that they
might do better by exercising more discretion. Gene-
rally speaking, the' working classes have only one thing
to offer, and that is their labour, and they are entitled
to establish a condition upon which it shall be accepted
and utilized for the general benefit of the condition.
If they were not, then things would soon come to a
standstill.
Mr. GUMMING.—It is their most powerful weapon.
Mr. MORBY.—I admit that. You gentlemen would
not be here to-day but for that fact.
Senator PLAIiN.—But the members of these new
unions are doing what you say—making the best terms
possible for the labour they can offer.
Mr. MORBY.—Mo, I say the Government are mak-
ing the terms for them.
Senator PLAIN".—But they have the Arbitration
Court available to them.
Mr. MORBY.—I admit that, and more than that.
They have the advantage of what we never had—that
is a subsidy from the State Government. This is a
serious statement, but it is true. That is the position
in New South Wales. Whoever dreamt that a time
would arise in the history of ordinary trade unionism
when the Government of that State would take over a
magnificent building and subsidize it for the purpose
of encouraging men
Mr. BEEBY.—For the purpose of keeping our
transports going.
Mr. MORBY.—I know all about that. This build-
ing was taken over and subsidized by the Government
for the purpose of encouraging at one time temporary
employees to become permanent assets of Labour to the
State. The State Government took over a very large
lodging house in Sydney to provide for those men. I
wish I could believe that, in the near future, members
of organized Labour would enjoy the same opportu-
nities ; that they would have conferred upon them the
same privileges that are being enjoyed by so-called
“ loyalist ” workers in New South Wales to-day.
Senator PLAIN".—It is only recently that the
Queensland State Government granted a beautiful site
for a certain purpose.
Mr. MORBY.—But who could question anything
done by the Queensland Government?
Mr. lIOLMAN.—The point you have just raised as
to the New South Wales position is important. You
say that the victimization of those who participated in
the late strike is an obstacle to recruiting. We endeav-
our to meet that objection by saying that these men
shall no longer be victimized.
Senator GARDINER.—May I interject that the
wording of Mr. Holman’s promise is exactly that of the
promise made by Mr. Fuller, then Acting Premier of
New South Wales, during the strike?
Mr. lIOLMAN.—I know nothing of that, but we
have made a certain proposal.
Mr. MORBY 7 ".—And I believe it is your intention to
carry it out.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The point I wish to ascertain is
whether you say that the obstacle to recruiting is not
merely the victimization of these men, but the non-
punishment of the loyalists,” or of those whom you
have described as “ vultures.” Do you say that we must
not merely restore, to their old status, unionists who
have been victimized, but also punish the “ vultures?”
Mr. MORBY.—I have no desire that they shall be
punished. My only wish is that they shall'return to
their former employment. Ido not consider the de-re-
gistration of their union would be any punishment to
them since they have done nothing for the registration
°f unionism. All tliat has been done for them by the
T\ew South Wales Government. What sacrifice have
those men made for organized labour ?
. HOLMAN.—But what is the obstacle to recruit-
ing m this regard? Is it the injury done to the old
unions, or the benefit enjoyed by this new union?
vtr i '* . —There are two obstacles in New South
\\ ales. The first is the want of an official declaration
by the lederal Government that conscription for the
life of the present Parliament, at all events, has been
a landoned. The second is, that whilst you concede the
re-registration of de-registered unions and their return
to theii old-time status, the existing registration of
•iw US r UmOnS Li m y judgment, lead to continued
ill-feeling, shall I say, between the two elements, and
so not add to the chances of more successful recruiting.
mt, at least, is my opinion. I do not say the result
will be exactly what I have forecasted, but I base my
opinion on experience gained while mixing among the
men, and I think that if Mr. Holman watches events
? ose y as fuey develop, he will find that my statement
is not far out. I here is only one other point to which
desne to refer. On Monday evening I made a definite
statement as to what would be my attitude. With all
d ® fe F e . nce r - Storey, I think I may say I am the only
o cial representative in this Conference who has made
a c efinite statement on the lines I have indicated. X
aA e 110 desire to withdraw that statement, but having
regard to the new circumstances it is my duty to say
t. lat X cannot go to my people and advance reasons why
they should throw their weight into the recruiting move-
ment as. enthusiastically as I should have done if our
propositions had been more generouslv met by the other
side I believe that organized labour in New South
Wales is not only war weary—and this sterns to be the
feeling throughout Australia—but is labouring under
grievances and disadvantages—economic or otherwise—
brought about by deliberate design, on the part of em-
ployers, and the Government, as a result of the recent
industrial trouble. In face of the fact that at the last
ew ® Wales gave a majority of
116,000 votes against conscription, how can I go to
these people and say ‘'Conscription is dead.” They
would laugh at me.
Senator PLAIN-.—lf Mr. Hughes, in Parliament,
gave an undertaking on behalf of himself and his col-
leagues that the conscription issue would not be raised
again, would that be sufficient to enable you to go back
to your people and urge them to throw themselves whole-
heartedly into the movement ?
Mr. MOREY.—I am not here to bargain, or to say
to those on the other side, “You do this, and I will do
that. All that I urge is that these things stand in the
way of successful recruiting, and that, in my judgment
the movement has not the same prospect of success that
it would have if these obstacles were removed. lam not
here to say, Mr. Hughes, if you will give me a dollar
I will give you a dollar and a half.”
Senator MILLEN.—Might I suggest that it is pos-
sible for you to say now that if certain assurances
which you seek are given you will be free to take a
certain course.
Mr .MORBY.—If our suggestions are given effect
to, and what we conceive to be the primary obstacles
to recruiting are thus removed by the Federal and State
Governments, I shall feel that I can go without chal-
enge to my own people,, and strongly advise them to
throw all their energies into the recruiting campaign.
When I take up a certain position I am not easily
shaken from. it. I am just as strong in my conscien-
10US convictions. as is any man. I want only to remind
Mr. Beeby of his statement that, by arrangement the
miners, at Pekw Mam I think It was,
stated and that there were only three or four
loyalists now employed at that mine. The fact is


that at present there are over 200 “ loyalist ” workers
employed at the Richmond Main Mine.
Mr. BEEBY. —All the men in the Richmond Main
Lodge have been found work.
Mr. MORBY.—Twenty of them have found work
by migrating to Queensland.
Mr. BEEBY. —I merely said that you could not
deny that the State Government had strained every
nerve to clean up the result of the strike at A ewcastle.
Mr. MORBY. —Tliq matter appears to me to be
primarily one as between Mr. Beeby and the mineis
themselves. I have no desire, therefore, to raise undue
controversy on the point, more particularly as I know
that Mr. Beeby has been in conference with the men.
I shall conclude by expressing my keen disappointment
with the counter proposals submitted by the Prime
Minister. With the exception of the guarantee offered
by the Government of New South Wales, and what I
believe to be the genuine statement made by Senator
Eairbairn, in regard to economic conscription, I be-
lieve it will be found in the last analysis that the pro-
posals made by the representatives of the Federal and
State Government concede nothing to us.
Senator MILLEN. —Mr. Morby and others have ex-
pressed some dissatisfaction with the statement made
by the Prime Minister on behalf of himself and those
for whom he spoke. Mr. Morby has been the first to
respond to an invitation for definite suggestions as to
how these sets of proposals, if I may so refer to them,
can be brought closely together. He has made the very
definite proposition that he would regard it as at least
satisfactory, in a practical sense, if the Prime Minis-
ter, speaking in his place in the House, would declai e,
on behalf of the Government, that conscription had
been finally abandoned for the life of the present I ai-
liament. I understand that is his suggestion. It is
a practicable one, and the only opinion I wish to ex-
press at this juncture regarding it —the only one I am
entitled to express—is that it is a definite proposition,
and as such is entitled to the gravest consideration, not
only at the hands of the Commonwealth Government,
but at the hands of every member of this Conference.
Mr. Morby’s proposal —which he would accept as reason-
ably satisfactory—is that the Prime Minister should
make a declaration on behalf of the Government that
conscription has been finally abandoned during the li e
of the present Parliament. Coming from anybody,
that suggestion would be entitled to consideration, but
it would have a very considerable influence upon the
Commonwealth Government and this Conference if we
knew that that suggestion by Mr. Morby was shared
by those who are associated with him. It is possible
that the Government may consider it, and agree to it.
But surely we should be no farther advanced then if
all Mr. Morby’s associates declined to accept it.
have risen for the purpose of eliciting an expression of
opinion as to whether the suggestion which he has made
carries a general indorsement on the part of those asso-
ciated with him.
Mr. MORBY.—I made that suggestion on the spur
of the moment, believing that we must find some way
out of the difficulty. But I have no desire to commit
my colleagues to it. Indeed, I am not competent to
do that. Personally, I feel that my suggestion should
be adopted, but if my associates do not agree with it,
that is, of course, their business.
Senator MILLEN.—I quite recognise that that is
the position, and Mr. Morby has now confirmed the
purpose-for which I rose. He says that he spoke foi
himself only. May I again point out fhat it would
put the Commonwealth Government in an infinitely
better position to deal with that suggestion if they
knew that Mr. Tudor and Mr. Ryan indorsed it*
Mr. RYAN. —Can you also guarantee not to inter-
fere with the franchise during the life of this Par-
liament ?
Senator MTLLEN. —Mr. Ryan raises this question
now for the first time. I admit that it is quite a fail
thing for him to say that ho will indorse Mr. Morby’s
suggestion, subject to certain conditions. X can assure
Mr. Ryan that any suggestion which he may make —as,
indeed, any suggestion which may he made by any
member of the Conference —will not be thrown aside
lightly.
Mr. RYAN.—I am just attempting to feel my way.
Will the Commonwealth Government and the National
party guarantee that there shall be no interference
with the franchise during the life of the present Par-
liament ?
Senator MILLEN. —Mr. Ryan will recognise that I
am not entitled to speak for the Government.
Mr. RYAN. —But you can see the importance of my
question. .
Senator MILLEN. —It is a condition which may
properly he attached to a proposition of this kind.
Mr. SCULLIN.— I The Government disfranchised
80,000 electors on the occasion of the last referendum.
Senator MILLEN. —These wild assertions will not
help us to arrive |it a harmonious decision.
Mr. TUDOR. —Do you not know that I can only
express my own opinion in regard to anything? I
cannot commit the other thirty-three members of our
party, and I have not the slightest intention of attempt-
ing to do so.
The PRESIDENT.—May I point out that we shall
never reach finality if members drift into general
discussion.
Senator MILLEN. —With all due deference to you,
sir, I insist that I was, as far as my limited abilities
would admit, confining myself to a specific point.. I
was endeavouring to see how far two sets of views
might be brought more closely into harmony, and also
to put myself in a position to inform the Prime Minis-
ter, who is now present, what is in the minds of mem-
bers of this Conference. Under the circumstances, I
shall repeat the question which I put, and leave it at
that. Mr. Morby has said that, being dissatisfied
with the statement made by the Prime Minister on
behalf of the Commonwealth Government and those
associated with him, he would be willing to accept as
reasonably satisfactory a declaration by the Prime
Minister, on behalf of the Government, that conscrip-
tion has been finally abandoned for the life of the
present Parliament.
Mr. MORBY—Such statement to be made in the
House.
Senator MILLEN.—Yes. FolloVing upon that I
asked Mr. Morby whether he spoke for himself, and he
replied, “ Yes, for myself alone,” I then stated that
while all suggestions from this Conference would re-
ceive consideration at the hands of the Government, it
was very desirable that we should know how far his
associates shared his views. Mr. Ryan then declared
that the acceptance or otherwise of Mr. Morby’s sugges-
tion might be contingent upon a guarantee by the
Government that there would be no interference with
the franchise during the life of the present Parliament.
Mr. HUGHES. —What does that mean, Mr. Ryan?
Mr. RYAN. —We have an electoral law at present.
You know what it is.
Mr. HUGHES.—No amendment of the electoral
law? Is there anything else you would like? Do you
mean to say that we are not- to pass an Electoral Act..
Mr. RYAN.—I am merely feeling my way on tin*
matter. I want to know what you mean.


Mr. HUGHES. —And I want to know what you
mean. If you say that we must not pass an electoral
law, the statement is ridiculous.
Mr. RYAN.—Is not the present electoral law suffi-
cient ?
Mr. HUGHES.—No. The Government stated, when
it was elected, that it was in favour of proportional
representation in the Senate.
Mr. RYAN.—Postal votes, and so on.
Mr. HUGHES. —I do not know whether it said
that. But this is not the place to discuss what the
Commonwealth Government may do in that regard.
Mr. RYAN.—You may think that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It is part of the suggested guaran-
tee, and in itself is a very reasonable proposal. Mr.
Morby suggests that there should be no conscription
, during the life of this Parliament, which means no
conscription without an appeal to the electors. Then
Mr. Ryan says, “ and the same electors as to-day.
There must be no touching the franchise.
Mr. RYAN.—I have other objections also.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—Then we shall not reach
finality.
MF. HUGHES.-—I had not the advantage of hearing
these gentlemen state their case first hand, but I assume
that what Senator Millen and Mr. Holman have said
substantially sets out their views. . I wish to say
without in any way being understood to set myself in
opposition to either of these suggestions—that I cannot
give any such undertaking. It amounts to this: that
if I am now asked what I regard as the hindrances to
recruiting I will state them. They are none of the
things that appear in the list which was submitted by
Mr. Tudor. But we have most carefully refrained from
mentioning that which we believe has done more injury
to recruiting than has anything else. We do not ask
you for any counter guarantee, although we have a right
to do so. You represent the people, just as we do, and
if we had been making a bargain with you we ought to
have insisted upon guarantees. Instead we come here
and say to you, “ Will you help us in recruiting? ” You
ought to help us without our giving you anything.
Senator GARDINER.—We have been helping you.
Mr, HUGHES.—That is nonsense. What we want
from you is the same kind of assistance that you would
render if you were standing for election yourselves, or
that would he forthcoming if you were leading a great
strike. We want your co-operation to the last ounce
of energy that you have-not the kind of assistance that
we get in many quarters where men say, “ Oh, yes. We
are in favour of voluntary recruiting,' but it is dinner-
time now, and we are going home.” This is a matter
of life and death, and because of that, we come here and
ask, “ Will you help us ?”
Mr. RYAN.—You are assuming that the Labour
party only is at fault.
-JJ r • HUGHES.—In reply to our question, you say,
We are willing to help you, but we think that if certain
things were done, we should be enabled to help you more
effectively.”. I could tell the Conference of things
whereby, if it took up a certain attitude, the number of
recruits forthcoming would be materially increased. But
I say nothing of those things.
Mr. TUDOR.—I wish you would.
Mr. HUGHES.—But if you are going to ask me to
say that the Government will not amend-the electoral
law, and that under no circumstances during the life
of this Parliament will conscription be introduced, I
ask what are we going to get in return ? Are we goino-
to get the recruits by voluntary enlistment ? You reply
“We cannot guarantee that. All we can say is that we
will do as we have been doing.” That will not do. We
have to get the men. At the present rate of recruiting,
we are not getting them, and, unless you will come
behind us and work with us, we cannot get them. But
they have to be got. We cannot go down without making
an effort to stand up. Britain is now in extremis .
Everybody knows the circumstances in which she stands,
and she has asked us, with every other Dominion, to
strike a blow lor ourselves—for that is what it has come
to. And here we are on this, the sixth day of Con-
ference; and you say, “We will do this if you promise
not to amend the electoral law.”
Mr. RYAN.—That is a misrepresentation of the
position.
Mr. SC ELLIN.—The Prime Minister says that our
suggestions, as being in the way of obstacles to recruit-
ing, are not the real obstacles. I ask the Prime Min-
ister s views, then, as to what are the troubles. Let
us have the benefit of his great knowledge and wisdom
placed before us, as it should have been done on the
i ery first day. He has asked us to be prepared to go
out and fight for recruiting as though we were fighting
the greatest campaign in our experience. Has he ever
done that ? Has he addressed a recruiting meeting
since sth May last year? I read an account of /a
recruiting meeting in Sydney which Mr. Tudor ad-
dressed, before the elections, and at which Mr. Hughes
was 1 to have been present.
Mr. TUDOR.—Mr. Hughes was there. It was Mr.
Cook who was to have attended.
Mr. SC ELLIN.—I accept that as the case, then.
I know of no man who possesses such tremendous ener-
gies for campaigning as the Prime Minister; yet I have
not seen him do any recruiting, with all that marvellous
energy of his. We do not put these proposals forward
as coming from a party. We present them as sugges-
tions, speaking for the workers, and regarding them as
obstacles. Mr. Hughes and his party say, however, that
they are not the obstacles; and, as a matter of fact, they
have sought to prove that by proposing to meet them
only m a slight degree. But if they are not the obstacles
let us have the things which are obstacles. Let us start
all over again, and let us begin with a state-
ment by Mr, Hughes. The very first day of the Con-
ference I arose and suggested that before we put one
suggestion forward we should ask the Federal Govern-
ment to give us their proposals. Senator Millen said,
however, that it was not the function of the Govern-
ment to do so. Now we have stated our obstacles fairly
and impartially, and for our trouble we are told that
we are bargaining. Several gentlemen here have told
us so. Mr. Hughes now says so. I say, sweep them
aside, and let us have the Federal Government’s policv.
Mr. HUGHES.—I want to say this
Mr. HOLMAN.— Pardon me, Mr. Hughes. I think
rt urgent that I should say something before you reply
There are many causes of irritation in the way in which
the business of the Conference is being conducted or,
rather, has conducted itself. I assure Mr. Scullin that
I am as much a victim of that irritation as he or any-
body else here, and perhaps with somewhat more
ground. I had hoped that long before this the detailed
differences in the list of proposals presented by Mr.
ludor would have been discussed, and probably ere
n .°u /u e T Ved - has been done ’ and that is
still the business before us; but I urge you, gentlemen,
to realize that it has been quite evident from the be-
gmnmg that, in addition to the obstacles brought for-
ward by Mr Tudor, there is another obstacle, and
t lat is the small share taken in recruiting by recognised
Labour leaders during the past few months.
Mr. SCULLIN.—And by Nationalist leaders, too.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The small share taken by those
who are trusted by the workers-and we are anxious to
see the trusted Labour leaders of Australia throw them-
selves into the recruiting movement—has undoubtedly
been another obstacle which should be stated here It
- al *w n ? alI u Y ° U Said ’ " Here are certain
obstacles. We have shown you another, and that is


the indisposition of the recognised and trusted Labour
leaders to take the platform, and impress their organiza-
tions with Australia’s urgent duty.
Mr. JELLED. —The Rrime Minister says our pro-
posals are not obstacles—that there are other obstacles
which have not been mentioned, and that they are tne
real obstacles. . , ~
]Vf r HOLMAN. —Is it not apparent that the purpose
of this discussion .is to get further influence exerted
by all, but particularly by those gentlemen who have
been prevented from exerting tlieir influence, or w o
say they have been prevented, owing to these griev-
ances. The Prime Minister is anxious to join 111 tlio
removal of those grievances if that will pave the way
to first class propaganda on behalf of recruiting by'thos
who are unable to undertake it at this moment. I uig
this on Mr. Hughes. The question of the electoral law
has arisen legitimately and naturally out of
cussion which occurred before he entered the Confer-
ence this morning. One of the difficulties pointed out
is some pledge on the question of conscription. I stated
in the course of a speech which I recently made that
there was a possibility of the question of conscription
being reconsidered, but I admitted that it was a very
remote possibility. Mr. Morby has come forward with
a proposal which, while not shutting out that remote
possibility, requires a practically definite guarantee that
conscription shall not be further raised. Mr. Ryan
points out, however, a possible loop-hole, that there may
be such a wholesale disfranchisement of electors that the
guarantee will be illusory, if not nugatory. It is not
as remote as Mr. Hughes may imagine from his view-
point, in not having been present during the earlier
discussion to-day. It is a legitimate outcome of the
debate, and I beg the Prime Minister s calm considera-
tion of those two questions.
Mr. RYAN. —He jumped to conclusions, which he
apparently has an inclination to do.
Mr HOLMAN. —Do not say that. The reason why
I rose before Mr. Hughes just now was in an endeavour
to re-state the position before the Prime Minister spoke
a second time, and I beg him to say whether he can
give an undertaking to consider this.
The PRESIDENT. —How would it do it I lett tne
chair for a few minutes? n
Mr HOLMAN. —Please, do not do that. Inis L/on-
ference will dissolve before your eyes if we do not get
something done, and I ask the Prime Minister to meet
this objection in a reasonable spirit, and to try to give
those guarantees in place of that which he gave before
in the course of his speech at the Royal Agncultuial
Show in Sydney at Easter. ... . ~
Senator MILLEN. —We are entitled to know whether
that will then be acceptable.
Mr. HOLMAN.— Certainly.
Mr HUGHES. —The last thing in my mind was to
do any thing to ruffle the feelings of Conference, but
what I had to say was, I considered, necessary. It was
that we cannot go on endlessly discussing proposal after
proposal. We had dealt with the matter as it was pre-
sented to us in general terms, but now there is sprung
on us another condition precedent. ,
Mr. HOLMAN. —We invited it. We asked for prac-
tical suggestions. . , , T A - A
Mr HUGHES. —You may have done so; I did not,
at any rate. Mr. Scullin said I had done very little m
the matter of recruiting. From the first day of the war
until now no man has done more for recruiting than 1.
I have never made one speech which did not have for its
object—no matter how remote the subject—the rallying
of Australia to the war. I have led, during the last
twenty months or so, since my return from England
three first-class campaigns which had for their object
the getting of men.
Mr. SCULLIN.—Not recruiting.
Mr HUGHES. —And I have, in season and out ot .
season urged the necessity of Australia doing its duty.
And if I am possibly —by some sections of the
Labour party, but, thank God, only some—the best
hated man in Australia, it is for the reason that I have,
in season and out of season, talked about the war and
concerning Australia’s duty in relation to it. Now, 1
have done with that. I quite understand the attitude
of those who think this Government have at the back
of their minds any idea of introducing conscription.
We have no such idea.
Mr. RYAN. —I have heard that somewhere before.
Mr. HUGHES. —Whatever assurance I give, if you
do not accept it, the mere fact that it is doubly strong
will not get us any further. It does not matter how 1
couch the words—whether I take my oath a thousand
times—if you do not accept them there is an end of it.
We have no such idea. But if you ask the Govern-
ment to commit themselves that, in all circumstances,
no matter how deeply in extremis the nation may be,
we_shall sit amidst the ruins of voluntary recruiting,
with your organizations not doing their duty, and that
we are to do nothing —well, we cannot give that assur-
ance. I put it this way as evidence of our bona fides.
I cannot-conceive a worse situation than exists just now.
I can conceive Britain defeated, but conscription would
then be no good to us for overseas service. With
Eritain defeated what could we do overseas? We do
not need a law to pass conscription for inside Australia.
That has been the law for years. Therefore I cannot
conceive a worse situation than at present. Now is the
time, if ever there was, to impose conscription at this
very moment. Mr. Holman has put forward a sup-
posititious case. If such a case occurred that would
create a situation which would make us all think very
hard; but that is a very remote possibility. lam deal-
ing with the things as they are, and as they are likely
to be, and I tell you that I cannot conceive of any
greater need for conscription than exists to-day.. But. I
do not say that there might not be one. And since, in
this hour of our Empire’s greatest need for conscription,
we ask you to assist us in voluntary recruiting, what
greater proof of our bona fides could there be ? Take,
therefore, my assurance that voluntarism has been
nailed to the mast, and that we have accepted the ver-
dict of the people. Then what greater assurance can
you have ? Why should we discuss with you day after
day in order to get your assistance for voluntary re-
cruiting if we retain at the back of our minds some
idea of conscription? It is on the face of it absurd.
Mr. Holman has suggested that the reason why this
matter of the Electoral Act, or some amendment of it,
has been linked up with the obstacles is that con-
scription might be preceded by an appeal to the people.
Ido not admit that. I cannot conceive of a circum-
stance where there would be more justification for con-
scription than to-day —I cannot conceive how Britain
could be in greater extremities and our assistance
more needed than at this moment. It is no good after
the enemy has burst in and conquered our garrison. It
is now. when he is thundering at the gates, that it is
time to act. But if we should be in dire extremity to
have a three months’ general election campaign before
we acted, would be to commit national suicide. I
cannot conceive, whatever may be done, that a general
election would precede it. That, on the face of it,
would be absurd. I want to speak quite plainly, and
I say that if there be an election, for any reason, the
Government have never considered for a moment the
question of disfranchising anybody except persons of
enemy descent or origin whom, in this life and death
struggle, it would be improper to allow to vote at an
election. I forget now how far persons of enemy
origin were excluded by the law we passed in 1917.
Mr. TUDOR,—It was not a law that was passed, it
was a regulation.
Mr. HUGHES. —I thought there was a short Statute
Mr. TUDOR.—No.


Senator MILLEN.—There is what is known as “ sec-
tion 9 ” in the Act.
Mr. TUDOR.—That is in the 1916 Act. Under that
section a Returning Officer might set aside the votes of
certain persons for subsequent consideration. Subse-
quent to that Act there was a regulation passed, and.
in 1917, another regulation dealing with the matter was
passed.
Mr. HUGHES.—I will say, without any reservation,
that if an election should take place during the war, so
far as I have any influence or power, any action taken
in the direction referred to will be directed solely to
the disfranchisement of persons of enemy origin. Be-
yond that I should no more dream of going than my
friend Mr. Ryan would. You have That assurance.
Mr. MORBY.—Perhaps the Prime Minister will par-
don me for the moment. This is a matter which has
been a great bone of contention in New South Wales.
When the Prime Minister says that he would disfran-
cnise only persons of enemy origin, I should like to know
exactly what that means. I take the case of a man who
has enlisted in the Commonwealth Forces, and is
fighting in France, and is of enemy origin.
Mr. HUGHES.—I would give him a vote.
Senator MILLEN.- -He had a vote at the reinforce-
ments referendum.
Mr. MORBY.—I do not want to unduly press the
matter. You would give such a man a vote because
you would accept the fact that he is fighting in France
as a guarantee that he is loyal to the Empire, but you
would disfranchise his brother or his sister, though it
might be quite impossible for them to fight.
Mr. HUGHES. I should be prepared to consider
that question on its merits, and without any prejudice
at all. lam not going to say that a family having
given proof of loyalty by sending one of their number
to fight have not proved their loyalty as much as I or
Mr. Morby have proved ours.
Mr. HOLMAN.—WhiIe on that point, let me say
that, m Canada, before the last general election, a
course was adopted which might meet Mr. Morby’s
wishes. There, any family of whom the greater num-
ber of military eligibles had volunteered was enfran-
chised m its entirety.
Senator MILLEN.—We had the same provision at
the reinforcements referendum.
Mr HUGHES.—I would go as far as that. I
should like to ask Mr. Ryan whether he had anything
m his mind beyond the question of the disfranchise-
-o±JGermansJ Germans or persons of enemy descent.
r - R 7„ AN -—l had n( >t that in mind at all, as a
matter of fact. I simply wanted a general statement.
1 know, and you know, what the practice of Liberal
Governments has been with regard to the franchise
even when no war has been on. ’
• 7 r ’ Wlll sa y that d would do nothing
m the way of disfranchisement that I would not have
done if I were still leading the Labour party, except
with regard to persons of German descent.
Mr. BAKEWELL.—I have sat here without saying
anything for six days. I came here to represent em-
ployers. I wish now to say that I have a strong mes-
sage from my executive, informing me that whatever
we want them to do they are prepared to carry out.
They have sent me the following message, which 1
should like to read to the Conference:
“At the executive meeting of the South Aus-
tralian Employers Federation, held yesterday I
was directed to ask you to express to His
Excellency the Governor-General their very
hearty approval of the objects of the Conference i
which he had called, with the assurance of their
very earnest and loyal consideration of any deci-
sions come to, and to give practical effect to them.” |
1 cannot bring you a better message than that. It is
evidence that I came here to do something practical
to help recruiting. I have been deeply impressed with
the remarks which have been made by the giants of the
political world ot Australia. I have been very glad
indeed to have had the opportunity of listening to them,
iiut I must say that 1 am much concerned at the atti-
J tude displayed in some quarters, and which, it has
; seemed to me, has not made it easy to clear away our
difficulties. 1 desire that we should achieve the object
ioi which the Conference was called together, and I
re^Gr f° matters which might produce further
differences. Many things might be discussed in con-
nexion with statements that have been made, but it is
better for us to keep to the definite object of the Con-
ference. I am certain that the employers of Australia
are only too desirous to liel& in recruiting. Whatever
may be said in reference to the actions of some in the
diiection. of what has been referred to as economic
conscription, Senator I airbairn has given you his
word, as president of the Central Council, that he will
do what he can in the matter, and I give you the assur-
ance that his word will go-far with the employers of
Australia. Ido not believe that there has been any
economic conscription in South Australia. Ido not
admit that there has been any; but if it can be said that
there has, I will endeavour to remove and prevent it,
and I am certain that employers in that State will do
all that is possible to help in this matter. As the
ume. Minister has told us, we have reached a serious
crisis m the history of the Empire, and it is our duty
to set aside all minor matters, and deal with the par-
ticular object of the Conference. It would be to the
lasting discredit of us all if we did not as early as
possible arrive at something definite. I am certain
that the whole of the people of Australia are anxiously
waiting to know what we have to put before them.
In view of the representative character of the Con-
ference, I feel that we shall be without excuse if we
fail to do something definite. I hope that we shall
follow the advice of the Prime Minister, and do some-
thing to give direct help to the Empire now. It is
of no use to pretend that Australia can go on her own.
bhe would be simply the toy of the great nations of the
world if we separated from the British Empire, or if
m any way the British Empire were weakened, and her
* lee } ™ not m a position to defend us. We have de-
pended during the whole of our existence here upon the
protection of the Empire’s Fleet, and it is only of
recent years that we even paid anything towards it.
As one of the producers and employers of the Common-
wealth, I want to help in this matter. I shall do all
t lat I can in my own State. I have never been invited
to go upon a recruiting platform, and have never been
on one, but I am prepared to go upon the platform if it
is considered that I can help in that way. If there is
any other voluntary work which I can do to assist in
ns matter, or to forward m any way the interest of
ie country I want to do it. I cannot say more. I
should be ashamed to say less.
Mr. I UDOB.—I am very much afraid that the speech
delivered by the Prime Minister will not greatly assist
us to arrive at the harmony which we are all agreed L
essential if the Conference is to do any good He ha
satd that the matters which I put forward are not
obstacles, and that there are obstacles which he could
state to the Conference. If that be so T ° -
the time to state them If there are obstacles
way of achieving the object of the Conference, we have
a right to know what they are. As Mr. Scullin has
said, if the proposals we put forward are in the way
let us withdraw them, and let the Government put tliefr
f,y e 7, I accepted His Excellency’s invitation to attend
this Conference in good faith. The party I have tka


honour to lead unanimously indorsed the action I took
in coming to the Conference. W e have laid certain
suggestions before the Conference, and I say now that
if they are of no service, let us sweep them away, and
let us hear what the Prime Minister considers are the
real obstacles in the way of bringing about harmony.
Mr. LEE.—Your suggestions have been of use, be-
cause they have been very seriously considered, and we
have put our counter proposals forward.
Mr. TUDOR. —I think I made my attitude perfectly
plain in my first speech to the Conference. A few in-
troductory remarks were made by us all with the object
of paving the way to the consideration of means to
arrive at the harmony which we are all agreed is abso-
lutely necessary. Mr. Bakewell has said that, unless
we continue to be connected with the British Empire,
Australia cannot hope to retain her position. I want
to say that no one on my side has ever suggested that
we should sever connexion.
Mr. BAKEWELL.—I never suggested that you had
A MEMBER.—What Mr. Bakewell said was that if
we lost the protection of the British Empire, we should
be the toy of the nations.
Mr. TUDOR. —We are as keen to-day as is any one
else that the relations'that exist between Australia and
the Empire should continue. R o one on our side has
suggested “ cutting the painter.”
Mr. PEAKE.—I do not think that Mr. Bakewell
said that.
Mr. TUDOR. —Ro; but that might be inferred. We
are here in a most unusual position. We have assembled
at the invitation of the Governor-General, who, of
course, would act on the advice of responsible Minis-
ters, and at the outset of the Conference, were asked
if we had any definite suggestions to make to promote
harmony in the community. With all due deference
to Air. Orchard’s statement, I must say that there was
nothing in his speech on Saturday on the question of
promoting harmony between different sections of the
community. It was rather a statement indicating how
the Government proposed to conduct the recruiting
movement in future. Row, if the Prime Alinister,
after having considered our proposals, has in mind any
other obstacles that stand in the way of harmony, then
this Conference is entitled to know what they are, so
that we may, if possible, deal with them. lam not
one of those who believe that the Conference will have
been a failure.
Senator MILLER. —Pardon me. You have stated
nine points which you regard as obstacles to harmonious
relations between the different sections of our com-
munity. We are considering them; and, if we come to
an agreement upon those nine points, is there to be any
addition to the list?
Air. TUDOR. —I have said that, as far as I am con-
cerned, lam not here to bargain at all. I stated certain
matters which were regarded as obstacles. to that
harmony which I believe is absolutely essential at the
present juncture.
Senator MILLER. —And we are trying to meet you
on those points.
Air. TUDOR. —We on this side say that now is the
time for action on the part of the people who have the
power to remove those obstacles. I pointed out on
Saturday that if they were removed, that suspicion
which exists in the minds of certain people would also
be removed, and recruiting would automatically increase.
I honestly believe that. If I did not believe it, I would
not say it.
• Senator MILLER. —You say you are not here to
bargain. May we interpret that statement to mean
that, even if you do not secure the redress of certain
grievances which have been mentioned, you will still
be prepared to urge recruiting?
Mr. TUDOR—I said tliat, unless they are removed,
I did not think it would be any good for any of us to
get on a platform and urge recruiting.
Senator AIILLER. —I do not mention the public
platform. I merely asked —suppose all these negotia-
tions came to nothing, will you still be prepared to do
everything that lies in your power to urge recruiting?
Mr. TUDOR. —I have already done so.
Senator MILLER. —Yes; but would you do more?
Mr. TUDOR. —I have to speak at one or two meet-
ings this week, and I will certainly do this.
Mr. HOLMAR. —Will you urge that, notwithstand-
ing these obstacles, men should go to the Front to de-
fend their country?
Mr. TUDOR. —I would still urge them to do that;
but certain obstacles are in the road, and, until they are
removed, I believe it would he practically talking to
the air.
Mr. JELLEY. —It would be worse than useless.
Mr. TUDOR. —I know it would be practically useless,
in view of the effect of many of the Acts that have been
passed, to go to some of the men and urge recruiting.
With reference to the first question on the list sub-
mitted by me, asking for a definite pronouncement from
the Government that conscription was finally aban-
doned, it appears that there is some objection to the
word “ finally.” Well, I say put in anything you like
instead of that word, so long as we can go back to our
people and tell them that the objections have been
removed.
Mr. HUGHES. —Well, why not put it this way —
“ Conscription is not the policy of the Government ” ?
Mr. TUDOR.—Mr. Hughes has told us thut con-
scription is not the policy of the Government ; but, in
the next breath, he has said that he can conceive of no
time when conscription was more necessary than at
present.
Mr. HUGHES.—Quite so. Then, if we add the
words “ Conscription is not the policy of the Govern-
ment,” we have a case as strong as any man need have it.
Mr. TUDOR. —I will take the Prime Minister’s own
words back to the people I represent at this Conference.
Mr. JELLEY. —But it is a question whether they
will accept it or not.
Mr. TUDOR. —Ro one has made it clearer than the
Prime Minister that we cannot speak for any one except
ourselves. If we can go back to our people and say
that we tendered certain advice to this Conference, and
that certain items had been considered, that is as far as
we can go. We have received certain replies, and I
repeat that if the Prime Minister knows of any other
obstacles it is up to him to state them. I candidly
admit that Ido not know what they are. Every one
will admit that on Friday afternoon our position was
unique, for at that time no one had definite suggestions
as to what ought to be done.
Mr. HUGHES. —I must take exception to that state-
ment. We say that there is only one way in which we
can get recruits voluntarily, and that is by united
action. If you can show that our present plan of cam-
paign is not satisfactory we will alter it if you like.
Mr. TUDOR. —But still many of the obstacles will
remain.
Mr. LIUGHES. —Some obstacles are obstacles which
neither you nor I, nor those we stand for, can shift.
Mr. TUDOR. —While it is something to know they
cannot be shifted
Mr. HUGHES. —By you or by me.
Mr. TUDOR. —Then that means that, so far as this
Conference is concerned, we have no power to deal with
them.
Mr. HUGHES.—I did not say that. I say you can-
not shift them and I cannot.


Mr. TUDOR.—If we can get from the Prime Minis-
tei some idea of these obstacles we may have a chance
of considering them, and perhaps make some sugges-
tions.
Mr* —I say that all that can be done by
any human being in this Conference in regard to the
matter is to be done by a resolution to the effect that
this Conference, recognising the gravity of the crisis,
pledges itself to do all things necessary to secure the
required number of recruits, and that its members will
urge their respective organizations to do so too.
Mr. TUDOR.—When the Prime Minister was asked
by Mr. Scullin this morning about the recruiting cam-
paigns he said he had conducted three very strenuous
campaigns throughout the Commonwealth and had done
his best. I believe those three campaigns have done
more to injure recruiting than anything else done by
the Prime Minister.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—What is the use of all this ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Keep to the practical question, Mr.
Tudor. We cannot sit here indefinitely.
Mr. TUDOR. I admit that, and oil Tuesday after-
noon, after we had received the Prime Minister’s
written statement in reply to our proposals, I said the
best thing we could do would be to wind up the Con-
ference. We have tendered certain advice, which has
been leplied to, and the sooner we can arrive at some
determination the better. I do not mean by carrying
any resolution, because I do not believe that any motion
will help the matter at all.
Mr. HUGHES.—But you represent the Parliament-
ary Labour party.
Mr. TUDOR.—That is so.
Mr. HUGHES.—Very well; and with all due defer-
ence to you, I know as much about the Parliamentary
Labour party as you do, and I say that behind it are
the people who move it. Now, there are people here
to-day representing organizations that move the parlia-
mentaiy machine, and if they vote in a certain direction
the Parliamentary Labour party will be moved too.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You think, Mr. Tudor, that that
resolution would be worthless, but certain other mem-
bers of the Conference think it would be valuable. You
admit, no doubt, that we may be right, and, that being
so, would you have any objection to a motion being sub-
mitted to see whether it would be valuable or not ?
Mr. "TUDOR.—Not the slightest. I have no more
right than any other member of this Conference to urge
an opinion in any particular direction. I hope that vtc
will reach harmony, and I think that we have achieve,
something by the sitting of the Conference, although we
may not have utilized the opportunity to the best ad-
vantage. The sitting of the Conference is in itself an
earnest that we are all anxious to do something, and if
the Prime Minister knows of any obstacles that stand in
the way of harmony, now is the time for him to state
them.
Mr. BROOKS.—I have no desire to take up the
time of the Conference, but I felt rather concerned this
morning at the turn affairs were taking, and, in case
my silence should be misconstrued, I feel that, as a
member of the Employers Federation, representing the
employers of New South Wales, it is necessary for me
to make some statement, or, at all events, to say a few 1
words on the general question. We have reached a 1
stage, apparently, when we are commencing to consider 1
clause by clause the propositions that have been placed I
before us. We have had proposals laid down, and very 1
properly so, by our friends opposite, and we have had <
the answers to them as furnished by the Federal and i
btate Ministers, as well as the replies by the repre- c
sentatives of the employers. Throughout the Conference i
I have given all members on both sides full credit for r
absolute sincerity, which I believe to be the only right c
attitude to promote harmony. I must say, however, a
that at this juncture I consider a debate in detail of 1
5- the proposals and counter suggestions would only be a
e further waste of time, and be mainly beating the air.
* I can say that the committee, of which I was a mem-
*3er» appointed to consider the proposals placed before
> the Conference, gave them very grave consideration,
e As has been said frequently, we desired to see how far
it was possible to meet the proposals put forward.
Coming to the industrial proposition put forward, I fail
e to see how it is possible to go any further than we have.
I do not make that statement with the object of exclud-
mg all possible chance of our coming to an agreement,
but, taking into consideration what has been said by
speakers on the other side, I feel it is practically impos-
> sible for us on this side—l know it is impossible for me
- to pledge ourselves to accept in their entirety the
5 suggestions made by the other side. If we are to accept
in their entirety the suggestions advanced by Mr. Tudor
alter due consideration with his fellow representatives
ol Labour, I believe that, while we might reduce the
tension in some quarters, we should add very materially
to the spirit of dissension in others.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN.—It is well to have that state-
ment.
Mr. BROOKS. That, at all events, is my personal
opinion. lo attempt to elaborate in detail the con-
siderations that lead me to that conclusion would be to
occupy your time at greater length than I feel
justified .in doing at this juncture. I quite
agree with, the statement made by Senator Fair-
airn, after consultation with the other representa-
ives of the employers. As to the proposals made by
the Prime Minister on behalf of the Federal Govern-
ment the State Governments, and the employers, I
teei that, m some quarters particularly, it will be con-
sidered that their adoption would be unjust to certain
sections of both employers and employees. Neverthe-
less I believe that 1 could take back those proposals
to the employers of New South Wales, and, not by
reason of any particular powers of suasion, but by the
mere force of logic convince them of the desirableness
of conforming to them. I have no hesitation in ex-
pressing the opinion that they would conform to them
We certainly ought to avoid anything having
the semblance ot what members on the other
si e have described as the spirit of bargaining.
I believe, however, that we ought, in this Conference
to pass a resolution which will show the people that
\ve are determined to do all that we can to assist the
Empire in its hour of trouble. Unless we do so we
tnH be f ° ndem * ied from one of the Commonwealth
to the other. Ido not suggest that we should pass a
lesolution binding, as with iron bands, the Labour
representatives of the Conference to pursie any course
of achon other than that which has been outlined by
. • and otl »r Labour representatives, who have
said, X have never failed to support recruiting, and
whatever happens, I shall continue to do so.” Then
we have also the assurance given by Mr. Morby, whom
L b T ™,7 P eaS l d *°, meet here - Having regard
to the difficulties with which we are confronted I
would be prepared to say that we need go no further’ in
the discussion of these suggestions-fhat we shou d
consider whether we ought not to pledge ourselves to
the counter suggestions which have been ,nJC
without any further attempt at what might seem to be
bargaining on these various points. If the Conference
2 dSc reS t°N lon B , h ° wil,g that ’ "* a tever may be
t . difficulties that confront us, we are anximi
arrive at a satisfactory conclusion, we should give an
earnest of our desire to minimize the discord fxlstin^
m the community. Such a resolution would satisfv
me, and I would be quite prepared to support the ‘
carrying into operation of all that we on this side hive
already intimated our willingness to do lam nit
going to attempt, at this juncture, to deal in deta“w“th


the question of profiteering and industrial conscription.
I frankly admit that, like many other employers, I have
felt considerable difficulty with regard to the employment
of eligibles for military service. But, as a result ot
this Conference, I have arrived at the conclusion that,
having regard to the large volume of public opinion
that has definitely expressed its opposition to conscrip-
tion in this country, it is not right—and I use the word
“ right ” in its fullest sense —that any section oi the
community should set in operation a policy which the
people have determined shall not be the law ot this
country. I have not the slightest doubt that if I make
such a representation to the employers of New South
Wales, it will be adopted. If I represent to them that,
no matter what has been the custom in the past, we
consider that, having regard to the decision of the
people on the question of conscription, a man s position
in any employment should be held safe, irrespectn e of
his fitness or otherwise for military service, they will
agree to it. I agree with Senator Fairbairn that pro-
fiteering in war time is absolutely inexcusable. It is
necessary, however, that we should not confuse pro-
fiteering with profit-making. There is a great dif-
ference between the two terms. Many firms might be
making more profit than they were before the wai -
Mr. COLLIER.—And that might merely be due to
a larger turnover. . _
Mr. BROOKS. —That is one of the points I was
about to advance. Owing to the extraordinary increase
in the cost of their material, and to some extent owing
to increased local costs, due to higher wages and so
forth, the turnover of many businesses has been in-
creased to an enormous extent. In my own business,
for instance, the prices of material which we pui chase
in connexion with it have increased to the extent of
400 per cent. .
Mr. TUDOR. —In what class of business is Mr.
Brooks engaged?
Mr. BROOKS.—We deal with paper, printing ink,
stationery, publications, and so forth. I do not wish to
go into personal matters, but I would point out that,
notwithstanding the enormous increase in the cost of
materials, it is found that, in respect of a considerable
proportion of the business which we and many other
firms do, it is quite impossible to get back that in-
creased cost. In the circumstances, our profits, instead
of increasing, have decreased. There is yet another
aspect of the question of profit-making, which I have
discussed with representatives of all branches of busi-
ness. A few weeks ago I was discussing with the head
of a large business concern the question of war-profits
taxation, and, in the course of the discussion, it was
pointed out that, in the first two years of the war,
many firms made big profits. As the war continued
however, their material came in at greatly enhanced
cost, and extraordinary charges had to be borne. In
respect of goods arriving in Sydney from Scandi-
navian countries, thaU is particularly the case. Ihe
depreciation in currency between Scandinavian coun-
tries and London is as great as 60 per cent. In other
words, where you paid £lOO for goods f.0.b., when those
goods reached London, before coming to Sydney, the
increase in cost was £6O out of every £lOO. Most of
the traders and commercial men quite agree that war-
time profits are a fair subject for taxation. They
would not agree, however, with Mr. Ryan,, that a
war-time profits tax of 100 per cent, should be imposed.
Men could not be expected to carry on without making
any profit.
Mr. RYAN. —I was referring to extraordinary war-
time profits, and not to ordinary profits.
Mr BROOKS. —Eor several years before the war
many’ businesses were increasing their capital and
working up a larger turnover. In this way they were
F. 3959. — 9
increasing their profits year by year. Let us take the
case of a firm which in this way, for five, years piior
to the outbreak of war, had increased their profits by
£2,000 per annum, so that, on reaching the war period,
their profits had increased by £IO,OOO as compaied with
the return five years previously. Under ordinary con-
ditions, and quite irrespective of the war, the profits
of this business would naturally be expected to go on
increasing so as to cover the additional capital put into
it, and to suggest a 100 per cent, tax on those profits
would be absurd.
Mr. RYAN. —Such matters as you have referred
to would be taken into consideration in arriving at the
profit actually made as a result of the war.
Mr. BROOKS. —Certainly, and it is because of the
nuecessity of taking all these points into consideration
that the Federal Treasurer has been inundated with
statements of facts showing that a hard-and-fast tax,
based on the desire to sweep away all war profits, would
not only operate unjustly, but would constitute a- severe
blow at the development of the country.
Mr. PRITCHARD. —It would have a boomerang-
lik© offc'Ct
Mr. BROOKS.—Quite so. If Mr. Ryan, together
with the various State Treasurers and a few business
men, were to devote themselves for a week or two to
the discovery of a reasonable solution of the difficulty,
they would find it could not be obtained by sweeping
legislation declaring that all extra profits made in war
time, as against profits made in the period immediately
preceding the war, should be absorbed by the Treasury.
I do not think, however, that we need trouble ourselves
about that phase of the question; it is not likely to have
a material effect on the decisions of this Conference.
The main point I wish to emphasise is that the em-
ployers represented in this Conference agree with all
the other representatives in the belief that what is
known as profiteering should be swept away. What
the Commonwealth Government have done in the past
is not met by the assertion that they have done nothing.
During the course of this debate some reference has
been made to our shipping companies, and probably
there are members present who do not know that the
rates of freight now ruling in the Inter-State shipping
companies are the same rates that operated prior to the
outbreak of the war. Yet the amounts which these
companies have to pay for their repairs constitutes an
enormous tax on their resources.
A MEMBER. —Do you say that there has been no
increase in freights during the past three and a half
years i
Mr. BROOKS. —There has been no increase in
freights since the outbreak of the war. I make that
statement definitely, because I believe I am right in
saying that whatever increase has taken place in the
rate of freights during the past five years, was imposed
just prior to the outbreak of the war. Since then tnere
has been absolutely no increase in the freights along
our coast.
Mr. COLLIER. —I think that my friend is wrong.
There was an increase of 10 per cent.
Mr. BROOKS. —If I am wrong, I have been wrongly
informed at head-quarters. It is, of course, always
possible that the responsible gentleman who gave me
the information made a mistake. But, on the authority
of the representatives of one of the largest Inter-State
shipping companies in Australia, I say that the rates of
freight have not been increased by those companies
since the commencement of the war.
Mr. RYAN. —Their balance-sheets show larger
profits.
Mr. BROOKS. —The big companies conduct other
businesses outside of shipping. In addition, many of
their ships have been sent overseas, where they earn
much more than they could earn here, and probably
that accounts for their increased profits. The fact which
I have placed before the Conference is, I think, rather


a striking one. We know that the price of coal, which
has been under control, has considerably increased of
late years. Similarly, the wholesale price of sugar has
considerably increased. But Mr. Ryan knows that the
causes of that increase are not associated with the war.
Mr. PEAKE.—There was a 40 per cent, increase in
the wages of cane cutters.
Mr. BROOKS.—I am not complaining of that.
Many of the workers who deserved an increase in their
wages have obtained it. I regard it as a fundamental
principle that the prosperity of any country should
be largely shared -by the workers. Indeed, the
prosperous condition of the worker is the only true
index of the prosperity of a country. But in all these
matters we must recollect that there are quite a number
of extraneous things which have to be taken into con-
sideration. Where firms are making big profits, those
profits—irrespective of whether or not they are war-
time profits—are a fit subject for taxation up to the
hilt for war requirements. There is no escape from that
position. Manufacturers do not cherish the illusion
that their incomes will not be taxed. But I say that
vve shall not get any beneficial results by making a dead
set at men who are merely making profits. There are a
lot of things that I would like to say. I have listened
attentively to other speakers, anticipating that I would
have my opportunity of presenting my views to-day.
But when I arrived this morning I found that the tinrn
of the Conference was being largely occupied by Mr.
Morby’s very interesting address. That address has
shown me that it is idle to attempt to bargain upon
these matters under consideration. Let us endeavour to
finish the Conference to-day. If we are going to discuss
the proposals which have been submitted, clause by
clause, we shall inevitably get down to bargaining, and
the proceedings of the Conference will be protracted for
another week. I suggest that we should arrive at some
definite conclusions which will enable us to say that
our labours have not been altogether in vain. It will
then go forth to the world that we have advanced some
distance in the direction of unity with a view to help-
ing the Empire in this grave crisis.
Mr. BLUNDELL.—As one who has listened with a
great deal of pleasure to the opinions which have been
expressed during the past six days, I wish to preface
my remarks with an intimation that I shall speak for
only a couple of hours. I do so because every member
who has announced that he intended to speak for only
a couple of minutes has easily occupied half-an-hour.
Surely we have now reached that stage in our general
discussion when we can get right down to a debate in
detail upon the proposals and counter-proposals which
have been submitted.
The PRESIDENT.—I thought that we had arrived
at that stage last night.
Mr. BLUNDELL.—I, too, thought we had reached
a definite understanding that the question of conscrip-
tion was to be discussed this morning. I understood
that to-day we were to attempt to frame a resolution
dealing with it, to which we could all subscribe. But
instead of doing so, we have started a general discussion
afresh.
The PRESIDENT.—I would suggest that some
member should move a resolution on the subject.
Mr. BLUNDELL.—If you, sir, will accept a motion
from me, I am prepared to move one now. I move—
That we proceed to discuss the suggestions made
by Mr. Tudor, item by item, beginning with the
first.
Mr. IIOLMAY.—Move that the discussion com-
mence with item Yo. 2, because we have already had
a discussion on item Yo. 1.
Mr. BLUNDELL. —Yo; my desire is that we should
embrace the lot. Whatever may be our decisions in
connexion with these proposals, it -would be a crime if
this Conference —called for the purpose of considering
the best means of throwing our whole weight into an
appeal for voluntary enlistment —were to disperse with-
out carrying some resolution affirming the desirableness
of adopting that course, and our determination to stand
behind the effort. If we should fail to do that, what
will the people outside think of us? They will know
that men who have come from all parts of Australia
were not sufficiently united to give them a lead. In my
opinion, if we do not carry some such resolution, we
shall be open to the most severe condemnation from all
sides, because it will be convincing proof that we have
not sufficient interest in the welfare of the Empire to
express our full approval of the voluntary system.
Every member present is favorable to that system, and
even if we cannot agree upon all the details connected
with it, we can at least agree to go out and declare,
“ Ao matter what we may have said of each other, we
have confirmed the desirableness of everybody in the
community bending their best efforts towards the sup-
port of voluntary enlistment.”
Mr. JELLEY.—I rise to second the motion. In
doing so, I wish to add that I think an invitation should
be extended to the Prime Minister to state what he
conceives to be the real obstacles to successful recruit-
ing. Mr. Blundell’s proposal is that we should discuss
seriatim the proposals put forward by Mr. Tudor, in
which he enumerates what we regard as obstacles to
recruiting.
Mr. HOLM AY.—Cannot we deal with them first?
We have been discussing them for four davs.
Mr. JELLEY.—IIow can I go back to my State and
say, “ The obstacles which we believe hindered success-
ful recruiting were dealt with by the Conference.”
Senator MILLEY.—But we have not dealt with them
yet.
Mr. JELLEY.—If I tell my associates that the Prime
Minister intimated there were other obstacles—and
that these were the real obstacles to recruiting—l shall
at once be asked, “ Why did you not deal with those real
obstacles ? In seconding the motion, I say that we
have a right to know what are those obstacles, in order
that we may remove them.
Senator GARDIYEIL—I protest against entering
upon a course which will unquestionably have the effect
of prolonging this Conference. The details of these
proposals have already been threshed threadbare, and
I aril perfectly satisfied with all that the Commonwealth
Government, and the. representatatives of the State
Governments, have said. If we attempt to consider
these proposals in detail, we shall do so with Mr.
Holman believing that perhaps he can come closer to
us by more fully explaining his position, and with Mr.
Hughes imagining, perhaps, that we should be able to
arrive at a more unanimous decision if ho stated his
views more explicitly. Ido not think that we should.
This Conference has been called, not to discuss
gi.iev ances, but to deal with the most serious situation
with which we have ever been confronted. But I do
not think we want any expressions of good faith. Pass
a resolution in keeping with what you believe, or pre-
pare a losolution of what you believe to be the opinion
of this Conference. I believe the whole of Australia
is united at present in the object we have in view. In
the means of getting there, however, we are hopelessly
disunited, and no resolutions or promises will get us
there. When Senator Millen introduced a resolution
in the Senate the other, day, in which we pledged our-
selves to fight on to a victorious peace, I, without hesi-
tation, seconded that motion. lam as much repre-
sentative of the political organizations behind our
unions as any one. They have made no complaints to
me as to my action then. I agree with Mr. Hughes.
These matters which have been brought forward are
not the real obstacles in the way of recruiting. In my


opinion, the great obstacle is the absence of men. If
you take the first year’s recruiting and compare it with
the last, and examine the percentages, you will not find
that enormous falling off which our. anxiety and oui
lack of consideration, perhaps, make it appear.
Mr. HOLMAN. —There must actually be a great
falling off. , . . ,
Senator GARDINER.—I am speaking relatively and
proportionately. However, we will not follow that
up. We are adopting a wrong course in our considera-
tion of these things. I assure you that we would still
be prepared to meet the situation as best we could, eien
if you told us that you would not discuss those things
which have been put before you. Therefore, I say,
carry a resolution in keeping with the intelligence and
dignity of this Conference. Can we not express therein
something which would really cover Australia’s senti-
ments at this the gravest crisis in our history? e
Mr. HOLMAN. —There is a great deal to be said m
favour of that; but we have already agreed to the
removal of certain of these obstacles.
Mr TUDOR.—We will take your word for that..
Mr! HOLMAN.—But, clearly, it is no use entering
upon a' detailed discussion, piece-meal, unless that
removal is satisfactory. We want to know how far it
will be of any value, and where it is considered that the
removal suggested falls short of what is desired. We
are entitled to the advice and assistance of Senator
Gardiner and his colleagues on the schedule broug t
forward. We want to know whether these things will
be enough, and, if not, what more are required. It
has been understood all along that we should discuss
the schedule in detail. Let us get down to it..
Mr. COLLIER. —I am opposed to the motion. One
has to ask, at this stage, where we stand at all. In
view of the statement of the Prime Minister that these
proposals do not stand in the way of recruiting at a ,
I want to know what do ?
Mr. HUGHES.—I did not say that. .
Mr. COLLIER.—I think the honorable gentleman
did.
Mr. HUGHES.—No. I said that, m my opinion,
there are things that stand in the way of recruiting
that have not been mentioned; and I said, later, m icp y
to Mr. Tudor, that I did not think he or 1 could do
anything in regard to them. There are undoubtedly
other things. , • A
Mr COLLIER. —I think the Prime Minister said
that these are not the things that stand in the way of
recruiting at all. , , ,
Mr HUGHES.—If I did say so, or if you understood
me to say so, I say now that you have come along and
told us that these things stand in the way of recruiting.
I will accept that; but I say, further, that m my
opinion it is other things which stand m the way of
recruiting. ? •
Mr COLLIER. —I understood you to say this morn-
ing that these things—our proposals—are not the things
that stand in the way of recruiting at all.
Mr HUGHES.— Why labour that now when I have
just given you my position, whatever I may have
said, and whatever you may have thought I said before .
Mr COLLIER.— Then why discuss these things in
detail if they do not stand in the way of recruiting ?
We have occupied six or seven days discussing matters
which, in the opinion of a large number of our friends
here do not stand in the way of recruiting at all,
while at the same time, it appears, there has been with-
held from our consideration some other matters of great
importance, which, in the view of the]Prune Minister
do militate against recruiting? Why did not the
Prime Minister take the Conference into his confidence
at an early stage and say, “ These are> the things .
Mr. HUGHES.—I was ill in bed. That is the answer,
and it is a good answer.
92
Mr. COLLIER.—These are the things that have
hindered recruiting, but if they were not proper subjects/
for consideration by the Conference we need not have
wasted time in touching upon them at all.
Mr. HOLMAN. —As soon as Mr. Tudor brought
these matters forward several of us said, “ We do not
admit that they are obstacles, but we are prepared to
discuss them and remove them as far as possible.
Mr. COLLIER.—Rut might we not, with greater
profit to this Conference, have considered the points
which, in the opinion of the Federal Government, were
the real obstacles ?
Mr. HOLMAN. —That is indicated in Mr. Hughes’
statement —“a better method of co-operation among
Labour leaders and Labour bodies. The remedy
shows the disease. That is the remedy suggested, and
it indicates what the disease is.
Mr. COLLIER. —We have worn this subject thread-
bare.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Not in the details.
Mr. COLLIER. —Yes, even down to the details. If
you think that by further discussion you can get further
ahead, however, I will not stand in the way.
Mr. PEAKE.—I do not rise to support the motion.
I am inclined to the view stated by Mr. Brooks, that
we cannot get much further beyond the point already
reached by going into the matters in detail. We have
Mr. Tudor’s propositions, against which we have set our
counter propositions. I suggest that they be put as
motion and amendment, because, although it has been
disclaimed that there is any spirit of bargaining, I am
afraid it will be now not a question of bargaining, but
of haggling, which is below the dignity of the Confei-
ence. The propositions have been the result .of due
deliberation. Then there are counter propositions,
which I know to have been also the result of much con-
sideration. What is the good of going into details
now —details which must, of necessity, take still more
days to consider ? Why cannot the two sets of pro-
positions be put in the form I have suggested? And
then, as for the results, we must leave it to the people
to decide whether Mr. Tudor’s proposals contain points
which ought not to have been asked for, or whether
what was offered in response to them should or should
not have been granted. We cannot expect to come to
any resolution of a unanimous character. It is not at
all likely that we shall arrive at any decision on a con-
crete matter and carry it with anything like unanimity.
The only motion we are likely to carry unanimously is
such as that of the Governor-General—an abstract reso-
lution. Take the first question on the list. Why should
conscription be such a bugbear in the minds of people
at present ? Have we not got those splendid examples
of America, Canada, and New Zealand, whose people
have conscripted themselves ? Why should we magnify
the issue at this stage ? I was in favour of conscription,
and voted for and advocated it; but it is not to be
obtained, so what is the use of haggling now over the
express form in which disclaimers should be given
to what we recognise at the present moment to be the
fixed policy, so far as the people are concerned? The
voice of the Australian public has expressed itself twice
emphatically against it.
Mr. HOLMAN. —May I put this: After all, Mr.
Peake, your Government are not directly concerned so
much as ours in the proposals put before Conference.
Our Government are asked to make a large alteration
of policy on a matter which has deeply affected the
public of New South Wales. We say that, given cer-
tain conditions, we are quite prepared to do that, but
is it too much to ask that the other points in Mr.
Tudor’s proposals and in the counter schedule should
be discussed in detail ? I am asked to make a "very
great plunge, and before I can take the responsibility
of advising my colleagues to make that plunge with me
I should have an examination in detail to see how far


that and other plunges following will affect the public
mind.
The PRESIDENT.—Let us have a vote on the mat-
ter.
Mr. PEAKE.—I want to put forward a suggestion
which will hasten the procedure. This Conference can-
not pass a resolution which would be of any value with
respect to Mr. Holman’s Government. What have we
to do with matters solely affecting the Government of
New South Wales?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not say that you have any-
thing to do with them; but it is part of any general
scheme of conciliation. lam moving in this matter
as one of a general body of conciliators. If any one
part of the scheme is not satisfactory or acceptable, it
may lead to difficulty, and I want the whole scheme
considered in detail.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is just- what I wish to avoid.
Mr. HUGHES.—It might be that what Mr. Holman
desires would not be satisfactory.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is quite possible.
Mr. PEAKE.—I want t© avoid, if possible, haggling
over the differences that lie between the proposals.
Mr. HOLMAN. That is what we ought to have
dealt with yesterday.
Mr. PEAKE.—What I propose is that Mr. Tudor’s
proposals should he submitted to the Conference as a
motion, and the counter proposals should he put as an
amendment of it, and it should be left to the people
outside to decide the value of either as affecting
recruiting.
Mr. LEE.—I have very great sympathy with Mr.
Holman’s position as he has stated it. I agree that
New South Wales is very seriously affected. But, not-
withstanding what Mr. Holman has said, I think that
we have discussed these questions in very considerable
detail. We reached the position last night that there
were a few outstanding details which needed to he
cleared up, and it was understood that at 11 o’clock
this morning the general discussion would cease, and a
small committee, representing the Commonwealth Go-
vernment, the New South Wales Government, Mr.
Tudor, perhaps Mr. Ryan, and one or two others, might
sit to consider those outstanding details and report to
the Conference, when we should be in a position, per-
haps, to agree to a general resolution.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Not a small committee. That was
at first suggested, but it was abandoned, and it was
understood that the consideration should be by a com-
mittee of the whole Conference.
Mr. LEE. —The real point of difference is that be-
tween the New South Wales Government and the
Federal Government.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The real point of difference is con-
tained in some of the outstanding proposals of the
Federal Government.
Mr. LEE.—I was going to mention that. Would it
not be possible for Mr. Hughes, Mr. Holman, Mr.
Tudor, and perhaps one or two others directly interested
to meet for a little while after lunch, see whether they
could not thresh out the outstanding details, and then
report to the Conference ? I am sadly afraid that, if we
adopt the suggestion of Mr. Holman to consider the
items in detail in open Conference, we shall be here
for another five days, and, personally, I cannot stay
any longer than a little time this afternoon. I came
over to do important business, and I have been unable
to do any work but attend the Conference. I venture
to say that if my suggestion were adopted, and the out-
standing details were considered by a small committee,
the result would be that a motion might be submitted
to which we could all agree.
Mr. WATSON.—I am prepared to support the sug-
gestion made by Mr. Lee as an alternative to the
motion. I prefer the consideration of these matters by
a committee; but I am afraid that our friends on the
other side are not favorable to committees. One or two
of them have said that they would decline to go into
committee. I believe that, if they are willing, the
consideration of the matter by the Prime Minister, the
Premier of New South Wales, and one or two others,
would probably be the quickest way to arrive at a
decision. I must express my profound disappointment
that gentlemen representing Labour organizations have
not responded to the invitation of the Prime Minister,
on behalf of those presenting the counter proposals,,
to say what, if any, amendment of the phraseology of
those proposals they desired.
Mr. RYAN.—When I made inquiry from Senator
Milieu, you saw what it led to.
Mr. WATSON.—I mean amendments of form and
phraseology. The Prime Minister put forward definite
proposals, with the intimation that they did not repre-
sent the final word, and that, on our side, we were open
to receive suggestions as to amendments of phraseology
considered necessary to make clear to our friends
exactly what was aimed at. So far, there has been no
suggestion by way of amendment of those proposals,
and the fact that none has been offered has been a pro-
found disappointment to me and to other members of
the Conference.
Mr. TIOLMAN.—It should, I think, fairly be said
that our friends have had no opportunity of doing that.
Yesterday the Prime Minister could not attend, and I
understood that we were to-day to begin that work at
11 a.m. I hope that we will begin it after lunch.
Mr. TUDOR.—We can go on with the consideration
of the items until we come to one in connexion with
which it may be considered advisable to have a commit-
tee, and then a committee can be moved for.
Mr. Blundell’s motion, that discussion of proposals
be proceeded with, agreed to.
Mr. lIOLMAN.—WouId the Conference generally
agree to the postponement, after lunch, of items 1 and
2, since they have been discussed to some extent this
morning, and begin with the discussion on No. 3 ?
Mr. HUGHES.—It would be better to take them
in order.
Sitting suspended from 1.10 to 2.30.
The PRESIDENT.—I understand it is the desire of
the Conference that the proposals submitted by Mr.
Tudor should be considered seriatim, and probably,
therefore, it would be preferable for Mr. Tudor to sub-
mit motions in respect to each of them.
Proposal No. I. —That there should be a definite
pronouncement by the Government that conscrip-
tion has been finally abandoned.
Reply. —Mr. Hughes’ statement to stand.
Mr. TUDOR. —The first proposal on my list asks
for a pronouncement from the Federal Government
that conscription has been finally abandoned. If mem-
bers of the Conference are of the opinion that we should
put in “ for oversea service,” I am quite prepared to
do that. I think, however, that the Prime Minister
said that his statement, in Sydney, should stand. I
still believe it is not necessary to carry any motion at
all, but if it is the desire of members I shall move
That there should be a definite pronouncement by
the Government that conscription has been finally
abandoned.
Mr. HUGHES. —That must be regarded as a sort of
ultimatum, I suppose?
Mr. TUDOR.—I do not think it is.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Is the Prime Minister prepared to
make a statement ?
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes, but I cannot make it in those
words.


Mr. TUDOR.— Then, in what words are you pre-
pared to make a statement ?
Mr HUGHES. —I fail to see how my remarks, as
set out originally, together with the subsequent state-
ment in which I declared the policy of the Government
and of those associated with it—the State 1 remiers an
the State representatives—are not regarded as sutticient.
I cannot help expressing surprise that it is not so re-
garded by our friends. We say that the Government
have accepted the verdict of the people; that it had
nailed voluntarism to the mast; that conscription is not
its policy; and that it has no intention of resorting to
conscription. This morning I pointed out that I could
conceive of no circumstances m which, if conscription
were our policy, we should be more justified m adopting
it than the present circumstances. But since we do not
propose to resort to it now, and since, by our presence
and attitude of this Conference, we are asking you to
help us in the voluntary system, the bulk of the people
outside, lam sure, will accept our assurance. Anything
more than that, I submit, is not necessary. A mere
insistence on a form of words, as proposed would shut
the door upon any future action m which
we cannot conceive of .at present, but which, if they did
arise, would probably insure for us the support of near y
every man at this Conference. If the enemy were
inside of Australia, and were here to-morrow, there is
not one of my friends on the other side who would not
support the call for every able-bodied man m this coun-
try to come to the colours for the defence of the Com-
monwealth. I do not think there is one member here
who would say a word of protest to that course of action
in such circumstances. And the time may come w ien
we will have to do that quite shortly. But we are not
here to discuss that now, and, in any case, we are all
committed to that policy. In regard to conscriptio>
for oversea service, wo liave told you definitely that
that is not the policy of the Government The Govern
ment have gone to the people twice, and the proposal
has been twice rejected, so the responsibility now rests
upon Hie people. We do not propose to resort to that
P °Mr. STOREY.— May I suggest that it would be pos-
sible for this Conference to state m definite terms that
it indorses the statement made by the Prime Minis . ,
that conscription is dead, and wiH not be revived du r g
the life of the present Parliament? Would that be
acceptable to the Prime Minister ? It appears to me to
be along the lines suggested by him this morning,
cannot commit a, future Parliament in any case.
Mr. HUGHES.—No. May I put the matter this
way ? It is not a question of Parliament at a .
Unfortunately, the tide of war proceeds with such
appalling rapidity that that which may be regarded by
us as impossible to-day is often realized
Who would have thought, when we went to the people
last December in the belief that the collapse of Russia
and the debacle in Italy were the worst misfortunes
that could have befallen the Allied cause, that to-day,
even while we are sitting here, the Channel ports are
in series peril, and Britain is m grave danger of being
almost beaten to her knees ? Had we gone to e coun-
trv in the circumstances that exist to-day, I do not know
fhlt one Australian out of four wouldl have rejected
our proposals. Ido not know what the ftitur has
in s ‘tore —no can can even say what will occur
to-morrow —I cannot tell, and I cannot conceive. It
mu=t be remembered, however, that the danger is upon
us If, by general consent in Conference to-day, we
decided to enforce conscription immediately, that would
nut one more man to-morrow m the battle line
Very well. I want members of the Conference to 100
at this matter as practical men. The ohiect of the Co
feVence in adopting an, motion is .twofold-one to
strengthen, by our resolution the spirit of
wS is now looking to us in this cris.s anxious, hut
calm and resolute; and the other is to raise such rein-
forcements as are necessary, so that if the Allies stand
the immediate crisis, further assistance will be forth-
coming to insure victory in the months to come. That
is the position. If the enemy were outside, and it 1
were to ask every man to follow me outside to meet
the enemy, I am sure thafi not one man would remain
in the room. But the enemy is 12,000 miles away, and
patriotism may spend itself in vain in trying to do more
just at this moment than lend moral aid to the A 1 ie
cause. It will, however, be grand encouragement to
England and France to know that the people ot
Australia are united at this juncture; that they have
sunk all their differences, and have determined to stand
by them. They will then know that, m the months to
come, if, by God’s grace, the Allies are triumphant
during the next few days, a steady stream of recruits
will go out from this country. . .
Mr STOREY. —I put it to the Prime Minister that,
if we’carried the motion, and if those members of the
Conference who do not usually see eye to eye with him
and others on matters connected with our troops, could
be induced to accept the view, it would helr> recruiting
very considerably. It may be that, as a result, we
would then be able to get such a steady stream o±
recruits prepared in time as would help the Allies as
effectively as the American help will prove to be. Ihe
desired end could, perhaps, be attained by stating that
the Conference recognises that the people have already
determined twice against conscription, and is of the
opinion that the statement made by the Prime Minister
that conscription is not part of the policy of the Go-
vernment, and will not be resorted to, is satisfactory. It
the Prime Minister adds to that the undertaking that it
will not be revived in the life of the present Parliament,
I think it would help materially without doing any pos-
sible injury. If the Empire were in positive danger
to-day, the mere carrying of a resolution by this Con-
ference would not stay the hands of lhe
moral effect of such a resolution on the British Empire,
in such circumstances, would be as nothing; although
the actual effect on the people of Australia might per-
haps be of a material character. If, as has been said,
the making of an arrangement whereby recruiting could
be carried on with greater success would have a bene-
ficial effect on the rest of the Empire, then I think we
ought to do everything possible, on the lines of the policy
we have laid down, to achieve that end. . There can be
no harm, therefore, in the Prime Minister giving us
the assurance for which we ask. If we were overtaken
by disaster, and it became absolutely necessary tor the
Government to resort to an unprecedented or violent
method of strengthening the hands of the Empire, that
step could not be given effect to within six months.
Even if we had all our men ready to go to the front
to-day, we would not have the ships to take them.
Mr. HUGHES. —We could not get them to the front
to-day, but that is quite a different matter. We have to
determine how we are going to get them. ready to do
their bit when the time comes. If, for instance, -Mr.
Storey and I were called on to-morrow, then, quite apart
from our physical ability, we would be of no service
since we are not trained. America has its millions, yet
it has in the battle-line to-day but a negligible number
of men. The chief consideration is to tram your men.
The training alone takes months, and anv legitimate
means that the representatives of the people can adopt
to secure that end ought to he resorted to.
Mr. STOREY. —The Prime Minister will admit that
I am as constantly in touch with the workers as he used
to be and I am convinced that the fear of conscription
has materially retarded recruiting. The fact that men
are likely to be conscripted any day prevents a number
from enlisting. They say. “If we are going to be con-
scripted later on, we might as well wait until then, .so
that we may all go in together.” The fear of conscnp-


nil !f 5n Spon n ible f l or a great deal of tlle apathy dis-
played throughout the country so far as recruiting is
onceine . hat fear might be removed from the minds
ot the people if the Prime Minister would not allow
is tremendous _ fear, arising, no doubt, from his
nthusiastic patriotism, to override, in respect of many
rim- nil’ hl - t ttGr •i ud » n l ent - It is my conviction that
recruiting is being interfered with very materially by
he tear of conscription; yet the Prime Minister says
morrow U ® tbe pledge We ask to-
r llave t 0 averse his decision.
noftfm G„ ? ES - In TI6W ° f tlle actual Position, could
°t tbe Conference pass a resolution to this effect*
Accepting the Prime Minister’s assurance that the
policy of conscription has been abandoned, this Con-
ference pledges itself, individually and through its
? d0 al } in its power to - ab io
men s ” Tnl-f, \ d Y “ the securin g of reinforce-
Sucl! « „t J h Way y ° U Would saf eguard yourselves.
thl oor P d p T y ° Ur part would be contingent upon
the pohey °f voluntarism being continued. P
nowto S wW EY T If the Pri T Minister would agree
G lltl T 1 W r lave s ?SS ested , it is possible that at
a later stage—after we had completed as much of the
work as we are likely to complete—such a resolution as
he suggests might be moved. Its terms could be freely
c“at ; r e apart from the B^Bt - - -S
I h S '~ l ffi 1 h r'T nothing at the back of
.1" n d * I bave not the slightest intention nor has
believe'ThatT/is°th re f or ‘ in « t 0 inscription. ’ I do not '
0 that it is the best way of getting- men now T t
do not deny that you can do much by force maieure *
tr U a i fbehind" 0 !// ™ 7 ° f a unST/s! [
otherwis? bl/f i 1 - haVe no reserv ati o n, mental or ,
otherwise, but for obvious reasons, I think the assnr i
M /vrx? IT PV° Ught t 0 be efficient. ‘
the besf/"- d ° not ‘ hink * hat “Option is
besf\' b said I d i d n °f think it was the v
best way of getting men “ now.” If every word T
utter is to be twisted y WOld L
nv r V RYAN ’*—I d ° not wish to twist any utterance e
indicate 7 a°n ’ SV '''rff' 1 " 1 statement just made si
you previousl/100l tip™ 17 dlffBrent fr ° m that whiab “
■■
low “ S now" • and'l^a° f thY ‘ S beSt 00Urse t 0 fol ‘ P<
is to-dey reco isl -7 t ‘ b f t ’7; p ‘“f e 7 «, it w
~/?w? m t/l d not EaVe r °
;< Command help us to make VO IZJ 7 w<
Mr. STOREY.—I f ear thst If r , ar
common-sense peofle to do all that bVI ° US du . ty of W-
about the desired result ? If th" wiT® soa
to obtain recruits by voluntarism, he will not h/s St„ tio
gne the people an assurance that durimr the bf r Slb
the present Parliament, there shall he ? 8 h • - of to
At the luncheon given in connexinV •? T l3 '? 1 ?! 1 ™- I h
tural Society’s show in Sydnev" he slid 7/?™!/ oth
that the Government had nailed their eel pbatlca l y ln
mast of voluntarism; so that he is „ 0 t »» ’ , th S P»s:
to concede much. If such a set of ei?„ 7 , asked P a g
arise as would enable the G^rmanT ,Um f““ s sI >o«M on I
in the Pacific to our discomfit! toat^W'f Mir
be established to-morrow. IZnZ^£ %
dl»- were taken by them, we cannot suppose that a nation
’j® a . y y h . as maintained practically a two-power
ids standard is going to be defeated.
bis menace. RITCHARD - D ° not forget the submarine
H Pr * STOREY.—I am not forgetting it
bat Mr. HUGHES. If German/secufes the Russian
ays S?c'e"of a the re ” ‘ /’ eets r all of which are part and
to- nearlv as i a P rese “ fc battle—she will possess a Fleet
b.ned 8 M ° f England aud Ameriea c°m-
-7 so Mr HoI OEE /ri Not <lUite 80 Bt ™«> very nearly
the Site o?r;ositt: 18 ratllCr “ o-ggerated^-iew
its Mr STORCT-if h ° P , e ‘ hat yo f u are ri « Lt -
Wo arose,' we should be in a' lpX pos™TZ TZ
es. f r U 0 1 “ e ’to°da e v VCr ’ that il 7 not arisc - B “‘> months
to take pan iTthU“great^ SUfHCientl7
- a ptus P h K op T e CHAED - Tha ‘ “ the expression of
be PiJJs hoDM R nev’~~ lt V S SOmething more than that,
as f h P 6Ver ac bieved anything. We are un
ly so g ns nS and the W haS been Created by other P« r '
er In sense tn C ° UrS ? ° pen to us is to ad °Pt a com-
which we all £ST fh C ope W thatlh g e f'
i : in r a Httle “ tb * mat 0 w 7a e re“ n sf:s
“ K: already ‘7°
I f-w i F ® aid the Government have nailed
, thom colours to the mast of voluntarism. Nothing short
: ta^ar^fwas.ai-5
cou^gi^wa/u^hth/m/tter^Hth B “ inister
3 ever became as grave as lie think ft 16 m .‘ ltar y situation
i sibility of it befoZ J U t . l ‘ e , re ,S a remot « P°s-
. that it would be the eiiest thing t the woritUo 7“
B,t a, new apreemAnf wrUii j.i_ j, riel to arrive
, opposition to him. The conlngen/ are now in
then be so awful to contemplate fhat V 8 !, US WOU,d
; infest mt/ W ° U,d *£ to sT/
vve must meet this new emergenrv Wl *+i, „
position. ” Undpr sunt o,Vo , g icy with a new pro-
whatever to be apprehended “f I Z° tjT"
arise 01 /uT la at e the" Prime TinisterT
question could only be h- S ?" thn ? d > the
unanimous support of the crpntl practlca % with the
dustrial organfz'ations IS ar ? e 77,? "P™** »-
Mr. HOLMAN -Broadlv li t * r'^
Watson. I realize to 1 T- h Mr<
sented to the Conference i™ difficulty that is pre-.
tion. On the oneland T fJ with this ques-
sible Ministers like the Federal'rove 8811 ' 7 ?“ at re3pon-
to be driven into an imposdMl 7,7’ rnment °“S ht »ot
I have said so repeatedly ’ on “Pon this point,
other hand, I quite undemtend the 7 stlll ' 0n the
m which our friends opposite are placeTand 7™%
possible ,t is for them to undertake anv e 7/° W ™'
paganda work unless thev a 6 eff ective pro-
on this particular question 7 T d ® quatel y safeguarded
Minister a view wh.ch hasoeY n P pU * *° the Prime
his further discussion of the poririon tod’""* b heard
pointed out that even if


now it would be barren of all practical results for a
period of many months—certainly for six, and perhaps
for eight or ten months. Clearly, therefore, conscription
is not a remedy which can be used in any sudden mili-
tary emergency, and the set of circumstances whic ias
presented itself to my own imagination as possibly in-
volving an ultimate resort to conscription by any Go-
vernment in Australia, is not a military set of circum-
stances, but a diplomatic set—a demand on the Govern-
ment of Australia to render more effective aid to the
Allied cause, by making certain permanent changes,
When once the Commonwealth Government have de-
cided to adopt voluntary recruiting as their policy we
can abandon the idea of resorting to conscription to
meet any military change in the situation. _ Now, it
seems to me, that that does remove the objection to
Mr. Morby’s compromise. If the Government will
pledge themselves not to bring in conscription “ during
the life of this Parliament ”
Mr. WATSON. —That phrase may be misunderstood,
because the inference is that conscription may bo
brought in during the life of the next Parliament. We
do not want that. . .
Mr HOLMAN. —If an overwhelming diplomatic
necessity arose of the kind I have suggested Parliament
could be dissolved. . .
Mr. HUGHES. —If such a diplomatic position arose
it would have to be resolved instantly.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not altogether agree with the
Prime Minister. If such a diplomatic communication
reached us from the British Government, and we said,
“ We will do what you desire, but we shall first have to
dissolve Parliament, and to secure the approval of the
electors, which we have no doubt will be forthcoming,
that would settle the matter. I would urge upon the
Prime Minister either to give way upon this point alto-
gether or to accept Mr. Morby’s compromise, or be-
tween now and the time when he finally makes his state-
ment on conscription, to discover some other safeguaic
which will be equally satisfactory to Mr. Tudor and
Mr. Ryan. _ . , .
Mr. MORBY. —Did Mr. Tudor make the statement
that he was quite prepared that the Prime Minister
should reserve his definite pronouncement on this matter
to a future (time ? ,
Mr. HOLMAN.—I understood this morning that the
Prime Minister and his colleagues should make a de-
claration in Parliament. That is the point..
Mr. MORBY. —Yes; but they should give us the
declaration which they are going to make there.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The value of a concession on this
point will be so great to the Labour men present who
have to placate, re-assure, and, if possible, convince,
hostile elements in their organizations that that con-
cession should be made.
Mr. RYAN. —The recommendation has been made by
the representatives of Labour here that there should
be a definite pronouncement by the Government that
conscription has been finally abandoned. The reason
for that recommendation is that, in our opinion, the
apprehension that the issue will be revived is militating
against that harmony which should prevail in the com-
munity if the voluntary system, is to be entirely suc-
cessful. A great deal of the differences, now existing
are the direct result of the conscription issue. Some
of those differences existing to-day are the. aftermath
of it. The fact that we have seen people flying at each
other’s throats in this State is clearly an aftermath, of
the conscription issue. The fact that certain objec-
tionable regulations have been passed by the Govern-
ment, on the insistence of one section of the community,
is also due to the differences that arose while the con-
scription issue was before the people. Therefore, if
the people can be convinced that there is no further
fear of conscription being brought up, it will go a long
way to making the voluntary system a complete success.
It is not a matter of satisfying me, or any one else here,
but of satisfying the people of Australia. This morn-
ing, Mr. Morby was making a suggestion about the
matter which, however, did not entirely satisfy me,
and Senator Millen was dealing with the suggestion
when I interjected regarding an indication being given
that there would be no interference with the franchise,
and then (the Prime Minister entered the room. He
thereafter dealt with the matter in a way which I think
was not justified, but which was probably due to the
fact that he had not heard what preceded it. That is
the most charitable view to take of his remarks. He
allowed it to be inferred that he thought this question
was really an effort to side-track the great issue with
which we are dealing. Ido not think he was justified
in that attitude. I was endeavouring to find out whe-
ther this guarantee, if it were given, would be such as
to convince the people of Australia. Guarantees have
been given on previous occasions. The Prime Minister
gave a guarantee, as complete as is now asked for,
when he said that, not in any circumstances, would, he
agree to send people out of this country to fight against
their will.
Mr. HUGHES. —I have not done so.
Mr. HYATT. —Ho; you have not.
Mr. HUGHES.—But I could have done it.
Mr. RYAN.—It is because you have been prevented
by the vote of the people.
Mr. HUGHES.—What has that to do with it? There
is nothing to prevent me now.
Mr. RYAN. —If you do not think the vote of the
people has anything to do with it
Mr. HUGHES.—If the vote of the people was for it,
there would be no option but to carry it out.
Mr. RYAN.—I point out that the people of Aus-
tralia have an apprehension that the issue may be re-
introduced.
A MEMBER. —A portion of the people.
Mr. RYAN.—And the other portion want to intro-
duce it.
A MEMBER. —No; they do not.
Mr. RYAN.—There is a fear in that direction, and
the onus lies on the Government to remove it. If the
Government go to the full extent asked for, they will
remove that apprehension. If they are not prepared
to go to that extent, I do not think it is a matter of
agreement at all. This Conference has been called to
have the views of different representative men placed
before it.
Mr. WATSON.—And to secure agreement, if possible.
Mr. RYAN. —We have tendered advice which we
think will go in the direction of harmony.
Mr. WATSON. —It is a poor attitude that you will
not go further than that.
Mr. RYAN. —I think those on the other side are
assuming that we have done something to hinder re-
cruiting.
Mr. WATSON. —I do not say that for a moment.
Mr. RYAN.—We have always stood by the voluntary
system, and have endeavoured to assist it. I shall not,
in any circumstances, be drawn away from what I con-
sider the true view of the situation. Mv opinion is
that it will be a good thing to finally abandon conscrip-
tion; and you cannot alter that opinion except by suc-
cessful argument. If you only want to go half way,
or to do something that will not convince the people,
then you will not have done what, in my mind, is the
best thing. lam not endeavouring to force you into
an agreement. , ~ . . .
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—There should be give-and-
take in all these matters. . .
Mr. RYAN.—You misunderstand the position. Ihe
people have to be satisfied that the conscription issue
is dead.


COOK.—AII the people have to be
satisfied. Ihere are 1,000,000 people on the other side.'
• ii- • , the people who have the apprehension
m .their mmds are the people to be satisfied; and, in my
ojnmon tins iS the best way to bring it about.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If you were satisfied—you and your
tel ow representatives—that would convince these doubt-
ing people?
r ' can 1 sa y I am satisfied?
Mr HOLMAN.—If you are not personally satisfied,
let us know what you require in order to arrive at satis-
faction.
Mr. RYAN.—There is some limitation placed on the
matter. I believe that, in all circumstances, the volun-
tary system is the best. If the Government
do not. consider our suggestion sound, they will not
accept it. But, whether they accept it or not, it will
not alter my attitude. We have been told that some
lave a ways said that they believe in the voluntary
system, and have then gone home to dinner. But that
does not apply to me. I can inform the Conference
that an appeal has been made to the people of Queens-
land which I have signed, and which I believe has also
been signed by Mr. Macartney, the Leader of the
Opposition in the Queensland Parliament. This is the
appeal which has been made—
of tho extremely serious position of
the Allied Forces on the western Front, we wish to
appeal to every man in Queensland eligible for
service who feels that his services can he dispensed
With to immediately enlist with the Australian Im-
perial Force We address this appeal to men of :
all creeds and politics, as we feel that any serious
reverse to the Allied Troops would ultimately
react on Australia and cause, in the future, the 1
loss of those privileges for which we have striven <
m the past.” }
That appeal has been signed by the Governor of <
Queensland by myself as Premier of the State, by the J
Leader of the Opposition m Queensland, and by the 1
churches in that State. . I stand for that system, and I 1
intend to continue to stand for it. If the Prime Min- r
ister feels that some other things are militating against t
recruiting, I wish he would mention what they are c
It is of no use to come here with innuendoes. It is far f
better to say plainly what they are, if there is any
one here who can remove them, and ask that thev a
should be removed I object to innuendoes, which t]
merely continue the objectionable suggestions that were c:
made during the conscription campaign. They will not 0:
6 Mi JOSFPK a? all desire t 0 see exist * U i
M c 9 OK -~^ or will that speech.
Mr. RYAN.—It is my speech. tl
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I know it is R
i, T thi s PE Mr *° me ‘ bat tbe P° sitio » Z
. Mr. Kyan, and those with him f/iii f
that they find it difficult to urge successfully amongst ta
liAn« Vl -l W 10m have influence that they Should en- kr
list as volunteers, because there is apprehension in thpii- &°
mmds that there wil. he another
i T f r° R - H - you not found tha ‘ *0 be the case of
The PRESIDENT.—I wish to be perfectly frank I
app?eWoi l‘t J 0 Australia ' there is such th j
apprenension. It, arises from two things. One is not ,
so much a fear of compulsory military service but a S ‘ ■
fear, such as that which existed in England that +J. * sal<
rmght be an extension of compulsory 7er? ?e fn td i 'Z the
service, which would, to a lhge eTS involve th 1 the
stroction of the industrial veXt ?.
obtained after many years of agitation for industrial A
legislation. I realize that there is a genuine m *
(\e Jmptv lit pai l °, f man y people in Australia that
de. something of that kind might follow. A suggestion has
on been made that instead of the matter being left to Par-
ny lamen ,it should, in the event of an extreme emergency
arising, be referred to such a Conference as this. There
-U- T i ent o , r 9 16 ad °Pti° n of such a course. Mr.
. illustrious fellow-countryman of our
friend the Prime Minister, in the earlier stages of
o war, m the course of work carried out with activity
is IS,™ + T C * CeSS 111 En approached the industrial
classes m their organizations, and established an under-
lie nl Zt? B Hem J llat , there should be certain limits
n Tie aip?d f SUPply ? f men from those organizations,
ot be allowed th ™ ® xemptlons U P°P a certain scale should
ot ftp •' ien a B reat crisis arose, and he went to
t the organizations deliberately and said," I have made
with draTtb t° I f* now *> a »ow ™to
•v T ? r ° and t 0 P roceed on other lines,
It for the snfeJ y Til? ord now tbe only possible means
•e Mr the Empire.” I sympathize with what
f Watson h i a ? said > and 1 cannot see why the Prime
,o suggestedtrMr n T^ Perh b ap + S - not GXact1 ’ 7 in the WOrds
e savMW nn y Tudo L but m some similar words—
e concerned tZ 1? " de ? d ’ " far as the «
botl) .Ms. f,, n n ?t mer ely tie view entertained by
f street Dublt or he C ? r ‘ forence > but it is the view of the
l thS leader® ? .- C ° Untry - When the people gave
Si S" 10n o, '- the matter ’ we found the
i although tb 6 o mention merely local newspapers
cn id tW g hy - W + • re stron S l y in favour of conscription
P recinhed C d ?S t nP tl 10n T* 8 dead ’ and that that should be
L gmsed distinctly. I assure the Prime Minister that
, the apprehension to which reference has been made is
militating against the complete success of the voluntary
* dh -d“' fl Conscri P tlon has been an apple of discord
1 10 P eo P e ’ and, as 011 e man said to me in Tas-
mama, they were not prepared to put their energy into
objects of this sort when they might be required for
omething quite different. I earnestly ask members of
medfately\~„ C s 0m if m t °he W‘° the , bu ™ ess ™-
...-aMRMBsr wtrsaac
Mr. LEE.— The point of difference nt •
SStlCl “/& PrimeMf
ciently explicit to enable *T
MqualXTsuppoib 11 T cTn n s y m pa7hi‘ ,h^
the position they have Jt'?, , " Jl ‘hem
then, the position from the othe^poinT^f‘view ®
Ryan says, on behalf of the side he represents “ '
want the statement to be mode the. P ■ ’■ We
‘finally abandoned.’” I point out fW o on3on P* 10 n is
taking another view in Australia j 6 ? eople
know from us explicitly what tb!! h ° Wlll deS)re <o
go back and tell my people what'that" 53 " 3 1 bave t 0
Mr. JOSEPH COOK -A „■] ; ‘ ba * T™*'
Mr. LEE.—Yes. ' A 1011 voters.
of lusSa N bra Y maiorit S v of mm peopl6
voluntary system with the vrLJtyi d / Clded for the
that meant the end of the On! before them that
Mr. LEE.-I aSi no fn„? SCnptl ° n , G °vernment.
statement, but I recognisl thaWfe* *l° acce Pt that
said that they do not want ! pe °P le have twice
the people of Australil t 1 beli eve that
the term, accept that verdict acce Pj ation of
as that we must accent hi<? int r - Ryan tell
" Mr a,l U b^ d “"? ’ Pi " »"X^. 0 ' ‘ he P ’ ,raSe
n,oree ff^AVt k 4 b n e cy° ther W ° UH ba


Mr. LEE. —Am I, in any extreme case, to tell the
1,000,000 voters behind me that they are not allowed
to adopt anv method other than the voluntary system ?
Mr. WATSON. —We might call Mr. Ryan again into
conference then.
Mr. LEE.—There is a good deal in that suggestion.
I agree with what the President has said in reference
to the_ twice-repeated verdict of the people, and I say
that no Government dare bring in conscription without
putting the matter before them, or before representa-
tives of the people, in some such way as we are dealing
with matters to-day. I believe that in these critical
times the Government of the Commonwealth should be
in a position to call representatives of various sections
of the Commonwealth together for consultation.
Senator GARDINER. —They have something better
than that. Thev have an overwhelming majority in
both Houses of the Federal Parliament. What more
do they require?
Mr. LEE.—I am not prepared even to accept that.
I do not think we have an adequate reflection of the
various phases of feeling in the country there. Why
should we not have in Australia a War Council, similar
to what they have in the Old Country at the present
time, that might be brought together on very short
notice to deal with these questions in an emergency ?
Is it not wise that we should prepare for emergencies in
such a way as to have a guarantee that no Government
will be able to take precipitate action detrimental to
the interests of the Commonwealth? Do not place us
in such a position that we may have to go back to the
people who are behind us, and say that, notwithstand-
ing the Empire mav be rocking to its foundations, we
must stand by whilst hundreds of able-bodied men in
the country refuse to take up arms in its defence. I
ask our friends on the other side, in their desire to
re-assure their followers, not to put us in a worse posi-
tion than they would themselves be placed in by accept-
ing the counter-proposals to their suggestions.
Mr. SCULLIN. —We have laid down proposals which
we believe would re-assure the people if they were
adopted. It has been urged that because of emergen-
cies which might arise they could not be accepted by
those responsible for the government of the country.
We then suggested a compromise, that what we pro-
posed might be adopted for the life of the present
Federal Parliament, which would mean that there could
be no alteration without an election. I feel that any
objection that might be taken to No. 1 might also be
taken to No. 2. All that apparently stands in the way
of our suggestion is what might occur in the event of
some hypothetical cases that have been put forward.
This has convinced me more than ever that the phrase
we need to use is “ finallv abandoned.” When I came
into the Conference I thought that conscription was
finally abandoned, but the discussion convinced me
that it was not. That is the position. The reservation
made by the Prime Minister, his hesitancy to give any
guarantees, the remarks made by Mr. Joseph Cook and
Senator Millen on the first day, and the further utter-
ances and elaborations made by the Prime Minister,
have made me change the view I had when I came to
this Conference. I cannot go back to the people and
say that, in my honest judgment, conscription has been
abandoned. The responsibility for the obstacle to
unanimity rests upon the Government and their sup-
porters.
Mr. BROOKS. —It would be deplorable if some
course could not he found to satisfv the doubts in the
minds of the gentlemen opposite, and which would have
the effect upon the people that we all so rnuch. desire.
It would be still more deplorable, in view of
the critical news we are receiving from day to
day from the Front, showing that our Armies
are in a desperate position, that we should preface
any recommendation we may make to the public
by saying, first of all, that conscription is finally aban-
doned. I think that, under the circumstances, the
assurance given by the Prime Minister should be taken
as going far enough. We know that it will be so re-
garded by one section of the population, but that, in
the minds of those who voted against conscription, it
will not be taken as going far enough. The Govern-
ment, however, must remember their responsibilities,
and keep in mind the moral effect of this declaration,
not only on the people of Australia, but on the minds
of members of the British Government and the British
people:
The PRESIDENT. —You must remember, Mr.
Brooks, that they have already had intimation of the
results of two referendums on the question.
Mr. BROOKS.—Yes, but in the present critical cir-
cumstances the British Government are imposing con-
scription on an unwilling section of their own territory,
and it seems to me that the situation is so desperate that
they have to convince their Allies that the British
Empire is going to put the last ounce of its man power
into the struggle. Responsibility in this matter rests,
not with me as a. private individual, or as a member of
this Conference, but with the Government, and I have
no hesitation in saying that if I were a member of the
Government I should be quite unable to go the whole
length required by some members of this Conference.
Mr. KEEP. —I want to say that, when the repre-
sentatives of the employers had the privilege of meeting
with the representatives of the Federal Government and
State Governments, the suggestion put forward by Mr.
Tudor was discussed thoroughly, and it was considered
that Mr. Hughes’ speech in Sydney, clearly setting
out the position, should stand as a reply to Mr. Tudor’s
first proposal. I have, heard nothing in the arguments
this afternoon to show that we should go back on that
decision. I cannot, therefore, see my way to vote for
his suers'estion.
Mr. WATSON. —His declaration in Sydney was
much in the same spirit as the proposal submitted by
Mr. Tudor.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I move—
That the consideration of proposal No. 1 be
postponed.
Mr. TUDOR. —I will second the motion.
Mr. MORBY. —Will you tell me, Mr. Chairman,
what is meant by the movement to postpone a decision ?
Does it mean that we will reconsider it at a later stage ?
The PRESIDENT.—I understand it will be dealt
with at a later stage of the proceedings.
Motion to postpone decision declared carried.
Proposal No. 2. —That there should be no
economic conscription in public or private employ.
Reply. — “ Accept.”
Mr. SCULLIN. —I should like the Premier of Vic-
toria to clear up a certain matter that may come under
this heading.
Mr. LAWSON. —It appears that some reference was
made in the Age the other day which had the effect of
causing apprehension among a section of the com-
munity regarding the action taken by a State Recruit-
ing Committee of Victoria. I have in my hand a letter
from Captain Dyett asking for certain information
from various Government Departments. In his letter
Captain Dyett states—
The Government’s ballot scheme, which is to be
launched in connexion with recruiting, involves the
obtaining of a complete list of eligible men in Aus-
tralia, and, with a view to the compilation of the
Victorian list, I am directed to ask for a list of the
men —excluding returned soldiers—between t-he
ages of eighteen and forty-four who are employed
in the various Departments under your control.
That letter was sent out to each of the Departments,
asking employees to furnish the names, addresses, occu-
pations, ages, and whether they had any persons de-


pendent upon them. That is all that the Departments
have been asked to do. It was thought that if we are
to make the voluntary system a success an accurate
list of all the eligible men in the community should be
obtained. I understand that the recruiting authorities
may make a voluntary appeal to these men to see if
they are prepared to enlist, and, if not, to say what is
the reason. That is what is being done. There is to
be no attempt to “ comb out ” in the way that is ordi-
narily understood. There must be no pressure by the
Department or the State Government in the matter.
All that the men are asked to do is to supply the in-
formation.
Mr. TUDOR.—Do you not think that this informa-
tion will be duplicated ? I saw in this morning’s paper
that the quotas from various electorates were set out,
and if in the Education Department, for instance, there
was a number of men in one electorate, the information
obtained in the Public Offices would probably be a dupli-
cation. :
Mr. LAWSON. That is a matter of procedure that
will have to be considered. I think there is a fear in
Mr. Scullin s mind that this was an indirect way of
bringing in conscription, so far as it relates to men in
the Public Service; but I want to give him and this
Conference an assurance that the information is being
obtained merely to enable the recruiting authorities to
make an a,ppeal to these men. The Director-General
of Recruiting no doubt fully understands what is pro-
posed, and what we have been asked to do.
The PRESIDENT. A little while ago a request
was sent out to the State Recruiting Committees to im-
prove and bring up to date their list of eligibles, which
had been compiled from the electoral roll. Captain
Dyett came to me, and told me he proposed to send cir-
culars to all employers, asking if they could supply
lists of men eligible for military service in their employ
so that the. Recruiting Committees would be able to
compile their lists. The idea is to appeal to eligible
men to allow themselves to come up for a voluntary
ballot, and., in order to give everybody a fair chance/
the authorities want to make the list as complete as
possible. The action taken is entirely for that purpose
alone, and the instructions I have received from the
Government are to oppose any attempt at compulsion
m every possible way—that, if men do not care to
answer it, or object to their names being sent in, this
will not be done. This action is part of the voluntary
recruiting movement the idea being, as I have already
stated, to .make the lists more accurate; for, obviously
it is unfair that the names of some men should be on
the list, while those of others are not. I considered the
matter, and could see no objection to it. lam sorry
however, if there is any idea that it has been intended <
as a proposal for “combing out,” because instructions '
were given to keep away from compulsion in any shape 1
or form; the phrase “combing out” is a mere news-
paper expression.
HUEP. As to the desire of our friends on the 1
other side that we should impress upon employers the <
necessity of avoiding anything in the shape of economic t
conscription, I would point out that Mr. Bakewell *
the president of the Employers Federation of South -
Australia, and Mr. Brooks, president of the Employers *
Federation of New South Wales, have already an- h
nounced that they will do so. On behalf of the Vic-
torian Employers Federation, I undertake to bring be- f
fore employers m this State the absolute necessity of i
dissociating themselves from any form of economic con- h
scription. Ido not understand that complaint has been i
made of the employers of Victoria collectively— c
it has not been suggested that as a body they i
have been guilty of economic conscription; but the b
idea is that there have been individual cases of the
kind. In that connexion, I wish to draw attention to t<
r ma de by Mr. Tudor on Saturday last, which
6 nnd is inaccurate. In dealing with the question of
e victimization, Mr. Tudor said:—“ln another factory,
6 mana S er which was president of the Chamber of
f ™. ufactures in Victoria—l refer to Miller’s Rope
Works—a man who had been employed at the place for
thirty-five y ears was dismissed because he went on to
an anti-conscription platform.”
Mr. TUDOR. I should have said that the managing
director “had been” president of the Chamber of
• Manufactures.
ie mana gi n g director of those works,
r. logg, is a member of the Employers Federation,
but is not the president of it. I brought this state-
ment under his notice, and he desired me to say that it
was not correct to say that the man in question had been
ismissed for going on to an anti-conscription plat-
form Ihe reasons for his dismissal will be willingly
supplied to Mr. Tudor. I shall content myself with an
emphatic denial of the statement that the man was dis-
missed because he went on an anti-conscription plat-
Proposal 2 agreed to.
J roposal No. 3. —Re-registration of unions de-
legistered, and restoration to unions of their for-
mei. status. .Restoration to their employment of
v lc lmized unionists, abolition of bogus unions and
bureaux set up in connexion therewith.
Mr. lIOLMAH.—I move—
That proposal No. 3 be postponed.
I believe that the points still outstanding mav be reached
later If we do not reach them, they can still be dis-
cussed m Few South Wales in so far as they affect that
fetate. Mr. Lefroy is, I understand, prepared to follow
practically any example set by New South Wales. That
being so, we need not discuss this proposal now; but if
we have time, we may do so later.
Mr. TUDOR—This matter, so far as Victoria is
concerned applies largely to men who were employed
on the wharfs prior to the recent industrial dispute.-
nice then, there has not been as much employment on
ie wharfs as there used to be, owing to the reduction
n shipping Complaint is made, however, that mem-
bers of the old union are victimized. One man told me
yesterday that m the eight months that have elapsed
since the settlement of the dispute he has had only two
jays work He states that what are known as the
loyalist workers secure the preference. There is an
employment bureau in Flindcrs-street, with the details
of which Mr Elmslie is familiar. Members of Par-
liament. who have visited it state that members of the
new union—who.number some hundreds as against the
old union comprising some thousands of men—receive
ie pieference. . We ask that the members of the old
union shall be given a fair deal.
?J r - JpJHHES. —That is agreed upon.
Mr ELMSLIE.—Mr. Tudor has stated the position
as it has been revealed to me by men who are working
on the wharfs They tell me that this discrimination
akes p ace, and that it is absolutely useless for a mem-
ber of. the old union to apply for work on the wharfs,
that is the assurance given me by men whose word I-
hoZr isunSS" 06 Ca " te aCCepted ’ “ d
Senator GARDINER.—I want to sav, in a perfectlv
fnendly spirit, to Mr. Holman, that there is going on
i ew South Wales a form of victimization that will
have to be removed, whether we have voluntary recruit-
ing or. conscription. Whenever a Labour Government
comes into power there, even if it is twenty vears hence
it will take steps to remedy the evil, if U 'is not done
before I make this statement merely to enable
Mi Holman to appreciate how strongly I f ee l in regard
to this matter. The case I have in mind is that of men


who had been for years in the Government service. I
refer more particularly to men who were in the rail-
way and tramway service, but went out on strike.
There was no particular grievance, perhaps, in their
branch, but their mates had gone out on strike, and
they went out with them. The position now is that,
not only are they refused reinstatement in their old
positions, but that where they obtain employment in
another branch of the service, orders are issued for
their discharge. Here is a memorandum, dated 22nd
March last, which puts the position more clearly than
I could do in even a lengthy speech. It shows how
the system is operating:—
Bathurst, 22nd March, 1918.
Inspector of Permanent Why, Bathurst.
Ganger Gibson,
Orange Triangle.
It has been reported by the District Superin-
tendent, Orange, that Walter Francis Woods was
previously employed in Traffic Branch as a leading
porter at Orange, and was dismissed in connexion
with the late railway strike. As we have no autho-
rity to re-employ Woods, he should not have been
given employment, and you will, therefore, arrange
for his discharge along with others from to-morrow,
Saturday, 23rd inst.
(Sgd.) Geo. King.
That is the kind of victimization that I say should not
continue.
Mr. lIOLMAN. —Do you say that a man has a right
to strike against the State whenever he pleases—that
the State is to be put on the same level as an ordinary
employer ?
Senator GARDINER. —I do not wish to go into de-
tails, but, as sensible men, we are anxious to remove
grievances which have militated against harmony in the
community; and I think that when men who had no
black marks against them while in the employ of the
State, but who because of want of judgment went
out
Mr. HOLMAN. —Want of judgment?
Senator GARDINER. —My friends opposite have
described their action as a blunder.
Mr. HOLMAN. —A blunder on the part of the
leaders.
Senator GARDINER. —And the wives and children
of these men are suffering because of what you say was
a blunder. I quite understand the Government’s posi-
tion, but I am certain that harmony will not be secured
while victimization of this kind obtains.
Mr. HOLMAN—You might as well say that we shall
not get harmony until we release all the burglars and
criminals from our gaols. Men who strike against the
Statue are surely not in the same position as those who
strike against capitalistic employers.
Senator GARDINER. —I am glad I mentioned this
matter. We want to know whether victimization is to
be a fixed policy of the Government. Recently, when
visiting the rooms of the Railway Union, I met a man
who was the secretary of the Locomotive Drivers Union,
and whose case is one of peculiar hardship. His father
died fighting in France, and although a young. man,
he has a large family. Because he held the position of
secretary of the Locomotive Drivers Union, he was not
put back at the close of the strike, although other men
were. He had no right, of course, to sti ike against
the State !
Mr. HOLMAN. —He knew what the position would
be when he went out.
Senator GARDINER.—Of course, he did.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then what is he screaming about ?
Senator GARDINER.—He had been sixteen years
in the Government service, and because he happened
to be secretary of his. union, after the strike was over,
he was refused employment.
Mr. HOLMAN.— I like these men who want to wear
a martyr’s crown one day and the next day come plead-
ing to you !
Mr. HUGHES.—Do not forget that Mr. Holman
and I, after giving twenty-five years of faithful service
to the Labour movement, were turned out without a
word of explanation.
Senator GARDINER. —I am pleased to have even
that feeble admission that the Prime Minister feels his
position.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do feel it.
Senator GARDINER.—What would your feelings be
if you were in the position of these men, who are suffer-
ing from this continued victimization ? If Mr. Hughes
and Mr. Holman will conform to the conditions of ser-
vice obtaining in our organization at the present time
they can be reinstated. The men to whom lam refer-
ring are prepared to conform to the conditions now ob-
taining in the State service and want to be reinstated.
It is well known that I played no part in the removal
of Mr. Hughes and Mr. Holman from our organization.
Mr. HOLMAN. —But lots of men who, in their
private conversation, had approved of conscription were
not turned out of the Labour movement.
Senator GARDINER. —There are hundreds of these
cases all over the States. If any of these men get em-
ployment in another branch of the Public Service they
are dismissed as soon as it becomes known that they
were among those who went out on strike.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I was only arguing with Senator
Gardiner the theoretical side. The proposal made by
the representatives of Labour, and which is now before
us, covers every such case. Our reply is that no man
shall be excluded from employment because of his con-
nexion with the late strike. That covers everything.
Senator GARDINER. —No man is to be refused em-
ployment, but when some of these men apply for rein-
statement there will be no employment for them. These
men had vested interests in their employment. They
were entitled, in some cases, to a superannuation allow-
ance.
Mr. PRITCHARD. —And they renounced that right
by going out on strike.
Senator GARDINER. —At this time of .great crisis
I am prepared to give every assistance to the recruiting
movement, even if the Government say, “We will
adhere to our-fixed policy.” I have the courage to say
to our men, “ No matter to what extent we are mis-
governed, nothing should stop us from unity in this
time of great crisis.” These people, because they have
made a mistake, are to be shut out of employment for
ever, and naturally when they are asked to go and fight
for the Government they have a nasty habit of getting
down to logic by inquiring, “ Could men be treated
worse than we have been by any Government?”
Mr. HOLMAN. —A good deal worse. If they were
in Belgium they would know it.
Senator GARDINER. —It is these inflexible deter-
minations -which have caused the industrial disputes
and strikes that we have experienced. It is because our
men are so obstinate that they fight so well. But, ac-
cording to my friends opposite, what is a splendid attri-
bute in a man when he is storming a strong position on
the battlefield is an attribute for the possession of which
he must be punished when he exhibits it industrially.
If anybody thinks that I am bargaining in order that
I may obtain conditions under which I can approach
the unionists of Australia, my reply is that I am not.
I can go to the unionists to-day and say to them, “ The
position is so serious that the one thing needed in Aus-
tralia is unity and harmony.”


Mr. McCALLUM.—I wish to know how this matter
affects the State of Western Australia. I understand
that Mr. Holman proposes that it shall be decided
between himself and the representatives of New South
Wales. Mr. Lefroy has stated that he will be guided
by the decision of the Conference upon it, and I desire
to know whether we shall have a chance of being con-
sulted in reference to it. In the reply which has been
made by my honorable friends opposite to the demand
for a cessation of industrial victimization, a reference
is made to the late general strike only. There is no
reference to the strike of members of the A.W.U. on
the wheat stacks in Western Australia.
Mr. HUGHES.—Has there been another strike?
Mr. McCALLUM.—Yes, there was another strike
about eight weeks ago, but only about 150 men were
involved in it.
Mr. WATSOH.—Mr. Lefroy was sitting near me
when he gave an assurance that effect would be given
to the agreement arrived at here. The second case is
covered by the terms of that agreement.
Mr. McCALLUM.—Ho. There is no reference made
to the second strike.
Mr. HUGHES.—We did not discuss it, because we
did not know of it; but our intention was to cover all
cases of industrial victimization, from !*he general strike
onwards. Of course, lam not able to speak for Mr.
Lefroy.
Mr. McCALLUM.—The Colonial Secretary for
Western Australia has said that no member of the
Australian Workers Union will be again employed on
the wheat stacks there. As a result, the whole job is
hung up.
Mr. HUGHES.—I would suggest that you should
talk the matter over with Mr. Lefroy. But, as chair-
man of the united body, I will take it on myself to say
that Mr. Lefroy will meet you and discuss the matter
with you.
Mr. ILOLMAH.—Mr. Lefroy will be at the Premiers’
Conference in Sydney on the Bth May next, and if.
there is any point then outstanding as the result of the
discussion in our own States, we shall be glad to let
Mr. McCallum know in advance, so that he may arrange
for a member of his organization to come to Sydney
with Mr. Lefroy, with a view to arriving at an agree-
ment there. I understand that Mr. Lefroy said that
he would settle the Western Australian trouble on the
same lines as we settled our trouble. In other words,
if we can come to a friendly arrangement, he will
accept it.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—I would point out that a some-
what similar position obtains at Whllaroo and Port
Pirie, in South Australia, and I should like to know
whether the workmen there will receive the same con-
sideration as the workers in Western Australia and
Hew South Wales. _ Upon my return to South Aus-
tralia, I want to be in a position to communicate with
the persons affected in the centres I have indicated, in-
forming them that, in regard to industrial victimiza-
tion, they are to be treated in the same way as their
comrades in the other States.
Mr. HOLM AH.—Are these men permanent em-
ployes ?
Mr. WILLIAMS.—Yes.
Mr. LAMBERT. There are other phases of vic-
timization which have not been brought under the notice
of the Conference. That, however, may not be the
fault of the Government of Hew South Wales. But
as Mr. Brooks, who represents the employers of that
State, is present, I presume that he will know some-
thing about it. I desire to bring under the notice of the
Conference certain matters, which, in my judgment,
are calculated to create discord, and to hinder recruit-
ing. In Sydney, for example, there are bureaux and
employing agencies on behalf of country employers,
such as farmers and pastoralists, which absolutely lay
it down as a condition that, before a man can secure
engagement, he must give them an absolute assurance
that lie is not a member of a trade organization, and
particularly that he is not a member of the Australian
Workers Union. Such a condition, I contend, is not
calculated to bring about harmony, and certainly ope-
rates against the success of recruiting. So far as I am
aware, the Australian Workers Union has some 50,000
of its members at present at the Front. Whilst khey are
absent serving their country, a dead set seems to have
been made against the remaining members of that
organization for the purpose of victimizing them.
Mr. HUGHES.—Upon what work are they engaged?
Mr. LAMBERT.—They are general station workers
and general bush workers.
Mr. BEEBY.—I do not think your statement is
correct.
Mr. LAMBERT.—It is absolutely correct, although
Mr. Beeby may not have any knowledge of the mat-
ter. I repeat that a dead set has been made against the
industrial organizations of Hew South Wales. It
seems to be either a deliberately engineered scheme,
01 an agreement between the employers and the agencies
to which I have alluded.
Mr. STOREY. I desire to bring under the notice
of the Minister for the Havy something which has
occurred in Hew South Wales. There, as members are
aware, the Commonwealth Government have entered
into a very comprehensive scheme of shipbuilding, and
ha\ e laid down certain conditions under which the men
shall be employed. One of those conditions is that they
shall work for a certain period, that there shall be no
strikes, that there shall be a dilution of labour, and
piece-work. In many cases the men have signed the
agreement personally, without the consent of their
organizations. But a number have not done thalt.
Mr. HUGHES.—Very few.
Mr. STOREY. I put it to the Prime Minister that
a man who has given faithful service to the Government
tor a number of years, who is strictly sober from
January to December, who is at his work regularly
every Monday morning should be considered.
Everybody does not render faithful service to
his employer. Does Mr. Hughes think it is a fair
thing that these men should be treated in the way
I have outlined? They are not men of the class who
are ready to jump m on every occasion with a view to
preventing the Government from doing what they wish
to do. But they cannot readily agree to sign the
agreement which they have been asked to sign Why
only a few years ago, both Mr. Cook and Mr. Holman
would have raised a great outcry if they had been asked
to sign a contract for any considerable time without
the consent of their organizations. The engineers are
not called upon to work piece-work, nor will they be
I will stake my life that there is not an engineer but
who will work on the Adelaide on piece-work^
Mr. HUGHES. Well, why don’t they sign it?
Mr. STOREY.—The Government are asking them to
sign a contract to work piece-work, when they have been
doing tha very thing for the past twenty years without
any trouble or anything more being asked of them The
engineers, until comparatively recently, were regarded
as the men who were a menace to trade unionism because
tiey would not strike. They were the aristocrats of
trade unionism, so to speak. But you know what it is
when a conservative body becomes radical. It i s only


in comparatively recent times that they have come over
to their fellow unionists’ way of thinking, and now they
are more active than the other fellows, and will use t le
strike readily.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I think I can give an under-
taking that w T e can fix that matter up.
Mr. TUDOR. —The only things I understand to be
postponed now are those matters affecting the Govern-
ments of Now South. Whies and. Whstern Austialia.
There is another point, however. There is trouble in
the matter of the Steam-ship Owners I ederation of
Australia. The Victorian owners are those to whom I
particularly refer. Will the same thing apply to those
men, namely, that there shall be no preference given to
•die new unionists, and that new and old alike are to
be treated similarly in the method to be adopted of
selecting men?
Mr. KEEP.—Unfortunately, the shipping companies
are not represented here. They are not affiliated with
the Employers’ Federation, either. But it has been in
my mind that a great deal of injustice would be shown
to the men Avho have been loyal to the shipping com-
panies if any such steps as have been indicated heie
are adopted.
Mr. SCULLIN. —It is idle to discuss whether they
are goiug to get equal opportunities or not. You
gentlemen must know very well that the existence. of
the other union will be a source of unending conflict,
whether it is right or wrong. You speak of equal
opportunity. Suppose a trade wants to go to Couit.
Who is going to present its log ? The genuine or the
bogus union ? The bogus union has, in many cases,
representatives of blie employers among its numbeis.
There is no trade unionist who will tolerate that for
five minutes, if he can stop it. Here, in Melbourne,
when negotiations take place, it is between the repre-
sentatives of the employees and bhe Employers Federa-
tion. Who is going to speak for the bogus unions?
Offered as a suggestion towards harmony, you must
consider that, if you are going to have two kinds of
unionists, you are merely perpetuating trouble.
Mr. WATSON.—Whatever the conditions of employ-
ment are, and whatever is laid down by the Courts,
will be open equally to all the men engaged in the
industry concerned.
Mr. SCULLlN.—Everything depends on who pre-
sents the log, and on how it is presented. If you have
two unions going into the Court, the one presenting one
log and the other undercutting its requests, so to speak
the unions will not have a chance of getting their case
considered on its merits. Trade unionists will not
stand for that condition of things.
Mr. MORBY —lf this matter is postponed, I take
it from Mr. Holman that the Conference, or Committee,
which is to further consider it will be called together at
the earliest possible moment.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Yes; we can arrange the date and
other necessary matters straight away.
The PRESIDENT. —It is understood, then, that this
matter is postponed.
Prosposal l/.a. —Repeal of all war precautions re-
gulations not vital to the conduct of the war, and a
Government guarantee against their re-enactment.
Mr. TUDOR. —The Prime Minister’s answer to this
proposal is—
The Federal Government are prepared to favor-
ably consider the repeal of all war regulations not
vital to the war. The Labour representatives to
state which regulations are objected to.
Some members of the Labour party in the Federal Par-
liament have made a special study of these war regula-
tions, and notice has been given from time to time of
motions for the disallowance of some of them. X pre-
sume that what the Prime Minister means by his
answer to Proposal 4a is that I, on behalf of Labour
representatives, should submit to him the regulations
which we do not consider necessary. I point out that
in many cases the objection is not to the regulation
itself, but to its administration and the use that is made
of it. I shall be pleased to confer with the Prime
Minister on the terms of the understanding he has given
to the Conference. With respect to the Government
guarantee against the re-enactment of regulations ob-
jected to, I think it may be assumed that if the Go-
vernment agree to their withdrawal they will have no
desire to re-enact them.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—The reply to Proposal 4a scarcely
seems to me to go far enough. To say that the Govern-
ment are prepared to favorably consider the repeal of
war regulations not vital to the war is delightfully
vague. -A man may favorably consider a proposal and
still decide to do nothing.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Can you not safely leave this
matter to Mr. Tudor ?
Mr. TUDOR. —There is one regulation which I fear
may cause a great deal of discord in the community.
It is one which was passed recently as affecting certain
organizations and the wearing of certain emblems. I
do hope that the Federal Government will see to it that
that regulation is repealed. I trust that there will be
no pin-pricking of any one section of the community.
We know that this regulation arose out of a procession
held in Melbourne on 16th March—of .certain
people who wore certain colours. As a result of that
procession another section of the community immedia-
tely held a public meeting and tbok part in another
public procession. We know that certain persons who
protested against the high cost of living were prosecuted
and thrown into gaol for taking part in a procession;
but the people who wished by their procession to protest
against those who wore certain colours went up to the
Prime Minister’s office, though, I understand, their
procession was not allowed.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Both processions were al-
lowed.
Mr. TUDOR. —No. I understand that the Lord
Mayor of Melbourne did not allow the second proces-
sion. It was a purely voluntary or spontaneous move-
ment by the people who took part in it as a protest
against certain other people. We should not do any-
thing which may be the means of creating discord in the
community, and I feel confident that the enforcement
of the regulation to which I refer would have that
effect. I "hope the Federal Government will consider
the desirability of withdrawing that obnoxious regula-
tion, as to do so would make for greater harmony in
the community.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—You will admit that the
wearing of the emblems referred to did not create much
harmony ? It put the whole place into a turmoil.
Mr. TUDOR. —I have sat in the Federal Parliament
with Mr. Joseph Cook for seventeen years, and I know
that he has never found me asking a special privilege
for any one section in the community. I do ask the
Federal Government to withdraw a regulation of this
kind, which is aimed only at one section.
The PRESIDENT.—How do you propose to word
the decision on this matter 1
Mr. TUDOR,—I should say that “ The Labour repre-
sentatives will be pleased to indicate to the Prime
Minister the regulations which they consider are not
vital to the war, and the administration of -which they
believe creates discord in the community to-day.”


Mr. STOREY.—I should like the Federal Govern-
ment to look into the matter raised by Mr. Tudor. 1
am not very much concerned about what irrational
people may do, except that I agree that we should be
careful that things do not occur in these troublous
times which are likely to create bad feeling in the com-
munity. I am bound to say that when I saw the regula-
tion referred to I thought that the Federal Government
were taking leave of their senses. It may be that some
gentlemen present are of opinion that I have taken
leave of mine in using such an expression, but, candidly,
I think that the Federal Government have got into such
a state that they are prepared to take notice of almost
anything. It looked as if, should there be a proces-
sion of unemployed marching through the streets with
banners, some one would jump to the conclusion that
it was a riot in embryo.
Mr. BROOKS.—Processions of the unemployed were
not stopped in Sydney.
Mr. STOREY.—That is a pertinent interjection, and
Mr. Brooks will, I am sure, agree that had the Govern-
ment of Lew South Wales prevented those processions
the tram cars would never have been driven by volun-
teers. J
Mr. BROOKS.—I quite believe that.
Mr. STOREY.—Because they were allowed to have
their processions nothing of an injurious character could
be said of the strikers throughout the whole of that
strike.
A MEMBER. No fault could be found with their
conduct at all.
Mr. STOREY. I want.the Conference to under-
stand that the unionists of to-day live in an atmosphere
altogether different from that of the trade unionists
m the early days of the movement, and if it is the sin-
cere desire of the Government to create harmony they
should meet us by stating in some acceptable words
that, although they believed something was likely to
happen because of the action which a certain section of
the people had taken, they are of the opinion now that
there is no necessity for the regulation, and that it will
be withdrawn. I doubt if anybody really believes that
there are in Australia Sinn Feiners who desire to do
mjury to our country. I have moved about a good deal,
I have mixed amongst active members of my own class,'
and I have made diligent search to find out if anything
of this sort is going on, but I failed to obtain any evi-,
dence of it. If I thought that any number of people
were endeavouring to bring about disaffection in our
midst, I should be the last man in this country to re-
commend the course we are now urging the Prime Min-
ister to adopt. I am anxious, however, to do what I
can to present a common front to the enemy, and, there-
fore, I ask that the proposal we make be accepted.
Mr. McCALLUM.—I urge the Government to repeal
tie regulation. I believe it was gazetted as a result of
something that happened in Melbourne, but the conse-
quences of the Government’s action are not limited to
the State of Victoria, for I understand there is to be a
big demonstration in Perth on Sunday next to protest
against the regulation. This shows ‘ that feeling is
spreading, and I want to emphasize the fact that if 1
the Government think they are not getting whole- '
hearted support in the trade union movement for the 1
voluntary recruiting system, it is because there is a 1
belief- amongst trade unionists that the Commonwealth I
Government has made a dead set against them In just i
the same way the regulation to which we now object c
will hinder the recruiting movement, because it will \
have the same effect upon the particular section of the 1
community aimed at, and it is to that particular section t
we must look for a large number of our recruits if we c
make an appeal. It appears to me that the Government v
is totally disregarding the lessons of history, 0 r this r
regulation would never have been brought into force n
r ~^_r . HUGHES. What particular regulation are you
1 alluding to ?
1 Mr. I UDOR. The Sinn Fein regulation.
3 ,^ r ‘ HUGHES. Well, only one portion of that regu-
s lation aims at Sinn Feiners.
Mr. McCALLUM.—I point out that in the early
history of the Labour movement this line of conduct
t was adopted by Governments in most countries, with
i the result that the workers were driven into secret con-
l clave, their organizations became secret societies where
, gnevances were discussed in the dark, and thus, in a
sense, they became a danger to society. When, how-
ever, their legitimate position was recognised, and they
were given a standing in the community the trade'union
movemen ecame a force for good, and the whole com-
munity benefited. Now, this regulation aiming at Sinn
Feiners will have the same effect upon those men as the
then existing laws had on men connected with the
Labour movement m its early stages, and it will defeat
the very object aimed at by the Government. It seems
to me that if a regulation aims at a certain section of
the community, and seeks to impose upon certain people
given disabilities, we might reasonably expect this
action to lead to regulations to prevent even trade
unmonists from wearing buttons or other emblems of
then union, because some of these emblems are objec-
tionable to some people. We all remember the big
strike that occurred in Queensland because the tramway
company objectedl to their workmen wearing the buttons
but I nJ Un A Or V lhere was no regulation then in force,
but, nevertheless, an attempt was made to prevent the
men from wearing their buttons. 1 hope? therefore!
that the Prime Minister and those associated with him
will see the wisdom of withdrawing the regulation.
■ HORBY.—H hope the Prime Minister will give
this Conference his assurance that the regulation will
be repealed. At an earlier stage in our proceedings he
would Z T b6r that the P e °P le of Great Britain
would be greatly encouraged if we could send out news
from this Conference that Australia had become united
this crisis, and that all members of the Conference
f n ada f eed to , ur £ e their respective organizations to help
m the recruiting movement. I also remind him that
Sinn Fein members are even sitting in the British House
of Commons, and that they are allowed to have thei!
piocessions in the Old Country.
1 I think that, though they have been
Commo’„ s 7 they wi “ not sit “ House of
Mr - MORBY.—Mr. Watson is quite wrong when he
b - - ever fat in^f
dined to de ‘
England for some year, ™ haVe not been 111
nofbee„“lrJ tftUtl/an pre7 "ft*
advise Mr Watson to study
Journal , for there he will find that t i ! ?
seat in the British House of erlftd
and was ordered out. This remiLtinr, a . scene >
object affects (the liberty of a Stain WJ®-
community. Because of something that arose out of
the demonstration or procession'in Melbourne the
people concerned are, by this reguliHnr, + , . ?
the right to exhibit their emblem ff mfmi AfSr
all, Ido not know that anything verv serlm la if j
on that occasion; but it appears thlt Zw • h 2 PP<sned
which would, I believe, s^pp’ort
lung they were prepared to do to aupprSs anSS
that originated from the Roman CatholiLfctin„Yf \l S
community, made certain rt Y' 0
vermnent. They appear to t o“he Sinn Fe, ? n"
organization because it is a revolution nr* Fem
against the present order of things, and becanTuie


mad© up chiefly of Roman Catholics. That is how the
matter appears to me, though I may be wrong. In my
judgment, it is ridiculous that a regulation shouia
set out that these people shall not be permitted to wear
a Sinn Fein button. If the Government want to
popularize any particular movement, the best way to do
that is to try and suppress it.
Mr. JELLEY. —Make martyrs of them.
Mr. MOKBY. —Yes; place all the obstacles possible
in their way. In this respect, lam reminded of wliat
happened in the early days of the suffragette movement
in England. The Government of the day threw into
prison the leading women in the movement. The women
then adopted what they thought the best means, of con-
vincing the Government of their absolute sinceiity.
They refused to take the prison diet, and some of them
were on the verge of starvation. Thereupon, other regu-
lations were introduced to suppress the movement. . lhe
offices of the suffragettes in London and the provinces
were closed, and meetings to further the cause weio
prohibited. But, after all these efforts at suppression,
the position is that, at the next parliamentary elections
in the Old Country, women will have the right to vote.
That Avill have been brought about by the martyrdom
of these women. The opponents of the movement have
been convinced of the wisdom of granting the franchise
to women. The wrongs to which women weie subjected
only served to stimulate them to greater effort. We
shall find the same thing occurring in relation to any
effort to suppress Sinn Fein organization by closing up
their clubs and so forth. Such action will only give a
fillip to the movement. It will advertise it. People
in other parts of Australia who, perhaps, were not aware
of the existence of such an organization here, will learn
of it for the first time, and be anxious to join it. Irish-
men, or the descendants of Irishmen, will be anxious to
secure membership, and will adopt different, methods
until, to your everlasting surprise, there will be an
outburst on the part of these people. They will come
out in force, and make their presence felt in a way that
might not be always to the advantage of the general
community. The enthusiasm of these people having
been suppressed, it may reach the bursting point when
such a thing would be least welcome. I ask Mr. Hughes
to extend to these people the same treatment as he pro-
poses to extend to others, and to restore them to their
former stfltus*
Mr. SCULLIK—I agree that in war time a War
Pi’ecautions Act, and regulations under it, are neces-
sary ; but there should be no regulations framed under
such an Act which are not vital to the war. lam quite
agreeable that Mr. Hughes and Mr. Tudor should meet
subsequently to decide what regulations should be re-
pealed on the ground that they are not vital to the war.
Mr. TUDOE. —It is not necessary that I should meet
Mr. Hughes. Any representative of the Federal Go-
vernment and a representative of the other side could
deal with the matter.
Mr. SCULLIU. —Exactly. Surely, however, the
Government will give us an absolute assurance that
only those regulations which are vital to the war will
be retained. Why should we have the words favorably
consider ” in the Government’s reply?
Mr. HUGHES.—We have, for example, a regulation
under the War Precautions Act providing for a contract
with the British Government for the sale of rabbits.
Mr. SCULLIK—Is not that vital to the war?
Mr. HUGHES—I do not know whether it is or not.
If you urge that without rabbits there is no victory,
I have nothing more to say; but it could hardly be urged
that if there were no rabbits in Australia Britain could
not win. You might argue, therefore, that this rabbit
contract regulation under the War Precautions Act
would have to go. I know, of course, that you do not
mean that?
Mr. SCULLIN. —We could say that Britain without
food could not hope to win.
Mr. HUGHES. —Of course we could; but we have
sheep. Ido not know whether you are aware of that.
Mr. SCULLlN'.—Babbits are a part of the food
supply, and a sufficient food supply is as important as
is the supply of munitions. I think we could say that
the Federal Government are prepared to repeal all
regulations under the War Precautions Act not vital to
the war, and we can, by common agreement, determine
what are not vital to the war. lhat being so, why
should not the Government, instead of promising to
“ favorably consider/’ say straight out that this will
be done. As an earnest of good will and sincerity, I
suggest to the Prime Minister that he should yield to
the appeal iust made to him. The incident which
occurred recently in Melbourne has been magnified, just
as the Warwick incident was exaggerated. If there is
any sedition in the country it can be dealt with under
the common law; but the framing of a regulation under
the War Precautions Act to deal with any one section
of the Community must, I am sure, militate against suc-
cessful recruiting. I join in the appeal to the Prime
Minister to repeal the regulation in question.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —I am not prepared to accept the
offer of the other side as it stands unless I hear some-
thing to alter my present opinion. I was loth to inter-
vene in the discussion regarding the new regulation deal-
ing with a certain organization, but I want to empha-
size what has been said as to the necessity of striking
out the words “ favorably consider.” Why not say
straight out that the Government are prepared to repeal
all war regulations not vital to the war. The members
of this Conference have had an opportunity to-judge of
the manner in which promises have been made on each
side. They are familiar with all the circumstances lead-
ing up to those offers, and may be prepared —personally,
1 am —to accept the assurance that all we desire in this
regard will be granted. It must not be forgotten, how-
ever, that we have to satisfy hundreds of thousands of
people outside, and that they will say, rightly or
wrongly, “ A promise to ‘ favorably consider ’ is no
good to me.” Can we not remove that feeling of un-
certainty 1
Mr. HUGHES. —You are only beating about the
bush. It matters not whether we use the words
“ favorably consider ” or not. Wffiat the man outside
desires is action. He will judge, not by what the Go-
vernment say, but by what they do. You have to see
whether we do these things or not. The mere form of
words employed is nothing. When I use the words
“ favorably consider,” I have no qualification at the
back of mv mind.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —I do not say that you have, but
if the Government are prepared to do these things, why
do they not give us a straight-out declaration instead
of a promise to “favorably consider”?
Mr. HUGHES. —There are a great number of these
regulations. How can I say that I will repeal them
all ? I tell the Conference, and through it the country,
that the Federal Government will favorably consider
the repeal of all regulations not vital to the conduct of
the war. By that I mean that they will repeal all such
as can be shown by Mr. Tudor not to be vital to the
war.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —The Prime Minister has just said
that he will repeal them, but in his written answer to
our proposal he merely promises to “ favorably con-
sider ” a request for their repeal.
Mr. HUGHES. —The assurance I am giving now is
also the assurance of the Government.
Mr. ELMSLIE. —In another part of the Govern-
ment’s answer to our proposals with regard to regu-
lations there occurs this statement, “ The War Pre-
cautions Act will not be used for political and industrial
prosecutions.” That is a straight-out statement that


will carry conviction. If the same words had been
used in this case the position would have been different.
Mr. HUGHES.—WiII you not allow any one but
yourself to live? Must we adopt your formula in every
case ?
Mr. ELMSLIE.—That is not the question. The
Prime Minister cannot fail to understand our position.
If this promise is to have any virtue it must be such as
will impress the people.
Mr. HUGHES.—If they are impressed, it will be
by what we do, and not by what we say.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—Sureiy if I think there will be a
difficulty in impressing the people with the complete-
ness of this offer, I have a right to say so. I have no
desire to be offensive, but I believe I am correctly inter-
preting the view of a large number outside when I say
that they will want something more definite than a
promise to “ favorably consider.”
Mr. HUGHES.—I can add nothing to the debate
beyond saying that the Government, in making its state-
ment in the form that it did, intended to convey what
I endeavoured to do by way of interjection while Mr.
Elmslie w'as speaking. It desired me to convey its in-
tention of approaching these questions bond fide, and
without any mental or other reservation, so as to remove
as far as is humanly possible all things standing between
us and the sections which you gentlemen represent. We
say that the War Precautions regulations shall be used
only as far as is necessary for the conduct of the war.
I cannot say more than that. It does not matter in
what words it is put—that is the intention of the Go-
vernment.
Mr. LYONS. What is your intention in regard to
the Sinn Fein regulation?
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not know what is my inten-
tion in regard to that regulation. It will remain to be
shown whether or not it is vital to the conduct of the
war. But if my friend means to say that we should
shut our eyes to the fact that there are in our midst
people who—whether knowingly or not—are playing the
game of the enemy, it must be very obvious that we
cannot permit them either to display emblems or to use
language calculated to disrupt the Empire, strengthen
the enemy, and impair the powers either of the Com-
monwealth or of Britain in the conduct of this war.
Whether these things are done under the guise of Sinn
Fein or anything else, they cannot be permitted. But
where it is shown—if it can be shown—that this Sinn
Fein movement is one which has no relation to the war,
and is not intended to retard recruiting or to hamstring
the policy of the Government in its conduct of the war,
the regulation will go—it will be repealed.
Mr. RYAN.—You do not want any more stringent
regulation than the Imperial Government have?
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not know. The Imperial Go-
vernment is situated very differently from ourselves.
In the first place, they have adopted a policy of con-
scription. We have not. It does not matter what .
Sinn Fein says, it cannot have the slightest effect on
recruiting in Britain. It has an effect in Ireland, and
one may see that effect by looking at the proportion of
its population who have gone to the Front as compared
with the proportion of the population of Britain. It is
slightly over 4 per cent, in the one case as against 14
per cent, in the other. Here, where there is voluntary
recruiting, some persons talk about Australia when they
are not thinking of Australia at all, but of Ireland.
I am for Australia—Australia against England; Aus-
tralia against anybody. I cannot put Wales or any
other country before Australia. But some men who
talk about putting Australia first really mean putting
Ireland first all the time. They will not do that if I
can prevent them.
Mr. LYONS.—It seems to me that the first detailed
answer we have had in regard to the suggested repeal of
the War Precautions Act regulations has convincingly
shown us that we are not likely to obtain much from
uru Commonwealth Government by way of concession,
whatever Mr. Hughes may know in regard to the atti-
tude of the Irish section throughout Australia, I know
that so long as this regulation remains in existence he
need not expect the full and complete co-operation of
tout section, because he will not get it. Personally, I
should have very great hesitation in going back to my
own State and making an appeal to the people there
on behalf of recruiting while that regulation continues
m operation. They would tell me straightway that I
had returned empty handed.
Mi. HUGHES. I have not the regulation before me,
u l aS rW r can f ec ollect, it i s divided into two
pai s. I lie first portion refers to statements made
generally, and to the wearing of disloyal badges, &c.,
while the second part mentions Sinn Fein. I will favor-
ab y consider the repeal of the second part of that re-
gulation m order to meet the views of Mr. Lyons and
those who think with him.
Mi HOLMAN.—That is the part which deals with
Sinn Fem?
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes.
— That is a very great concession.
k°P e that members will under-
stand that this question falls in quite a different cate-
gory from the other question that is dealt with by the
same regulation. I have gone as far as I ought to be
asked to go, because the other portion of the regulation
does not contain a single word about one particular sec-
tion of the community more than it does about another,
it merely says that people who do certain things which
are clearly calculated to interfere with recruiting shall
be liable to certain penalties. It is the second part of
that regulation to which exception has been taken. Of
course, I am only one mm in the Government, and
members must not think that I am an autocrat.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I wish to refer for a moment
to an interjection made by my friend Mr. Ryan while
the Prime Mmister was speaking. Mr. Ryah appears
all the while to have in his mind the British Govern-
ment. I wish to stress the point that conditions which
obtain here are not similar to the conditions which
obtain in the Old Country. The British Government
have conscription—we have not got it here.
Mr. RYAN.—I do not see the relevancy of this
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.-I am not concerned with
whether you see the relevancy of it or not—l am going
to state the position. Whatever may occur in the way
of the display of emblems or the holding of processions
at Home cannot in any way interfere with recruiting
there. The men have to rally to the colours whether
they will or not.
Mr. RYAN.—That is not the case in the country
where they have these processions. J
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—There is a vital distinction be-
tween the conditions which obtain in the two countries
and things which may very well be permitted at Home
because they cannot interfere with recruiting and with
the reinforcement of troops abroad, cannot be permitted
here. . The cases are very different. If we had con-
scription m Australia, and the men were bound to enlist
just as we think they should be, and as the nations'
needs them to be, a very different attitude might be
assumed towards all these other matters. But here we
have to consider what is likely to divide (the country
and -what is likely to hinder recruiting.
SCULLIjS . Is that not all the more reason why
we should not have regulations which do harm to re-
cruiting? e
I C00K ~ M .y friend knows as well as
I do that what occurred m Melbourne the other day
drove a wedge between fthe people of this country There
are two sides to this question, and the Government are
m duty bound to consider both sides. It has no right
to consider only one side.


Mr. SCULLIN'. —There is an impression abroad that
they have considered only one side.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—Does not Mr. Scullin see
that the objections come from one side? Then I ask
members to recollect that the Sinn I ein movement is
not an Irish movement. Let us make the broad distinc-
tion between the Irish as a race and these very various
excrescences which have grown upon Ireland. The
same remark is applicable to every other country. I
say, therefore, that we are not as free here to permit
certain things to be done as are the authorities in Great
Britain. I repeat that, whatever goes on there cannot
in any way interfere with the rallying of the men to
the colours. That is the vital distinction which we need
to keep in mind. First of all, we are relying upon
the voluntary movement, and anything which tends to
discredit recruiting must be sternly dealt with by any
Government.
A MEMBER. —What is your personal attitude upon
this question?
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—My attitude is that the whole
matter should be reconsidered, and if anything can be
done to prevent a repetition of what occurred the other
day in Melbourne, it should be done. But lam here
to tell my friends quite plainly that that kind of thing
cannot go on Avithout hindering recruiting, and inter-
fering with that harmony which this Conference is
anxious 'to promote. I hope that I cannot be accused
of being a sectarian-monger.
Mr. MOEBY. —Critchley Parker would not charge
you with being that.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—I do not know Critchley
Parker. I know nothing about him. But we must
keep in our minds the vital distinction which exists
between the condition of affairs in a country whose
whole manhood is at the disposal of the Government
for the reinforcement of its troops abroad, and a coun-
try in which we have to entirely rely upon the voluntary
movement.
Mr. RYAN.—Mr. Cook has made the remarks which
he has just addressed to (the Conference by reason of an
interjection which I made whilst the Prime Minister
was speaking. He has been at some pains to explain
that the position which obtains in Great Britain is quite
different from the position which obtains here. Ido
not admit that. He has referred to the existence of
Sinn Fein at Home in a country where there is con-
scription ; but I would remind him that there is no
conscription in the country in which Sinn Fein candi-
dates stood for Parliament and were elected. The
Imperial Government had no law operating to prevent
these candidates, when elected, from taking their seats
in the British Parliament. They are given complete
freedom
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—They are not given complete
freedom. The Imperial Parliament is just about to
impose conscription in that very country.
Mr. RYAN. —Mr. Cook is attempting to drew a red
herring across the trail. I say that when the Sinn I ein
candidates were elected to (the House of Commons, there
was no conscription in Ireland. Mr. Cook has attempted
to draw a distinction which does not exist. Ido not
know what happened in Melbourne the other day
A MEMBER. —I do not know what happened here,
but I do know what is happening in Perth.
Mr. RYAN. —I know that this regulation, or a por-
tion of it, is a restriction upon the freedom which should
obtain in this country, just as it obtains in Great
Britain. Any interference wi ( th that freedom, whether
in respect to Sinn Fein or anything else, is a species of
tyranny. It does not make for harmony in the com-
munity. lam sure that the Prime Minister will under-
stand me, because he has previously referred to me as a
Sinn Feiner.
A MEMBER.—Ho you plead guilty?
F. 3959. — 10
Mr. EYAN. —I do not.
Mr. HUGHES.—I had forgotten Ithe incident. What
I did was to repeat wha l *; the Archbishop of Melbourne
said.
Mr. RYAN. —I am convinced that a great deal of
the misunderstanding between us arises from the_ use
of terms in a different sense. What the Prime Minister
means by Sinn Eein is a body ot persons who resort
to means which are not constitutional —to disloyalty and
rebellion. Others use the term in quite a different
sense. A good deal of argument would be avoided if
we started out by asking, “ What do you mean by the
expression ‘ Sinn Fein’?” Then we should find that
the Prime Minister means one thing, whilst other people
mean something quite different. lam not expressing
any opinion on the question of Sinn Fein. Ido not
care to what section of the community such a restric-
tion as that imposed by "this regulation may be applied.
I say that it must have a bad effect. _ It makes for dis-
union in the community. I was in Great Britain
and Ireland shortly after these occurrences in Dublin.
I said both in Dublin and Belfast that what the
Dominions were concerned about was that such an ad-
justment should take place as that the efficiency of the
Empire in this great struggle should not be impaired in
the least. That is just the position that I have always
adopted, and which we should stand by now. We know
what the result of this regulation has been. Perhaps it
is something that the Government did not expect. We
know that these large meetings—if I can gauge from
the newspaper reports accurately —are the aftermath of
conscription. It is deplorable that any speaker should
be able to say that the remedy is “ a white wall and a
firing squad.’ We want to remove that kind of thing.
We do not wish to have these sections fighting each
other. We want to find some way to bring them to-
gether; for they must be brought together, since they
will sink or swim together in the final resort. By doing
away with this regulation, and having none such as it
upon our statute-books, that will tend to promote har-
mony. Mr. Cook says he is not a sectarian-monger.
Neither am I. No one in Queensland, or any other part
of Australia, will suggest that sectarianism influences
me in any way. This is not a time when we should per-
mit such things to divide us. We should be big enough
to rise above them, for if we do not, we shall be doing
something that will allow some one else to rise above us.
We should give each other the credit for being sincere
when we say we want to bring about unanimity and
sink sectarianism. It is one of those questions which, a
word misunderstood, may lead to further misunder-
standing. It is a matter where we should strive to rise
above the situation that has been created about us.
Mr. HUGHES.—When, by interjection, I spoke of
myself favorably considering the repeal of that portion
of the paragraph in the regulation, I desired the facts
to be clearly understood. Of course, I have my con-
ception of what Sinn Fein means. Mr. Ryan has not
told us what it is. I cannot speak Gaelic, and Ido not
know; but we are told that it means “ Ourselves alone.”
I do not mean that a man belonging to a society that
says, “ Ourselves alone ” should for that alone be penal-
ized ; but wha't I do object to, and will continue to con-
test, is that a man should belong to a society whose ob-
ject is the disruption of the Empire, the creation of a
rebel state in Ireland, and the resistance by force of
the effective carrying on of the war by Great Britain.
I shall resist, therefore, any attempt by Sinn Fein or
any other society that is, in effect, a rebel society to
hamper the war policy of the Commonwealth, either by
preaching sedition, discrediting Britain, retarding re-
cruiting, or helping the enemy. I can quite under-
stand that thousands of people in this country are
misled, calling themselves Sinn Feiners only because of
the mere causual connexion which Sinn Fein has with
religion. As a matter of fact, one of the most pro-


minent features of Sinn Fein is its utter disregard of
sect, and therefore it has only a casual connexion with
sectarianism. But there are thousands of unfortunate
people here who have been led away in the belief that
it has nothing to do with, and is vital to, their religion
or their country.
A MEMBER.—They think it is voicing the national
aspirations of their parents.
Mr. HUGHES.—I can quite understand that. I am
not an Englishman myself. I have no English blood in
me. I am Welsh.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK.—But I have.
Mr. HUGHES.—Mr. Cook certainly has. ]
can quite understand that a number of people may
say, “ I am a member of the Sinn Fein,” without the
faintest knowledge of what they are talking about. B
I am not going to call such people rebels. That is not
the intention of the at all. I say, with
Mr. Cook, that we will consider that particular part of
the regulation, with a view—without impairing it so far
as it is directed against rebel societies and conditions
precluding effective voluntary recruiting—to seeing
whether we cannot find some way of restoring harmony.
Mr. TUDOR. —As the original speaker upon this pro-
posal, I want to say, to clear matters up, that I put the
position as temperately as I could. I do not know
that I mentioned throughout my remarks the specific
mattef of Sinn Fein. There can be no suspicion in any
one s mind that I was at all interested, from a personal
view-point, but I am anxious to do what I consider right
m the promotion of harmony; and this is one of the
things that would create discord. That is why I asked
that the Government should deal particularly with
something that has come forward most recently, so as
to promote the necessary harmony precedent to obtain-
ing the best results among the Australian community.
The PRESIDENT.—We will now take up the con-
sideration of proposal 4 (b) —
Proposal 4b. —Abolition of press censorship and
limitations upon free speech, except as relating to
military news of advantage to the enemy.
Reply. —
The Press Conference is now sitting, as a result
of which it is confidently anticipated a modus
vivendi will be resolved so far as the press is con-
cerned.
Free speech to be permitted other than statements
of advantage to the enemy ot prejudicial to the
Allies or to recruiting.
Mr. HUGHES.—Exception has been taken to our
reply, because it is said that the Press Conference does
not look upon censorship from the same stand-point
as the members here. My answer is that the Govern-
ment are willing to confer with Mr. Tudor so as to
bring about anything that is reasonable in regard to
censorship.
Mr. IUDOR.—But it affects also Mr. Holman and
Mr. Ryan, and the represlentatives of every other
State." J
Mr. HUGHES.—The last part of our reply can be
taken to apply to the whole proposal. That is, we will
permit free speech, which means here free publication
on those lines.
Mr. IIOLMAN.—Before discussing the matter of ad-
journment, can we not now devise some order of busi-
ness so as to permit these things to be dealt with in a
way likely to be fruitful ?
Mr. HUGHES.—If we sit to-night I cannot be here,
and the House is sitting to-morrow. That is why I pro-
pose now to go through these items, and that is why,
in relation to this one in particular, I am giving the
other side all they want. Therefore, in relation to
that, there is nothing more to be said.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But I want to know what course is
to be followed to-morrow. Cannot Mr. Hughes possibly
be here to-night ? If not, can he not arrange to meet
us so that when we begin promptly at 10 o'clock in the
morning we may be able to proceed with the discussion
ol the remaining items seriatim ? While realizing that
the Prime Minister is far from well, and that his time is
very much occupied with highly important matters, it
must not be forgotten that my time, and the time of
other responsible heads of Government, is also highly
important. Personally, I feel that if we are going to
waste more hours on discussion that is not directly to
the points at issue 1 shall say that I am going home too
only regretting that I did not return five days ago.
Mr. WATSON.—I am afraid that we cannot hope
to get on with the consideration of the details of the
proposal without the presence of Ithe Prime Minister,
and I suggest that it might be possible to so arrange
the business of the Federal Parliament as to allow
of his being present to-morrow.
Mr. HUGHES.—I am willing to do what I can to
meet the convenience of the Conference; but the House
of Representatives meets to-morrow automatically, and
T am not responsible for that.
• Mr. HOLMAN.—The Prime Minister is responsible
for the fact that we are meeting in this Conference;
and if there is no business for us to go on with, we
should be allowed Ifo go.
Mi. HUGHES. The House of Pepresentatives does
not meet until .11 o’clock, when Mr. Tudor is to reply
to a speech which I made. If we could come to an
understanding that that matter should be allowed to
stand over until Tuesday, the difficulty mighb be over-
come.
Mr. TUDOR.—I am willing to do what I can to
bring that about.
Mr. HOLMAN. I hope that Mr. Hughes and Mr.
Tudor can be here at 10 o’clock. 'Could not Mr. Joseph
Cook make the necessary arrangements with the House
of Representatives, so that we might have an uninter-
rupted debate from 10 o’clock onwards?
Mi. LEE. I should like to make a statement before
the- Conference adjourns to-night. Already the Pre-
miers of two of the States have left the Conference, and
cann °t be present again afber this meeting, so that
from to-night the Premiers of three of the States will
be absent from the Conference, and we have so far
arrived at absolutely no decision. I want to say quite
plainly that I must go back and report fto my Govern-
ment that, so far as Tasmania is concerned, the Con-
ference has been absolutely abortive. lam not pre-
pared to say that Tasmania will agree to anything
that may be done here subsequent! v.
r- HHITOHARD.—When do you go to Tasmania?
Mr. LEE. I must go to-morrow; but I have made
arrangements which will take up the whole of to-morrow
I have put men off from day to day because
of the Conference, and I must complete the business
which my Government sent me over here to do in addi-
-1 ion to the business of the -Conference. I was in hopes
that the Conference would meet to-night; but as it is
not to do so, and I cannot attend to-morrow, for the
tuture, so far as my Government is concerned, Tasmania
must be counted out in connexion with anything that
may be done by the Conference. lam sorry that the
procedure adopted should have led to an absolute waste
nf snd5 nd / i at 1 1 7 iatters connected with the meeting
of theHederal Parliament—quite apart from the grant?
ing of Supply-should be allowed to take precedence
°Aei Lhe work of this Conference, which has been en-
gaged in discussing the most important matter that we
could _ discuss at the present time, and which the
I remiers of some of the States came here from hundreds
o miles away to discuss. I have only to say lihat the
result is to me very disappointing.
Conference, adjourned at G.JjO until 10 a.m.
the following day.


SEVENTH DAY.
FRIDAY, 19th APRIL, 1918.
* - /
The Conference was resumed at 10 a.m.
Present :
The Right Honorable W. M. Hughes, Prime Minister.
The Right Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Minister for the Navy.
Senator the Honorable Edward Davis Millen, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P.
Senator the Honorable Albert Gardiner.
The Honorable Richard Beaumont Orchard, Minister for Recruiting.
President, Central Council of Employers, Senator G. Fairbairn.
Director-General of Recruiting, The Honorable Donald Mackinnon.
•
»
New South Wales.
Premier, Honorable W. A. Holman.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable John Storey).
Employers’ Federation (Honorable William Brooks, M.L.C.)
National Federation (Honorable J. C. Watson, representing).
President, New South Wales Labour Party (Mr. Lambert).
National Association of New South Wales (Honorable G. S. Beeby, M.L.A., representing).
President, Grand Federal Council of Labour (Mr. Morby).
Victoria.
Premier, Honorable H. S. W. Lawson.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable G. A. Elmslie.
President, Employers’ Federation, (Mr. E. E. Keep).
President, United National Federation (Senator Wm. Plain).
General Secretary, United National Federation (Honorable J. Hume Cook).
President, Victorian Branch Australian Labour Party (J. H. Scullin).
Queensland.
Premier, Honorable T. J. Ryan.
Leader of the Opposition (Honorable E. H. Macartney).
Employers’ Federation (Mr. P. Berry, -of Melbourne, representing).
National Political Council (Mr. G. H. Pritchard), President.
South Australia.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. Jelley.
President, Employers’ Federation (Mr. E. H. Bakewell).
South-Australian National Party (Mr. R. P. Blundell, representing).
President, Trades and Labour Council (Mr. F. D. Williams).
Western Australia.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable P. Collier.
Employers’ Federation, Mr. Alexander McNeil, President.
President, West Australian A.L.F. (Mr. P. O’Lougiilin,) Political.
Federation of Labour (Mr. A. McCallum, representing), Industrial.
National Labour Party and Fed( ral Council National Labour Party, Mr. Cumming.
National Fedeiation, Mr. William Leslie.
•
Tasmania.
Premier, Honorable W. H. Lee.
Leader of the Opposition, Honorable J. A. Lyons.
10 2


Debate resumed on—
Proposal 4 (b) abolition of press censorship and
limitations upon free speech except as relating to
military news of advantage to the enemy.
and the reply of the Government that—
The Press Conference is now sitting, as a result of
which it is confidently anticipated a modus vivendi
will be resolved as far as the press is concerned.
Free speech to be permitted other than statements
of advantage to the enemy or prejudicial to the
Allies or to recruiting.
Mr. TUDOR.—Our complaint is really as to the
censorship of political matter. I have in my pocket a
copy of the report of a speech that I delivered during
the campaign in South Australia. It is one of the best
reports I have ever had, but the censor struck out of it
paragraph after paragraph, having no bearing whatso-
ever on the war.
Mr. HUGHES.—The censor held up my speech until
2 a.m., and it missed publication altogether.
Mi. lUDOR. Ihe curious part about the- censorship
of my speech was that the portions struck out related to
puiely political matters. As showing the absurdity of
the system, I might mention that on the day in
question I delivered two speeches, and that the
censor allowed to remain in the report of my
evening speech matter that he had struck out
of the report of the speech I delivered during the
afternoon. The initials of the censor are the same in
each case. The censorship of political matters suggests
that the system has gone mad. I hope that the Govern-
ment will agiee that there shall be no more censorship
of speeches on political matters, just as he is prepared to
sweep away limitations on the right of free speech. I
do not think the Press Conference will secure what we
desire. It is curious that, although thousands of people
witness the departure of every transport, nothing is
allowed to appear in the press concerning their de-
parture. For this, however, there may be good reason
Where censorship is necessary for military reasons it
ought to prevail, but I contend that there should be no
limitation of political statements.
Mr. JObEPH COOK.—The naval censorship is very
important. Captain Thring, who is in charge of it to-
day, is outside, and, if the Conference desires, will at-
tend and give any explanation of it that is desired.
He has attended the Press Conference, and, I believe,
has thoroughly satisfied all there as to the necessity of
the naval censorship. The Naval Department is re-
sponsible for our transports, and the reason why we
cannot permit any announcement to be made in the
press as to the date of the arrival or departure of trans-
ports is that we do not desire the enemy to know any-
thing of their movements.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I think we are all agreed that there
should be a military censorship of military matters. I
am not going to criticise the Government for any action
they take to keep from the enemy news that might be
of advantage to him, but there should be no censorship
of puiely political matter. During the first referendum
campaign a controversy arose as to whether Lieutenant
Jacka, V.C., was in favour of conscription. A letter
appeared in the Argus, signed “ Reg. Turnbull, Wedder-
burn,” in which the writer declared that he had re-
ceived a letter from Jacka in which he spoke about the
rotters ” who opposed conscription, and declared him-
self to be a conscriptionist. Lieutenant Jacka’s father
then made an affidavit that he had lived at Wedderburn
for 30 years, and that there was no such person as Re».
Turnbull residing there. The publication of that affi-
davit was censored. That is an excellent example of
purely political censorship. A copy of this affidavit
was sent to our newspaper at Ballarat—we have a censor
on the office premises. At midday we submitted the
affidavit, together with our comments, to the censor,
Capt. Anderson, and he passed it. At 4 p.m., how-
ever, a telephone message came from head-quarters
stating that it must not appear. We were told that we
must not publish the affidavit, but we did. We believed
that the message came from the political and not the
military head-quarters, and we decided to disregard it.
ihousands of copies of the issue in which the affidavit
appeared were sold, and we heard no more of the inci-
dent. I recognise' that there must be a censorship of
military and naval matters, but to apply the censorship
to politics is to drag it into the mire of political parti-
zanship.
Mr. HUGHES. lam not going to stand here as the
piotagonist of the censor. 1 shall not say that if I had
been in Mr. ludor’s place 1 would not have said a great
deal more than he has of the censor. As a matter of
fact, I have said things of the censorship which
would surprise even a hardened Conference like this.
It is difficult to get them to carry out the
instructions. The trouble is not caused so much
by instructions from head-quarters— I mean, of course,
Ministerial head-quarters—as by the manner in which
perfectly well-meaning men interpret them. I am hope-
ful, however, that, despite what may be said of criticism
as to the wisdom of accepting the decisions of the Press
Censorship Conference as final, a great deal of good will
come out of the deliberations of that body. I am not
in favour of political censorship. It may be, of course,
that a suspicion «of party politics attaches to anything
done by one party in a time of war, but I want the
Conference to understand that I am not in favour of
political censorship, and the Government will endeavour,
by instructions and administration, to prevent the naval
and military censorship being used for political pur-
poses. 1
Mr. HOLMAN. Let me put this case to you. A
statement appeared in the Melbourne Punch a week ago
that arrangements had been made that you and Senator
Mi Hen should simultaneously make a statement of
policy in each House, but for some reason your state-
ment was not delivered, and so instructions, were sent to
the press not to publish Senator Millen’s speech Is
that so?
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes.
Mr. HOLMAN.—How did that occur ?
Mr. HUGHES.—You will understand, Mr Holman
that it is quite proper that the head of the Government
should deliver the policy speech, and because of some-
thing that occurred in our House occupying the atten-
tion of members for two days my speech was not de-
livered. Senator Millen’s speech was to be in the
nature of information to the Senate.
Mr. HOLMAN. Yes, but is that your idea of the
employment of the censorship?
f n r ‘ ™ something that I was per-
fectly justified in doing, because, necessarily, the Prime
Minister must first make the statement of policy It
was merely the result of one of those things that will
happen m the best regulated of families.
Mr. HOLMAN —And the censorship must be called
in to correct it. Is that your view ?
Mr. HUGHES.—The censorship was used for that
particular purpose, at the request of the press, and
because it was the most convenient instrument. It was
not a matter of party politics at all.
Mr .\ HOLMAN.—Party politics, no. But if a re-
sponsibie Minister makes a statement, the public have a
right to know what he said. r
• ¥. r \ HUGH ES Well, the public have a perfect
right to know what takes place in caucus, but they
rarely do find out. J
Mr. HOLMAN —No because the caucus does not
represent the public, and the Senate does.
tV Mr^? U +w ES ‘~ T undert ake t-o say that if any-
thing like that occurred in your Parliament you would
take any steps necessary to put the position right.


Mr. HOLMAN. —No; I should regard myself as a
very poor sort of democrat if I did.
Mr. HUGHES. —I am not in favour of political cen-
sorship, nor will I permit it; but, as I have already
shown, the trouble is with the interpretation of in-
structions, and I hope the Press Censorship Conference
will have good results.
Mr. RYAN. —Is it true that there has been some pro-
hibition against any publication of criticism in respect
of the regulations that was discussed .yesterday ?
Mr. HUGHES. —Not to my knowledge; but I know
very little of the instructions that are issued.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Then which Minister does accept
responsibility for this matter?
Mr. HUGHES. —The Minister for Defence and the
Minister for the Navy respectively. It was only in the
referendum campaign that this matter was brought be-
fore the Government to decide the extent to which the
censorship should be removed.
Mr. McCALLUM. —Was that affidavit concerning
Lieutenant Jacka referred to you ?
Mr. HUGHES.—No, I never heard of it in my life.
You must recollect that very probably I was touring
Australia at the time.
Mr. RYAN. —If any prohibition has been issued
against the discussion of the particular War Regula-
tions I refer to, will you see that it is withdrawn ?
Mr. HUGHES. —I will ascertain during the day if
any prohibition was issued with regard to that regula-
tion.
Mr. JELLEY. —We understand in Adelaide that
even telephone conversations are censored, and that if
any member of the Labour party rings up any officia
of the Trades Hall the conversation is listened to. That
statement was made in Adelaide and has never been
denied. .
Mr. HUGHES. —I know nothing about that, but let
me say that it is a fact that I never speak on a Sydney
telephone without having my speeches listened to and
taken note of by persons who have no right to do that
Mr. STOREY. —There is no doubt about that.
Mr. HUGHES.—Some persons once deliberately
blocked the line for two hours while I was trying to
have a conversation on a matter of vital importance in
Sydney, and they boasted about it afterwards. Very
often, if I speak to a man in Sydney, a friend of mine
in the post office will tell me that the subject of my
remarks are referred to in a round-about way m the
office. If they are doing anything like that to Labour
men in Adelaide, is there any redress for me?
Mr. RYAN. The censor censors cables from Govern-
ments to their Agents-General. Cannot that be stopped ?
Mr. HUGHES—So far as I know, there was one
censored and stopped, which was discussed at the Pre-
miers’ Conference, and the Premiers supported us
Mr. RYAN.—In stopping our cablegram? Not to
mv knowledge. .
Mr. HOLMAN. —What were the circumstances {
Mr. HUGHES. —It was a cable in connexion with
conscription. It was very well meant and very well
d °Mr. RYAN.—Can I not send a cablegram to my
Agent-General ? ,
Mr. HUGHES. —That one was in the Government
CO( j e —a case where the Government code was used by a
private person. .
‘ Mr. RYAN. —No, it was used by me. I conveyed
the views of the anti-conscription committee to Sir
Thomas Robinson, for him to forward that message to
Mr. Snowden, but it never left Queensland.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Even if it had been sent by a
private person, why should not the anti-conscription
committee in Australia communicate its views to Mr.
Snowden ? m, ,
Mr HUGHES.— Certainly, but not in code., that
is a law of the British Empire. No messages in code
may be cabled except the Government code.
Mr. RYAN. —This was not from a private individual.
It was sent by me.
Mr. HUGHES. —What you did was to cable that
message so as to do what private persons could not do,
namely, get it through by the Government code.
Mr. RYAN.—Do they translate all my messages coded
to London ?
Mr. HUGHES. —There is nothing done in regard to
your messages any more than concerning any message of
any individual in this country.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Are we to understand that all
State Government messages are de-coded before trans-
mission ?
Mr. HUGHES.—No.
Mr. HOLMAN.—How did they know the contents of
Mr. Ryan’s message?
Mr. HUGHES. —There were certain circumstances
which need not be gone into now, but which dis-
tinguished this particular message from others.
Mr. RYAN. —No. I find that others are translated
also.
Mr. HUGHES.—I know nothing of that.
Mr. RYAN. —Perhaps you will give instructions that
they will not interfere with my messages to our Agent-
General.
Mr. HUGHES. —So far as I know, no such instruc-
tions are necessary, because no such circumstances now
exist.
Mr. RYAN.—But they do it.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not know that. However, I
will make inquiries.
Mr. HOLMAN. —If we get another Prime Minister
in office he will be suppressing a message from the
Orange Lodge in Australia to the loyalists of England, •
just as you suppressed the anti-conscriptionists’ mes-
sage.
Mr. HUGHES. —We have done that also. We have
sent neither.
Mr. HOLMAN. —You ought to have sent both. You
have no business to interfere. I ask the Prime Minister
if he will define a little more clearly the reform pro-
posed to be introduced. Unless that is definitely de-
fined, the opening for misunderstanding between the
instructions of the Ministry and the actions of the
officials carrying out those instructions will be such as
to continue the irritation, despite the better intentions
of the Government. Let me cite a case<. The facts
were brought under my notice in connexion with the
last referendum campaign, and they refer to a matter
of very great hardship. The T Vorhcr newspaper of
Sydney was issuing two extra editions per week at that
time, and they were printing under considerable diffi-
culty. The editor informed me of these facts. They
submitted all their matter to the censor for one certain
edition, and three or four columns were struck out on
the day of publication. They replaced those columns
with other articles which had been prepared for the •
issue to follow. These also were referred to the censor
and again a portion of that was struck out. They
were then within an hour or so of the moment when
they had to go to press. Now, they were not permitted
to publish with any blanks in their column indicating
that certain matter had been censored —for that also is
an offence. To get out of the difficulty they therefore
took certain matter which had already appeared m
other newspapers.
Mr. RYAN.—The Daily Telegraph.
Mr. HOLMAN. —This was reprint matter, and they
filled their own columns with it at the eleventh hour.
The editor believed this to be unobjectionable, and,
taking it for granted that, since it had already been
published once, it had been submitted to the censor, lie
did not, in the haste of the moment, submit it again.
For having failed to submit that matter, which had
already been censored, to the censor the newspaper was
prosecuted and fined. Ido not imagine that, any
Minister is personally responsible for that, but it is an


illustration of what, under the situation as it exists to-
day, can easily occur, and which is calculated to create
disgust and irritation in the minds of many thousands
who know the circumstances. And many thousands
did learn of them, for, although the Worker was not
permitted to allude to them, they were spoken of in
every public meeting, pretty well, in New South Wales.
I he facts were very widely known, and they constituted
the verv best kind of ammunition at that time. They
amount to just one of those tilings which excite, irrita-
tion against the governing powers and are calculated to
injure recruiting. I ask Mr. Hughes for his definite
instructions—which can be made, say, through Parlia-
ment, and the documents laid on the table of the House
—that the censors are to confine their activities to these
two things, (1) information likely to be of advantage to
the enemy ; and (2) information likely to give offence
to the Allies.
Mr. BEEBY.—-Or likely to hinder recruiting.
Mr. HOLMAN. No, not that. Once you open that
you open up everything again. What is likely to hinder
recruiting, or is deemed in the mind of one official to
e a hindrance to recruiting, cannot be interpreted by
any gang of officials—men who might possibly think
that they would be currying favour with their Minis-
terial superiors by adopting certain lines of procedure
m that respect.
A MEMBER.— But what about disloyal statements?
Mr. HOLMAN.—No sucli matters as disloyal state-
ments and utterances or publications considered likely
to hinder recruiting should be dealt with other than in
open Court.
A MEMBER. Can a Court of law deal with the
matter of recruiting speeches ?
M . r ‘ HOLMAN.—Yes; any man whose words are
considered injurious to recruiting should get six months
nd moie, but let his offence be proved in open Court.
rnn tf^ SOr S \ OU d not be . the i ud § e - We must surrender
danir d w nt •?? uestlons of military or diplomatic
danger but with respect to what is considered to be
Efrif?’ ° r a disloyal nature > there still
stands the old law, and there are still the Courts of
justice to enforce the law.
Senator MILLEN—A pamphlet detrimental to re-
cruiting ;s prepared by the many thousands. The censor
is not allowed to operate. It is circulated throughout
prosecuted “v “ autl,or . or is subsequently
oTS kind. Ur propoSlt,on would «* a cas^
• HOLMAN —A man who is prepared to risk gaol
m older to get such a pamphlet issued, knowing tha? he
would be immediately prosecuted, would take the same
manner of risk, and publish the pamphlet secretly with-
out submission to the censor at all. He is a disloyalist *
an enemy, and he would take his risks in any case for
• en ,. thou^h t . here were no censorship upon matters
tion C of th* 60111141 he would be aware that the publica-
comm/tted 6 IT ff W °P ld r6nder him liab le as having
mmitted an offence at common law. And he would
TMEMBER OUI B b t e 5 U £? habl ? Under tb * °* d system. -
to besubmitted”^,V thlS ant «“vuiting matter bad .
e submitted to the censor he would collar Ho '
P M? hI HO b LMAN hey TTT t ° U ‘ a " d did da "age '
would my pr ° PoSiti ™ P»'- i
sffi a* :
enemy ? 7 to be of ad vantage to the \
finrf r to H and P that h tV CenSOrS bi P ‘ S C °"' ''
Of statements likely to harm reoru.w'’™? LLf’” ’
issued, as T ha,ve mdicaed, in defiance of tli P 1 °
without reference to the authorities ft! r &W and M
immediately become 'aware of the facts, and,' Tthe U
)- pamphlets were seizable, they would be seized. Nobody
, e objects to military or diplomatic censorship, but at the
s same time nobody favours political censorship. I
s stiongly urge the Government to abandon that head-
> mg. it they do so they can strengthen the law against
sedition m any way that may be necessary. They
>■ can introduce a specific regulation under the War Pre-
cautions Act to deal with statements that are likely
y to prove detrimental to recruiting. Nobody would
oiject to that so long as those statements were dealt
with m open Court and after proper trial
e , Mr. MOEBT-We are very* anxious that they should
be dealt with in open Court.
•a M' r HOLMAN, ihe idea of putting the decision
: 0± deli f te questions like these into the hands of a
, y°* y° officials on the censor’s staff seems to
be absolutely contrary to all that we know of political
freedom, is responsible for two-thirds of the irritation
t lat exists to-day, and, I believe, was largely re-
t sponsible for the defeat of the last referendum,
f . Mr. WATSON.--Would it not still be necessarv to
> insist upon all printed matter being submitted to" the
r censors
[ r - HOLMAN.—If the censorship were confined—
as I suggest it should be—to purely diplomatic and
military requirements, it might well be that printed
matter dealing with other subjects need not be sub-
mitted to the censor at all, or that the censor might
be instructed not to interfere with such matter. If
that officer thinks that matter about to be published
s seditious, let him report it to the law officers of the
t rown, who will take the proper action.
Senator MILLEN.—You have expressed your will-
ingness to see the legal machinery tightened' up. Can
von say how far your opinion is shared by others in
this room {
th S' is universally shared. I do not
tlmik that anybody desires us to allow individuals
lieedom to make statements which are calculated to
stilemenfiT rU - lt T E,e " , where » makes such
to m miC by n! nadvertence le should bo “ailed upon
I .Übmit to the consequences of his action. The in-
dividual who mounts a soap-box and lets language
° f his mouth should be Bcom-
«ve of wherte V C °" Se<!Ut ' ,lces of his action, irrespec-
or not. 118 offence was committed deliberately
o-osccuted Ol ThT _ ’ He 18 - eaU "' itl ' ‘“-day, and is
twelve * .1 ' a r e mo" 111 our State who are doing
nuhe months imprisonment for that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I am quite satisfied that the Go-
vernment can accomplish all that is desired in that
way without the employment of the censorship which
is .m instrumentality that was devised for entirely
different purposes. entirely
Mr. STOREY—I was very pleased to hear Mr
Holman . speak m the way he has done on this question
he % r,
of the Labour party. Within the ‘course of the”™xt
month, a by-election will take ulooo at
Wales in respect of which Mr. Holman S<ra £
will be on opposite sides. Nearly all ,1, f
which will be used by the NalloL L t ? rmtm S '
nexion with that election will be iinmnne fL t C ° n "
censorship, and although the election will V, f ft” 0 *
whatever to do with the quest on ’’ haTC . pothln g
wth the cause for which the MU reo ™ l ‘“g. or
will undertake to say that the cans 'A hgbtmg, I
out two-thirds of the matter which Bt l 'le
will be desirous of putting before the electors’ tTis
re. resiling, therefore, to bear Mr -rr , e ectors * H} s
opposition to the strictness of the'' censorship l^
Wish to put it to the Prime Ministerth fl T rt, *
surely a vast difference between orirdol +1 ther , e . V 3
18 Ca ' ouk,ed t 0 Empire and simill e r r m W atS


which cannot possibly have any effect either upon
the Empire or its Allies. It seems to me that, we
have adopted a general censorship which'.comes into
violent opposition to all printed matter, irrespective
of whether that matter relates to the war or not.
Only a little while ago I was told by a gentleman
interested in shipping that he had endeavoured to
send a message from one of the islands to New Zea-
land, and had been informed that it was quite im-
possible for him to get it through. The message was
one affecting the coaling of ships, and was in the
Bentley code.
Mr. WATSON.—You can get messages in the
Bentley code through for commercial purposes quite
easily.
Mr. STOREY. —The gentleman to whom I am re-
ferring is an official of the Commonwealth. As illus-
trating the stupidity of the censorship, he told me that
he had desired to send this message to New Zealand
in proper code, but had been informed that it was
quite impossible to do so. He waited upon the Governor
of the island in reference to it, but. was informed that
the message could not be transmitted. During the
course of their conversation it so happened that a
message was brought to him from New Zealand, in
which the very matter in respect of which he had
desired to cable was set out in plain English. It stated
that ships containing so much merchandise would stay at
a certain place to discharge. That message was sent
from a place where the strictest censorship is observed.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—There could be no political
motive about that.
Mr. STOREY.—I do not suggest that there was.
I merely mention the matter to illustrate the positive
stupidity of the censorship. If I chose, I could cite
numerous illustrations of the hardships we have suffered
in New South Wales consequent upon the censorship.
The cases indicated by Mr. Holman can be dealt with in
the way that he has outlined. If a person speaks m
terms which are likely to prejudicially affect recruiting
we should be up against him at once. At the present
moment there is a returned soldier named Percy
McDonald, who used to speak regularly in the Sydney
Domain, undergoing a sentence of twelve months im-
prisonment for having made statements calculated to
prejudice recruiting. Cases of that sort can be dealt
with now. But there is no excuse for the censor com-
pelling persons to disclose the colour of the ink which
they propose to use in connexion with the printing of
certain literature.
Mr. MORBY. —The censor in Sydney actually deter-
mined the colour of the ink that we should use in the
printing of our cartoons. He felt that it was a very
important factor in the winning of .the. war, and so he
stipulated that we should use black ink in lieu of red.
Mr. STOREY. —I know it was not the intention,
when the censorship was instituted, that it should be
used in the way I have indicated. These pinpricks pro-
duce a lot of mischievous irritation, and impel people
outside to ask, “ What sort, of a Government have we at
all?” At the present time young lieutenants, be-
cause they have passed an examination, are constituted
censors. I know of a politician in New South Wales
who was for a'time acting as a censor. He wore the
Kind’s uniform right up to the outbreak of the war,
and then left it off . lam sure that eighty-nine persons
out of ninety would quite disapprove of. his being
appointed a censor of anything —even of himself. Yet
he had the right to dictate to sensible Labour, men m
regard to the character of the literature which they
should print and publish. We have no objection to the
censorship being applied as rigidly as possible for the
purpose of preventing people from saying and doing
things which they ought not to say and do. But com-
mon sense should be exercised if we wish to bring about
that feeling of harmony of which so much has been
heard during the past few days.
Mr. BEEBY. —This is one of the most important
matters that the Conference has to consider. What is
really required is a revision of the instructions that have
been issued to the censors. That is really what is at
the back of the whole difficulty. Information does leak
out. and I have every reason to believe that some cen-
sors have definite instructions to suppress the criticism
of certain public men irrespective of whether it relates
to the war or not. In this connexion I may be per-
mitted to quote an illustration in which there is a touch
of humour. Some time ago the Worker newspaper
proposed to publish a heading somewhat upon these
lines —“ Holman and Hughes Betray the Labour
Party.” The censor very impartially struck out the
name of Mr. Hughes, and allowed Mr. Holman s name
to remain. The explanation which we got was that
newspapers had received instructions not to allow certain
lines of criticism of certain public men, irrespective of
whether or not it related to the war. . I repeat that one
of the urgent reforms that is necessary is a revision of
the instructions that have been issued to the censors.
Upon the question of whether there should be a censor-
ship over pamphlets which are likely to prejudice re-
cruiting, Ido not quite agree with Mr. Holman. When
once a pamphlet has been circulated the damage has
been done. Obviously, thefe should be some oppor-
tunity given for the revision of the pamphlet before it
is issued. If a man chooses to issue a pamphlet which
is calculated to prejudice recruiting, let him be put on
his trial for the act of publication or printing; let him
be mulcted in the penalty that is provided; and let the
issue of the pamphlet be suspended. But in view of the
way in which some factions, who are not altogether
behind us in this war, are using pamphlets and leaflets,
I do not think that there should *be an unrestricted
right on the part of any individual to comment-on mat-
ters which may affect recruiting. Some restriction is
undoubtedly necessary.
Mr. HOLMAN". —Let every leaflet which it is pro-
posed to publish be submitted to the censor, say forty-
eight hours before its publication, and if there is any
suggestion that it contains seditious matter, let action
be taken in open Court against the publishers. In the
meantime, let the issue be suspended.
Mr. BEEBY. —As a matter of fact, I believe that we
should penalize a man for attempting to commit an act
which is likely to prejudice recruiting.
Mr. SCTJLLIN. —Suppose that he does not realize
that he is 'doing that, and that he submitted the matter
which he propones to publish to the censor ?
Mr. BEEBY.—That appeals to me, but there should
be a prohibition of these pamphlets and leaflets before
they are issued.
A MEMBER. —Suppose the censor passes a pamphlet,
does that free the publisher from the consequences of
publication ?
Mr. HOLMAN. —No; the common law penalties may
follow.
Mr. MORBY. —In Sydney during our recent cam-
paign I was informed on more than one occasion by a
censor that, although he passed certain matter, if we
published it we might still be open to prosecution.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is so.
Mr. MORBY.—Then, what was the value of the
censor’s permission to publish?
Mr. HOLMAN. —He has to determine whether there
is anything of advantage to the enemy or prejudicial to
recruiting. He may say that there is nothing of the
kind, but the matter proposed to be published may still
be seditious.
Mr. HUGHES. —The ordinary law here and in Eng-
land is that you may say or publish anything you like,
subject to the law.
Mr. BEEBY. —I urge upon the Prime Minister that
the censorship, as carried out, is one of the greatest
sources of irritation in Australia to-day. The urgent
need is not a mere promise that the Censorship Depart-


rnent will do better in the future, but an honest revision
ot the instructions given to censors in order that they
may know what their functions really are, and may not
continue to dabble in politics, as they have done in the
past, under instructions.
Mr. O LOUGHLIN.—I am reluctant to prolong the
rn-oceediiigs of the Conference at this stage, but I agree
with Mr. Beeby that the censorship as at present car-
ried out is doing much to retard recruiting in Australia
li we are to do any good when we go back to Western
us la ia, we must appeal to a section of the community
who feel that they are to some extent penalized as a
U7W le stu P ld ity of the Censorship Department.
V\ hat is done really exceeds censorship in many respects.
Yesterday we discussed certain regulations affecting a
certam section of the community. We have to appeal
to that section to help us in every crisis and emergency,
as well as to the rest of the people. I will give the Con-
ference an illustration of what has taken place in
Western Australia. I do not blame the censor in this
particular case, because 1 believe that the blame is really
due to the Minister for Defence. A little time ago the
nsh element m Perth made a big demonstration, and
p cte is Majesty’s Theatre there with a meeting
lich was addressed by several public men. It was
fhe^tp’ M \TV' the meetin -’ to send a cable to
the Ute Mr. John Bedmond, who was not a disloyalist.
L transniltted Melbourne to be forwarded
fn and a sum > 1 believe, of £5 155., was
forwarded with it to meet the expense. Two days later
there was, m comparison with the huge meeting'held in
Perth a small meeting held in Melbourne, and presided
over, T believe by Dr. Leeper. That meeting carried
a resolution, which was promptly transmitted by the
Federal Government, at the Government expense, whilst
he cab e from the Perth meeting, although it was paid
for bv the people interested in sending it, was held up
for fourteen days. For some reason or another the
MWter would not send it, although Senator Lynch,
wi h whom I do not agr°e on every question, urged the
rovernment day after day to transmit the cable' to Mr
dmond The other cable was sent promptly, but the
Perth cable was held up for a considerable time. Later
on. the league interested in the Perth cable got a refund
ae money they forwarded for its transmission
pon™™ AN '- Wbat WBS ‘ h * PO^-
?w OTTGnT J N - Tb r WaS no explanation
1S rankling: m the minds of a. number of
naonle ,n Wertern Australia. I have said that later on
those interested t-ot a refund of the monev they had '
o°r„An t,L that bo f h Olaoed on a sLilar .
foot.ne m that respect. The people to whom I specially
Ar-f * ™ry bi ff section of the connnunity in 1
Dtion. th«t and ll T i am S " re d ° not wanfc t 0 frame reeu- 1
ns Th? W 1 hav6a tendency to get them up against
ns. There are over 2.000 names on the honour hoard '
o onr union in mv electorate, three of the men have 1
von the V. 0.. and of these two are pretty pronounced '
anfSf -act AS a ,r ,U ««*•"*«>> hegulati„n d
hi, action taken, I believe, by the Minister for t
is, next Sunday, to he a big meeting held V
t let m ,eS r tV ITI’l TI ’? a c tre ' in Parth ' Protest against
the W f t r - r p,'T. lnform t, ’“ Conference that dnrim,
is the n fortn ! £ * t the proprietors of the Record, which o
AiirtAlrVav k r S Se - t '°i' - f t,le rommnnity in Western y
of ti, h ™ received instructions that the whole ti
i s ie of the periodical must be fo “
We shall not get the co-operationlT Wmtf^dZre
™.ed MimW ih° f Au . s . tralia ,i f , s " ch iPetructions are It
reattfftts-£'3 :
we should do what we ca„ to allay it. I hope' that Y
” ral ¥ l fi St6rS wiU attach as mucll importance to this
X i e },° ie censorship as to any which has been
ug 1 under the notice of the Conference. Ministers
le may not be altogether responsible, but they should give
such mstructions to their officers which will prevent in
le ti,p l V le f l 6 stu . pid action of censors which lias had
3e { +WXI ar ? usm g irritation amongst the people. I
r- at the mstan ? es which have been brought for-
-1 inJ f US morni ng will be considered sufficiently strik-
n Pdm ° M° mf f Federal Ministers, and especially the
■y Illlls^ er to get right down to bed-rock on this
a oprbln 11 ’ and , r u emOVe t] ? lS SoUrce of irritation, which,
t. IZntr more , than anything else, has had the effect of
5. keeping men back from the colours.
1 aUGHES.—Did you say that the Common-
J Dr iLpeT?™ “ PMd the COSt ° f ‘ he cable from
Tl Mr ' O’LODGHLIN.-That is the reply we got.
a f, -? ald 'l° cost °1 the other telegram later, but
; da f ;r d;t was held back for a period
1 ,1 b \ r ‘ WILLIAMS. The Prime Minister was not, I
T shin ’ f UffiCient jr definite when discussing the censor-
a 1P of mes sages over the telephone. Is there not
> ® ome mea ns by which that kind of thing can be pre-
ented. We shall be asked about it when we go back
[ I?!? 36 we represent, and I should like to be
5 tfnued ™ 7 - them Will 110 lon ger be con-
' nriSri f IOI V S another difficulty in South Australia
ansmg from the fact that the Chief Censor (Major
shb fo^nolV^ l^ 1 Partizan ’ and uses theeensor-
o dih f/ ! Party purposes. I should like to
tlatl £t P f e f pe ?P le . we an assurance
that a hitter party politician will not be allowed to
the .imadofthe censorship in South Aus-
So, th A,lt, el r IS t u a . f !t lng amon S st the workers in
outh Australia that the censorship is being used en-
difficulSs'of th em f ° r P i artJ pUr P° Ses - 11111683 these
difficulties of the censorship are removed, we cannot
nunitv° r Tf 6 T CO ' op< j? tion of all sections of the com-
nunity. If I could assure those whom I represent
lint I?" thm i§ S WIH 11 ° ! 011^e r continue I feel satisfied
desires m the mann6r the Conference
Mr. SCULLIH. Would the Prime Minister con-
sider such a proposal as this: Tf any body feels irri-
G action of the censor, would you consider
the establishment of an impartial Court or Committee
representatrve of both views to hear complaints in such
Mr HUGHES.—I shall talk that over with the
Minister for Defence and the other members of the
Government. Personally, I think that there is some-
thing in the suggestion. me
th-i? PEESTEEET -—May I suggest, Mr. Hughes
that if any gentleman has any objection to the method
in winch the censorship is exercised, the Government
will be perfectly, willing to consider it *
£s&****£3st*S
Mr HUGHES ’~Th nd t ln / elation t 0 the Allies.
Mi. IiL(jHES.—-That, of course, is included The ’
censorship will not be used for party Durnnw WW
you gentlemen on the other £LTmiS"r
take it, is that the censorship shall not be used for
party rather than “political” nurnnses Ti 10
of the word “ political ” might affect us all equally
It must he understood that an honest differ™ ' 7 ‘
anse as to what should be done Z at %Zlu£
case. I am willing to give very favornhie on
tton to Mr. Seullin’s proposal At we should create a
masters'’ TW “‘T b °‘ h SideS ’ *° deal with these
matters. That might overcome a lot of difficulties
ou would be able to put your case directly, and the


responsible Minister would have it brought directly
under his notice, instead of it being dealt with by
an official on his own initiative.
Mr. HOLMAN. —What about having a Committee,
representative of each side, with a Judge as Chair-
man.
Mr. HUGHES. —Yes. I would not have more than
one representative of each side on the tribunal, and I
would have as Chairman a Judge or some other person
mutually satisfactory.
Mr. SCULLIN. —You could have such a Committee
in each State capital.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not want to promise more
than I can do. Questions of principle would not have
to be settled more than once. Hard special cases might
have to be dealt with where they arose.
Mr. SCULLIN. —They are often the cause of much
trouble.
Mr. HUGHES.—We could have one central com-
mitte here, and leave it to determine whether it desires
a duplication of its machinery elsewhere.
Mr. HOLMAN.—One central committee here would
be of little advantage to a journalist in Perth or North
Queensland.
Mr. HUGHES.—We cannot discuss the matter in
detail now; but I will agree to the appointment of one
central tribunal. We can ascertain from experience
how it should be amplified.
Mr. O’LOUGHLlN.—Gentlemen could be secured
to act in an honorary capacity in each State.
Mr. HUGHES.—The question of expense was not in
my mind. The point is that it is not an easy matter to
secure impartial chairmen.
Mr. O’LOUGHLIN. —You will be able to secure
one to whose appointment both sides will agree.
Mr. HUGHES.—That will be most satisfactory. It
will be understood, of course, that I am now only
speaking for myself. You gentlemen cannot bind your
organizations, neither can I bind the Government now
in regard to this matter. These, however, are my
views. I will press them on the Government, and en-
deavour to have them carried out.
The PRESIDENT.—The next proposal with which
we have to 'deal is
4. ( c ) Cessation of political and industrial prose-
cutions under the War Precautions Act ;
to which the reply o 7 the Government is—
The War Precautions Act will not be used for
political and industrial prosecutions.
As to this item, I think we are all agreed.
Mr. RYAN.—I think the word “ and ” in the
Government’s reply should be replaced by the word
u or,” so that it will read, “ for political or industrial
prosecutions.”
Mr. HUGHES.—Very w«ll.
The PRESIDENT.—The next proposal is—
4. (d) The immediate release of all persons, not
guilty of criminal offences, imprisoned in connexion
with conscription, peace propaganda, recruiting,
and the recent industrial trouble.
To which the reply of the Government is—
All persons, if any, who are confined as a result
of matters arising out of the referendum campaign,
or the last general strike, will be released.
Mr. SCULLIN.—The concession made by the Go-
vernment does not go far enough, for the reason that I
do not think there is one of these men in prison to-day
who could not be detained in gaol by the authorities
declaring that he had committed an offence against some
other regulation not covered by these proposals. There
is imprisoned in Melbourne, for instance, a man named
Baracchi. Ido not know him; but I think his misfor-
tune was that no shorthand writer was capable of ex-
pressing sarcasm in his notes. Baracchi, I understand,
while addressing a meeting, referred to a leaflet which
had been issued during the last referendum campaign, i
and in which was set out what was declared to be the
“ Anti’s Creed.” In this leaflet it was alleged that
those opposed to conscription believed in various out-
, rages, such as the murder of Nurse Oavell, murder on
the high seas, and the sinking of the Lusitania.
Baracchi, I am given to understand, indulging in sar-
casm, said, “ Friends, I am one of those people who
believe that Nurse Cavell got her deserts. I am one of
those who believe that the sinking of the Lusitania was
justified,” and so forth. A shorthand writer took down
his statement. He was brought before the Court, and
fined £lOO, and was ordered to enter into recognisances
not to offend again. He paid the fine, but he is in gaol
to-day, because he refused to enter into the required
bond.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—You might mention what the
magistrate said of him.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I think the case was heard by Mr.
Notley Moore, P.M., who said of the defendant, “ This
man is mentally deficient.” This case may or may not
be held to have arisen out of the referendum campaign.
The point I wish to make is that there are in gaol to-day
a number of men who are not criminals, but political
or industrial prisoners, and that in order to restore har-
mony, it would be a very fine thing to release them.
We are not going to say that in every case they have
been wrongly treated, and that they are all innocent
lambs, although I believe in many cases they have been
harshly treated’. At a time like the present, however,
nothing is lost by extending leniency to political
prisoners.
Mr. MORBY.—A large number of men have been
imprisoned as the results of convictions obtained at
Broken Hill. There is a difference of opinion as to the
merits or demerits of the action taken by these men, but
the fact remains that the offence alleged to have been
committed by them took place during the recent
referendum campaign. I believe—and I say this without
any reservation—that our friends on the other side are
anxious to remove the present obstacles to the advance-
ment of recruiting, and the Government might well
give favorable consideration to the case of these men.
I wish also to refer 'to members of the Industrial
Workers of the World, who have been convicted and
imprisoned under the Unlawful Associations Act. I
am not here to make any confessions or apologies. I
have never been a member of the Industrial Workers of
the World, and my only knowledge of it has been gained
by reading their literature, and listening on many occa-
sions to their propaganda. It is true that manv mem-
bers of the Industrial Workers of the World, like many
others, not excluding Mr. Hughes, make statements at
times, which, upon reflection, they recognise might have
been better put. For being members of this organisa-
tion these men have received an average sentence of six
months’ imprisonment. On the termination of that
sentence they are still detained. I understand that th.ev
are provided with civil attire and with somethin & in
advance of the ordinary prison diet after the expiration
of their sentences. They are not called upon to do anv
hard work, but they are not given their libertv. When
a man has completed his sentence, he should be given
his liberty, or dealt with in open Court in such a wav
as the authorities may determine. T have in mind the
case of a man named Barker. While not agreeino- hv
any means with the views he advances, I sav that he is
an exceedingly intellectual man, and capable of closelv
reasoning the interests of the people on behalf of whom
he sneaks. He received a sentence of six months’ im-
prisonment for being a member of an unlawful associa-
tion, but, although that sentence has expired, he is
still detained. It is not the first time he has been in
gaol, but he has never been imprisoned for a crimn'no]
offence. He is an ex-soldier of the British Armv and «
native of England. Although his sentence expired six
week'- ago he is detained bv the authorities without any
explanation of the reason for his detention. In another


case a man finished his sentence eleven weeks ago, while a
third man completed his sentence three weeks ago, but
both are still detained. The reason, I understand, for
this action is that the authorities feel that these men
might be a menace to the safety of the country if given
their liberty. If that is the only reason, then a man
convicted of embezzlement should not be released on
completing his sentence, since he might embezzle once
moie. My contention is that a man, having served his
sentence, should be given his liberty, and if then he
transgresses he will become subject to the law again.
The tieatment meted out in these cases is extremely
hard. The Government counter-proposal, I understand,
refers to any offences committed during the recent
referendum, and I point out that the offence committed
by this man had nothing whatever to do with the refer-
endum. I hope that the Government will give careful
attention to this matter, and decide, from humanitarian
stand-points, that men who have suffered penalties for
their offences shall be given liberty upon the comple-
tion of their sentences. Their citizenship should be
again tested, and, if then they prove to be a danger to
the Empire or society, the offence should be proved in
open Court. There is no excuse whatever for detaining
these men upon the completion of their sentences. T
know the idea is to deport them, and I am right up
against deportation every time, because, if we cannot
manage men in this country, we will only be placing
additional burdens on the _ shoulders of the Government
in Great, Britain, and this is very undesirable at the
present time. We should accept some share of this re-
sponsibility here.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—I wish to refer to a case on some-
what similar lines—that of a man named Moyle, who
was one of the most industrious workmen in South
Australia. He was "charged with being a member of an
unlawful association, was taken before the Court, and,
notwithstanding our personal knowledge that he had
long ceased to be a member of the Industrial Workers
of the World, he was found guilty, and sentenced to a
term of imprisonment. That term expired eight weeks
ago, but still the man is being detained.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Do you say .that you knew he had
left his association before he was charged ?
Mr. WILLIAMS.—We do know that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Was it not proved in Court?
WILLIAMS.—You know, Mr. Holman, how
difficult it is sometimes to prove certain things in open
Court. This man, as T have said, was sentenced to
imprisonment, and, though his sentence has long since
expired, he is still being detained pending deportation.
We communicated with the Minister for Home Affairs
(Mr. Glynn), who promised to look into the matter, but
up to the present we have had no further advice. This
is causing irritation to many people in South Australia.
When I came over to the Conference at the end of last
week, Moyle was also brought over, and sent on to the
bury gaol pending deportation. We consider that
this is not a fair proposition. The law found the man
guiltv, and he served his sentence. What more do the
Government want ? If they intend to deport these men,
I say unhesitatingly that they are inviting discord
amongst members of trade organizations generally.
Mr. HUGHES.—Is he an Industrial Workers of the
World man?
r W T TTJ jT ! AMS ~ He was char £ ed with being an
Industrial Workers of the World man, but I remind the
Conference That when Mr. Hughes passed his famous
Bill through the Federal Parliament, this man ceased
to be associated with the Industrial Workers of the
World people. Unfortunately, he could not, prove it
in open Court, and so was found guilty. If the policy
of deportation is to be carried out against men who have
served their sentences, where do we stand ? Moyle’*
people in South Australia cannot get any information
as to when he is likely to be deported, or where he is
to be sent to.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Is lie an Australian?
r Mr. WILLIAMS.—No; he was born in England.
Ihe position is most unsatisfactory.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—It does not follow that because
he was born in England he is an Englishman.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—He is of English parentage, and
has British blood in him. I hope this position will
be cleared up satisfactorily, so that we can be sure
of co-operation among all sections of the community.
Mr. HUGHES.—I want, first of all, to say that
these Industrial Workers of the World men are im-
prisoned not under War Precautions Regulations, but
under the Statute. A law was passed to deal with a
state of affairs that existed at that time throughout
the Commonwealth. This law does not differ essentially
from that passed by the New South Wales Govern-
ment. It provides, however, for deportation. Wliile
T am quite willing to admit that many members of
the Industrial Workers of the World are well-meaning
dreamers, fanatics, or foolish persons, yet I know that
those who move the organization are persons whose
objects are opposed not only to the maintenance of
society, but fundamentally opposed to the principles
of the Labour movement.
Mr. MORBY.—They are opposed to me, and fight
me, but that is no reason
Mr. HUGHES.—I have had a great deal to do with
them. I hey came into the organization with which
I "was connected, and I have sat as secretary—under
the presidency of a man who was a member of the
Industrial Workers of the World—in the Wharf
Labourers Union for many years. I know that a
number of these men are quite harmless. I am not
going to say that all the men in gaol are of the same
tyP e > ar *d when cases have been brought before me,
wherever there has been any doubt as to whether a
man was an Australian or not, I have always given
him the benefit of the doubt. But where it appears
on the surface that their object was to stir up industrial
stufe and to bring about a general strike, interfering
with our war activities, I will not be led away from
my clear duty by any feelings of sentiment or any
ideas about humanitarianism. My friends‘talk about
the treatment of these men in Australia. Do
they remember what happened in America, the land
of the free? Why, in that country they have had great
drives of Industrial Workers of the Whrld men, who
have been driven out like so many cattle. I will give
careful consideration to each case on its merits. I
am not going to make any promise beyond that in
regard to the Industrial Workers of the World men
From my own personal knowledge I know that the
men who have caused trouble in the Wharf Labourers
Union are almost uniformly imported men of less than
five or six years’ residence in Australia. Some of
them have been here for only eighteen months.
Mr. WILLIAMS.—The man I refer to has been
resident m Australia for thirteen years.
Mr. HUGHES. Well, I will give these cases care-
ful consideration, and I remind you I have not asked
you gentlemen opposite for any guarantees by way of
letum for any of the things you are asking of the.
Government, because I know you could not give such
undertakings. I am not going to haVe men like these
drung nothing else in our unions but creating strife.
Tf you had any consideration for your own welfare in
nine case out of ten you would let them stay wher* 5
they are. I come now to the case of Baracchi'. He is
an educated man, and knew what he was savins -
A MEMBER.—Is he all there?'
Mr. HUGHES.—It is a case such as Mr. Holman
cited a day or two ago concerning: his own actions dur-
lng the Boer war. What Baracchi said was that Nurse
G a veil got her deserts, and that it was quite right that
tne Lusitania was sunk—words to that effect


Mr. SCULLIN. —He was quoting from a pamphlet
issued by the National Federation, and he held up the
pamphlet in his hand.
Mr. HUGHES. —I know about that. He was say-
ing, “ I agree with that. That is what I think.” Here
was an educated man talking to a lot of feather-headed
people on the bank. If ho was an ignorant fellow, I
would say nothing, and let him out.
Mr. SCULLIN. —The Police Magistrate said he was
mentally deficient. 1 do not know him. He has paid
his fine, but is still in gaol because he will not sign a
bond. It is really a question of free speech.
Mr. HOLMAN. —If Baracchi is mentally defective,
it is a very different case. We do not know what to
do with him. With regard to the Sydney eccentric —
Chidley—we had to gaol him time after time, and the
public were largely of the opinion that it was because
of his peculiar dress, whereas it was because he per-
sisted in addressing his hearers on a matter which we
considered indecent. Eventually we discovered that he
was mentally deficient, and he had to be placed in an
asylum.
Mr. HUGHES.—I will promise to look into Bai’-
acchi’s case, and into each case on its merits, and see
wliat I can do.
Mr. JELLEY. —Has the case of Moyle, in South
Australia, been brought under your notice by Mr.
Glynn ?
Mr. HUGHES.—No. But I will have that also
looked up. On the general question, the Government
will give the assurance exactly as we have set it forth
in our reply; and, in. addition, I repeat that I will
look into each case on its merits, and see how far we
are able to release those who are outside that under-
taking.
Mr. McCALBUM. —Our grievance in Western Aus-
tralia is that the imported men support the Prime Min-
ister, and not us. We had the case of a quiet inoffensive
fellow, named Tier, who was working on the wheat
stacks at Northam. A strike took place at Midland
Junction, and a delegation from there asked the
Northam men to make common cause. They agreed,
and then selected two of their number to put the posi-
tion to the men at Narrogin. There they also agreed to
make common cause with their fellow unionists at the
other two places. The next thing Avas that the Aus-
tralian Workers Union representative at Northam —one
of the tAA r o appointed to go to Narrogin—was arrested.
This was the man Tier. The newspapers informed us
that he was being held pending deportation. He had
done what he had been told to do under instructions
from.his organization. The only reason given in the
press was that he had gone to Narrogin to get the 60
men there to make common cause. That man was to
be deported without trial, and without opportunity to
place his position before any tribunal. He was not
tried at all.
Mr. HUGHES. —I do not think that could have been
the case. The Act says that he has to be tried first,
and deportation may follow. I will look into
it.
Mr. McCALLUM. —1 was sent to endeavour to get
him a trial.
Mr. HUGHES. —Give me the details. T will pro-
mise that he shall have a trial.
Mr. McC ALBUM.-*- As the result of our efforts we
got him out; but the point is that without the influence
of our organization lie might haA 7 e been deported.
Mr. HUGHES. —A. man cannot be sent out of the
country without the Attorney-General’s approval.
Mr. McCALLUM. —We were told that the authori-
ties had instructions from Melbourne to deport him. We
urged a trial. It was not even suggested that he was a
member of the Industrial Workers of the World.
Mr. HUGHES.—I will make inquiries with a view to
preventing the repetition of any such case.
Mr. RYAN.—With regard to the internment powers
of the Government, there are some incidents wherein
these powers have been used for purposes which were
never intended. In Queensland, several persons have
been interned, and it has caused considerable\ feeling,
particularly among the Labour organizations. One
man, subsequent to his publishing a letter in one of
the daily papers, was interned, and it was impossible
to obtain the reason why. There was another case —
that of the man Schache. He was an individual to
whom a letter w'as sent by the Central Political Execu-
tive in Queensland in connexion with that issue of
Hansard which was subsequently seized in the raid at
the instance of the Commonwealth authorities upon
the Government Printing Office in Brisbane. Schache’s
name was aftemvards mentioned by the Prime Minister
in the course of a speech i« Brisbane. This was shortly
after the seizure of the Hansard, and there was a sug-
gestion then made as to a kind of conspiracy between
myself and the Treasurer and Germans. It was a most
unfounded suggestion. This is a matter that I have not
previously, dealt with at this Conference, because I did
not wish to bring up anything calculated to lead to
heated discussion. The views which I hold upon
the incident are well known. However, the point is
that Schache was subsequently interned; and I believe
he is still interned. He is an Australian native, and
is the same man with respect to whom a report was
made a considerable time previously by our police, in
carrying out their duties for the Federal Government.
I ascertained, following on his internment, that the
report from our police was good. Then I had a special
investigation made, through the Commissioner of
Police, who 'sent a thoroughly competent officer to
Gladstone, where Schache had been working, and the
particulars of that official inquiry, contained in the
police officer’s report, were entirely satisfactory. He
could find no reason why Schache had been taken from
Gladstone and interned. I can gather no reason, unless
it was for something such as that he had had a letter
written to him in connexion with the Hansard incident.
I do not like to suggest all that is in my mind in regard
to his internment ; but it is an extraordinary circum-
stance that, immediately after a charge of conspiracy
liad been laid against myself and others, the particular
person to whom this letter was written was interned.
I am sure there are many reasons which will suggest
themselves to those present why such action was taken
if it Were intended to make a case subsequently. I
communicated with the Federal Government in an en-
deavour to ascertain the reason for his internment, and
I received a reply from the Prime Minister that the
internment had taken place under a warrant issued by
Mr. Watt, who was acting Minister for Defence at the
time. But I was unable to learn what were the reasons
for this man’s internment.
The PRESIDENT.—Do you suggest that it arose
out of the conscription issue ?
Mr. RYAN.—Yes; and out of the incidents which
took place in Queensland about that time.
Mr. MORBY.—May I suggest that this matter should
be brought under the notice of the Prime Minister
when he is present?
Mr. RYAN.—I have no doubt that, he will have an
opportunity of reading the report of what I have said.
Both these cases should be looked into, and some action
should be taken to remove the very strong feeling which
has been created amongst the organizations in Queens-
land on account of this power having been used in a way
in which it was never intended to be used.
Mr. BEEBY. —I would like to mention one matter
which T regard as of some importance. I wish to urge
upon the Prime Minister that in cases in which a man
has a substantial following, it is desirable that the
public should be informed of the reasons for his in-


ternment. I have in my mind one case which has been
the subject of a good deal of perturbation in Sydney—
the case of Father Yugger. His internment has pro-
duced a disturbance amongst a section of the people
there, and I submit that the full reasons as to why he
was interned should be made public. I do not know
whether or not he is rightly interned, but the pre-
sumption is that he is. Nevertheless, the reasons for
his internment should be made known, in order that a
section of the public which is affected may have an
opportunity of judging the actions of the Government.
Where a man is interned who is the representative of
a faction, some definite statement of the reasons for his
internment should be forthcoming.
Mr. MORBY.—I presume that you know, Mr.
Beeby, that what led up to the internment of Father
Yugger was an agitation in the public press by persons
of an opposite theological conviction to himself.
Mr. STOREY.—I would like to confirm what has
been said by Mr. Beeby’ in reference to this reverend
gentleman who has been interned in New South Wales.
I think that the Prime Minister ought to make some
public statement of a definite character as to the
reasons underlying that internment. A tremendous
section in New South Wale|S is frightfully incensed
at Father Yugger’s internment. I understand that
he is a German; but he is a very cultured man, and he
is a priest.
A MEMBER.—Do I understand you to say that
he is a German?
Mr. STOREY.—Yes. But we have Germans in the
Victoria Barracks. Indeed, there are Germans all over
New South Wales and Australia.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Do you say there are some in the
Victoria Barracks?
Mr. STOREY.—Yes. There is a man holding one
of the highest positions in our Government service who
has a German wife—l refer to Mr. Bowie Wilson.
Even one of the Ministers of the Crown in the honorable
gentleman’s own Government has a German wife. I
understand that Father Yugger, the priest to whom I
have been referring, has been interned because of state-
ments made by a. man named Ness. If that is not a
German name, I do not know what is. I understand that
this man Ness used to live at Temora. The statements
alleged to have been made by the priest were over
twelve months old.
Mr. BEEBY.—He has been interned on informa-
tion that was investigated by the Federal Government,
and the Government ought to state upon what grounds
he was interned.
Mr. STOREY.—Mr. Ness was the man who started
the agitation against Father Yugger. I know of nothing
which the latter has done that is calculated to injure
our country. But I do know that his internment has
inflicted a great injury upon recruiting. How many
hundreds of people in New South Wales in private
conversation make statements which, if published,
would lead to their internment? How many persons,
for example, declare that this is a capitalistic war?
That statement does a tremendous amount of injury 1
to recruiting.
Mr. HOLMAN.—They ought not to say it. \
Mr. JELLEY.—I understood the Prime Minister ]
to say that the outcome of this war will be the com-
mercial supremacy of one nation or another. ,
Mr. STOREY.—I know of no legitimate reason why
(his priest should be interned. }
Mr. BEEBY.—There may be very good reasons for j
his internment, but we ought to know what they are. 1
Mr. STOREY.—I do not know of any reason for v
it. As a matter of fact, people have written hundreds t
of letters to me, asking me to take some action to s
secure his release, but I have not been courageous f
enough to do so, because I do not know what he has v
1 ■ saia. xmt wnen people have informed me ol what
he said I had to reply, “ Good heavens! There is
nothing at all in that.” Mr. Hughes, even at this late
; stage, might see that a little rational discrimination
! is exercised in the administration of the various Com-
monwealth Departments.
Mr. MACARTNEY.—Mr. liyan has asked me if I
would support him in the reference which he has made
to the internment of the man Schache. I can only
say that if Mr. Schache was interned because of the
receipt of the letter to which Mr. Ryan has alluded, I
am quite in accord with the remarks which he has
made. I do not think it is fair to use the right of
internment to punish a man upon mere suspicion. As
far as I know Mr. Schache, and Mr. Richter —that
is the name of the man who was associated with him
in the receipt of a letter from the Central Political
Executive, in which they were requested to circularize
the number of the Queensland Hansard which was
suppressed
Mr. RYAN.—There were scores of others.
Mr. MACARTNEY.—Mr. Ryan may have know-
ledge which I do not possess. All I can say is that
if Mr. Schache did no more than receive that letter,
he has no more right to be interned than has Mr. Ryan
himself. Something has been said regarding the fact
that Schache and Richter are German names. But
it must he remembered that in Queensland we have
a large number of persons of German descent who are
just as loyal to the Empire as we are. The dis-
franchisement of these individuals on the occasion of
the second referendum engendered a great deal of ill-
feeling which might well have been spared. To that
extent, and to that extent only, I can support the
remarks of Mr. Ryan.
Paragraph (e) of Proposal 4 postponed.
Proposal No. 5
That immediate and effective steps he taken
to protect soldiers’ dependants and the public
generally against profiteering.
To which the Government reply is—
Agreed.
The Government has given, and will continue to
give, every attention to this matter, the vital im-
portance of which is fully recognised. The Govern-
ment will welcome any practical suggestion from
Conference to this end.
The PRESIDENT.—We had a very lung general dis-
cussion on this matter. I hope that members of the
Conference will not desire to go over the same ground
again.
Mr. STOREY.—The Prime Minister might give us
a general indication of what the Federal Government
propose to do in this 'matter.
Mr. BERRY.—I believe lam the only member of the
Conference who is engaged in a business in connexion
with which what is called “ profiteering ” is suggested.
The company of which'l am a member deals in food-
stuffs. Mr. Hughes said yesterday morning that we
must judge his words on this matter by his actions. I
may tell you that yesterday, at 2 p.m., the price fixer '
was hard at work, so that it is evident that the Prime
Minister’s words were followed very promptly by action.
Mr. RYAN.—Is it suggested that the price fixer has
not previously been at work at all ?
Mr. BERRY.—No, it is not. Mr. Elmslie mentioned
bread in the speech which he made on the subject of
profiteering. He said that proof had been given that
bread could be profitably sold at 6d. per loaf. Proof
was given by representative bakers that they were able
to make a profit at that price, and it was, therefore,
suggested that the price fixed, namely 7d., was too high
for the general public. I should like to say in connexion
with that statement that one of the principal witnesses,


who gave evidence that he was making a profit at 6d.,
still owes my firm an outstanding debt which we have
not been able to recover. Having read his evidence,
we promptly sent him a request to utilize those profits,
which he claimed to be making, in the payment of old
debts. That debt is not yet paid. I have noticed that
other members of the Conference have agreed that the
case of bread is not a bad one, and evidence has been
adduced by the Commission to show that there have
been no undue profits in the bread line.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—I beg to differ from that statement.
Mr. BERRY. —Mr. Brooks, in speaking of this mat-
ter, mentioned that it must be approached in a business-
like fashion. I will give an instance to show what I
am trying to convey. About a year ago the price fixer
called to see the landed cost of a certain line of invalids’
foods. He was given the cost, and, quite rightly fi’om
his point of view, he took the lowest cost, although that
was connected with a purchase made twelve months
before, and delayed in shipment. He fixed the price of
the article on that cost, and the consequence was that
telegrams went from all over Australia to England
cancelling importations of those foods, because their im-
portation would have meant a considerable loss to tiie
importers if they had to sell at the price that was fixed.
I do not for a moment say that there have not been
some cases of food profiteering. What Ido say is that
it is a very difficult matter to control the food profiteer
by fixing prices, because there is a very great danger
that, unless the prices are altered by the price fixer
from day to day in following the market, there may be
brought about what is worse than any high prices, and
that is absolute famine. I am a believer in war-profits
taxation.
Mr. RYAN.—What is your view of the Common-
wealth controlling all importations ?
Mr. BERRY.—Mr. Ryan has very properly men-
tioned that matter, but, in my view, it is impossible
at the moment to consider such a course, and for exactly
the reason which he used in dealing with the question
of conscription—because by the time the Commonwealth
Government were able to deal with such a matter, most
of us would have passed to another world. It would
take too many years for the Commonwealth authorities
to acquire the necessary training to carry out such work
effectively. Business knowledge is not acquired in five
minutes, and is the result only of many years of constant
association with each particular line of business. Per-
sonally, I do not believe that the control of importations
by the Commonwealth Government would lead to lower
prices.
Mr.-RYAN.—Is it not a fact that, while goods are in
transit from overseas, they are often sold over and over
again at increased prices ?
Mr. BERRY.—Even in that case there might be this
very good excuse: No one importing goods can say
exactly how much he will be able to sell. He has to
take the risk of being under or over imported. If A
under-imports, he still has to supply his customers, who
depend upon him, and if he is short-ordered, he may
have to buy from B, who has over-imported in the same
line. It is obvious that A will not buy goods to sell
without a profit, as that would involve a loss, since his
expenses of selling go on all the time.
Mr. RYAN.—If the Commonwealth were doing the
importing, the Government could give the goods to B
for the same price as they cost A.
Mr. WATSON.—That might be possible in respect
of special lines.
Mr. BERRY.—That might be done in lines of goods
that are easily handled, such, for instance, as wheat,
wool, galvanized iron, and the other lines which the
Government have already handled, but if the Common-
wealth Government attempted to deal with the whole
of the various lines in our business, running from
40,000 to 50,000 different kinds of goods, it would take
their officers many years to understand the position.
I rose particularly to press the point that the mere
fixing of prices does not necessarily involve any improve-
ment in the buying conditions to the general public.
The PRESIDENT.—The Government have agreed to
proposal No. 5, and we might pass to the next business.
Unless the Prime Minister wishes to say something
more, I think that we may assume that this matter is
agreed upon, though whether every member of the Con-
ference is satisfied with the addendum is, of course,
another matter.
Mr. MORBY.—I am not satisfied with it, but if it is
the best the Federal Government can do, we can do no
more.
Ihe PRESIDENT.—You must wait until you see
how the proposal is carried out.
Mr. JELLEY.—I should like to say that if the
Government reply to proposal No. 5 stopped at the
word Agreed, ’it would have a much better effect
upon the community than it will if the addendum is
included in it. In the addendum, the Government say
that they nave given, and will continue to give, every
attention to this matter, the vital importance of which
is fully recognised. That implies that the Government
are going to continue the course that they have adopted
hitherto.
Mr. WATSON.—PIus your suggestions.
Mr. JELLEY.—Of course; but I am pointing out
that the public generally will conclude from the
addendum that the course already adopted will be con-
tinued, and that the same results will follow as have
followed from the adoption of that course in the past.
It seems to.me a pity that the Government should have
overloaded their agreement with our proposals by an
addendum which may lead to the impression on the
part of the public that no real improvement in this
matter will take place. There is no doubt that profits
aie made out of food-stuffs, and the people whom we
represent will look for some assurance from the Govern-
ment that something more effective to prevent profiteer-
ing will be done in the future than has been done in the
past. Perhaps the Prime Minister, on giving the
matter further consideration, will see that it would b
better to confine the reply to proposal No. 5 to the
word Agreed. If that were done, the reply would
have a much better influence on the public mind than
it will have if the addendum is included in it.
Mr. HUGHES.—I accept Mr. Jelley’s criticism in
the spirit in which it has been offered. The reply of
the Federal Government and the Premiers is not to be
regarded as an intention on their part merely to con-
tinue to do that which they have been doing, where
that action has been ineffective. The intention was to
say that we recognise, equally with our friends on the
other side, the importance of this question of profiteer-
want to say that 1 am quite sure that profiteer-
ing exists, but it is not so easy to deal with as may be
supposed by the man in the street. I will give the
Conference an illustration which, without implicating
him in any way, was put before me by Mr. Brooks, who
represents the Chamber of Manufactures, and is one of
the representatives of the Employers’ Federation.
There are all sorts of employers as well as all sorts of
workmen. There are some employers who are honestly
endeavouring to do what they can, and there are others
who are endeavouring to make money out of the war.
1 think that Mr. Collier mentioned a case of this sort:
A cargo of goods is in transit from abroad consigned to
A. The price to A is £250,000. Whilst the goods are
on the water, A sells them to B for £300,000, and be-
fore they are landed, B sells to C for £500,000; so that
by the time the goods arrive in Australia the price has
been loaded up to the extent of 100 per cent. That
sort of thing is very difficult to deal with. Let me tell
you of a case that was given to me yesterday by a manu- •
facturer in this city. Before the war he was selling his


finished manufactured product at £lO per ton; he is
now selling it at £l2 10s. per ton; but the people who
sell it again to others, who use it in their manufactured
products, are charging £2O, £3O, and up to £4O per
ton for it. The manufacturer himself is perfectly con-
tent to make up his profit by the increase in his turn-
over, due to the reduction of importations. The in-
crease in the cost of his raw material fully justifies his
increased price of £2 10s. per ton; but he complains
that the people to whom he sells are charging these
enormously high prices for it.
Senator FAIRBAIRN. —And selling it to the New
South Wales Government, amongst others, at that
higher price.
Mr. HUGHES. —Is that so? There we have a con-
crete case. We are forming a Board of Trade, which
will consist of three Ministers and two first-class busi-
ness men, who will give their attention to these matters.
Those men understand those ramifications of business,
which we, who stand aloof from the business world, do
not. They will have full authority, and I believe we
can do a good deal to prevent these quite unjustifiable
inflations of prices. To a considerable extent, these
increases are made, not so much by the men who first
handle the goods, as by those who. subsequently handle
them. As my friend, Mr. Brooks, knows, I have asked
the Chamber of Manufactures and the Chamber of
Commerce to give the Government the benefit of the
services of two first-class men for our Board. They
are going to supply them, and I hope to be able to
make an announcement to-day. We shall do what we
can.
Mr. TUDOR.—Do you think the members of the
Chamber of Manufactures and the Chamber of Com-
merce are alone concerned in this matter? They might
be concerned with the keeping up of prices.
Mr. HUGHES.—But there will be three Ministers on
the Board. The real trouble, so far as the Government
are concerned, is that it does not know hoAv to get at
these things.
Mr. MORBY. —Why not appoint a representative of
the consumers?
Mr. HUGHES.—We will look after the consumer,
but in endeavouring to do so -we are met from time to
time with such statements as, “If you fix the price at
such-and-such a rate, So-and-so cannot live/’ I am
thoroughly aware of the importance of this matter, and
I give the Conference the assurance that the Govern-
ment will endeavour to do everything in their power
to prevent the exploitation of the public. I desire the
Conference, and the people of Australia, to recognise,
however, that, no matter what we do, prices will neces-
sarily be higher than they were before the war. That
cannot be prevented; but we ought not, at all events, to
be exploited. The Employers’ Federation is keenly
alive to this, and, as a body, has given us every assist-
ance both by way of suggestion and advice. But there
are amongst the employers, as there are in every other
class, a number of individuals who are taking advantage
of the war. I think I may be permitted to say, on
behalf of the Chambers of Commerce and the Em-
ployers’ Federation, that they have no sympathy with
such men, nor will they support them. On the contrary,
they will support the Government in their effort to
enable the people to get through these most trying times
as comfortably as possible.
Mr. BROOKS. —I desire to impress upon the Con-
ference the difficulty of regulating the prices of com-
modities on this market. The Prime Minister has re-
ferred to the case of a local manufacturer, the price of
whose product since the outbreak of war has increased
from £lO to £l2 10s. per ton. That is the price from
the mill to the manufacturers, who convert it into other
finished products. I am a fairly large buyer of that
very material, but cannot obtain an ounce of the locally-
i manufactured article. In that respect lam not alone.
' Even those to whom it is supplied can obtain only por-
tion of their requirements from the local manufac-
turer. . Ihe consequence is that every ounce of this
material, which I am using at the present time, is cost-
ing, landed here, £3B per ton, as against £l2 10s. per
ton charged by the local manufacturer.
Mr. TUDOR.—What did it cost you to land that
material before the war?
Mr. BROOKS.—The landed cost, including the pay-
ment of a quite heavy duty, was £8 or £8 10s. per ton.
e place orders in any of the Allied countries from
which we can obtain the material. We have had some
from Japan, America, and Scandinavian countries, hut
it is most difficult to obtain. Here is an article the local
manufactured cost of which is only £l2 10s. per ton,
and yet everybody is paying for the greater part of
that article used by them, and which is im-
ported, £3B per ton. I dare say the price
to-day is £35 f.0.b., or £42 per ton landed. I men-
tion this as showing the difficulty of dealing with the
question of price-fixing from one stand-point. It is
ridiculous that a locally-manufactured article should
be going out from the mill at £l2 10s. per ton whereas
those who use that material have to pay up to £35 or
£3B per ton for it. This article was largely imported
into Great Britain before the war, and was landed in
manufacturing establishments there at something like
£6 to £6 10s. per ton from Holland. I recently had a
letter from a business firm in the Old Country, however,
informing me that the price in Great Britain was then
£45 per ton.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—Why can you not get the
locally-manufactured article here at £l2 10s. per ton?
Mr. BROOKS. Because the local manufacturer can-
not make enough to supply local requirements. I should
like to see the locally-manufactured article distributed
fairly amongst manufacturers, but that, perhaps, might
be asking too much. It is news to me that the local
article can be sold at the mill for £l2 10s. per ton.
Mr. TUDOR.—Are you referring to methylated
spirits ?
Mr. BROOKS.—Ho.
Mr. TUDOR.—I know it is exceedingly difficult to
get any methylated spirits at all to-day.
Mr. BROOKS.- I want to emphasize the point that
there are difficulties in the way that do not appear on
the surface.
The PRESIDENT.—I might point out to the Con-
ference that the Government have agreed to this
proposal, and I cannot see any use for further dis-
cussion.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—Though the Government have
agreed to the proposal, the discussion has been ex-
tremely valuable in many respects; but one aspect has
not been touched upon. We are dealing with the
question of profiteering as affecting the cost of living
and I point out that the increase of rents intimately
touches this question.
Mr. PRITCHARD.—There is a Fair Rents Court
in New South Wales, I understand.
Mr. ELMSLIE. But we have not such an institu-
tion in Victoria, and rents have gone up enormously
in some districts the increase being as much as 60 per
cent. These increases have not been justified by any
increased cost of production.
Mr. WATSON.—There has been a big increase in
the cost of building, you must remember.
Mi. ELMSLIE. Yes, but in most cases the houses
have been built for half a century.
Mr. BROOKS. The increase of taxation may be
an important factor, as well as cost of living.
Mr. ELMSLIE.—I can see that we cannot go into
details just now, but the question of profiteering will
not have been satisfactorily dealt with so a


large number of the people are concerned unless atten-
tion is also given to the increase in rents. I hope the
Prime Minister will also take this matter into con-
sideration.
Mr. HUGHES.—Very well.
Mr. SCULLIN.—I disagree entirely with your state-
ment, Mr. President, that the proposal has been agreed
to.
The PRESIDENT. —The Government have agreed
to it.
Mr.’.HUGHES. —That is what I said just now.
Mr. SCULLIN.—No; you said what you were going
to do, and I want to say that the Government have
. -deliberately refrained from doing these things that
they promised.
Mr. HUGHES. —Oh, well, I have nothing further to
say.
Mr. SCULLIN. —You are not observing your own
laws.
The PRESIDENT. —I think, Mr. Scullin, you will
have to take what the Prime Minister has said.
Mr. SCULLIN. —We will not take it.
Mr. HUGHES. —I am sorry Mr. Scullin has taken
up this attitude. I am as earnest as he is over this
question of profiteering, and I said distinctly in reply
to Mr. Jelley that the statement was not to be inter-
preted as meaning that if our former action had failed
we proposed simply to go on, but that we shall do
everything and anything we can to prevent profiteer-
ing. Do not forget that for two and a half years the
Labour party
Mr. SCULLIN. —I do not know why I was pre-
vented from speaking, Mr. President, if you are going
to allow others to speak two or three times. _ I say
the Government have refused to enforce their own
regulations with regard to this matter.
Mr. LEE. —I shall not be at the Conference after
lunch. Before we separated last night, I intimated
that it would be impossible for me to attend to-day,
but owing to strong requests made by my fellow-
Premiers and the good judgment of my secretary, who
made certain arrangements for me last night, I have
been able to attend to-day. I must, however, leave
by the Loongana at 2.30, and before I leave the Con-
ference I want to say that I hope members will not
disperse without passing a resolution unanimously. I
wish also to say that when we return' to our several
States I hope we will carry back with us a determina-
tion to impress upon our people, no matter to what
class we belong, the gravity of the present situation.
It does appear to me that we in Australia are looking
at this world conflict through the wrong end of a tele-
scope, and that we need to turn it round and see the
war situation as it really is. If there is one thing
we ought to do it is to endeavour to bring about a
more serious train of thought in the community with
regard to this war. I think it would be well if the
various Governments endeavoured to curtail sports and
amusements in some way, so as to make our people
realize that we are really at war.
Sitting suspended from 1.10 to 2.‘30 p.m.
The PRESIDENT. —Conference has gone through
the various matters item by item. I understand that
proposal No. 3 will be dealt with by the gentlemen
concerned in the interested State Governments. Pro-
posal No. 1 was postponed. That was a request for a
definite pronouncement by the Government that con-
scription had been finally abandoned. And the answer
was that Mr. Hughes’ statement in Sydney was to stand.
Mr. Hughes has said a good many more things upon
that, which appear in the report. Ido not know
whether that clears it up in the minds of all members.
Mr. HUGHES. —We have now reached a stage
where, if we are to do any good, we must express our-
selves in terms that will be acceptable to the Conference.
At the outset, I said that, speaking for the State and
Federal Governments, we were prepared to do certain
tilings provided that the organizations represented by
certain of you gentlemen would lend that cordial and
complete co-operation which we deemed essential for the
success of the voluntary movement. * Members here
have pointed out how difficult is their position, that
they have not come as plenipotentiaries, nor as men
clothed by their organizations with power even to
discuss, let alone approve things.
Mr. MORBY.—There was no time to call our or-
ganizations together. •
Mr. HUGHES. —Quite so; we recognise that. On
the other hand, of course, it must be realized—and is,
I think—that all of the Governments, including the
Federal Government, are in an almost identically similar
position. We have no mandate and have not consulted
the parties supporting us, but we are assuming that
those feelings which move us will move them; for,
after all, we are all citizens of this Commonwealth, and,
with very few exceptions, I feel that the heart of Aus-
tralia has been stirred by this most serious crisis. So
we shall not ask you to do that which you declare im-
possible, as a condition precedent to our doing things
which you declare necessary. We have been told by
Mr. Ryan, Senator Gardiner, Mr. Tudor, and
other gentlemen present, that no matter whether we do
any of these things, or none of them, they will still go
on helping us in the matter of recruiting. But we
realize thajb to secure effective results it behoves ps to
do certain things. We, for our part, have endeavoured
to meet you; and we have gone, I hope, a go'od way
towards your requests. On behalf of the Federal and
State Governments I wish to say that, realizing how
necessary united action is, and how insignificant all
other things are beside it, we are prepared to do these
things in order to secure your co-operation and support.
If a resolution is passed somewhat on lines as I shall
indicate in a moment, this Conference will have
strengthened the hands of the Commonwealth and State
Governments; because, although upon us is devolved
constitutionally the responsibility of carrying on during
the war, we must be regarded only as the executive
selected as the most convenient instrument for that pur-
pose. Without the assistance of the State Govern-
ments, we must fail, and also, without your assistance,
gentlemen, we must fall short. It has been suggested
that we carry a resolution in the following terms: —
That the delegates present, in face of the im-
minent peril now besetting the Allied cause, and in
view of the expressed willingness of the Federal
and State Governments to join in the removal of
grievances which have been regarded as obstacles
to recruiting, pledge, first, their full personal co-
operation, and, secondly, the most strenuous ex-
ertion possible of their influence with the Govern-
ments and organizations they respectively repre-
sent, to secure an immediate and continuing in-
crease in Australian recruiting on a voluntary
basis.
That resolution, if agreed to by Conference, would
be of the greatest possible assistance to the cause we
all have at heart, and would enable us to send a
message to Britain, now sorely tried, that Aus-
tralia, recognising the gravity of the crisis, has agreed
among all parties to sink her differences and to stand
united in the common cause. I shall not move that
resolution. I have outlined it so that you may know
what is proposed.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—Mr. Tudor has admitted
that the Empire is in a very critical position. That
being so, it is our duty to do everything that we can to


help it, and if we pass a resolution such as has been sug-
gested by the Prime Minister, it will be published in
every newspaper throughout the world, and the message
it contains will be a tremendous aid to the Old Land,
from which our race has sprung. It is a dreadful time
through which we are now passing, and we ought, there-
fore, to assist the Empire in every possible way. I
understand Mr. Tudor’s objection
Mr. HOLMAN.—But do you understand any reason
for it ? He gave no reason, except that he does not like
resolutions.
Senator lAIRBAIRN.—I do not understand the
reason underlying Mr. Tudor’s attitude, and I think
that he and his associates should waive any small objec-
tion which they may have to the procedure that is pro-
posed, and join with us in helping the Old Land in this
tune of stress and trouble. The employers throughout
the Commonwealth have met my friends on the other
side in every way, and I think that in the discussions
wmcU have taken place here many rough angles have
been rubbed off. YVe given way on the question
ot economic conscription, we are pledged to stop vic-
timization in every way
ivir. TUDOR.—Yesterday I asked—as the Steam-ship
Owners Eederation is not represented here—whether
tne steam-ship owners were prepared to come into line.
Senator TAIRBAIRN.—We had a conversation with
the snip-owners during the progress of this Conference,
and I think that we can go a long way towards promis-
ing that they will come into line.
Mr. TUDOR.—Mr. Keep’s answer was not in the
terms of the agreement arrived at in regard to para-
graph 2 of counter-proposal 3.
Senator EAIRBAIRN.—I repeat that while the Con-
ference has been in session we have had the advantage
of a talk with the representatives of shipping interests,
witn the result that I believe they will come into line
wAh us. Upon the question of profiteering, which has
had a. deplorable effect on recruiting, Mr. Hughes liao
admitted that the employers have helped him & all that
tney possibly could. We hate this thing—profiteering—
aosoiutefy; we hate the robbing of people at a time like
this. But I would urge upon every member that we
are Britishers, who desire to help the Old Land. For
Urod s sake, let us pass this resolution. If we do so it
wifi ring throughout the Empire. It will hearten the
troops which are fighting so valiantly at the Front, and
win assure them that the heart of the nation is sound
cnroughout.
Mr. BEEBY. I ask Mr. Tudor and his friends, who
oppose the carrying of the resolution which has beei,
suggested, to regard the matter from this point of view:
vv e have had a definite appeal from the Prime Minister
of Britain in which he asks the Dominions to. send all
the assistance they possibly can. Then, the Governor-
General has called together in this Conference repre-
sentatives of every section of public thought, and if 1
Mr. Tudor’s attitude is insisted upon, our deliberations,
from the stand-point of the outside world, will have
been abortive. Word will go forth that, with all shades ’
of political opinion represented here, we were unable
to reach unanimity. It were better ten thousand times 1
that the Conference should not have met at all. Our 1
failure to adopt even a simple resolution will have, I '
think, a disastrous effect on the future of the Common- 1
wealth. I admit that at the outset of our proceedings I
we met practically as two factions, and, naturally, with 3
a good deal of mutual distrust. But, as the Conference l '
has progressed, that feeling has disappeared, and I be-
lieve that there is now a sincere desire on the part of ii
all of us to arrive at a common working basis. Having
dispelled a good many misunderstandings which existed v
I think we can now, with mutual grace, agree to the t
carrying of the resolution of His Excellency the i]
Governor-General and, subsequently, of a wider resolu- b
tion on the lines which have been suggested by the C
Prime Minister. If the only result of this Conference v
ls t 0 wllat was proposed by Mr. Tudor and what
n was offered by the Governments is to be taken back to
e different trade organizations, and discussed by them,
, it will be a standing disgrace to everybody present. If
3 tne proposals and counter-proposals which we have been
- considering are to be taken to different unions, whose
I members have not the information that we possess, and
w 10 lave not the broad outlook that we, as public men,
i take, the whole thing will resolve itself into a miserable
a haggling bargain as to how much they have got out of
Senator GARDINER.—That is what you are trying
L to make it. J 6
Mr. BEEBY.—No.
5 Senator GARDINEiR.—That is what Mr. Holman's
; suggested resolution says.
, Mr. BEEBY. No. But if the proposals which we
’ have discussed, and the replies to them by the Common-
wealth and State Governments, are to be submitted to
trade unions, with a view to ascertaining whether they
have obtained enough, or whether they cannot get a little
more, the proceedings of this Conference will have been
an absolute failure. Ido beg of members to realize the
effect of the attitude that has been taken up by Mr.
Tudor. If that attitude is persisted in, let us tear up
the records of the Conference as if it had never been
held.. I submit that we, as men occupying responsible
positions, ought to show that we realize the seriousness of
the present crisis, and that we are prepared to impress
its seriousness upon those whom we represent. That is
our duty. We know that, in order to bring about
greater unanimity among the different sections of the
community, certain grievances, which have been re-
ferred to, must be removed. Realizing that, and appre-
ciating our responsibility, we need to impress our belief
on the people outside.
Senator GARDINER.—At the risk of prolonging the
debate, I want to say that, from the beginning, the
course followed of taking the proposals we put forward
merely asi suggesting obstacles to harmony, as though
they represented part of a bargain, was a mistake.
That mistake has been continued, and it is continued
in the motion which Mr. Holman has suggested.
* ve j. lture to sa y t] iat we have arrived at a stage of the
Confeience when there is practically a unanimous
opinion that we must come together, not because the
obstacles to harmony suggested are to be removed, but
because of the seriousness of the situation. I am not
piepared to vote for a motion into which some one may
lead the view that w r e have been for over a week
lmggling about what the Governments will give and
what the unions will accept. I have not been doing
that at all. The matter is one which ought not to have
been haggled over at all. We have said that wrong ad-
ministration and wrong policy are not calculated to
create harmony in our community, and that if our
friends desire harmony, they must remove those things
which are obstacles to it, and we are prepared to join
with them in restoring harmony. But if it is desired
to pledge us to go back to the unions, and try to force
them, it will be an invitation to the unions not to
accept. What is wanted is a broad general motion
which will not be susceptible of any suggestion of
haggling or bargaining, but which will give the ap-
pearance of unity in the Conference, If we can arrive
at practical unanimity the sections of the community we
represent should be able to do so. 7
Mi WATSON. Hear, hear; that is the spirit that
is wanted.
. Mr - LAWSON.—May I be permitted to say that I
view with the profoundest disappointment the sugges-
tion that the Conference should break up without carrv-
mg any resolution at all. The impression which would
be created in the public mind by that would be that the
Conference had been a failure. We have discussed
various matters for seven days, and despite little put-


bursts, which are inevitable at such gatherings our dis-
cussions have been conducted with the utmost harmony
and good-will, and with a sincere desire to dissolve
differences. Surely we can agree upon some resolution
to urge the people to forget their differences and make
a united effort to secure the necessary reinforcements.
I do not wish to labour the matter, or to occupy time
in speeches. I have not done so hitherto, but have fol-
lowed what has been done with the greatest interest.
We are not wedded to the form of any motion that has
been suggested, and if any so far suggested may be in-
terpreted to contain the spirit of bargaining, there is no
reason why that suggestion should not be avoided. We
might declare that we have amongst ourselves estab-
lished unity so far as the recruiting effort is concerned,
and might urge the different sections of the community
to follow our example, and unite to make that effort
successful. If we could agree to something of that kmc!
we might expect some results to follow from tlie Con
ference
Mr. RYAN. —We are basing the whole thing on the
assumption that we are not opposed to the war, or to
recruiting, and, in my view, we should not by any reso-
lution lead it to be inferred that anybody in the com-
munity is opposed to the war or recruiting I here is
no one here opposed to winning the war or recruiting.
Sitting suspended from 3.40 to 3.50 p.m.
Mr. TUDOR. —ItHias been suggested that in order
that it may appear that we have arrived at a unanimous
decision, no record should be taken of this discussion.
As a result of our deliberations during the last few
minutes, it is suggested that the following motion be
moved —
That this Conference, meeting at a time of un-
paralleled emergency, resolves to make all possible
efforts to avert defeat at the hands of German
militarism, and to secure an honorable and lasting
peace.
I move that motion.
Mr. BEEBY. —Is there not to be a word about re-
cruiting ? ,
Mr. TUDOR. —In this motion, we express the resolve
to “make all possible efforts to avert defeat.” How
-could we do that without encouraging recruiting ?
Mr. AIORBY. —If it is necessary, I will second the
motion.
Mr. HUGHES.—I cannot vote for such a motion.
It is to me a most appalling thought that, after seven
days of deliberation, we should have submitted to us a
resolution which, in its futility, in its obvious lack of
earnest purpose, is an epitaph upon our efforts, and is
calculated to do untold harm in the community. I pro-
pose to move by way of amendment
That'the delegates present, in the face of the
imminent peril now besetting the Allied cause, and
in view of the expressed willingness of the Federal
and State Governments to join in the removal of
grievances, which those representing Labour say
have been regarded as obstacles to recruiting,
pledge first their full personal co-operation, and,
secondly, the most strenuous exertion possible of
their influence with the Governments and organiza-
tions they respectively represent, to secure an im-
mediate and continuing increase in Australian
recruiting on a voluntary basis.
I submit this amendment as the least that ought
to go out from this Conference. Even in such a form
it is but the lay of an impotent end to a Conference
which we have been told is the most memorable in the
history of this country—a Conference called at a time
of unparalleled danger to the Commonwealth. We are
told that our friends, who have been gathered from all
corners of the Continent, are going to “ oppose German
. militarism, and to ask for an honorable and lasting
peace.” With the enemy thundering at our gates, we
F. 3959.—11
ask them to assist us in voluntary recruiting, and to
tell their organizations to assist us; hut they decline to
do so. What must we think of men who say that tUey
themselves are in favour of voluntary recruiting
that they have helped, and will continue to help in the
work of securing reinforcements—when they hesitate to
go back to their organizations and to tell them what
they ought to do? Never mind how faction has raised
its 'head. Take no thought of how organizations have
been misled. We can forgive them, because they are
very easily misled; but we, who know the truth, have
no right to be a party to misleading them. We must
tell them the truth, even if for telling them the truth
thev dethrone us for ever. Although the party of which
I have the honour to be the leader has not been con-
sulted in the decisions at which we have arrived, 1,
speaking as the head of the Government, say that I will
stand- or fall by the recommendations of the Gonter-
ence if this amendment be carried.
Mr. MORBY. —It is our intention to tell our people
the truth.
Mr. HUGHES.— Then why not express the truth m
such terms as can leave no doubt whatever that you are
going to stand with me on the same platform, in tne
Sydney Town Hall, or Martin-place, or m any ot the
union rooms? If they will allow me to go into the
Trades and Labour Council, I will go with you there,
or anywhere else, and help you in urging them to arouse
themselves, to gird up their loins, and to fight 01 - us
tralia. I cannot believe that Labour in this country
has come to such a stage as to be satisfied with such
words as those embodied in the motion. Remember
what Gompers has said. Remember what Henderson,
and Barnes, and Hodges have said. Keep m your minds
what Thomas and other French leaders have said.
And yet you come along with a motion ot this sort, in
which you talk about “ a lasting peace.” That is what
the German propagandists are saying now. Every
enemy of Britain, every man working against Britain
and Australia to-day, is making the same declaration
You have couched your motion most unfortunately, and
inadvertently, no doubt, in the very terms that an enemy
of this country would have chosen if he had been pre-
sent in this Conference. I urge you, gentlemen, to
vote for this amendment. You are masters of your own
will, masters of your own destiny. It is your duty to
do this. Your country calls upon you to tell your
fellow unionists, your fellow-citizens, what they ought
to do. I hope the amendment will be carried unani-
mously.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I rise to support the amendment.
Ido not wish to give a silent vote. lam deeply dis-
appointed with the position, taken up by Mr. ludor.
I cannot understand his objection., first of all, to the
passing of any resolution —an objection which he ex-
pressed a few minutes ago —nor can I understand his
objection to such a proposition as Air. Hughes has just
moved by way of amendment, and which has been in
Mr. Tudor’s possession for the last 24 hours. As soon
as I drafted it yesterday afternoon, I supplied him with
a copy.
Mr. TUDOR. —That is so.
Mr. HOLMAN—I hope the amendment will be
carried. I shall be very sorry if there is any division
of opinion upon it, or if a vote should be necessary.
In any event, I trust we shall not shut the door finally
to any reconsideration of the position. My final sug-
gestion to the Conference is that, on our rising to-day,
we do not conclude the proceedings, but adjourn to a
date to be determined by the President, who, upon
receipt of any information which in his opinion would
justify him in asking the Governor-General to bung
the Conference together once more, should take the
necessary steps to that end. It may well be that the
organizations represented by our Labour friends will
/


take a different view of this matter than some of them
evidently fear they will. Delegates do not like to speak
a for their organizations; but it may well
dc that influences which have been operating on us will
have been operating on them, and that delegates on
t en’ return to their organizations will find they are
able to go much further than they have been able to
go iere. Lpeakmg for my Government, I say that our
offer remains open. As soon as the gentlemen here
can inform us that there will be a definite recruiting
effort made in New South Wales, with the support of
Babour organizations, we will mov ? immediately to get
nd of all obstacles standing in the way.
Senator GARDINER, lliat' attitude is repugnant
bargain SUggGStS that We are waiting to make a
, HOLMAN.—We ask you, not to bargain, but to
and up as citizens and have the courage to say to
fell ° w trade unionists what you say here—that
they ought to go into the trenches
the S r a ‘T OARMNER.-Why do you not say to
them, Come into the trenches ” ? 3
HOLM A.N— 1 will, if necessary. lam not
much as ”o" ' tary a “ d P re P ared t 0 d ° ™
coumge t 0 R '~ DO " 0t SUg * eS ‘ “ Want ° f
Mr. HOLMAN.—But I do. You, as a Minister
iTtr r dln * 250 ’ 000 meu hlto the trenches I
‘ onl y to sa y that the offer made by our Govern-
ment was advanced in absolute good faith. I believe
the offers made by the Commonwealth Government are
m e( l uall y good faith, and will not be withdrawn be-
cause of this momentary failure in our negotiations. I
y, clearly that a motion of the kind proposed by
“? present national eler ,
f f at keil ?£ so > I ask members to carry the
amendment moved by Mr. Hughes, to adjourrf this I
Conference so that they may re-consult their com
/ b ° dieS ’ + and , leave 111 the hands of the Presi-
den the power to call this Conference together again if £
he has from the delegates reports showing thft any
good can arise from further discussion. 7
Mr. RYAN.—I am somewhat surprised at the atti- e
tude taken up by the Prime Minister with regard to the g
SeTthl‘ hink l ha " a !‘ ag ™ that in! t
! Tes ? lutl °? sh ould be passed at this S'
Conference unless it could be carried unanimously u
Mr. PRITCHARD.—No. h
Mr BEEBY.—You wish to close the Conference with ti
resclutwnwh'ch discourages recruiting.
it „ , m 7 be y°" r interpretation of it; te
Idled to mi “ 6 ' 1 unde . r ! taod ‘his Conference was tl
wi !b it JfT rage recru ‘ tl n& and devise means by
wuich it may be encouraged. Certain suggestions were dc
tetives^th- by -t Mr ’ P ! ldor 011 be half of the represen- yc
the effect nt f Sld !’ p W UCI :t was conten ded would have su
e effect of stimulating recruiting if carried out. To is
ie extent to which they are carried out by the Com- w<
£ and th e respective State Governments in- to
£1 Z/n lU ™ OOUrag f re:cruitin g- lam sure at
that Mr. Tudor had no intention of asking the Con- m(
ference to carry a resolution from the form of which it Co ]
favour of SUgge , sfced we werel not whole-heartedly in 0 f
favour of recruiting, as we have shown ourselves to be, 1
ceive U of° U h hIS great , world .Juggle. I cannot con- 0 f
ceive of stronger words. Members of the Conference ;
£u aWare my attltude towards recruiting, and
- mk there can be no doubt about the attitude of any b ]
other member of the Conference on this side I cannot i
motion- Str ° nger W ° rdS than are COntained in the
We are resolved to make all possible efforts to has
avert defeat at the hands of German militarism, voh
and to secure an honorable and lasting peace. one
hem Senator MILLED.—But is there anything in the
well m r n ryaV nf e organization could not adopt?
wi Mil£ W ?-~° f °° urae you ma -> r tkink so > Senator
it’ , u ma y as k you ii all peace organizations
on pledge themselves “to avert defeat at the hands of
are German militarism ” ?
our Senator :MILLEN.- They want to destroy all rnili-
,ere also waut an honorable peace.
i ne , 1 1- If members of the Conference want
of - o + Pl !i ? ? onst Iructlon 1 ructlon upon the motion that was never
get Tli en b,7 vi he - m °ver> they are at liberty to do so.
& r| C riine funster has an alternative motion which
anf IUAt j l - 0 * S^ eU -X et ’ kut d listened carefully while he
ant was reading it We have been discussing this question
- a on the assumption, which, lam sure, is a correct one,
at all desirous of winning the war.
to Mr. BROOKS.— That is so.
iat • HYAN.—Apd that we are all desirous of secur-
ln& an honorable and lasting peace.
to • b Bd? OOKS—A victorious peace. Our enemies
want an honorable and lasting peace.
, . | Mr - BA AN—Are our enemies prepared to make an
iot honorable and lasting peace?
aS H l ' BROOKS.—They say they are.
, BY AN—Are you suggesting, Mr. Brooks, that
°* i udor » wien ke uses those words, does not mean
them ?
!r > Mr. BROOKS.—I say those words would be mis-
! cons ti‘ued right throughout the country, and people
w . d tlllak we were more concerned about peace than
winning the war.
re Mi- BYAN.—I do not think so. The motion sets
e . out our objective, namely, an honorable and lasting
I peace. °
>y Mr. WATSON".—But we want the recruiting move-
r- ment to be stimulated in the meantime.
6 a £i‘ AY.—-And has not the discussion throughout
s the Conference been along those lines?
M l ' why “ sli y ” at B now?
f our l part iYAN ‘~ There 1S 110 “ shying off ” at all on
vr 1 ' i° oks vei 7 much like it.
Mr. RYAN.—I objdct, at the end of this Confer-
- ence, to any course of action that will allow a sug-
-3 gestion to go forth to the public that there are dif-
- terences amongst us as to the desirability of achieving
J succ , ess 111 &ia great struggle. As I have said before!
.we have met here on the assumption that we are all
m favour of securing ultimate victory under the volun-
tary system.
Mr. WATSON.—WiII the Conference accept your
telegram as a motion? That expresses practically all
that can be asked for.
Mr. RYAN —I have sent many telegrams, and I
do not remember the exact form of the one to which
y T NTi I P rot ® st fgamst the attack on the motion
submitted by Mr.. Tudor on the presumption that there
is a want of bona fides. I resent that because I was
well aware of the motion which Mr. Tudor intended
to submit, and I approved of it, so I was astounded
at the remarks made by the Prime Minister It is
most unfortunate that a resolution of this kind should •
come under discussion after quite a number of members
of the Conference have gone, and when others are
about to leave. We want unanimity as to the form
of resolution to be adopted.
Senator FAIRBAIRN.—Why not take your tele-
gram ? J
Mr RYAN.—It would be most unfortunate if it
should go forth that the Conference has proved abortive
or failed merely by reason of the fact that no resolution
could be agreed upon, as the whole of the discussion
has been directed to the removal of obstacles to the
voluntary system of recruiting, as complained of by -
one section of the members.


Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —Does it not seem anomalous
that in a resolution of a Recruiting Conference no
mention should be made of recruiting, as m Mr.
Tudor’s motion?
Mr. RYAN—I contend that it goes m*uch further
than that? It affirms that “all possible efforts” shall
be made to achieve the desired end, namely, to avert
defeat and secure an honorable and lasting peace.
Mr. HUGHES.—Leave that out. Why talk about
peace ?
Mr. RYAN. —I admit, Mr. President, that when the
enemy is driving us back is not the time to talk about
peace. But that is not the sense in which the. words
are used. The motion refers to our ultimate objective,
and it should not be taken to suggest that the Prime
Minister of Great Britain must at once enter into
negotiations with the Kaiser as to terms of peace.
Mr. HOLMAN.—But, Mr. Ryan, this Conference
was called for the special purpose of urging recruiting,
not to deal with the ultimate objective.
Mr. RYAN. —I do not admit that. •
Mr. HOLMAN.—WeII, I do.
Mr. RYAN.—We have been told that, neither by con-
scription nor by recruiting can we render any effective
military assistance in this immediate crisis.
Mr. HUGHES.—I do not admit that. What I said
was that, while we could not increase the number of
trained men on the spot, a resolution showing that Aus-
tralia was united at this crisis would strengthen the
morale and assist the people of Great Britain and our
Allies; therefore it would be of great military
assistance.
Mr. RYAN.—Then is there anything in Mr. Tudor’s
motion to object to?
Mr. HUGHES.—Yes; you talk about peace when
there is no peace.
Mr. RYAN.—WeII, I do not understand the motion
in that way.
Mr. JOSEPH COOK. —I suppose, Mr. Ryan, you
are not wedded to this particular form of words, are
you?
Mr. RYAN. —Of course, I am not.
Mr. LAWSON. —The Conference seems to have got
into a somewhat heated frame of mind. I think it
would be a mistake to attempt to pass. Mr. Tudor’s
motion, for the reasons that have been indicated, be-
cause it would lead to a most serious misunderstanding.
The amendment submitted by the Prime Minister, on
the other hand, does not seem to meet the concurrence
of those members who support Mr. Tudor’s motion.
Surely the whole purpose of the Conference is to stimu-
late the enlistment of recruits, and I suggest that the
motion should be accepted in the following form :
That this Conference, meeting at a time of un-
paralleled emergency, resolves to make all possible
efforts to avert defeat at the hands of German mili-
tarism, and urges the people of Australia to unite
in a whole-hearted effort to secure the necessary
reinforcements under the voluntary system.
In this form the motion cuts out the pledge suggested
by the Prime Minister’s amendment, and is free from
the spirit of bargaining, to which Senator Gardiner
has referred. Inferentially, it pledges the people of
Australia to united action, and urges them to follow
our example. Is there anything that can reasonably
be objected to in the motion as now framed? I urge
our friends opposite to accept this motion, so that we
can give a lead to the people of Australia.
Mr. MORBY.—I would not change one word of it.
Mr. RYAN.—But, Mr. Lawson, you have no objec-
tion to an honorable and lasting peace?
Mr. LAWSON. —No; but I agree with the Prime
Minister that in existing circumstances we cannot talk
peace.
Mr. COLLIER.—I will so
ment.
Mr. HUGHES—I d
come here at all if we p
stand between this Conferee
not going to talk any more .
the Labour movement, but, it
would go back to the unions t ■
thought was right, no matter win.
Mr. MORBY. —We are all going
irrespective of any resolution.
Mr. HUGHES. —I am glad to hear it, for if the
people say, “ Morby is for it,” and “ Holman is for it,”
be sure about this: They will realize that there must
be some crisis of an unexampled kind to persuade both
men to urge them to do the same thing. There is a
virtue in mere words at a time like this. We have to
express our feelings in such a way as will strike home
to the most indifferent; and the form of our words, if
couched too mildly, will seem to fall short of what the
occasion demands. [ will say no more than that, if
my friends on the other side cannot accept the motion
as I have put it forward, I will not stand between the
Conference and unanimity. And, if the necessary
unanimity can be secured through the motion of Mr.
Lawson, I shall have nothing further to observe than
that it is with deep regret that I find myself in this
situation after seven days of effort. Is that the best
we can say —we who have our children there fighting,
as some of us here have? It seems to me that the
Labour movement is afraid. What is it afraid of?
Mr. MORBY. —The Labour movement has a con-
science, and I will not sit here quietly and listen to any
one tell me that it is afraid. It is not afraid. '
Mr. HUGHES.—Very well; I was wrong.
Mr. MORBY. —We have provided 75 per cent, of the
men who have gone into the trenches, and you tell us
that the Labour movement is afraid.
Mr. HUGHES.—WeII then, let the Labour move-
ment say boldly what is really in its heart. Our hearts
must be in this fight. Surely they are. If I were still
a leader of Labour, and if we were conducting a strike
as in the old days, would we not tear to tatters a
man who attempted to force on us such a meagre and,
in fact, emasculated motion ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—On this matter I am entirely at
one with Mr. Hugh.es. We came to this Conference to
consider recruiting, the national emergency, and the
national danger. We have had a whole series of ques-
tions raised which do not affect the military effort at
all—questions which have been devoted entirely to do-
mestic troubles, and which might as well have come
before us in a time of profound peace as at the present.
Mr. SCULLIN.—There would have been nothing
done at all if we had not come forward with a list. You
had nothing to offer but a bald resolution.
Mr. HUGHES.—We had the military situation.
Surely that is enough.
Mr. SCULLIN. —You had nothing else to offer us.
Mr. HOLMAN. —And from your side we have heard
nothing about the military situation. I am concerned
only about the Allies’ military position. Here we have
spent seven days endeavouring to meet your difficulities,
in order that we may all stand upon common ground.
We have prepared a scheme for the removal of those
difficulties—a scheme which has taken us a long way
towards necessary unanimity.
Mr. SCULLIN. —That is not * so. Substantially,
things are left untouched.
Mr. HOLMAN. —We have made offers which have
very largely answered your requirements, and now we
are asked to vote for this simple and unexpressive motion
in the form as you have put it to us. I regard it—as
does Mr. Hughes —as entirely unworthy of the Con-
ference, and entirely inadequate f)o the situation. The
Conference will break up now without any recognition


made to secure unity on the
•'•iaraticn of the duty o
uose grievances and diffi-
our discussion. We have
.ne difficulties of the Labour
ically up till now, without ad-
to them to throw themselves
ne common cause of providing as
üble in this time of urgent crisis.
N r ER.—I opposed the proposition of
T“ ‘ -^ r - Holman because I considered it
too small for tne Conference. Mr. Lawson’s motion
gn es expression to that unity which does exist. lam
prepared to go back to die unions to tell them what
they do not need to be told, namely, that the nation is
m suca a grave position that we must have recruits, and
must do our utmost towards securing them.
, Mr - HOLMAN. —Are you prepared to go to the Mel-
bourne Trades Council ? It seems to me that that wants
teding the position.
Senator GARDINER.-—The trouble is that ail of us
view things in the particular way we wish to see them
and can see everybody rise's faults but our own. Mr.’
"jimslie drafted a suggested motion which, it seems
to me, would meet our views better than any of those
put foiwaid, including Mr. ivawson's. It was roughly
to die following effect:—
That this Conference, recognising the necessity
lot harmony amongst ail sections of the community
ni m dei that Australia may discharge her duty
during the present grave crisis, is of opinion that
the decisions arrived at will tend to produce such
harmony, and therefore urges the people, of Aus-
tralia to render cordial co-operation in the recruit-
ing efforts of the various States.
I do not put that as counter to Mr. Lawson’s proposal,
o at it certainly shows our tendency throughout this Con-
ference— our endeavour to rry to arrive at unanimity.
DAWSON. The I*rime Minister says my pro-
position is absolutely unworthy. I am prepared to
pass one as strong as the Prime Minister likes to word
it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We know that, Yours is a com-
promise. The Prime Minister says he will vote for it,
and I say that I will.
Mr. LAW SON.—Perhaps a modification of the reso-
lution, as indicated by Senator Gardiner, and which
has been drawn up tentatively by Mr. Elrnslie, would
ne somewhat stronger than that which I have moved.
But, as I read this proposal of mine, it not only binds
us to united effort, but expresses the purpose that we
shall lead the people of Australia in that united effort.
Mi-. H UGHES.—Cannot you add the words—“ and
we pledge the people that we shall lead the effort ” ?
ihe PRESIDENT.—I have Mr. Elmslie’s proposed
motion before me.
Mr. H UGHES.—If you will include, at the be-
ginning, the first two lines of Mr. Tudor’s motion, I
will be prepared to accept that. It would then com-
mence : that this Conference, meeting at a time of
unparalleled emergency, and recognising the necessity
for harmony,” &c.
Mr. SC ELLIN. The objection is that it proclaims
a whole bargaining process. There is this also, that
the amendment which the Prime Minister has moved is
actually not correct when it speaks of the “ expressed
willingness. We cannot honestly say that we have
come to agreement upon the obstacles brought forward.
e have not secured anything like what we were wishing
to obtain. The motion, as presented by Mr. Tudor, is
the one we should have carried; but I am prepared to
accept Mr.. Lawson’s; I would not agree to that which
has just been read.
Motion proposed by Mr. Lawson carried unanimously.
Mr. HUGHES.—I move—
That the members of this Conference desire to
place on record their obligation "to His Excellency
the Governor-General for summoning this Con-
ference and giving them an opportunity of ex-
changing views: upon matters affecting voluntary
recruiting, and so enabling misunderstandings .and
obstacles which appear to interfere with unanimitv
and harmony among the people in the appeal for
reinforcements to be removed.
Mr. TUDOR.—I second that.
Motion carried unanimously.
Mr. HUGHES.—I desire to move also’a hearty vote
of thanks to the President.
Mr. TUDOR.—I have pleasure in seconding the
motion. v
Carried unanimously.
The PRESIDENT.—I thank the Conference, and
desire to move a vote expressing our appreciation to
Colonel Sir George Steward, for his service's as
secretary to the Conference.
Carried unanimously.
At the instance of Mr. Hughes, a vote of thanks was
also tendered, to the Common wealth Parliamentary
Hansard staff lor their voluntary services in supplving
the official report.
At 4.35 p.m. Conference closed.
