





REPORT OF EVIDENCE
at
TARIFF BOARD INQUIRIES
into
Proposal of Duty
on
Books, Magazines and
Fashion Plates
held in
ADELAIDE, BRISBANE
SYDNEY and MELBOURNE
Transcript by
CUNNINGHAM, TURNBULL 8 SCHOLL
No. 3 St. James’ Buildings, 119 William Street, Melbourne
Printed by Wilke and Co, Ply. Ltd., 241-245 William Street, Melbourne
Published by the Australian Booksellers' Association, 245 William St., Melbourne.
6s. Net.




REPORT OF EVIDENCE
at
TARIFF BOARD INQUIRIES
into
Proposal of Duty
on
Books, Magazines and
Fashion Plates
held in
ADELAIDE, BRISBANE
SYDNEY and MELBOURNE
Transcript by
CUNNINGHAM. TURNBULL ti SCHOLL
No. 3 St. James' Buildings, 119 William Street, Melbourne
Published by the Australian Booksellers’ Association, 245 William St., Melbourne.


ADELAIDE
The Board met at Parliament House, North Terrace,
Adelaide, South Australia, on Thursday, March 20, 1930,
at 10 a.m.
Present.—Mr. H. E. Guy (Chairman), and Mr. W. S.
Kelly.
The Chairman.—The Board will proceed with an inquiry
into a request for increased duties on fashion plates and
books, books n.e.i., and printed matter n.e.i. The
applicants are the Combined Printing and Allied Trades’
Tariff Committee, 375 Kent street, Sydney, New South
Wales.
Present Items and Duties.
Item 335
B.P.T. I.T. G.T.
Fashion plates and
books, ad. val. . . Free 5 per cent. 10 per cent.
Item 339
Books, n.e.i. and
printed matter n.e.i. Free Free Free
Requests.—The requests in regard to items 335 and 339
aro as follow:
(1) That goods admitted under Tariff Item 335, in-
cluding the weight or value of immediate con-
tainers, should be dutiable on each printed colour
at the rate of:—
Brit. Pref. Tariff .. 1/ per lb. or 45 p.c. ad val.
Intermediate Tariff 1/3 per lb. or 50 p.c. ad val.
General Tariff ... 1/6 per lb. or 55 p.c. ad val.
whichever rate returns the higher duty.
(2) That Tariff Item 339, books n.e.i. and printed
matter n.e.i., should include books, periodicals,
music and newspapers, and be dutiable as under;
Brit. Pref. Tariff 45 p.c. or 1/ per doz.
Intermediate Tariff .... 50 p.c. or 1/3 per doz.
General Tariff 55 p.c. or 1/6 per doz.
for each 3/ per doz. or part thereof on the
standard retail sale price in Australia or country
of origin, whichever rate returns the higher duty.
Is there anyone present who desires to give evidence
in favour of the application? (No response.) We are
sorry that the applicants are not here to state their case,
so that you would have an opportunity of combating, but
I will state briefly what their ease is, as I think it is only
fair that you gentlemen should know’ what they are
claiming. I will just give you a few extracts.
What I am giving you is the original application,
but we have been informed that it is likely to be
revised, but w’hat it will be finally we will know when we
arrive in Sydney, I understand, when we open the inquiry
there. The original application suggested that duties
shall be assessed under tariff items 335 and 339 on the
cost of producing an equivalent quantity of identically
similar matter in the country of origin. That “re-
mainders” and “back date” books and periodicals, music,
newspapers and other publications sold for export at less
than tho original price by the publishers shall be dutiable
at double the ordinary rates.
That educational and other books or publications may
be admitted free under departmental by-laws, where the
Minister is satisfied, after report from the Industry Com-
mittee, that such books cannot be efficiently and econo-
mically printed in Australia. It is quite a big claim, and
I am giving you extracts. The claim also stated that
the value of buildings was £9,310,538, machinery and plant
£8,187,155, in 1556 factories in the printing industry of
Australia for the year 1927-28, or £17,497,693. The
value of the raw materials £8,139,535, and the employees,
34,008; the wages paid, £7,136,666; or an average wage
Thomas Henry Tidstvell
of £250. The total output represented £20,810,370, being
the fifth largest industry in Australia.
In regard to the imports for 1927-28 the imports of
paper, printing, stationery and books, periodicals, etc.,
approximated £8,000,000, of which it is estimated
£3,000,000 was for commercial printing and £1,300,000 for
books, periodicals, etc. It is estimated that,'with' proper
tariff protection, increased local production approximating
£5,000,000 worth of books, periodicals, advertising matter
and commercial, etc., would be manufactured in Australia,
increasing direct employment by 11,000 employees, besides
thousands of wage-earners indirectly, and adding
£2,250,000 or more to Australia’s wages fund. The term
“direct employment” would cover the employment of
linotypers, compositors, letter press machinists, book-
binders, process engravers, stereotypers, and the like
skilled artisans, while indirect labour would include artists,
writers, wharf labourers, packers, carters, etc. The
present customs revenue from printed matter is very
small. They claim, if a new method is adopted with
commercial printing, as suggested, and a similar duty
placed upon books and periodicals, excepting educational
and classical work, we can be expected to produce a very
large revenue indeed, £2,000,000 to £2,500,000 being an
easy possibility, and this without, as a general rule,
increasing the price to the Australian consumer, since
a great deal of the periodicals and books are sold on
standard prices. The applicants are anxious for an
opportunity of submitting samples of local production and
imported articles, such as are referred to in their state-
ment; they state that the evidence and facts are over-
whelmingly in favour of Australia being enabled to do this
class of work, and thus provide employment for at least
10,000 additional craftsmen, to say nothing of the impetus
reflected in other branches of Australian trade. I think
that is a fair statement of their case, just to give you
some idea of what their claims are. Is there anyone
present desirous of giving evidence in opposition to the
application ?
THOMAS HENRY TIDSWELL.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity are you appearing ?
—As President of the Authorised Newsagents’ Association
of South Australia, Norwich Union Buildings, Waymouth
street, Adelaide, South Australia.
Question. —Who are the members of that organisation ?
—The whole of the distributing agents of the metropolitan
area, and many of the country centres.
Q. —Did they authorise you to appear on their behalf?
Yes, I have prepared a statement, which is as follows: —
The Association of which I am President comprises 93
members controlling 400 sub-agencies throughout South
Australia, of which many employ one or more assistants.
The members of my Association are considerably
alarmed at the thought that a duty may be placed upon
overseas periodicals, magazines, etc. This is what can
be classed as bread and butter lines of the general
newsagency business.
As overseas publications are important selling lines
to the shopkeeper newsagent, of which there are many
who are practically dependent upon these and allied
lines for their livelihood, we fear that if the duty was
placed upon these lines it would make them prohibitive
to the wage-earners and their children, who are the
principal purchasers at the present time, with the
serious depression we are passing through.
We also feel that the Commission would not be fulfil-
ling its obligations to the community by imposing hard-
ships upon the newsagent, by placing a duty upon lines
that cannot for some considerable time to come be
printed in Australia at a price acceptable to the public,
or on a par with overseas lines.
2


This is brought about by lack of population and cost
of local production and installation of plant that would
be able to cope with this class of massed production.
We fear further that if a duty is placed upon these
lines it naturally means increased cost to the purchaser,
and in consequence would mean loss of trade and even-
tually closing down and further adding to the unem-
ployed market, vacant shops and loss upon invested
capital to the landlord, shopkeeper and wholesale agent.
The newsagency business is now only profitable
through the great variety of lines which they have to
offer at reasonable prices, and the contents of which
appeal to readers from a child of five years upwards.
From my own experience as controller of a chain of
newsagencies in the northern districts, I am convinced
that if increased prices have to be placed upon the
imported lines, that sales must be restricted, which in
turn would be followed by the closing down of some of
the shops under my control.
Q, —Have you any knowledge of the increased cost of
tho Australian production in comparison with the im-
ported; that is, a book printed in Australia, in comparison
with any of the other countries? —Do you mean a
periodical ?
Q. —Yes, if you have any evidence in regard to a
periodical?—l have no knowledge of the cost, but I have
a fair idea of the mass production that would be necessary
to be able to cater for the public at the price suitable to
them.
Q —Do you not consider that our Australian periodicals
are up to those of the imported ?—I would not say indi-
vidually, but we have a variety of over 200 periodicals
coming into this State weekly. With our population I
do claim that it would be almost impossible to produce
anything that would be reasonable to the newsagent to
give h m that variety of selling that makes up his trade.
Q. —What is the position in regard to secondhand
books? Do you import secondhand books at all?—No,
very few. Some of the newsagents do deal in secondhand
books, but I do not think by importing; they are dealers.
Q. —There is a pretty big importation of secondhand
books, is there not? —Not to my knowledge.
Q. —And periodicals?—Not secondhand.
Q. —It has been claimed that secondhand books are
exported to Australia, and they are principally picked up
from the janitors of the different hotels and sent to Aus-
tralia at a very cheap rate. Have you any knowledge
of that?—No.
Q. —What about back-number periodicals?—Those are
in the minority also.
Q. —But they are imported, the back numbers at a lower
rate?—Not to my knowledge.
Q. —How do you deal with your back numbers ?—When
they accumulate, which at times they do, according to
seasonal conditions, they are parcelled and sold at a lower
rate, the seller endeavouring to relieve his stock in that
way.
Q. —-Have you no information in regard to books which
havo been published overseas, and the same book pub-
lished here in Australia ?—What would you class as a
book?
Q. —It may be a novel or it may be a life work?—l
would prefer to leave that to the booksellers, who, I
believe, are here.
Q. —You have no knowledge yourself; no comparison of
prices ?—No.
Q. —What do you consider about their claim in regard to
the increased employment if this increased duty were
given. Do you think it is likely in Australia?—Not with
the periodicals on which I am giving evidence in par-
ticular. I do not think that for very many years to come
we could produce anything that would cater for the public
in the same manner as what the overseas production does
to-day.
By Mr. Kelly.—You hold, with the limitation of supply
it would limit the demand; that is to say, if you did not
have the variety you would not have the output?—That
is so. You would not have that trade in your shop if you
did not have the variety.
Q. —In other words, you cannot standardise reading?—
No, you cannot; that is clear.
By the Chairman.—ln regard to the prices of the
periodicals, would you state the prices, could you give us
the landed cost of them and the selling prices to the
public?—Do you mean the wholesale prices to us as
agents, and the retail prices?
Q. —Yes, of your best selling lines?—We would take
the “cheaps,” what we term the “cheaps.” There are
about 140 that are wholesale to us at lid. or 1/6 per
dozen, which we retail at 2d. per copy. There is another
dozen that is wholesale to us at 1/9, for which we get
2id. each. Then there is another half-dozen which is
wholesale to us at 2/3, for which we get 3d. a copy. Then
there is another half-dozen, which is wholesale to us at
3/ per dozen, for which we get 4d. a copy; those are what
we term tho “perios.”
By Mr. Kelly.—From whom do you purchase?—Mostly
from Gordon and Gotch, who are the distributing agents
for the Amalgamated Press and other leading publishing
houses.
Q. —-They are sold wholesale at 4/ a dozen?—No, they
are retailed to the public. The second price I gave you
was the retail price to the public; they cost us 3/, and
they are retailed to the public at 4/. Then there are
many other lines, such as magazines.
By the Chairman.—What about magazines?—The
wholesale prices are 7d., selling at 9d.; 9d. selling at 1/;
and 1/ selling at 1/4. Those are the principal prices
of the magazines. Then there are the American maga-
zines.
Q. —I think that will be sufficient for the present.—
Further than that, we have what we term high-class or
literary magazines, such as the “Sphere” and other allied
publications. They are wholesale to us at 1/2 and sold
at 1/6.
By Mr. Kelly.—What do you do with the remainder;
have you got the right to return?—No, none of those lines
are on sale and return. When I say none of them, some-
times at various periods the wholesale houses do give the
firms the right over a certain period of making these
publications on sale or return.
By the Chairman.—What happens then in regard to
those which you have not sold, say, within a month or
six weeks. Do you sell those at a reduced rate?—Do
you mean those where we get the privilege of return ?
Q. —No, you take advantage of that, I suppose?—Yes.
Those that are not sold, if we cannot sell them, that is
our loss.
Q. —You put them by for Christmas, I suppose?—Very
often, but very often the benevolent institutions get a
present of them.
Q. —Do you not usually sell them at Christmas time?—
We try to do our best.
Q. —Is there a very big percentage of back dates? —
No, not a great percentage. A man has to be very
cautious in the handling of his business, and probably a
shrewd business man lets the wholesaler carry the baby.
By Mr. Kelly.—That is what he is there for?—Very
often. He certainly tries to cater for his trade ade-
quately, but he allows tho wholesaler to carry the bulk.
FREDERICK EDWARD MELENCJ,
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing ?—As Secretary of the Institutes’ Association of South
Australia Incorporated, also Secretary of the Australian
Library Association, the Public Library Buildings, North
Terrace, Adelaide. I have prepared a statement, which is
as follows:
As Secretary of the Institutes’ Association of South
Australia Incorporated, and also as Secretary to the
Australian Library Association, and on behalf of nearly
27,000 subscribers to the libraries of the various sub-
urban and country institutes in this State, I have been
ADELAlDE—Frederick Edward Meleng
ADELAIDE —Thomas Henry Tidswell


instructed by the Council of the Institutes’ Association
to enter an emphatic protest against the proposed duty
on books.
There are two distinct phases of library activity—one,
representative of such institutions as the Public Library
and the University, which cater for the student, more
particularly in the metropolitan area, and the other
known as the institute, which stands for the social and
intellectual advancement of the people in the country.
While it may be shown that a duty on books and
periodicals would be disastrous so far as the institutions
of a more academical character are concerned, I propose
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Tariff Board
that it would be unwise to tax the institutes. The
following reasons are, therefore, respectfully advanced
why institutes should not be penalised in the direction
indicated—•
(1) Suburban and country institutes were established
in this State for the purpose of making the con-
ditions of life in the country more acceptable,
and thereby adding to the material well-being
of the people and the prosperity of the State.
What applies to South Australia in this respect
has an equal bearing in the other States.
(2) The Government, recognising the value of the
institute system as an aid to popular education,
subsidised the amount expended on the erection
of institute buildings to the extent of £124,778,
and is still subsidising members’ subscriptions.
The institute movement takes the form of a great
popular educator, and to retard the growth of an
institution of this character would be a tragic
mistake. The policy of the Governments, Fede-
ral and State, is in the direction of increased
production, and the textbooks that are being sent
out to farmers and others interested in production
from the reference library of the Institutes’ Asso-
ciation, on subjects likely to help in this direc-
tion, are indicated as follows:—“Wheat Grow-
ing,” “Fertilisers and Crops,” “Dairying in Aus-
tralasia,” “Management and Diseases of Sheep,”
“Structure of Wool Fibre,” “Profitable Stock
Raising,” “Home Doctoring of Animals,” “En-
cyclopaedia of the Stable,” “Oil Finding,” “Mak-
ing the Farm Pay,” “Feeding and Management of
Dairy Cattle,” “Pig Keeping on Money-making
Lines,” “Fruitgrower’s Handbook,” and hundreds
of other books dealing with by-products, etc. It
is patent, therefore, that the institutes are per-
forming a valuable educational work and assist-
ing in the objective of the Federal Government.
As books of the character mentioned, and thou-
sands of similar publications, are purchased from
. the book-trade, the booksellers, in the event of
the tax being imposed, would simply pass on the
duty, and the usefulness of the institutes, which
have a precarious existence, would be restricted
by the infliction of a direct tax on knowledge. The
proposal, to my mind, is unthinkable, and is
bitterly resented by tens of thousands of institute
managers throughout the Commonwealth.
(3) The management of institutes is conducted in an
honorary capacity by ladies and gentlemen de-
sirous of bridging the gulf between the schools
and the machinery for promoting education in
adult years, and at the same time conferring
on the rural population some of the social and
intellectual advantages enjoyed by the people in
the metropolitan area —a most laudable ambition
and deserving of commendation. A recent inno-
vation, promoted by the Council of the Institutes’
Association, which guides the destiny of our
institutes, is the formation of a travelling juvenile
library, believed to be the first in the Common-
wealth. This library deposits books suitable for
children at the various institutes, and school
children avail themselves of the privilege. As
shewing the value of the movement, it is authori-
tatively stated that many school inspectors, when
sending in their official reports to the Education
Department, refer in eulogistic terms to the yalue
of the Institutes’ Juvenile Library as an aid to
education. It will be remembered that the
Carnegie millions have been attributed to the fact
that Andrew Carnegie, as a boy, was given access
to a gentleman’s library, and derived so much
benefit therefrom that when he became wealthy
he created Carnegie Free Libraries throughout
the world. The use of these libraries has pro-
bably conferred untold benefit upon millions of
people. Instead of placing our institutes and
libraries at a disadvantage by the imposition of
a duty, a premium should be paid to them in order
to further enhance their usefulness.
(4) In addition to its many other operations, the
Council of the Association conducts educational
classes at many of the country institutes. Tuition
is given in electrical technology, shorthand and
typewriting, accountancy, mathematics, me-
chanical drawing, and many other commercial and
technical subjects. For the efficient conduct of
these classes, technical and trade books are fre-
quently in request, and a duty, if imposed, would
limit the usefulness of these educational agencies.
While it has been suggested that educational books
might be admitted free, and that the tax is designed
against the introduction of fiction, in order to assist
local publishers, I venture to think that this also would
ba a mistake. There should be no restriction what-
ever in making available to people the thoughts of the
world’s brainiest men and women. The novel represents
an important part of the intellectual life of the period,
and may be said to have taken the place of the drama.
The great writers of fiction to-day stand out, as they
always did, like the great dramatists, by reason of their
knowledge of human nature and their skill in portraying
its passions and weaknesses. The leading novelists will
always command the larger public of the old world, and
it is questionable whether it will ever be practicable to
publish in Australia on profitable lines.
In regard to what might be termed fiction of a less
intellectual character, such as mystery stories by Edgar
Wallace, and light magazines, which would attract the
attention of publishers and be selected for publication
on account of the sales which they command, it is
suggested that, even with these publications, it is prob-
lematical whether the business would be worth pursuing.
To place a duty on this class of fiction at the expense
of the better kind of book in order to employ a number
of additional printers would be an iniquitous proceed-
ing.
The latest annual statistical information available,
relating to the South Australian Institutes, will enable
the Tariff Board to realise the amount of energy and en-
thusiasm expended in arriving at the present position,
and also to form an opinion of the beneficial influence
which the movement must exercise in moulding the
character of our young people, and shaping the destiny
of the nation:—
Number of suburban and country institutes .. 300
Number of volumes in libraries 618,399
Number of issues 1,679,078
Number of subscribers 26,463
Annual income (excluding Government
grant) _. .. £54,124/8/5
Amount of Government grant, excluding
Adelaide Circulating Library, £250 £9,738/18/11
Cost of buildings £408,100
Value of library contents £146,269
Amount spent on books £11,150/6/6
A great many of the smaller distributors of books in
Australia who depend largely on the sale of novels
are working on a very small margin between profit and
loss. Many of them would go out of business, and
their trade would go to the larger booksellers. There
would be fewer people employed in the bookselling
ADELAlDE—Frederick Edward Meleng


trade, and the public, over such an immense country as
Australia, would be poorly served by bookshops.
Australia is far removed from the older centres of
civilisation and the United States. We are a new
country, working out new problems, endeavouring to
build up secondary industries, and make our primary
industries more efficient. Already books are dearer
here than they are in Europe and America, and the
cost of distribution is greater. We realise the necessity
for building up a student population. All efforts in
this direction would be seriously affected by a tariff
on books. The suggestion that America has such a tariff
is no criterion. America is, of course, a highly pro-
tected country, as we are rapidly becoming, but America
has an enormous home market. Her primers and pub-
lishers cater for approximately 120 million people. It
is problematical whether a tax on books will improve
the position of the Australian publisher. It is certain
that by restricting the importation of the best thoughts
of the great thinkers and writers of the world, it will
starve the intellectual life of the people and thereby
retard the development of a great Australian literature.
It is confidently hoped that the library movement,
which is now assuming a Federal aspect, as evidenced
by the recently formed Australian Library Association,
will not have its operations restricted by the imposition
of a tax on books. Library activity in the true educa-
tional interest of the people represents a very important
phase of public life to-day, and should receive every
possible encouragement.
The majority of the people of Australia are interested
in our libraries, and our organisation is capable of
exercising a tremendous influence for good; therefore
we confidently leave the issue in the hands of the Tariff
Board. We believe that the more closely the position
is examined, the more manifest it will become to the
Commission that a duty on books would not be in the
best interest of Australia.
A reading people becomes a thinking people, and a
thinking people a great people, therefore Australians,
to be free and great, should be encouraged in the art
of reading and thinking. Only in this way can Aus-
tralia develop a literature of its own.
Q- —On page 3 of your statement you say that the cost
of books would be greatly increased, and already books
are dearer here than they are in Europe and America, and
the cost of distribution is greater?—Yes.
Q. —The applicants, in submitting their case, referred
to examples of different works, which were cheaper in
Australia than they were in England, and also in regard
to American publications, what they state here is “The
Life and Work of Henry Ford,” which is quoted as an
example, was cheaper in Australia than overseas. They
quote that as an example of how locally-made books are
sold cheaper than those made overseas. This work was
sold in America at a price equal to 14/7, while the Aus-
tralian edition equalled in every respect that in U.S.A.
was sold for 7/6?—lt has been suggested that the
publication of that particular work was subsidised. I
am not sure of that.
Q.—You consider it was subsidised?—l do not say so
definitely, but I saw that statement in the press, or a
statement to that effect.
Q. —Do you consider that the Australian edition equalled
in every respect that of the American?—l do not, not in
my judgment.
Q. —Do you think the difference was justified, 14/7 to
7/6?—No, I do not. I have heard a lot about that book.
Q. —Here is another instance, “‘The Life and Letters
of Walter Page.” That was sold for a guinea in America
and it can be bought here for 16/?—The same edition.
Q. —It is claimed so?—lt may have been sold as a
remainder.
Q. —In regard to that work, the “Life of Henry Ford,”
can you tell me if that was printed in Australia?—One
edition, I understand, was printed in Australia.
Q. —That is what, I take it, is the edition they are refer-
ring to, and then the “Life and Letters of Walter Page,”
I understand by their claim it was printed in Australia
and sold at 16/ ?—I could not say definitely whether it
was published in Australia, but a second edition came out
at 16/, whilst the original edition was published at a
higher cost.
Q. —The next example they give is “War Birds: the
Diary of an Aviator.” They say the cost was 14/7 in
America and an Australian edition was priced at 7/6
I am rather surprised to learn that; I was not aware of
that fact.
Q. —There are a number of other witnesses, and perhaps
it would be just as well that I should give them these
examples as they may wish to combat them. We would
be pleased if they will do so?—I venture to think that the
booksellers, perhaps, handling these books would be in a
better position than I am to answer these questions.
Q. —I am taking this opportunity of giving them this
information. They say there are other comparisons. For
instance, “Head Hunters of the Amazon,” first edition in
England 16/, here 6/. I take it that is for an Australian
edition. Then the next example is, “Difficulties,” by
Seymour Hicks, 10/6 in England, 4/6 here. Again, “Why
I am a Christian,” by Dr. Frank Crane, 8/4 in U.S.A.,
4/6 here. “Beasts, Men and Gods,” by Ossendowski, 12/6
in U.S.A., 6/ here. “Corner Stones of Auction Bridge,”
10/5 in U S.A., 7/6 here. “Chinese Bandits,” 12/6 in
U.S.A., 6/ here. “The Revolt of Asia,” by Upon Close,
10/5 in U.S.A. and 6/ here. Lindbergh’s “We,” in the
States 10/5 and 7/6 in Australia?—Might I say that the
object of my evidence is to help you to imagine the
position in the country, inasmuch as in the event of the
duty being imposed, difficulties would undoubtedly be
encountered by many of the institute managers in carry-
ing on.
Q. —In regard to educational and other books or publi-
cations, the suggestion is that those be admitted free
under departmental by-law?—Yes, but that does not go
far enough.
Q. —That is where the Minister is satisfied on the report
of the Industry Committee that such books can be effi-
ciently and economically printed in Australia. From
what source does the institute obtain its publications and
books ?—Wherever we can get the better value. That is
to say, if the funds permit, we buy locally, or we might
buy overseas, go to Melbourne, Sydney, or anywhere else
in order to conserve the taxpayers’ money. We feel it
our bounden duty with our Government grant to get the
best possible price in the interests of the taxpayer.
Q. —A number of these books you have mentioned here
would they not be classified as educational books and come
in free?—Many of them would, but not books of the type
of Edgar Wallace. The more important magazines, that
is, the “Fortnightly Review” and the “Nineteenth Cen-
tury,” and so forth, are literary and political magazines,
and, of course, are educational.
Q. —There is one point in regard to those educational
books which you have to consider. The applicants say if
the Minister is satisfied after report from the Industry
Committee that such books cannot be economically and
efficiently printed in Australia. That does not mean all
educational books would be admitted free?—Not neces-
sarily. lam inclined to think that the Australian pub-
lisher would naturally strain after the more sensational
type of book and magazine in order to make his position
good.
Q. —Therefore, you consider that those educational
books would bo admitted free?—Yes, I conclude that
would be the case.
Q. —What would happen to the institutes if the cost
was increased?—lt would seriously embarrass their posi-
tion financially. I might say, I have in mind at the
present time my institute, where subscribers have paid
their subscriptions for the current year with promissory
notes. We are not a money-making concern, and our
object is just as I have indicated in my statement, to
bring about a little of the social and intellectual conditions
for the folk in the country, and not to have them all for
ourselves in the city. (Witness withdrew.)
ADELAlDE—Frederick Edward Meleng


HUBERT RUTHERFORD PURNELL.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
appear?—As a Fellow of the Library Association of the
United Kingdom, Librarian of the Public Library of
South Australia, Honorary Treasurer of the Australian
Library Association of South Australia, and Honorary
Secretary of the Library Association of South Australia.
I have prepared a statement, which is as follows:
Statement before the Tariff Board against a proposed
duty on books, on behalf of the Australian Library Asso-
ciation, with which are associated the Library Association
of South Australia, the Board of Governors of the Public
Library, Museum and Art Gallery of South Australia, the
South Australian Public Teachers’ Union, the Railways
Institute, and other kindred organisations.
1. Educational.—The Australian educational system
has been built up on the broadest lines, so as to ensure
the possibility of free education to all citizens of the
Commonwealth, even up to University standard. It
aims at the cultivation of an appreciation of books, and
is dependent on a liberal supply from all parts of the
world. The prices of books are already high, as com-
pared with those in other countries, and a duty is bound
to increase their cost and so still further to lessen their
accessibility. Australians of all ages, and especially
the workers, would suffer a severe cultural handicap as
compared with the inhabitants of other countries.
2. Libraries.—lt is the duty of libraries to promote
culture through the wide dissemination of knowledge
obtained from books from every quarter of the globe.
Books are the raw materials of every kind of science and
art, and of all social improvement. An increase in their
cost would react disadvantageously on the libraries,
through which so much is done for the continuance
of education into adult years. In regard to the Public
Library of South Australia, for some years, owing to
the financial stringency, the Board of Governors has
suffered from lack of funds to carry on the work of
the institution adequately. An increase in the cost of
books would further adversely affect the w.ork of the
library.
3. Periodicals.—The same considerations that apply
to books are due in equal measure to periodicals, which
record the latest researches in all branches of science,
technology, literature, and the arts, knowledge of which
is essential to the students, research workers, manu-
facturers, and producers of Australia to enable them to
keep up-to-date with the progress of their various
activities. The fact that they contain advertisements
should not be taken into account, since it is by advertise-
ment revenue that the cost is kept down, and, neither
with nor without advertisements, can they be produced
in Australia. A duty would provide no compensating
protection to Australian printing and publishing indus-
tries, and would be a bar to progress.
4. Duty Non-protective.—Against the grave disad-
vantages of a duty there would be no corresponding
benefit, since the vast majority of books cannot be manu-
factured in this country. Profitable production is
dependent on a sufficiently extensive demand, which does
not exist in Australia. In nearly all countries, protec-
tionist or otherwise, books are exempted from tariff
duty. The outstanding exception is the United States,
in which, however, the enormous population, estimated
to-day at over 118 millions, might warrant it. But in
the United States the book industry has not flourished
under the tariff. In 1913, according to details given
in an address (for reference see foot of statement)
made by Mr. E. H. Anderson, Director of the New York
Public Library, the number of books published annually
in the United States, with its then population of ninety
millions, was only about 6 per cent, of the total produc-
tion of the world. Germany, a strongly protectionist
country, with no duty on books, was found to be the
largest book producing country in the world. In pro-
portion to population, in 1913 Switzerland was produc-
ing ten times as many books as the United States.
Germany, France, Britain, Holland, Italy, Austria and
Japan were each producing from three and one-half to
five times as many. In summing up the case against
the duty on books in America, Mr. Anderson said: “Tho
tariff has signally failed to promote the publishing,
the manufacture, or the sale of books.”
By Mr. Kelly.—That is a long time ago. I wonder
what those facts would be 17 years after?—Well, the
figures have not been worked out so far as I know since
that date, but I know that in 1928 the number of new
books published in England was over 8000, and in U.S.A.
just over 5000, so that the United States, with its vastly
greater population, is still far behind Great Britain in
the production of new books. In discussing the figures of
publication the matter is complicated by the difference in
the records. For instance, the figures in the United
States include pamphlets, which are not contained in the
record for the United Kingdom, so that it seems as if the
United States’ publications are well behind the United
Kingdom. My statement continues: —■
5. Decline of bookshops under a tariff.—During the
thirty or forty years prior to the statement from which
the estimate in paragraph 4 is taken, the number of
book stores in the United States had notoriously de-
clined. Good bookshops are of great educational value
to tho community. They supply the demand created by
the educational system and by the libraries. The tariff
has done nothing in the United States to save the book-
shops, but by making books more costly has assisted in
their decline, and has driven people to the reading of
cheap newspapers. It will be disastrous to Australia
if the educational system leads only to the scrappiness
of outlook engendered by the overproduction of the
newspaper form of reading, for which there is no need
for tariff, because there can be no competition from
outside.
G. Decline of bookshops in Australia.—Already since
the war the increase in the cost of books has caused
a decline in the bookselling trade. Three large general
bookshops have closed down since 1920 in Adelaide
alone. To increase tho cost of books by imposing a
tariff would be a further blow to the book trade, for
which no compensation can be looked for in stimulus
to the printing and publishing trades. Books which
are already difficult to obtain, and cannot be produced
in Australia, will be still more difficult. A duty on
books is particularly unwise in a democracy, the very
existence of which depends on the intelligence of its
citizens.
In conclusion, I would like to advance what is, to my
mind, the most cogent objection to a duty on books and
periodicals: that is, the isolation of Australia from the
rest of the world. It is only by constant interchange
of ideas that Australians can keep in touch with what
is being done in other centres of civilisation, which
information can only be obtained from books and
periodicals. This is of particular importance in regard
to the literature of the Empire, which should be freely
accessible. A duty on books is non-protective, and can
only be regarded as a tax on knowledge.
Note.—The reference to an address on sheet 2 is “The
Tax on Ideas,” address by Mr. E. H. Anderson, Director
of the New York Public Library, and President of the
American Library Association, May 25, 1914, cited from
“Library Journal,” vol. 39, pp. 499-503.
Q. —On the first page of your evidence is the statement,
“The prices of books are already high, as compared with
those in other countries.” Have you any knowledge in
regard to the statements I made in respect of the prices
of certain imported books, and the reduced prices of those
published in Australia? Can you give us any information
in regard to that?—l should only like to say that I cannot
give you any specific information about the cost of
production, but, in comparing the books that have been
mentioned, the books produced in Australia cannot be
regarded as equal to the imported. For example, the
Henry Ford book produced in Australia cannot be re-
garded as the equal of the book published at a higher price
elsewhere. The Australian book was produced in cheap


form. I may say that a great many books can be pro-
duced cheaply. For example, a book like the “Origin
of Species” can be produced in England and sold at a
profit there at sixpence. Usually a book printed else-
where could be printed in a cheap form, and sold at less
than the price of the original edition, which has to bear
the bulk of the payment to the author, and so on.
Q- —Would not the Australian edition of “The Life and
Work of Henry Ford” be suitable for library purposes?—■
No. It is too small. In regard to that book, lam only
speaking from memory, as I have not examined it. I
only saw it on a bookstall, but it was the sort of book
that I would avoid buying for the Public Library.
Q. —Is the binding and printing inferior to the im-
ported?—l could not speak of the binding of that particu-
lar book, because Ido not remember handling a copy. I
only saw it on a stall.
Q- —You could not give us any information in regard to
some of the other books mentioned?—l have a copy of the
Australian edition of “War Birds” and the binding is in
every way inferior to the binding of the original edition.
In my opinion, the book cannot be brought into compari-
son.
Q. —Do you think a diiference of 7/ is justified? The
production of that book at 7/6 is going to encourage the
reading of it?—l should look at is in a different way.
It is a credit to Australia when, without a tariff on books
it can produce a book of that sort to sell at that price.
Q. —If they can do that without a tariff what will they
do with a tariff that will mean greater production?—The
tariff in that case will only serve to increase the general
cost of books. It is impossible to argue from the par-
ticular to the general in this case, because one or two
books have been produced in Australia. We do not even
know that they were produced at a profit.
Q. —Quite a number of books have been mentioned,
and if there is greater production surely that will bring
down costs. If costs are reduced the manufacturers
should bring down the selling prices?—Compared with
Great Britain, for instance, I have information that
every material used in the production of an Australian
book is subject to a duty. Therefore, in Australia the
general production of a book must cost more. I can only
speak from a general point of view, not from expert
knowledge.
Q. —In regard to periodicals, if they were printed in
Australia, would we have the same opportunity of getting
those special articles that are quite educational, and
which we are getting out of imported periodicals at the
present time?—No. In my opinion periodicals, speaking
generally, cannot be produced in Australia. There are
too many of them. There are 20,000 separate publications
in the world list of scientific periodicals. In the union list
of periodicals, that is periodicals in general, there are
no fewer than 75,000 periodicals. These are printed
throughout the world and are contained in the libraries of
America. To my mind it is unthinkable that even a
small percentage of periodicals can be produced in Aus-
tralia.
Q. —You do not think it likely that we would get the
information we are getting to-day from the “Scientific
American,” or the “Saturday Evening Post.” You do
not think we would get that information in Australia?—
We would get a little of it, but very little.
Q. —You said, “The fact that they contain advertise-
ments should not be taken into account.” What is your
reason for saying that? Do you think those advertise-
ments are instructive, that they are educational? —No.
My reason is that the cost of a periodical is reduced by
the revenue received by advertisements.
Q. —That is the only reason why you would include
advertising in those periodicals?—l think so, on the face
of it.
Q. —You do not think there is anything to be gained
from the advertisements?—Advertisements are certainly
a stimulus to trade. They have their value.
Q. —They certainly give you an idea of the progress
that is being made, and I certainly think that many of
those advertisements are educational in form?—l agree.
By Mr. Kelly.—There is a suggested contradiction in
one of your arguments. You proved very conclusively
that a big market is necessary for the successful printing
of books. Then you indicated that Switzerland had done
excellently in that regard. That rather upends the other
argument, does it not? —Switzerland is the neighbour of
a great many countries.
Q. —I confess that I do not know the language in which
Swiss books are printed. Would they be available to the
neighbouring countries?—The languages of the country
are French and German.
Q.—The books are printed in French or German and
then sent to the French or German market?—A great
many of them are sold in those markets.
Q. —In that sense Switzerland has a big market, inas-
much as they use the same languages as two neighbouring
countries ?—Yes.
Q. —Does that apply to Sweden, which prints a lot of its
own books? —Sweden has a duty on books in Swedish only.
Q. —Obviously Sweden would not print in a language
other than Swedish?—The object of the duty is to pre-
serve to Swedish books the Swedish market. Otherwise
Swedish authors would send their books away to places
where they could get them printed more cheaply and
import them in very large numbers. The case of Sweden
is not similar to that of Australia.
Q. —In reference to the present cost of books, I suppose
that books have risen in price more than almost any
other commodity since the war? —It is difficult to answer
that question. I cannot answer it.
Q. —In what way do you make your purchases for your
libraries?—We buy mostly from the local booksellers and
wo have London agents also.
Q. —-You compare the prices and buy in what you think
is the best market?—Yes.
Q. —Do you consider that the Australian prices are
justifiable as against the prices in the United Kingdom
for comparable books? —I am not engaged in the business
of bookselling.
Q. —But a man who is engaged in the business would
be somewhat biassed in his point of view. I look to you
as one who is disinterested?—lf I were a business man
I should not like to be a bookseller.
Q. —Most business men usually advise others not to
engage in their particular trade ?—I am not engaged in
any trade, although I am associated with books, and I
consider booksellers must have great difficulty in carrying
on, especially in view of the present high prices of books.
Q. —In other words, you assert that the high prices of
books in Australia are not due to profiteering in Aus-
tralia?—Quite.
Q. —It is due to the price of the books at the source?—
Yes.
By the Chairman. —You said, “Profitable production is
dependent on a sufficiently extensive demand.” In com-
parison to population, do you not think there is a great
demand for books in Australia than in other parts of the
world. Are the Australians not considered great readers ?
—Might I refer to what is now become a trite saying.
The remark emanated from my colleague in New South
Wales, who, in 1928, publicly said, “Only one Australian
in four ever opens a book.”
Q. —What is the position in other parts of the world? —
His statement cannot be proved or disproved. It is the
opinion of an Australian. I was not fortunate enough to
be born in Australia, but I give the remark as the opinion
of an Australian. It is very difficult to check the figures,
but I did see a statement in the prospectus of a book that
50 per cent, of Americans are readers in a particular
part of the United States.
Q. —Readers of books?—Of course the United States
is an unfortunate case to quote, because the people there
are great readers of periodicals and not great readers of
books.
Q. —You said, “Three large general bookshops have
closed down since 1920 in Adelaide alone.” Were those
ADELAIDE—Hubert Rutherford Purnell


concerns taken over by bigger concerns? —No, they have
actually disappeared.
Q. —Can you give the Board the names of those con-
cerns?—E. S. Wigg and Son, the Harvey Bookshop, and
Tyrell’s Limited. I make the statement, “general book-
sellers,” because Wigg and Son still sell books. However,
I would not call them general booksellers.
Q.—. Nobody bought those businesses; they have just
disappeared ?—That is so- lam sorry. I have been
corrected. I understand that the stock of the Harvey
Bookshop was bought by Cole’s Book Arcade. You might
say that the Harvey Bookshop has been absorbed by Coles.
(Witness withdrew.)
JOHN RAYMOND WILTON,
Affirmed and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
I am Professor of Mathematics at the University of Ade-
laide, and I am here because I am Chairman of the Library
Committee. I believe the statement handed in to the
Board is signed by the Registrar, but I am quite willing
to sign it, as I wrote it. It was prepared by a Com-
mittee, but the actual drafting was in my hands.
Q. —There is no need to sign it. You can read it as
your evidence?—The statement was prepared by a Com-
mittee of three Professors, and - then was revised by
another Committee of three Professors, although one
Professor was a member of both Committees. I shall
read the statement.
1. It is assumed that any scheme providing for
duties on imported books, etc., would exempt the class
of books and magazines received into University
libraries. Such books and magazines could not, in any
circumstances, be produced exclusively in Australia, and
a tax upon them would mean great loss to the Univer-
sities, with no compensating economic gain to the
Commonwealth. The position is substantially the same
as regards all books required for organised education,
i.e., in schools, colleges, and organisations for adult
education.
Assuming that the immediate interest of the Univer-
sities and other educational organisations would in
any such scheme be safeguarded, the Council would still
urge upon the Minister the following objections against
the proposed tax:—■
(a) It is undesirable that any artificial restriction
should be placed on the acquisition by Australians
of the knowledge gained in other countries. (The
word knowledge is here employed in a sense wide
enough to include drama, poetry and fiction.) In
a country as isolated as Australia, books are
almost exclusively the vehicle of such know-
ledge, and to tax them would add to the already
great difficulty which the average reading man
experiences in becoming acquainted with thought
in other parts of the world. The educated read-
ing public of Australia is small, not only abso-
lutely, but also relatively to population, and it is
of the utmost importance for the cultural advance
of Australia that the habit of reading good litera-
ture should become more general, and that the
few who read widely and deeply should be in
every way encouraged; to this end it is essential
that the importation of books, magazines and
newspapers should be unrestricted. All whose
work is intellectual know from experience the
frequent vexatious delay and loss which result
from the inability to obtain in their own city, or
even in Australia, a much needed book or maga-
zine. An import duty on books, etc., would tend
to increase the difficulty, because the number of
books sold, and with it booksellers’ profits, would
certainly decrease, so that the booksellers would
be compelled to carry smaller stocks than they do
at present.
(b) It is more than doubtful whether a tax on im-
ported books would to any significant extent
stimulate the production of Australian literature,
but, even if it should, it would still have to be
recognised that, in the matter of literature,
Australia is, and must long remain, overwhelm-
ingly a debtor or beneficiary to other nations.
(c) It is doubtful whether, from the strictly economic
point of view, such a tax would achieve anything.
The population of Australia is so small compared
with that of the great countries of the old world
that, even were the impossible condition granted
that a sufficiency of authors of high standing
would be forthcoming, the Australian publisher
would not have a market sufficient to warrant
the publication of the great majority of books.
In the case of books of the more serious kind,
an English edition usually consists of from 750
to 1000 copies. In Australia, on a population
basis, the sale for such a book would be limited
to at most 100 copies, and it could be produced
only at a cost that would be altogether pro-
hibitive. The tax might result in the employ-
ment of a few additional men in the production
of certain works of a popular character, but the
cost to the community would be heavy—much
greater than could be measured financially. Es-
pecially would it exercise a retarding influence
on that free inflow of inspiring thoughts and
recent acquisitions of knowledge which is so
vitally essential to a progressive nation.
2. The Council views with even greater concern the
proposal to tax prohibitively, or even to prohibit alto-
gether, the importation of publishers’ remainders and
secondhand books. Members of the reading public are
not usually wealthy, and they are often, to a large
extent, dependent for their volumes of general litera-
ture on remainders and secondhand books; especially
is this the case with literature of a serious character
not directly in the line of a man’s own work. To render
such books much more expensive, or even unprocurable,
would inflict great hardship upon just those whom it
should be the aim of the Government to encourage,
namely, the most intelligent members of the community,
and this without any compensating gain of any kind to
the Commonwealth as a whole. Moreover, many very
valuable and important books are out of print, and to
cut off the supply of secondhand copies of such books
would place an intolerable restriction upon all intellec-
tual work.
Q. —Provision is made in the application that educational
and other books or publications may be admitted free
under departmental by-laws?—We assumed that.
Q. —It goes farther, and states, “Where the Minister is
satisfied, after a report from the Industry Committee,
that such books cannot be efficiently and economically
printed in Australia.” With regard to the books to which
you are referring, I take it there would be only a very
small production necessary?—There is a very large
demand for school books. I do not know what demand
there is for ordinary school books, but several thousand
candidates sit for the public examinations in Adelaide.
Q. —Could those books be printed economically and
efficiently in Australia?—There is no one to write them,
so far as I know. You could not get a non-Australian
author to send his books here to be published. That
type of book simply cannot be produced here.
Q. —We have quite a number of instances of books
having been published in Australia. The cost of the books
so published was less than that of the English publica-
tions?—Yes, but were the books of equal quality.
Q. —Evidence has been given regarding the inferior
quality of the Australian books compared with the im-
ported books, but the fact remains that books are being
printed here efficiently and economically?—Some ad-
mirable books have been printed in Australia. One does
not wish to discourage that; one wishes to encourage it;
but I, for instance, could not recommend for public
examinations a book simply because it was published here.
I would recommend a book because it satisfied certain
8
ADELAIDE—John Raymond Wilton


conditions. lam concerned with the matter of a book,
not with its get-up.
Q. —When would you make up your mind regarding a
textbook? Would there be sufficient time for local
printers to make arrangements to print that book in Aus-
tralia?—Probably not for the next year.
Q. —They would not have the knowledge that a certain
book was required, would they?—ln certain cases, yes, but
as a rule, no. Of course, many books set for public
examinations are simply continued from year to year.
In some subjects they are changed every year.
Q. —If you were changing a textbook, what notice could
be given?—We give a notice of three months at least.
Our Public Examinations Board usually meets in August,
and decides upon the textbooks for the following year.
Q. —Approximately, that would give printers five
months’ notice of any alteration, because the books would
not be required until early in February?—That is so.
Q. —Quite a number of textbooks are printed in Aus-
tralia at the present time, are they not?—l am afraid I
do not know. In my own subject I know what is hap-
pening. lam only aware of one little book on arithmetic,
that is at all used, that is printed here. lam afraid that
I really cannot answer the question.
Q. —I know that in the Victorian schools cheap editions
of textbooks are used, and I believe they are printed in
Australia. The books are quite satisfactory, for twelve
months or two years’ use, but they would not be satisfac-
tory for library purposes. Would you suggest that such
books would be satisfactory for students, if not for library
purposes?—l should not like to say that any book is
suitable for student purposes unless I knew something
about the subject and something about the book. I cannot
answer a general question of that type.
Q. —A student at a public school does not take much
interest in a book after he has used it for a couple of
years?—No, but the teacher does. Are you referring to
reprints of a book published elsewhere.
Q. —Yes. I see no reason why a book should not be
reprinted here?—lf that is the point I have nothing to
say against it.
Q. —You have had no experience of the Australian
produced book?—Not personally, except in regard to a
very few that have come my way and were very nicely
bound. I know of nothing in my subject, but a book on
the history of South Australia was printed here and was
very nicely bound.
Q. —You said, “All whose work is intellectual know from
experience that frequent vexatious delay and loss which
result from the inability to obtain in our own city, or even
in Australia, a much needed book or magazine.” If we
were producing books in Australia, do you not think such
books would be more likely to be available?—There I am
referring really to books of a type in very limited demand,
books that may be wanted only by a dozen people in the
whole of the Commonwealth. Some of our booksellers
in Adelaide are extraordinarily good in carrying stocks
of books for which there must be a very small demand.
They carry one or two copies. My friends and I have
often been very pleased to find books here which we did
not expect to find. We thought that we would have to
send to England to get them.
Q. —Very often it is necessary to indent these special
books for you?—Yes. Almost invariably one has to
order them from England or elsewhere.
Q. —In regard to the importation of secondhand books,
is there a big trade in Australia?—l do not know.
Q. —Are secondhand books bought up very freely by
students and others?—l know they buy from one another
a good deal, and I suppose they buy from booksellers who
have bought from previous students.
By Mr. Kelly.—You stated that you viewed with even
greater concern the proposal to tax prohibitively, or even
to prohibit altogether, the importation of publishers’ re-
mainders and secondhand books. That suggests that you
realise there has been a benefit in the past?—lt is a very
great benefit to individuals, but whether there is any
large demand for such books is another matter altogether.
Q. —In your own experience, you know of benefit having
been derived because of the availableness of books of that
nature?—l think I may quote my own personal experience
as a buyer of books. I suppose that outside my own
subject practically all my serious reading is done with
secondhand books. I cannot afford to buy new books
because they are so expensive. I can secure a good
biography secondhand for one-third of the price of the
new book, sometimes even less than that. They are not
so very old, either.
Q. —Stress has been laid on the reprinting of books. The
reprints have been sold at a figure which appears to be
good intrinsic value. However, I presume that the subject
matter of the book and the likely market would entirely
dominate the price at which it could be printed?—Yes.
Q. —Therefore, what would be possible in a limited
range of books would not be possible in a range of books
essential for the reading public?—Of course. A novel
which has a large circulation can be sold much more
cheaply than a scientific book which has practically no
circulation.
(Witness withdrew.)
JOHN MORLEY BATH.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity do you appear?
—On behalf of the South Australian branch of the Aus-
tralian Booksellers’ Association.
Q. —Where do they have their headquarters?—ln Mel-
bourne.
Q. —What is the branch’s address? —The Secretary is
E. H. Lowe, care of the Methodist Book Depot, Pirie
street, Adelaide.
Q. —What is the address of the headquarters in Mel-
bourne? —That address is 247 William street, Melbourne.
The Secretary is D. W. Thorpe.
Q. —How many booksellers do you represent?—l have
not exact figures, but I should say approximately in South
Australia 20 full members, and quite a number of the
members of the trade who are associated with us that are
not subscribing.
Q. —Do you call them associate members?—Yes.
Q. —And they do not subscribe to the Association?—
That is so.
Q. —Are members of your organisation members of
Mr. Tidswell’s ?—No. There is no relation. I have
prepared a statement, which is as follows:
Rigby’s Bookselling Business (in which I hold a
controlling interest) was established in 1859, and for
over 70 years has served the general public. Govern-
ment and private schools and colleges, public and Par-
liamentary libraries and institutes, and as wholesalers
the stores in all parts of this State. For the greater
part of that period Rigby Ltd. conducted a wholesale
and retail periodical department, doing an extensive
business with the newsagents and general public, the
latter principally by subscription. This department of
the business was sold to Messrs. Gordon and Gotch
(Aust.) Ltd. over six years ago, and since that time we
have not traded in periodicals.
From experience gained during my association with
this business, I feel that I am able to express an intelli-
gent opinion on the subject under notice, and beg to
submit the following statement for your consideration:
Whilst I am keenly sensible of the financial stringency
and recognise the necessity for searching all avenues
for revenue, and the importance of reducing the balance
of trade which is so seriously against Australia to-day,
I contend that the imposition of a duty on imported
reading matter would not sufficiently relieve the position
to justify such drastic action as that of placing a duty
on books and periodicals.
Bookselling is a particularly peculiar trade, and
ordinary trade usage and conditions which pertain to
other commercial enterprises cannot be applied in the
conduct of a bookselling business.
9
ADELAIDE—John Morley Bath


In the first place, publishers’ terms are known to
every member of the trade, and the published price is
fixed, and the trading profit thus limited. The quality
of the contents of a book, unlike other merchandise, does
not determine the selling price, and so the financial
success of bookselling, therefore, depends entirely upon
tho bookseller’s expert knowledge of his trade. If his
judgment is at fault when buying he is forced to cut
his loss by disposing of his surplus stock at under cost
price; also he is frequently the victim of the public’s
caprice.
Booksellers in Australia, being so far distant from
the world’s markets, are at a great disadvantage, as
they are forced to place their orders for larger quan-
tities than those booksellers, say, in the provincial towns
of England. Tho consequent risk of “overs” is ever
present in Australia, making the trade a very precarious
one, and any further imposition inflicted upon the trade
will react with disastrous results to many people who
are earning their livelihood by bookselling.
Assuming that educational books will be admitted
free, I, whose bookselling business is practically all
with educational institutions, will be exempt from this
tax. Rigby’s have published a number of books by
Australian authors, which have been wholly set up and
printed in South Australia, and it might be inferred that
we will benefit from any protective duty which might be
imposed. I emphatically assert, however, notwithstand-
ing the implied exemption and protection, that it would
be a retrograde step to impose a duty on literature of
any description, and to restrict the education of the
people in this free and enlightened country would be
nothing short of a calamity.
The difficulty of defining an educational book and
distinguishing fiction for school use would complicate
the work of the Customs Department, and would tax the
ingenuity of the department’s experts. It has been
suggested that all books, especially imported, for the
use of schools, colleges, institutes, etc., should be
admitted “free.” How would an importer be able to
“declare” his books when he does not know until months
after to whom he will sell those books? Many books
of fiction are set or approved for the use of scholars
in the primary and secondary schools and colleges,
either as readers, library books, or textbooks for the
study of English literature for the University examina-
tions. To quote only a few taken from official lists
covering the last three years.
Fiction Used as Readers and Library Books in—
Primary Schools.
Jeffrey Famol—The Broad Highway, Money Moon,
Amateur Gentleman and others.
R. Sabatini—The Sea Hawk, St. Martin’s Summer
and others.
Conan Doyle—Sign of Four, Micah Clarke, Sherlock
Holmes and others.
H. A. Vachell —The Hill, Brothers, John Verney and
others.
J. M. Barrie—Peter Pan, Little White Bird, Peter and
Wendy and others.
R. L. Stevenson —Black Arrow, Kidnapped, Treasure
Island and others.
R. D. Blackmore—Lorna Doone, etc.
Also any of the books written by Thos. Hardy, George
Elliot, Scott, Thackeray, Mark Twain, Dickens, King-
ston, Henty, Ellis, and many others are officially ap-
proved.
The above and many more of a like nature are also
distributed as prizes and library books to religious insti-
tutions, who would have to bear the increased cost.
Secondary Schools.
Books of Fiction Set by the Public Examinations
Board (Adelaide University Examinations).
English Literature.
Shakespeare—Merchant of Venice, Midsummer
Night’s Dream, As You Like It, etc.
Novels by Dickens, Scott, Thackeray, Jane Austin,
Stevenson, Meredith, Hardy, Kingsley, etc.
Any of the above and hundreds of cheap readers
approved by the Director of Education are sold to
individuals by the bookseller, who does not know
whether they are for school use or not, and consequently
any duty imposed would be added to the cost of the book,
thus penalising the poorer people and placing a tax on
education. (Mr. W. J. Adey, Director of Education in
S.A., has read and confirmed the above statement.)
If a duty was placed upon fiction and the like only-,
this would drastically curtail the operations of the book-
selling trade, for, however low the duty might be, tho
importation of many books would be prohibited, result-
ing in the dismissal of employees and the closing of
small stores in the poorer suburbs and country towns
now conducted by men and women of small means. The
prices of books bearing a duty must of necessity be
increased, and this will place these books out of the
reach of the average regular book-buyer, who, it is
generally recognised, develops from a fiction reader to
that of good literature.
Diminished sales and a consequent reduction in orders
going overseas would certainly- limit the importation of
books subject to duty, whilst the revenue so obtained
would ultimately be reduced to such an amount that it
would probably not justify even the administrative costs
incurred.
Possibly the proposed duty is intended as a protective
one in the hope that employment will be given to
printers in Australia by the increased production of
books in Australia. As an ardent protectionist, who
has had some expensive experience in the publishing of
books printed in Australia, I would say that the little
that might be gained in this connection by the printers’
employees would be at the expense of many more em-
ployees in tho bookselling trade.
With the very limited market in Australia, as com-
pared with that of England, who caters for the whole
world, it would not be profitable to print and publish
a novel in Australia unless it was of a very outstanding
character.
To produce at a cost to sell at the usual retail price
the publisher in Australia would have to print at least
2000 copies, and he would be very fortunate if he sold
half of these, as it is recognised that the sales limit
for a novel in Australia is 1000 copies, and then only
for a “best seller.” It is a trade axiom that “Youn
profit or loss depends upon your overs,” and another,
“Overs are the bookseller’s bugbear.” I have published
to sell at 4/ to 5/ retail, and have jobbed half the
edition a year later at 6d. and 7d. per copy, and I know
of others who have had a similar experience.
Two weeks ago I had conversation with the biggest
publisher in Australia—Mr. George Robertson, of Angus
and Robertson, Sydney—when he gave me his permission
to say that he was definitely opposed to a duty on books.
With the limited outlet in Australia the author must
needs send his MSS. to England, where they publish
much larger editions, and where he has a better chance
of collecting bigger royalties than if his book is pub-
lished in Australia. The proposal that “books of all
kinds which have been printed or reprinted in Aus-
tralia and then printed abroad” should bear a heavy
duty is very unwise, and if put into effect would prove
a cruel blow to the Australian writer, unless, of course,
it was a “pirated” edition. Some years ago my firm
published Mr. Arthur Cask’s first novel, which was
printed in this State. The limited market returned only
a very small profit either to the author or publisher,
but a copy of our book was sent to each of several
publishers in England, one of whom immediately cabled
an offer to Mr. Cask. Rigbys withdrew the balance of
the local stocks and Herbert Jenkins published the book
in England with much success and profit to the author,
who has since written six books and received a con-
siderable amount in royalties. If the English reprint
of Mr. Cask’s first book had been subject to duty when
entering Australia the publishers would certainly not
ADELAIDE—John Motley Bath


have purchased the rights, and possibly the author
would not have written another book. (Mr. Cask has
read and confirmed the above statement.)
To summarise my statement, I would emphasise my
contention that—
A duty on books would not—
Increase the customs revenue materially,
Encourage the production of books in Australia,
Relieve unemployment,
Protect any industry, or
Benefit the Australian authors.
A duty on books would—
Increase the price of books,
Penalise the people of small means,
Reduce sales,
Create unemployment and close small stores,
Restrict reading and reflect on the intelligence of
the people, and
Be a tax on knowledge.
In conclusion, I would remind the Board that every
country has its own particular kind of knowledge, which
is the accumulated experience of its people gradually
recorded in its books. The people of each of the older
countries of the world have been helped by the ex-
periences of other peoples of past ages, gathered from
their records, books, and used to their own great advan-
tage by the living.
The younger a country is the greater is its need for
the free introduction from outside of these records of
knowledge and experience, and anything that is done
to restrict the facilities for obtaining this knowledge
would be, in my opinion, nothing short of a crime
against the coming generations, who, as users of the
English language, are entitled to share in the common
heritage of English literature.
I sincerely trust that our protests will not go unheeded
and that the idea of taxing knowledge and impeding its
free importation into this young country of ours will
be abandoned by this and every succeeding Government
of Australia.
Q. —You say in your statement that the imposition of
a duty would not sufficiently relieve the position. The
claim has been made in regard to the customs revenue
that if the new method is adopted with commercial print-
ing, as suggested, and so on, it can be expected to produce
a very large revenue indeed, £2,000,000 to £2,500,000 being
an easy possibility. Do you not agree with that?—Those
figures are limited to books and periodicals.
Q. —And they claim £2,000,000 to £2,500,000 as the
probable increased revenue?—lf the whole of that amount
could be manufactured in Australia I would be the first
to welcome it, but my contention, drawn from my ex-
perience, is that a very small percentage of that
£2,000,000 would create the trade in Australia, because
of the nature of the books and periodicals published.
Q. —Do you consider that there is scope for some books
to bo published in Australia?—Unquestionably.
Q. —And do you think the opportunity is there for the
printers at the present time? Do you think that, as the
position is—free, five and ten, or free, free, free —they
could print those books to compete with the books from
overseas?—As I remarked in my statement, there are
certain books which have been published in Australia
already, some profitably, some very unprofitably. If they
can be published profitably why impose the duty ? The
imposition of the duty would not increase the sales of
any of the books I have published, nor encourage me to
launch out in any new direction.
Q. —In regard to those books which have been published
in Australia, we look to you to tell us something about
those which have been produced at such a cheap rate. The
Life of Henry Ford, for instance, was published in Aus-
tralia and sold for 7/6, and it was sold in America for
14/7? —The one that was published in America was
certainly a very nice edition; it was published in octavo
with excellent paper, and splendid type, and covers of
strong cloth board; but the Australian edition was of a
smaller size, with different paper, and very ordinary
covers. We ought to take consideration of the fact
that there are so many different factors which would cause
a book such as you have named to be sold in Australia.
First of all, the natural inference is that Henry Ford’s
interests are behind this book, although no evidence of it
can be produced. That would be a business secret.
Secondly, in regard to other books which you have named
this morning in my hearing, dumping may come into it.
They may have had the experience which I have quoted
in my statement, and the result is that, to cut their losses,
they naturally dumped their overs into the first country
they can lay their hands on.
Q. —But I take it those books have been published in
Australia. They are not books which have been published
in England and exported to Australia?—l am answering
your two questions at once. In regard to the edition of
the Life of Henry Ford, that was published in Australia,
the quality of the material was much worse than that of
the American edition.
Q. —Do you know anything of “Why I am a Christian” ?
—No.
By Mr. Kelly.—What about “The Life and Letters of
Walter Page”?—There will be a new edition of that
shortly. There are to be two volumes in one sold for 5/.
That will be in the next few days. In regard to the
titles of the books you have named, I was impressed with
the fact that they would not have been sold if the price
had not been made what it was.
By the Chairman.—ls it going to be profitable for the
Australian production?—We have made careful inquiries
and I understand there is not one publisher in Australia
who is supporting this request for a duty. That should
be a sufficient answer, and an indication that the pub-
lishers here recognise that they are not prepared to take
the risk,
Qj—What is going to be the price of “The Life and
Letters of Walter Page”? Will is be 16/, as suggested
here?—The two volumes are going to be bound into one,
and it will be sold for 5/. I would also like to remind
you that many of these books, apart from their being
remainders, are reprints. The initial cost, which has been
already wiped off, possibly in America, does not come into
the question?
Q. —But they must pay some royalties, surely?—ln
many instances it is not so, but it cannot be proved. If
I were to attempt to purchase the published rights to, say,
“The Life of Henry Ford” I would soon find out what it
would cost me.
Q. —I have given you a list of these various books, and
I think it would be as well for your Association to inves-
tigate them and submit evidence at a later date in regard
to them ?—That will be done.
Q. —It is necessary for you to combat that evidence, and
give reasons why the books are so much cheaper.—We
will do that.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt would be interesting to give exhibits?
—Yes. I understand the proposers have no exhibits.
By the Chairman.—Not yet, but I think your Association
should take it up.—Yes.
Q. —There are a number of books produced in Australia,
such as the textbooks wdiich I spoke about to Professor
Wilton. Those books have served a good purpose. Do
you agree with that?—Yes.
Q. —Do you not think those books should be protected?
—You are speaking of the locally produced book?
Q. —Yes?—I am producing a book at the present time
for educational purposes, and even one on the subject
Professor Wilton is instructing on at the University—
mathematics—but that book is not set by the examination
board of the University, but is used principally by the
local high schools, because the formula is all put together
by one of their staff. In a case like that it is left to our
business acumen to see that that particular book is used
as an aid, at any rate, but those books are not actually
set. It is not compulsory that they should be used for
the purpose of University examinations.
Q. —You are quite satisfied with the result of that pro-
ADELAIDE—John Morley Bath


duction, and the sales?—Yes. Its success is solely be-
cause it is local.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt is not really amenable to attack from
outside, quite frequently, I take it?—No. It would be
used more or less besides the others.
Q. —There is no competition?—No, but any duty im-
posed would not increase my sales one iota.
Q. —That means that such books are not of a universal
type of literature, but something with local colour or
something applicable to the curriculum of the State
Department ?—-Yes.
Q. —Therefore, they are protected in the sense that
there is nothing else available of the kind?—Yes. May I
answer a question put to Professor Wilton in regard to
the time, given to procure these textbooks from overseas.
As Professor Wilton said, the examination board have
usually completed their list of prescrib'd books for the
ensuing year by August. Then, as booksellers, we must
naturally anticipate the requirements of the various
schools and colleges for the coming year. You will
recognise, of course, that it would be a most difficult thing
for me or you, or the headmaster of a school, to say how
many books would be required at the opening of the
schools in the coming year, because there are so many
factors which come into force, such as the present depres-
sion, and that sort of thing. They make it very difficult
for the teacher to estimate his requirements for the com-
ing year. To ensure that stocks will be available in
Australia in time to arrive and be distributed before the
opening of schools it is necessary for us to put out an
order lor an approximate quantity. 1 need not emphasise
the risk that we take in that connection. Last year, as
soon as wo obtained the list, we secured an estimate of
approximate requirements from each of the teachers, who,
of course, must be protected against any risk which they
are not prepared personally to take. The result is often
as follows:—A teacher says to me, “I think I shall need
50 copies of this book.” We have to see that 50 copies
are available. After we have handed him over his 50
copies he says that he finds that the depression has kept
many scholars away—all sorts of things may occur—and
he requires only 40 of the books, and, therefore, he returns
ten of them.
Q. —There might possibly be an overflow at the next
school?—Yes. We have to know our job, of course. To
illustrate my point, let me tell you that the amount which
was credited on account of returns in the month of
February this year was over £I6OO.
Q. —Have you any opportunity of selling these re-
mainders ?—lt depends on the University Examination
Board. As Professor Wilton said, they set their books for
the coming year, and many are reset. The board is very
considerate. If they know that a bookseller is caught
with a book, and there is a suggestion that it should
be altered, they will consider the bookseller and say,
“No; we will carry it on for another year.” So we have
to work in conjunction with the University authorities,
and the schools and colleges, because they recognise that
they are dependent on us for supplies. It would be
disastrous to any school if they started teaching a subject
and had not the textbooks.
Q. —In regard to those textbooks, are there any cheap
reprints of those in Australia ?—No.
Q. —You have the opportunity of shipping these overs,
returning the overs to England?—Emphatically no. We
have to give a firm order ourselves and accept the respon-
sibility.
Q. —-You really think it would be a restriction if the
increased duty were granted. There is not the least hope
of them being printed in Australia?—No, those books
that I quoted are in this position. I spent some time with
Mr. Adey, who gave me permission to mention the fact
that I had conferred with him. He said it would be a
very serious thing if we were restricted in any way in
regard to the use of fiction in our schools. He considers
that fiction is absolutely essential to the study of English
literature, and that it is essential that these books of those
better authors—of course, we all recognise that—are
essential and must be placed in the libraries of the schools.
, Every school in South Australia has its own library.
Every school is supported by a school committee, which
committee works in an honorary capacity. That commit-
tee raises funds by bazaars or concerts or anything you
like in that way, and then the department turns round
and subsidises what has been collected upon an equal
basis of pound for pound up to a certain amount. With
the present financial stringency, from which we are all
suffering, it is just a question as to how the Government
is going to continue this generous assistance to these
school committees. That is another phase of the matter
which I might have mentioned.
Q. —Are you satisfied that educational books would be
admitted free under the application of the applicants?—
I feel sure of it.
Q. —You have heard the wording of the application?—l
have seen a copy of that.
Q. —Do you think there would be a sufficient number of
any one line which they could produce efficiently and
economically. Take, for instance, one of those textbooks,
and there was a big demand for it, say there were 2000
or 3000 required, do you not consider that those could be
produced?—Unquestionably, I do it myself.
Q. —If they were produced economically, the imported
book would not be admitted free, so that it would mean all
educational books would not come in free?—The point of
that is, would you limit the educational authorities in this
State or any other State to the one textbook simply
because it is manufactured here. I have produced for a
number of years and published a book by a local author
that is not set, but which is strongly recommended by the
University authorities, and is used in all the secondary
schools. I have been very successful with that book, but
if I attempted to make elaborate production of that book
I could not do it. I must keep the material down to
the lowest possible figure in order to sell that book at a
reasonable price to the schools.
Q. —Are you, therefore, satisfied with that proviso in
regard to educational books?—No. My contention is that
all books should be free. Speaking quite selfishly, it
would be to my advantage, perhaps, but at the same time,
speaking as one of the community, I think it would be
an undesirable thing.
Q. —You are dealing with educational books only for
the moment, and would you be satisfied with the proviso
as prescribed there ?—I could get through it.
Q. —You could?—Yes. Allow me to illustrate my point.
There are several booksellers in this town who do not
cater for school books. Say the Director of Education
authorised us to put Jeffrey FarnoTs “Amateur Gentle-
man” in the schools. Other booksellers must import that
book to sell to the general public. If the duty is put on
fiction, as proposed, the price at which the booksellers
would sell it would be considerably increased. I could
make my declaration that I am importing the “Amateur
Gentleman” for the use of schools, and could truthfully
adhere to it, and stick strictly to it. Because there is
no duty on it I could sell that book to the schools at, say,
6/, as against the other man’s 9/. Then what is going
to happen. The other bookseller would be placed at a
disadvantage again, because a customer would say, “I am
not going to pay 9/ to him.” They would only have to
get a friend in the school department to get that particular
book for them, a copy of the “Amateur Gentleman.” The
customs authorities could not control that.
Q. —So that it would be liable to abuse? —Yes, I suggest
that, of course, not that I would do it.
By Mr. Kelly.—l would just like to ask you to check
me on the risks that you would run, and on what you
would judge a book. I mean, whether it would be wise
to attempt to print a book in Australia? I take it the
ground would be pretty limited. I think you suggested
a book of an educational nature that suits the local
curriculum ?—I know that might be published.
Q. —That is all right; in that case, duty or otherwise, it
would make no difference. But take a book that deals
with local incidents or local history, or the history of
a battalion, or unit of South Australian origin, anything
12
ADELAIDE—John Morley Bath


that is specifically South Australian or Australian, that
you would be inclined to take the risk of publishing?—l
published the “43rd Battalion” under arrangement with
those out here, because it was on behalf of the battalion
club. That was done purely without any profit at all.
That was sold principally to members of the club at the
absolute bedrock cost. You could not take a book like
that.
Q. —I just want to know. Those two types of books are
obviously suitable for local production?—Yes.
Q. —What other type of book would you add to those
two. I have suggested two, one that suits the curricu-
lum and one that deals with local conditions?—You have
mentioned local conditions, and I have a book in my stock
there now; in fact, I have a couple of thousand of them,
which was an excellent story from a reading point of
view, even regarded as a novel, on the early history of
South Australia before the State was colonised. It is an
excellent book, yet there is no demand for it. They do
not want to know anything about themselves, and we are
not old enough for a book of that particular type.
Q. —What I am trying to find out is what is the nature
of a book that you can successfully print here. When
you get into general literature, then you are open to the
world’s competition?—Yes, that is right.
Q. —I suggest that most of the successful publications
have been in reference to subjects that are not open to
the world’s competition. I think that is generally so?—
Yes, I would say that is correct in every particular.
Q. —Where you are open to the world’s competition you
do not consider that local production would be feasible?
No.
Q. —As to these profits, or the lack of them, you know
what is the nature of the attack. The attack that there
is a ring, and a well-erected ring, with quite a good fence
around it, and considerable profits are made. That is the
allegation. You think there is no harm in extending the
principal a bit further and putting a ring right around
the Commonwealth?—lf a may, I would like to give a
general reply to that.
Q. —I want to get that?—The Association which I said I
was representing has been in existence for a number of
years, and every bookseller in Australia comes under the
jurisdiction of that particular Association. We have at
very great expense covering a period of the last three or
four years arranged an agreement between the Publishers’
Association of England, and that agreement came into
force on January 1 last. That was the date on which
that agreement was to take effect. Not only did we
arrange it by correspondence, but we sent four delegates
to England to confer with the Publishers’ Association, and
after some months they were able to bring about an
agreement that reduced the price of books, and everyone
knows on what basis they are to be sold. Those efforts
have unquestionably resulted—and we can produce
evidence to that effect—in a lower retail price, and in
many instances the British publishers, and that is one
point I want to bring forcibly before your Board, as it
has been mentioned several times—have enabled us to
sell at a lower price than books are sold in England. Of
course, it has been mentioned several times here, and
the question has been asked why books are sold in Aus-
tralia at a lower price than in America. I notice that no
comments were made at all as to why fiction is sold in
Australia at 6/ a copy, which the man in the street in
London has to pay 7/6 a copy for. I might say, in
addition to what I have already said, under this arrange-
ment which we have there are certain books where the
cost of production to-day is exceptionally high owing to
the royalties that have to be paid. If a publisher wants
an expert to write up a particular book, he must naturally
pay for his services and the royalty may range from 5 per
cent, for the poor man and for the small circulating book
up to even as high as 15 per cent, and 20 per cent. So
that the publisher must set off that cost before he starts.
Notwithstanding all the conferences and discussions that
have taken place, the booksellers of Australia for some
years now have been selling books here in Australia under
the English published price. For years we have been
selling books published here and sold in England at the
retail price of 7/6 throughout Australia at the price of 6/.
Q. —That is not because you are making that much less
profit than the bookseller in Great Britain ?—As I said in
my statement, everybody in the trade knows the pub-
lisher’s terms, and, the published price being fixed, the
profit is limited.
Q. —-What I want to know is, and I have often wanted
to know, on these figures that you have given, the lower
price here as against Great Britain, is not that due to
concessions given by the printer?—No. It is due to the
number of books that are published in a particular edition.
For instance, with a textbook I would not dare to publish
?. 5000 edition of a textbook.
Q. —That is not the point; why is it that a book is
available here in Australia cheaper than in the United
Kingdom?—Because of the huge quantities that are pub-
lished.
Q. —That hardly answers the question.—The larger the
edition the lower the cost of a particular book, of an
individual book.
Q. —But I would assume that that reduced cost would
be applied equally all round the edition. Why is it sold
here lower than in the United Kingdom in the cases you
indicate?—They have got their surplus supplies over and
above the requirements of the English markets.
Q. —In other words, the publishers make available to
the Australian merchants books at a lower price?—The
surplus that they produce over and above the requirements
of the English market.
Q.—ln ordinary commerce we would say that they are
dumping ?—They are giving us the advantage they recog-
nise that they supply us with what are known as the
colonial editions.
Q.—ln other words, they are made available by the
publisher at a lower price for the colonies than for the
United Kingdom ?—Yes.
By the Chairman. —Does the colonial edition cost the
publisher less?—No, it is the surplus over and above the
English requirements, or the requirements of the United
Kingdom.
Bv Mr. Kelly.—l am rather amazed at this 1000 for the
best seller. We surely exceed 1000 copies for anything
like a popular book?—I am speaking of an Australian
book, published in Australia.
Mr. Purnell.—May I reply to that previous question in
regard to the colonial edition? The colonial edition is
often very inferior to the English edition, and that is why
it can be sold here at a cheaper price. In many cases the
English edition has a gilt top. I have an edition of a
novel which differs from the Australian edition very
considerably. In the English edition there is a gilt top
and that is not in the Australian edition.
The Chairman.—Your colonial edition would cost less
than the English edition.
Mr. Purnell.—Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—You laid stress right through on the
higher costs and that they would restrict production. That
really was the basis of your argument?—Unquestionably.
Q.—l take it that if it be a fact that the book trade has
been restricted latterly since the war it has been due to
that?—Yes, we are all having a bad time.
Q. —I know the price of books is the limiting factor, but
you suggest if it was higher it would limit the trade more
severely ?—Undoubtedly.
By the Chairman.—You told me that evidence would be
submitted of the price of these books, the importer’s price
and the price to the public?—Yes, that will be submitted.
I will pass that on.
Q. —Because it would be very interesting for the Board
to have that information?-—I have had the assurance of
the Executive last week that all information we could not
supply here would be definitely given in Sydney and
13
ADELAIDE—John Morley Bath


BRISBANE —George Herbert Barker
Melbourne. They will be prepared with anything in that
way.
(Witness withdrew.)
The Chairman.—ls there any other evidence?—(No
response.)
The Chairman.—l just wish to say the Board is very
pleased with the way in which you have dealt with this
matter and the way in which you have given evidence.
The inquiry is now adjourned to Sydney on April 3, 1930.
The inquiry will be held at the Commonwealth Bank
Buildings, Sydney.
BRISBANE
Thj Board met at Parliament House, Brisbane, on
Monday, March 24, 1930, at 10 a.m.
Present.—Mr. H. McConaghy and Mr. S. Berchdolt.
GEORGE HERBERT BARKER.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appearing ?
—-As a bookseller and Secretary to the Queensland Book-
sellers’ Association.
Q. —What is your address?—Adelaide street, Brisbane.
Q. —And the Association’s address ?—They have no
official address.
Q. —It will be in your care?—Yes.
Q. —I notice you are appearing on behalf of the Associa-
tion?—Yes.
Q. —And you are presenting a case on behalf of the
Association?—Yes. My statement of evidence reads as
follows:—• .
Speaking on behalf of the members of the Queensland
Booksellers’ Association of Brisbane, I desire to place
before the Board reasons why the suggestion that a duty
bo imposed on printed books and periodicals should not
be entertained. Summarised the reasons are as fol-
lows:—•' _
1. Such duty would be a direct tax on knowledge.
2. It would be a certain cause of distress and unem-
ployment among the proprietors and assistants in
the thousands of shops devoted to the sale of
books and papers.
3. It would provide a negligible increase, if any, in
the employment of printing operatives.
4. It would practically kill the slow-growing effort
to foster an Australian authorship, owing to the
impossibility of Australian sales providing them
with any adequate regard for their labours.
5. The penalising of the great mass of Australian
people in all walks of life, due to the fact that
the duty would in a large measure deprive them
of the means of the best and most lasting form
of entertainment, that of reading.
6. It would nullify the recently successful effort of
Australian booksellers to secure a modified
uniform price for British and foreign books on the
Australian market.
In enlarging on the subjects dealt with in our sum-
mary, we do not for one moment anticipate that any
Government would contemplate a duty on educational
or religious books, and we, therefore, waste no time in
detailing any of the many reasons against such a
proposal.
There remains, then, only the very few books that do
not come under this heading, chiefly fiction and some
other books of entertainment, and here again there
will be many exceptions causing much loss of time and
trouble to departmental officials and public alike. For
example, this year at the University over fifty (50)
novels are set for study at the different intra and extra-
mural examinations held under the direction of the
Senate.
Under this heading also comes the thousands of
juveniles imported into the Commonwealth each year
for school library purposes, and which our chief educa-
tionists declare to be one of the most fruitful courses
of mind training that the child receives. For many
reasons, embracing copyright, royalty and cost of
production, nothing but a fraction of this material could
be produced here, and the insignificant amount of
revenue a customs duty would yield, due to vanishing
imports, would be greatly overshadowed by the increased
expenditure under the heading of education.
It is held that fiction is an entertainment, and this
is admitted, but we also contend that it is a necessity,
and that in this age of strenuous living it is a vital
necessity to the health of the nation, providing relaxa-
tion both mentally and physically for men and women
who would otherwise be existing at high pressure all
the time, to the danger of their well-being.
As an indication of how little chance there is of
publishing books here at a profit, the case of the book, “A
House is Built,” may be cited. This book, which has
received by far tho greatest boost of any recent novel
in Australia, winning as it did the “Bulletin” prize,
appearing as a serial in the pages of that journal, and
receiving all the publicity of that paper’s organisation.
Yet no publisher in Australia could see sufficient profit
in the venture to publish it here, and it came out in
London, where the publisher, with his outlet to the
whole of the Empire, is able to issue an edition large
enough to keep the individual cost of the book within
bounds. It is, therefore, plain that an Australian
author who looks for profit must be content to have his
book published in Britain. Therefore, if a duty be
placed on books none but the very front rank authors
will be imported, and the chance of the Australian being
introduced to this market would be nil. The statement
made in the press that the £3,300,000 worth of imports of
printed matter (which includes advertising matter al-
ready dutiable) would provide industry with six or
seven million pounds cannot be substantiated, and even
if it could the argument defeats itself, because it imme-
diately shows that the Australian public would have to
pay just double the present cost (which is already high
enough, in all conscience) for the same amount of
material for which it now pays £3,300,000.
As against the very doubtful fact that any advantage
at all would accrue to the printing and allied trades,
there is the certainty that a duty on books and maga-
zines would so deplete the trade in these goods that
the many thousands of small shops throughout the Com-
monwealth almost entirely depending on these goods
for a livelihood would be forced to close their doors or
considerably reduce their staffs, and thus swell the
already large army of unemployed, and we would be
far worse off than we are now. We, therefore, ask
that no such duty should be imposed.
Q. —What proportion of the bookselling trade does your
organisation cover?—ln effect, practically the whole of
the people selling retail and wholesale books in this city
and in the towns of Queensland, because we not only act
for members, but we act for the trade as a whole.
Q. —Do you consider that you are authorised to speak
for the trade as a whole?—Yes. That was done at a
recent very well attended meeting.
Q—Are you addressing yourself at all to fashion plates
in this evidence?—No, we are confining ourselves to the
statement in that evidence.
Q. —To what extent in the State of Queensland are
books that would be covered by this application now
printed. Have you any idea?—Practically none at all.
Q. —Compared with the range of goods sold, would it
scarcely bo worth mentioning?-—Yes, infinitesimal.
14


Q. —When you say that you exclude educational or
religious books, you then say, “There remains only the
very few books that do not come under this heading.”—Do
you think that statement is correct, “A very few books
that do not come under the heading of educational or
religious”?—Yes, that is the considered opinion of our
Association.
Q. —Obviously, then, you do not limit educational to
school books?—Certainly not.
Q. —All books are educational. They may be badly
educational, for instance, or moderate, or good?—We were
not considering that point.
Q. —All books on travel and discovery you consider
educational?—lf you go over the classified list that
is published in the English catalogue of books prac-
tically every heading in the catalogue, in fact, with-
out exception, there are educational books, and I suppose
there are 25 to 30 headings, and there are educational
books under every heading, including science, literature,
travel and discovery, and fiction. Even with fiction to-
day the greater part is educational. Many books of
educational value are written in the form of fiction, and
you would probably learn more from some books of fiction
than from books of travel, and, in addition, they have
the added advantage of being interesting to read.
Q. —That imposes a very broad definition of the word
“educational”?—l mention that there. It would be very
difficult to differentiate if educational books were
exempted. There is no doubt it would, from our know-
ledge of catalogues and issuing lists.
Q—Of course, you could make a clear definition of
technical books?—The technical side is, of course, one
branch of education. I make the statement there that
the University this year have 50 novels in their list for
practical school work, which no one can gainsay is
educational. It shows you how hard it is to differentiate.
Q. —What is the nature of these 50. How many are
modern novels?—l should say half of them.
Q. —And half the old classics?—When I say half
modern I would regard books by Dickens, Thackeray and
Scott as old.
Q. —In connection with the book, “A House is Built,” do
you think if this duty had operated before that book was
written it would have helped to have had it printed in
Australia?—No, I do not think so.
Q. —Are you arguing, then, on the lines that, if it had
helped to print it in Australia, the most you could have
expected would be for the Australian requirements to be
printed in Australia?—Well, no, I do not think I would be
prepared to say that. The great point about it, of course,
is the scarcity of the reading public, and, that being so,
you must bring out an edition of over 5000 if you are
going to see any profit in it, and the risk of such a book
finding a public of 5000 here in Australia would be’ too
great for the publisher to contemplate. It is from that
point of view that I speak of it there.
Q. —Would you really think that a novel that had the
boost that that novel had would not find 5000 readers in
Australia ?—lt did, but it may not. For instance, it
appeared in the pages of a journal for a start. That may
influence a publisher’s opinion. As I say, one never
gauges the public in any particular place, and the British
publisher has the outlet of the whole of the Empire, where
tastes vary so much that he is pretty certain to get
through his quantity.
Q. —Do you know the origin of your figures, £3,300,000 ?
Do you know where they emanate from? lam asking
because under the heading of books, including music,
periodicals, and newspapers, the official statistics show
only £1,250,000? —It was a contribution to the press. I
am just trying to think whether it was in the “Sydney
Morning Herald” or the “Courier.” I have just for-
gotten for the moment. I neglected to make a note at
the time, but it could be turned up.
Q. —Taking books on the one hand as apart from
periodicals and magazines, in what country are the
majority of the books which reach Australia printed?—
Great Britain.
Q. —Non-magazines?—I am not speaking of magazines.
Q. —Probably not Great Britain for magazines?—l do
not know. Ido not handle them personally at all. Though
some of my shops do, I do not handle them at all.
Q. —Taking the British preferential rate, proposed, that
is, 45 per cent, ad val. or 1/ per- dozen for each 3/ per
dozen or part thereof of the standard retail sale price,
have you any idea how that duty would work out?—No,
I have not given the matter any thought. That is the
first time I have heard of that particular suggestion.
Q. —I am not sure that this represents the final sugges-
tion, but I do not think that matters for the purpose of
your evidence. If the duty were anything like this at
all, your objections would stand, and, of course, if the
duty were not substantial, presumably it would be no
use. I presume even the sponsors of the duty would
admit it would be no use unless it were substantial?—
Possibly, but I have not given the matter any thought,
so I would not be pi'epared to make any statement on
that. W 6 are totally opposed, of course, to any duty.
Q. —In any case, 45 per cent, virtually means 50 per
cent.?—-That would be ad valorem?
Q.—Yes, that would scarcely have the effect that you
mention of doubling the cost, would it?—Practically. We
always have our selling cost on top of that again propor-
tioned.
Q. —Could you tell the Board what the difference is
now in the sale price of the average book in the country
of publication, that is, the retail price and the price which
the Australian buyer pays?—The difference.
Q.—Yes.—Yes.
Q. —And what does it amount to?—ln most cases there
is an increase on books brought out here by Australian
booksellers ranging from one-third to 20 per cent.
Q. —That is in the actual retail selling price?—Yes.
Q. —A book which sells in England for 3/ would sell
here at about 4/?—Yes, and as the price rises the increase
gets less, gets to 20 per cent., for instance, on a 20/ or
30/ book. As against that, of course, on some books we
are able, by getting an extra discount, to sell at the
London price.
Q. —There are some sold at the London price?—Yes,
the list of those is increasing.
Q. —Any fair proportion of the business?—Not yet.
Q. —How is that third on accounted for apart from
freight?—The chief reason for it is the distance from the
market and the consequent loss of unsold stock.
Q. —And, of course, the distance is irremediable?—Yes.
Q. —The loss on stock is only a question of judgment?—
Yes, which, of course, is the crux of the bookselling
business. We have not the facilities for return stocks
that the British bookseller has.
Q. —In ordinary fiction, would the bookseller at home
have right of return?-—No, fiction is exempt from that
increase I spoke of. I should have remembered that.
The English novel, which sells to the public at 7/6 at
Home, sells here to the public at 6/, due to the fact that
the Australian bookseller gets more discount than the
British bookseller does.
Q. —What about the cheap fiction?—No, it is only the
colonial 6/ novel which is exempt. All the others are
subject to increase.
Q. —That is, you call it the colonial edition?—Yes.
(The witness withdrew.)
ALFRED JOSEPH THOMPSON,
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As President of the School of Arts Association,
Queensland, Dalgety’s Buildings, Elizabeth street, Bris-
bane. lam speaking on behalf of the School of Arts
Association of Queensland.
The School of Arts Association of Queensland is an
Association formed for the purpose of promoting the
interests of these institutions within the State, and
co-operating with similar bodies elsewhere.
BRISBANE—George Herbert Barker


There are 284 Schools of Arts in Queensland, with an
aggregate membership of 18,427. These are scattered
far and wide. Most of the country towns and some
sugar mills and sheep stations have Schools of Arts,
which are the only means the people in these places
have of getting good literature at a reasonable price.
The sum of £11,004 was spent during the year 1928-
1929 on literature, and 34,730 volumes added to the
libraries, which at June 30, 1929, totalled 517,257.
The Schools of Arts Association is opposed to any
increase of duty on books brought into the country;
it would involve either an increase in the present sub-
scription rates or a reduction in the number of new
books being purchased.
Tho number of subscribers to Schools of Arts is small
when compared with the population of the State, and
committees in many centres complain of the financial
difficulties being met with, owing to the fact that the
list of subscribers is either stationary or actually falling
oft' in numbers.
The State Government generously subsidised Schools
of Arts to the extent of 10/ in the pound, and without
this it would be quite impossible to carry on. This
vote goes to the institutions through the Department
of Education, and the help afforded to Schools of Arts
is regarded as part of the general educational system.
Any additional duty would be a deterrent to the expan-
sion of knowledge, and involve the State Government
and the individual Schools of Arts in higher expenditure,
that is, if the present rate of progress is to be main-
tained.
A School of Arts may be regarded as the poor man’s
library, and everything should be done to nurture his
taste for reading, by keeping up a steady supply of the
newest and the best volumes.
Any higher duty imposed at the present time, coupled
with an exchange rate of £6/10/, would be a very
serious burden on Schools of Arts.
Q. —I take it you are not interested in fashion plates?—
Not at all; this really includes magazines, as well as
fiction.
Q. —Well, it covers the whole gamut of the application,
excepting the first part, fashion plates?—Yes.
Q. —What proportion of the activities, if I may put in
that way, of the School of Arts is addressed to literature.
They have other attractions, I take it?—Some Schools
of Arts have halls which they let. Others have billiard
rooms, but with the majority of them the chief activity is
the library.
Q. —Speaking generally of your 284 institutions, would
you say that by far the major portion of their interests
is in the library?—lt is very difficult for me to say that.
A great number of them has halls, but I do not know
what proportion of the revenue comes from the halls and
what proportion from subscriptions, but some indication
of that is given by the amount of subsidy passed by the
Government. If I remember right, the amount of sub-
sidy given by the Government was £7lOO in the year 1928-
29, and we are subsidised to the extent of 10/ in the
pound on library subscriptions and on functions organised
for the benefit of the library.
Q. —What is the average subscription?—lt differs from
7/6 to 15/ a year.
Q. —And you only get the subsidy on subscriptions?—
Subscriptions and entertainments organised for the
library.
Q. —That indicates a relation of 18,000 membership to
£7OOO. The subsidy shows that the subscriptions loom
very large in the income?—Yes, they do.
(The witness withdrew.)
ROBERT VICTOR SMITH.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity do you appear?—
As Librarian of the Workers’ Educational Association,
Edward street, Brisbane.
Q. —I take it that your evidence is addressed to books,
magazines and the like, and not to fashion plates. Is
that right ?—That is so. I have prepared a statement of
evidence, which reads as follows:
I am empowered by the Educational Asso-
ciation to state that it regards the proposed tariff on
books as nothing but a crushing tax on knowledge. It
is not a tax which will be borne equitably by the
community, nor even by those best fitted to bear it, but
by the class of citizens which it should be the duty of
every civilised State to encourage—the seekers after
knowledge.
Books can roughly be divided into the following;—
(a) Classical; largely in cheap editions.
(b) Modem books—■
(1) Books which are technical, or with a limited
appeal.
(2) Books with a larger public.
A tariff on books would not result in books under
division (a) or (b) (1) being printed in Australia. It
might cause some books under division (b) (2) to be
printed here, but any advantage accruing to Australia
by reason of additional employment in the printing
trades would be offset by unemployment in the staffs of
booksellers and distributing houses, for, with the in-
creased costs of books, obviously less would be sold.
That would happen even if the same amount continued
to be spent on books, but it is almost certain that large
numbers of people who now spend small amounts on
books would spend their money on amusements, or in
other directions, when the increase of price becomes
operative.
Last year my Association spent the sum of £350 on
buying books for its library. That amount is quite
separate from what was spent by the Department of
Tutorial Classes for textbooks and class libraries. For
the current year the Association can only spend £250.
If the proposed tariff becomes law £BO of this amount
will go to customs revenue, and only £l7O, or ap-
proximately half of last year’s expenditure, will be
paid for books. My Association provides the following
periodicals for its members:—-“The Nineteenth Cen-
tury,” “The Contemporary Review,” “The National
Geographic Magazine,” “The Forum,” “Current His-
tory,” and others. These magazines give to its mem-
bers some knowledge of world movements, and of the
ideas which are occupying the minds of thinking men
in Europe and America. It would be a tragedy if the
supply of these magazines had to be cut off, for the
Association cannot afford to spend more on periodicals.
If their cost is increased some must be dispensed with.
The following are a few books bought by my organisa-
tion:—
The Rise of the House of Rothschild (Corti), 30/.
Ten Plays of Shakespeare (Stopford Brooke), 10/.
Genius and Character (Emil Ludwig), 16/.
England (Dean Inge), 10/6.
Elizabeth and Essex (Lytton Strachey), 19/.
Alfred Deakin (Walter Murdoch), 18/6.
My Crowded Solitude (Jack McLaren), 12/6.
The Greek Commonwealth (A. E. Zimmern), 30/.
The Decline of the West (Oswald Spengler), 30/.
Collected Poems (Sir William Watson), 13/6.
With the increased tariff my Association will not be
able to purchase so many of these and similar books.
It will have less to offer its subscribers, mainly workers;
knowledge will be curtailed, and work of the Associa-
tion will be less effective, and the number of members
will probably diminish. Not only will members be
receiving less assistance, but they will find it more
difficult to buy textbooks needed for their studies. The
position is absurd. The State Government, in a desire
to foster education, is affording monetary assistance to
the W.E.A. What the State Government is giving the
Commonwealth proposes to take away.
My Association has no desire to hamper local writers
in their efforts to gain recognition. On the contrary, it
would welcome any scheme which would effectively
encourage them, but it cannot contemplate with equani-
mity a proposal which would assuredly shut Australia
BRISBANE—Robert Victor Smith
BRISBANE—AIfred Joseph Thompson


off from the foremost thought of the world, whilst
affording no certainty of benefit to the talented Aus-
tralian writer. If he or she has restrictions placed
upon the access to the world’s great writers, how can
Australia expect to produce great books? A bounty
would effect all the desirable results which are sought,
and the bounty need not be extravagant. The Sydney
“Bulletin” has recently conducted prize competitions
for novels. Eight of the books submitted have since
been published in London or are shortly to be published
there. There is no advantage in encouraging trash,
even if it is Australian trash, and a bounty would assist
the desirable without encouraging the undesirable, and
without restricting the access of readers and students,
possibly of future local writers, to the cream of the
world’s literature.
It may be suggested that a tariff would distinguish
between educational and other work. We maintain that
no fair line of demarcation can be drawn. Take the
following list of authors: —Ibsen, Hardy, Shaw, Gals-
worthy, Wells, Eugene O’Neill, Arnold, Phillip Gibbs,
Anatole France, H. L. Menchen, G. J. Nathan, Phillip
Guedalla, Edmond Gosse, A. G. Gardiner, G. K. Ches-
terton, Hillaire Belloc, Dean Inge, Bertrand Russell, J.
B. Bury, Joseph Conrad, H. M. Tomlinson, Remain
Rolland, J. M. Synge, Middleton Blurry, Robert Lynd, E.
V. Lucan, Ludwig Lewishon, Robert Bridges, and George
Saintsbury. Those are a few modern writers. All are
talented. Blany are great. Who is fit to classify their
works as educational or non-educational?
My Association—and the majority of the thinking
section of the community must support its view—
regard the suggested tariff as a direct frontal attack
on the principle of free education, which has been
accepted by everyone for half a century. It is the most
retrograde and reactionary proposal of modern times.
For upwards of fifty years it has been the aim of the
State and the community to provide for all easy access
to knowledge, education and culture. The citizens of
Australia cannot afford to lose the ground which has
been so hardly won.
Q. —What is the relation between your institution and
Schools of Art?—Our Association provides classes for
people in the community. For instance, we have a litera-
ture class, taken by a University lecturer; a psychology
class, taken by a University lecturer, and so with econo-
mics, and right down the subjects are all taken by
qualified men. We say to the community that, if you
are interested in the development of education, you can
join the Workers’ Educational Association for 7/6 a year.
You have a course which is 21 lectures, a University
course practically, and you can use the library as well,
which is somewhat different from the Schools of Arts.
Q. —All of that for 7/6 a year?—Subsidised by the
Government. In connection with the library we charge
outsiders 10/ a year. If you join a class you get the
library and class for 7/6, and if you only join the library
it costs you 2/6 more. In other words, to encourage
students.
Q. —What is the membership?—Our membership now is
something about 1200.
Q. —Are they workers in the true sense of the word. Of
course, we all reckon we are workers. Are they indus-
trialists ?—B5 per cent, would be confined to what you are
terming now the industrial movement. Ido not know
exactly what people mean by “workers.” I think the
majority of the people in the community are workers.
Q. —Yes, you say 85 per cent, of your members would
be workers in trades?—Yes, what you would call near the
industrial movement.
Q. —Then 85 per cent, of your members are helped by a
protectionist tariff on other goods?—Yes, exactly, but I
would like to point out that, however our ideas may be
affected politically, in relation to the question of tariff
reform and free trade, I would assert that, so far as we
are concerned, we should all agree that there should be
free trade as far as knowledge is concerned.
Q. —Would you say if any of your members are con-
nected with the Printing Association?—Yes, our President
is in the Printing Association.
Q. —And are some of them members of the Printers’
Union?—Yes, our President is a member of the Printers’
Union. He was President of it for a number of years.
Q. —Is it the unanimous view of your members that
you are expressing, do you think?—Yes, I am quite sure
that it is, from the point of view of books. I may not be
expressing the unanimous view of my members on tariif
reform.
Q. —Do not think I am saying this in any sense of
picking a hole in policy. We are only dealing with books,
and all I want to know is whether unionists really consider
that there is more advantage in cheap literature than
there is in the limited advantage which would accrue from
this duty, according to their view?—Yes, I think that
would be the general opinion, from my knowledge of the
trade union movement.
Q. —Then there is another point. You speak with a
degree of certainty that this duty would mean additional
costs ?—Yes.
Q. —Is that a well-considered opinion?—Yes, let me
take one or two books that are here. Take the book,
“Elizabeth and Essex,” which costs 19/. Under a tariff
that would cost us somewhere about 25/. If you are
going to keep up your standard—let me put it that way—
obviously it is going to cost you a great deal more?—Given
the subscriptions and the Government subsidy, we find at
present that we are practically unable to meet the enor-
mous demand that we have, and, if it is going to be
increased, we are not going to be able to cater for the
demand at all.
Q. —Have you any idea, in that 19/ book—we will keep
to this book, “Elizabeth and Essex”—how much of that
19/ is expended in actually producing the book; that is,
after the author is done with it?—l could not say that.
The Chairman.—Have you any idea, Mr. Barker?
Mr. Barker.—No, there is no rule as to what the author
gets on these publications, but I should say that the man
who wrote that commanded a fairly big royalty.
The Chairman.—lt obviously would not cost anywhere
like 19/ to print it?
Mr. Barker. —No. In a book of that standard I would
think a large measure of the cost is due to royalty paid
to the author.
The Chairman.—Supposing the manuscript of the book
■was handed to you, have you any idea what it would cost
you to put it on the market?
Mr. Barker.—No; I have no idea.
The Chairman.—ln the case of a book like that, it
would admittedly be a protection on authorship if you
based it on the selling price of the book. It would be
more a protection on authorship than printing.
Mr. Barker. —Yes, that is so.
The Witness.—That is so, but there again is a point
that I want to make.' Australia at the present time is
approximately about three months away from what you
term the centre of culture —we will call it the centre of
culture for our purposes—and the booksellers I have come
in contact with inform me that they will not take the
risk of bringing in books of this description unless they
are established, so to speak. We have to find out from
the literary periodicals the standard of a book, and then
we have to send to England. If the tax is put on, the
bookseller will not bring them in. Another six months
elapses before Australia comes in contact with the leading
knowledge of the world.
By the Chairman. —I think that could be overcome by
agencies on the other side, probably?—lt may be, but I
have had a great deal of difficulty with some booksellers
in getting them to bring in some things that I want, and
if there is going to be a further handicap I will have a
further difficulty.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You mention that the State Govern-
ment subsidises your Association, and then you say that
what the State gives with one hand the Commonwealth
proposes to take away. The Commonwealth is not pro-
posing to take away anything; this is merely an applica-
tion by certain citizens?—l see. Then, so far as that
BRISBANE—Robert Victor Smith


statement is concerned, it is not worth the paper it is
written on.
Mr. Berchdolt.—lt is not right. I just wanted to point
that out to you.
(The witness withdrew.)
ROBERT HAROLD CRAWFORD.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
Representing the Queensland Newsagents’ Association, 27
Melbourne street, South Brisbane.
Q. —You arc yourself a newsagent?—l am.
Q. —What proportion of Queensland newsagents is in
tho Association? —The membership at the present time
runs from about 100 to 120 —that is about one-eighth.
Q. —Is that subject to qualification in that the bigger
agents are in it or out of it?—Oh, no, small and large are
in it.
Q. —I notice your evidence covers fashion journals and
books?—Not so much books, mainly periodicals, journals
and fashion journals. My statement reads as follows: —
I, Robert Harold Crawford, of 27 Melbourne street,
South Brisbane, newsagent, submit the following for
consideration by the Tariff Board:—
1. That the Queensland Newsagents’ Association is
a voluntary Association of bona-fide newsagents, being
vendors and distributors of daily and weekly news-
papers and periodicals of every description, including
fashion journals, magazines, comic papers, weekly
journals, and Sunday journals.
2. That the Association is governed by rules and has
as officers Messrs. Stephen. James Rees, of Lutwyche
road, Lutwyche, Brisbane (President); Mr. Robert
Harold Crawford, of 27 Melbourne street, South Bris-
bane, newsagent (Acting Secretary); Mr. F. G. Jordan
(Vice-President); Mr. W. Lawson (Treasurer), and a
Committee of nine persons, in addition to the President,
Vice-President and Treasurer.
3. That the Association considers it would be a
national calamity if a tax of any nature were imposed
upon imported periodicals, which are mostly of an
instructive nature. In the opinion of the Association,
and of me, any tax at all would have the effect of
substantially reducing the circulation, particularly
amongst working people, who constitute the bulk of the
population of Queensland. Accordingly, it registers a
strong protest against the imposition of any duty on
imported periodicals.
4. In addition, it would do great injury to the
business of the members of this Association, who are
mostly men of small capital, working daily long hours
in their own businesses.
5. At present it is estimated that there are approxi-
mately 850 newsagents in Queensland handling
periodicals. It would be safe to say that an average
of two adult persons at the least are employed in
association with each business. In addition, there is
a large number of youths coming from homes of poor
people who find a measure of support by doing perma-
nent or casual work in connection with the business of
newsagents.
6. Whilst this Association does not wish to enter into
details upon this question, it would appear to us that
even if a high duty were imposed on imported periodicals
no adequate substitute could be profitably produced in
Australia or the periodicals wholly or in part prevented
access. Our business is largely dependent upon the
great variety in publications, suitable for all ages and
tastes, and we consider it is only by sharing these
publications with places of larger populations that they
could be profitably produced. We think it would be
impossible to produce with profit in Australia anything
like the variety of reading matter now demanded for such
a small market.
We believe that any tax which would in any way
increase the price of periodicals would seriously reduce
the circulation to the detriment of the public and of our
businesses, without in any way giving any correspond-
ing national advantage. The resultant falling off in
circulation would necessitate the discharge of a number
of our employees, and this would go to swell the already
too great army of the unemployed. We are informed
that the object of the proposed imposition of duty is to
increase employment, but we are of opinion that it
would have the opposite result.
Q. —What is the country of origin of the majority of
the printed matter you handle?—Britain.
Q. —Is that in magazines and periodicals ?—Magazines
and periodicals, and fashion journals.
Q. —Separating fashion journals, take them first; are
they mainly British?—Yes, mainly British.
Q. —Then, as to the remainder, periodicals and maga-
zines; are they mainly British?—Yes, the biggest pro-
portion is British. Of course, there is a proportion which
is American.
Q. —-You think it is not larger than the British?—No.
Q. —Are you handling any periodicals or magazines of
Australian production at the moment?—Yes.
Q. —What proportion of your business is in Australian,
as contrasted with imported?—Very small.
Q. —-Would you like to guess at it, an estimate? Would
it be 10 per cent.?—No, I do not think it would be
5 per cent.
Q. —It would not be 5 per cent.?—No.
Q. —Do you handle as much Australian as is on the
market?—Everything practically Australian that is on
tho market.
(The witness withdrew.)
The Chairman.—ls there anyone else present who de-
sires to tender evidence? (No response.) The inquiry
stands adjourned to Sydney on Thursday, April 3, at 11.30
a.m.
SYDNEY
The Board met at the Commonwealth Bank Building,
Martin place, Sydney, on Thursday, April 3, 1930, at
12.25 p.m.
Present. —Mr. H. McConaghy (Chairman), Mr. S. Berch-
dolt, Mr. H. E. Guy, and Mr. W. S. Kelly.
The Chairman. —The Board will proceed with the ad-
journed hearing of an inquiry into a request for increased
duties on fashion plates and books and for duties on
books n.e.i., and printed matter n.e.i. The applicant is
the Combined Printing and Allied Trades Tariff Com-
mittee, 375 Kent street, Sydney. The existing tariff
items are:—
Item 335, which provides that fashion plates and books
shall be free in the British preferential and ad valorem
rates of 5 per cent, and 10 per cent, in the intermediate
and general tariff columns respectively. Item 339, books
n.e.i. and printed matter n.e.i., are admitted free from
all countries. In submitting the request of the applicant
I will ignore all communications excepting an amended
communication recently received, which reads as follows:
—That the tariff schedule be amended as follows:
B.P.T. I.T. G.T.
Item 335
Fashion Plates and books, in-
cluding the weight and value
of containers, be dutiable on
one printed colour at the
rate of per lb. 1/ 1/3 1/6
Or ad val 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
Plus 25 per cent, for each additional colour, which-
ever returns the higher duty.
BRISBANE —Robert Harold Crawford


Item 339—■
Books and/or publications not
carrying advertisement mat-
ter, viz., novels or works of
fiction, or literature of a
similar character .. ad val. 30 p.c. 40 p.c. 50 p.c.
Books and/or publications, viz.,
books on the application of
science to industries of all
kinds, including books on
agriculture, horticulture,
forestry, fish or fishing, min-
ing, metallurgy, architec-
ture, electric and other
engineering, carpentry, ship-
building, mechanism, dyeing,
bleaching, tanning, weaving,
and other mechanical arts
and similar industrial books Free Free Free
Books embossed or grooved
cards for the blind, and
books for the instruction of
the deaf, dumb and blind,
maps and charts for use
in schools for the blind . . Free Free Free
Books printed by any Go-
vernment or any association
for the promotion of science
or letters, and official annual
reports of religious or bene-
volent associations, and is-
sued in the course of pro-
ceedings of the said associa-
tions to members, and not
for the purpose of sale or
trade Free Free Free
Books not printed or reprinted
in Australia which are in-
cluded and used as textbooks
in the curriculum of any
university, college, or school
in Australia, books specially
imported for the bona-fide
use of incorporated me-
chanics’ institutes, public
libraries of universities, col-
leges and schools or for
the library of any incor-
porated medical, law, lite-
rary, scientific, or art asso-
ciation or society, and being
tho property of the organisa-
tion authorities of such
library, and not in any case
the property of individuals—
the whole under regulations
prescribed by the Minister
for Customs Free Free Free
Books of all kinds which have
been printed or reprinted in
Australia and then printed
abroad _.. .. ad val. SO p.c. 40 p.c. 50 p.c.
Books, legal, dealing with Aus-
tralian Commonwealth or
State laws ad val. 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
N.e.i., magazines and periodic-
als carrying advertising per lb. 1/ 1/3 1/6
Or ad val. 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
Plus 25 per cent, for each additional colour, whichever
returns the higher duty.
Printed matter of any kind enclosed in cases of imported
merchandise and/or motor cars, cycles, or other machinery
and not disclosed on shipping documents and/or invoices
to be subject to a fine of £5OO and the printed matter to
be destroyed.
The “remainders” and “back date” books, periodicals and
other publications sold for export at less than the original
price by the publishers shall be dutiable at double the
ordinary rates.
That secondhand books, periodicals and newspapers for
sale be prohibited on the grounds affecting printers and
publishers, and additionally for reasons of health.
The Chairman.—ls there a representative of the appli-
cant Committee present?
Mr. Catts.—Yes.
JAMES HOWARD CATTS.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
To represent the Combined Printing and Allied Trades’
Tariff Committee, and my address is “Wembley House,”
Central square, Sydney.
Q.—-Is that covering the whole of the Commonwealth?—
No, New South Wales. The bodies that I appear to
represent are the Australian Publishers’ Federation of
N.S.W., which represents fashion journals, paper pat-
terns, syndicated newspaper features, and certain books/
fiction, text and educational, and special subject publica-
tions, such as motor publications and such like, and trade
publications; the N.S.W. Master Printers’ Mutual Protec-
tive Association, representing magazines, catalogues, and
general printing; N.S.W. Allied Printing Trades’ Service
Association, representing trade work, books, periodicals,
catalogues, commercial printing, and the grouping of
trades in the printing of the final product, linotype, book-
binding, and various subsidiary trades to printing in
trade capacity; N.S.W. Master Process and Graders’
Association, representing blockmakers and colour etchers;
N..S.W. Master Stereotypers and Electrotypers’ Associa-
tion, representing all classes of metal and matrix repro-
duction; Linotypers’ Association of N.S.W., representing
trade linotype, monotype, ludlow, and all classes of me-
chanical composition; N.S.W. Bookbinders’ Employers’
Association, representing trade bookbinders, etc.; Printing
Industry Employees’ Union, representing general print-
ing trade employees; Amalgamated Printing Employees’
Trades’ Union, representing machinists, bookbinders etc.;
N.S.W. Printing Industry, which covers the whole of the
working operatives in the printing industry, and the
Craftsmen Association, which represents printing industry
executives and foremen. I have prepared a statement,
which reads as follows;—■
On December 9, 1929, the Combined Tariff Committee
above referred to circularised the various printing fac-
tories of Sydney, asking for their endorsement of our
efforts to secure effective tariff protection for the print-
ing industry and allied trades, and received 100 replies
of endorsement.
We claim to represent the majority of printing fac-
tories of the metropolitan area of Sydney, as distin-
guished from printers who are partly printers and partly
importers of printed matter, who assemble overseas
printed matter in some form or other.
During the past six months deputations of the Com-
bined Tariff Committee have waited upon the Minister
for Customs and Comptroller-General of Customs on
several occasions, preferring requests for protection
of printing products.
Our proposals now vary a little, on account of a
conference held on February 10 and 17 last, between repre-
sentatives of the “Combined Printing and Allied Trades’
Tariff Committee,” and “The N.S.W. Master Printers
and Connected Trades’ Association,” at the request of the
latter body.
The N.S.W. master printers were represented by W.
A. Crichton (Federal President), J. R. Firth (State
President), H. L. Atkinson, B. Waite, and F. H. Kent.
The Combined Tariff Committee was represented by
Messrs. J. H. Catts, A. A. Catts, E. J. Hyde, F. A. Randle
and L. Baordman.
Wo submit our request in the form and terms agreed
upon by this conference referred to as follows:
Suggested.
B.P.T. I.T, G.T.
Item 335
Fashion plates and books, in-
cluding the weight and value
19
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


of containers, be dutiable on
one printed colour at the
rate of .. . . ad val. per lb. 1/ 1/3 1/6
Or ad val 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
Plus 25 per cent, for each additional colour,
whichever returns the higher duty.
Item 339-
Books and/or publications not
carrying advertisement mat-
ter, viz., novels or works of
fiction, or literature of a
similar character, ad val. 30 p.c. 40 p.c. 50 p.c.
Books and/or publications, viz.,
books on the application of
science to industries of all
kinds, including books on
agriculture, horticulture,
forestry, fish or fishing, min-
ing, metallurgy, architec-
ture, electric and other engi-
neering, carpentry, ship-
building, mechanism, dyeing,
bleaching, tanning, weaving,
and other mechanical arts,
and similar industrial books Free Free Free
Books embossed or grooved
cards for the blind, and books
for the instruction of the
deaf, dumb and blind, maps
and charts for use in schools
for the blind Free Free Free
Books printed by any Govern-
ment or any association for
the promotion of science or
letters and official annual
reports of religious or bene-
volent associations, and is-
sued in the course of pro-
ceedings of the said asso-
ciations to members, and not
for the purpose of sale or
trade Free Free Free
Books not printed or re-
printed in Australia, which
are included and used as
textbooks in the curriculum
of any university, college, or
school in Australia, books
specially imported for the
bona-fide use of incorpo-
rated mechanics’ institutes,
public libraries of univer-
sities, colleges, and schools
or for the library of any
incorporated medical, law,
literary, scientific or art
association or society, and
being the property of the
organisation authorities of
such library, and not in any
case the property of indi-
viduals—the whole under
regulations prescribed by the
Minister for Customs .. .. Free Free Free
Books of all kinds which have
been printed or reprinted in
Australia, and then printed
abroad ad val. 36 p.c. 40 p.c. 50 p.c.
Books, legal, dealing with
Australian, Commonwealth
or State laws .. .. ad val. 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
N.e.i. magazines and periodic-
als carrying advertising, ad
val per lb. 1/ 1/3 1/6
Or ad val 45 p.c. 55 p.c. 65 p.c.
Plus 25 per cent, for each additional colour,
whichever returns the higher duty.
Printed matter of any kind enclosed in cases of im-
ported merchandise and/or motor cars, cycles, or other
machinery and not disclosed on shipping documents and/or
invoices to be subject to a fine of £SOO, and the printed
matter to be destroyed.
The “remainders” and “back date” books, periodicals
and other publications sold for export at less than the
original price by the publishers shall be dutiable at double
tho ordinary rates.
That secondhand books, periodicals and newspapers for
sale be prohibited on the grounds affecting printers and
publishers, and additionally for reasons of health.
It will be observed from the liberal exemptions w©
have agreed upon, that the attacks made against us re
tariff on books and other publications on the application
cf science to industry, educational textbooks, etc., have
been misdirected.
In these exemptions we have met the bona-fide objec-
tions of the importing interests and representatives of
overseas printers and publishers as far as possible.
A statement of the value of imports by the Customs
Department under items 335 and 339 does not afford
much light and leading, as they are based on tho
invoice value in country of origin, and, as these are so
low, the total value of, say, £IB,OOO to £20,000 given in
the case of fashion plates and fashion books does not
give any indication of the deluge of competition the
Australian product has to face on every one of the 3000
bookstalls and newsagencies throughout Australia.
In the case of books, the customs value of imports
at about £1,300,000 per year is of little value, as it
contains substantial quantities and values not proposed
to be taxed for protective purposes.
Tho Witness (continuing).—The figures, I believe, are
round about £13,000 or £15,000 under the heading of
fashion plates and books, and about £I3OO in the case of
books and periodicals generally.
By the Chairman.—Yes, taking them over the last four
recorded years, the figures on fashion plates and books
are £16,500, £17,500, £12,600 and £13,000. That is in
round figures. The figures on books printed, including
music, periodicals and newspapers, are £1,330,000,
£1,306,000, £1,386,000, and £1,292,000 ?—Yes, well under
the heading of fashion plates, I think a great majority
of the cases of competition against us, which are partly
fashion books and partly having general periodical matter
in them, must be classed under the general heading of
books and periodicals.
Q. —You mean for statistical purposes?—Yes. I think
under that heading it is impossible to put down a figure
like £15,000 to cover what the trade look upon as fashion
books. They may be issued primarily as fashion books,
but they have a short story in the front, which runs to
the back of the book, and in those cases I think they are
probably looked on as periodicals.
Q. —In any case, I presume that the Customs Depart-
ment, as the duties are nominal, for preference purposes
only, they probably do not pay the same attention to
valuations as they might'do on higher duty goods?—
Yes, My statement continues:—
The groupings of items by the Tariff Board for
inquiry purposes has cut across that of the Combined
Printing and Allied Trades’ Tariff Committee, but,
taking all imports of printed matter and allied paper
products, we estimate that with proper tariff protection
the imported matter which could and should be manu-
factured in Australia would amount to £6,000,000 value
of manufactured products and provide additional work
for 11,000 employees.
Some of the disadvantages under which the local
product suffers are as follows:
1. Raw material (printing paper), of which there is
practically no local production.
Our overseas competitors buy in most cases direct
from tho paper mills, saving the profits of several inter-
mediaries. At the present moment the local printer
is paying all the usual charges, heavy exchanges, rates,
plus 10 per cent., which the paper houses have lately
20
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


imposed in anticipation of a super tax referred to in
the press recently.
There is often 10 per cent, wastage on paper in
cutting, trimming, and other handling. The local
manufacturer has to pay freight, duty and other charges
on the wastage, which the finished imported article is
not subjected to. -
2. We have to meet the lower producing costs of
America, due to mass production, and less union
regulation regarding piecework and quantity out-
put, and, in connection with British competition,
there is considerably less costly industrial con-
ditions generally.
3. Our Factories Acts, Workmen’s Compensation,
child endowment, and general social legislation
impose a very heavy burden upon local manufac-
turers when compared with our overseas competi-
tion.
4. A very serious handicap under which the pro-
ducer of Australian fashion periodicals and vari-
ous other periodicals, publications from Great
Britain, is the combined selling arrangements of
our competitors.
Distribution to selling agencies throughout Austral-
asia is a virtual monopoly in the control of Messrs.
Gordon and Gotch Ltd., whose headquarters are in
London, a most efficient and honourable company. But
the large capital and output of the British printing and
publishing houses enables them, through Messrs. Gordon
and Gotch Ltd., to prevail upon all local selling agencies
to carry and display stocks and to carry out methods
and propaganda for continual pushing of sales of over-
seas periodicals.
Tho small local selling agencies scattered over our
continent—in every village and hamlet—dependent upon
Messrs. Gordon and Gotch Ltd. for practically the whole
of their supplies, are visibly influenced by the con-
tinuous push of the large overseas publishers expressed
through the efficient organisation of Messrs. Gordon
and Gotch Ltd.
Thus, at most newsagents and bookstalls, the display
of imported periodicals altogether overshadows the local
product.
Attached hereto, and marked with the letter “A,” is a
copy of circular recently issued by Messrs. Gordon and
Gotch Ltd. to local agents, and is a sample of the
continuous pressure to sell overseas fashion periodicals,
which, it will be noted, “enjoy a phenomenal sale” in
Australia. The local agents in many cases look upon
these suggestions as a royal edict and feel that if a
reasonable response is not made a new competing
agency may arise in their centre and would more quickly
act upon the promptings of the distributing monopoly
at the capital centres.
Messrs. Gordon and Gotch Ltd. are always ready to
co-operate with local producers by distributing the
circulars of such local producer to retail agencies, but
an intimation by Gordon and Gotch Ltd. themselves,
direct to selling agents, acts with much more efficacy.
No complaint whatever is made or intended so far as
Messrs. Gordon and Gotch Ltd. are concerned. The
British publishing interests issue a great volume of
matter through Messrs. Gordon and Gotch Ltd., and by
reasons of this huge turnover, by selling co-operation,
and immense financial resources, impose their will to
sell their overseas production upon thousands of selling
agencies throughout Australasia.
A very important factor of advantage to the overseas
producer of fashion publications, which inflicts upon the
Australian producer what is to all intents and purposes
dumping in its most serious form, is the alternating of
the seasons in the countries of the Northern and
Southern Hemispheres.
Fashions are initiated in Paris. As the Bank of
England is the world’s financial centre, and controls
international exchange, so is Paris the style centre of
the world. The Parisian designers in advance determine
the silhouette and the predominant features of the
season’s mode. From these basic designs and fashion
artists and designers the world over develop their crea-
tions and seek, without departing from the fundamental
style outlines, to cater for and interpret popular fancy
in their respective countries.
The fashion artists and designers of Britain and
America, of Germany and Austria, as well as those of
Australia, base their work upon the original silhouette
of Paris. There is no fundamental originality in
fashions anywhere but Paris, and, indeed, the general
populace of Prance is catered for in a similar way to
-that of other countries—through the work of a legion
of artists and designers developing practical' service
from the fixed essentials of the acknowledged Parisian
style leaders.
The timing of style announcements for each season
is coincident with the change of seasons in Paris, and,
therefore, also in countries of similar latitude.
Thus the new styles are exploited for several m;nths
in the northern countries before the corresponding
season arrives in Australia, and this country th n be-
comes a regular and permanent market for the surplus
and left-over product in fashion productions and i aper
patterns.
There is no dearth of fashion artists in Australia; and
no real disadvantage would be suffered by the g.n_ral
public if every overseas publication relating to fa hions
were cut off at once. Australian capacity to handle the
business would rapidly grasp the opportunity.
During the war there were many months at a stretch
when the supply of overseas fashion publications was
entirely cut off, and this enabled a few local predictions
to get a footing, but the deluge of overseas compe-iuon
is now crippling Australian advancement.
Gordon and Gotch (Australasia) Ltd.,
Barrack and Clarence streets, Sydney.
Correspondence,
1627 88, G.P.O.
y Sll*
BESTWAY, LEACH’S AND WELDON’S SIXPENNY
SERIES.
(Trade rate, 6/ doz.; retailing in Australia at 9d.)
These publications, as you know, enjoy a phenomenal
sale, but we believe many thousands more could be edd
if all agents followed the practice, as some do, of
registering standing orders and receiving supplies regu-
larly and promptly as they arrive from England.
The difficulty in placing standing orders lies in the
fact that the series deals with many different subjects,
some of greater selling value than others. To sur-
mount this difficulty we have selected nine groups which,
as near as can be anticipated, cover the subjects most
likely to be available in the future.
If you will kindly fill in the quantities of each group
required on standing order you will ensure regular
and early supplies.
Standing Order.—
Group I—Children’s fashions, school outfits, etc.
Group 2—Babies’ woolies, knitted frocks and suits,
2 to 4 years.
Group 3—House frocks, washing frocks, street frocks,
etc.
Group 4—Sports jumpers, cardigans, etc.
Group s—Lingerie, underwear, etc.
Group 6—Evening dresses, fancy dresses and bridal
outfits.
Group 7—Embroidery, smocking and crochet.
Group B—Raffia, headings, and edgings, etc.
Group 9—Wireless.
Name
Address
There are approximately four of these series issued
each month, so that a standing order of three each
would not mean more than twelve a month, but discern-
ing agents would probably require variations, and our
experience suggests the following proportions:—
Group I—Standing order, 6 copies.
Group 2 —Standing order, 4 copies.
Group 3—Standing order, 6 copies.
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


Group 4—Standing order, 2 copies.
Group s—Standing order, 6 copies.
Group 6—Standing order, 4 copies.
Group 7—Standing order, 2 copies.
Group B—Standing order, 2 copies.
Group 9—Standing order, 2 copies,
which, of course, might be doubled or halved, according
to size of agency. Standing orders could be supplanted
from time to time by securing extras from our stocks.
Gordon and Gotch (Australasia) Ltd.
There are popularly sold in Australia some 36 or
more British periodicals dealing with fashions, and
about half that number of American, while, probably,
French, German and Australian may together account
for about a dozen, with more restricted sales. The
imported fashion periodicals sold from 2d. to 3d. up-
wards.
Samples of Australian, British and American fashion
periodicals are tendered herewith as follow: —
Australian —Australian Home Budget.
Australian Home Budget Fashion Catalogue.
Australian Home Journal.
Australian Home Journal Catalogue.
Everylady’s Journal.
Weigell’s Journal.
The Woman’s Budget.
The Mirror.
British —Weldon’s Ladies’ Journal.
Weldon’s Girls in Their Teens.
Weldon’s Dressmaker and Milliner.
Fashions for All.
Home Fashions.
Children’s Dress.
Bestway Dance Frocks.
Maybe.
Coming Fashions.
Woman’s Life.
Home Chat.
Modern.
Homo Notes.
America—The Ladies’ Home Journal.
Butterick’s.
McCall’s.
Pictorial Review.
Delineator.
Free Catalogues.
New Butterick’s Fashions.
Pictorial Printed Patterns.
McCall Style News.
The above-mentioned fashion periodicals are almost
wholly designed to propagate and sell paper patterns.
(The Board at 12.55 p.m. adjourned until 2.15 p.m.)
On resuming at 2.20 p.m..
The Witness.—We were dealing with the list of pub-
lications which we put forward as fashion periodicals.
These fashion periodicals are almost wholly designed to
propagate and sell paper patterns. My statement con-
tinues: —
The Weldon Publications. —Fashions for all publica-
tions and Mabs have corresponding paper pattern
factories in Australia, and are keen competitors with
the wholly Australian paper pattern manufacturers;
their fashion periodicals are openly and avowedly cata-
logues for the sale in Australia of locally-made paper
patterns.
These are examples (produces sample). Those are
the imported paper patterns, and these are the local
article, but we will be dealing with those later. I
would just like to show you that Weldon’s print a cover
which is an Australian edition. You will notice the
illustration of fashions on the inside. They give free
patterns and free transfers for a start.
By Mr. Berchdolt. —That is imported?—All imported. I
am not sure; these may be inserted here now (indicat-
ing). lam not sure about that, but these are what we
call the free patterns. This is the catalogue in the centre
of the book, and right through it will be seen, “Weldon’s
patterns illustrated in this supplement. Australasian
price, 1/, by post 1/3; transfers, Weldon’s price, 6d., by
post 7id.” They have a factory handy to the city and
they are running these pattern services in the big stores
in open competition with us.
By Mr. Kelly.—Portion of the Board has been hearing
an inquiry on another subject which includes patterns. It
was put up by the pattern-makers for protection as
against patterns, and that is listed for future inquiry.
Those who are interested to oppose that will presumably
come to that inquiry. We are dealing with patterns
altogether independent of fashion plates, under the manu-
facture of papers?—You will pardon me, but you cannot
separate them entirely, because all of these fashion books
are openly catalogues for the sale in Australia of paper
patterns.
Q. —Quite so, but the man who is putting up the case
seeking to have a duty on patterns put up similar
periodicals to illustrate the same point. We do not
want to hear the same case twice. —No. At the same
time it is an essential part of the case for a proper protec-
tion against the periodicals. They are not what some
people think they are technically. They are in effect
catalogues. They are not in the proper sense of the term
“periodicals.” Anything else that goes in in the way of
periodical matter is subsidiary to the sale of patterns.
That is the point I want to make.
By the Chairman.—And to that extent it is relevant to
this inquiry?—Yes, I do not want to go into the whole
question of paper patterns now.
By Mr. Kelly.—We are hearing a request on paper
patterns in which that evidence will be given?.—Yes, I
hope to appear on paper patterns here next week. In
addition, most of those publications, of course, issued free
patterns right down to the lowest priced thing. It
issues this free set of paper patterns (indicating), and it
is impossible successfully to compete against that in
Australia under present conditions. These importing
people have practically got the market.
Q. —If the application for a duty on patterns is suc-
cessful, there will be no point in your advocacy?—Yes,
there would.
Q. —You do not want the thing protected twice in two
different ways ?—Here is our pattern catalogue, which we
have to pay Australian rates for (produced). Why should
these other people, selling patterns in Australia, be able
to get cheap stuff printed in Great Britain and America
and swamp us out here with their catalogues ?
By the Chairman.—l think the two things are quite dis-
tinct, in so far as the marketing of patterns is concerned,
and the catalogue. The fact that there is one free sample
given does not entirely connect the catalogues with the
paper industry.
Mr. Kelly.—Possibly not, but the applicant in the other
case thought it did.
The Chairman.—Whereas the witness produces only one
in which there are only two or three free samples given
away, there is quite a number of catalogue patterns for
sale; that is, the periodical is used as a dissemination of
information regarding other patterns?—lt is a catalogue
for the sale of stocks of patterns that are carried in the
large stores; thousands of pounds worth. They are even
in these (indicating), which you people would think, on
looking at it, first of all was an ordinary reading maga-
zine. Their main purpose is the sale of patterns, and
not the sale of short stories, such as the “Delineator,”
the “Pictorial Review,” and so on.
By Mr. Kelly.—l quite realise that. All I am saying
is that has been put up under the plea for a protection
on patterns?—We not only want protection on patterns,
but we want the deluge of this country with all kinds of
catalogues published overseas for the sale of these
patterns in Australia stopped. We want them shut out.
The main argument against these things is that they
are_ catalogues; that they are not periodicals in the
ordinary sense of the term at all.
By the Chairman. —Nothing in my colleague’s remarks,
I take it, is intended to limit your evidence on the publica-
tions at all. It would only limit your evidence in this
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


inquiry as regards the actual patterns themselves?—Yes,
Ido not want to go into that. lam only referring to
that incidentally. I would like to say that these leading
publications, the “Ladies’ Home Journal,” for instance,
cut my firm out of a very big order for patterns in
Western Australia a few months back. They have large
stocks of patterns in the stores, and every month these
journals come out with the fashions and the numbers.
You read about them and then go to the store and buy
the patterns.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You would not say that the “Ladies’
Home Journal” was merely a catalogue. Is it not more
of a magazine than a catalogue?—l do not think so. It
is issued by pattern manufacturers.
Q. —Issued by the “Saturday Evening Post”?—l do not
think so.
Q. —Then that is a new one? —I do not know who does
issue it, really. It may be issued by the “Saturday
Evening Post.”
By the Chairman.—l think it is quite competent for the
witness to refer to the fact, in applying for a duty on
these journals, that they are to a large extent cataloguing
these patterns?—Yes, there are all sorts of gradations
amongst them. That is not quite as much a catalogue
as this (indicating).
By Mr. Berchdolt.—l think you are stretching it to
call this a catalogue?—Well, as I say, that is probably
the limit of them. The others are more so than this, but
the point is that they do run large pattern services and
put stocks in the stores running into £4OO and £SOO up to
£IOOO worth of paper patterns. I would like you to note
that I am putting in our own catalogue, which shows a
range of goods equal to anything that is imported.
By the Chairman. —That is entitled, “Fashions, 1930”?
—Yes.
Q. —.“Australian Home Budget” paper patterns—does
this deal entirely with patterns made in Australia? —Yes,
the artists’ work and the blocks and everything in con-
nection with it.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—l call that (indicating) a pattern
catalogue?—That is exclusively a pattern catalogue. It
is only for use on the counters of stores. Here are some
more that these people issue (produced). These are
issued free by the million. This is issued by Butterick’s,
“The New Butterick Fashions,” issued every month. The
price of 2d. is marked on it, but it is never sold. That is
pure trade fiction to put a price on it. It is overprinted
in order that it will be, I suppose, purely and simply a
fashion plate or something. This free catalogue is issued
in the same unlimited quantities from Farmers Ltd. and
Anthony Hordern and Sons Ltd., and in the other large
centres. That space (indicating) is left blank, and
matters relating to the local firms are overprinted in
Australia. You find these free catalogues available from
containers near the lifts, with the invitation to “Please
take one.” As I say, they are in unlimited quantities.
By Mr. Berchdolt. —You would call those advertising
matter?—They are catalogues of fashions. The fashions
are in the racks in the store, and you see the one you
like and go to the store counter and ask for that number.
Q. —It is the same as your catalogue, only smaller?—
Yes, the same idea. They have big catalogues, and we
have tried, in response to the stores, to issue the small
ones, but it is impossible for us to do it at the price.
This is the “Pictorial Review,” which is issued in some
of the big stores, such as Marcus Clark’s Ltd., McCathies
Ltd., and Grace Bros. They leave a blank space on the
cover for the overprinting of the advertisement to the
local store. In this one (indicating) there is “McCathies”
overprinted on the back there, I suppose, to make it a
fa hion plate, and apparently it would be submitted to
r '-ro duty if that printing were done before it got here.
I is a pure subterfuge. This one is McCall’s, which is
issued in unlimited quantities for David Jones.
Q. —Is that printing done in Australia? —Yes, it is
overprinted. In that case of David Jones, the top half
comes out here blank, the same as in other cases. My
statement continues:—
These free catalogues are produced on large ar.;oiv.atic
printing presses, and when once the initial co: t of
getting the machines to work on production is ovcrc: me,
the cost of turning them out may be calculated at pence
per thousand.
It would be impossible in Australia to find m cutlet
for the gigantic issues of these free catalogues cuffifient
to justify the organisation of a plant of the needful
proportions to compete on a price level w'th th: Ameri-
can output.
Faced with the same kind of competition, very few
Australian industries could live.
These pattern catalogues, issued to promote he sale
of paper products in Australia, are direct cov pjtitors
of our printing factories in the production oi pr'nted
sales matter, and unless cheapness and overwhelnvng
power to stifle local work is to be encouraged, 1., y hive
no justification for issue in Australia at all.
Tho work involved in the production of these 'r.. hxn
periodicals and free fashion catalogues woul if the
local market were made available to the A- slralian
handicap, provide work for fashion artists, csigners,
writers, process engravers, stereotypers, priming
trades, etc., and Australian capacity could quLe easily
take care of all Australian requirements. There is
absolutely no justification whatever for any cf this
work to go out of Australia; the whole lot can bi done
here.
The organisations combined together as a Tariff Com-
mittee for the printing and allied trades after long and
careful consideration came to the conclusion that ade-
quate protection for local products could only be pro-
vided by the rates suggested, and, as the imppsition of
every colour on paper increases the work and value
thereof, it was necessary to follow the multiplication
of processes on the same paper by a levy based on the
number of colours appearing on the finished article.
Books.
We do not at present ask for a duty on—
(a) Books and magazines on the application of
science to industry.
(b) Embossed books or grooved cards or maps or
charts used in teaching the deaf, dumb and for
the blind.
(c) Books printed by any Government or association
for promotion of science or letters, or certain
official religious or benevolent publications.
(d) Educational books prescribed under regulations
by the Minister for Customs.
The exemptions we suggest under (a) and (d) are
very widespread, and, considering the capacity of Aus-
tralian industry and the urgent need for employment,
this is the limit which should be conceded to the
importing interests.
The Federal Government proposes to grant a bonus
of £4 per ton on the production of paper in Australia.
This industry cannot be developed unless the use of
paper is encouraged.
There is a protective duty on strawboard and on glue,
also on thread, ink and metal, and all main accessory
materials used in book production of from 15 per cent,
to 45 per cent. All the items mentioned are now
employing Australians in factory production.
In addition to the extra costs imposed upon Austra-
lian printing trades, which our overseas competitors
have not to bear, in relation to our social legislation
and trade union regulations mentioned in connection
with the fashion magazines, the printing of books
involves the use of materials produced by Australian
factories under our protective system.
It is difficult to understand on what basis of equity
protection should be denied to the products of printing
trades to compensate for the economic burden imposed
by these considerations as against overseas rivals.
Furthermore, there are many evidences of dumping
in regard to books. Bound books at 3 for 1/ are being
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


sold in some of the stores in Sydney and Melbourne
that could not be produced anywhere in the world at
that price. It is impossible to obtain the benefits of
our anti-dumping legislation unless some measure of
protective tariff is in operation in relation to the article.
Prior to tariff protection on account books, diaries,
exercise books, stationery, etc., it was boldly urged that
these lines could not be economically produced in Aus-
tralia. Now these goods are being largely made here
at favourable prices, and not only have local firms
turned their attention thereto, but British houses, such
as John Dickinson and Sons Ltd. and Collins Bros, and
Co. Ltd., have opened up factories in Australia.
Australia can produce books as well as any country
in the world; Ihe Government printing offices in the
various States, as well as at Canberra, are great book-
producing institutions.
Samples arc produced herewith of bound volumes,
historical records of Australia and reports of Parlia-
mentary debates, which are good examples of book
production.
I want to make the point that, apart altogether from
the question of writers, authors, and editorial prepara-
tion of the reading matter, so far as the craftsmanship
and the setting of it is concerned, I do not think it can be
disputed. Australia can do this class of work at
present as well as u can be done anywhere else in the
world.
By Mr. Guy.—Are they paying very much more for it?
—We are paying higher rates for all of the articles I have
mentioned. We do pay higher rates than Great Britain,
but in America there is not the same iirri'; of output, and
the American workman makes up very largely for his
higher wages by his increased output.
A cample is produced of what is known as the Can-
berra Series—“ The Small Dark Man”—type of bound
novel sold at 6/, which is the equal of anything printed
elsewhere at the price. The novel was printed and
published in Australia on a royalty basis and then sold
at 6/ retail. The American price is 10/, and the British
price is 7/6. It will be seen that this book is now in
its fourth edition of 2000 each, although the first edition
was only published last October.
By Mr. Kelly.—l suppose you have not samples of
comparable volumes selling at 10/ and 7/6? —No, I pro-
duce a sample showing the Parliamentary debates as
bound. lam assuming there is no dispute as to the
craftsmanship.
By tho Chairman.—l think that is probably the line that
could be least questioned?—Yes. My statement con-
tinues:—•
I have other examples of difficult setting—algebra,
geometry, and arithmetic, numerical trigonometry,
and Latin —produced by Australian craftsmen.
Q. —They are published by Australian authors, and if
you look at the settings you will find they are most
complicated and difficult settings. They were previously
done in Dublin, but now the Australian rights have been
secured they have for some time been printed in
Australia. My statement continues:—
Samples of these educational books are produced
herewith as follows: —
(a) Arithmetic for second, third and fifth standards,
by the Christian Brothers. These were formerly
printed in Dublin, but the Australian rights have
been secured, and they are now printed in this
country, and are being sold cheaper than when
imported. Attention is drawn to the linotype
setting.
(b) Fourth Reader and Fifth Reader samples, one
printed in Dublin sold in Australia at 2/9, and
the same book printed in Australia and sold at
2/0.
(c) A first course in algebra, part 1, by J. P. Chard,
B.A. This is compiled and printed in Australia
and adopted by the N.S.W. Department of Educa-
tion. This is a good example of difficult type
setting.
(d) Parts 1, 2 and 3 of first course in geometry and
numerical trigonometry, by J. P. Chard, B.A.
These books have been compiled and produced
in Australia, and, although not yet officially
adopted, are said to meet all requirements and to
be equal to anything of the kind produced else-
where. It is stated on good authority that the
representatives of Hall and Stevens, London, ob-
tained orders last year in Australia for 140,000
copies of the English books, which these Austra-
lian productions were designed to challenge, for
the Australian market.
All of these books require skilful setting - , but part
2 contains pages of tabulated matter to which attention
is directed.
(e) “Elements of Poetry,” by two Australian authors,
and used by the Christian Brothers’ schools
throughout Australia and New Zealand. This
work is being used in lieu of “Stables Bond of
Poetry.” This was the work of an Australian
printed in London.
(f) “A Handbook of Intermediate English,” by
George Mackaness, 8.A., and Sidney A. Lenehan,
is in general use in the educational establish-
ments of Australia.
(g) “Latin Revision Tests,” by H. O. Craddock, M.A.,
Inspector of Secondary Schools, has been adopted
by the Education Department of N.S.W.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Why did they get those orders re-
ferred to in paragraph (d); because the schools specified
them?—Because they were then adopted for use in the
schools. Some of them have not yet been adopted, but
probably, following on the work of Mr. Chard, they will
be adopted.
Q. —You could not blame the schools if they were
specified?—No; what we say is that if some encourage-
ment is given to local production more of this work will
be done in Australia. My statement continues;—
These samples of educational works by Australian
authors and produced in Australia could be added to by
large numbers of others.
An instance of overseas tactics in regard to the Aus-
tralian market is provided by two books, “Anne of Green
Gables” and “Anne of Avonlea,” and several others of
the same series; six in all. An Australian firm of
printers and publishers secured the Australian rights
from America in 1923, and have been producing ever
since. These were sold at 2/4 wholesale, retail 3/6.
Now England has obtained the rights, as well as
Australia, and are landing this series in Australia at
1/9 wholesale, and a window full may be seen now on
view at the Methodist Bookstall; the retail price is still
3/6.
In this case the local producer has built up demand
and popularised the sale of these books, now to be
seriously undercut by importations.
Do not cases such as these require tariff protection ?
Attached hereto are lists of Canberra Series of 6/
books, of which “The Small Dark Man,” produced by
Maurice Walsh, is a sample of get-up and quality. It
is attached to the cover of “The Small Dark Man.”
On the same printed annexure are shown lists of the
Bell Bird and Platypus series for boys and girls, which
altogether have met with a popular response on the
local market.
The output from the Eagle Press Ltd., Sydney, and
its successors of books during the last seven years has
accounted for nearly 3,000,000 copies.
This splendid factory is now almost at a standstill,
while the work it is organised to produce is supplied by
overseas craftsmen, which our Australian tariff policy
keeps in employment, whilst our own people are idle.
Australian Encyclopaedia, Volumes 1 and 2.—This
great work was edited by Australian authors and printed
and bound by Australian craftsmen. These are pro-
duced to bring forward the testimony of one of the
greatest publishing firms in the world, namely, Messrs.
SYDNEY—James Howard Calls


Funk and Wagnalls Co., New York. Here is a letter
published broadcast testifying to the high standard of
Australian printers and allied trades;—
Editorial Rooms of Funk and Wagnalls,
New Standard Dictionary of the English Language,
Managing Editor’s Room, New York.
Publishing House of Funk and Wagnalls Co.,
354-300 Fourth avenue, New York.
Blr. George Robertson,
C/o Messrs. Angus and Robertson Ltd.,
85-90 Castlereagh street, Sydney, N.S.W., Aus.
Dear Mr. Robertson, —
Your gracious gift of the first volume of the “Aus-
tralian Encyclopaedia,” which has just reached our
hands, is very much appreciated by our general mana-
ger and treasurer, Mr. Robert J. Cuddihy, who has
asked me on his behalf to acknowledge its receipt and
to thank you for the kind thought that prompted you
to send it to us for the use of our editorial staff.
Naturally, as the man in charge of our reference
books, the volume has been handed to me to place in my
library, and I welcome it, as I shall the remaining
volumes to our shelves. You have produced a master-
■ piece, one that will prove a monument to your firm and
mark a distinct era in the development of Australian
literature. For years the world has been sadly in need
of such a work. Therefore, let me offer you my cordial
congratulations in having supplied a long-felt want.
The format of your book commends itself highly to
me as a practical bookman, and I have been in the
publishing business for close on 45 years. The type
chosen could not have been improved, the half-tones in
black and white have been reproduced with exceptional
care, and their presswork is excellent. If you ask me
to particularise, I cannot take a finer example of
black and white half-tone work than that which you
show on plate 21, which faces page 73G of your text.
The remarkable result that you have obtained in print-
ing plates 22 and 23 back to back without either affect-
ing the other is a triumph of the printer’s art, for it
is seldom that one can get so complete a black as you
have succeeded in getting on plate 23 without it pene-
trating through and affecting the preceding plate.
And now a word or two on your colour work. Your
plates of chats and finches are veritable works of art,
amazing in the brilliancy of their colouring and the
perfection of their register. The double-page plates
of algae, beetles, butterflies, moths, and insects are
marvellous examples of scientific accuracy and colour-
ing, while your plates of fishes, birds’ eggs, lizards,
snakes and frogs measure up to the high standard
that you established for yourselves when you undertook
this magnum opus.
Turning to the text, let me say in general that you
have contributed a monument in Australian biography
that will be of immense value to all historians. Many
of the biographies read like romance. The articles on
“Chronology” and “Explorations by Land and Sea” are
such that they must commend themselves to every
student of Australian history, while every scientist will
find your contributions on geology and minerals in-
valuable helps in the further development of these
sciences. This may sound fulsome praise, but it is well
merited, for, my dear sir, it is the ripe judgment of a
man who, since 1882, has been concerned with the
making of books, the man who produced “The Jewish
Encyclopaedia” in 12 volumes, “The New Encyclo-
paedia” in 40 volumes, the “New Standard Dictionary,”
and all of its abridgments, and more than 500 other
books on almost every walk in life.
The spontaneous enthusiasm that your great work
has awakened in me is shared by everyone here, and
not the least by your old friend, Mr. L. Knight, the
head of our foreign department here, through whose
kindness your letter and volume were referred to me.
We wish you every success, and once again extend our
cordial congratulations.—Very faithfully yours,
Frank H. Vizetelly, Editor.
I am here to say for you and on behalf of Australian
printing craftsmen and the allied trades, artists, block-
makers and the rest that they can undertake to produce
at as high a standard of quality the whole of the im-
ported printed matter coming into Australia, of every
type and description, whether plain or illustrated, and
they are in need of additional work; that large numbers
of their skilled craftsmen are unemployed, and to
request in their name that the administrative capacity
of Government, expressed through Boards and Minis-
ters, shall evolve measures of policy as a matter of
urgency to transfer Australia’s market for printing
products from overseas countries to our own.
Periodicals.
The general handicaps of our social legislation apply
equally to periodicals generally as to fashion periodicals
and books.
We class any periodicals as a fashion periodical which
encloses free paper patterns, transfers, or other similar
product, or which contains a fashion section calculated
to promote the sale of paper patterns, as well as those
which are exclusively illustrations of fashions.
The enormous quantities of imported periodicals
which bespatter our bookstalls throughout Australia
would take considerable time and attention to analyse.
When reference is made to periodicals there is visualised
some prominent publication of Great Britain or America,
with an international reputation. But these are the
very small minority of importations.
There are thousands of tons of weekly and monthly
publications, such as short story prints, weeklies for
boys and girls, comics, and every class and description
of reading matter. These offer no difficulty in produc-
ing locally, either in regard to preparation of the
reading matter and illustrations or the printing and
distribution.
The coloured supplements of the Sunday daily papers
of Australia containing comic sections are an example
of local capacity to turn out illustrated comic matter
in variety and at low cost; all that is wanted to have
this work done in Australia, giving work to writers
and artists, process engravers and the direct printing
trades, is the conservation of the Australian market
for the local product. Ido not think it is necessary to
do more than produce specimens of the supplements to
the Sunday newspapers.
In referring to local artists and illustrators, I sub-
mit a statement by a member of our Combined Tariff
Committee, Mr. Sydney Ure Smith, President Austra-
lian Society of Artists, and Trustee National Art
Gallery of N.S.W., as follows;
Employment of Artists, etfc.
“There are numerous cases of young artists who are
well trained at art schools in Sydney (and probably in
Bfelbourne), certainly in Adelaide, who, when they are
ready to emerge, completely trained from the art school,
cannot find sufficient work to earn a living, except as
commercial artists. At present there are insufficient
journals in Australia to support good illustrators, and
very few books are illustrated. If we had some form
of protection, we should be able to compete with im-
ported publications, whether they are books or journals.
“For years past I have examined work by young
artists, whose work is capable and of a high standard
as illustrators, and one can only tell them the same
story, i.e., that they must do commercial work or try
to get some other occupation. Children’s books, written
and illustrated by Australians, which cannot compete at
present with the cheaply produced works from abroad,
calendars, prints, booklets, etc., could all be carried out
excellently by Australians.
“There would be no fear of well produced books in
‘Australia falling below the standard of high-class books
from abroad. Numerous letters have been received from
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


most competent artists, writers and public men abroad
stating that the books and productions issued by Art in
Australia Ltd., and some other firms are equal to the
b;st works abroad.
“Writers, artists, blockmakers and printers would, no
doubt, all have better opportunities for work under
adequate protection, and the important industry of
printing in Australia would certainly progress enor-
mously.
“Local publishers would be in a better position to
encourage the work of local writers and artists, and a
great deal of the books now imported would undoubtedly
be produced in Australia, and certainly would help to
provide work for a large number of people.”
(Signed) SYDNEY URE SMITH.
Left Over and Back Date Periodicals and Books.
This item constitutes a very serious menace to the
trade in Australia. Various concerns in both England
and America deal in left overs, buying at job rates
from publishers, and in turn jobbing out to the trade
in Australia, and presumably elsewhere. The price
at which these are sold is definitely injurious.
Periodicals priced at from 6d. to 1/ being sold at three
and four and more for 1/, killing the sale, more or less,
of the current publications.
This applies, too, in a large measure to books, these
remainders being bought so cheaply as to badly undercut
tho ordinary trade.
There is also the trade in what is called “cheaps,” or
libraries, that is, books or fiction sold at a low price.
To-day, a big line is on sale at various houses at li d.
per copy, books that are sewn and stiff covered, and in
Melbourne they can be bought at 4id., or three for 1/.
These lines were never produced at anything like the
price, and do immeasurable damage to legitimate busi-
ness.
Secondhand Publications.
There is a further very serious aspect of this trade
for Australia. It is estimated that one American
exporter to this country of back date periodicals is
sending upwards of 100,000 copies per month to Aus-
tralia, and the main source of his supplies is the hotel
porter, apartment janitors, railway porters, and others
of like ilk, who collect from various sources after more
or less use has been made of the publication. In other
words, 100,000 periodicals per month come to Australia
that ought to go to the garbage tip, and could be
full of any disease under the sun.
Our figures have been arrived at after consultation
with Messrs. Gordon and Gotch Ltd., and they are sure
100,000 per month is not an exaggeration.
We present herewith copy of circular issued in Mel-
bourne by W. M. Kavanagh, indentor and importer,
who deals in left-overs, remainders and secondhand
books, periodicals, etc. With this circular is a price-
list of the publications in question.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—ln regard to this catalogue of
Kavanagh, were the new copies originally exported to
Australia and sold when they arrived?—l cannot say that.
Q. —You do not know that?—l cannot say reasonably;
some of them would be; I am sure some of them
were. The English catalogue shows a good number that
I recognise.
We also attach catalogues of new book remainders,
cloth and paper bound novels, toy books, miscellaneous,
fiction, music, picture postcards, etc., by C. A. Ransom
and Co., 28 Paternoster row, London.
From an examination of these catalogues, the lines
quoted showing standard retail prices, with the cut
wholesale rates of these jobbing merchants, it will be
seen how extensive is the range of competition covered
by this class of trade.
Our Combined Printing and Allied Trades’ Tariff
Committee have given long and earnest consideration to
the tariff protection necessary to enable Australia tb
do the work involved in large importations of printed
matter involving no serious obstacles to the local manu-
facturer on an economic basis.
From the large and varied importations involved, it
serves no good purpose to pick out some isolated case
presenting special peculiarities in order to disparage
the case for local production.
The local distributors of imported matter, no doubt,
make good profits out of imports, and there would also
be, no doubt, some little business disturbance in switch-
ing over from overseas to locally-produced lines, but
this is unavoidable.
But, while the importers are opposing local manufac-
ture, the suggestion of tariff protection is influencing
overseas producers who are now and have been for
some time diligently exploring the possibilities of ar-
ranging by the sale of rights, royalties, and even local
printing, to transfer their productions to Australian
factories. That is now proceeding.
Wo ask for the adequate tariff protection we propose,
and if further exemptions than those we suggest should
be considered desirable we think an Industry Board
should be constituted, representing exclusively Austra-
lian manufacturing interests, both employers and em-
ployees, to advise the Minister, after an examination of
applications for exemption on their merits.
What we mean is this, that if a Board is constituted
to represent the manufacturing interests it ought to be
seen that the representation is effective, that is, repre-
sentative of factories and not of firms who are part
factories and part importers, so that there would be no
doubt the manufacturing interests would be represented
on a Board of that kind. So that we ask that the
employees and manufacturers should be representative
of bona-fide manufacturing concerns. I might say
that I am at a disadvantage, as my brother, who has
taken a very large and active part in this matter, had
arranged to go to London, and had to go before this
Board sat; also a very important witness, who knows
the whole business from A to Z, unfortunately is pre-
vented from coming along owing to something that has
occurred in the business, although he was with us up to
the end of last year in our deputations to the Minister,
Something in connection with the business has stopped
him taking any further action in regard to getting
protection for the local industry. I am, therefore,
deprived of his assistance in presenting the case in
regard to books with which he is very familiar.
By the Chairman.—ls he likely to be appearing on the
centra side ?—I do not think so.
Q. —On the practicability of the administration of these
items, have you any knowledge as to whether similar
wordings appear in other tariffs? —No.
Q. —We might deal with the items seriatim. Take the
first item, “Fashion plates and books, including the weight
and value of containers.” Is it usual for those lines to
be invoiced by weight or by numbers?—By numbers.
Q. —You think there would be no great difficulty in
having the invoice price showing the numbers. Where-
as there certainly would be no difficulty in weighing them
here, if the goods had all to be opened up entirely it may
present difficulties, that is to say, if every shipment had
to be opened up?—Of course, our object is to get effective
protection. It may be some very high qualities of paper
weigh very light, and you may get two or three colours
on a very light paper. It may be in some cases if you
tax them by numbers that they would escape. What we
want to provide for is that, if they escape one way, they
will be caught the other way.
Q. —Taking that publication that we looked at, “Wel-
don’s Home Journal,” have you any idea of its weight?
Mr. Berchdolt.—The weight varies.
The Witness.—That would be something over one pound.
By the Chairman.—Do you know how many colours
there are in it?—There are at least three. We are only
concerned with a duty which is only high enough to keep
them out. A duty that only makes them pay and produce
revenue and still allows them to come in does not appeal
to us at all.
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


By Mi\ Berchdolt.—You want an embargo, in fact?—
Yes.
Q. —Tho duties are designed to be absolutely prohibi-
tive? —Yes.
By the Chairman.—What would this “Ladies’ Home
Journal” sell at in Australia. I notice it is priced at 10
cents in America?—l paid 6d. for that copy; I think it is
9d. on the stalls; there may be a variation in price; I do
not know.
Q. —The duty on that would be 1/6 if it paid the fixed
rate under your proposal ?—Yes.
Q. —You admit the duties are meant to be prohibitive?
—-Yes. You might pick up one case where that would
occur, and there might be other cases where it would not
occur.
Q. —From that point of view, if your suggestions were
adopted the difficulties of the Customs Department would
bo minimised because the imports would be very materially
reduced?—Yes. There is another point I want to mention,
that is, the advertising in those publications. There is
advertising in those journals, and the bulk of the lines
advertised in “Weldon’s Journal” are lines that are
suitable to Australian purposes; therefore, “Weldon’s
Journal” is a competitor with Australian publications as
an advertising medium for the sale of all sorts of products.
Q. —That would not apply with a lot of magazines; they
would contain advertisements for the country where they
are printed?—Yes. But it applies to a lot of American
journals that are sold in Australia; they appeal to women,
the advertisements.
Q. —Coming to your next item, “Books and/or publica-
tions not carrying advertising matter.” Then there will
be the other side, “Books and/or publications carrying
advertising matter.” To what extent do you mean your
phrase, “carrying advertising matter,” to govern. For
instance, in that book you produced to us there is a list
of other books, that is obviously advertising, and in very
many publications there are similar lists of books by the
same author, or by the same publisher?—There is a whole
range of books listed on the back of that cover.
Q. —Would you class that as advertising matter for
the purposes of your item 339?—Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—Then it would apply to every book?—ln
that case they would send the book quite separately from
the cover, no doubt.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Supposing they printed an adver-
tisement on the back page of the book, as is very often
done, what would you call that, an advertisement?—We
do not look upon these books as carrying advertising
matter in the ordinary sense.
Q. —But the question is whether the customs would
do so?—Yes.
By tho Chairman.—-Are you willing to say, for the pur-
pose of defining your items, advertising in a novel of
other novels is not an advertisement?—Yes, we were
thinking of other products—general products.
Q. —In the matter of books or publications in your next
item, “Books on the application of science to industry,”
would you not anticipate any difficulty in the description
and identification of those books ? I take it, to some
extent, that those exemptions have been drawn up with
a view of relieving the opposition?—Yes. I might say
that that definition was drawn up by the N.S.W. Master
Printers’ Association, and our Tariff Committee had some
definition to cover cases of the kind, which was more
general than this, but the Committee thought it better to
adopt the phrasing that the master printers had adopted.
Q. —On the look of it, it does not seem to present very
great difficulties, and I think the same may be said of the
next item, dealing with the deaf, dumb, and blind, and
probably the next item, that is, “books printed by any
Government or association.” Then, take the next item,
“books not printed or reprinted in Australia which are
included and used as textbooks.” I suppose, in putting
that up, you were perfectly aware that would mean
discrimination in the same book imported for one purpose
and imported for another purpose, that is to say, that
the book set in the universities and colleges include ordi-
nary novels very frequently and ordinary classics?—We
do recognise there is very great difficulty in administering
that, but, on the other hand, when such reprints are
Australian production by educational authorities we say
something must be done to give them encouragement and
protection, and to give the craftsmen producing them some
protection also. There are some cases where oversea
textbooks have been previously in use, and in general use,
whilst on the other hand I produce some samples to you
to-day of an Australian book produced 'in Australia, then
it is challenged by an overseas article, and has to go
before the educational authorities. We do not want to
cut across that in the ordinary course. If it is necessary
for educational purposes, we do not want to do anything
to harm or interfere with it, but when it gets to the
point of being an Australian-produced book we think
something should be done.
Q. —You think the admission under regulation prescribed
by the Minister would cover those particular cases?—Yes.
By the Chairman.—lt would not cover the inherent
difficulty of administration, inasmuch as any bookseller
you like to name could order a thousand copies of a book
and might sell a hundred of them for this purpose and
900 for other purposes?—We cannot think of that in the
case of textbooks.
Q. —No, but there is a tremendous number of books
which are not textbooks. I should say that probably
50 books of fiction a year are set by the University?—We
have put down here, “and used as textbooks.”
By Mr. Guy.—They must be imported for that purpose ?
—Yes.
The Chairman.—The point is whether you can follow
the goods after they are released from the customs, or
any other goods, generally speaking. The Customs De-
partment admit that printing paper, which is a line you
know, particularly ordinary news printing paper, can be
sold for butchers’ wrapping or for any other purpose once
it has been cleared through the customs. That illustrates,
perhaps, immediately what I mean in regard to books
which would be imported in large numbers or in compara-
tively small numbers for a particular purpose?—We are
not proposing to give any special exemption if a book is
in current use, and is a popularly read book; those books
would be dutiable under our proposal in regard to fiction.
Q. —Then you are not giving anything away to educa-
tional cheapness or the desire for educational cheapness ?
—We are in essential things, but if you say it is a novel
which is to be used for some educational purpose, just
sp'asmodically, in the same way as an article in the
Sydney “Morning Herald” would be used, I do not think
it should be included.
Q. —Probably we will learn more of that from the
opposition. The next item is “books of all kinds which
have been printed or reprinted in Australia and th. :n
printed abroad.” Would it be evident on the face of the
goods that that book was printed or reprinted in Aus-
tralia? The omission of that would be comparatively
simple?—Yes, but we should have a direction that it
should be stated on the book. At the present moment
printed matter that comes in must bear the name of the
country of origin, where it is printed, on it. I should r.iy
there should be a regulation that it should say that it
had been previously printed in Australia.
Q. —I should say, if you had 90 per cent, of honest book
importers, there would be a terrible temptation for some-
one to evade the duty ?—Perhaps so.
Q. —To the serious detriment of the honest importer
and the customs?—Yes, but there are people watching out
for those evasions to bring them into notice. They try
to do it with periodicals, but they are held up and very
often the periodicals are sent to some local printer to
have the printer print on them, “Printed in Germany”
or elsewhere before they are released.
Q. —Those policing the business in their own interests,
looking for those evasions, if they found them, do you
think it would be possible to trace the materials back to
the importer?—l think so.
Q. —If it amounted to this, of you had to open evc:y
shipment which arrived and check it, check each book io
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


see which had been printed or reprinted in Australia, then
I foresee tremendous difficulty?—We are in exactly the
same position now under the regulations as to printed
matter coming in. It must bear on the face of it where
it has been printed; plenty of them try to evade that.
Q. —That is a different matter. I mean the effects of
evasion of that are so different from the effects of the
evasion of your proposal, they are so different as to make
an inducement or an enticement to evade the law. The
enticement would be much less at present than if there
were a 50 per cent, duty to bo paid. If there were, I
should think there would be quite a reasonable enticement
to some people to merge 25 per cent, of those books in
with 75 per cent, other books and make detection almost
impossible?—lf you had educational books which had once
been printed in Australia, and then it was found they
could be more cheaply printed somewhere else and they
were sent overseas to be reprinted, we say that the duty
ought to be put on them.
Q. —We can look into that matter.—We do not think
there would be very great difficulty in the administration
of it.
Q. —Would you tell us the reason of your extreme
severity on the legal profession. You want a duty of 45,
55 and 65 per cent, on legal books and books dealing with
Australian Commonwealth or State laws. You propose
30, 40 and 50 per cent, on other books. The reason for
books dealing with Commonwealth or State laws is
obvious, but why the higher rates on the other legal
books?—l cannot tell you. We went along as a Commit-
tee, dealing with these items, and there was a conflict
of opinion on various things, and after fighting the matter
out, then some of us would say, this ought to go down
under so and so, and it went down that way. So long
as we think the duty is high enough to give effective
protection we are not concerned about anything below
that.
Q. —Taking it now from the point of view of setting up
and binding, and producing generally, is there any reason
why they should be differentiated as against other books ?
—No, I do not think so.
Q. —Take the next item, “magazines and periodicals
carrying advertising.” Have you ever met a magazine
or periodical that did not carry advertising?—Yes, I have,
but not many. I think “The Round Table,” to the best
of my belief, does not carry advertising.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—There are a few that do not?—Yes.
By the Chairman. —You do not mean to make any ex-
ception with regard to that advertising characteristic if
the Advertisements are clearly not primarily intended for
Australian use?—No, because we believe in the English
spe'hking magazines that the products advertised are
to a large extent in universal use in the English speaking
countries.
Q; —If those magazines do not carry advertising, where
would they come in in your group?—They would come in
under the first item of 339.
Q. —What would be the average weight of the magazine
covered by this item?—lt would be impossible to get the
average weight, the variation is so great.
Q. —Do you admit that you have put the rate so high as
to be intentionally prohibitive?—Yes, we think this work
can be done in Australia.
Q. —I might mention, as regards the next item, “printed
matter of any kind enclosed in cases of imported merchan-
dise, etc.,” to be subject to a fine of £SOO and the printed
matter to be destroyed, I do not think that is a matter
connected with the fiscal issue; that, is a matter of
penalties for documents not invoiced. I think that is
rather outside the scope of the inquiry. I think, as a
matter of fact, in extraordinary instances that forfeiture
is now insisted upon, but I have no doubt at all that if
considerably high duties are placed upon publications the
Customs Department will take steps under the ordinary
law to provide against invasions of that sort. I do not
think it can be dealt with in this inquiry; that is my view.
Mr. Berchdolt.—You might eliminate that paragraph?
—Yes, probably; I think it would come in better with the
catalogues.
By the Chairman.—ln regard to the “remainders,” and
“back date books,” is there any possible way of identify-
ing those who are hurt by the importation?—l do not
think so, unless the importers were compelled to produce
a declaration as to his costs.
Q. —I think that is a very important feature in connec-
tion with the proposals for duty, that is, to see if they
are practicable and workable. It does not matter how
justifiable the intention or how reasonable the aim may
be, if a thing will not work in practice it is scarcely worth
putting it into operation ?—There must be some means of
dealing with the swamping of Australia with secondhand
stuff.
Q. —Secondhand, I think, is different from the re-
mainders and back-date books. They are new goods, I
take it? —They are left-overs.
Q. —They are new goods and not subject to the same
objections as secondhands?—No.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—They are simply sold cheaper?—
Yes, but why is it possible to make a dumping ground of
Australia of a large amount of this matter?
Q. —Are the rates of duty you suggest not high enough
to block these without doubling the ordinary rates?—l
do not know, but we want the principle adopted.
Q. —You would suggest in that connection that every
importer declare with his entry that the invoice covered
no goods which were remainders or back-date books?—
Yes, or that they are remainders and back-date books.
You do not know what price they will be put in at.
By Mr. Kelly.—That means a man could not get a repeat
order for anything without paying double?—l do not
think that would be so.
Q. —A repeat order would be a back date ?—lt would
not be a back date, if it was in current sale.
Q. —What is current sale—That is, if it is a new edition.
Q. —It would be a back date, even if it were a new
edition. A new edition may be quite a number of years
back?—lt is quite easy to locate a book, but the periodicals
it is not so easy to cover.
By the Chairman. —It is comparatively simple to iden-
tify a periodical, but impossible with books?—lt looks
more difficult with books.
Q. —Then we come to your next item, secondhand books,
periodicals, and newspapers for sale, be prohibited on the
grounds affecting printers and publishers and additionally
for reasons of health.” Have any representations been
made up to the present to the Health Department?—l
saw the Minister for Health about it when we had our
last deputation to Canberra, and he did not see how he
could take action under the Health Act, and thought ft
was a matter for the Customs Department. He agreed
he ought to act, but he did not see how he could act under
the Act, unless it could be proved that they were disease
carriers.
Q. —I do not want to traverse the opinion of the Hon.
the Minister, but I would say this, that the procedure is
for the Health Department to say what should be done,
and for the Customs to act as agent for the Health
Department in doing it. It is certainly not a matter
for the Customs Department to say whether a thing is
healthy or unhealthy. The Health Department has no
organisation to block these things at the wharf, but the
Customs would be acting under their instructions, and
would hold them up for inspection?—We think there
should be something to stop it.
Q. —-You assume they are unhealthy, and it would be
difficult to prove actual disease or to trace actual disease
to any such importation?—We want to stop it for eco-
nomic reasons, mainly.
Q. —I would like to get your views on another phase,
assuming for the moment that these duties were actually
put into operation, what do you consider would be the
procedure, firstly, in regard to these fashion plates, of
which large numbers are now printed elsewhere, and have
a market in all the Australian States, cities and towns.
Would they continue to publish in Australia, or would
they absolutely die out as regards Australian circulation ?
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


—I think some of them would set up factories in Aus-
tralia.
By Mr. Berchdolt. —Such as McCall’s, Butterick’s, and
those people?—l do not think McCall’s and Butterick’s
would, but I think in regard to that they would have an
arrangement with Australian firms for handling their
Australian business. I am speaking now with some
knowledge of what is going on.
Q. —Weldon’s are all right; they are printing them
here?—No, they are making patterns here, but the
printing is done in England, and probably, with more
assured sales, Weldon’s would arrange for the printing of
their books here.
By the Chairman.—There would be more urge for them
to become more wholly Australian than other, perhaps?—
No doubt they are developing along those lines; if their
pattern books do develop in Australia they would start
with their publications more absolutely designed to serve
the Australian trade.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Supposing these patterns were made
in Australia, on account of the duty, what would be the
price to the consumer?—The Australian patterns can be
sold in competition on the prices now.
Q. —It would not affect patterns?—No.
Q. —It would only affect the magazines?—Yes, provided
there is such a deluge of sales matter it affects the price.
Q. —The pattern is more important than the press
matter?—lt saturates the public mind with the idea of
this other product.
By the Chairman. —Do you think there would be any
serious reduction in the number of those in circulation if
this duty went on other than in books ?—There may be
immediately, but we were in the same position during the
war. There were seven or eight months at a time when
nothing came overseas at all, and some Australian
publications got a bit of a chance then.
Q. —It looks like this, whether or not our women are
up-to-date in fashions or not, do you think it will result
in the women folk in Australia being limited in their
selection?—No.
Q. —Neither in patterns nor in catalogues?—No. In
that catalogue of ours you can take Butterick’s and
McCall’s, and you will find whatever you require.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—The point is that all these patterns
start from Paris?—Yes.
By the Chairman.—Do you get them as promptly as
they do in England?—Yes.
Q. —There should be no reason why you should not get
them more promptly?—We are in the market looking for
them.
Q. —What happens now, from what origin do your
publications spring?—From the Parisian models.
Q. —From the garment itself? —From pictures.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—ln the Paris magazines?—Yes. We
do not care what duty is put on, if we have to pay £5
for a thing we would pay it. These things which are
catalogued or in use by the manufacturers are being
used in some form or other; the price of them is not
material; the thing that is material is the widespread
sale of the matter.
By Mr. Kelly.—You hold your selection of these ma-
terials ought to be as satisfactory as those of anybody
else ?—Yes, and we have proved it.
Q. —It is a question of taste, of course?—We have
proved it; the American service has been thrown out of
Sydney Snow’s, and our service installed; it has been
going for two years. So with other -leading stores
throughout the Commonwealth; they have been investigat-
ing our pattern service, and the service has been found to
be satisfactory.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You do not anticipate if a duty was
put on you would have a monopoly in this sort of thing?
—No, there are a number of other pattern factories
making patterns, but not only that, the Technical College
is turning out girls to do this work; they take their educa-
tion diplomas and they are ready to do this class of work
and are fit to do it as well as anybody else in the world.
Q. —You expect competition?—Yes, there is competi-
tion; we expect it, and we say, let these other people come
here and face the music, as we do, and carry the same
handicaps and pay the same as we do for the same
material.
By the Chairman.—As to books, ordinary books, novels
and the like, and other classes of books, would you tell
us what you expect would happen in that respect. I
would like to comment at the outset you propose an ad
val. duty on them, and persumably the value of the books
is in the matter which is in the book, that has sprung
from tho author’s brains. Obviously, the same book
cannot be produced in two places at the same time, and
you are taxing the matter that is in the book at the same
time as you are taxing the setting up of the job, the
purchasing of the paper, and the printing of the book?—
Here is an illustration with reference to this book, “The
Little Dark Man.” That book was published here in
Australia before it was published overseas. The rights
were acquired for it in Australia, and the book was
produced and sold here at a less price than overseas.
By the Chairman.—l suppose you will admit that in
authorship there is a comparatively small number of
authors in Australia, as compared with the world’s
authors ?—Yes.
Q. —What would happen in regard to an author who
brings out a book in England or in America, and there
publishes his book for dissemination in that market and
any other markets where he can sell it. Just exactly
what would happen?—The books are published by pub-
lishers. They are very seldom issued by the authors
themselves.
Q. —I did not mean by the author; I meant by a pub-
lisher, by arrangement?—The publisher would very soon
have the firms in Australia with which he would be co-
operating, and the rights would automatically come out
for the printing of those books. They would be sold on
royalties. In the United States there is no copyright;
if a book is copyrighted overseas, and the owner of
that copyright does not go to America and print it,
anybody in America can print it.
Q. —They are well over twenty times our population?—
That is so, but we have got to make a start, and we are
a larger population here than some of the Continental
countries.
By Mr. Kelly.—Yes, but we are allied to a tongue that
is universal?—Yes.
Q. —Their market is limited to their tongue?—Yes, but
they have got to do this class of work for themselves all
the same.
Q. —Because nobody else would do it for them?—Yes,
but that does not prevent them from having good litera-
ture, and we will never have any literature unless, we
give encouragement to our writers and authors.
By the Chairman.—A book of this kind is set up in type
on linotype or cast in a matrix, or some other method?—
Linotype.
Q. —And printed. Would you suggest that for Aus-
tralian circulation it would pay to reset that book entirely
in Australia?—Yes.
Q. —That it could be reasonably done and still sold at
a price equivalent to the price at which it is now sold ?
Yes.
Q. —You would not go so far as to permit a matrix of
that being imported from which to cast a type ?—ln some
cases they would have to pay the duty that was applicable
to the matrix, which is very heavy. Ido not think it
would pay them to do it.
Q. —It might pay the printing trade ?—Setting of a book
like that is not a material thing at all. It is on linotype.
Q. —It is not material, considering the value of the
output derived from it? —No, of the price.
Q. —And, therefore, you do advocate that a book should
be entirely reset for the Australian edition?—-Yes. Of
course, you will be told of instances where there is a
very small sale, but if a book has got such a small sale
as to be almost unworthy of notice by the public, nobody
is going to be done any harm if that book does not get
to them.
SYDNEY—James Howard Catts


By' Mr. Berchdolt.—lt will be rough on the author?—
Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt would be rougher on the public?—lf
it is a book of so little merit that it has so little sale it
cannot be doing anybody much harm.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You cannot always judge merits
by sale, can you?—No.
By the Chairman.—Might it not be that books of great
merit have very little attraction for the public?—That
may be. I know perfectly well it is a very difficult subject
to handle, and I am at a great disadvantage, as the man
who is an expert at dealing with the books is not able to
be here to deal with that aspect of it.
Q. —As to magazines and periodicals, would you say
the same in regard to them, that the whole publication
would be reset and the Australian issue published in
Australia?—Yes, or something else would take their
place in Australia.
Q. —There are quite a number of publications already
circulating rather largely', I should say, in Australia, which
come in particularly for fine art work in their advertise-
ments, and, further than that, in the literary part of a
magazine. It seems to mo as if, pehaps, some considera-
tion might be due there, in so much as very often those
advertisements have no particular application at all in
the Australian market. I suppose your answer to that
would be that they could exclude them from the Austra-
lian issue?—No, we are not opposed to giving them some
consideration, if we can find out how to do it without
breaking down what we want to accomplish. We do not
know how to separate these things in order to do that.
The main point we are after is the thing of popular-sale
at popular prices.
By Mr. Guy.—You would stop that magazine, the “Home
Journal”?—Yes. If I had been able to do so, I would
have brought you something as good as that, produced
in Australia, but I have been very rushed to-day.
Q. —What about the “Saturday Evening Post”? Would
you prohibit that also?—I say- the “Saturday' Evening
Post” should not be selling in competition in Australia at
the prices it is selling at. It should be an expensive
production. It is impossible to produce anything like
that in Australia at that price.
Q. —What about these other magazines, the “Scientific
American,” for instance. Would you prohibit that?—l
think that would come under the heading of the applica-
tion of science to industry.
Q. —But that has advertisements. Then there is the
“American Machinist”?—We are not making any differ-
ence between them if they have advertisements. We say
nothing against them if they have advertisements, if they
arc scientific. That would come under “books and/or
publications, viz., books on the application of science to
industries of all kinds.” We are not taking any exception
to them carrying advertisements.
Q. —So that, in regard to the “American Machinist,” the
“Scientific American,” “Cassell’s Magazine,” and the likes
of those which contain scientific works, you would bring
those all under free, free, free?—Yes.
Q. —And yet the “Saturday Evening Post,” which has
articles similar to these other papers, you would exclude
altogether?—lt is largely a fiction magazine, and a lot
of big magazines like that have little bits of different
things, but you have to draw the line somewhere. You
cannot give protection to Australian short story writers,
for instance, and not give it in the same breath. It is a
complicated question, I admit.
By the Chairman. —You would not be giving the pro-
tection to Australian short story writers if these duties
merely meant the transference of the publications here.
Some of these organisations, without coming out here
themselves, might probably produce almost at cheaply as
they do abroad?—ln that case we would give the work
to Australian artisans and craftsmen.
Q. —There is certainly that advantage. To what extent
do you think the proposals now made would warp the
Australian mind in the matter of limiting its literature?—
I do not think it would affect anything worth while coming
to the Australian public. I think the question of rights
would come in.
By Mr. Kelly.—Do you think the serious British
periodicals would come in?—Yes, I think we could get
Australian rights for publishing them in Australia.
Q- —-Never. You could not get numbers sufficient to
make it popular?—There may be isolated cases, but, as I
say, with the deluge of stuff that you have got you cannot
legislate for these special cases.
Q. —I doubt whether anybody could suggest any one
British publication of the serious nature, such as the
“Quarterly,” the monthlies, and the weeklies for that
matter, the “Spectator,” and so forth; publications such
as those could not find a market to justify them being
printed here. It would mean the entire exclusion, or the
price would be practically prohibitive? —You could get
rights for publishing the articles in them. You probably
could combine two or three of them in one publication in
Australia.
Q. —I do not think they sell their rights?—l mean
leaving out the overseas advertisements. At any rate,
we have not been able to draft clauses to make the
differentiation, and, if that could be done, we should have
no objection in those cases.
Q. —As regards the cheap weekly and monthly
periodicals, I do not think many people would care to do
much advocacy for them?—Oh, yes, they will. They
will fight very hard for them, because there is big money
in them.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—lt represents quite a different point
of view from the other, but if you are cutting one off to
stop the other, it makes your case very difficult?—Well,
if we could separate such as you mention we would have
no objection to that, but when we tried to do it we found
that we were laying down definitions that let other stuff
in which we wanted to exclude.
By Mr. Guy.—How many comic papers do you antici-
pate you will have to take the place of those overseas?
How many would you have in Australia?—l suppose you
would easily have half a dozen.
Q. —At the present time?—You would produce half a
dozen local papers to take the place of the overseas.
Q. —And would there be sufficient demand for artists and
everybody else connected with half a dozen different
papers?—Yes, there is an enormous sale of that kind of
stuff.
Q. —Do you think the kiddies are going to be satisfied
with half a dozen different papers?—Yes, I do.
Q. —I doubt it?—l have four young children of my
own and I watch what they do about those things. They
are just as anxious to get the “Sun” every Sunday to see
the comics as they are to get any of the other comics.
Q. —I think they are keener on “Puck” and “Rainbow”
than they are on those?—ln that regard I can tell you
that the probabilities are that one of the first Australian
arrangements made for publication would be some of those
overseas comics, which have very large sales in Australia.
By the Chairman.—Yes, where there is very big circula-
tion; I do not see the same difficulty. The small circulation
stuff and the quality is the trouble?—We could come to an
arrangement. We could say, “Here is a tariff that
attacks us.” Let us sit down and we will very soon find
a working arrangement to enable us to produce that
article and still hold the trade that has been built up on it.
Q. —Your argument is that a firm which is holding a
good trade at the present moment will not lightly lose
it? —They will either come here and turn it out, or arrange
with somebody .else to do it.
Q. —Yes, wherever there is a fair-sized demand that
argument may hold good.
By Mr. Kelly.—ln reference to the amount of manufac-
ture that would be produced in Australia if printing in
the allied trades were all reserved for the Australian
market, it seems that your figure is somewhat hopeful, is
it not?—Well, it looks hopeful.
Q. —I am not quite sure whether it is £5,000,000 or
£6,000,000? —£6,000,000, it is supposed to be; that refers
to all paper products.
Q. —Of course, we are really dealing with the question
SYDNEY—James Howard Calls


of production of books and papers here, and the importa-
tion of all and sundry is £1,300,000? —Yes. Of course, we
were preparing our case along different lines when we
got notice of this inquiry. We were grouping our case
differently from what it is being dealt with now.
Q. —Still you count paper and all together in that
£0,000,000? —All paper products.
Q. —-You gave some excellent illustrations of textbooks
printed in Australia. You have indicated on page 4 the
disabilities of publishing in Australia, but they are not
insurmountable difficulties on something for which there
is a market. You have illustrated that excellently, I
think, by the success of your local publications, to suit
local curricula. They being of a local nature, there is
no competition from other parts of the world?—There is
competition.
Q. —Yes, there is in some types, but in others there is
not?—ln every case those have had to oust the imported
articles.
The Chairman.—Then Mr. Kelly’s question is all the
more forceful if they have ousted
By Mr. Kelly.—They have ousted an article to which the
market is limited to Australian reading. You can publish
in Australia relatively successfully any publication which
is limited to Australian reading, but you get into inherent
difficulties when you are competing against something the
limit of which is the reading of the British tongue; people
all over the Empire?—No, the overwhelming majority of
this class of stuff is imported now, and it is of the utmost
difficulty for a local industry to get on its feet at all in
producing this class of matter against the open competi-
tion.
Q. —It is quite possible that what is imported now is
part of the curriculum overseas, as well as here, and,
therefore, it is not limited to the Australian reading
public; but where it is essentially limited to the Australian
schools, then I take it the illustrations you have given
illustrate a natural advantage, and we are not at such
a great disadvantage. We stand at a great disadvantage
when we are producing a book limited to the Australian
market as against others who are supplying for the world’s
or the English-speaking market?—What is being done in
these cases is this. There is an adaptation of these text-
books to meet the requirements of the Educational Depart-
ment. They vary from what has been in use previously,
but it is now found that they are either an improvement
on or equal to what, as you say, had been in use in other
parts of the world simultaneously, and it is now found
that something peculiarly Australian can take its place,
but it is a very uphill fight.
Q. —But what is peculiarly Australian is the kind of
literature that offers the best opportunity for the Aus-
tralian publisher successfully to put out?—Yes, they
certainly want some strong encouragement in regard to
educational books. There is quite a large enough demand
in Australia for educational books to warrant their publi-
cation in Australia, and yet’ the overwhelming majority
of that stuff is still printed abroad.
By the Chairman.—And even if it is a book entirely
originated abroad and adapted for Australian use, you
think the Australian edition would be numerous enough
to warrant its reproduction in Australia?.—-Yes, in use in
the schools.
By Mr. Kelly.—l notice in your suggested exemptions
that they are mostly exemptions of books of the scientific
or technical nature. You must have sought to exempt
books of a high literary quality, geographical, historical
and philosophical books?—Yes.
Q- —You must have realised it would be impossible to
print those here?—Yes, the only thing we could think of
was a Committee representative of the industry, which
might be able to advise the Minister on such cases. Of
course, we do not want to be foolish about the thing and
take up a silly attitude.
Q- —Of course, it is not included in your exemptions in
any way?—No, it is not.
Q —That is the most essential and fundamental need of
Australia, to get access to the best literature printed in
the tongue?—ln that case the public sale is comparatively
small; the consumption is comparatively small.
Q. —May be in numbers?—Yes.
Q. —In value?—Yes, in value, no doubt, it is high, and,
as we were unable to frame a definition that would draw
the line and allow those things in and shut others out, we
then suggested a drag net proposal of a Committee repre-
sentative of the interests concerned to deal with cases
of that kind and to let them be dealt with on their merits.
Q. —Their (ask would be more onerous than that of the
censor of films ?—These things have got to be tackled.
Australia has got to learn to produce its own goods, and
wo have got to find some way. Because it is difficult, that
is no reason why we should dodge it. We have to find
some way of dealing with the proidem, and, if there were
a Committee representative of the various interests
concerned, they would find that, in dealing with some
cases, they would be so simple that they would then go
on to a list at once, and when they came to those on the
border line I have no doubt that a good working arrange-
ment would be evolved very quickly. It must be remem-
bered that for many years this matter has not been
subject to regulation, and when you have to make a start
there is some difficulty in providing the formula which
would do justice to Australian manufacturing and at the
same time not make a hindrance in the introduction of
literature which should come into Australia.
Mr. Kelly.—Yes, I appreciate that difficulty.
By the Chairman.—What is in your mind in connection
with that Committee? Would importers or intending
importers make application, listing the books, and the
Committee deal with them, or would the Committee deal
with the books after importation?—No. I should say, if
there were a Committee of that kind immediately, there
might be some notice given in cases of the amount of
duty to be imposed, and that would be referred to the
Committee. I have no doubt that in a great bulk of the
cases there would not be any dispute at all about them.
It would be a matter of form. Then, when you got on to
those which are on the borderline, you would have to try
to find some formula. It could very easily be ascertained
whether a thing could be economically produced in Aus-
tralia.
Q. —How often would that Committee meet, for
example?—We have not gone into that.
Q. —How many divisions might it list in a year?—We
do not know. We have not gone into that.
Q. —Might they run into hundreds ?—No, I do not think
so; no, it would be a comparatively small number.
Q. —I am afraid they would run into hundreds?—As far
as we can ascertain, there are 200 periodicals now im-
ported into Australia. I should say the cases that would
be cleared for exemption would not amount to more than
25.
Q. —The periodicals, of course, would be comparatively
simple compared with literature. I was not worrying
much about the periodicals ?—That is what I thought was
being spoken of.
By Mr. Kelly.—No, I was meaning literature; I was
meaning the book publications?—l did not notice you
transferring from periodicals to books.
By the Chairman.—Although there is a number of
periodicals, they could be dealt with fairly reasonably.
What is worrying me is the large number of books with
limited circulation, already high-priced, which would be
tremendously increased in price, with no added advantage
to Australian industry?—We certainly do not want to do
that. We do not want to increase the price of an article
for no purpose.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—l have been trying to find out under
which of these sections by-laws would be included. Could
you tell me?—l think they would come under I think
there is a section there dealing with religious.
Q.—-Will you just have a look?—I should think there
is consumption enough in Australia anyhow to publish
Bibles in Australia.
Q. —That is not an answer. I would like you to tell
me which of those eight sections they would come under-
SYDNEY-—James Howard Catts


—I do not think they are provided in the exemptions.
I do not think they are specifically provided for.
(The witness withdrew.)
The Chairman. —Is there anyone else present who de-
sires to tender evidence in favour of the proposed duties?
(No response.) Is there anyone present who desires to
tender evidence in opposition?
HENRY ARTHUR SINCLAIR.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
I am Secretary of the N.S.W. Master Printers and Con-
nected Trades’ Association, and, representing the Master
Printers and Allied Trades’ Federation of Australia, with
the authority of their Executive Council, desire to state
that the State Associations of New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tas-
mania, after mature consideration of the respective mem-
bers of each Association, have decided that no advantage
could accrue to the printing industry by levying a duty
on item 339—books, n.e.i., and printed matter n.e.i.—and
it is claimed by the combined Associations that the imposi-
tion of a duty should not be entertained by the Tariff
Board on the following grounds:—
(1) That the imposition of a duty on books would be
a tax on education.
(2) A duty levied would not bring about more em-
ployment in the printing industry, or at most a
negligible quantity.
(3) That the development of the book and magazine
industry, with the present population in Aus-
tralia, is impracticable, owing to an insufficient
market and the consequent high cost of produc-
tisn.
(4) Authors would not submit more manuscript to
Australian publishers, they naturally desiring to
sell their manuscript to publishers that can pay
the higher prices, because of almost unlimited
circulation, whereas any Australian publishing
house has a small and limited public to purchase.
(5) Only a small proportion of imported books is
other than of an educational character.
(6) And that we are not asking for a duty for the
reasons stated.
We would, however, submit for the consideration of the
Tariff Board that a separate item be inserted in the tariff
schedule as follows:
Books of all kinds which have been originally printed
in Australia, then printed abroad, ad val. B.P.T.
30 per cent., I.T. 40 per cent., G.T. 50 per cent.
Item 335—Fashion Plates and Books.—
Not being in receipt of the decisions of the various State
Associations, I do not purpose giving evidence on this
item, but Mr. Rundle, the Secretary of the Federation,
will deal with this item when the Tariff Board meets in
Melbourne on the 16th inst., giving the considered de-
cisions on behalf of the Master Printers and Allied Trades’
Associations, embracing the industry in Australia.
If I may be permitted, I would like to state, on behalf
of the N.S.W. Association, that the last witness, Mr.
Catts, made an assertion which is not in accordance with
the truth. He stated that he had had a meeting with the
N.S.W. Master Printers’ Association. That is quite true;
but it was pointed out to him and his Committee that any
suggestions with the Sub-Committee which interviewed
those gentlemen would have to be submitted to the Fede-
ration for their consideration before they were presented
to the Tariff Board, and previously to that the Combined
Tariff Committee approached the Minister, and we publicly
advertised in the Sydney “Morning Herald” that we
dissociated ourselves entirely from that Combined Com-
mittee-—that is, the master printers. We also wrote to
the Minister and told him that they had no authority to
speak on behalf of the members of the printing associa-
tion in Sydney. The Sub-Committee in which Mr. Catts
and the members of his Combined Committee are featured
submitted to the members of our Association the schedule
that it was agreed should be submitted, but it was plainly
pointed out to our members at a special general meeting
that any decision which they arrived at should be sub-
mitted to our Executive, or, rather, the Executive of the
Federation, before they approached the Minister.
In confirmation of my statement, if you wish, I can
turn up the minutes of those meetings. However, we do
want to stress to this Tariff Board that Mr. Catts is
not speaking on behalf of the N.S.W. Master Printers
and the N.S.W. Master Printers are not appearing before
the Tariff Board. We are speaking through our Federa-
tion for the whole of the printers of Australia. Mr.
Rundle will go into those matters with you.
Q. —Could you tell the Board the relations between the
N.S.W. Master Printers and Connected Trades’ Associa-
tion and the Combined Printing and Allied Trades’ Com-
mittee?—No connection whatever.
Q. —Does the organisation, which Mr. Catts is repre-
senting, include master printers; any master printers?—
Probably it may include those who are not members of
our Association, but they are a very small number.
Q. —What proportion of the master printers are mem-
bers of your organisation throughout the Commonwealth,
do you think?—Nearly 70 per cent.
Q. —-What is the difference between a master printer and
a publisher, if I may put it that way?—Well, the publisher
as a rule simply publishes, but he is not a printer; he does
not print.
Then, are the publishers in your organisation?—No,
they are not.
By Mr, Kelly.—But if they get anything published, they
would get it published through your organisation?—No,
they would get it printed through our organisation.
Mr. Kelly.—Yes, I meant that.
By the Chairman.—Then you stand to lose the pub-
lishers’ business, what business you might get through
the publishers, because of your action in making the
representation you do make now? —That possibly may be
so.
Q. —That is, if business was forthcoming. If those
duties forced business it would be your members who
would get a large proportion of it?—Yes.
Q. —And do you reckon your 70 per cent, is in numbers
of printers or in volume of work, or in both?—No, in
volume of work, 90 per cent.
Q. —Then, apart from the workers, do you consider your
organisation is the most affected by this proposition?—
Yes.
Q. —That is, if Mr. Catts’ proposals were beneficial, your
organisation is the one which would stand to benefit by
the proposition more than any other organisation, except-
ing the workers?—lf it went through.
Q. —Yes, if it were beneficial? —If it were beneficial, we
should, yes. I might go further and say that these
propositions regarding the duty, levying a duty on books,
were put to the ballot of the members of my Association,
and by an overwhelming majority they said no, the duties
to remain free. The firms that voted no duties were 2850
and those that were in favour of the duty being levied
were 842.
Q. —That is the number of firms?—No, that is the
number of employees that they engage.
Q. —How many of your members have mixed interests;
that is, Australian printers and handling imported litera-
ture. I mean what proportion of them? —I should say
5 per cent, or 6 per cent., and those members were not
asked to vote, and they did not vote.
Q. —In your statement numbered s—“only a small pro-
portion of imported books are other than of an educational
character” —would you give me a definition of “educa-
tional,” as you use it there. It seems rather broad?—
We claim that fiction is educational. 'Hie frivolous
amount of literature that comes into this country is
small. The fiction may be larger—no doubt it is—but
that fiction is still educational from an educative point of
view.
Q. —Either for good or for bad?—ln cases that may be,
but I think in most cases it is for good.
By Mr. Kelly.—You hold that, if they did not start to
SYDNEY—Henry Arthur Sinclair


read that class of literature they probably would not
read at all?—No, they might not. They would be at the
two-up schools or something.
The Chairman.—l questioned Mr. Catts on the prac-
ticability of that part of his proposal which is very
similar to yours, namely, books of all kinds which have
been originally printed in Australia. Would you consider
leaving out that word “originally”?—No, I think that is
rather important, the word “originally.” That would
mean an author who sold his manuscript to a publisher
here, and the publisher had put it on the market. It
would be unfair to the publisher and the author, too,
because I take it he would get a royalty, that it should
go abroad to be printed and then come in free.
By Mr. Kelly.—Otherwise, if he were originally cut out,
it would stop any classic that had once been printed here
being used. That is why you put “originally” in?—Yes.
That is to say, the publication must first have been printed
in Australia.
By the Chairman.—On the other hand, once the book is
set up, some part of the expense in any case has been
covered and there appears to be less justification for
purchasing a book from abroad after it has been printed
in Australia?—lt might be a second edition printed
abroad, where it would be cheaper.
Q. —That is just the point. If that is so, why not
apply the duty?—We are asking for a duty.
Q. —Yes, but I mean your “originally” would block a
lot of it. However, you wish to retain the word “origi-
nally”?—Yes, we wish to retain that, so as to give the
author and the publisher the benefit of putting it on the
Australian market.
Q. —Would it be practicable to work that item; that is,
you have got to consider that a duty only applies when
goods arrive at a port in Australia?—There would be a
difficulty. We have seen the difficulty and hardly see a
way out of it, but if the Board could not help us out of
that, or the Customs could not help us out of it, we would
waive that.
Q. —How many books would there be on the market at
the present moment that were originally printed in Aus-
tralia?—l think very few indeed.
Q. —Then, in that case, it would be possible for the
Customs to be supplied with a full list of them?—l think
that could be done.
(The witness withdrew.)
The Chairman.—ls there anyone else present who de-
sires to tender evidence?
WILLIAM HERBERT IFOULD.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity do you appear?—
As Principal Librarian of the Public Library of N.S.W.
and also on behalf of the Fisher Library of the University
of Sydney.
I have prepared this statement on behalf of the
Trustees of the Public Library of N.S.W., the Schools of
Arts throughout the State, the Municipal Library of the
City of Sydney, the Parliamentary Library of N.S.W.,
the various Learned Societies and Professional Associa-
tions, such as the Royal Society of N.S.W., the Institute
of Architects, the Institution of Engineers of Australia,
the Linnean Society of N.S.W., the British Medical
Association, and the Incorporated Law Institute of
N.S.W. I have discussed the matter with representa-
tives of all of these bodies, who are all very concerned
about the proposal, not only because of the extra
expense any tariff on books would entail to their various
institutions, but because of the effect on scholars and
students which these institutions represent.
It is felt that a tariff on books would be a tax, more
or less severe, on a comparatively poor class in the
community, for whom books are tools of trade, and the
main means of education; for instance, teachers, re-
searchers, scientists, chemists, engineers, and all
classes of students. Scholars and students in Aus-
tralia are already at a disadvantage as compred with
similar classes in other civilised countries, on account
of the distance of Australia from the centres of know-
ledge and original publication. They are more forced
to obtain information from books and journals than
scholars and students who are closer to the big centres
of learning and industry, and books and journals already
cost them more than similar classes pay for their
literature in other civilised countries. For most books,
in fact, one can say for all books and journals of an
informative character, as distinct from works of imagi-
nation, Australians pay more than Europeans or Ameri-
cans. I would like you to understand that lam using
that term “of an informative character” in somewhat
the same way as some of the witnesses have used the
term “educative.” Booksellers are forced to charge
a larger profit because of the necessary loss in dead
stock. Large Australian booksellers carry a much
larger stock than booksellers in other countries, because
they are not able to send a short distance to publishers
to procure the books required by their, customers.
Carrying larger stocks, they take greater risks, and
have far more dead stock, which must be sold at a loss.
Any tariff on informative books would mean an increase
in their cost to the students, not only by the amount of
the tariff, but also by an extra profit which the book-
seller must charge to assist in his extra overhead costs.
In this statement I cannot dare assume that the Tariff
Board was considering the question only of a tariff
on works of imagination and light periodicals.
Perhaps that needs some modification in the light
of \ some evidence you have had to-day. I was not
aware of the exact proposals before you, but would
like to discuss presently that schedule which has been
submitted to you. My statement continues: —
I must, therefore, point out that a tax on informative
books would be a very severe blow to scholars and
students, whose work and studies should have every
possible encouragement in a country so isolated as
Australia, and so much in need of building up a large
body of people thoroughly trained in all departments of
scholarship.
I should point out also that the effect on the purchas-
ing power of libraries, universities, learned societies,
schools and similar institutions would be so seriously
affected by a tariff on literature that students would
be able to depend less than formerly on being able to
procure from them the literature they required, which
they were not individually able to purchase. No
libraries or other institutions in Australia are able to
spend at the present time nearly enough on the pur-
chase of literature. By the term literature there I mean
all books. Libraries which contain books of value to
students and scholars are at present only seated in
the capital cities of the Commonwealth, and even the
large public libraries of N.S.W. and Victoria are
insufficiently equipped to supply information urgently
needed. A large proportion of the book vote for the
public library of N.S.W. is expended in the purchase of
purely scientific and technical literature. Somewhere
about a thousand scientific and technical periodicals are
procured in this library and bound for permanent refer-
ence, and at least twice as many should be prepared
to fulfil the reasonable requirements of scholars and
students. The trustees of the Public Library of N.S.W.,
recognising the very great disadvantages of the people
beyond the metropolitan area, and their inability to
procure books of information, have established an ex-
pensive country circulation system, through which
technical and other informative books (not pure litera-
ture) are forwarded by post to students in country
districts. This circulation of individual books to country
students has already reached over 30,000 volumes per
year, and would increase rapidly if the trustees of the
library could afford to provide more assistants for the
work and more money for the purchase of books.
The trustees also circulate over 4000 boxes of books
a year to Schools of Arts, branches of the Public
School Teachers’ Association, branches of the Agricul-
tural Bureau, and similar bodies, and small country
SYDNEY—William Herbert Ifould


schools. The demands in this direction, also, are much
more than the trustees can supply.
If books and journals are to cost more the extent of
this circulation will be cut down, and this would have
a serious cumulative effect on the capacity of the people,
especially primary producers, who are not only unable
to purchase books and journals which will give them
the information they seek, but are not in a position to
see them in any local institution.
I consider, also, that a tax, even if it w'ere confined
to fiction and the lighter class of periodicals, would
have a harmful effect on those using better classes of
books, because it would decrease the number of books
and journals sold, and thus increase booksellers’ over-
head charges, and so further increase the cost of all
kinds of books and journals. It would probably put
out of business a large number of small booksellers
in suburban and country districts, because these smaller
booksellers depend for their profits mostly on fiction
and magazines, and sell only a few books of information
and the more valuable journals. Their margin of
profit is at present a very small one, because the book-
selling business generally is by no means a profitable
one. If these smaller booksellers were put out of
business in any number it would increase unemployment
for this class, and it would also make it still more
difficult for people beyond the big centres of population
to procure books of any kind.
In such a widely scattered population, the means for
the distribution of books is already very insufficient.
No matter what efforts are made to build up our
industries, the student population of Australia will
always be at a disadvantage in book distribution. I
<io not mean by this that our booksellers are not efficient.
I think most of them are. lam satisfied, with my know-
ledge of book distribution in other countries of the
world, that there are no better bookshops than a few
of the larger bookshops in the capital cities; but these
large bookshops cannot adequately cater for people
hundreds of miles away from their centres.
A duty on books, even if it were confined to fiction
and magazines, would increase the capital outlay and
overhead costs of the numerous circulating libraries, not
only Schools of Arts and country institutes, but also
the small proprietary circulating libraries in small
towns and in all the suburbs of the larger cities. They
would be forced to increase their fees and would thus
lose a number of subscribers, and still further decrease
the means for the dissemination of information from
books and journals. The depression through which
Australia is passing will already make it exceedingly
hard for these small circulating libraries to retain their
subscribers in sufficient numbers to enable them to
continue their work. Any increase in their costs would
put a number of the proprietary libraries out of
existence and thus further increase unemployment.
A tariff on fiction, I believe, would have the effect of
causing the printing in Australia of only those few
extra books which a publisher could safely reckon on
selling to the mass of the people, probably not more
than a dozen titles a year, and too frequently these
books would be of a sensational kind, lacking in educa-
tive or literary value. Many of the best works of
fiction have no popular appeal. They would not be
printed locally and booksellers would not take the risk
of importing them in any sufficient number because of
their extra cost and the greater risk of dead stock.
Plays and volumes of poems and similar works of
imagination would not be printed here. They are
already imported in very small numbers, numbers
which would decrease under a tariff, and Australian
authors would have difficulty in purchasing them or
seeing them. The examples for them to study in works
of imagination would be overwhelmingly of the poorer
class. This would have an effect by no means to the
advantage of the local author, but very greatly to his
disadvantage. It would not assist in the building up
■ of an Australian literature.
I am satisfied that, even with a tax as high as
33 1-3 per cent, on all classes of books, the result would
not mean a very great increase in the employment of
printers and bookbinders.
I am amazed that it is proposed to put a tax of even
higher than 33 1-3 per cent. on. I thought I had got
to the very- highest limit there. My statement con-
tinues:—
The labour costs in the production of books are
smaller than they are in the production of most other
goods. A very small amount of labour can produce
an enormous number of copies of books and periodicals.
I think that probably as many bookbinders would be
thrown out of employment by a general tariff on books
as would procure employment by increased production
of books in Australia, because the bookbinders who are
employed on publishers’ binding are comparatively few
in number, as well as comparatively unskilled. The
work is largely done by machinery, and cloth-bound
commercial books have very little labour expended on
them. Good letterpress, binding for libraries and for
private individuals necessitates hand work involving
a considerable amount of time, and giving a consider-
able amount of employment to skilled tradesmen who
are entirely different from the class of people who are
merely feeding machines in the establishments of the
printers, turning out fiction and supplementary readers.
In a statement made by Mr. Birmingham, manager of
the Halstead Press, in Sydney, before the Minister for
Trade and Customs last year, it was claimed that this
press during the previous year had turned out a million
volumes, and that it employed 98 hands. Many of these
were only supplementary readers, but I very much doubt
whether a tariff on books and journals would cause the
printing of even another 100,000 volumes of books
a year in Australia, which, on Mr. Birmingham’s figures,
would not mean the employment of more than an insig-
nificant number of extra people. Many more people
would be thrown out of employment through the inci-
dence of such a tariff than would find employment
through the extra printing of books.
Mr. Birmingham’s comments, which I am referring
to, are confirmed by certain statistics which I obtained
from America. Those statistics are taken from the
biennial census of manufactures, 1925, The statistics
are for the year 1925, and are as follows:
Wage earners (average number employed for
the year) 13,316
(For printing of books, pamphlets and for job printing)
Number of copies of books and pamphlets 433,211,253
Value of books and pamphlets 3154,991,493
Value of job printing $669,937,423
If we can estimate the relative numbers employed in
book printing and in job printing from these values, we
get 26,663 engaged on the book publishing industry, or
61 individuals per million copies. Those figures are in
America, where they turn out many more copies of each
publication, with only two-thirds of the number that
Mr. Birmingham says are employed here. You see the
point, that if they printed even a million more copies
of books here, and I do not believe myself they would
print 100,000, even with the tariff, but if they did print
a million more, it would only, on Mr. Birmingham's
argument, mean about 80 more employees altogether.
My statement continues:—
The argument has been used that, as the United
States of America provides a tariff on books and has
continued such a tariff, it must be worth while. This
is not a logical argument. The scholars and students
in the United States are provided with by far the best
library system in the world. None of their people is
situated far from a good reference library, and in the
United States there is no tariff on books imported for
libraries, learned institutions, schools, religious bodies,
etc. Moreover, the United States has a population of
somewhere about 120,000,000 people. Their publishers
can reprint books, knowing that they have an enormous
buying public to draw on. Their printers and publishers
aro also protected by the fact that, whilst they get every
SYDNEY—William Herbert Ifould


protection from the International Copyright Agreement,
they do not conform to it themselves, as their country
is not a signatory.
To sum up, I consider that a tax on fiction and
magazines would be a mistake, and on informative books
and journals would be a folly—a bigger folly for Aus-
tralia than for most other countries of the world. The
younger a country the greater the need for procuring
from outside the accumulated experience of other people
and the records of advancement in any field of learning
or its application to science and industry. A tax on the
means for procuring this information would, I consider,
be a crime against future generations, as well as against
the present.
Q. —In a general way, that depends upon what the result
of the duty would be. If it merely means the transfer
of a publication to Australia, then the picture which you
present would not materialise?—But, you see, they could
not transfer the publication of informative books because
they have too small a publication.
Q. —I should have asked you just how far the exemptions
of the applicant would meet you in that respect, because
he exempts books on the application of science to indus-
tries of all kinds, including books on agriculture, horticul-
ture, forestry, fish or fishing, mining, metallurgy,
architecture, electrical and other engineering, carpentry,
shipbuilding, mechanism, dyeing, bleaching, tanning,
weaving and other mechanical art, and similar industrial
books?—You see, he does not exempt even science, pure
science will have to bear the tax under that.
Q. —I think that it is an oversight?—Even then, it
would not exempt a very great number of books of an
important informative nature, which have nothing to do
with the application of science to the arts. A book on
political economy would have no such relation, and it
would have to carry such a tax. The number he gives
would be at least 50 per cent, of the imported books, but
I doubt whether it would be that number.
Q. —What percentage would you consider that informa-
tive books would be of the total books imported?—l have
no statistics I can give you on that. I can give you no
idea about that, or where you would get it.
Q. —Can you tell us what proportion of your books are
informative books?—We have no fiction in our library at
all except fiction which can be regarded as classical,
fiction which will remain a permanent fixture for all
times, for instance, Dickens. No modern fiction in these
days is likely to be of very great importance in the
classics.
Q. —Then your proportion is very righ of informative
books ?—Yes.
Q. —In an ordinary library, such as a subscription
library in the city, what proportion of the books would
you consider might be informative and what are in the
other category?—l am afraid I could not give you those
statistics, as it depends such a lot on the nature of the
library. The best class of proprietary circulating libraries
would contain a larger proportion of informative books.
Q. —A guess from you would be much better than a
guess from us?—l am afraid I would not like to make a
guess, because these guesses are so difficult; I would not
give any guess at all.
Q. —I notice also that you assume, for the purpose of
all your arguments, that if a duty went on there must of
necessity be an increase in price to the extent of the duty ?
—Of more than the duty.
Q.—That need not necessarily apply surely in regard to
this instance, where a book could reasonably be printed
in Australia?—No, it was in the case of informative books.
I do not believe, myself, a dozen publications would be
printed, even with a heavy duty on books.
.’ Q. —Those textbooks on algebra, arithmetic, and so
forth, what is your view of including those in your
category of informative .books? —Yes, I would say they
should be, but in those instances they would be exempt
under the educational section purely for the schools.
. Q. —I take it the applicant clearly did not intend to
include them?—He says if they are for educational pur-
poses, and there are quite a lot, I think you will find.
Mr. Kelly.—He has another qualifying clause after-
wards there, “the whole under regulations prescribed by
the Minister for Customs,” that means it it could be
printed here it would be included?—lf they could be
printed here without a tariff why put a tariff on and make
those books dearer.
By the Chairman.—Because the argument is a very
great many more could be printed here if there was a
tariff?—There are a few there which he has given you
which are produced by Australian writers, and the
tendency is—l am speaking now with a knowledge of the
Education Department, of which I am an officer, and have
discussed this matter with the Director for Education, and
I know that the Education Department has given a
preference of 10 per cent, on books which they can
reasonably use, as they would far rather use an Australian
book if they could—to give every advantage to the
Australian product, but you have to produce brains as well
as printers and bookbinders in order to produce a single
book for educational purposes.
By Mr. Kelly.—Do you not suggest our disability is
more a matter of market, lack of market, than lack of
brains? —No, not in the case so much of educational books,
because you have a big market there. If you produced a
book which could be used by the Education Departments
of the various States you would sell not by thousands, or
ten thousand, but twenty thousand or more, and they
keep on for some years, and it would be an exceedingly
profitable thing. There is more than a little market
there for the local producer without a tariff.
Q.—l would like to get your views in reference to the
question of the production of literature in the small
nations of the Continent. They have successfully built
up a literature. Take Sweden or Holland; what is their
literature comprised of, their own production?—lt is not
a very large literature. Of course, you must remember
the circumstances of those countries; they read German
books; most of their books are in German. They certainly
in their schools have textboks in Dutch, but a tremendous
proportion of their textbooks would be read and printed
in Germany.
Q. —They are far from being limited by their own pro-
duction? —Yes, they are not by any means limited; a
tremendous proportion of their books is printed in
German, French or English.
(Witness withdrew.)
EDWARD RONALD WALKER.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
are appearing?—l am Acting Dean of the Faculty of
Economics of the University of Sydney.
Q. —Are you appearing on behalf of the University?—
The Vice-Chancellor approves of me appearing, but the
views I would express are my own. I suppose the matter
has been fairly well realised that the whole problem of
deciding about such a duty rests with the balancing of any
adverse facts against any advantages. You have already
had evidence from various witnesses regarding the disad-
vantages, and I think it important for the Board to
consider seriously just what is the need for this assistance.
The first point I would like to make is that, so far as I
can make out, the printing industry is probably in the
least need of assistance among other Australian indus-
tries. I have been studying for some two or three
years unemployment in various Australian industries, and
have been led to the conclusion that the printing industry
is the best off in that regard. Over a period of sixteen
years, from 1913 to 1928, the average percentage of
trade unionists returned as unemployed were as follow:
Wood furniture group , 6.3
Engineering, etc 8.5
' Food, drink, and tobacco 10.5
Clothing, hats, etc V. ... 5.4
Books and printing, etc 2.8
Other manufacturing 9.7
SYDNEY—Edward Ronald Walker


Building 6.7
Mining, quarrying, etc 9.8
Land transport, other than railways and tram-
ways 4.4
The average for all the different groups was .. 7.8
And that same tendency is indicated if you take the
highest point reached in unemployment. For books and
printing that point was 6.5, whereas if you take food,
drink and tobacco it was 24.1, other manufacturing 21.3,
building 17.3. On those figures it would appear that you
should consider just which industry should have the
benefit of import duty, which it is admitted involves
some burden upon consumers and some sections of the
community, and the printing industry is less in need of
such assistance than any other. The second point in that
relation is that the industry has made good progress for
the last few years. In the last nine years, according to
the production bulletins, the number of hands increased
from 25,000 in 1918 to 34,008 in 1927-28, an increase of
30 per cent. For all the groups that, are recorded in
those bulletins, the increase has been about the same
percentage, so that, despite lack of protection, this
industry has expanded on the average.
Q. —There is no lack of protection, although there may
be a lack of protection in certain directions?—l will
(jualify that in that way. So far as unemployment is
concerned, whereas for all industries the gradual trend
for those 16 years was for an increase, in this industry
of printing covering a long term the trend was not down-
wards. The downward trend which has been elsewhere
shown, it is rather remarkable, is not shown in this
industry. Another point is that the foreign competition
apparently is insignificant compared with other industries.
You quoted a figure earlier in the morning of imports in
the vicinity of £1,300,000. I have taken the production
in the printing industry, which does include more than
books for the years 1926, 1927, and also in 1928-29. The
figures show about £20,000,000 worth in each of those
years. The figures are:—For 1926-27, £20,217,555; 1927-
28, £20,810,371; and the latest figures for 1928-29 are not
available,, so that, even if all those books were shut out
by import duty and even if that whole amount were
transferred to the Australian production, that is, the
amount of imports, it would not add a great deal to the
amount to be produced by the Australian printing trade.
I do not believe that an import duty of 30 per cent, 40 per
cent., or 50 per cent, would transfer much of that oversea
competition to Australia. You have, first of all, to get
the copyright, and the cost of obtaining the right to
publish those overseas books in Australia would be con-
siderable. Secondly, what has already been pointed out
must be considered, that is, the great cost of printing
where you have such limited numbers. An import duty
must raise the price of books to the consumer,
because of the small market. It is only in those cases
of primary school textbooks where you can consume a
large number that the price might not be raised. I have
no great hope even with an import duty that the producers
will sell at a very low price. That higher prices will
inevitably reduce the sale of books is illustrated by the
falling-off in the imports. The demand for books is
very elastic, and if the price goes up the demand would
fall off much more than for many other commodities. In
1928-29, which was the beginning of the period of depres-
sion, although it was not generally realised at the time,
the importation of books was diminished by nearly
£IOO,OOO worth. In 1926-27 the figures were £1,309,613,
in 1927-28, £1,388,092, and then at Ihe beginning of this
depression the imports fell to £1,294,466.
By Mr. Kelly.—Has not that been caused by the reduc-
tion in the cost of books. Has there not been a fall in
the general price of books?—So far as the books I buy
are conc rn:d, there has not been any obvious fall in the
price in the last year or two. Ido not know whether
there has been so far as imported novels are concerned.
Q. —I think the tendency has been downwards.
The Chairman.—l think your comment is weak, because
the fall in the imports is not sufficient to actually indicate
the trend of the economic conditions of the country. For
instance, the arrival on the first day of July, in which the
year starts, of a couple of shipments, and at the end of
the year a couple more shipments might easily make
a difference of tens of thousands of pounds in the direction
one way or the other?—Would it make a difference of 8
per cent. ?
Q. —It is hard to say, but we will accept your argument
as one possible explanation of the different figures.
By Mr. Kelly.—-Are you able to apply that to the much
more obvious change in the value of books—books jumped
very erratically after the war, did they not?—l do not
know whether the price of books was raised as much as
the prices of other things.
Q. —Books changed more than anything, I think.—Do
you mean from 1914 onwards?
Q. —1 may be wrong as to whether it was just at that
period or not, but there was a radical change in the cost
of books about that period. The publishers, when they
come along, if my recollection is wrong, can correct me.
I would like to know. It would be interesting to know
what effect that had.
The Chairman.—At the same time, I do not think it
affects Mr. Walker’s argument, because in 1925-26 the
market would be stabilised.
By Mr. Kelly.—Still, the elasticity ought to be intensi-
fied by the fall resulting from the rise which I suggest
took place?—Would you like me to inquire into that?
Mr. Kelly.—We will take it for granted.
The Witness.—l just referred to that to illustrate the
fact that a rise in the price of goods does result in
reduced sales of books considerably more than in many
other commodities. Then you penalise the small book-
sellers, and, what is more important from my point of
view, you hamper education and scientific research. On
the point of those exemptions suggested by Mr. Catts,
I would like to emphasise the narrow interpretation that
is placed on that phrase, “application of science to indus-
try.” I am afraid that would not cover a great proportion
of books that economists and others of my colleagues at
the University require.
The Chairman. —Mr. Catts admitted that was a very
rough sort of item, and if the Board were making their
recommendation it would take great care in regard to
these exemptions?—l would like to be particularly clear
on that, because it must be realised from an economic
point of view it is important. We do find that more
and more of our own problems here have to be dealt with
in a scientific way, and we must have for that purpose
the best literature from other parts of the world, so far
as it is possible, as that is the only way of knowing what
is being done in other parts of the world. At present
is costly enough. On those general grounds I would'
come to the conclusion that the proposed duty, which would
involve grave disabilities of a social and economic nature
and in return promises not more than an inconsiderable
degree of protection to an industry that needs it least,
should not be imposed.
By the Chairman. —Notwithstanding your comments on
the fortunate position of this industry as regards unem-
ployment, I assume that you would admit that, if by
opening up new avenues you could very largely increase
the employment, it would be an advantage?—lt would be
an advantage, but I think that the Board should consider
the relative value of the different avenues.
Q. —True, I am not for a moment considering disadvan-
tage. You admit it would be an advantage, and the value
of that advantage would, of course, be gauged on your
own views as to whether it was more than offset by disad-
vantage?—Yes.
Q. —I mean the mere fact that you kept all the men
employed does not quite end the question?—No, I would
say that to make things better where they are already
good is certainly desirable, but where the process does
involve some burden you could see where you could do the
most good.
Q. —You claim that duty must increase prices. The
applicant put in an exhibit of a book which was published
SYDNEY—Edward Ronald Walker


in England, the sale price of which was 7/6 for that
issue; in America the sale price was 10/6 for that issue,
and in Australia, I take it, the evidence was meant the
Australian issue was priced at 6/ —What I said would
not apply to every specific book that was sold. I speci-
fically excepted those small textbooks, and I would also
add the exception of any one, two or three fiction lines
that happen to be extremely popular, but it will only
apply to those books that have a very large sale, and
certainly does not apply to the majority of books when
you consider them in numbers of titles.
Q. —And you claim that at least part of the duty must
go on unless there is a considerable output?—Un-
doubtedly, and I think that general consideration is more
relevant to the production of books than to some of the
commodities we do import.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt is rather a hopeful sign that “The
Life and Letters of Walter Page” found a market that
was profitable in Australia?—Yes.
Q. —It was reprinted here and successfully marketed,
I understand?—Yes, although I bought Volume 3 at
greatly reduced prices some time afterwards.
Q. —You often do that, but it is a hopeful sign that a
biography of such quality and value should find a market
sufficient to justify its being printed here?—Undoubtedly.
(The witness withdrew.)
GEORGE ROBERTSON.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—You are the managing director of
tho firm of Angus and Robertson Ltd.?—Yes, I have
prepared a statement, which reads as follows:
The firm has been established in the bookselling
business in New South Wales since June, 1884.
I hope this Commission will not approach the con-
sideration of a duty on books and magazines as they
would a duty on stockings or hats. When young men
and women leave High School or University it doesn’t
matter much what hose or headgear they wear. But it
matters a great deal whether or not they have free
access to the books they need for that self-education
to which mere schooling is only an introduction.
And to whom does the student look to supply his
needs but to the bookseller? No country in the world,
except New Zealand, is so well catered for by its book-
sellers as is Australia. The two best bookshops in
the world —so much-travelled readers tell us —are in our
own State of New South Wales. And all over Australia
shopkeepers who a few years ago described themselves
as newsagents and tobacconists now have “bookseller” as
the first word on their business stationery. On book-
sellers’ shelves in our capital cities the best books of
the day and of past days are accessible to all. If you
handicap us with a duty you will handicap the intellec-
tual life of the Commonwealth.
To those who adopt “plain living and high thinking”
as their motto in life, the bookseller is a godfather.
They can come to his shop and see if the new book is
what they want or what they need. And his expert
knowledge is always at their service. Put a duty on
books and you will make the present race of booksellers
a breed of book-brokers, who will indent to order only.
There is another class vitally concerned in this
proposed duty. In New South Wales are many hun-
dreds of lending libraries —in this city alone probably
two hundred, great and small. All are dependent for
their existence largely on a cheap supply of novels. At
most of these libraries wage-earners and their wives
and daughters can for threepence borrow the book that
will give them the mental relaxation and entertainment
they need. A duty on books will ringbark the pros-
perity of these small libraries, and, when their doors
are closed, drive would-be readers to the movies and
the talkies.
Australian publishers, too, will be hard hit by this
proposed duty. No country, taking our small popula-
tion into account, has been better served by its pub-
lishers. The writer has been engaged in bookselling in
Australia for nearly fifty years, and in publishing for
thirty-four years, and knows what he is talking about.
In nearly every instance the Australian author has owed
his “chance” to a local bookseller, whose “connection”
and bank balance have resulted from his dealing in
British and American books. That is true.
It is urged by advocates of this duty that it will
benefit Australian authors. Those who say that regard
books as if they were a factory product.' Nothing could
be farther from the truth. One of the greatest of our
race has declared that “A good book is the precious
lifeblood of a master spirit.” That is why no tariff
ever framed has nourished a country’s literature, why
no duty ever imposed has inspired a masterpiece.
There is another matter. At present Australian
authors are unhampered in their choice of a publishing
centre, and thus, acting on my advice, Dr. Charles
McLaurin sent to London his two brilliant studies of
great men in the light of their physiological weaknesses
and peculiarities, and achieved a world-wide success
with them, which he could never have done had he
published them here.
London is the natural centre for Empire authors
whose work appeals to either the very many or the
comparatively few. A duty on books would confront
Australian authors of such work with the alternatives
of publishing either in Australia at their own expense,
and almost certain loss, or, say, in London, and be
penalised by a duty in their homeland.
By the Chairman. —I might say, without in any way
detracting or reflecting on other witnesses, that I am
very pleased indeed to see a man so prominent in the
bookselling industry before the Board?—l thank you.
Q. —I take it that you do not consider the exemptions
that have been made in the application as in any way
sufficient to meet your objections?—What is the good of
exemptions? You would want a committee of 50 to go
through the stuff and decide whether a thing was informa-
tive or educative. It is not practicable.
Q. —Would your objection be any less to a duty on
fiction than on informative books?—No, I should think
that a small librarian and small bookseller, whose busi-
ness practically is wholly in the fiction
By Mr. Kelly.—Of course, you would not imply either
that fiction was not informative? —No, certainly not.
Mr. Kelly.—l know that was not used that way origi-
nally.
The Witness. —That is what is wrong. With some of it,
it is informative.
By the Chairman.—l think I made an interjection to
that effect earlier in the hearing, so we are quite in
accord?—You would never get a committee to work
either. Some people think that bookselling is the easiest
thing in the world. This Birmingham who has been
quoted thinks he knows all about it, but he does not know
anything.
By Mr. Kelly.—As regards the financial results of publi-
cations, could you give us any cue as to what percentage
are profitable in publications? We do not want to get
your particular business, but you have a knowledge of
the type of book?—About half the books a publisher pub-
lishes he loses money on. That has been my experience,
and I believe it is the experience of big London publishers.
When I say that they lose money, I mean they may get
their money back, but then you have lost all your time.
By the Chairman.—Could you in any way distinguish
the class of books that are most likely to be profitable?—
Fiction, I think, and travel.
Q. —The books that suit local curriculum chiefly, is it
not? —Of course, school books are highly profitable. In
connection with that book which we published at 6/, and
which is 7/6 at Home, you have to remember they do not
sell fiction novels to the general public at Home. It is
only the libraries that sell them, and they make the
libraries pay. I have no doubt that the libraries do not
pay much more for their 7/6 book than we charge the
trade here for our 6/ book.
Q. —The 7/6 is a nominal price really?—Yes. The
SYDNEY—George Robertson


buying of fiction has fallen off tremendously in the Old
Country. It all goes to the libraries.
By Mr. Kelly.—Does that explain the fact that colonial
editions are retailed here frequently at a lower price than
in Great Britain?—Yes, the libraries must have them and
they have to pay more.
Are they not really separate copies?—No, not one of
them.
(The witness withdrew.)
HENRY MACKENZIE GREEN.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—l
am appearing in a double capacity. The principal state-
ment on behalf of the University is to be made by the
Vice-Chancellor to-morrow, but he asked me also to make
a supplementary statement representing one aspect of the
University’s view on this question, and I was also asked
to speak specially from the point of view of the Depart-
ment of English and also to represent the Australian
English Association. Although I am the University
Librarian, I am not to speak as a librarian, because we
felt that the position from the point of view of libraries
generally was pretty much the same, and, therefore, Mr.
Ifould was asked to include the University library amongst
the others. Our position will be much the same as the
public libraries, except that we take more scientific and
more specialised works. On the question that was asked
since Mr. Ifould gave his evidence, with reference to the
price of books, I cannot give you figures, but my strong
impression is that the price of books, speaking generally
and not merely fiction, has gone up steadily since the war,
but it has not increased anything like so fast as the price
of periodicals, and especially the price of German
periodicals. I do not know how far this affects the
position, but some question was asked and I thought I had
better answer that.
By Mr. Kelly.—You do not suggest books have gone up
100 per cent, since the war?—l cannot tell you that, but
I do know that the price of books has steadily increased,
and the price of periodicals, especially the German
periodicals, has increased very much faster. Professor
Brereton was to have appeared instead of me to represent
the Department of English, and also to put the case for
the Australian authors, so to speak. That is what I am
going to talk about, the position of the Australian author
and of Australian literature, as it might be affected by the
proposed tariff. In order to show that I have some repre-
sentative capacity in this, the University considers that
it stands not only for science and scholarship, but also for
literature even extending beyond the bounds of the Univer-
sity. It has, for instance, produced graduates who are
amongst our best writers. There is Professor Brereton
himself, and there is Professor Brennan, who is certainly
Australia’s most important writer on verse to-day. There
are the two young writers who have just brought out
“A House is Built.” They are both University graduates.
Apart from that, the University takes a special interest
in Australian literature. It has made a practice for some
years every year of making the subject of some of its
thesis Australian literary subjects, and this year for
the first time in any Australian University it is lecturing
on Australian literature. As to the Australian English
Association, it is not purely a University Association, but
it extends far beyond the boundaries of the University and
includes in its membership a large number of Australian
writers. This statement that I am making may be con-
sidered to represent that Association, which has a mem-
bership of about 400 or more. I should like to say also
that I am Vice-President of the Fellowship of Australian
Writers. That institution decided not to be represented
here, so I cannot speak for it, but I feel convinced that
these statements represent the opinion of a large percen-
tage of its members. I have gone over this statement
with Professor Brereton, who is the President of that
Association, and who knows the feeling of the members,
and some little time ago he wrote a letter to the “Herald”
against the proposed tariff. He wrote that letter and
sent it as the President of the Australian Writers’ Fellow-
ship, and it was not contradicted. My statement reads
as follows:
Australian writers, even more than Australian
readers, need the stimulus of new ideas from the outside
world, and also the training in literary skill and judg-
ment which should result from wide reading. Anything
which may increase the price of books or make them
less easily available must be a very real handicap to
Australian literary work.
Specially in the scattered population outside the
cities books are more important to Australian thinkers
and writers than to those of the old world, because
Australians lack the benefits obtainable from personal
association with other thinkers and writers. It is by
intercourse with other minds that ideas are born and
developed. Even in onr cities for such intercourse
we have to depend largely on books, and without them
we should stagnate.
A tariff on books is bound to make at least certain
classes of books harder to obtain. Even if scientific
and educational books and the Universities are excepted
from its operations, that will not be enough, for works
of imaginative literature are especially necessary to
writers of imaginative literature, as well as to stu-
dents. Such works—verse, plays, novels, essays, etc. —
may have a high educative value, both for writers and
for readers, upon whose taste the writers depend. It
is true that not all imaginative works have such a
value, but it would be impossible to distinguish between
the valuable and the comparatively valueless without
establishing a literary censorship, which would be
costly, cumbrous, and generally unsatisfactory.
Writers are usually poor, and depend largely upon
secondhand books, and if a duty were imposed upon
these our literary output would again be affected, to say
nothing of the probable closing down of many small
bookshops, because those small bookshops depend to a
very large extent on those secondhand books.
Q. —But a lot of them may be locally obtained?—But
I am talking of secondhand books which were originally
published abroad, not local. Regarding Mr. Catts’ sug-
gestion that, because a book is not widely bought it is not
much good, I do not suppose he meant that seriously.
Q. —I think not. —My statement continues:—
The best books are often published in small editions,
because they have no wide popular sale. If we had
to depend upon Australian editions of such books, the
editions would have to be very much smaller still; the
sale price would have, therefore, to be greatly increased.
And for the local production, as distinct from the mere
reprinting of such books, we have not enough scholars
or literary men. We have scholars and literary men,
but we have not enough. All our writers would feel
the handicaps mentioned. But the proposed tariff
would, in effect, discriminate against the best of our
writers, most of whom publish abroad, simply because
their local market is not large enough. Australian
firms would probably be unwilling to take the risk of
publishing many of such books, for books published in
Australia do not seem to have the same chance in
England as if they had been published there. Examples
of leading Australian imaginative writers who publish
abroad are Henry Randel Richardson, A. S. Pritchard,
William Hay, and Dale Collins. Most of our historical,
scientific, and other writers also publish abroad; for
example, the late Professor Wood, Prof. MacCallum,
Prof. Woodhouse, Prof. T. G. Taylor, Mr. A. B.
Chisholm, and Prof. Scott, of Victoria. The only Aus-
tralian writers whom the proposed tariff might benefit
are those whose books could command a wide popular
market in Australia, and little or none in any other
country; and these are not as a rule our best writers.
Q. —I would ask whether you think that the exemptions
that are made in those items marked free are short of
what you would consider should be exempted; if any
duty should be imposed?—Yes, I think they are a very
long way short. Ido not say any books on pure science
SYDNEY—Henry Mackenzie Green


or on scholarship, and then I have already made a case
for works of fiction, which are certainly valuable and
educative, or whatever you like to call it. I do not say
all works of fiction are.
Q. —Without in any way assuming that it indicates the
Board’s mind—because that would, of course, he unthink-
able at the present moment—l should say that you could
help us materially in listing for us the class of books
on which you consider a duty is unthinkable. Presumably
you do not mean that a duty on any book at all might be
unthinkable. I would like you to list them, even if I
went so far as to ask you to range your mind in degrees
of opposition. Do you see what I mean?—Yes.
Q. —And if you put certain books which you reckon it
would be a little short of a crime to put a tax on; for
instance, make two divisions, or, if you saw fit, three
divisions?—Yes, such a list would be enormous.
Q. —I do not mean in titles. I only mean in the class
of books. Do you think you could do that?—Yes.
Q. —Could you do it within a week and send the list to
the Secretary of the Board?—Yes, I will do that.
Q. —You could make your own divisions, but please do
not attack the question from the point of view that you
are opposed to a duty on all books. We want you to
imagine for the moment that the Board might come to
the conclusion that a tariff on some books is justifiable,
and we would like you to express the view, assuming that
you knew that, what books the Board should certainly
leave alone ?—Very well, I will do that, but I want to
make it quite clear that, although I certainly admit it
would not do any harm in connection with certain kinds
of books, the difficulty is to draw the line between the
books which ought to be taxed and the book that ought
not to be taxed. The conclusion that I have come to, and
which is shared by a large number of people, is that it
is dangerous to draw such a line. You would have to set
up an institution to do it, and you would find there would
be plenty of people who would say, “I can tell a good
book from a bad one.” I think I can myself, but when
your neighbour does it you do not agree with him. Such
an institution will be costly and very unsatisfactory. At
the same time, I am prepared to do what you want.
Q. —Perhaps Mr. Ifould would be good enough to col-
laborate with you?—-Yes, I will send him the list. We
will do it between us.
Q. —Of course, do not for a moment take it as a sug-
gestion that we have come to a conclusion. We might
recommend a duty on all books, in spite of all your pro-
tests?—You want me just to divide all books and
periodicals or books into classes.
Q. —Periodicals are easier, but I would like you to keep
periodicals apart and deal with them separately in the
same way?—Very well. I can think now of certain
periodicals which would be just on the line. Take “John
O’ London’s Weeklv,” that has a certain literary value
and is just on the line. I do not know whether it would
be above or below.
By Mr. Berchdolt. —Take the applicant, he includes reli-
gious literature, if published by a society, free of duty,
and if published by an ordinary publisher, to pay duty?—
However, that is what you want me to do. You want the
list to cover all books and periodicals, and for me to draw
a line between them.
The Chairman.—That is so.
(The witness withdrew.)
(The inquiry at 5.40 p.m. was adjourned until the next
day, Friday, April 4, 1930, at 10 a.m.)
The Board met at the Commonwealth Bank Buildings,
Martin place, Sydney, on April 4th, 1930, at 10 a.m.
Present.—Mi-. H. McConaghy (Chairman), Mr. S.
Berchdolt. Mr. H. E. Guy, Mr. W. S. Kelly.
JOHN MALCOLM FORSYTH.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appearing?
—As President of the Australian Booksellers’ Associa-
tion, 245 William street, Melbourne. I am also Manager
of Dymock’s Book Arcade, Sydney. I have prepared a
statement, which is as follows:
1. Any duty on books must undoubtedly mean a tax
upon the wider knowledge, the culture and the education
of what is, after all, a very young community, very far
placed from many of the seats of learning and litera-
ture. The most value in a free and unhampered service
of books in any community is the breadth of reading
and knowledge that such offers. A duty on books must
increase the price of same, and thereby reduce the sale
and free distribution of books, and consequently seri-
ously affect the number employed in the selling of them.
On a careful estimate the wages paid in Sydney at the
present time on the sale of books amount to £250,000
per annum, and the wages paid in New South Wales
would be at least £750,000. That is rather problem-
atical, as we could not really get at that; at the same
time, we are safe in giving that sum. The loss of
employment in the event of a duty on books could not
be compensated by the increase in the employment of
the printing and allied trades. A very small percentage
of books that circulate in Australia, excluding educa-
tional textbooks, would total more than 250 copies each,
and a much smaller percentage would total to 1000
copies each. It will be plain, therefore, seeing that it
needs a run of at least 2000 to 5000 copies with an
assured sale to produce in Australia at anything like
the price to retail to the public at present figures at a
profit, the duty would not be effective. The reason
books are sold here at the present low prices (taking
into consideration the cost of importing same) is that
very large runs are produced in England to cater for
the whole of the Empire and other English-speaking
countries. It is scarcely necessary to impress the Board
that technical and educational books must be admitted
free in order that our industrial, educational, denomina-
tional and general public have the cheapest access to
the world’s experts on each subject. It will be evident
that technical books published for the Empire and
written by world experts could not profitably be pro-
duced in Australia owing to the comparatively few
copies required here. We submit that all books dealing
with industrial and technical subjects should be imme-
diately upon publication freely available to readers in
this young country at the lowest possible prices.
2. On the educational question, it is very difficult to
see where the scope ceases. Australia to-day is better
catered for by excellent bookshops than in any other
part of the Dominions, except, perhaps, New Zealand.
Publishers and English visitors have frequently ex-
pressed amazement at the magnificent and valuable
stocks carried at this far distant part of the Empire for
the use of the reading public. Auistralia_pcr capita is
one of the largest reading publics among English-speak-
ipg people, and we suggest that to restrain such an
excellent reputation in any way would' be a bad policy
for any rightthinking Government. State and Federal
Governments establish free libraries and subsidise
others in order to propagate the dissemination of good
reading; but, no matter how many libraries there are,
the full function and intention of the Governments could
not be fulfilled without the efficient aid of bookselling
establishments. The majority of readers do not use
the public libraries, and will always go to an up-to-date
bookshop for their reading. It is granted that book-
sellers are in the business to make a living and profit,
but, nevertheless, they are fulfilling part of the excel-
lent aim of the Governments in establishing libraries.
The greater percentage of fiction is undoubtedly
educational. The majority of readers first read fiction,
and, almost without exception, readers of the better
class of books develop from fiction readers, so that, from
an educational point of view, fiction and juvenile books
are to bi -egarded as the primary class in this educa-
tional avenue.
SYDNEY—John Malcolm Forsyth


3. Many books of standard and modern fiction are
used as textbooks for reading in schools and universi-
ties for the study of English, etc., and it would be an
anomaly to allow one title which is definitely used as a
textbook in free when thousands of books of fiction,
possibly of more value to the public, may be dutiable,
because they do not happen to be on any educational
schedule.
It is necessary for any large bookseller carrying a
general stock to have a free and unhampered sale of
fiction and the lighter forms of reading, for it is from
this source that the bookseller looks to pay the major
portion of his overhead, which enables him to carry
adequate stocks of the informative sections of books.
By that I mean if we did not have fiction we could not
do the business; that we could not keep the other section
of our stock.
Q. —You mean the bigger sellers carry the poorer?—
Yes, the bread and butter lines have got to carry the slow
sellers.
Q. —Clearly, if the effect of any duty imposed were
simply to transfer the printing of books from elsewhere
to Australia, that would not diminish the expense of sell-
ing books in Australia, but presumably you have come
to the conclusion that a duty cannot be imposed without
restricting the number of books circulating in Australia?
—Surely. There are a few books, examples of which were
shown yesterday—for instance, “The Dark Man” and a
few others—which have a large sale and have the push of
one big firm well behind them. They can be profitably
used now, but a very small proportion of the general read-
ing and the better fiction cannot be. The really high-class
fiction—books that have a chance of living or becoming
standard, or becoming a standard vogue for a period—first
sell in very small quantities, and continue to sell in quanti-
ties of sixes and dozens, and it would not pay any pub-
lisher here to produce them, because they sell too slow.
There are books which are performing a wonderfully edu-
cational function, which cannot be produced here, as they
sell slowly, and what is one man’s meat is another man’s
poison, in books particularly. Some people will say one
book is a masterpiece, and other people will say it is rot;
that is not infrequent.
Q. —You estimate that a run of at least 2000 to 5000 is
necessary in order to profitably produce a book in Aus-
tralia?—A publisher cannot get out and get his money
back on 2000, and if it is to be a profitable venture he
needs a run of at least 5000.
Q. —In ordinary fiction, what percentage of the books
which you handle would have a run of 2000 for the whole
of Australia?—My opinion is that not one book of that
nature in 2000 would have a run of 2000.
Q. —Over the whole of Australia?—Yes, the big sellers
are very few. Most of our sales are made by a dozen
of this or a dozen of that, or sometimes 50 of that, or
100 of that, and they do not live very long.
By Mr. Kelly.—You then say that a total of 250 copies
would be small?—Yes.
By the Chairman.—The figures you have given are over
the whole of Australia?—Yes.
Q. —It sounds amazing?—lf you see the number of
books that come along every mail, and that are not re-
peated and are never reordered—just sample books—you
would realise the position. Of course, you will see, we
have to be very careful on the question of dead stock.
It does seem an amazing proposition, but I can assure you
it is right.
Q. —You claim that it is altogether an uncommercial
proposition for an Australian publisher?—-Yes.
Q. —What would be the ordinary run of these books like
those which were produced here yesterday—the school
books, like algebra and arithmetic?—lt all depends
on whether it is set as an educational textbook, and any-
one who has published them without having some assur-
ance of that is taking a'very big risk indeed.
Q. —You think the publication would be rather rare?
Yes, it is hopeless, unless you are fairly well assured it
is going to be set as a textbook.
Q. —If you do get that nomination, what run would
you get then?—The N.S.W. Education Department would
probably order 5000 or 7000. The department give the
primary schools nearly all their textbooks. There are a
few over—a few hundred—but not a great deal. The one
you had yesterday was a book published specially for the
Christian Brothers; but the booksellers do not get that
sale.
Q. —That is, it is printed for and produced for the
Christian Brothers’ schools, and does not go into ordinary
circulation at all?—We can get it if we want it, but we
would have to pay the full price for it.
Q. —It bears the imprint of the Christian Brothers’
school, and, naturally, would not be used by schools other
than that?—l suppose the other Roman Catholic schools
may use it; I do not know whether they do, although we
do the biggest ordinary school book business in Sydney.
Q. —They do not buy it from the ordinary booksellers ?
—No, I think one bookseller holds the stock for them; he
stocks them and sends them out to the schools—but I am
not sure of that.
Q. —I understand that a number of ordinary books of
fiction are placed on the textbook list as set books for
study by the universities and schools each year?—Yes.
Q. —Can you give the Board any idea of the number
there is of such books?—l have not looked that un, but
I could get the number that is on this year’s curricula.
Q. —Do they run into dozens?—Yes, taking the univer-
sities and colleges.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—They include fiction as well?—Yes,
and light fiction. The tendency is to lighten up the fiction
curricula. If they give a copy of a standard work, such
as Walter Scott or Dickens, they generally lighten that up
with a more recent publication.
Q. —Assuming you have your list, including some pre-
sent-day novel, what number of copies would you sell of
those particular books because of the fact that they are
listed by the universities or schools?—The number would
vary; • you could get at that by getting the number of
students taking that particular year at the university.
Q. —Would it be dozens, hundreds or thousands?—lt
may be hundreds for the university; on a particular year
you might run into a couple of hundred for the university;
but if it were a school textbook it might run into 4000
or 5000.
Q. —I will tell you what was in my mind—that the
books selected would probably be books that would have
a fairly large sale?—Not always; they are books which
are mainly of a standard nature, but the tendency is to
lighten up that form of reading a little. There would be
a book of merit, which would not be a very popular novel,
but a book of merit, a fairly recent publication. There
is one on the university list this year; it is listed there,
something about the Adventures of a Lugger, a travel
book. There is one of Geoffrey Farnol’s books listed.
Q. —What is in my mind is that it may happen that the
specification of a book by universities or schools would
increase its sale. It might even place it in a position of
a book which could be commercially nroduced in Aus-
tralia. Do you see what I mean? The applicants are
willing to exempt those books, but there would be a
difficulty in exempting so many copies of a book in an
endeavour that they should reach the hands of students
and charge duty on the same book for general purposes?
—-The books they put up as textbooks are generally books
that stood the test of time and have had their run, so
that putting them up as textbooks would not increase
their general public sale. Mr. Catts mentioned yester-
day the remainders. They are infinitesimal. In books
occasionally you see a remainder list of something which
you know you would never have a market for. Occasion-
SYDNEY—John Malcolm Forsyth


ally you get a couple of hundred, or something like that.
They are not secondhand books; the only secondhand
books are for those people who are making libraries on
certain subjects; they get these books from London. They
write there and get their selection. There is practically
no bulk importation of secondhand goods; we get too many
secondhand books here—general stuff.
Q. —Could you go to any more degree of definiteness
with regard to remainders? Would you give us a rough
idea of what your number in a year would be of remain-
ders—what percentage of your trade?—Our turnover is
£120,000 a year or more, and the remainders would not
total £250 in a year. It is infinitesimal—it is not a point
at all.
(Witness withdrew.)
WILLIAM AUGUSTUS CREW.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
are appearing?—As Manager of the N.S.W. Bookstall Co.
Ltd., comer Castlereagh and Market streets, Sydney. The
shareholders of that company all reside in N.S.W. I have
prepared a statement, which is as follows:
The company are booksellers, publishers, and the
largest retail distributors in New South Wales of maga-
zines and periodicals, and I desire to place before you
my reason why a duty should not be imposed on litera-
ture.
If a duty becomes effective it will mean a very serious
loss to my company. We estimate that we would lose
the sale of 60 to 70 per cent, of the overseas publica-
tions, and as this loss would not be compensated for
by an increase in the sale of local publications, the loss
of trade must necessarily mean that our staff would
have to be reduced, or junior or female labour substi-
tuted for that of male assistants.
From our experience we know that Australian pub-
lishers have nothing to fear from the importation of
books or other publications. Australian publications
generally are much cheaper, and many of them com-
mand very large circulation. For instance, Smith’s
Weekly, Bulletin, Sydney Mail, Australasian, World’s
News, Woman’s Mirror, Woman’s Budget, Humour,
Wireless Weekly, Referee, Arrow, Woman’s World, New
Idea, Listener-In, Life, Home Beautiful, Home Car-
penter, Australian Home Journal, Home Budget, Home,
Stead’s Review, Australian Journal, Aussie, Motor in
Australia, Motor Life, Motor Owner, Photoplayer, and
many others. The overseas publications are necessary,
for they are an incentive to Australian publishers to
maintain a high standard; whilst there is healthy com-
petition the general public are the gainers. Overseas
magazines and books have a much wider field to cater
for—the English-speaking world—and are, therefore,
assured of a much larger circulation, which enables the
publishers to pay the highest rates to its contributors,
and thus commanding the best brains of the world,
which bring their publications up to a standard tha f we
cannot expect to reach for many years. Impose a duty,
and you will decrease our field for education, affecting
the young and old.
As publishers of approximately thirty years’ standing,
we do not consider that a duty on literature would be
beneficial to us. Limitation of imports of books would
not have the effect of increasing sales of our local pro-
ductions; by curtailing our business in overseas books
(such business being carried on in conjunction with
our publishing), our field of operations would be re-
stricted, and possibly the publishing side of our busi-
ness would have to be discontinued. We can definitely
state that the success of our publishing, in a measure,
has been accomplished by the aid of sales of overseas
publications. Therefore, we do not favour the imposi-
tion of a duty on any class of literature, for, as pub-
lishers, we consider such a duty would be detrimental.
Publishing was commenced by us in 1900 and main-
tained during a period when the importation of cheap
literature was at its highest point, namely, from 1900
to the beginning of the World War in 1914. Fiction,
which was most likely to compete against our own
local publications, was imported in'large numbers and
sold at a very low price. The novel priced at 6/ to-day
was sold at 3/6 and 2/6, whilst paper-covered editions,
at 6d., flooded the market. Yet the publication of our
local books grew apace until sales reached very high
figures. Owing to a limited market, Australian pub-
lishers take a heavy risk when estimating probable
sales, for there is always the possibility of a book
failing to catch the public taste, and two or three
months after publication may not be worth the paper
it is printed on, and in any case would have to be sold
at a heavy loss.
We stress this point, because the field for successful
publication of books in Australia is very limited, owing
to the small population. It is much wiser to allow
publishing to progress, as it has hitherto to a wonderful
extent, by natural process than to use forcing methods.
As publishers, we are content to face competition, if
any, from abroad, but we do not consider free import
of literature to be competition. It is, we consider, a
leaven which is necessary to keep Australian literature
healthy.
Q. —To what extent do you consider your company is
a publisher, as compared with a bookseller?—To a very
small extent. We are greater importers than we are pub-
lishers. Still, at the same time, we have published books
to a total number, probably, of six million copies.
Q. —What is the average number per book?—We gener-
ally start off with an edition of 5000, which is usually
printed at a loss, and we expect to make profit on the suc-
ceeding editions; and, naturally, if there are no succeeding
editions, they remain a loss. There has been some talk
about dumping, and, unfortunately, that has been our
experience with Australian publications. We have had to
dump some of our own, simply because they did not sell.
We could not get a resale, or we could not sell them at any
price.
Q. —Do you consider it necessary to set out with an
edition of 5000, and if you do, it does not ensure a profit?
—lt does not. I refer principally to our own series, which
are published and retailed at 17 per copy, such as Steele
Rudd’s, Arthur Wright and Charles Wright’s books.
Q. —Could you give the Board the percentage of re-
mainders out of those that you sell in a year, as compared
with your total sales?—No, I do not think I could say
that with any degree of certainty, but I do know this:
we recently retailed to Anthony Hordern’s a quantity
numbering 115,000, which they are selling at 4d. a copy.
Q. —Were they remainders of yours ?—Yes, of our own
books, published here in Sydney; not imported at all.
Q. —How many imported remainders—that is what I
wanted to get at?—We do not handle them at all. We
do not import any remainders from the Old Country at all.
It is not part of our business. So far as remainders of
magazines are concerned, we certainly have handled a few
of those, simply because our competitors were doing it.
We are absolutely against the importation of any back-
date magazines. So far as secondhand magazines are
concerned, I know there have been a certain number
brought here, but we do not handle them.
Q. —And you are one of the biggest retail distributors
in N.S.W.?—Yes.
Q. —You do not handle imported remainders?—No.
Q. —In this matter of duty, there surely is a difference
in a proposal to place a duty on magazines and a pro-
posal to place a duty on books?—A magazine is only a
book in serial. Magazines come either weekly, fortnightly,
monthly or quarterly, and they really contain the best
fiction which it is possible to get. The authors are not
confined to England or America, but there are Continental
SYDNEY—William Augustus Creu>


authors whose writings have been translated. You get
the best ficiton in short stories, and by the magazine you
are really getting the best fiction it is possible to get;
that is to say, in the magazine you get better fiction than
you do in a book itself, because in a book you are confined
to one author.
Q. —If you were publishing a magazine in Australia,
would not the world’s stories be open to you?—No, I do
not think so. In the first place, the author would not
get the price; the circulation in Australia is much smaller
than the Old World circulation. You could not produce
the “Windsor Magazine” or the “Strand,” or the “Argosy,”
or any magazine like that in Australia.
Q. —Are there enough of them circulating in Australia
to warrant proprietors of them publishing an Australian
edition ?—-I do not think so.
Q. —There must be a big sale in Australia?—There is
a big sale, but the overhead costs, I think, would be too
great, and I do not think it would be warranted. We
have our own Australian magazines, and in my opinion
the English and American magazines are really an extra
to a person who has already got an Australian magazine.
For instance, take “Smith’s Weekly.”
By Mr. Kelly.- -Do you class “Smith’s Weekly” as a
magazine?—Yes, it is a magazine in weekly form. The
“Bulletin” is a magazine, and you have such other things,
as “Life,” “Stead’s Review,” and others. Mr. Catts men-
tioned his brother yesterday; he is the publisher of
“Aussie,” which competes very successfully against over-
seas. Then he has the other publication, “Humour,” a
weekly paper. I suppose that is a very big selling line,
and there would be more copies of “Humour” than the
“Humorist” sold in Australia. We can only sell some
importations to the casual few and to subscribers. In
some of them we do not average one copy per branch.
Then, again, take the “Sphere,” or the “London News.”
It is idle to suggest that they can compete against the
“Western Australian,” the “Australasian,” or the “Sydney
Mail,” or anything like that. I think they get some of
the things from the overseas stuff to put in them.
Q. —Some of the publications are merely scissors and
paste?—Yes, the “World’s News” is practically scissors
and paste. Mr. Catts, who was here yesterday, has his
own paper. He has the “Home Budget,” and that has
a far larger circulation than “Weldon’s Journal” in Aus-
tralia. I am afraid if his suggestion were adopted that
“Weldon’s Journal” should be published in Australia, it
would be very detrimental to the Australian interests,
or more detrimental than having it published overseas,
because I think it would be good-bye to some of our
publications.
Q. —Do you think you have overestimated the calamity
that would attend the imposition of a duty. You seem to
think it would reduce your sales?—l think I am rather
conservative. Two or three years ago the “Saturday
Evening Post” was sold in Sydney at 6d. The price went
up to 1/6, not due to any duty, but due to the action
of the publishers on the other side. I understand they
did not want an Australian circulation. The sales fell
immediately, and when we got down to rock-bottom our
sales were just 79J per cent, less than they had been.
Q. —You lost four-fifths of your sales?—Yes, and I
think if we had continued it longer we would have lost
the whole of them.
By Mr. Kelly.—Do you think there would be more of the
“Bulletin” bought as a result of that?—lt may have been
for that reason, or the fact that the Bulletin improved
considerably; the sale of the “Bulletin” has gone up
wonderfully—at any rate, during the last few years—but
I really think that is because the “Bulletin” has improved
very considerably. If you give the public good stuff they
will buy it. It does not matter whether it is English
nr Australian. We can 'always sell a good article.
Q. —“Smith’s Weekly” has a good circulation?—Yes,
probably the largest of its kind anywhere in Australia.
By the Chairman.—You were giving us an instance of a
rise in price to 1/6. Evidently you are estimating there
is going to be a tremendous rise in the cost of production
and the selling price if this duty were imposed?—We can
only go by what we are told by these people who are
presenting this case. They said if the duty were imposed
as suggested the price of the “Saturday Evening Post”
would be 8/6. Mr. Catts’ brother said the other day that
the printers themselves recognised that the “Saturday
Evening Post” was a paper well worth copying from; they
reckoned it was an incentive to themselves.
Q. —The “Saturday Evening Post” is an outside argu-
ment to bring in here on the matter of duty, because it
is obviously not sold in Australia at cost?—No.
There is no relation between cost and selling price?—
That is quite true, but the “Sydney Morning Herald” is
sold for a price that is not cost. The publishers of these
papers get a great deal of their revenue from the adver-
tisements. If you took a journal that'had no advertise-
ments—it would be pretty hard to find—the cost would
be pretty high.
By Mr. Bercholdt.—What is the “Saturday Evening
Post” to-day?—One shilling.
Q. —Has the sale of that increased?—Yes, it has in-
creased considerably.
By the Chairman.—The “Round Table” was mentioned
yesterday. Do you circulate that?—Yes, mostly to sub-
scribers; there is very little retail trade.
Q. —Has it a fair circulation in Australia?—Our sales
are very small; a casual sale is practically all there is.
We have a few subscribers.
Q. —Has it any advertisements?—l really could not say.
Mr. Catts yesterday mentioned overseas fashion journals,
but he did not tell you his paper has a larger circulation
than any one of them. Some of these high-class fashion
journals are circulated; the circulation is small, mostly
to the dressmakers.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—What are they sold at?—Some of
the prices go up to 10/.
Q. —How many of those are coming in—different jour-
nals?—We would handle about 20 of these high-class
journals. The weekly papers, I suppose, would comprise
65 per cent, at least, made up of Australian productions
and 35 per cent, of the English and American productions;
that is our weekly list, I should say.
Q.- —With these expensive journals which go to dress-
makers, they are subscribers?—Yes, it would not pay
the average bookseller to handle them. You could not
get 3d. a copy for them when they are out of date,
because when a pattern is out of date it is of no value
at all except for cutting up purposes.
By the Chairman.—There is a very general statement
in the application, and is your statement intended as an
objection against fashion books and so forth being duti-
able?—We have, no serious objection, because our sales
are not affected by the high-class fashion journals, because
the sales are very small.
Q. —Your lack of obiection is because you are not
affected?—Yes, the small journals would be affected, such
as Weldon’s.
(Witness withdrew.)
WILLIAM ERNEST DUNNETT.
Sworn and Examined.
By tne Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—l am the Resident Representative in Australasia
for the Amalgamated Press Limited, of 499 Little Collins
street, Melbourne, an incorporated English company with
a capita] of £6.200,009, who issue 62 weekly and 36
monthly publications, also part-publications. On behalf
of this company I tender evidence in opposition to a tariff
being placed on the entry of British periodicals into Aus-
tralia, for the following reasons:—
(1) The imposition of any tariff by the Commonwealth
Government of Australia would seriously hamper the dis-
SYDNEY — William Augustus Crew


tribution and necessarily curtail the circulation of British
periodicals in that country.
(2) At the present time over one thousand different
periodicals are published in the British Isles. Their appeal
is of infinite variety, and their contents comprise the
results of research of the principal scientists, educationists
and technical specialists, as well as the works of the
principal writers and artists of the world.
(3) The British periodical press has been built up
during many years, and it has grown to its present dimen-
sions mainly from the fact that Great Britain alone has
a population of forty millions; that enables the British
publisher to demand only what is best for the contents
of his papers.
(4) The population of Australia is six millions, and it
cannot reasonably be expected to support the great variety
of publications that circulate in a country with forty
million inhabitants. The variety of publications circu-
lating among a limited number of people must be re-
stricted, and those papers that come into existence to
meet the demand, other than for daily newspapers, cannot
put down the capital expenditure necessary to ensure a
high standard in contents and production over a wide
range of publications intended to cater for all classes of
society.
(5) If a tax were imposed for the purpose of curtailing
the entry of British publications into the Commonwealth,
the loss would fall heavily on the Australian community,
who, owing to their geographical position, would be de-
prived of the amenities they have enjoyed for many years
in having available a full range of British periodical
literature, international in character. For economic reasons
they would be unable to make good this loss internally.
At the present time they enjoy, equally with the British
public, all the advantages of British publishing produc-
tion, in which over £40,000,000 is invested, and which is
a highly skilled and organised section of industry. It is,
perhaps, unnecessary to stress the fact that a large pro-
porton of this capital has been spent in the installation
of expensive and specialised machinery to obtain the best
possible production results at the most economical cost.
(6) The purpose of a tariff may be intended to give
effect to two purposes—either that a new publication may
be produced in Australia to take the place of those publi-
cations excluded by the tariff, or that British publishers
would be induced to produce in Australia. There is no
British periodical with a sufficient sale in Australia to
make it a commercial proposition to print there. It has
already been shown that the variety of British publications
sent to Australia is considerable. The quantity, however,
of any particular publication, even of the more popular
type, is small. It would be an economic impossibility to
contemplate replacing each variety of British publication
with a similar Australian one locally produced. The sales
would not justify such a venture, and the cost of contri-
butions, engravings, composition, editorial and overhead
charges would be quite disproportionate. It is, of course,
possible, if British periodicals were denied admittance,
that a few local productions would result, but such publi-
cations would, in all probability, be printed for some
years to come on existing machiery in the country, and
little or no additional demand for labour in the printing
world would occur. A considerable part of printing labour
is used in the initial work of composition and making
plates, and this side of the work is governed by the
number of publications, and not by the number of copies
printed. The contention that an additional ten thousand
printers would be employed if a tariff was placed on
imported publications must be inaccurate if careful
analysis is made of those conditions which govern periodi-
cal publishing as we understand them. As an illustration,
we would mention that two of the largest London periodi-
cal houses employ only 2800 men in the printing produc-
tion of 90 weekly and 40 monthly periodicals. The total
amount of paper used, however, in the production of one
issue of each of these publications is over 1200 tons per
week.
(7) Undoubtedly the distributing organisation in Aus-
tralia has been assisted by the gross volume of British
periodicals, which, were they lessened, would materially
affect the distribution costs of all publications produced
locally. With fewer publications to handle and a smaller
turnover, the distributing trade could not employ the same
amount of labour, and retailers would have the same con-
sideration to face.
(8) At present the majority of the periodicals produced
by my company are retailed in Australia at the same
price as in Great Britain—2d. This is only possible owing
to the Australian supplies necessitating a very small run-
on over the large quantities printed for circulation in
Great Britain. The plant employed is very complete and
expensive, and the machines used are very fast running.
Were it otherwise, it would be impossible to transport
these periodicals 12,000 miles and incur very heavy charges
for packing, freight, wharfage, etc., and still be able to
retail them at the English retail price. Any tariff im-
posed would mean an increase in the retail price, which
would result in a very considerable loss in circulation.
This loss would affect the staffs of the wholesale distri-
butors, as, with a decreased volume of trade, they would
not require their present staff, and, in addition, it would
affect the retail newsagents, of whom there are approxi-
mately 7000 in the Commonwealth, who, with a reduced
turnover, would not require the number of assistants at
present employed, and would have to dispense with some
of them.
(9) Part-Publications.—ln the production of these
works, which are of the highest educational value, the
foremost authorities are engaged to write on the various
specialised subjects which they contain. These works are
well and generously illustrated, which makes the cost of
production very high, and the limited number required
to meet the Australian demand could not possibly be
produced here on a profitable basis. A tariff on this class
of publication would make the retail selling price prohibi-
tive, with the result that the Australian public would be
unable to purchase these works, and thus be deprived of
the knowledge contained therein. The following is a list
of some of the works that have already been produced by
my company;—
“Countries of the World.”
“Wonderful Britain.”
“Children’s Encyclopaedia.”
“Peoples of All Nations.”
“Wonderful London.”
“Universal Encyclopaedia.”
“Universal History.”
“Children’s Treasure House.”
“Science of Life.”
“Wonders of Animal Life.”
“Our Wonderful World.”
By the Chairman.—Would you tell the Board the
number of your best sellers sold in Australia? Of course,
I mean in the weekly and monthly lines?—Unquestionably
our best seller would be the coloured comics.
Q. —Particular attention was given to them yesterday
and the expectations expressed that quite as good a job
could be produced in Australia?—l think there it is a
question of machinery largely, and also a question of the
limited circulation.
Q. —Have you any objection to stating what that circu-
lation is, or would you prefer to give it confidentially?—
I think there is another witness here who will be giving
you those figures. He has them with him. I would add
that there are 12 coloured comics.
Q. —Produced by your company?—Produced, yes.
Q. —Do you mean by your company?—Yes, by our com-
pany.
Q. —And has each one a fair circulation?—lt varies
considerably.
Q. —Are they all sold under their own name, or are
SYDNEY—William Ernest Dunnett


they incorporated in publications in Australia—l mean
some of them?—No, they are sold under their own names
as individual publications.
Q. —-As you say, there are two ways that this duty may
have effect. It may shut out entirely existing publi-
cations and lead to a new issue of publications in Aus-
tralia. That is rather a far-fetched idea, I admit, ex-
cepting in a limited way. The other way is that it may
induce or compel overseas publishers to produce some of
their works in Australia?—Yes.
Q. —How many, would you say, of your 62 weekly pro-
ductions are sufficiently strong numerically in their out-
put to justify an Australian edition?—Not one.
Q. —What about your 36 monthly publications ?—Their
circulations are far more limited than the weekly periodi-
cals which you are speaking of.
Q. —I do not want you to take your departure without
you can assure us that you can get the approximate
circulation of each one of these publications?—Yes, that
can be done.
Q. —Will you forward it to the Secretai-y?—l think that
will be produced this morning. Yes, they will be dealt
with by another witness later.
By Mr. Kelly.-—Your evidence seems to have been con-
tradicted somewhat by the witness who preceded you.
You suggest that these cheaper publications could not be
marketed economically here, whereas Mr. Crew indicated
that his best sellers of these lines are Australian publi-
cations?—l do not quite follow you.
Q. —You suggested that the overhead and editorial
expenses of these publications would make their produc-
tion economically impossible in Australia ?—With their
existing circulations.
Q. —Well, of course, you would not expect to get a cir-
culation of any one out of 62, but similar publications,
according to Mr. Crew, are being quite successfully mar-
keted here?—Yes, that is in the monthly publications in
particular, I think, he was referring to.
Q. —I am not well up in this type of literature, but
“Humour,” or the “Humorist,” or some such name ?
Yes, they are weeklies.
Q. —He said that the local publication was well outbid-
ding the imported?—Yes, that is so.
Q. —Indicating that it is possible to produce that type
of literature here successfully as an economic venture?
Yes.
By the Chairman.—ls “Humour” one of yours?—No,
but it is an Australian production.
Q. —And what about the “Humorist”?—The “Humorist”
is imported. That is not one of our publications.
By Mr. Kelly.—But it is similar to what you speak of?
—Yes.
Q. —So that, whatever may be said of the more serious
publications, it does appear that there is a possible market
for this class of cheap periodical. It is possible to pro-
duce them here, obviously, and to compete successfully,
in so much that the paper that you are importing is being
oversold by a locally-produced paper?—Yes, but the ques-
tion of variety comes in all the time. For instance, take
the coloured comic. Whereas we have a net sale gener-
ally which is fairly healthy, individually it is small, and
you must have the variety for the child. I know of actual
cases where a child will go in and not buy one coloured
comic, but he will buy four or five, and it is perfectly
obvious that he would not buy four or five of the one type.
It is the variety they are after all the time.
Q. —You hold that is good for the child—the buying of
four or five?—l do not know. Much depends upon his
means. I take it.
By Mr. Guy.—Are you distributing at all?—No, the dis-
tributing is done through the sole agents.
Q. —Who are they?-—Gordon and Gotch.
(Witness withdrew.)
DAVID STEWART.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
General Secretary of the Workers’ Educational Association
of N.S.W. I have been Secretary of this Association since
1912, and can claim to have had a wide experience in
organising classes of adult students, mainly of wage-
workers. Arranging for the supply of books for such
classes, either textbooks which students may purchase
or libraries to which they are given access, is a very im-
portant part of our work.
From my experience I have no hesitation in saying that
price is a most important factor in determining any text-
book to be used by a class; it would, as a general rule, be
useless to suggest a book costing more than 10/. Even at
that figure the number who could purchase would be small;
the lower the price the bigger the number of sales.
The following is a representative list of books which,
from time to time, have been recommended for purchase
by students. In all cases purchase is optional, and cannot
be otherwise:—
The Science of Wealth (Hobson).
The Evolution of Industry (MacGregor).
Plant Life (Farmer).
Commonsense in Law (Vinogradoff).
Elements of English Law (Geldart).
Political Thought in England; Bacon to Halifax
(Gooch).
Political Thought in England: Benthom to Mill
(Davidson).
(All Home University Library Series.)
Political Economy (Chapman).
Psychology (W. McDougall).
Decay Capitalist Civilisation (S. and B. Webb).
Guide to Political Economy (Spencer).
Economics for the General Reader (Clay).
Principles of Political Economy (Gide).
The Works Manager of To-day (Webb).
Machinery of the Mind (Firth).
Social Psychology (MacDougall).
Psychology; A Study of Mental Life (Wood-
worth).
Psycho-Analysis (E. Jones).
Nursery Years (Isaacs).
Textbook of Sociology (Dealey and Ward).
Europe Since Napoleon (Lovett).
Short History of the World (H. G. Wells).
Landmarks in English Industrial History (Towns-
end and Warner).
Tillage, Trade and Invention (Warner).
The World of Labour (Cole).
Labour in Wartime (Cole).
War and Democracy (Seton Watson and others).
The New Social Order (Atkinson).
Marx and Modern Thought (Portus).
Modern Economic History (Heaton).
Shadows and Realities of Government (Bland).
Psychology and Education (Mcßae).
I might draw attention to the fact that the last five
books on this list have all been printed and published in
Australia, and all, with the exception of “Psychology and
Education,” have been published by our Association, which
may be accepted as evidence that we are very far from
opposing any move which would encourage the local pro-
duction of books; but we do not think it would be possible
to replace any of the other books on this list by local
production. A tax on them would be purely a revenue-
producing tax, which, I feel sure, the advocates of the
proposed tariff and the present Government do not desire.
3. For the bulk of their reading our students are
wholly dependent on libraries. Attached to each class
there is a small libi-ary, supplied by the University on
loan. Our Association also provide a central lending
library. Our average annual expenditure on books for
our central lending library and by the University on bonks
SYDNEY—William Ernest Dunnett


lor class libraries is approximately £250 per year. This
is as much as we can possibly afford. Any additional
cost which may be added by Customs duty would mean
that the number of books purchased would have to be
reduced.
4. Reviewing the books placed in our libraries, the
number which could possibly be printed in Australia is,
in our opinion, wholly disproportionate to the tax on
knowledge which a tariff would impose. I tender herewith
a catalogue of our central lending library in support of
this opinion. There are approximately 2800 imported
books included in this catalogue, and of this number I
doubt if 10 could have been printed in Australia, the sale
for most of them being much too small.
5. Last year we added 517 books to the central lending
library. Probably another 400, many of them duplicates,
would be added to class libraries. Of the number placed
in the central lending library 16 were books printed in
Australia. That included the Year-Book, and also the
Index to the Sydney “Morning Herald.”
6. We have every desire to encourage the local pro-
duction of books, and have, in co-operation with the other
State Associations, provided a series of monographs and
textbooks dealing with Australian social problems, but
even here we have been hampered by the difficulty of
Australia’s small market. Included in our series was a
book by the late Mr. Justice Higgins, “A New Province
for Law and Order.” When arranging for the publication
of this book we found it impossible to persuade an Aus-
tralian publisher to take it up as a commercial proposi-
tion. We were forced to give it to an English publisher,
Messrs. Constable and Company, and their estimate of
the Australian market, apart from our Association itself,
was 500 copies, and I am sure their estimate was not very
far out.
I should be pleased to supplement this statement with
verbal evidence, and would like to add the following reso-
lution, which was passed by the Council of our Association
and indicates very clearly what their attitude is;—
“This Association views with alarm the proposal to
impose Customs taxation upon books, which would make
it still more difficult for working-class students to obtain
the texts they require, and make it impossible to
maintain our class and central lending libraries at their
present standard.
“In our opinion the proposed tax would have no
compensating effect worthy of consideration in relation
to the tax on knowledge which it would impose. We
would point out that none of the cheaper educational
works, such as the Sixpenny Series now so popular in
England, or the W.E.A. Outlines, a series of books
published by our own Association in England for the
use of our students, and retailed generally at prices
ranging from 1/3 to 2/6.
“We are in complete sympathy with the general in-
tentions of those who would foster the growth of Aus-
tralian literature, and we would support the alternative
course of providing a bounty to assist the publication
of desirable books by Australian writers. The Associa-
tion strongly urge these important considerations upon
the Commonwealth Government.”
Q. —What membership has your Association ?—ln New
South Wales approximately 1800.
Q. —And from where are they gathered. Are they all
workers?—l could give you the best answer to that by
giving you the statistics of the occupations. There is
last year’s list. (Produced.)
Q. —Would you say they are mostly good Unionists?—
We never ask them whether they are Unionists or not,
so long as they have a desire to study. Of course, our
propaganda is circulated amongst wage-workers, but the
classes are not limited at all, and. particularly in the
country districts, they must be rather representative of
the towns, and not representative of any particular class.
Q. —What I am interested to know is whether organised
labour, as represented by your members, is against this
proposition?—Well, organised labour is very strongly re-
presented on our Central Council, which passed that reso-
lution.
Q. —It is very strongly represented?—Yes, I suppose out
of 60 members eligible to sit on the Council you could say
over 30 of them are direct representatives of Labour or-
ganisation. A number of others representing the classes
may or may not be.
By Mr. Kelly.—A number of the others would be from
educational institutions. They would not be representing
the employing classes to a large extent?—No. Out-
classes are entitled to membership on the Council. You
can describe them as educational, and, of course, the
University and the Department of Education are also
represented.
By the Chairman.—Was this resolution which you read
carried unanimously?—No, there was one dissentient.
Q. —Was the announcement of the intention to put up
this resolution broadcast before the meeting?—l do not
remember whether it was on the business paper; it came
up under correspondence.
Q. —Can you say how many members were present at
the Council meeting which carried the resolution?
Roughly, about 25.
Q. —And there was only one dissentient?—Only one
dissentient.
By Mr. Kelly.—Do you know of any other attempts
anywhere else to safeguard the building up of local litera-
ture by means of a tariff. We know of the restrictions
placed on importations of books in the United States.
If you have any criticism in reference to the result of
that, it would be of interest as to whether it is or is not
successful in its aim of building up literature. Do you
know of any other attempts anywhere else?—l do not
know of any attempts outside of the U.S.A. I understand
that the U.S.A. have a strong agitation to repeal the
legislation in this connection. In any case the comparison
between the United States and Australia is not a very
good one, looking at it from the point of view of Aus-
tralian writers, at any rate. If you restrict the market
for Australian writers to Australia it would affect them
to a greater extent than the same restriction in the United
Sates, because there is certainly a much bigger market
there.
Q. —You do not know of any other attempt?—No, I do
not know of any other attempt.
Q. —And you think the best way of building up the
literature in Australia is to give access to the world’s
literature in the freest possible manner?—Yes, and I
believe that it would be worth while to assist the produc-
tion of Australian literature by a bounty. I know by
experience with the type of book that we handle, at any
rate, that, unless it has the good fortune to be adopted
as a general textbook by some of the big colleges, or by
some of the Educational Departments, there is practically
no hope of making a commercial success of the publication.
We have financed some publications ourselves, and lost
money on them, and, as I say, it has to be assisted by
some college. For example, I know several books the
publication of which has been partly financed by the
Higginbotham Scholarship in Melbourne.
Q. —Have any of those five books that you published
been a success financially?—Two of them, I can say, have
paid their way. As regards “Psychology and Education”
I do not know, because we did not publish that.
Q. —Professor Heaton’s book should have been a fair
market?—Yes, that paid its way. Ido not know whether
you could call it a commercial success, but we have not
lost any money on it. The other one is Professor Atkin-
son’s book. We were fortunate to have it adopted as a
textbook by certain colleges.
(Witness withdrew.)
SYDNEY—David Stewart


ALEXANDER JAMES DONALDSON GRAY.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
I am the General Manager for Gordon and Gotch (Aus-
tralasia) Limited. Our head office is 509 Little Collins
street, Melbourne, a company, so far as its Australian
interests are concerned, having houses in all the capital
cities of the Commonwealth. The shareholders, number-
ing 1250, are, with a few exceptions, resident Australians.
The whole of the capital of the company was subscribed
in Australia.
Gordon and Gotch (Australasia) Limited hold the dis-
tributing rights in the Commonwealth and New Zealand
for the leading magazine and periodical publishers of
Great Britain, including the Amalgamated Press Limited
(issuing approximately 125 publications), George Newnes
Limited, C. Arthur Pearson Limited, Odhams Limited,
Weldons Limited, and a number of others. The company
is also the Australian representative of the American
News Company Incorporated, which controls the bulk of
the United States magazine distributing trade: the Curtis
Publishing Company, of Philadelphia (“Saturday Evening
Post” and “Ladies’ Home Journal”); Street and Smith, of
New York; the Butterick Publishing Company, of New
York; and Macfadden Publications Incorporated, of New
York. These publishers issue various weekly, fortnightly
or monthly publications, and on a conservative basis it
may be stated that Gordon and Gotch (Australasia)
Limited altogether distribute in their wholesale depart-
ment between 400 and 500 imported publications.
In their subscription department, which caters almost
exclusively for class and technical journals, well over 1000
different oversea publications are dealt with. I think that
is very conservative. If we went into that I think we
would probably double that number. The large amount
represented as being the value of publications and printed
matter imported into Australia is, so far as the publi-
cations are concerned, distributed over thousands of titles
and dates. No particular publication has a circulation in
any way equal to that of a similar Australian publication.
It is the aggregation of the extensive variety which ac-
counts for the substantial import value. A large section
of the company’s business is the distribution of publica-
tions issued by Australian publishers.
The company has a staff of approximately 800 engaged
in their Australian business, a large number of whom are
employed in the department distributing magazines and
periodicals.
The distribution of publications is effected through
newsagents, of whom there are 4853 in Australia. News-
agents, in turn, supply many sub-agents, so that the total
number of businesses engaged in this work of distribution
is between 6000 and 7000. With comparatively few excep-
tions the newsagent has a staff of assistants, the majority
combining with their newsagency trade the business of a
stationer. It would be a conservative estimate to say that
from 20,000 to 25,000 people are engaged in one way or
another in the business of distributing newspapers,
periodicals and magazines. The recognised newsagents
are located:—
1449 in Victoria.
1388 in New South Wales.
851 in Queensland.
638 in South Australia.
495 in Western Australia.
132 in Tasmania.
It will thus be seen that the business of distributing
newspapers, magazines and periodicals has developed con-
siderable proportions, and any action which has the possi-
bility of restricting the means of earning a livelihood of
such a large section of the community must be seriously
considered.
My evidence will be directed to pointing out the fallacy
of the contention that:—
(a) “The great proportion of the imported publications
can be produced as a sound commercial proposition
in Australia.”
(b) “That the result of a duty on magazines and
periodicals will provide employment for 10,000
people.”
These, I understand, are the main arguments in favour
of the imposition of a duty. I will have to quote certain
figures, but they are given with the object of assisting
the Tariff Board, and not for public information.
In considering the question of imported publications a
distinction must be made as between magazines and
periodicals. Magazines are largely educational. A limited
number concentrate upon fiction, but in the main maga-
zines are devoted to the publication of thoughtful articles
and the discussion of scientific problems. There are many
reasons why the production of magazines would not be a
sound commercial proposition in Australia, the principal
being the comparatively limited population in the Com-
monwealth, which would not permit of a sufficient cir-
culation to warrant the outlay. I have taken out the
circulation figures of 34 of the principal popular reading
magazines imported, and they show an average circulation
in Australia of 3316. The minimum circulation of any
of this class of magazine is at least 150,000. It requires
no argument to convince the most ardent advocate of a
duty of the impossibility of producing high-grade maga-
zines with an average circulation of 3316. It is idle to
argue that the combined circulation is possible if the 34
magazines referred to were concentrated into a limited
number which could be produced in Australia. These
magazines cater for a variety of tastes in reading, and it
is impossible to fix the standard of reading to suit all
classes. They are at present produced in large numbers
for distribution throughout the Empire, and, because the
initial cost of printing, authors’ fees, copyright, etc., are
spread over a great output, the cost of production is
reduced to such an extent that the retail price is within
the compass of the great bulk of our people. Another
factor which contributes to the low production costs of
the popular magazines is the large advertising revenue
secured from advertisers because of the extensive British
circulations. This oversea advertising revenue would not
be available to any extent in a purely Australian edition,
nor would local advertisers be attracted by the compara-
tively limited circulation of the magazine produced
locally.
It is an acknowledged fact that the magazines with the
greatest appeal to the average reader carry the bulk of
advertising. Consequently the imposition of a duty on
the advertising section would seriously affect the sales of
this class of publication, and the poorer grades, which
carry little or no advertising, would be favoured. The
advertising matter appearing in magazines, which is not
primarily intended to effect sales to Australian people,
and which is not applicable in the majority of instances
to Australian conditions, is in an altogether different cate-
gory to the imported advertising matter designed to create
Australian sales, and which is already subject to duty. A
great proportion of the advertising in the magazines is
of little or no value to Australian readers from a pur-
chasing point of view, and is therefore not competitive
to Australian manufacturers. Any suggestion that the
advertising section should be subjected to taxation is not
equitable. The Australian circulation would not warrant
the publishers incurring the expense of removing the
advertising pages, and, consequently, the assessment of
the tax would involve great inconvenience for compara-
tively small financial results, in addition to practically
prohibiting the distribution of high-grade publications in
Australia. Moreover, such a duty would in no way be to the
benefit of the Australian printer, inasmuch as it would be
discriminating in its operation, and not protective.
That protection is unnecessary to locally produced pub-
lications of the type which have a strong appeal to Aus-
tralian people is evidenced by the fact that we have
already quite a number of very successful weekly and


monthly journals, which, by reason of the contents being
up-to-date and topical, command a much greater circu-
lation in Australia than any imported publication. I may
say that as far as I can see none of the proprietors of
these publications are applying for a duty, excepting one.
A few of these may be quoted, viz.:—
Australian Home Journal.
Aussie
Australian Journal.
Everylady’s Journal.
Home Beautiful.
Home Budget (which is applying for a duty).
Humour.
Life.
New Idea.
Popular Hobbies.
Stead’s Review.
The Home.
Woman’s Mirror.
Woman’s Budget.
World’s News.
There are a number of technical and wireless publi-
cations published in Australia, which are much more
widely sold than the imported competitive issues. To tax
similar Imported scientific publications would be placing
Australia under a considerable handicap. Local publi-
cations of this nature are purchased for the local interest
and their special appeal to Australians. Oversea pub-
lications are purchased because they reflect oversea thought
and conditions—one in no way clashes with the other.
Oversea technical publications render good service to Aus-
tralian manufacturers in keeping them abreast of the
times.
To give some idea of the number of magazines which
are issued, and which are available to Australian readers,
it is interesting to note that recent subscription catalogues
embrace 1274 English publications, 1066 Continental, and
2961 American. These publications cater for all in-
terests —educational, industrial, scientific, travel, litera-
ture, historical, fiction, etc. Most of them are imported
in small quantities, but are principally read by specialists
in their various lines of thought, scientists, scholars,
manufacturers, etc., and their influence is widespread.
The outstanding fact is that, while the variety is large,
the individual quantities imported are relatively small,
and their influence is great. An analysis of these cata-
logues shows that probably three-fourths of the publi-
cations are devoted to scientific and technical subjects,
religion, agriculture, etc., a small percentage to fiction,
while not an inconsiderable number are devoted to
thoughtful articles on social and economic problems. It
would surely be a retrograde step for a country geo-
graphically isolated, as is Australia, to erect a tariff wall
with the object of limiting the distribution of publications
which set out for our edification various aspects of world
problems of all kinds. Australians welcome and seek to
know the thoughts of the world’s educationalists and his-
torians, the current progress of events, and have always
evinced a desire to acquire up-to-date knowledge of world
affairs generally. The tie that binds the great British
Empire exists in no small measure because of the dis-i
semination of reading matter found in the pages of the
literary magazines of the day.
Periodicals, as distinct from magazines, appeal to dif-
ferent sections of readers. Broadly speaking, they in-
clude children’s papers, women’s and family papers, and
fashion journals.
Children’s papers may be subdivided into three sections
—comics, boys’ and girls’ papers. The first-tnamed pro-
vide- for the younger children a healthy and harmless
amusement, and have a distinct influence, inasmuch as
they cultivate a taste for reading. The reading matter
is designed to suit children of varying ages, and the illus-
trations are attractive and devoid of any vulgarity. In
many instances words are syllabified to assist the younger
children in their reading. A section of these papers is
distinctly educational, as, for example, “Children’s News-
paper,” edited by Arthur Mee, whose reputation as a
writer on subjects which interest and educate the young
mind is world-wide.
To assist the Board in determining whether it is pos-
sible to produce this class of literature successfully in
Australia, I propose to refer particularly to the coloured
comics, because they command a wider circulation in
Australia than any other class of periodical issued. As
circulation is the basis of successful production, if the
argument against the local production of coloured comics
is sound, it is surely much stronger when applied to other
and less widely circulated periodicals.
Coloured comics are printed in two and three colours.
The plant required for printing is necessarily compli-
cated and expensive, and for economical production must
be employed during the whole of the working week. The
normal rate of production of the plant is 10,000 copies
per hour, equivalent to 400,000 weekly. The staff engaged
in the compilation of this class of literature are specialists
in their various departments, and the organisations are
designed and equipped for this particular business. The
success of any of these issues is dependent upon a regular
circulation of at least 150,000 copies per issue. This figure
is supplied by the British publishers. The average cir-
culation in Australia of the twelve coloured comics is
15,296.
It may be contended that the present combined cir-
culations could be concentrated upon one or two publi-
cations, but my answer is that our experience shows that
children are even more fastidious than their elders in
respect to their choice of literature. Each of these publi-
cations caters for children of varying ages, and what
has an appeal to one section does not interest another.
It is the considered opinion of all the managers of our
company and departmental managers interested in this
particular business that it would be impossible to concen-
trate the varied appeals of children’s papers into one or
two publications.
If, under more favourable circumstances than we assert
could possibly exist, and irrespective of cost, it were
possible to produce these comics in Australia, not more
than one or two could be printed here, for even the total
sales, assuming quite unwarrantably that one or two
could attain the total sales of twelve, would be insufficient
to utilise the capacity of the machines necessary for this
work—machines with an output of 10,000 per hour and
an enormous overhead and maintenance cost. It must
also be remembered that no general advertising can be
secured for this class of children’s papers, but the pub-
lishers use them as a means of announcing features in
respect to allied publications, which take the form of
advertisements.
The bulk of these coloured comics and other children’s
papers are distributed in industrial centres. Our managers
have very carefully analysed the circulation of this type
of publication in the metropolitan areas in Australia, and
find that the percentage distributed in industrial areas is
as follows:
Per cent.
Melbourne 66.84
Sydney 75.00
Brisbane 38.00
Adelaide 49.80
Perth 45.00
Launceston 39.53
From these figures it will be seen that the children of
the industrial classes would be affected principally if a
duty were imposed on these publications, and would prob-
ably be deprived of what is now a great and inexpensive
source of interest and amusement to them were the exist-
ing excellently produced publications increased in price.
It is owing to the number of publications arriving, which
are distributed simultaneously to newsagents, that the
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Gray


cost of handling is reduced to such an extent that the
majority of these publications are retailed in the metro-
politan areas in Australia at the same price as they are
being retailed in Great Britain.
Emphasis is laid upon this point because it is surely a
rather commendable fact that after allowing for freight
and handling charges the Australian child is able to pur-
chase his papers at the same price as the child in Great
Britain, where there is practically no transport charge.
The Boys’ and Girls’ Papers cater for children of
maturer age, and, although they are not illustrated in
the same way as the comics, the cost of production would
be prohibitive when the Australian circulation is taken
into consideration.
To substantiate the contention that the circulation of
imported publications would not justify local production,
the following figures are quoted, representing imported
publications, i.e.:—
13 Women’s Publications with an average circulation
of 3055.
15 Fashion Journals with an average circulation of
4332.
13 Family Papers with an average circulation of
2157.
The imported fashion papers contain patterns, which
are already subject to a duty of 1/ per lb. (English) and
1/6 per lb (foreign). That has recently been increased to
that figure. There was a 50 per cent, increase recently
imposed. I need not look any further for argument
against an increased duty on this class of publication than
to direct attention to the wide circulation obtained by
similar papers printed and published in Australia, some
attaining a circulation of well over 100,000 per issue.
These locally produced papers have circulations many
times greater than that of any English fashion journal in
Australia, largely because of the decided advantage en-
joyed by the Australian in the production of seasonal
patterns, whereas the imported publications contain de-
signs suitable only to the English season. Fashion journals
are of great value to the ladies of the community, and
particularly dressmakers and milliners, as a guide to
coming fashions.
Family papers are purely of a domestic character, con-
taining household hints, fiction of an elevating type, and
are thoroughly up-to-date in their advice to housewives.
They include Sunday papers, which are strictly religious
publications of the type of “British Weekly,” “Sunday
Companion,” “Christian Herald,” “Jewish Chronicle,”
“Catholic Times,” etc., and find their circle of readers
amongst the religious community. They are contributed
to by leading divines and men of letters.
If newspapers are included in the proposals for duty,
I would remind the Board that there are many technical,
medical and business publications which are designated
under the heading of newspapers. The great weeklies,
such as the London “Weekly Times,” “Illustrated News,”
“Graphic,” “Sphere,” “Daily Mirror,” etc., come within
the designation of newspapers.
Technical and medical newspapers are particularly
valuable to the professions and trades of the Common-
wealth, while the illustrated weeklies have a distinct
influence on Empire unity. Already our great illustrated
weekly newspapers cater for the section of the cam-
munity which looks for illustrations of local events, but
the “Illustrated News,’ “Graphic,” etc., illustrate events
which are beyond the scope of local publications.
I would emphasise the impossibility of producing in
Australia even an extremely limited number of the publi-
cations at present imported, unless at greatly increased
cost, which might possibly make the retail price pro-
hibitive, and therefore the argument that additional em-
ployment would result from the imposition of a duty
has no sound foundation. The duty would not force pub-
lishers to establish factories in Australia or to give
the printing of their publications to established printeries.
The only effect of such a duty would be to increase the
price to the reader, and assuredly circulations would sub-
stantially diminish. Apart from the adverse influence
this would have on the Australian people as a nation by
I'eason of not having at their command the magazine
literature of the world, it would be disastrous to the news-
agency trade, in which there are, as pointed out, at least
20,000 people engaged. It is not contended that news-
agents are solely dependent upon the sale of imported
publications for their livelihood, but the business is an
important section with them, and any restriction in trade
must inevitably be followed by a reduction in staff, and in
the case of the smaller agents the possibilities are a
number would be compelled to relinquish operations.
Newsagents’ terms provide for a return to them on the
sale of imported publications of from 25 per cent, to
33 1/3 per cent, gross, the former predominating. It will
be seen that they have no margin to take care of a duty.
The wholesaler’s margin, after providing for all charges
incidental to the distribution of publications, in no case
is in excess of 4 per cent., probably 3 per cent. Thus it
will be seen that it would be impossible for the trade to
absorb any duty, which, consequently, must be passed on
to the reader.
Books.
Consideration of the question of imposing a duty on
books, other than intellectual or scientific works, brings
into prominence who is to determine the line of demar-
cation between a work of fiction and an educational work.
Charles Dickens, Sir Walter Scott, R. L. Stevenson, Gals-
worthy and numberless other authors primarily wrote
fiction, but no one will contest the tremendous influence
writers of this standard have upon the community.
During 1929, according to the Publishers’ Circular,
14,086 new titles were produced in Great Britain. This
enormous output is at the command of the Australian
reader, and it would be a retrograde step to erect any
barrier which would in any way check the wide dissemina-
tion in Australia of literature produced in Great Britain.
A substantal proportion of the books imported into
Australia comprise what is known as reprints. These are
reissues in a cheaper form of successful works of fiction.
Printed in large numbers they are distributed throughout
the Empire, and it is because of the extraordinarily large
circulation thus achieved that they are retailed in Aus-
tralia at a comparatively low price. Thus the Australian
reader has at his or her command the fiction literature
of the British market at prices well within reach. In a
later paragraph I will deal with a venture which the
company I represent, made in printing and publishing
somewhat similar issues in Australia. We failed, not
because our titles did not appeal, but because it was
impossible to dispose of a sufficient quantity in Autralia
to make the proposition commercially successful. I pro-
duce reprints of books. -
By Mr. Kelly.—What about the coyprights ?—Those are
English productions.
Q. —Yes, I know those are reprinted?—Yes, those are
imported reprints. My point is that, being reprinted,
they are able to be sold here at a low price. They are
comparatively recent books.
By the Chairman.—Are they reprinted by the original
publisher?—Yes.
Q. —In each instance?—Yes.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Are they sold at these marked
prices?—No, there is 6d. advance on those. My statement
continues:—
I am not unmindful of the fact that books have been
printed in Australia and retailed at a lesser price than in
the country of origin. This is quite understandable with
certain works which are outstanding, and to realise the
reasons why these particular issues were sold at a cheaper
rate in Australia it would be necessary to become fully
acquainted with the details of each arrangement with the
author and publisher. It is quite conceivable that a dif-
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Gray


ferent basis of author’s royalty was established in respect
to Australian issues, and generally the Australian issue is
not comparable in appearance with the original edition.
That books of this character will be produced in Australia
in future in larger numbers without the aid of a duty is
undoubted, but it must necessarily be a slow development,
which will not be assisted by the imposition of a duty.
Success depends entirely upon the volume of circulation.
Reference has been made to the fact that books desig-
nated as Colonial Libraries are sold cheaper in Australia
than the same book issued in the English edition. That
is partly made possible by the variation in the payment
of author’s royalty. In Great Britain royalties are paid
according to the retail selling price (7/6). For the Aus-
tralian (or Colonial) edition the royalty is paid on the
rate charged by the publisher to the wholesaler, approxi-
mately 31.
By the Chairman.—ls it an ad valorem royalty?—Yes,
it is per value. My statement continues:—
The establishment of the system of issuing a Colonial
Library edition dates back many years—probably half a
century. The British publisher, to encourage export trade,
determined upon the creation of the Colonial Library, and
what was originally established as an experiment has
developed into a custom which no bookseller would like
to see altered. Colonial Libraries are issued simul-
taneously with the English editions, and are mostly con-
fined to works of fiction.
It would be impossible to produce in Australia anything
approaching the variety of fiction now available by draw-
ing upon the Home market. Obviously also, because, as
pointed out, of the large printing order originally placed
in England, costs of production are reduced, whereas if
the local publisher had to rely upon the Australian field
entirely for circulation the production costs must, by
reason of the limited demand, be considerably advanced.
Books are educational and informative. There are ex-
ceptions to this general rule, but ample provision already
exists in the Customs Department to deal with these
exceptions. Any action which would have a restrictive
influence in the dissemination of educational information
is surely not in the best interests of the community.
Books are in a class by themselves, and cannot be con-
sidered in the same way as ordinary merchandise. The
amount of protection would fluctuate according to the
circulation of each particular book. There are thousands
of books which only have a limited circulation in Aus-
tralia, and the protection necessary to enable them to be
produced profitably locally is an indefinite quantity. Pre-
liminary production costs are the same whether a book
has a circulation of 1000 copies or 100,000. Included in
the preliminary production charges are the typesetting,
reading and correction, and author’s remuneration, whiclr
is determined by the extent of the sales. Before these
costs can be covered, in the case of ari ordinary work of
fiction, a circulation of at least 2000 copies is necessary.
Recent advices show that only exceptional novels reach
a circulation of 1000 copies in Australia. 'lt was stated
at the Booksellers’ Conference recently by a leading book-
seller that with many authors an offer of 250 would be
sufficient to secure the rights for the Australian market.
The same gentleman also estimated that about one in
every 1000 novels produced in Great Britain would show
a profitable return on a purely Australian edition.
The imposition of a duty would necessarily mean an
increased retail price, affecting sales proportionate to the
increase, with the result that many of the smaller book-
selling businesses would in all probability be compelled
to dispense with assistants. Thus, instead of creating
employment, the effect of the duty would be the reverse.
A duty would not be to the benefit of the Australian
author. The most popular Australian authors can only
rarely command a sufficiently large sale in Australia to
warrant local production. They have to take advantage
of the world-wide selling organisation which oversea pub-
lishers have at their command, enabling them to sell
quantities far in excess of what an Australian publisher
could sell of the same work, and, as the average basis of
remuneration is a royalty on the number sold, obviously
the Australian author is best served by the British pub-
lisher.
A tax upon books would penalise approximately 95 per
cent, of the publications read by the public, to the benefit
of 5 per cent., which would be printed in Australia.
The company which I represent has already had some
experience in the production of paper-bound works of
fiction. Our first effort was in 1913, when we published
nine titles of 5000 each. The cost of production varied
from 3id. to sid. per copy, according to the bulking of
the contents. Royalties varied from id. to lid. per copy.
We were able, owing, perhaps, to the restriction of sup-
plies from overseas during the war years, to dispose of
this stock, although, I am advised, the financial returns
were not satisfactory. In 1919-20 we produced a further
nine titles, with editions of 5000 in the case of five titles,
and 10,000 in the case of four titles. The authors were
good—Sewell Ford and Harben principally. The pro-
duction costs varied from 4id. to 7d. per copy, and the
royalty was paid on 15,000 each of Sewell Ford’s books,
but only 10,000 were printed. One title on which royalty
on 15,000 copies was paid was not produced. In 1923,
owing to the lack of demand, stocks of these titles were
written down to 2id., and last year some thousands of the
remainder were sold at lid. each. The loss on this
venture, irrespective of working expenses, was £I2OO.
Similar works are now being landed from England at
4id. per copy, inclusive of royalty. As already pointed
out, the venture was unsuccessful, because we were re-
stricted to the Australian and New Zealand field, which
was not sufficiently responsive. A British publisher would
regard a circulation of 5000 of a title of a paper reprint
in Australia as an outstanding success.
Our venture in the production of picture books was
equally unsatisfactory. We produced 95,000 picture books
at a cost of from 3d. to 1/IJ., according to the style of
book. The total production cost was £3356/19/6. In suc-
cessive years we depreciated our heavy remainders, until
we were offering them from Id. to 2Jd. per copy. Ulti-
mately, in 1927, we wrote out the balance of the stock,
and destroyed thousands. Admittedly, our picture books
were not comparable in appearance with the imported
issues which they had to meet in competition, hence our
failure. To enable us to issue picture books to compete
successfully our initial cost would have probably made the
retail price prohibitive. This condition would still obtain
if a sufficiently high duty to permit of Australian issues of
this class of book were imposed.
Books are produced in Great Britain by printing fac-
tories which concentrate upon this class of work. The
average general printer, such as we have in Australia, is
not at all interested in producing books. Book production
is a section of the printing trade which is highly spe-
cialised.
As an illustration of how essential the British publish-
ing house is to the Australian author, I would mention
Frank A. Russell’s novel, “The Ashes of Achievement.”
This was published in Australia some few years ago, the
printing being done by a Melbourne firm, the Specialty
Press. For some unaccountable reason—not the lack of
merit in the work—the book was not a success in Aus-
tralia, with the result that a large number were sold at a
greatly reduced price. Quite recently T. Fisher Unwin
Ltd., publishers, of London, have incorporated this work
in their “First Novel” Library, copies of which have just
reached Australia. It is rather significant, as emphasis-
ing the failure of this book to make good when originally
Published in Australia, that the edition now issued by
T. Fisher Unwin Ltd. bears the imprint of the Melbourne
printer. Evidently the sheets, as printed in Australia,
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Gray


were sent to England to be bound and issued by the
English publisher.
On the best of authority I am advised that the Master
Printers’ Associations in the various States, who should
be the best judges of the effect of the proposed duty, have
rejected the proposal that a duty should be imposed on
books, magazines and periodicals.
On the question of the amendment of the Copyright Law
I do not propose to go further than to quote from the
“Publisher and Bookseller,” London, February 7th, 1930:
“To alter the Copyright Act in the way suggested,
and make copyright in Australia dependent on manu-
facture in the Commonwealth, would be almost more
unwise than to impose an import tax on books, as it
would be a cruel blow against the interests of the
native-born Australian writer. It would cut him off
from the other markets of the British-speaking world,
as such an alteration of the copyright law would make
it necessary for Australia to withdraw from the Inter-
national Copyright Union, which secures to a writer
his copyright in practically all the civilised countries
of the world, since the prime condition of membership
of the union is that copyrght should he protected, with-
out any conditions or formalities at all. Can Australia
offer her writers such a home sale of their books that
it will compensate them for the loss of the wider
markets?”
My objections to the proposed duties are:—
(a) That, even if the higher rate of duty suggested
were adopted, it would not be followed by the pro-
duction to any extent in Australia of books, maga-
zines or periodicals at present imported, inasmuch
as circulation is the basis of profitable production,
the population in the Commonwealth will not, for
many years, at the present rate of progress, be
sufficient to secure the necessary circulations.
(b) Consequently, as the result of a duty, little or no
additional employment could be offered Australian
workmen.
(c) Necessarily, any duty would require to be paid by
the reader. Consequently the duty would consti-
tute a tax on knowledge.
(d) Because of the increased retail price necessitated
by the imposition of a duty circulations would
inevitably diminish, and the revenue results be dis-
appointing.
(e) Diminished circulations means reduced opportuni-
ties of employment. A well-established industry
would be seriously interfered with, without any
corresponding benefit to any section of the com-
munity.
I am submitting a further short statement, as fol-
lows:
It is impossible to traverse the whole of the state-
ments made by the claimant in favour of the duty at this
session, and I ask the Board’s permission to be allowed to
reply in greater detail at the next meeting. There are,
however, one or two outstanding statements which should
not be allowed to pass unchallenged at the earliest oppor-
tunity.
Fiction, we maintain, is educative, and in a large
rheasure of good influence. The few exceptions, which
receive so much free publicity, cannot rightly place a
stigma on the thousands of titles of' wholesome fiction
which have helped us all to while away many a pleasant
hour, and have, incidentally, played an important, though,
perhaps, an unconscious part, in moulding our reading
tastes.
Fiction is not dumped on this market to any noticeable
extent. It is rarely, indeed, that any Australian importer
would consider taking the risk of incurring importing
charges on publishers’ remainders. Exceptionally cheap
books, selling at 7i5d., are large-quantity productions, and
are a boon to those who must practise economy in these
matters.
Children’s Annuals (samples produced) are compiled to
appeal to the children, and are both instructive and enter-
taining, with a high moral tone throughout. They are
produced in England in enormous quantities, and are
replete with illustrations, coloured and otherwise, to an
extent which would make it impossible to produce them in
quantities saleable in Australia at many times the price.
Illustrations and blocks particularly are an exceptionally
high initial expense.
Children’s Comics sell at to 2d. each on their
merits, and are not comparable in any way with Sunday
paper supplements. The English publishers have the
greatest difficulty in securing contributors and artists—
this difficulty is much more pronounced than with adults’
papers, as some Australian dailies who have tried to
emulate the successful supplements which are to-day in
existence could testify.
The claimant referred on more than one occasion to
“the deluge of competition from imported fashion jour-
nals.” I have quoted you figures to show that the alle-
gations of a deluge are in the nature of a myth. The
catalogues to which reference was made are, I understand,
imported as advertising matter, upon which duty of 1/
per lb. in the case of the English publications, and 1/6
per lb. in the case of American publications, is being paid.
These catalogues are not handled by my company, and
do not come within the scope of periodicals. When Eng-
lish fashion periodicals do make reference to an Australian
pattern address, they are classified as advertising matter,
and duty is levied at the rates above quoted.
The fact that some of the patterns (not all) are obtain-
able locally is indicative of a demand which overseas
publishers feel they must provide for. To our certain
knowledge some of these local pattern agencies are quite
unprofitable to the publishers.
The supplies of fashion books were not cut off during
the war—at no time was there more than five weeks
between shipments—and supplies arrived by each mail-
boat in larger quantities than at present.
The editions marked “Australian Edition” are similar
in every respect to the English supplies. The distinction
is necessary, because an Australian price is shown, or the
English price is deleted. These supplies are portion of
the first and only printing, and are shipped as soon as
they are off the presses.
The proposers in the case for a duty mention £6,000,000
as the additional production in Australia which would
follow a duty. They claim 11,000 additional employees
would be engaged. As these figures apply to all classes of
paper and paper manufactures, it will be clear that not
much of the £6,000,000 will consist of books and maga-
zines, of which only £1,300,000 in value are imported. As
employees to production equal only one to every £550 of
general printing manufactures, and as books call for less
labour than other classes of printing, it is safe to say
that extra production of £250,000 (in our opinion quite an
impossible attainment, but mentioned merely to demon-
strate our point) would create employment for 450 em-
ployees—something quite different to 11,000 —and at that
not nearly within the realms of possibility.
Incidentally, it was stated that one of the burdens placed
on the local printer was the result of a 10 per cent, in-
crease in paper in anticipation of a surtax. The increase
was agreed to by merchants, but not 10 per cent, on all
papers, and was in consequence of high exchange costs.
We know this, because we were parties to the arrange-
ment.
With regard to the statement that special consideration
is paid to the development of sales of imported publi-
cations, as compared with Australian, I direct your at-
tention to recent issues of the “Newsagents’ Bulletin”
(produced), issued by my company fortnightly to the
newsagents, reference to which will show you that pro-
minence is given to increasing sales of Australian publi-
cations. English publishers are just as alive to the oppor-
tunities of developnig sales as the Australian publishers.
50
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Gray


and my company co-operates just as cordially with the
Australian publishers as with the English in this direc-
tion.
Another point I would desire to impress upon the Board
is that the Australian importations, of magazines and
periodicals do not represent an overprint of the supply.
In almost every case definite orders are placed by my
company, and executed by the publishers. The exceptions
are when a new publication is placed upon the market, and
we have no opportunity of fixing our actual requirements
until the market has been tested.
The suggestion that 25 per cent, additional duty should
apply for each additional colour would be absolute pro-
hibition (some publications running to eight colours, and
nearly all four or more), and would, therefore, save the
Customs the impossible task of discrimination.
The Witness (continuing).—l would like to say that I
submitted the statement to the other leading wholesale
representatives in Sydney, Edwards Dunlop and Company
-Limited, and I have received the following letter from
them:—
3rd April, 1930.
“Messrs. Gordon and Gotch (Australasia) Ltd.,
Sydney.
“Dear Sirs, —We have read a copy of the evidence
which your General Manager proposes to submit to
the Tariff Board in connection with the suggested
imposition of a duty -on books, magazines and
periodicals. We would say that we think Mr. Gray’s
statement of the position is entirely fair and in com-
plete accordance with the facts of the case. We
desire fully to associate ourselves with you in the
reasonable protest which you are making.—Yours,
faithfully,
(Sgd.) EDWARDS DUNLOP AND CO. LTD.,
WM. P. DUNLOP.”
By the Chairman.—Do you say definitely that the state-
ment referred to in Edwards Dunlop and Company’s letter
covers the evidence which you read?—Excepting the last
short statement. It covers the whole of my first state-
ment, covering 17 sheets.
Q. —Regarding comics, there are some comics produced
in Australia now. Reading your evidence, one would
almost come to the conclusion that you think it was im-
possible to produce comics in Australia?—That is for the
Sunday papers—the Sunday supplements. They are not
in the same category. If you make a comparison, I think
that will be obvious. I have samples of the English pro-
ductions here. (Produced.)
Q. —You think the same printing difficulties are not
inherent to the production of a supplement?—They are
not as large, and not the same quality.
Q. —You think, then, that the fact that the supplements
are produced here is no argument that publications such
as you have circulated could be produced here?—No, and,
moreover, they are used as an incentive to the circulation.
No one knows what the cost of the production of those
amounts to.
Q. —You admit there was a very large circulation of
some fashion journals printed in Australia?—Yes.
Q. —Is that an acknowledgment that Australia is in a
position to get early information of the necessary changes
of fashion?—lt is largely because of the topical nature
of its contents, in addition, of course, to the fact that they
produce seasonal patterns.
Q. —Does that not indicate that all the fashion journals
necessary for Australia might well be produced in Aus-
tralia?—No, because at the present time these are pro-
duced in Australia, and their circulations are very far in
excess of the imported, and still the imported ones are
required for advance fashions. They have advance
fashions.
Q. —You do not suggest that every Australian fashion
publication is out-of-date in its issues?—No, it is sea-
sonal.
Q. —And the other is in futurity?—The English publi-
cation is for the winter, and we get it here in the summer-
time.
Q- —You made a reference to the fact that these publi-
cations referred to as catalogues now pay duty as adver-
tising matter?—As far as I know.
Q. —As a matter of fact, the witness yesterday produced
some publications which were purely catalogues?—Yes.
Q. —But he produced others, which, he said, were essen-
tially catalogues that were issued under the guise of a
magazine or a periodical; that is, they contained stories
and other information?—True.
Q. —And in conjunction with that a catalogue of pat-
terns. Those, lam inclined to think, do not pay duty?—
He referred, I think, to Weldon’s.
Q. —They are imprinted after they arrive here with the
name of an Australian house. That point, my Secretary
confirms, decides whether or not they should pay duty.
That is, by merely leaving a blank page somewhere in
an accessible part to add an imprint in Australia, they
evade the duty?—That is purely the catalogue, not the
fashion paper—the fashion journal. Take Weldon’s; that
is a fashion journal, as compared with Butterick’s.
Q. —McCall’s and Butterick’s?—They distribute those
free. Whether they pay duty or not, I cannot tell you,
because we do not handle them; but in Weldon’s there is
no trace of an Australian pattern. They are fashion
journals, and they are not imprinted when they get here.
Q. —They pay no duty?—Not on the journal. They pay
duty on the pattern.
Q.—The point I want to make is that the only one
that pays duty is the one which is wholly a catalogue?—
Yes.
Q. —That may help the applicant to a slight degree,
but I do not think it would satisfy him to withdraw his
request?—No. Take Weldon’s catalogue. That is duti-
able as a catalogue. The others are regarded by the
Customs Department as fashion journals.
Q. —How many, do you consider, of those 14,000 new
titles in Great Britain in one year could possibly have
supported an Australian edition?—l could not tell you.
Q.—You would not make any sort of a guess?—lt would
bei merely a wild guess.
Q. —On page 13 of your statement you say it was
stated at the Booksellers’ Conference recently by a leading
bookseller that with many authors an offer of 250 would
be sufficient to secure the rights for the Australian
market. An opinion expressed is not of much value unless
you give us its source. Have you any objection to giving
his name?—No; it was Mr. Peters, of Robertson and
Mullens.
Q. —One part of the applicant’s case which he stressed
pretty strongly was about a duty on books which had been
printed or reprinted in Australia. Would you admit that
it is a reasonable thing to ask protection in the matter
of a book which had already been printed in Australia?
—And then reprinted overseas?
Q. —Yes?—Yes, certainly.
Q. —You would concede that it would be quite reason-
able?—Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—Would you not put in the same adjec-
tive as the man who advocated that did—“originally”?—
The same adjective?
Q. —“Originally” printed?—Yes, originally printed in
Australia.
Q. —That is what you would say?—Oh, yes.
Q. —You would not agree with it if it were not?—No.
I might say there was a small part of Shakespeare printed
here last week. You surely would not restrict that be-
cause the book was reprinted here. If the author printed
a book in Australia first, he should be protected.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Was that a complete edition of
Shakespeare?—No, Shakespeare’s plays, a sixpenny edi-
tion. ' r .'T»
51
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Cray


By the Chairman. —If a duty were imposed on books
originally printed in Australia, to what extent would it
result in printing being done in Australia that would not
otherwise be done in Australia?—lt would be very in-
considerable.
Q. —Would it be worth while going to the trouble of
imposing the duty, in your opinion?—No, you must have
the world’s market to justify it. There are occasional
books, such as “We of the Never-Never”—that is an out-
standing one, and if originally that had been printed in
Australia it would have paid—but that is an exception.
By Mr. Kelly.—Have you any knowledge of any other
attempt being made to build up literature by putting a
duty on books, other than the United States?—Well,
Canada has a duty on books as against America.
Q. —Only against America?—l would not say “only,”
but that was the object. I think it is principally pro-
tected against the American issues.
Q. —You have access to this information. Could you
ascertain that for us?—l will find out, certainly.
Q. —To what extent, and to what it applies?—Yes.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—And any other countries as well, if
you can?—Yes, I will look into that. I do not know of
any others, as a matter of fact.
By Mr. Guy.—During the war there was a big increase
in the price of those comics. Did the sale drop at all ?■—
Oh, yes.
Q. —So that price does have some effect?—l cannot do
better than repeat what the last witness told you in
regard to the “Saturday Evening Post.” That is the
latest example. In that instance, when the price went to
eighteen pence the circulation tumbled, and it started to
recover when the price was brought down to one shilling.
Q. —Were there any Australian productions at that time
to take the place of those imported comics?—Yes, I think
during those years there was one produced.
Q. —And the children were quite satisfied, I presume?
—With the one brought out locally?
Q. —Yes?—It did not last long.
Q. —No, but that satisfied them for the time?—Of
course, the comics were brought out here.
Q. —Yes, but there was a tremendous falling off?—Yes.
Q. —In the circulation of those comics?—There was a
big falling off.
Q. —So that it was the matter of price that was govern-
ing the distribution of those?—No, you have to take into
account exceptional circumstances. A lot of people did
not buy in those years, and, of course, there were obvious
reasons.
By the Chairman.—You referred earlier in your state-
ment to a quotation of figures. Have you prepared any
figures, other than those you have incorporated in your
statement, for submission to the Board ?—I have some
data, but I have not got it with me. However, if the
Board requires any information I will be glad to supply
it.
Q. —Any information you could let us have regarding
the cost of publishing would be materially helpful to the
Board. Have you figures from actual experience, apart
from those you have given us?—Yes, I think I could
give you some information there.
Q. —If it is evidence that you do not wish published,
say so when you are forwarding it, and we will regard it
as confidential?—Yes, I think I have some information on
that.
The Chairman.—lf you would give us the benefit of your
experience it would be useful.
By Mr. Kelly.—You have read the evidence in Adelaide
in reference to certain books. It was really a letter which
was read by the Chairman there, indicating that they had
published materially cheaper here than elsewhere. You
have already dealt with the question of the reduction due
to subsequent editions. Do you hold that is the complete
exrdanation of that. The illustration was given to the
effect that Henry Ford’s book sold here at 7/6, as against
14/7 in America?—Yes.
Q. —Walter Page’s book 16/, as against one guinea in
America, and the “War Birds” half the price it was in
America?—Of course, on that I say you would want to
know the arrangement made with the author or the owner
of the original edition before you could determine reasons
why they were sold at the lower rates here.
Mr. Kelly.—On the face of it, it would make it appear
as though the publication of those books could be very
successfully carried out here. If you could submit any
criticism that will throw further light on that it will be
of interest.
By Mr. Guy.—You are the biggest distributors of these
papers?—Yes.
Q. —Are there any restrictions in regard to the distri-
bution of these magazines?—Yes, to this extent that we
protect the agents where they give us service. In other
words, we say, “In a certain district you can transact a
certain amount of business,” and so long as the agent
gives us good service we do not put another man in com-
petition; it is no use dividing up between two what is
just enough for one.
Q. —If anybody wanted to start up in that district he
would have a difficulty in getting them?—Yes.
Q. —Could he get them from that agent?—Yes, in a
number of instances. We arrange that.
By the Chairman.—With an overriding commission?
He gets his supplies from the agent, and he is what we
call a sub-agent, and the arrangement is between the agent
and the sub-agent; some concession is allowed.
Q. —He would obviously be at a disadvantage as com-
pared with the agent?—Yes, in that case; but you are
aware that the newspapers have block areas.
By Mr. Guy.—Would that distribution be made by the
agent or from Gordon and Gotch?—We insist in some
areas on an agent appointing a sub-agent; on other occa-
sions we put in a full agent ourselves where we think the
district warrants it.
(Witness withdrew.)
JAMES BRISCOE BRIGDEN.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman. —In what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As a President of the Federal Council of the
Workers’ Educational Associations of Australia, operating
in each State in conjunction with the Universities. I
desire to offer evidence against the proposal. For your
convenience I append the following statement;—
1. The Workers’ Educational Associations are volun-
tary bodies of students, formed for the purpose of using
University facilities, which are not otherwise open to
their members. The major part of their activities are
concerned with University Tutorial Classes, conducted
by tutors appointed by the Universities in each State
and financed by Government and other grants and by
the subscriptions of the student members, who are
chiefly wage and salary earners. These classes are held
in country districts as well as in the cities, and books
are provided as essential accessories to the teaching.
The members are also expected to purchase texts for
themselves, and the W.E.A. supplies books to its
members whether they can attend classes or not. The
subscriptions are very low, and the books lent are gener-
ally lent without charge, to encourage self-education.
2. The books used are, I think, wholly educational,
and they are carefully chosen to give the best value
for the very limited funds available. They include most
of the range of books used in Universities, but com-
paratively few of the larger and more expensive texts.
For the most part they comprise small and readable
expositions of the best knowledge in each subject.
3. I have no exact knowledge of the numbers of
individual books purchased each year, but I should think
they would amount to about 1000—I mean separate
52
SYDNEY—Alexander James Donaldson Gray
SYDNEY—James Briscoe Bngden


titles. For very few of these books the total number
imported and sold would exceed 100 copies of each
book for the whole of Australia, and for the whole life
of the books. The majority would be imported in much
smaller numbers. The importing agents would know
the facts for most of the books sold in any quantity,
but many are in such small demand in Australia that
they can be procured only by special order, and a good
deal of importing is done through the post.
4. I submit, therefore, that practically none of the
imported books used by our students could be printed
in Australia. My experience has been that it requires
a sale of about 2000 copies of a book to allow of its
being sold at a price within the personal capacity of
our students. The experience of my Association is
fairly extensive, both of books and of readers, and we
know that the sale of a book depends very largely upon
its price, and that the money now being spent on books
in Australia will not be increased.
5. If a Customs duty were imposed on the books
used by our students, we should, no doubt, have to pay
it, or discontinue our activities. But its only effects
would be to transfer some of our funds into Common-
wealth revenue, and to reduce the number of individual
books we could purchase and supply. Our students
should have to do without books to the extent of the
taxation imposed, and without the knowledge contained
in them.
6. I am confident that no Government authority
would wish to take educational funds into general
revenue, but rather the reverse; nor would it wish to
deprive the public or our members of access to know-
ledge. But I submit that this would be the effect of
the proposal if carried out.
7. I beg respectfully to suggest to the Board that if
it considers the proposal worthy of investigations, it
should ascertain the proportion of the books now im-
ported that would be taxed, and the proportion that
could be produced and sold in Australia. And, further,
what actual employment would be promoted in Australia
both by setting up the type and by the actual printing.
Finally. I suggest that the cost imposed on the users
of books should be compared, including the taxation
paid, and the excess costs of local printing where that
was commercially practicable. If the Board is able to
compare the relative value of any increased production
in Australia with the cultural and intellectual costs, I
hope it will do so, or, at least, give due weight to the
latter consideration.
8. I should be pleased to supplement this statement
with verbal evidence, and I may be permitted to sug-
gest that if the Board thinks it desirable to promote
the printing of books in Australia, there are other ways
of doing so than by taxing books. And in this case
a bounty paid from consolidated or Customs revenue,
and contributed by the people as a whole, is obviously
more equitable and less harmful than a bounty paid
solely by the users of books.
9. My Association is deeply interested in the en-
couragement of Australian authorship, and it has en-
dorsed a scries of books published in Australia and
largely dealing with Australian conditions. We are
also anxious to promote the growth of a publishing
industry, which would further assist towards our objec-
tive. We have no interests whatever in importing, and
I speak entirely on behalf of consumers.
10. In conclusion I wish to say that it is natural
that Australia should import most of its books, apart
from any question of local costs, and many books can
only be published at all if they have the whole world
as a market. Some of these books are written by Aus-
tralian authors. The Australian demand for their books
is not large enough to secure publication here, but it
is a factor assisting publication abroad. To exclude
or tax the books when published abroad would rob some
of our authors of their chance of publication, and would,
therefore, discourage Australian literature.
Q. —I think you are setting the Board a rather heavy
task in the matter of study, but I can assure you the
Board is aiming at doing it, but it realises the extreme
difficulty of comparing the relative value of any increased
competition in Australia with the cultural and intellectual
costs. I would ask if you have studied the exemptions
which the applicant himself provided?—No, I have not.
Q- —To a large extent, although it is certainly not to
the full extent, it would remove some of your objections.
The applicant evinced a desire to exclude technical works,
and I think that possibly, on reconsideration, after hear-
ing the evidence, he might largely extend his exemptions.
In making these remarks I am not indicating in any way
the feeling of the Board, either towards the exemptions
or towards his proposition, but it does seem to me the
exemptions were hurriedly put together, and that some
of them are intended to be more liberal than the actual
wording represents?—l may say on that if any consider-
able exemptions are allowed it will destroy the whole
purpose or objective of the application. I do not think
the two things are compatible. If you have very elabo-
rate exemptions it will involve the necessity of an organi-
sation to principally discriminate between informative
works and imaginative works, and I am afraid that would
be a very difficult thing to do.
Q. —Do you think it is not possible?—No, as a matter
of fact, not in practical administration; it would be very
difficult. It is all very well to talk about literature of
knowledge and literature of power, but when you come
down to separate them into so many books you will find
it a very difficult proposition indeed. The amount of
employment to be given in these reprinted editions, I
should think, should be investigated very carefully.
Q. —I do not think that your proposition for a payment
of a bounty is very simple, or more simple than the dis-
crimination between the books. For instance, in all bounty
legislation that I have seen or had anything to do with,
there is a stipulation that the goods must be of market-
able quality, and there are certain other restrictions.
Therefore, I think you are putting up a fairly heavy
proposition in the discrimination as to whether an Aus-
tralian product would be of marketable quality?—l do
not suggest a bounty, and I would not.
Q. —Witnesses have said there is only one judge of a
successful book, and that is after it has been available
for some time; it depends on how many copies you have
got left?—Bounties are now paid on the publication of
books in Australia by private interests.
Q. —But they are in the position of judging of the
quality?—Yes.
(Witness withdrew.)
ROBERT STRONG WALLACE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As Professor of the University and as Vice-Chan-
cellor of the University of Sydney.
Q. —Have you any statement prepared?—No, but I sub-
scribe to the statements which have been handed in by
the Universities generally, and I speak on behalf of the
Sydney University, also as a reader and scholar. I oppose
the tariff on quite general grounds, which I need not
elaborate. I would object to the specific items which are
presented to you, as I cannot see they will do very much
good. I notice they are asking for a duty on novels or
works of fiction, or works of a similar character, and it
it is very hard to say what “similar character” is. I
cannot see that can be the slightest good to anyone, and
it will be a very serious handicap on all readers here; the
SYDNEY—Robert Strong Wallace


only excuse, so far as I can see, is it would lead to re-
setting of books in Australia.
Q. —That would surely be the objective?—Yes, I should
say it was impossible to reset many of these books in
Australia; it would not pay. I should not think it would
pay for an edition of Sir Walter Scott or of George Mere-
dith.
Q. —There is nothing in there which excludes that; the
applicant clearly intended that to be included?—How are
you going to set up an edition of George Meredith and
make it pay; it would be impossible. The last edition of
George Meredith cost me £lB/18/, and I think there were
50 copies imported. I am speaking from Melbourne ex-
perience now, and not from Sydney. They had the greatest
difficulty in getting rid of those 50 sets. That is an
extreme example, but there are some of Walter Scott’s
editions that could not be reset, and, coming down to more
modern novels, many of them could not be reset. There
is nowhere to draw the line.
Q. —You are not at all hopeful of any appreciable result
at all in the resetting of books?—No.
Q. —And the answer suggested by other witnesses was
there was not a sufficiently large market, nor a sufficient
number of titles?—That is so; that also applies in a
contrary direction; it does not pay to set up a book in
Australia unless you get a market outside of Australia.
In that I am speaking from personal experience; it is not
worth your while. Then, again, as regards the second
item—the application of science to industries of all kinds.
Some of those items look to me to be more like political
paragraphs than anything else. There is no line to be
drawn between books applying to science and books
pure science. You cannot possibly draw a line of demar-
cation. Chemistry is pure science, and so is the appli-
cation of it. We cannot draw the line at all.
Q. —That is a criticism as to the extent of the exemp-
tion?—l should think you could not possibly draft a clause
of this kind which would hold water.
Q. —Supposing it was possible to draft a definition
which would divide up purely educational work or books of
the nature of these exemptions compared with a publica-
tion like this book, “The Enchanted Hill,” would you
admit there would be less damaging effect by putting a
duty on a novel like “The Enchanted Hill” than by put-
ting a duty on your works of chemistry?—No, I would
make it apply all round. It is very hard to say what
value a person gets out of a book like “The Enchanted
Hill.” He may get out of that as much value as I get out
of my scientific books.
Q. —You consider a varied diet for the mind is as neces-
sary as a variety of diet for the stomach?—Yes. Then
there is an exemption clause with regard to textbooks
in the curriculum of Universities, and so forth.
Q. —i would like to know from you how many books
are scheduled each year in that connection? —It would be
very hard to say, but a mere fraction. I mean of the books
that are scheduled, that is to say, the actual books are
a mere fraction of the publication of books.
QHow many books of ordinary fiction—l mean fiction
in its widest sense, so to speak, clearly apart from any
technical work—are listed? Would there be 50 listed by
the colleges and universities in a year?—l could not say
that. I should think that the schools generally follow the
syllabus of the public examinations, which are prescribed
by the University. Probably they would not go very far
outsicte of that.
Q. — That is to say, certain authors are selected?—Yes.
By Mr. Berchdolt. —They differ each year?—Yes, they
are always changed from year to year.
By the Chairman. —You could not give any estimate.
Would it run into dozens, so far as the particular books
are concerned? —I could not tell you. I should think it
would not run into a very big figure. They might prescribe
a novel by Scott. I could not tell you the number at all.
Then there is another item—the question of books of all
kinds which have been printed or reprinted in Australia.
I do not know why “reprinted” is there.
Q- —That may mean a book which was printed abroad,
then the print was set up in Australia, and then, for some
reason or other, it was printed abroad again?—l cannot
see that situation’arising.
Q. —It may be that a London publisher might put a book
on the market, then there might be an Australian edition,
then there may be a further London edition. I think that
is what the intention is—that books originally printed in
Australia should be protected. There might be a reason-
abte request as regards books originally printed in Aus-
tralia that the market should be protected for them.
Would you not say that?—-I do not think so; the situation
hardly arises. A man may print a book here, and then he
is forced to seek a Home market for it. You may seek
another publisher to reprint for you, say, in London; but
1 take it the publisher has still got the right to print it
here.
Q. —They say he ought to have control of that?—l
printed a book myself in Melbourne, and it was reprinted
by the Cambridge University Press. I much preferred
the latter edition. I might say that this is out of the
question altogether, as the book does not come back again
into Australia.
Q. —That might be a reason why the author, if he still
holds the copyright, may not object to the introduction
into Australia of his book in the second print. It may
be a better edition. I am not talking of an Australian
edition in that respect, I am speaking of a production in
the Australian style?—This clause might have this effect;
if you are going to tax the Home product, the man may
not print here at all. What is the use of it if he can
collar the Canadian market and the South African market,
and other markets, by printing it at Cambridge? Of
course, he will do it. The tax might be so high that it
would react in that position and in that way. I can say
it is very hard to get a book printed nowadays. Take the
educational books; if you wish to publish them you have
to pay for them yourself. I paid £3OO for an edition
myself. If a man is paying for it himself he is going to
the best publisher he can get. It is quite a mistake to
think the publishers are bearing all the cost of these
books. As regards these last clauses, they appear to me
absolutely absurd. That is all I can say about them. If
you are going to prohibit secondhand books and periodi-
cals, a folio of Shakespeare and first editions could not
come in. Are all our folios of Shakespeare and first
editions to go to America, and we not get the chance of
getting some of them ? This clause would prevent a folio
of Shakespeare coming in, and you could not possibly
imagine such a state of affairs.
Q. —I do not think that was ever in the applicant’s mind.
He has tackled a very big subject, and, no doubt, he would
admit in draftsmanship there could be a lot of improve-
ments in it?—Our scholars and students depend almost
entirely on remainders and secondhand copies. Our diffi-
culties in Australia are surely sufficient. Scholars and
learners here are met with very great difficulties and
many restrictions, and I do not like to see any more
restrictions put upon them. We cannot get books as it
is; at any rate, we have to pay extra prices for them.
We actually draw a good deal of our instructive litera-
ture from Home; we do not buy here, we buy or draw
from Oxford and Cambridge if it is to our advantage.
I also put in the plea for the private scholar and all our
professors, and so on. Our difficulties are great already,
and lam not speaking without knowledge. I just wanted
to voice the opinion throughout the University of the
general objection to any further difficulties being put upon
us by the tariff. lam not talking on any particular item
and producing any figures to you.
(Witness withdrew.)
SYDNEY —Robert Strong Wallace


HORACE BOHMER NEWMAN.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
are appearing ?—As a British book publishers’ represen-
tative, also on behalf of the New South Wales section of
the British Book Publishers’ Representatives’ Associa-
tion of Australia and New Zealand, which, in turn, repre-
sents at least fifty British publishers.
In opposing the application for duty on books, we
particularly wish to stress the extreme difficulty, amount-
ing to impossibility, of producing most books in Aus-
tralia, except at exaggerated prices, which would preclude
their sale entirely.
The main reason for this contention is that the market
is, comparatively, so small and the variety of books
published so enormous, that the sale of most books, with
the exception of outstanding works, is confined to a few
copies, even when the sale is spread over a number of
years.
The book trade is entirely different from any other form
of manufacturing. There is no competition between book
and book, except in the case of a few educational books,
where authorities differ as to the best textbooks for
teaching certain subjects. When a buyer wants a certain
book on a certain subject, by a particular author, he
wants that book and that book alone, and he will not buy
any other in its place. This statement may be slightly
modified in the case of fiction, but even in this class of
literature it still obtains to a very large extent.
In nearly every other trade different factories compete
with almost identical articles, which, with slight varia-
tions, will all serve the same purpose, but in the case of
books it is absolutely not so, and every book is printed,
published and sold entirely on its own particular merits.
Each book is a distinct problem in itself. Its success or
failure not only rests in the book itself, but very often
on the publisher who handles it. For instance, certain
publishers are particularly successful with fiction,
others with biography and travel, others with Belles
letters, while a very large section of publishers confine
their operations almost entirely to educational books, and
booksellers and other interested parties can confirm that
when these various publishers bring out books outside of
their usual range they are almost invariably failures.
We submit this point, particularly as an argument that
to publish successfully here in the first place there would
need to be quite a number of publishers.
For the information of the Board, we are submitting a
range of catalogues from various British publishers, the
items in which are almost without exception all pro-
curable at a moment’s notice, and a big proportion of
them are always being asked for, even if only at irregular
intervals in small quantities.
Of all the books in these lists, only a trifling number
have been sold in anything approaching quantities. Even
when they were first published, sales of most of them
were in orders of 1,2, 3upto 12 copies, and to help the
Board in this respect we submit a twelve months’ file of
the orders we have secured for one of the publishers we
represent, and who are one of the biggest publishing
houses in England.'
I have brought this file to show you how books are
ordered. That contains practically the entire year of
orders to that house; that is, to one big publishing house,
and that will show you the quantity of books that are
ordered. You will see the catalogue and you will get an
idea of the facts. Not one single one of these books could
have been published here.
Q. —Are you the only source from which those books
could reach Australia?—No; a certain amount of orders
will go direct to the publisher, but they are small. We
have houses in Melbourne and Sydney, and our travellers
are going around the whole time.
Q._ —As regards any particular book there, what pro-
portion of the orders would that represent?—That would
represent, in my opinion, 85 per cent, of the orders,
because, even with the Booksellers’ Association in London,
they usually give the representatives copies of their
orders. My statement continues:—
A glance through these copy orders will confirm our
statement regarding the small quantities of each book
that are ordered, and the enormous range of titles that
are required by the Australian public, and it is obvious
that, on these figures, not one of these books could
possibly have been published here, no matter what the
duty was. The only result of a duty on these par-
ticular books would have been that the price would be
so high as to be absolutely prohibitive to anybody but
very wealthy people, and, unfortunately, the people
who read good literature are not usually the wealthiest
in the community.
As another illustration of the prolific publishing
of modern times, we attach a table of the books pub-
lished in England during January of this year totalling
over one thousand. The table gives the subjects of the
various books published in that month, and few of these
will be sold in Australia in anything but trifling quan-
tities, but nearly all of them without exception will
appeal to a few people here, and are necessary to the
knowledge, advancement and recreation of the Common-
wealth. Even in Great Britain, with its world market
for these books, the sale will not be large, hence the fact
that most of them will be published at fairly high prices
and will be still dearer in Australia if a duty is imposed.
Regarding books cjuoted in evidence before the Board
in Adelaide and Brisbane as having been successfully
published in Australia, we submit that all of these were
either proved sellers at a higher price before being
printed here; that they were in the main connected
with world-renowned and popular personalities, such as
Ford and Lindberg, or else they were all of a very
sensational and popular appeal. That there are other
books of similar type which could be published here
cannot be denied, but, in comparison with the books
detailed in the catalogues submitted, they are infinitesi-
mal, and it might be pertinent to suggest that it is not
due to any lack of protection that other books of a
similar type have not been published here, whatever else
the reasons may be.
The publishing business is highly speculative, probably
more so than any other trade, and there are few pub-
lishers in England making money, in spite of the high
price of books, as witness the amalgamations and ab-
sorptions which have been going on in London during
the past few years.
We would also express the opinion that there are
few booksellers in Australia making much more than a
living, and those who are doing well are making money
out of other commodities.
The bulk of the booksellers’ trade is made up of
slow sellers and lines which do not sell in any big
number; in fact, it would be found that the day’s takings
of an average bookseller were culled from almost
every part of his store. In buying, he naturally makes
mistakes, and, unlike other trades, he is unable to
recoup himself for these losses by big successes, as best
sellers do not amount to a great deal in the annual
turnover of a book business.
Evidence can be had from Australian booksellers that
more and more every year they have to be cautious as
to what books they buy; in the case of new fiction even
the largest book stores will rarely ever plunge until
they have seen how the public receive the book, although
it is obvious there will be some instances where a
particularly good book will attract some firms to specu-
late, but this is the exception rather than the rule. How
much more so, then, will this apply to local publishing,
where it is not a question of risking a dozen or twenty-
five, or even one hundred copies, but of putting in
several thousands ?
To illustrate the peculiar conditions of publishing,
we would refer you to an extremely clever and lucid
book on the subject by Mr. Stanley Unwin, entitled
“The Truth About Publishing,” and we shall be glad to
supply the Board with copies if they care to have them.
Mr. Unwin’s book is looked upon as a standard of


January, 1930.
Glassification.
Total.
New Trans-
Editions. lations.
Editions
de Luxe.
Aeronautics
8
Annuals and Serials
34
i —
Archaeology
6
i —
Art and Architecture
31
2 —
2
Astronomy and Meteorology
4
1 —
Banking and Finance. ...
5
1 —
Bibliography and Literary
History
11
1 —
1
Biography and History .. s .
82
5 9
—
authority on this subject, and we would particularly like
the Board to read it in order to help our contention
that if, in a country like Great Britain, with its popula-
tion of forty odd millions, publishing generally is such a
precarious business, then what hope has it in Australia
until such time as the population becomes very much
greater ?
We contend, therefore, that the principal effect a duty
will have is to increase the price of books here, thereby
immediately decreasing the sale, to the detriment of not
only interested parties like ourselves and tne book-
sellers, but to the public generally, who must have books
if they are to keep up with the rest of the world in
current thought and literature.
We leave other witnesses opposing the application
to give evidence regarding the effects that the duty, in
curtailing sales of books, would have on employment in
the trade in Australia.
As far as Australian authors are concerned, we submit
that is must be obvious, in order to give the best chance
of success to a world-wide sale, and, after all, authors
write for the world, that a book must be published in
the Empire’s literary centre, which is, undoubtedly, Lon-
don.
When a British publisher has a manuscript submitted
by an Australian author, it is obvious, when considering
the pros and cons of accepting it, that he will think of
how many can be placed in Australia, and if this portion
is cut out by a tariff, it is evident that it will have a
deterring effect on the chance of the book being accepted
by that publisher.
Furthermore, it goes without saying that if a book
is published in London, and is successful there, the
publicity which it will get will be of great use in
Australia, whereas if it is published in Australia our
local publicity will not reach many readers in other
parts of the world.
At present there is absolutely no reason why attrac-
tive books by Australian authors, and, of late, there
have been many such, should not be published here
without any further protection.
The principal publishing house here have been selling
their local publications at the same price as the overseas
article, and it is, therefore, evident that either the
Australian publisher will not take the risk, or the author
sees a much better chance of success lies in him having
his book published in England. There is no question
of copyright protection, as the laws are reciprocal
between Australia and Britain, and a book published
here would be automatically copyright and protected
in Great Britain.
Even with some of the best books, we think it un-
likely that publication could be secured in this country,
for, with the help of world-wide recognition, the total
Australian sales are still often insufficient to warrant
separate publication here.
Somehow or other, it is a fact that, unless the lead
is given from the centre of the book world, Australians
are slow to appreciate the literary merit of their own
people’s writings, and are somewhat critical even after
Britain has given deserved praise to the works.
Many instances of this can be quoted if the Board
wishes, but we will give only one here, which came
within our particular notice.
A book by Mr. Jack MacLaren, entitled “My Crowded
Solitude,” was exceptionally well reviewed in England
and was successful there, but, as far as this market is
concerned, the response was very poor, even though the
book was a particularly fine literary effort, easily read
and attractive, and, in addition, the scene was laid in
the northern part of Australia. The London “By-
stander” thought so highly of it that it gave it two
full pages of review.
It is, therefore, reasonable to assert that, instead of
helping the Australian author, a duty on fiction will
do nothing but hinder him.
Our authors at the present day are under no disability
whatever; they have absolute freedom in submitting
their manuscripts personally in London; they can send
them direct, or they can be sent through any of the
publishers’ Australian representatives, and their books
will be read and considered probably with a greater
degree of care and attention than the English author
would get unless he happened to be among those who
have already made their name. This has always been
our experience.
Even though an author might feel that he would like
to have his book first published in Australia, and would
be prepared to forego the many advantages that initial
publication in England would give him, might we sug-
gest that it would be distinctly unfair to expect a
publisher in Australia to take the same risks as the
Englishman could and would ? It is perfectly obvious
that the Australian author would have much less chance
of publication here than in Britain.
A tax on fiction by decreasing Australian sales and
so reducing the already precarious financial return our
Australian novelists can hope for, would be a definite
discouragement to their continued effort.
The following are a few Australian novelists whose
works have become popular:—
Author. Novels.
H. Handel Richardson . . Ultima Thule.
The Way Home.
Richard Mahony.
Maurice Guest.
Fred Howard The Emigrant.
Return Ticket.
A. Barnard Eldershaw .. A House is Built.
Martin Mills The Montforts.
Kathleen Pritchard .... Working Bullocks,
And other good novels.
Dale Collins Ordeal.
The Sentimentalists,
And other good novels.
Marie Bjelke Petersen .. Jewelled Nights,
And a number of other very
successful novels.
Had these novels not been published in London it is
fairly certain that they would have been largely over-
looked in Australia, even if some Australian publisher
could have been found willing to take the risk. It was
largely their overseas popularity that made the sale
here. It is a pity that these writers cannot be brought
before the Board to give evidence, but they are scat-
tered far and wide, although we take it there are various
societies here who will look after their interests.
Books Published in January, 1930.
The table shows the books published in January and
the number of new editions, translations and editions-
de-luxe.
Pamphlets priced at less than 6d. are omitted, as also
are Government publications, except annual volumes
and the more important works, etc., issued by H. M.
Stationery Office.
The classifications of new editions or reprints of
children’s books is questionable, as this information is
seldom given by publishers:—
SYDNEY—Horace Bohmer Newman


Botany, Horticulture and
Agriculture
11
1
2
Calendars
2
Chemistry and Physics
Children’s Books and Minor
Fiction
4
—
—
—
26
14
Classics and Translations
29
5
20
o
Dictionaries & Encyclopaedias
8
1
—
—
Directories & Guide Books ..
26
6
Domestic Economy ... ...
2
—
Educational
72
4
Engineering, Electricity and
Mechanics
5
■ 1
Essays and Belles-Letters .
34
6
2
Facetiae
2
Fiction 278
101
11
1
Geology, Mineralogy &
Mining
2
Illustrated Gift Books
5
2
1
Law and Parliamentary . ..
23
12
1
Mathematics
1
1
Medical and Surgical
31
9
—
—
Music
5
Natural History, Biology and
Zoology
13
1
Nautical
5
3
Naval and Military
9
—
1
—
Occultism
3
Oriental
4
Philosophy and Science ....
9
1
—
—
Poetry and Drama
49
15
1
2
Politics, Political Economy
& Questions of the Day .
48
3
Psychology
9
—
1
—
Religion and Theology
61
3
3
—
Sociology
16
1
—
—
Sports, Games and Pastimes
6
—
—
—
Technical Handbooks
42
3
Topography, Local History
and Folklore
8
Trade, Commerce & Industry
24
1
__
Travel and Adventure
19
1
2
Veterinary Science, Farming
and Stock-keeping
1
1
Wireless
3
—
—
—
Totals 107G
208
51
11
By the Chairman.—This schedule, which you are sub-
mitting, refers to books published in January, 1930?—Yes,
it is copied from the Publishers’ Circular.
Q. —And you have made an analysis of the subjects ?
The analysis is given. It is exactly as it appears. (Wit-
ness tenders copy of a letter from T. Fisher Unwin, dated
February 25, 1925, for the information of the Board.)
By Mr. Kelly.—What percentage have books increased
since 1913?—Mr. Unwin says not double.
Q. —Very nearly?—He says it is over double, but not
three times, but I think he is referring to the costs. Ido
not think the average published price would be double.
Q. —Have you any objection to publishing this (indicat-
ing) in the evidence?—None at all. It reads as follows:
Cost of Manufacture.—Paper of the kind used in book
production costs about one and two-thirds what it did
in 1913, e.g., a good quality antique wove, which could
then be bought at about 2id. per pound, would cost
to-day about 4d.—a not unreasonable increase and one
comparing favourably with the fancy price of 1/7 per
pound which profiteers obtained in 1918.
Printing costs nearly three times what it did before
the war. In fact, the complete production of a book in
1914 often amounted to less than the mere setting of
the type does to-day. The difference is largely ac-
counted for by wage increases, but it is partly due to
the printers’ introduction of a costing system which
showed them they were making insufficient allowance
for “overhead” and certain other items in their esti-
mates.
Binding.—lt is difficult to give a fair comparison,
because the increase in the cost of binding small num-
bers, from, say, 50 to 250, is much greater than it is in
quantities of 1000 and upwards. Roughly speaking, for
small quantities the cost is more than double, and for
larger numbers about double the pre-war figure. That
it is not more is probably due to improved machinery
and the new plan of making a separate charge for
warehousing stock, because the cost of two principal
items in binding, viz., “labour” and “cloth,” is about
two and a half times what it was. Included under
“binding” is the “jacket,” or “dust cover,” which, in
the case of novels is a most serious item.
Averaging the three, the production costs of new
books are more than double, but less than treble, whar
they were in 1914. The increase is highest when type
setting is the biggest factor, and lowest when the
number to be printed is large. In fact, it takes more
than 2/ to do what 1/ did.
There is then the cost of distribution; this is also
much greater than in 1914.
Cost of Advertising.—There has also been a propor-
tionate increase in all classes of this work, a great deal
more of which is now done than in 1914.
These (produced) are Benns’ sixpenny library
editions. Six of those are published every month at
6d. each in England. They embrace every subject under
the sun, and it could not possibly be done here in any
circumstances. The production is enormous and the
sales here are comparatively limited.
(The witness withdrew.)
GLADYS HOPE MARKS.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
As lecturer in French at the University of Sydney. I
do not appear officially to represent the University.
Q. —These expressions are your personal views?—No. I
say in my statement that I appear before you as Vice-
President of the National Council of Women of N.S.W.
and as President of the Australian Federation of Univer-
sity Women to protest against the proposed duty on
books. I might say that last night, at a very full meeting
of the University Graduates’ Association, the following
resolution was passed:—
That the Sydney University Women Graduates’ Asso-
ciation views with alarm the suggestion to put a duty
on books, and is opposed to any measure that will
prevent the free importation of literature into Aus-
tralia.
I have prepared a statement of evidence, which reads as
follows:
As President of the A.F.U.W. I represent that group
of women who have enjoyed the advantages of a Uni-
versity education, who are taking their place in the
professional life of the communities in which they live,
especially as teachers, and who cannot fail to be deeply
interested in the intellectual development of the nation
and anxious for the untrammelled dissemination of
knowledge. I have no hesitation in claiming to be, in
this instance, the mouthpiece of the University women
of Australia. As representative of the N.C.W. of
N.S.W. I do not claim to express the unanimous opinion
of its members. The Council is an association of
organisations that include a very large number of
women, whose training, whose interests, and whose
outlook vary so greatly that it is impossible to ascribe
to them any one common aim, save an earnest desire
to serve the community.
To make books more and more accessible to the
public, to withstand any attempt to put obstacles in
the way of acquiring knowledge by means of them,
would, I feel sure, be considered by all thoughtful
women a service to the community. This is, after all,
a matter of peculiar importance to women, and for
women, whether their influence be exerted within or
without the home. The influence of women on the
intellectual progress of the nation is obvious, though it
SYDNEY—GIadys Hope Marks


has not always been sufficiently recognised. In modern
conditions it is extending in ever widening circles, but
nowhere can it make itself so deeply felt as in the
home. The woman in the home should then be en-
couraged to continue the education begun at school by
reading good books. The effect of books is real, if
incalculable, and one may well say that any son of
woman is better for having had a mother with a mind
well stored with facts gleaned from books and sensitive
to the beauties they teach us to comprehend. There
is, then, “a woman’s side” to this question. But I wish
to protest also on more general grounds.
Before doing so, I should like, if I may, to say a word
about fashion books, though I had no intention of doing
so. Ido not know very much about them, but Mr.
Catts said yesterday that we had the artists who were
capable of designing dresses for the women of Aus-
tralia. He seemed to think it wrong that Paris should
set the fashions for the world. Then Mr. Catts said
that he would get his ideas from the French journals,
which he would import, and that he would not mind, I
think ho said, if a duty of £5 were put on those journals.
Probably Mr. Catts and others might print, perhaps,
two fashion journals in Australia. We would, there-
fore, perhaps, have the possibility of all Australian
women being dressed more or less alike, just according
to the taste of the gentleman Mr. Catts or others who
would choose from the French journals for which he
was ready to pay any price on account of their great
value to models which he considered were fitted for the
women of Australia.
The Chairman.—Getting on to dangerous ground, it
might be a very nice thing for the men; it would probably
mean a great saving?—A gentleman said yesterday that
such a measure would reduce the marriage rate in Aus-
tralia. I believe there are some fifteen fashion journals.
These are of very great importance to the dressmakers
and to the dealers, who comprise a very great number, and
I think it would be a great mistake and from the aesthetic
point of view, because dress has an aesthetic value, to
put a high duty on these journals, just for the sake of
Mr. Catts’ one or two journals. In regard to Butteriek’s,
McCall’s and Weldon’s, I think that too much importance
has been laid on the patterns that are in Weldon’s jour-
nals. These patterns come out, one pattern at a time, and
they are really of very little value, so lam told. Ido
not use Weldon’s patterns. Ido not know Butterick’s
and McCall’s, but I understand they advertise patterns
which can be bought according to the measurement of
the person desiring them. The question has been asked,
in connection with comics, whether the children are
satisfied with the Australian comics. If we have not got
things we do not know any better, and if the children
were to have only the Australian comics they probably
would be satisfied, because they would not know what they
were missing. My statement continues: —
Australia’s isolation from the older centres of learn-
ing is responsible for new currents of ideas being very
slow in reaching us. Some never flow this way. We
live, as it were, in a backwater of civilisation, and are
even more dependent on the outside world for mental
stimulus than a people more favourably situated. What
men can get from personal contacts, from the spoken
word, the acted play, from the exhibited picture, etc., in
London, Paris, or Berlin, we can get here only from
books. And books are not and cannot be treated like
commodities. Erase the printed word that conveys
the idea and they have no intrinsic or commercial
value. They are only paper and cardboard and linen
or leather. You may protect the manufacturer of
woollens, and force us, by a prohibitive duty on im-
ported goods, to buy locally made underclothes. That
may be unimportant. But you cannot protect the
Australian author, however gifted he may be, because
you cannot force us to content ourselves with his books,
even by putting a prohibitive duty on the imported
works of an Englishman. If you could force us to be
content we should be at worst intellectually dead; at
best, insufferably ill-educated and narrow. It is essen-
tial that we should have at our disposal in this young
and youthfully crude country the best literature the
world can offer us, and at the lowest possible price,
so that, as individuals, we may continue that education
which is only begun at school, and, as a nation, come
in due course to be counted among the cultured nations
of the world. Intellectual free-trade is a sine qua non
of achievement in this direction.
I should like to say, if I may interpolate this, that in
regard to, say, America, where they have a duty on
books, the ordinary novel, for which we pay 5/6 or
G/G, is two dollars in America, and I think also that,
when you have read that book of Unwin’s on “The Truth
About Publishing,” you would not like to see the same
methods adopted in Australia as are adopted in the
publishing world of America. We have to remember
that the copyright which in honour binds all Europe and
England is not binding in America, and that their public
morality is very different from that of the rest of the
world.
I would also like to say a word about the small nations
to which reference was made yesterday. I have been in
Scandinavia, and I know many Scandinavian people.
You will find in Denmark, which is a very small nation,
that the Danes are so thoroughly taught in the schools
that the literature, you might say, of Europe, is avail-
able to them. The Danes read English, French and
German—the educated Danes—with equal facility.
By Mr. Kelly.—And the percentage of what you would
term “educated students” would be amazing?—Extraor-
dinarily high. It is a very high education. Regarding
Norway, that country has the common literature of Nor-
way and Sweden at is disposal, and the Norwegian, and
Swede as well, I think, would be ashamed if they were
not able to read, at any rate, English or German books.
Belgium—of course, I am taking the smaller nations—has
the whole of the French literature at its disposal, and also
as far as the Flemish population is concerned, the whole
of the German at its disposal.
In regard to books in foreign countries, there is, I
believe, a nominal duty on books in Switzerland. It is
not a protective duty; I do not know whether it is big
enough to be a revenue-producing duty. That certainly
may have something to do with the fact that Switzer-
land is divided into two parts; half of it is German
speaking and half French speaking, but the reason for
that very nominal duty I really cannot explain. It is,
I think, the only European nation which has such a
duty.
By the Chairman. —It might possibly be to facilitate a
censorship ?—I doubt if any cultivated country in the
world, except British speaking ones, have a censorship.
My statement continues: —
It has been suggested that “educational books” may
be exempted from the tax, but all good literature has
an‘ educational value. Every good book, be it fiction,
poetry, or drama, whatever its source, is as much an
“educational book ” as a Latin text or French Grammar.
It is as impossible to draw a line of demarcation between
books that amuse and books that edify the mind as it
is to draw such a line between books that are moral
and books that are immoral. Fools might rush in to
decide where sages fear to tread. The same statements
apply to magazines and journals.
Where would you be without “Punch”? Would it
not be awful if there were a duty on “Punch”? Mr.
Green spoke yesterday of “John o’London.” I per-
sonally do not think there is any doubt whatever that
such a magazine as “John o’ London” should not be
classed as a journal that instructs. Any paper that
has articles such as that on literary questions, on current
events, is of the utmost importance to us. Such articles
are put in a popular way, and such books are read by
a public that would not read the more serious journal,
and there is no doubt about it that they have an educa-
tional value. May I also say in regard to fiction that
modern education places more and more value on the
58
SYDNEY—GIadys Hope Marks


use of fiction as education? We speak of informative
literature, but surely what we call imaginative literature
also has an educational value
Q. —Nobody questions that. We only use the adjective
to try to make an artificial ?—I do not see where the
line is to come between informative and imaginative
works. My statement continues:—
Books must be as cheap as possible. At present the
proportion of the reading public that requires the higher
class of books is small, though our system of education
may be expected gradually to increase this minority.
The greater number are but moderately blessed with
this world’s goods. That the proposed duty would
raise the price of books there can be no doubt. Very
few could be published here, with profit to the publisher,
save “best sellers,” and widely used school books. An
ordinary English edition—l do not mean of novels; I
mean books of other types—comprises from 750 to 1000
copies, about 100 of which at most may find purchasers
in Australia. One has to send to England for many
books because booksellers here find it does not pay to
stock them. Just as it is impracticable to manufac-
ture here the finest grade of woollen materials, owing
to the high cost of plant and production, and the small-
ness of the demand in a country of six million inhabi-
tants, in the same way it is impracticable (and for
identical reasons) to publish books of high scientific,
literary or aesthetic value. And if the reading public,
especially that section of it that ought to be encouraged
by such a duty, it is very far from certain that it would
be a boon to those of our authors most deserving of
consideration. As for writers who would support the
tax, they condemn themselves and are worthy of no
protection whatever. An Australian who publishes his
book in England obtains a wider publicity and a wider
public than if he publishes it locally, and his glory adds
lustre to Australia. Few books published here enjoy
a wide circulation and win fame in Europe. A number
of our good novels have been recently published in
London, and a still greater number of our scientific
and historical works and books that may be grouped as
“belles letters.” The duty then would compel an Aus-
tralian writer of standing to forego a European reputa-
tion and monetary reward (such as it is) for his labours,
or to restrict the circulation even among his fellow-
countrymen by raising the price of his book. The
printer alone might hope for a little extra gain from
the imposition of the duty. In short, there is no reason
for anybody else to support the proposal; there is every
reason to condemn it. It is even more objectionable
from a cultural point of view than the duty on works
of art. To impose it would be to brand us in the eyes
of the civilised world as a nation of unenlightened,
short-sighted materialists, and, what is worse, we should
deserve the branding.
It is more a matter of opinion, not being an expert,
that I wish to give. There is public opinion behind it.
(The witness withdrew.)
GEORGE BLACKMORE PHILIP.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?
—As educational bookseller and publisher, 451 Pitt street,
Sydney.
Q. —-To what extent are you a publisher. I mean to
what extent of the business that you do? —You mean on
books I publish?
Q. —Yes.—No more than 10,000 a year.
Q. —In numbers?—Yes. I want to say that there has
been a lot of talk about imaginative and informative
literature. One seems to be fiction and the other seems
to be the other thing. I did not hear the question of
juveniles and prizes for children mentioned, and those are
certainly imaginative; but they play a very big part in the
formation of the childhood of the State. You know
personally, particularly all of you who are parents, that
there are thousands of juveniles published. You know
them, and you are probably aware of the prices of them,
and it would be absolutely impossible to publish juveniles
in Australia to be of any benefit to the children. First
of all, the prices would be extortionate, and the limit of
authors would be absolutely infinitesimal, and I do wish
that in your deliberations you will dissociate prize books
and juvenile literature from fiction. I think I need not
say any more. We all know what lam aiming at without
labouring the subject. You can see that the juveniles
that are sold to-day for 1/6 and 2/ would be about 3/6 or
4/, according to Mr. Catts. The limit would be very small
and we are not in a position to do that. I might say that
I am practically the oldest bookseller in N.S.W. outside
Mr. Robertson and I would say that the prize giving in our
schools is one incentive to learning.
By Mr. Kelly.—Not the only incentive?—No, one incen-
tive. I hope that you will particularly remember that;
that though they are fiction they are certainly one of the
main factors in the building up of children’s character.
(The witness withdrew.)
The Chairman.—ln adjourning this inquiry, I remember
a conversation I had with a gentleman who appears to
have left the room, and I am not sure whether he had in
his mind that those witnesses would still come forward.
I would say that, if anybody in the room knows of anyone
whose evidence has been shut out because we adjourned
at this rather unusual hour in the lunch time, I would
be glad if that witness would convey his views to the
Secretary of the Board in writing, if it is his wish to
present evidence. The Board will then certainly give
them consideration. lam saying that with perfect safety,
because I do not think it is capable for any witness to
put up in opposition any view that has not already been
expressed. The inquiry stands adjourned to Melbourne
on Wednesday, April 16, 1930, at 10 a.m.
Mr. W. A. Crew.—l would like to state that Mr. O’Dea,
the Secretary of the Shop Assistants and Warehouse
Employees’ Federation, did intend to submit a statement,
but, unfortunately, he had to go away. He left that
statement with me. Could I hand that in.
The Chairman.—Yes. Are you in a position to sub-
scribe to these views that are in it?
Mr. Crew. —-Yes.
The Chairman.—l think you might just make the
evidence formal in that way. You are already sworn.
WILLIAM AUGUSTUS CREW.
Already Sworn.
By the Chairman.—You might just say that you put
in here a statement prepared by Mr. O’Dea?—Yes, I
have pleasure in stating that Mr. O’Dea authorised me to
present this. The statement reads as follows:
If the suggested duty becomes operative, many mem-
bers of my Union, particularly those employed in book-
shops, newsagencies, and bookstalls will be seriously
affected by the threatened reduction of staffs caused by
loss of trade consequent on the added cost of duty. I
feel also that, apart from the loss to employees, my
members would be seriously affected by having their
facilities for purchasing literature restricted, either by
increase of price or by the prohibitive cost of bringing
it to Australia. Good literature—magazines, books,
newspapers—from overseas is widely read by the wage-
earners generally, who are thereby becoming better
educated and better citizens.
If they are forced to confine their knowledge to
Australian publications only, no matter how good, their
minds are not developed as they would be if the world’s
literature is obtainable at a reasonable price.
In the Bookstall Company the biggest retailers of
periodicals and newspapers in N.S.W. alone have over
200 members, and these, with others, would be affected.
(The witness withdrew.)
The inquiry at 1.10 p.m. was adjourned to Melbourne on
Wednesday, April 16, 1930, at 10 a.m.
SYDNEY—William Augustus Crew
SYDNEY—George Blackmore Philip


MELBOURNE
The Board met at the Boardroom, Elizabeth street Post
Office, on Wednesday, 16th April, 1930, at 10 a.m.
Present.—Mr. H. Conaghy (Chairman), Mr. S. Berch-
dolt, Mr. H. E. Guy, Mr. W. S. Kelly.
The Chairman.—ls there anyone present who desires to
tender evidence in favour of the application for duties?
(No response.) Is there anyone present who desires to
tender evidence in opposition?
ARTHUR STANLEY BUNDLE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?
—As Secretary of the Printing and Allied Trades Em-
ployers’ Federation of Australia, the head office of which
is situate at the Rialto, 497 Collins street, Melbourne.
I have prepared a statement, which reads as follows:
I am instructed by my Federation to oppose the
application of the Combined Printing and Allied Trades
Committee, 375 Kent street, Sydney, for a duty on
schedule Item 339, with one exception, as specified here-
under, in terms of resolutions passed at a conference
of the Federation held in Sydney on the 17th and 18th
March, 1930.
The resolutions referred to r'ead as follows:
(1) Item 339—800k5, n.e.i., and printed matter, n.e.i.,
“That no action be taken by the Federation to
interfere with the existing arrangements on tariff
schedule Item 339, viz., Free Duty.”
(2) “That the Minister of Trade and Customs be
respectfully requested to separate the following
classes of goods from Item 339 of the Tariff
Schedule, and that the undermentioned duties be
levied thereon”:—
Books of all kinds which have been printed
or reprinted in Australia and then printed
abroad:—3o p.c., 40 p.c., 50 p.c.
I have nothing further to add to the evidence already
given by Mr. H. A. Sinclair, on behalf of the Federation,
at the inquiry into this item by the Board at Sydney on
the 3rd instant. The statement made by Mr. Sinclair on
that occasion represents the views of my Federation.
Item 335—Fashion Plates and Books: At the conference
previously referred to in this submission the following
resolution was passed in respect to Item 335:
“That owing to the absence of any request for an
alteration of the existing rates of duty, viz., Free, 5 p.c.,
10 p.c., no action be taken in regard to Item 335 of the
Tariff Schedule.”
Q. —Your organisation is described as the Federation
of Australia. Do these views represent the views of all
the branches?—That is correct. They were passed at a
meeting, and to make doubly sure of them being the views
of the Federation a copy of those resolutions was sub-
mitted, in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Federation, to the various State Master Printers’
Associations, all of whom are members of this Federation,
and all the resolutions submitted, were passed.
Q. —The applicant body is described as a Combined
Printing and Allied Trades Tariff Committee?—They have
no connection with this Federation at all.
Q. —Is there any relation between them?—No relation
whatever. They just simply sprung up at the time. I
do not think they have been six months in existence, and
they do not represent any representative body of the trade
at all. The fact that the unions are members of that
committee proves that it is not an employers’ organisation
—not entirely.
Q. —Are any members of your Federation members of
that committee?—Not that I am aware of.
Q. —Could you tell the Board how many books that have
had circulation in Australia would have paid duty over
a period of, say, the last three years or five years, or ten
years—the longer period that you could give it to us,
under your heading, “Books of all kinds which have been
printed or reprinted in Australia and then printed
abroad”?—l could not give you any definite figures on
that, but the reason of that application is this—that we
think that where a printer has given advice and assistance
in the preparation of a book in the first instance, he'is at
least entitled to get any reprint of it.
Q. —Take, for instance, if somebody printed a Bible in
Australia—one issue of the Bible—would that mean that
the intention of your Federation is that all subsequent
importations ?—I think we would exempt a case such
as you have mentioned.
Q. —What about Shakespeare, the Immortal?—Well,
that is not quite the purpose of the claim.
Q. —You have to look at what will happen?—lf a man
has manuscript here in Australia and he sends it to Eng-
land he is going to suffer many difficulties in getting his
work carried out. It is easier for him to take it to an
Australian printer and get him to do all the corrections
and give him all the advice that he requires, get the thing
set Up, and then, when everything is 0.K., send it to
England and get it reprinted. That is what we are up
against.
Q. —There may be quite good reasons for this suggestion
in regard to a book which is only likely to be set up in
one edition, or, say, two editions; but if you had a book
which might be set up in scores of editions—take the
two I have mentioned, and I could easily mention a score
of others which will readily appeal to you—what would
be your position? I know what is in your mind—take
the ordinary novel, for instance?—Not only a novel; it
might be a technical book.
By Mr. Kelly.—You state books that have been printed;
if they have been printed, then the copyright would pro-
tect them?—lt would not in America; the copyright does
not give you full protection on them.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You mean really originally printed
in Australia?—Not necessarily.
The Chairman.—lt says “Printed or reprinted.”
By Mr. Kelly.—The Chairman has dealt with the Bible
and Shakespeare. There are a lot of other books I could
mention. Take the books of Walter Page. They were
reprinted here, and it is quite possible, and it is more than
probable, when that edition runs out it will not be re-
printed here. It is also, I hope, more than probable that
the Bible will be reprinted.
The Chairman.—As a book, that is likely to last for a
long, long time.
By Mr. Kelly.—ln which case you would be asking for
a duty on a book which was once printed here, but does
not justify printing here again on account of the limited
market?—lf the Board wishes it I would take the matter
up with my members and let you know what books they
want covered. I produce a list showing the members of
my Association.
(Witness withdrew.)
ROBERT DOUGLASS BOYS.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
appear?—As Chief Librarian of the Public Library of
Victoria and as representing the Trustees of the Public
Library, Museums and National Gallery of Victoria. The
following statement is made on behalf of my trustees,
who view with the greatest concern the proposal to impose
a duty upon the books and periodicals. It deals with the
matter only in so far as it would affect this institution:—
The books purchased for the Reference Library and
for the National Museum are all of a serious and
educational character. They comprise two main divi-
sions;—(l) Contemporary publications, representing a


careful selection of the best books in all languages pub-
lished in practically every civilised country; and (2)
secondhand books of older date, selected as source-books
and original editions, to meet the needs of students of
every possible subject.
Under (1) “Contemporary Publications,” come all the
technical works for the use of manufacturers, chemists,
engineers, etc.; books on science in all its branches;
examples of modern fine printing; books on art, philo-
sophy, religion, the social sciences, linguistics, litera-
ture, and history. Many of these works are published
in comparatively small and expensive editions, and in
not a few eases the copy imported for the Melbourne
Public Library, and available there to all inquiries, is
the only one received in Victoria.
Under (2) “Secondhand Books,” are included early
editions of standard literary works, original and other
editions of scientific and technical works of importance
in the history of knowledge, sets of scientific, techno-
logical, historical and other periodicals and publications
of learned socieities and institutions, etc. In most cases
the copy purchased for the Melbourne Public Library is
the only one available in Australia.
From these remarks it will be evident that for prac-
tically all the books purchased for the Melbourne Public
Library there is not a sufficient demand in Australia to
enable the books to be printed here. The imposition of
a general duty on such books would, therefore, only result
in addition to the cost of books essential for industry,
educational and cultural purposes. In effect the result
would only be to diminish the buying power of private
individuals and public institutions requiring these books.
From the point of view of my trustees such a result would
be a matter of great concern, since the tax, if imposed,
would render the public library less able to do its part
in meeting the educational, scientific and technological
requirements of the people.
I wish also to protest against the imposition of any pro-
posed discriminatory duty against books printed in foreign
countries. The number of these imported is so few that
it would be impossible to print them here at a profit.
But there are many important books and periodicals
printed in the United States of America, in France, Ger-
many and other countries, which must be upon the Public
Library shelves. An educational institution, such as the
Public Library, must be able to give the people of Victoria
the benefit of advances of knowledge made in all countries
and printed in all languages.
As I am making this statement only on behalf of the
Trustees of the Public Library, Museums and National
Gallery of Victoria, an institution supported by public
taxation for educational purposes, I wish to draw your
attention to the fact that in the United States, under its
latest Tariff Act 1922, paragraph 1530, all books imported
for public libraries are admitted free of duty.
Q. —Is it the practice of your institution to import all
its own books, or do you buy books locally?—We buy
locally.
Q. —To what extent do you buy locally, and to what
extent do you import?—-I suppose we buy about one-fifth
of our books locally.
Q. —Assuming for a moment that the Board might see
fit to recommend duties on books, it might still be con-
sidered reasonable to exempt books for public libraries
bought from public funds, and if we exempted books
bought for public libraries, in your instance, it would
exempt four-fifths of your books?—We buy books which
are imported by the local booksellers.
Q. —I thought you said your own direct imports were
about four-fifths?—Yes.
Q. —As regards the others, do you buy from ordinary
stocks, or are the books you buy from booksellers here
Q. —They are specially obtained for you sometimes?—
Yes.
imported for you?—They are imported probably because
they know we will buy them.
Q. —Are there some that you just go along and buy out
of ordinary stock?—Yes, replacing other books.
Q.—What I want to get at is this: Assuming there is
to be a duty on books, would it be possible to exempt your
books at the time of their importation? That is to say,
could the bookseller or importer set them aside and say.
“Those books, numbered from so-and-so to so-and-so, are
imported expressly for the Public Library,” or do you
frequently go along and buy just from ordinary stock?-—•
What we do is we prepare a monthly list of books, and
that is sent round to all the city booksellers, and we get
from them what they have in stock.
Q. —Then vou are just buying from ordinary stock?
Yes.
Q. —To what extent would your purchases be —would
they be one-fifth?—Yes, they would be about one-fifth.
Q. —Do you import quite a number of secondhand books?
—We do.
Q. —They are all rare, valuable books?—As a rule.
Q. —If this proposition, put up ostensibly on the grounds
of public health, and also admittedly as a system of pro-
tection, to exclude secondhand books, that would not be a
blow at the Public Library, but in your opinion it would
be very disadvantageous to the Australian book-loving
world?—Certainly; we are in this position: Our library
is a great library, and we are trying to fill up gaps so far
as possible, and to do so we buy secondhand books. I do
not think any bookseller would sell a book detrimental to
health. They make a point of sending out a clean copy.
Q. —For their own credit—that is, so far as you are
concerned—but it is quite possible that a certain class of
bookseller might import books from any source he can
get them. I do not mean necessarily valuable editions,
I moan the ordinary, common secondhand books, for which
there might be a market. I understand there are quite
a number of books catalogued and circulated from over-
seas?—l do not remember ever getting a dirty book from
an English bookseller.
Q. —We tried to make a classification of books in
Sydney. You say that all the books imported for the
reference library of the National Museum are of a serious
and educational character. Are you differentiating there
from the Public Library?—The Reference Library is the
public reading room, but we have a lending library.
Q. —For the lending library that description would
scarcely cover it?—We have a certain number of books
of fiction in the lending libary; we have about 20 per
cent, of fiction.
Q. —Would it be possible for you to add to the exemp-
tions which have already been provided in the suggestions
made the exemptions which would cover the majority of
the books which you use?—l really do not know what the
proposals are.
Q. —These are the exemptions proposed, and I will read
them to you. (Reads.) You could not say offhand how
far those exemptions would cover your books, because I
do not think for a moment that the applicant ever meant
to put a duty on this first class of books mentioned—for
instance, the copy received by the Public Library, which
would be the only copy in the State. I do not think any
sane man would suggest a duty on those books?—You did
not mention dictionaries, which is a big item. We get a
copy of every important dictionary published in the world.
Q. —We asked the Sydney University Librarian to make
a list of exemptions, and I was wondering whether it
would be possible for you to draw up a classification of
books which, even in spite of the fact that ordinary books
might be subject to taxation, which you consider should be
left alone by any tariff that has been imposed or may
be imposed. Do you think you could draw up a list?—
Yes. As I say, I really did not know what the proposals
were.
Q. —I think you, with the assistance of some of your
staff, could do it. The briefer it is, naturally, the better
MELBOURNE—Robert Douglass Boys


it would be, but I would not limit you, because we really
want to see how big is the list of exemptions you would
want to have. I do not mean you should let your personal
views enter into it, if you think that no book should be
dutiable; but, assuming for the moment for this purpose
it would be reasonable to tax the ordinary novel with the
big circulation, or something of that sort, that it would
be reasonable to tax some books, you could tell us what
books you regard it would be absolutely unreasonable to
tax. You might send along that list to the Secretary?—
Yes, but I suppose there is no immediate hurry.
Q. —We would like it within a week if you could do it?
—I think I could do it.
Q. —You might send in several copies of the list, which
we can circulate to anyone who might want a copy?--I
will do that.
(Witness withdrew.)
FRANK TATE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As President of Library Association of Victoria,
Municipal Library, Prahran.
Q. —What does that Association embrace?—lt repre-
sents the Public Libraries of Victoria other than the
great Melbourne Public Library, the Municipal Libraries,
and Mechanics’ Institutes throughout the State of Vic-
toria. It also has a membership of persons who are
interested in the provision of better facilities for reading
and study through public libraries.
The Library Association of Victoria wishes to record
an emphatic protest against any proposal to impose a
duty upon books and periodicals entering Australia.
The Association represents municipal libraries and
mechanics’ institutes throughout the State of Victoria, as
well as private members interested in the provision of
better facilities for reading and study through public
libraries. Its aim is to foster the reading habit as a
factor in the intellectual development of the people. The
standard of culture in Australia is admittedly below that
of older countries of Europe and America. Several fac-
tors operate in producing this result, such as:—
(a) The youth of our country and its comparative lack
of traditional inspiration.
(b) The necessity in a new country of devoting so much
thought and energy to material development.
(c) Our isolation from the rest of the world, and the
consequent lack of opportunities for absorbing the
culture of older lands by personal contact.
The best means of overcoming these disabilities is by
education, and especially by reading; and the policy of the
State and Commonwealth Governments should, therefore,
be to encourage the reading habit by increasing the facili-
ties for obtaining books of the best kind. The State
Governments have done much by establishing an adequate
system of compulsory primary education, and by an in-
creasingly generous provision for secondary and higher
education. One of their main objectives has been to make
education as widespread, as free and as efficient as pos-
sible.
The best result of a good school training is to develop
the ability and desire to educate oneself further. This is
done mainly by reading and having access to books. Any
attempt, therefore, to place obstacles in the way of readers
by limiting their choice of books or increasing their cost
interferes with the objectives which the State educational
authorities have, at such great cost, endeavoured to
realise. Libraries are an essential part of the equipment
of education institutions and public libraries, and abun-
dant opportunities for obtaining books make adult educa-
tion practicable, and are thus the best supplement to a
system of education.
I might mention that to my mind one of the most
fruitful sources of education yet to be developed is, in
the opinion of my Association, adult education. Any de-
termination to put hindrances in the way of people to
obtain books, either in restricting their choice of the books
which may be brought to Australia or by increasing the
price of books, will make adult education increasingly
difficult to attain. My statement continues:—
The Library Association have on two occasions re-
cently interviewed the Chief Secretary, and have pressed
for a substantial increase in the State grant for public
libraries. ( A reply has been received expressing sym-
pathy with the objects of the Association, and stating
definitely that as soon as the financial circumstances
permit the grant will be increased. At present the
libraries in provincial towns are in a very bad case
financially. Their present position will be rendered
much worse if a duty on books and periodicals is
imposed, and, moreover, the good intentions of the State
Government in regard to the near future will be nullified
if, concurrently with the increase granted, the pur-
chasing power of the grant is adversely affected.
To show how bad is the financial position of some of
our libraries, it may be mentioned that one country
library established many years ago has been driven to
the expedient of selling valuable historical records and
works of reference in order to provide funds for pur-
chasing contemporary literature. What is true of Vic-
torian libraries is undoubtedly true of libraries in other
States.
Further, the proposed duty is not in harmony with
the actions of the Commonwealth Government itself.
Australia expends large sums in the furtherance of
wireless communication with the rest of the world. The
Library Association considers that the written word is
a more powerful factor in the dissemination of culture
than the spoken word, and urges, therefore, that it is
the duty of the Australian Government to encourage
by every means possible the introduction into Aus-
tralia of books from abroad. The Association does not
suggest a bonus to be paid to importers, but it feels
that this would be a far more desirable course than to
impose a restrictive duty.
I think it might fairly well be argued that it would
be a good thing to pay a bonus on bringing books into
this country.
It cannot be claimed that the free introduction of
literature hinders in any way the output of Australian
writers. The argument usually adduced in favour of
the restriction of imports of ordinary commercial pro-
ducts, that local production is therefore increased, does
not apply. On the other hand it is certain that Aus-
tralian creative work is helped, and not hindered,
through the stimulus supplied by literature represent-
ing the thought of other countries.
There is much evidence of the growth among Aus-
tralians of a narrow, parochial mindedness, expressing
itself in a very hateful self-sufficiency, and an in-
tolerance of other nationalities and their ways of think-
ing and acting.
By Mr. Kelly.—With reference to your previous para-
graph, the aim is to stimulate printing, rather than writ-
ing?—l doubt whether it would stimulate printing to any
great extent. I think myself that is a very real feature
of Australian life—the very intolerant attitude towards
other nationalities and their ways of thinking and acting.
My statement continues:—
One great corrective of this objectionable habit of
mind is widespread reading. This reading should in-
clude not only books written within the Empire and in
America, but throughout the world. Nearly everything
worth while is, nowadays, translated, and made avail-
able for readers the world over. There is a greater
need of free circulation of world literature in Australia
than possibly in any other country of its standing. ...
What has been said about books applies equally to
periodicals. In the opinion of our Association no duty,
however great, would materially increase the output of
MELBOURNE—Frank Tate


Australian magazines. A comparatively small popula-
tion, which, to put it mildly, is not a reading public
in any true sense, cannot support magazines that are
really first-class. The world produces many deservedly
famous periodicals, and it would be the height of folly
to place hindrances in the way of Australians who
desire to get from these the stimulus or the mental
recreation they can give. There are, of course, many
magazines entering Australia that do not merit the
description “literature,” but the practical difficulty of
discrimination in favour of some against others makes
it undesirable to impose a tariff upon them.
It has been suggested that libraries and educational
institutions should be exempted from any duty upon
books; our Association would, of course, welcome such
exemption if the duty were imposed, but it feels bound
to point out that the exemption would be inoperative
in the case of an overwhelming majority of the libraries,
especially those in country districts. These libraries
are not in a position to import their supplies directly,
not only because of the inherent difficulty of such a
proceeding, but because their income is limited, and
they are so greatly dependent upon the booksellers for
information regarding suitable books. Life in the small
towns, and in rural areas of Australia, lacks many of
the amenities of life in the city. To the men and women
who have trained themselves to use and to enjoy them,
books are a great source of culture and of mental re-
creation. Any attempt to limit the supply should, in
the interests of country folk, be strenuously resisted.
I think anyone who has travelled much in the back-
blocks of Australia will realise that. There are some men
one finds having no opinions and no ideas. On the other
hand, you will find men leading an efficient life away off
in the remote parts of the State, and when you seek the
reason you find that that man is interested in things of the
mind, and he has his own collection of books, and he has
got something within himself which reacts against the
monotony of life round about him.
My statement continues:-
Nor would it be wise to limit the duty to works of
fiction. Good fiction has an undoubted value in itself,
and, moreover, the records of many a library show that,
as the demand for fiction has increased, the demand
for more serious and solid reading has also increased.
I made some inquiries, and I found in the Lending
Library in Melbourne that that is true—that the demand
for fiction was remarkable when fiction was intoduced,
but it also produced a growing demand for books of a
more serious type. My statement continues:—
We understand that one object of the proposers of
a duty upon bocks is to secure the publication of Aus-
tralian editions of books written and published else-
where. We would point out that our market is neces-
sarily a limited one, and that the inevitable result of
such a course would be to restrict very greatly the books
entering Australia. A few publishers of popular fiction
might be willing to cater for the Australian trade, but
there are hundreds of good books of light literature
and of fiction, which now enter in small quantities,
which would be shut from us. Even under the free con-
fditions of to-day it is not easy to get books that have
not been successful in making a popular appeal. Under
a book duty the position would be infinitely worse.
In conclusion, we desire to state that we have been
in communication with the Library Association of Tas-
mania, which desires to be associated with us in this
evidence.
Q. —Have you any idea to what extent the part of the
proposition which refers to books w T hich have been printed
and reprinted in Australia, and then printed abroad, a
duty of that sort would have effect? —Do you mean Aus-
tralian books published here?
Q. —The item reads: “Books of all kinds which have
been printed or reprinted in Australia, and then printed
abroad.” That means if a book has been once printed in
Australia, the suggestion is it is not reasonable to go
outside Australia to print it for the Australian market.
I am asking you because in your late position you may
have come in contact with one class of book which would
be considerably printed in Australia. I do not know
whether such educational books would be likely to be, if
they had an acceptance in Australia, sent abroad for
printing?—No, I think, on the other hand, the tendency
is for a man to try to seek publication abroad first, know-
ing the Australian trade would follow. I spoke to one
of our leading booksellers in Australia quite recently, and
he spoke of the almost impossibility of getting on to
the English and American markets with books that had
been published in Australia.
Q. —-What class of books were they particularly?—One
was the Australian Encyclopaedia, which is quite a fine
work of reference, in every way a very fine publication.
I am now speaking of Messrs. Angus and Robertson. They
had the greatest difficulty in obtaining hospitality to the
entry of Australian books into the outside markets.
Q. —We were shown in Sydney quite a lot of school
books which were published in Australia. Can you say
whether a duty would have any effect there or not?
Would they be just as likely to be published in Australia
without a duty as with a duty?—Yes. As a matter of
fact, we have had no duty, and for years in Victoria the
Education Department has steadfastly fostered the publi-
cation of books in Australia. This began away back in
1901 or 1902, and practically all the books which are used
in Victoria in any quantity are published locally. We
have firms like Whitcombe and Tombs, and others, who
have opened up out here in order to cater for that
educational trade, but when you come to the higher
education, where the number of books is limited and the
demand is limited, and where the book itself is very
difficult to supply, there we have got to depend upon
the outside world.
Q. —How many books which are set for the ordinary
State school educational purposes are produced in Aus-
tralia?—l should say the books used in the elementary
schools in Victoria are to the extent of over 90 per cent,
supplied entirely in the State.
By Mr. Kelly.—They are compiled for the local cur-
riculum?—Yes, by the local trade, and it has been a
definite part of the policy for the department to insist
on that being done.
By the Chairman.—They are wholly set up and printeu
in Victoria.—Yes.
Q. —As regards the other 10 per cent., or less, are they
books selected from an already published list?—Yes, as
a rule. The publishers, of course, are continually sending
out specimens. They are mostly of the type of supple-
mentary readers and the like for the elementary schools.
The books would not be textbooks in the ordinary school
subjects, which are all published locally.
Q. —Would any of these books have a sufficient cir-
culation to warrant their being printed in Australia?—No,
I do not think so; they are continually changing, and, in
fact, there is every desire to keep them on the move.
They are books for supplementary reading, and, natur-
ally, you do not want a boy who has read a book one
year to find that he has to read the same book the next
year.
By Mr. Kelly.—Of course, that would be complicated
by the copyright?—Yes.
Q. —You could not reprint here if it were a modern
book? —No, it would mean that the publisher would have
to publish an Australian edition.
Q. —In reference to the question of where you query
the Australian reading habits, we would all agree, I think,
that we do not read as much as we should, but we are
all hopeful that the Australian people will read more; but
the evidence seems to query what you have said in re-
ference to the comparative reading habit. Are you not
rather taking what may be called the cultured view in
MELBOURNE—Frank Tate


Australia as against the same proportion in other coun-
tries?—Yes, I was not so much speaking comparatively
as speaking absolutely. When I think of the opportuni-
ties for education in Australia, that the publishing
measure of ele.mentary books is higher in Australia than
is normal in other countries, I think it is fair to say that
we do not take sufficient advantage of the opportunities
we have, or, in other words, I have to say our educational
system has failed to this extent, that while it has given
the ability to read, it has not always given thei desire to
read.
Q. —No doubt that is true, but that does not substan-
tiate your suggestion we read less than other people?—lt
does not substantiate it, but still I think it is worthy of
inquiry.
Q. —Unwin, for instance, suggests quite specifically that
the Australian market is a much better market for the
ready sale of books. Of course, he qualifies that by indi-
cating a large proportion of the novels are read through
lending libraries in the old country, but from a purchas-
ing point of view they look upon the colonial market as
a much better market than the home market ?—Of course,
there would be many factors in that. The Australian
has got to buy his book if he wants to read it. He has
not the access to circulating and public libraries that they
have in the older countries.
Q. —Your evidence seemed to indicate we were reading
nothing like as much as we ought to do ? Do we read
quite as much as they do in the older countries? I would
like to get a criticism on that?—l have put forward my
view.
(Witness withdrew.)
SIR WILLIAM HARRISON MOORE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—You are appearing as a director of
Robertsons and Mullens Limited, publishers and book-
sellers, of Melbourne?—Yes, primarily in that capacity,
but I would not like to be limited to that.
Q. —Are you appearing in any other capacity?—l was
for nearly 35 years Professor of Law at the University
of Melbourne, and that, of course, brought me into very
close relation with all the educational activities of the
community. Then I have done some writing and pub-
lishing both in Australia and in England, and I have been
brought into very close relation with one aspect of this
matter which cannot be overlooked—that is, the subject
of copyright. I attended the International Copyright Con-
ference at Rome in 1928, where I represented the Com-
monwealth Government. In putting my statement for-
ward to you I ought to call your attention to the fact
that I made it out having before me only the claims
which were put forward at Brisbane or Adelaide. I did
not have before me the claim which was subsequently
put forward in Sydney. I presume that the Board is
considering in the main the whole subject, and I under-
stand the whole matter is at large, and that I may pro-
ceed with my evidence on those lines. Then, perhaps, I
might turn to certain matters in the amended schedule.
Q. —You are quite at liberty to do that, and as a
matter of fact you are not bound to adhere to your state-
ment?^—Thank you; the statement I have prepared is
as follows:
(a) Protection, (b) Revenue.
1. Ordinarily a protective duty is one which is laid
upon a class of commodities all capable of being pro-
duced in the country; the duty is confined to those
articles so capable of being produced. The imposition
of a protective duty has to be determined upon a con-
sideration of all the social interests of the whole com-
muity, which include the cultural interests as well as
material. The present proposal is to lay the duty on
all books, music and periodicals, subject to certain
vague exceptions, but no attempt is made to show what
is the extent of the industry that could be established.
Figures will be given to show the number of titles
dealt with in a year in a single business of Robertson
and Mullens; they themselves are enough to show the
difference between “books,” with their infinite diversity,
and those commodities which fall into a few classes,
and to establish that in relation to the whole number
of works that will have to bear the duty, the number
of titles that could in any circumstances be produced
in Australia is infinitesimal. “Books” cover the whole
range of human knowledge, and the whole intellectual
interest of mankind; they have nothing in common
except the mechanical means used for communicating
the thoughts of the writer to the mind of the reader.
They are not “subsitutable” articles—it is no use offer-
ing the man who desires to consult a German periodical
on physics or a Canadian work on the Constitution of
Canada a book on the Australian flower garden or
Coane’s “Australian Roads.”
It is really a new principle in protection of industry
that in order to promote the protection of a few com-
modities duties should be imposed on other commodi-
ties, irrespective of whether the tax could have any
tendency to cause the production of those goods in
Australia.
2. It is not, I suppose, possible to say what cir-
culation is necessary to induce publication of a book
in Australia. But the actual large circulation of some
books is not a sure guide; a large proportion of them
are cases in which such a circulation could not have
been foreseen, and in which the demand is anticipated
cautiously by repeated orders for relatively small quan-
tities. When the question is one of publication, the
publisher must be able to foresee a circulation which
will return him the costs of publication, and a reason-
able profit. Where a publisher has the whole English
reading world for his market, even a book with a
limited interest may satisfy this condition, though
every limitation tends to send up the price.
My point there simply is it must not be too readily
inferred from the large circulation of a book in Australia
that the book could have been published here, because
many of these things are surprises.
Q. —And there are many surprises in the other direc-
tion?—Yes. My statement continues:—
In Australia none but the few books of the most
popular appeal would fulfil the condition. It will, 1
think, be shown that even in the case of the most
popular authors, and of the best selling works, there is
much unevenness in their popularity. One book is a
success and another falls flat; one book is not noticed
until it has been in the market for some time, and then
suddenly bursts into popularity; another is a striking
success in one country and failure in another. That
is a matter which is quite well known in the bookselling
trade.
Obviously the smaller the market the greater the
risks. Unless Australia is the country of original pub-
lication, which could apply to very few works, the Aus-
tralian edition must find its sole market in Australia;
it will be excluded from every other country by copy-
right law.
I have stated that rather obscurely, and in a sense rather
inaccurately. What I mean is this:—Take a book of
min© that I published in England. I published a first
edition there, and that, of course, had a general copy-
right. Then I published a second edition in Australia,
and, of course, that also had a general copyright, and it
would not be excluded by other countries by the copyright
law. That class of case would be comparatively rare.
The case that we have, I think, to deal with here is the
case of a book which has been published elsewhere, and
the publisher has what you might call a general copy-
right in the subject, but, owing to the duty in Australia,
he assigns to an Australian publisher the Australian
MELBOURNE—Sic William Harrison Moore


copyright. In that case the book that is published in
Australia, by virtue of the Australian copyright, is con-
fined to the Australian market; it is no use for other
countries.
Q. —And it would be exceedingly unlikely that the sale
of the copyright would go anything beyond that?—Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—You are dealing with books of which the
copyright still exists?—Yes.
Q. —If the copyright has lapsed, then that is another
matter?—Yes, I was dealing with the case where the
copyright still exists. My statement continues:—
The increase in the cost of publication since the war
has necessitated, if a book is to be published at all,
the issue of much larger editions than formerly. The
publisher has to be able to reckon on a much larger
circulation before he can undertake the risk. That, of
course, tells against the publication for limited markets.
It is, I believe, the case, contrary to what is generally
assumed, that the actual number of books published to-
day is very much smaller than it was before the war.
I cannot give you exact figures, but I saw the figures
for 1913 and 1927, and the figures for 1927 were below
those for 1913.
By the Chairman.—Has that been general, or was that
a different year?—No, I think 1927 was taken as the year
immediately preceding the year in which the statement was
made. I think there was some correspondence, which
appeared in the “Nation,’ in which Mr. Unwin took an
important part, and Mr. J. M. Keynes, the “Economist,”
and quite a number of publishers and booksellers also took
part. My statement continues:—
Moreover, the price of a book is compounded of the
factors of costs and circulation; if the market is narrow
the price must be high; if, with a given circulation, a
book has to be sold at 15/, with three times the cir-
culation it can be sold at 7/6. Australian readers, as
part of a wide market, have the benefit of this
in a narrow market; even where books could be pub-
lished, they would encounter the high price, unless you
are to suppose that the proportion of Australian readers
can be raised to vastly higher figures in relation to
population than is found elsewhere. I am not speaking
of profiteering or exploiting the public by Australian
publishers, but simply of the conditions under which
price is necessarily determined.
Of course, you have the factor, to which a great deal
of attention has been given by the applicants, that the
actual cost of publication here is necessarily high, having
regard to the fact that all the materials that enter into
printing the book themselves have to bear a heavy burden
of duty, and so on, all of which points to the fact, of
course, that the increased cost of publication makes it
necessary to seek for a wider market, and then you have
to form some sort of equation between price and market.
My statement continues:—
The effect of increase on the price of books: Even if
the duty were forty-five per cent, on invoice price, a
work which now sells in Melbourne at 12/6 would cost
the wholesale bookseller 12/65, and must, therefore, be
sold retail at about £l.
I am not sure of that figure, £l, but the manager of
Robertson and Mullens will be able to tell you more
exactly what the actual figure is. My statement con-
tinues:—
There are few ways of spending money in which the
average Englishman or Australian practises such rigid
economy as in buying books; increases of such a scale
as would be necessary would make him think it a wanton
extravagance. The volume of the bookselling trade
would therefore diminish, and with that, of course, the
number of persons to whom that trade gives employ-
ment.
The Witness (continuing).—l might say that I speak
there as one who has had a great deal of experience in
book-buying, and I know how my own mind in regard to
the subject has changed. There was a time when I thought
a book would interest me, and I bought the book. Then,
as prices go up, or your income is curtailed, you begin
to apply other standards, such as “Is this a book that I
cannot possibly do without?” or “Is there any chance of
my getting this book elsewhere—is jt good enough for me
to rely upon a library copy?” and so on. It is affected
by that, and perhaps I might on that speak again from
personal experience with reference to the subject _of
periodicals. It is in cases where you pay a subscription
that you are really, periodically, called upon to revise
your plans, and if you find that the cost of the periodical
has risen it might not affect you if you simply buy an
occasional copy of that periodical, but it is going to affect
you if you are a subscriber. You begin to think, well here
is this periodical 50 per cent, more than it was last year;
I must strike it off. I know that in regard to my own
case that has had some effect. What has affected me
more in regard to periodicals has been the growth of the
cost of binding. I have dropped periodicals that I have
been in the habit of taking, simply because the cost of
binding them has become so high. Of course, where one
had a complete set of anything, one was not going to
spoil one’s complete set by ceasing it, but where one
has not a complete set, and, therefore, the value of the
thing from the market point of view was small, one has
just dropped one’s subscription. My statement continues:—
5. To high prices, diminished sales and diminished
employment must be added the financial difficulties that
would follow the additional capital that would be re-
quired to carry on any given amount of trade. If
£75,000 per annum is to be necessary to put on the
market the books that £50,000 will now supply, and
that is putting the matter at its lowest, one may ask:
“Where is the money going to be obtained?” Existing
booksellers are in no position to put in the capital;
financing on bank overdraft on such a scale as would
be necessary is out of the question. Even if it were
practicable, the case would present a striking illustra-
tion of over-capitalising in relation to work done, at a
time when the country demands the most economical
use of capital.
In relation to protection of the book producing in
dustry in Australia, it should be borne in mind that a
diminution of imports will injuriously affect some part
of the trade in Australia. Many foreign books are
imported in paper and covers and bound here; periodi-
cals, on completion of the year’s parts, are sent to the
binder. Neither can be printed here, so that the print-
ing trade can gain nothing. But if the books or the
periodicals are not imported the binder has so much
less work. If a number of lawyers, finding the cost
of their English Law Reports nearly doubled, give up
their subscriptions, and depend on libraries, no Aus-
tralian printer is going to gain anything, but a lot of
binders’ work is going to be lost. The same is true
of medical, scientific and other learned periodicals.
7. The duty as revenue:—As in the case of every
other protective duty, in proportion to its success in
causing - the protected article to be made here, any
estimate of revenue based on the value of existing im-
portations is vitiated. In the second place, there is
no fixed demand, the higher prices necessary upon the
scales proposed will diminish importations, and, there-
fore, diminish estimated revenue, far more than will the
works actually produced here.
What I am referring to there is the special non-substi-
tutional character of books. If you are dealing with
other duties, you may say that what is lost in revenue is
made up in production here; but in the case of books my
point is that you cannot say that. You may succeed in
getting some books produced here, but al very large
number of books not competing with those will, on account
of the higher price, simply not be imported. My state-
ment continues:—
But there is a special feature of books and periodicals
MELBOURNE—Sir William Harrison Moore


to be noticed in this connection. By far the largest
purchasers of books in Australia are the libraries, which
derive their funds wholly or substantially from the
Government, i.e., from the people—the Public Libraries
in the city, the Parliament Libraries of the Common-
wealth and the States, the National Library at Can-
berra, the libraries of the Supreme Courts, the Univer-
sities, technical colleges and institutes. If they are
to have the same number of books as at present they
must have more money from the Government; if they
get no more money they must have fewer books. How-
ever, the charge of a duty on many of these institutions
cannot be measured by their purchases of books. Many
of them receive considerable numbers of books and other
publications by way of donation, and some of these are
of great value. These must either pay duty or bo
refused. Incidentally, if they are refused, there will be
substantial loss of Australian book binding, for many
of them have to be bound here.
Of course, that requires qualification in the light of the
amended claim; but even there I notice that public libra-
ries, Supreme Court libraries and Parliamentary libraries
do not seem to get the benefit of the exception, and in
regard to the rest, the medical, literary and Incorporated
Mechanics’ Institutes’ Libraries—l intended to make the
point that was made by Mr. Tate—a very large number
of those are in no position to import themselves. It is
out of the question for the mechanics’ institutes in the
country to send an order to England for each of the books
that they want to take into their libraries.
By the Chairman.—l do not think that needs any elabo-
ration. That is abundantly clear. I think we all know
the country libraries ?—Yes, you probably know them so
much better than I do. My statement continues:—■
8. The suggested exceptions from the duties: Pro-
posed by way of exception to general duties, they re-
quire the consideration by some authority in Australia
of each title sought to be introduced. It is not clear
how this is to be done—whether a ruling may be asked
for in regard to any book in advance of order, or the
book must be submitted only on importation. In any
case, presumably the Ministry and the Industry Com-
mittee may demand to see and have the opportunity of
examining a book before pronouncing judgment on the
mass of books imported into Australia; to examine
these and make necessary inquiries the work will be
overwhelming. If thay are not, the determinations must
be arbitrary and capricious. In any case, there must
be delay and uncertainty as to the position of a book.
That, of course', also was written in regard to the first
claim, but it is fully as applicatble to the later claim that
is made, which sets an extraordinary number of questions
to be answered, and I gather that even in relation to the
second claim it is anticipated there will be this Industry
Board to assist the Minister, and I call attention to the
fact, as indicative of the manner in which this whole
subject has been regarded exclusively from the stand-
point of the printing trade, that the suggestion has been
made that in order that that body should function pro-
perly, its membership must be confined to representatives
of the two sides of the printing trade, the masters and
the men.
By Mr. Kelly.—That was qualified under cross-exami-
nation?—Was it?
Q. —Yes?—Then I come to the question of copyright,
and that is a matter which I think presents some diffi-
culties which I do not think the applicants have faced,
and which, even in regard to their present practice, they
may not fully have realised. I noticed in the evidence of
Mr. Catts in regard to fashion journals, for instance, the
statement that these things originated in Paris, and that
they must have them for purposes of publication here!
I think he said they would have to have them even if they
paid £5 apiece for them. Well, are they taking the plates
from these Paris journals for the purpose of publishing
them in their journals here? Because, if they are, they
are infringing the copyright already.
By the Chairman.—On the evidence it is either being
clone by arrangement or without arrangement. We do not
know which?—Quite so.
Q. —But presumably, as they are of such value, it has
been done with authority?—One would assume so.
Q. —I think we may assume that, as they are of such
value, the owners would look after their own interests?
—I think that would be so. My statement continues;—
Copyright.—The subject of a Customs Tariff on books
cannot be considered without regard to the position,
distinguishing them from other commodities, that arises
under the copyright law, which is itself based on an
international convention to which Australia, among over
30 other countries, including Great Britain and all the
Dominions, is a party. Except in those cases in which
copyright has expired, all the works to which the pro-
posed duties apply are protected by the law of copy-
right. This has two consequences. No work can be
published here: without the authority of the copyright
owner. The imposition of a duty, therefore, does not
leave freedom to manufacture; secondly, when the Aus-
tralian publisher has got an assignment, and has thus
become owner of the Australian copyright, he has a
more effective protection than a tariff, because impor-
tation is itself an infringement of his copyright—no
imported copies may be sold or offered for sale, and
the Australian owner, by notice of the Customs, may
secure the detention and forfeiture of all copies which
it is attempted to import. The addition of a tariff pro-
tection, then, can only be for two reasons: First, because
the Australian publisher could not sell at the imported
price (that disposes of the suggestion apparently made
that Australian editions will be cheaper than imported
editions).
Secondly, to put the pressure upon the copyright
owner to part with the Australian rights, i.e., to sacri-
fice the intellectual property, which copyright laws and
conventions exist to protect, to the industrial interest
in the means of reproduction. The grant of a licence
or assignment is in the discretion of the copyright
owner; whether he grants it, and on what terms, or
refuses it, will be determined by him on the calculation
of how his interests will best be served. He will take
into account that the loss of the Australian market is
the loss of something that may be nearly all profit, for
the multiplication of copies is a trifling cost. He may
see a better profit, even upon much restricted Australian
sales of his own edition, than out of such a royalty as
the Australian publisher, whose edition has to bear the
whole cost of manufacturing the book, can afford to
pay.
May I break off just at that point to say a word in
regard to the benefit, or the contrary, of imposts of this
kind upon the Australian author? Supposing you have
a position of things in which, say, the English edition is
excluded from the market under a very heavy tariff, and
the author or owner of the copyright is invited to publish
in Australia. Well, he is being subject to a squeeze
in a way; that is to say, he is not in a free and open
market for bargaining. It means that the Australian
publisher has him at an advantage, and can, presumably,
secure the right to publish at a better rate than he could
if the market had been open; but the effect of that, of
course, is not merely to beat down the foreign author.
Its effect is to beat down the Australian author as well,
because the number of publishers in Australia is pretty
limited, the number of publications they can undertake is
comparatively small, and they will say to the Australian
author: “Well, we can get this English work published at
a relatively small cost, so far as the copyright is con-
cerned, and the cost of setting up and putting the book
on to the market is the same, whether it is an English
book or an Australian book, and therefore you, the
66
MELBOURNE —Sir William Harrison Moore


Australian author, have got to put up with less.” That
is not fanciful, because that is exactly what happened in
the United States of America. The agitation which
secured the amendment of the Copyright Law of the
United States, and which brought about the Act of 1909
was the agitation of associated authors and of associated
publishers. The American authors found themselves in
exactly the position that I have described. The publishers,
having the run of English publications for nothing, offered
negligible royalties to American authors, and, if any
case is seriously made that the Australian author is going
to benefit by restrictions of that kind, I think the experi-
ence of the United States of America is a complete refu-
tation of it. May I now proceed to deal with certain con-
siderations that arise out of the International Copyright
Convention? My statement continues;—
The principle of the International Copyright Conven-
tion is to put works published in any country of the
union upon the same footing in every other country of
the union as if they were published here.
The “manufacturing clause” in the U.S. copyright
law requiring as a condition of copyright that books
shall be printed in the United States has been the
reason for her exclusion from the Copyright Union.
A similar clause in the Canadian Copyright Act had
by subsequent legislation to be amended, so as to limit
it to cases outside the British Empire, and, outside the
International Copyright Union.
By Mr. Kelly.—So that, in effect, it really applied
merely to the United States?—Yes.
Q. —And was really retaliatory action.—Really that was
the position. I am not sure that they have not swept that
away now by Order-in-Council, by some sort of arrange-
ment between the two countries. My statement con-
tinues:—
The proposed Australian tariff is assuredly a means
of securing the same industrial protection at the ex-
pense of the copyright owner. The difference between
the prohibition of importation of the work—the Ameri-
can means—and the imposition of a prohibitory tariff
may be ignored, and the only difference between the
cases lies in the fact that under Australian law the
copyright owner would still be able to prevent un-
authorised editions from being published in Australia
during the whole term of the copyright, while under
United States law he has this right only for a limited
period of four months.
Evidently a very grave question must arise as to
whether, if the American law precludes the admission
of the United States to the International Copyright
Union, the Australian law would be consistent with Aus-
tralia remaining a member. In substance the situation
under American law is more favourable to copyright
owners than it would be under Australian law, for the
wide market in America and the competition of pub-
lishers to get into it give to the owner of the copyright
. the opportunity of publication and a great bargaining
power ■with publishers.
That is notorious. We know English writers who make
vastly more from their American sales than they do
from their English sales. My statement continues;—
Obviously in Australia he would be shut out from both
these advantages.
If the scheme of the protective duties is to ensure
that an unwilling owner of copyrights shall be com-
pelled to give facilities for an Australian edition, it
would have to be carried out by an alteration of the
law, providing for compulsory assignments or compul-
sory licences, upon terms fixed by law, and not by
agreement. The question of compulsory licences in re-
lation to the Copyright Convention has given rise to
disputes. In some countries provision has been made
for compulsory licence in particular cases, but always,
sc far as I know, on account of some special conditions,
of which the common character is that they are con-
ditions which prevent the public from getting access to
the work—familiar cases are those in which a book has
got out of print, or where translation is desired into a
language which is so restricted as to offer no induce-
ment for profitable publication. The interests regarded
it will be observed are the cultural interests, not the
commercial or industrial. Even within these limits the
compulsory licence has been vehemently contested as
not consistent with the Convention. So far as I know,
it has never been suggested that a country may go fur-
ther, and within the limits of the Copyright Convention
apply compulsion to a work generally,, not because the
copyright owner is unable to supply the public demand
for his work, or because it is otherwise inaccessible to
the public, but because national policy desires to pro-
tect a particular industrial interest of its own
The objections attaching to either a prohibitory tariff
or to compulsory licences, considered separately from
the standpoint of the International Convention, would,
of course, be intensified where these two elements were
associated as part of a single system directed against
the copyright owner.
Might I just add one word in regard to that? A case
which might stand out as an objection to that line of
development would be gramophone records. Gramophone
records are copyright in other countries, and they are
made here, I imagine, under some provisions concerning
compulsory licence.
By the Chairman.—They pay royalties?—And they pay
royalties, but the whole subject of gramophones and
mechanical music generally is dealt with by a specific
provision of the Copyright Convention, which enables each
country by its own domestic law to establish exceptions
and reservations upon the general protection that is given,
together with a clause that, if they do this, then records
that are manufactured in virtue of this special power
given are to be confined to the country in which they are
made. The fact that that is specifically dealt with in
the case of gramophone records rather strengthens the
view that the Fame kind of thing could not be done under
the more general provisions of the Convention which
deals with books. My statement continues:—
Three further points arising from copyright must be
considered. First, an Australian edition of works copy-
right elsewhere would be necessarily restricted to the
Australian market. Just as an assignment of Aus-
tralian rights in a book excludes from Australia copies
lawfully produced elsewhere, so that importation of an
“Australian edition” into other countries would bo pro-
hibited as an infringement of copyright there. That is
why I have spoken, generally of Australian editions of
books published elsewhere being confined to the Aus-
tralian market.
By Mr. Kelly.—You have already qualified that in illus-
tration of your own publication?—Yes. I should rather
like to refer to that publication of my own, if I may, when
I have finished my statement, because that is a case of
reprinting here.
By the Chairman.—l have a note to ask you in that
very respect. That will be very interesting?—My state-
ment continues: —
Secondly, if Australia has to go out from the Inter-
national Union, and if her legislation is inconsistent
with the reciprocal legislation within the British Em-
pire, Australian publications lose all protection outside
Australia, and Australian authors will, therefore, be
compelled to publish abroad.
Under the Copyright Convention, if they publish
abroad, then they would get the benefit of the protection
that is given in other countries to the country of pub-
lication, so that the Australian author would not go
unprotected, but in order to get protection he has to
go out and publish elsewhere.
By Mr. Kelly.—You are not implying that we would
be outside the Berne Convention as a result of putting the
duty 1 on?—I think that we might.
MELBOURNE—Sir William Harrison Moore


Q. —We would not really be attacking the copyright
law?—Well, you are attacking the interest that the whole
subject of copyright exists to protect; that is to say, the
interest of the author in his work; and you are saying,
“You shall not have a specific advantage; you have one
advantage as far as Australia is concerned”; that is to
say, you can exclude other people from publishing, but
the exclusion of other people from publishing is a barren
right unless you can publish yourself; and if you pub-
lish yourself you must print in Australia, subject to a
very heavy penalty, or, it may be, a duty sufficiently large
to keep your work out of Australia.
Q. —I take it the assumption was that assignments
would be made; if publication were possible, it would be
under assignment?—lt would be under assignment, no
doubt. My point is that you have applied the squeeze
so far to the interest which the Copyright Convention
exists to protect; that is to say, the interest of the author.
It would be very doubtful whether that is a compliance
with the convention. I may say, incidentally, that the
matter has already been referred to in the January num-
ber of the official publication of the Copyright Bureau at
Berne. It has noticed this proposal, which it refers to
in connection with the United States law upon the subject.
They are very prompt to find these things out. Berne
is very vigilant in all these matters, and the question, I
am sure, will be raised in one form or another. I am
not expressing a final legal opinion upon the subject, but
I am certain the thing will be question. My statement
continues;—
Thirdly, if Australian legislation provides for com-
pulsory licences or assignments, it cannot confine that
to foreign authors and foreign publications.
My assumption is that, if legislation of this kind is
passed—that is to say, if duties of this kind are imposed
for the benefit of the Australian printer—it is almost
certain to be followed by the compulsory licence. That
is to say, you refuse to allow the copyright owner to
say, “Well, whatever you may do with your law in Aus-
tralia, I am going to stand on my copyright; I am not
going to give you any licence, nor going to give you any
assignment at all.”
By the Chairman.—Yes, there is a provision now in our
patents law, is there not?—Yes, that has to be considered
in connection with the Industrial Property Convention,
which, perhaps, by a rather strained interpretation allows
that.
Q. —Anyhow, it would be a natural sequence to this?—
Yes.
Q. —To say to some obstreperous copyright owner: “Well,
you are not to be the judge; you have got to publish in
Australia or sell your rights?”—Yes, I think it would
follow. That brings me to my third point:—
Thirdly, if Australian legislation provides for com-
pulsory licences or assignments, it cannot confine that
to foreign authors and foreign publications. The Inter-
national Convention requires identical treatment; every
person who published in Australia would do so subject
to tho right of anyone else to republish here the work
on paying the licence fee fixed by the Government.
That, of course, would be an additional risk that must
affect the mind of a publisher in Australia in consider-
ing whether he will publish any work.
The matter that I stated before, in regard to the Copy-
right Convention, was, as I indicated, a matter upon which
some question would arise, but I do not express a definite
legal opinion one way or the other. However, in regard
to this last matter, there is no doubt at all.
Q. —But this is subsequent on your other assumption?
—No, it is based on this assumption that we find it neces-
sary to adopt the compulsory licence or the compulsory
assignment.
Q.—lf that were so, this would follow?—This would
follow, and any book published here by an Australian writer
or anybody else is then subject to the condition that any-
body may get a compulsory licence here to reprint that
book here. That is the position under the Convention.
That is rather a serious matter for people who are think-
ing of undertaking books here.
By Mr. Kelly.—That thing is applicable in the United
States to-day?—No, they are outside the Convention.
Q. —Yes, but we would put ourselves outside the Con-
vention if we took similar action; I mean if wel took the
action of forcing?—Compulsory assignments?
Q. —Assignments?—I should think so; but, as I say,
you must not take that from me as a final legal opinion.
I think it would force us out, but this is on the assump-
tion that it does not force us out, this third point that I
am speaking of.
By the Chairman.—That is on the assumption that we
stay in?—Yes.
Q. —Naturally, because if we were outside of it, we
would not be bound?—That is so. My statement con-
tinues:—
In the above statement I have set down considera-
tions suggested by my connection with the publishing
and bookselling trade in Melbourne, and by my pro-
fessional knowledge and experience in regard to copy-
right. I want to add something based upon my out-
look as a student and the association established through
my work in the University with the intellectual life of a
community, and, perhaps, also something suggested by
my experience outside Australia during the last three
years.
The abolition in England, over 60 years ago, of the
newspaper duty has given us a trite phrase, “the tax
on knowledge,” which has not, I think, been lost sight
of in the course of this inquiry, which marks the
significance of the Act in the development of intel-
lectual freedom. Whether we consider the community
or the individual, the knowledge which is communicated
by man to man through the medium of the printing
press is not less important than it was in those day's.
It is becoming more and more true that, not one or
two professions merely, but every occupation, has its
own “learning,” and that success of the individual and
progress of the community depend on the dissemination
of, and additions to, this knowledge. Any neglect of
this, any discouragement of it, has to be paid for in
lack of capacity for using the material to our hand, and
for adapting ourselves to the conditions of modem life
—in other words, by lack of progress. No country can
hope to be self-sufficing in knowledge, and no country
can hope to make its own contribution to knowledge
worthy of respect, unless it opens its doors freely to
knowledge from every quarter.
Australian authors receive their equipment and their
stimulus only through the full mind which comes from
access to the best minds, and to the published know-
ledge of others. One great advantage we have is that
our mother-tongue itself gives that access to a know-
ledge of the widest range. How great this advantage
is, perhaps one realises only after contact with many
of those, who, having a restricted language as their
mother tongue, can only reach out to the world’s know-
ledge through learning one or more of the “inter-
national” languages (French, German or English!, and
who recognise that this is a condition of their civilisa-
tion. Toi throw away or diminish this advantage,
through setting up voluntary obstacles, is suicidal,
whether we regard the spiritual or the material aspect.
This is the more true in the case of a country which
is “new,” in the sense that its development is still in
the early stages, and its national life beginning to take
form and character.
Tho access afforded by our English language to
literature—using that term in its widest sense—gives
us the opportunity of overcoming many of the disad-
vantages which attach to distance from the centres of the
world’s life and thought, and from contacts which
enrich Europe and America. But it is an opportunity of
"MELBOURNE—Sir William Harrison Moore


which the utmost use must be made, if we are to avoid
dangers inherent in isolated communities—a certain
crudeness and lack of standards, which may affect both
thought and action.
In referring to the countries with the restricted lan-
guages, I had a good deal of opportunity during the last
few years of meeting the people who are in that position
at Geneva, and at Geneva the subject of language is a
very constant subject of conversation, owing to the diffi-
culties that many countries represented in the League
have in expressing themselves. They have to express
themselves in a language which is not their mother-tongue
at all, English and French being the two official languages
there, and over and over again, in talking with, for in-
stance, people from the Scandinavian countries, they
have expressed their envy of a country like our own, which
shares one of the big languages of the world as its
mother-tongue, and, therefore, has, without trouble to
itself, access to literature which they can only get at
through acquiring a foreign language. I, on my part,
put it to them what wonderful linguists they are. I have
in mind particularly a conversation I had with a very
distinguished Norwegian, who speaks English as well as
I do, and French certainly as well as one heard it spoken
by anyone other than the Frenchmen at Geneva, and also
German; and, speaking about the wonderful attainments
of that kind, and what it must mean to a country to attain
that, he said, “Yes, but think of your own country, where
you have access +o so manv books which we can only get
access to by acquiring foreign tongues.”
Q. —It is rather unfortunate for your reference that
Norway puts a duty on books imported into Norway?—
Yes, in her own language, but not in foreign languages.
Q. —Yes, but you would think she would, above all, try
to encourage the printing of books which she might not
otherwise get?—No, I should say, rather, that she feels
the necessity of getting access to English, French and
German publications, and so she is careful to impose no
obstacles to their introduction into the country, but in the
case nf p. book wViioh is printed in Norwegian she says,
■“Well, if you deliberately go outside the country and
print a Norwegian book, that may be a case for imposing
p duty.” T nu’te understand that. I was not aware that
Norway had any duties.
Q. —Yes ?—While we are speaking on the subject of
duties, I would like to refer to the case of Switzerland.
I notice in the evidence that the Board has some infor-
mation before it as to the existence of import duty on
bod's te Switzerland. lam not aware of any such duties.
By Mr. Kelly.—l do not remember that? —There was
some reference to the subiect.
Q. —Sweden?—And Sweden also.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—lt was just mentoned by a witness,
but there was no detail given?—A little over two years
ago I lived in Switzerland for four months, and during
that time I was getting library books from England every
week, from “The Times” Book Club. I was also importing
some books—l bought both from England and France—
and I have not the slightest recollection of a duty. If
the duty has been at all a substantial one, I would cer-
tainly have remembered it.
By the Chairman.—We have tried, but we have not been
able so far to find out whether it is a fact or not.
By Mr. Kelly.—One of the witnesses in Sydney under-
took to give us the full information in regard to any
duty?—l should be very much surprised if it is so, having
regard to the fact that a hook-publ'shing and bookselling
trade is characteristic of Switzerland. They have wonder-
fully good bookshops in Geneva.
Bv the Chairman.—They have two languages?—Three;
but for literary purposes you could say they have just the
French and Herman. Mv statement continues: —
One of the most striking characteristics of to-day is
the insistence that in view of the interdependence of
nations, the peace and prosperity of the world depend
ultimately upon the cultivation of mutual understanding
among nations. This in itself is a difficult enough
task, and we may not be able to make many positive
contributions to its performance. But the organisation
of the world of States in the League of Nations, the
interest which every country’s policy now excites from
the standpoint of its tendency to further or hinder the
ideals of the League, will draw attention to any country
which deliberately adopts a policy tending to narrow its
intellectual life, and to foster ignorance of thought and
conditions in the world among her citizens. The in-
ference that will be drawn of indifference and insin-
cerity will discredit such a country far more than
would have been the case a few years ago, and will be a
heavy weight against any influence it may desire to have
in the counsels of the League of Nations.
I hope that does not appear fanciful to the Board, but
to one who has worked at Geneva it is a very real con-
sideration. One has the certainty that it would be thrown
up against you. You have the certainty that when people
are delivering addresses upon the League and its work
and intellectual understanding, a note will be thrown in
to the effect that one country of the League has taken
action of this kind, and so on.
By the Chairman.—Even one body which came forward
this morning, represented by Mr. Bundle, the Printing and
Allied Trades Employers’ Federation of Australia, a body
who should be very closely interested in this proposal
(perhaps one would almost expect they might be in-
terested in a direction contrary to their evidence), have
refused to give any assistance to the project, excepting
in so far as it applies to books of all kinds which have
been printed or reprinted in Australia and then printed
abroad. I am quite sure, if you would care to give us
your experience, or your opinion based on your experience,
as you said you first printed in England and then you
printed in Australia, it would be helpful to the Board.
Where would you stand if you again printed outside Aus-
tralia? Naturally, some copies, even if they were not a
large number, would undoubtedly be imported into Aus-
tralia, and under that proposition they would be taxed?
—Well, I should have to consider very carefully what I
was going to do. That is to say, there were various con-
siderations which induced me to bring out the second
edition of my book in Australia; but if the law had then
been that if I wanted to bring out a third edition of the
book, that third edition must, subject to heavy imposts,
be published in Australia, I should have considered very
carefully whether I would bring out the second edition in
Australia, or whether I would not do with the second
edition as I did with the first; that is to say, bring it out
in England. I do not say that that would have absolutely
determined me, because there was a number of considera-
tions affecting the case; but undoubtedly, if the publi-
cation of a book in Australia is going to hamper your
freedom in regard to subsequent editions of the book,
that will rather be a reason against having your book
printed and published in Australia in the first instance.
In my own case there was a number of considerations
affecting both the first and the second editions. I took
them all into account, and decided upon publishing the
first edition in England and the second edition here. I
do not know whether it would help you at all if I ex-
plained to you the sort of reasons.
Q. —I think it may help—l mean it would show what
was in the mind of an author, and what may be in the
minds of other authors ?—Yes.
By Mr. Kelly.—ln connection with the publisher and
the author, it is the publisher that obtains the copyright,
is it not?—That is entirely a matter of arrangement. In
publishing a book, when you write a book you sometimes
dispose of the copyright out and out to the publisher, and
then you are done with it.
Q. —It is really the author’s prerogative?—Yes.
He can do what he likes?—Subject to this—
MELBOURNE—Sir William Harrison Moore


By the Chairman.—lf he does not do what the publisher
likes, he does no business?—Quite.
By Mr. Kelly.—He really sells the copyright to the
publisher, does he?—Yes, but you may have this position:
The author might say, “I, as the author, say I retain the
copyright, but I will give the publisher the first oppor-
tunity of bringing out a second edition.” That is to say,
when I am thinking of a second edition I will go to him
and say, "Well, are you prepared to bring it out?” If
he is, then I must publish through him. If he is not, then
lam free to go elsewhere. That is the position in regard
to my own book on the Constitution of the Common-
wealth. I deliberately published the first edition in
England, because it was published just shortly after the
foundation of the Commonwealth, when there was a very
extensive interest in this new Constitution. I knew that
the demand from other countries would be very consider-
able, and I knew that in those circumstances an English
publisher had far better opportunities of distribution than
an Australian publisher would have, and so I went to the
English publisher. Then, when the question of a second
edition arose, some ten years afterwards, I communi-
cated with my English publisher and reminded him that
he had the option over the second edition, but I said, "I
have to tell you that it will have a much more restricted
extra Australian interest than the first volume.”
By the Chairman.—Because of the lapse of time since
the Constitution?—Yes, and because also of the fact that
in the second edition one had to deal with the development
of the Constitution in Australia, and the very technical
development that had taken place in the courts which is
of general interest only to specialists in other countries,
but which is, of course, a matter of very practical concern
here. Obviously, therefore, the second edition was mainly
called for by Australian conditions, which meant that the
Australian publisher had facilities for distribution here,
and there were certain conditions also in connection with
the printing off of the book that made it advantageous
to publish it here. There were cases pending in the courts,
and decisions might be given. It might be desirable to
make alterations in the book, and so on. All that was a
consideration in favour of publishing here.
Q. —Naturally, after having said so much it is clear
that with a different tyne of book conditions might be
entirely different?—lt might be.
Q.—lf a third edition of your book were to become
desirable, the chances are that all the considerations that
influenced you to publish in Australia in the second edition
would again influence you in the third?—Unless I deter-
mined upon a different plan of the book. I can conceive
the possibility of a book on the Commonwealth Consti-
tution which I might think had more advantages to place
with an English publisher, if I were making a very gener-'l
review of the subject, but I must add this, that in
comparison with Australia, the work of publication in
England and America—incidentally, I have published in
America—is totally different. The work of publication
there is very specialised work. You have got a publisher
to take up this line and a publisher to take up another
line, and so on. They have developed all their different
modes of distribution, and so on. We cannot have any-
thing of that kind here.
By the Chairman.—ln a technical way, it is rather in-
teresting. I am not sure now that the item suggested
was really intended to cover a work of the nature of
your book, because it does seem to me, reading it, although
it does not say so, there can be read into the wording
“Books which in their entirety have been set up and
printed in Australia at some time.” Naturally, in a book
of the class which you published, your second edition in-
cluded a very large volume of matter which was not in
the first edition?—Yes.
Q. —I scarcely think that is intended?—lt may not be.
Q. —It opens up quite a question of interpretation, which
we need not go into; it is interesting, all the same?—That,
of course, is one of the difficulties I see in the proposals
—there is not one item in them which does not open diffi-
culties. I said something at the outset regarding this
claim, but just on matters of interpretaion, take Item
339, Books and/or publications not carrying advertise-
ment matter, namely, novels or works of fiction or litera-
ture of a similar character. What does that mean—does
it confine you to novels, or is it intended to cover books
generally ?
By Mr. Kelly.—l think you had better not get your legal
mind on to these classifications?—l am afraid the things
that I have noted on this schedule would take the greater
part of the day to deal with. Might I just refer to books
printed by any Government? I would like to say that I
think the League of Nations’ publications should be ex-
cepted—they are of extraordinary value—and, secondly,
“books printed by any Government” is rather a wide
definition. The British Government does not print any
books at all; there is a King’s printer, who carries out
the ordinary printing.
Q. —It is a matter of interpretation?—Perhaps I need
not trouble you about these matters, but I would like to
say something about law books. I do not know whether
anybody is coming here to speak in relation to Australian
books, but I might say that Robertson and Mullens, of
which I am a director, does not deal in law books at all,
so that I could not say anything about them. I would
like to point to some of the difficulties, because the
schedule refers to books, legal, dealing with Australian,
Commonwealth or State. laws. In one sense, almost every
English law book deals with our State laws, or deals with
the laws of Australia, for this reason, that our law,
except so far as it is statute law, is substantially English
law. I cannot say that Anson’s book on the Law of Con-
tracts, or any ordinary English textbook, would not fall
within the definition, but, apart from that, te an increas-
ing degree, as the Dominions have become more important,
the legal books make reference to the law of the Do-
minions. They do it either in order to popularise the use
of that book in the Dominions, or more often without any
thought of that, simply to make their treatment of the
subject complete. You are dealing with certain legal
subjects, and you look round the countries in which some
similar law prevails, and if you find a valuable decision or
a significant statute in Australia, you include it. To take
one or two specific matters, which would be very hard
cases indeed. Take the English Law Reports, which
come out in parts monthly. The English Law Reports
are paid for by an annual subscription, and one volume
of the English Law Reports contains appeals to the Privy
Council, and those appeals to the Privy Council include
appeals from Australian Courts. It seems, therefore,
that the English Law Reports would come under this
rule.
Q. —I think I see your point; that is, if the Board, in
its wisdom or unwisdom, as you may think, should re-
commend such an item, it should be “Dealing solely or
primarily with Australian Commonwealth or State laws.”
I think that would make it less objectionable?—lt would
be very difficult to secure it absolutely. Might I just
mention one very big thing? There is now approaching
completion what is known as the Empire Digest of Case
Law; that is in 43 very large volumes, to be published
and sold here at 29/ a volume. The plan of that is to
include significant cases upon any subject whatsoever
from the Dominions, and on every page you will find a
note on some Dominion case. Taking that as 43 volumes
at 29/ a volume, that would certainly bring it within the
duty, according to this schedule. Might I take just an-
other case? An important German work has just been
published—a comparison of the commercial and civil laws
of a large number of countries, including Australia and
New Zealand. That, of course, will come within the duty.
I want to emphasise this: that it is becoming more and
more the case that law books are taking this wider sweep
and bringing in whatever is significant in the laws of the
MELBOURNE—Sir William Harrison Moore


Dominions. I picked up only on Friday afternoon a
recent book, which it would never be suggested Australia
would be able to produce. It is a work on the marginal
seas, dealing with the subject from a standpoint of inter-
national law, and in two pages stating, and stating com-
pletely, all the Australian material there was upon the
subject. It deals completely with the Commonwealth and
State laws on the subject. I do not know that there is
anything more I want to say, excepting that I would like
to say a word or two about secondhand books, because
that, again, affects the law very considerably. No law
library could have been founded in Australia, and I say
that deliberately, except upon a broad basis of books
which could only have been imported secondhand, because
they are books that are long since out of print, and
they are books which, for the purposes of reference, you
must have. Then, with regard to the editions of to-day,
if you take the law reports, and you want to buy a set
of the law reports, those are only to be obtained second-
hand. The publisher of those law reports is no longer
issuing them, and they are being imported here, sometimes
on special orders and sometimes by the booksellers as
speculations. Then if you take the scientific and literary
periodicals and journals, we have to import sets of those
things secondhand, because that is the only way you can
get them. Ido not think there is any other point I
desire to put before you, but I will be very pleased to
answer any questions.
Q. —I think you have fairly well covered the ground?—
I thank you.
(Witness withdrew.)
ERNEST SCOTT.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
As chairman of the Library Commitee of the University
cf Melbourne, and also as Professor of History of that
University. The University has drawn up for your infor-
mation a memorandum containing a number of points
which we wish to put before the Board. I do not think
there is any need for me to read it. I am not the author
of the memorandum, but I have read it carefully through,
and it embraces my own view and the views of the Univer-
sity generally, and I put it before you as an official state-
ment. The statement is as follows:
The University of Melbourne begs to put forward the
following considerations in opposition to any proposal
to impose a Customs duty on books and other publica-
tions:—
1. Australia is already sufficiently heavily handi-
capped in facilities for the purchase of books by reason
of her remoteness from the great centres of production.
Booksellers have ordained that, on account of sale risks
and costs of transportation, coupled with price organi-
sation, a selling price shall be imposed generally about
20 per cent, in advance of that in use in countries of
origin.
2. Books and other printed material, as the vehicles
of knowledge in a concrete form, hold a peculiar place
in modern civilisation. Any tax upon them would in
effect be a further barrier to the dissemination of
knowledge.
3. While the Universities feel that a claim by them
for exemption from any tax that might be imposed
would be unanswerable, and could not reasonably be
refused to them as educational institutions, they like-
wise hold the opinion, being responsible for the develop-
ment of higher education in Australia, that no citizen,
whether attending a University or not, should be
penalised in respect to the price of books.
4. While the general effect of the Australian tariff
is claimed to be the fostering and development of Aus-
tralian industries, that policy cannot be applied as yet
to book production, nor can he with any real justifi-
cation until our population has increased to many times
its present proportions. At present, with existing
limits imposed by this condition, it is impossible. to
produce works of substance locally without special sub-
sidies. A tax would only further complicate this already
difficult position.
The Printing and Allied Trades Employers’ Federa-
tion of Australia has resolved to oppose any duty what-
soever on printed books, magazines, and such like pub-
lications, for the foregoing and similar reasons.
5. Since knowledge is without geographical boun-
daries, the effect of any tax would further penalise
authors of scholarly works and books of high literary
merit, who are already severely handicapped. Writers
of books, as disseminators of knowledge, have a right
to demand that the production of their brains should not
be denied either the freest world competition or the
widest circulation.
6. The practice of the United States of America has
been quoted as a guide for Australia. As a matter
of fact, the United States is practically self-contained
as to book production. It has an enormous population,
its own copyright laws, and does not adhere to the
Berne Convention. There is no market there for this
or any other country, and its practice cannot possibly
be followed by us because of our limits of population,
and, in addition, our very proper sense of international
obligation.
The subject in which I am interested particularly, and,
in fact, entirely, is books which are used by students at
the University, in schools' and by student teachers—that
is, teachers of students and in schools who want a more
expensive kind of book than that which is used by Univer-
sity and school students. In reading the evidence given
in Adelaide, I am not sure whether it was proposed to
include, by those who advocate a duty on books, books
of the student class. If it is, then I would like to
direct your attention to the fact that there are some books
on the one hand which are very dear, and on the other
hand very cheap, which could not possibly be produced in
Australia, either under existing conditions or under any
conditions that one could conceive of at present.
Q. —The exemptions are rather hazy, and I was going
to ask you if you could, in conjunction with the Public
Librarian of Melbourne, whom I asked this morning to
prepare a certain list, draw up a list, or get somebody
at the University Library to collaborate with Mr. Boys in
the matter of drawing up a list, such as I asked him to
prepare, for the moment not taking any side on the
question as to whether there ought to be a duty on books.
I asked him to draw up a list of books which he thought
should be absolutely sacrosanct, and which should not he
touched at all. Do you think you could draw up such a
list?—l am not sure whether that would be possible.
I produce a book, which is quite new—l have not
taken the jacket off it yet—it is one volume of the Corn-
bridge Mediaeval History, which has just been published.
When it is completed it will consist of 28 volumes. That
comes from London at £2/10/ per volume, and the total
set will cost £2O London.
Q. —Can you make a rough guess of how many issues
there may be in Australia?—That is the point; that is the
reason why a book of that kind could not possibly be
produced in Australia—in fact, it could not be produced
in America.
Q. —I do not think you need spend much time on that,
because I do not believe the advocates of this duty had
in mind the putting of a duty on a book like that?—This
other book which I produce is at the other end of the
scale. The Cambridge volume is a very big book, and is
a very dear book. This book I now produce is a book
which is one of the series of the “Everyman” Library.
It is sold in London at 21, and sold by the Australian
bookseller for 2/6. That is a book which we wanted
Mr. Dent to put in his “Everyman” Library, because we
want it for students. It was a book by Wakefield, which
was the book which really led to the foundation of South
71
MELBOURNE—Ernest Scott


Australia and afterwards New Zealand. Mr. Dent told
me a book of that kind would not run into the number
of copies he required for the “Everyman” Library. He
told me that for every book he put into the “Everyman”
Library he had to sell ten thousand copies before he got
a penny out of it. The University wanted that book for
thcf students to use, as it was a book which Wakefield
wrote, which led to very important consequences in Aus-
tralia. Mr. Dent said he could never sell ten thousand
copies of that, and I do not think he will, but, being a
publisher of a series which contains now over 900 titles,
he could afford to give us one, because he will make the
loss on these copies out of the big sellers like “Pickwick
Papers,” “Oliver Twist” and the rest. He gave us that
book because we are good customers of his in other
directions. That is a book which could not be produced in
Australia at the price at which it is sold to students
under present conditions. I took that cheap book to illus-
trate my point.
Q. —It would be impossible to include that in the cate-
gory of exemptions that we have here?—l am afraid it
would, but this book is very valuable to us, and to young
men who want to know how Australia was founded. On
the other hand, there is a large range of educational
books which undoubtedly can be produced in Australia,
and are being published here to-day. Here is a book
not yet published, but it will be published within a day
or two by Angus and Robertson, of Sydney. It is written
by a Melbourne man who is a master of the Scotch
College, and so far as I have examined the book at
present, it is a good book, thoroughly commendable, and
from the point of view of book production, style and
binding it is excellent.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt is an interesting fact that Grenfell
Price has found publishers who will print his book based
on that calculation you have there?—lt is based on more
than that; it is based on the documentary material in
Adelaide. I know the book well.
Q. —I mean to say it does suggest that they found a
market, and there is the possibility of finding a market?
—I know Mr. Price, but I do not know the conditions
under which the book was produced. Before I could say
it found a market I would like to know something about
the way it naid him. I doubt very much whether it did
pay him. It is a good book, but I should like to know
whether it was a profitable publication. I doubt whether
it was.
Q. —He has published a second one?—There may be
funds available. We publish bonks at the University
Library. We have publishing foundations. There was
one book on the basic wage by Mr. Anderson, and it is
quite a good book from the point of view of production,
paper and bookbinding, and it. is nuite on a par with a
book which can be produced smn»Wi> else in the world.
Dr. Anderson is a printer, and he took a special pride
in producing the book. I do not know any better book
than that.
By the Chairman.—Taking that book compiled by the
Scotch College master, was that rm Wished here with an
idea of being a textbook for schools?—Entirely.
Q. —It will have a very limited circulation outside of
Australia, if any?—None at all.
0. —It is not designed to have any circulation outside
of Australia?—Not at all. The subiect is amply covered
by at least a dozen books I could mention published in
England. It covers the ground, and the value of the
book is that it covers the ground with a particular desire
to tell Australians the Australian point of view with
i-egard to the process of development.
By Mr. Kelly.—lt is sufficient, from the Australian
point of view, to make it acceptaWe to the Australian
public, and not acceptable, probably, to others?—That
emphasises the point which we want to bring out. For
instance, the development of responsible government is,
perhaps, less of importance to the boy in England than
the Wars of the Roses. The Wars of the Roses are
nothing to us, but the development of responsible govern-
ment is; hence the value of the book to Australia. When
there is a market books can be produced all ready; that
is the point I want to make. The only other point I wish
to speak on is about secondhand books, and that is a
matter which is very important to us. I was rather
alarmed at the suggestion of a duty on secondhand books.
There are two classes of secondhand books, and they want
to put a tax on them.
Q. —Not only to tax them, but they want to prohibit
them?—That is worse. What I want to say is there are
some branches of knowledge which you cannot nossibly
pursue without secondhand books. Professor Harrison
Moore alluded to law books, and the same thing applies
to history books, and every other book that is out of
print and there are no modern copies. It is very difficult
to get a lot of these books. Only by the last mail I got
from the bookseller I deal with in London this book, which
is a contemporary account of the English Revolution of
1688, which deposed the Stuarts and inaugurated the
British system of limited monarchy. You could not buy
that book as a new book. It was published in 1788, and
has never been reprinted. Unless you could get it second-
hand you would not be able to study it at all. My book-
seller was looking for this book for three years for me,
because I wanted it. That is one class of book which the
student in Australia must have secondhand if he is to
have it at all. Secondly, there is a class of book which
was alluded to by one of the witnesses in Adelaide, that
is, consisting of the books that have been handled or
circulated by circulating libraries, and which come into
the market cheap. They are of very great value to Aus-
tralian students, for this reason, that I specialise in a
particular branch of literature, political biography. I
have a pretty well complete collection, and if I had to
buy those books new I could not have looked at them,
because they are published generally at a very high price,
and with very little expectation they will have a market
as new books. For instance, take the Life of Lord Gran-
ville, who was a Foreipm Secretary when the trouble arose
about New Guinea. That book contains first-hand infor-
mation about that subiect. That book was published, and
it was a very dear book, at the author’s expense, and I
suppose very few copies of it would be bought. In due
course, after having been circulated through circulating
libraries, such as Mudie’s and the “Times” Book Club,
they come into the catalogue as secondhand books,
they are no longer in demand as new books, and then is
the opportunity for the Australian book-buyer to get that
sort of book if he wants it. If he cannot, pay the original
price, he can got it then at the secondhand price. Those
are the only points I wish to speak upon.
Q. —With these secondhand books, it is quite obvious
the proposal to prohibit them is loaded. With regard to
some secondhand books the proposition might be reason-
able—l mean with ordinary fiction, modern-day fiction, it
may or may not he. lam not exnressinv anv view on
that, but it is quite obvious that you would scarcely be
able to define those secondhand books which should not
be interfered with?—lt would be exceptionally difficult,
I think.
Q. —Would you look into that matter I asked you about
earlier, and see if you can draw up any definition that
would help us?—l-will do so.
Q. —We admit the difficulties, but will you go as far as
you can, and then express your views as to the complete-
ness of the list?—Perhaps our librarian, who was for-
merly an official of the Public Library, will be able to
give some reliable information on that point.
q.—We would be glad of any information that you
could give us?—l will do what I can.
(Witness withdrew.)
MELBOURNE—Ernest Scott


SIR WILLIAM HARRISON MOORE.
Already Sworn.
To the Chairman. —Might I say a word on the subject
of fiction? There is this aspect of fiction which must
be borne in mind. From fiction we learn most of the
actual life, it may be, of a particular historical period,
or it may be of a particular country. Take the history
of our Victorian era: the real opportunity that one has
of knowing the life of the period is in the works of George
Elliot, Jane Austen, George Meredith and Anthony Trol-
lope, and so on, and similarly with other countries. Take
Balzac and Anatole France; those are two particularly
good instances.
Q. —That question was raised in Sydney on what was
an educative book and what was an imaginative book.
That point was made, and it was said that you could not
separate the two?—Quite so, but there is a certain disposi-
tion to throw over fiction as of little educational value.
Of course, some of it is, but there may be other books
which are published, and there are books which are pub-
lished in other lands, which are distinctly of educational
value.
(Witness withdrew.)
DOUGLAS BERRY COPLAND.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—
I am a member of the Library Committee of the Univer-
sity of Melbourne, and Professor of Commerce at that
University. I only wish to amplify what Professor Scott
said concerning the publication of books here and in re-
ference to the point raised by Mr. Kelly about the publi-
cation of Grenfell Price’s book. I do not know the cir-
cumstances under which that book was published, but I
have had some experience of the publication of books on
economic problems in Australia, and in no case have we
been able to publish in Australia a book without a sub-
sidy. We are anxious to encourage this class of book;
we want these books for our students. Within the last
eighteen months we have published three books—“ The
Australian Tariff,” “The Peopling of Australia,” and
another book—all books dealing very directly with eco-
nomic problems in Australia, and in no case could those
books be published without a subsidy. No tariff will
assist that at all. Taking the books that I use for my
students, I went through the list, and, although we are
anxious to have Australian material, 90 per cent, of those
books must be imported dealing with the economic prob-
lems that the students have to study. Wherever possible
we publish Australian works, but we can never do so
without a subsidy.
Q. —Would you give us confidentially the circumstances
concerning those publications you mentioned?—We will
be glad to do that.
Q. —I think it will be helpful to us; that is the class of
book—those three books you mentioned—that are par-
ticularly Australian, and should' be of very much interest
to Australians?—They should be.
Q. —One would have expected, with regard to one of
those books at least, it might have been published without
a subsidy?—lt was published at a very low price, but a
substantial subsidy was required. There is another point
apropos of what Professor Scott said concerning second-
hand books. I tried to obtain a copy of a book by Paton
on the economic basis of protection. It is the most recent
statement on protection, and is one of the best works
on the subject I have ever read by an economist. I
endeavoured to get that in Australia; it was published
in 1890, but, notwithstanding all the inquiries I made, no
secondhand copies were available in Australia, and I will
have to get one from America. I have not got it yet,
but I will eventually get one. The prohibiting of second-
hand books would lead to the absolute impossibility of
getting a book like that in Australia. There is one
other point I would like to mention while I am here, and
that is this: I have looked into the facts of the unem-
ployment in the printing industry in Australia, compared
with unemployment generally, and I find, according to the
figures, that unemployment in the- printing industry in
Australia shows that there is no depression at all in that
industry.
Q. —We have had evidence on that, but I would draw
your attention to this: that supposing one hundred per
cent, are at present engaged, it would still be a
very fine thing if we could double that number?—With
your permission I would be prepared to say something
on that point, too. The imports of books, periodicals,
music and newspapers into Australia in 1927-28 amounted
to just under £1,400,000. The local production, according
to the statistical classification of similar materials,
amounted to £21,000,000, but that included other things,
and they are very hard to dissect. The total hands em-
ployed numbered 34,000. Supposing you put a tariff on
books, the first question to consider is—How much of
the £1,400,000 imports will be produced in Australia? It
is very difficult to say that, but. supposing half of it is
produced in Australia, which I think is an extravagant
e stim ate
Q. —I think it is a fairly liberal one?—lf half were pro-
duced in Australia, that would increase the local pro-
duction by three and one-third per cent., involving the
additional employment of hands to the number of about
one thousand. But it is impossible to think of one-half
being produced in Australia, for varying reasons. In the
first place, you would still have to import the other half
—that would be necessary books, apparently. That would
give you under seven hundred thousand—at least 25 per
cent.—so that you would .have less than one-half, and
you would not produce here £700,000 worth. You might
produce, say, £500,000. Then, in the second place, the
locally produced books themselves would be more expen-
sive than those imported, so that you could not reckon
on, perhaps, more than about half of the £700,000; that
would mean about £350,000 locally produced.
Q. —You think that the price of the books producedi in
Australia would be very much higher—that it would limit
its circulation?—Yes. So that you can reckon on the
additional employment of about 550 hands, and that is an
extravagant estimate even then. That is the obvious
benefit—sso new hands—but, against that, you have to
remember this: The total amount of imports would not
be reduced by the total amount of the new production,
because you may still have to import the raw material,
and the machinery. Secondly, the additional costs of the
necessary books imported to be set against the employ-
ment of the new hands; and, thirdly, the additional cost
involved in the loss of efficiency consequent upon the dis-
couragement given to learning and education. Those
costs cannot be estimated.
Q. —There is another point, that amongst the books
that would still be imported, undoubtedly there would be
a huge list of exemptions from duty; they would be in
large numbers, and you have not taken them into account?
—I have not.
Q. —You are not attempting to assess?—No; in fact,
it is impossible to assess.
Q. —Unfortunately you start with an absolute impossi-
bility; that is, to get a parallel between the Australian
production and the imports ?—Yes. That is all I have to
say.
(Witness withdrew.)
(The Board adjourned until 2.15 p.m.)
Upon resuming at 2.15 p.m.
Present. —Mr. H. E. Guy (Chairman), Mr. S. Berchdolt,
Mr. W. S. Kelly.
By the Chairman.—The Board will proceed with the
adjourned inquiry with regard to books. I think we were
dealing with books.
MELBOURNE—DougIas Berry Copland


GEORGE CAiMERON KINGSCOTT.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As President of the Association of British Book
Publishers’ Representatives of Australia and New Zea-
land, The Rialto, 497 Collins street, Melbourne. I have
prepared a statement, which reads as follows:
As President of the Association of British Book Pub-
lishers’ Representatives of Australia and New Zealand,
representing 14 members, carrying the representation
of about 120 British publishing houses, I have been
asked to appear before the Board and give opposition
to the application to alter Item 339 of the existing
tariff.
A statement having already been made before the
Board in Sydney by Mr. H. B. Newman, a member of
our Association, I will confine myself to certain points
suggested by the statements of the Sydney applicants
for the duty.
The fact that the case as originally presented in
Adelaide was revised for the Sydney hearing indicates
that the applicants, realised the weaknesses of their
original application, and, although the claim was made
that the exemptions noted in the revised claim meet the
bona fide objections of the representatives of overseas
publishers, I am here to state that these exemptions
are not sufficient, and to suggest that the voice of public
opinion is probably more pronounced against these
proposals than that of the Association I represent.
Figures were given in the original application re-
garding imports of paper, printing, stationery and
books, periodicals, etc., made during 1927-28, viz.,
£8,000,000, of which, it was estimated, £3,000,000 was for
commercial printing and £1,300,000 for books and
periodicals. I wish to submit that the only item with
which we are concerned is the last one, and that, for
the purposes of this inquiry, any figures relating to
advertising matter and commercial printing should be
disregarded, because provision for such imports is
already made under Items 338 and 340 of the tariff.
We must respectfully protest against figures being
brought from other items in the tariff to support what
the applicants evidently feel to be a weak case.
Assuming books and periodicals imported in 1927-28
to be £1,300,000, as stated, the estimated number of
employees required to produce a similar value locally,
based on the number-of employees and the Australian
output given in the applicants’ statement, would be
about 2120; but as a lesser staff is normally engaged
in book production than that required for general com-
mercial printing, this estimate could be reduced to prob-
ably 1500.
In support of that I would like to submit this copy
(produced), which is a sample of a book px-oduced on a
machine attended by six operatives. Complete copies are
produced at the rate of 3000 an hour, so that the daily
output, on an eight-hour day, represents 24,000 copies
of that book. My statement continues:—
And as the number of books which it might be pos-
sible to produce locally were a duty imposed would
be but a small percentage of those now imported (5
per cent, has been mentioned, I think), it is doubtful
whether more than 200 additional employees would be
required in the printing and allied industries. Against
this gain of 200 must be set the loss of employment
which would undoubtedly result in the book trade gener-
ally. A firm similarly placed to my own would be
faced with the problem of closing down its local
warehouse, and the consequent dispersal of the staff.
Beyond a certain general statement, giving the con-
dition of the printing industry in Australia at the end
of 1928, no indication has been given as to what steps
are likely to be taken to extend the publishing of books
in Australia. A question put to the applicant in Sydney
on this point was left unanswered;
In my opinion the mass production which is a feature
of the publishing of England and America is absolutely
impossible in Australia, and I think we are rendering
a service to the applicants for the duty by putting up
solid opposition to their proposals, because a few
seasons’ experience in publishing, especially in a re-
stricted market, would undoubtedly make them sadder
and poorer men, and probably wiser men.
In support of that point I might say that we repre-
sentatives have, perhaps, a case that supports them in
so far that ono of our clients recently has made an
arrangement with his creditors, which shows us quite-
clearly that he is engaged in local production, the prin-
cipal creditor being the local printers for items which
have been produced. That point crops up again, perhaps,,
in connection with another point that I make later. My
statement continues;-—•
One surprise that awaits them is the exceedingly
small number of books it will be possible to publish
locally, and to support this point I submit a list cover-
ing books on which I have recently paid royalties for a
year’s sales to 28th February last.
Q. —What is the purpose for which they are submitted?
—ln support of the claim that, being exceedingly small
numbers, they would be unable to print quite a number of
items. That list gives you complete details of a year’s
sales of those books on which royalties are payable to the-
authors.
Q. —This is just to point out the smallness of the de-
mand?—Yes, the smallness of the demand in Australia,
for those particular items. (Confidential list submitted.)
My statement continues:—
Taking the case of the class of books known as
juveniles, in order that these may be retailing at from
1/6 to 2/, editions of 10,000 are needed. The Oxford
University Press have just issued six new titles, and
printed 10,000 copies of each for a world market.
When a deputation to the Minister of Customs in-
March, 1925, urged the placing of a duty on books, the-
Minister asked the applicants;—
Could they get a publishing house that would be
willing to run the risk of standing up to the market
for Australia?
That question is just as pertinent to-day as it was
four years ago, because a duty will certainly not pro-
vide what is now lacking, viz., circulation, or demand
sufficient to make publishing successful as a commercial
venture.
Comparatively speaking, books are cheaper now than-
during the war, despite the statement frequently, heard
that the prices of books have advanced beyond the
prices of other commodities. Publishers are now work-
ing on a less percentage of profit than in pre-war
days.
By Mr. Kelly.—You have used those words rather
clumsily for a representative of English booksellers, have
you not? “Comparatively speaking”; you mean com-
paratively speaking with other articles?—Exactly; that
is the point. I conclude the sentence by saying they have
advanced beyond the prices of other commodities.
Q. —Yes, but you certainly do not mean to suggest that
they are not a good deal dearer than they were in 1914?'
—Exactly; I am not dealing with that point at all. It
is the comparison with other commodities. They have
advanced in prices.
Q. —That first sentence is not really what you mean?—
I mean that, having regard to the conditions under which
the trade is operating, the advance is not so marked in the-
case of books as in other commodities. That is the point..
My statement continues:—
In his book, “The Truth About Publishing,” Mr-
Stanlev Unwin states:—
“The net amount received to-day by the publisher
often does not greatly exceed the net amount received
in 1914, whereas the production costs are more than-
double what they were then.”
It is significant that of the four parties necessary


to the placing of a book on the market—viz., the author,
tho publisher, the printer and the bookseller—the appli-
cant for the duty is the one having the least risk in
the undertaking; whereas the author uses his brain in
the hope that his MS. will be accepted, and the pub-
lisher and the bookseller risk their capital, the printer
usually gets payment of his bill whether a book is suc-
cessful or not.
It is all the more significant that the acknowledged
chief of Australian publishers, Mr. George Robertson,
is definitely against tho proposal, and has already given
evidence against it, and that, in this connection, he has
associated with him all who are now engaged in book
publishing in Australia.
It is also significant that, both through their Federal
and State Councils, the Associated Master Printers
have opposed the proposal.
In their statement the applicants admit that certain
educational items are being manufactured here and
sold cheaper than when imported. If that is so, why
ask for a duty? The educational sales already estab-
lished are necessarily governed by the number of
scholars, and therefore a duty would not assist.
The statement submitted to the Board by J. H. Catts
included the following:—
“It is stated on good authority that the representa-
tives of Hall and Stevens, London, obtained orders
last year in Australia for 140,000 copies of the
English books which these Australian productions
were designed to challenge for the Australian
market.”
It would be interesting to learn who the good
authority is who is quoted in support of such absurd
figures. Hall and Stevens’ Geometry is a book used in
its complete form up to tho Leaving Certificate of
Matriculation standard, and the earlier parts up to the
Intermediate Examination.
The number of pupils studying elementary geometry
throughout Australia probably does not exceed 60,000,
so the figures given allow nearly three copies of the
book for each pupil, without taking into account the
large quantities of other standard books on the subject
which are sold in Australia, such as Godfrey and Sid-
dons, Ling and McLachlan, and secondhand copies of
Hall and Stevens.
Exact figures are not available, but I am authorised
to state it is certain that the sales of Hall and Stevens’
Geometry did not amount to more than 10,000 copies for
the whole of Australia last year.
Remainders were mentioned as being bought so •
cheaply as to badly undercut the ordinary trade. If
such could be proved to the satisfaction of the pub-
lishers, would it not naturally follow that remainders
would soon disappear, for I take it publishers would
scrap their bad stocks, instead of giving the remainder
agent an opportunity of securing them and disturbing
their usual markets? Comparatively speaking, Aus-
tralia sees very few of the publishers’ remainders.
And in regard to secondhand and old publications,
although I hold no brief for either the antiquarian or
secondhand bookseller, as represented by the two cata-
logues I submit (catalogues submitted, Holland Bros.,
Birmingham, and McLeish and Sons, London), I do sug-
gest that some consideration should be given to the
interests of the book collector. The argument on the
grounds of health against secondhand books, if valid,
is in substance equally a reason for closing all our
public libraries and all secondhand bookshops.
The encouragement of Australian authors will not be
helped one iota by a duty. Naturally, I would prefer,
were I an Australian author, to have my work published
here, but, unfortunately, sentiment is not so substantial
as a loaf of bread, and hence Australian authors must
publish where there is a reasonable chance of their
securing the very necessary bread. A duty will not
create the circulation they need, but, on the other hand,
it may very well help to destroy in part the circu-
lation their books may already enjoy.
I wish also to attack the applicants’ suggestion for
the composition of the Industry Board necessary if
their proposal is adopted. It is contrary to a Britisher’s
view of justice to have to submit a case to a packed
jury. The functions of the Board will be judicial, and
its formation will not be the easiest of the tasks this
problem will provide. The members will need to be
carefully chosen, and must be men having a very wide
knowledge of literature in its widest sense, and, inci-
dentally, some knowledge of publishing.
In regard to the clause of the application dealing
with reprints of books first printed in Australia, in
actual practice such a thing will probably hardly ever
arise, but I do foresee a difficulty in the event of an
Australian publisher disposing of his copyrights to a
purchaser overseas. It would be interesting to learn
what provision the applicants would make to deal with
such a case.
The preparation of a list such as that undertaken by
Mr. Green, in conjunction with Mr. Ifould, is a matter of
extreme difficulty. There are so many factors to be taken
into consideration. Books cannot be classed as ordinary
merchandise, and the imposition of a duty will not operate,
as in the case of merchandise. For example, in the
letter quoted from Mr. Ure Smith, who evidently seems
to treat books as merchandise, the claim is made that
there would be better opportunities for writers, artists
and blockmakers. If all that a duty achieves is to make
it imperative for the reprinting here of certain books,
these sections are not likely to be any better placed,
because a publisher will certainly not incur capital ex-
penditure on sketches and blocks for illustrations again.
A list such as that contemplated will be of no service-
able use to the Board unless the compilers have access to
the sales of individual titles, and take into full con-
sideration not only the new titles published annually in
England and America, but also the live titles covered
by the publishers’ catalogues contained in the reference
catalogue of the book trade. That (indicating), I might
say, is the reference catalogue referred to, of which these
are some extracts. They are listed on the supple-
mentary list. My statement continues:—
Catalogues as per list attached are submitted for the
Board’s inspection:—
LIST OF CATALOGUES SUBMITTED BY THE
BRITISH BOOK PUBLISHERS’ REPRE-
SENTATIVES’ ASSOCIATION.
Oxford University Press—General Catalogue, 1928.
„ Medical Publications, 1929.
~ Books on Science and Technology, 1929.
„ Catalogue of Books on Music.
Mowbray’s Book Catalogue, May, 1928.
Student Christian Movement Press, Sept., 1929.
Chapman and Hall—June, 1929, Technical and Scien-
tific Books.
Chapman and Hall—Complete List, 1929.
Blackie’s Complete Catalogue, 1930.
Blackie’s New List of Books, 1929-30.
G. Duckworth and Co., New Books, October, 1929.
G. Duckworth and Co., Complete Catalogue, 1928.
Methuen’s Illustrated List, First Half of 1930.
Methuen’s Catalogue of University Books.
Methuen’s Complete Catalogue, 1926.
G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1926 List.
Oliphants Ltd., 1928 list.
Williams and Norgate, Jan., 1930, complete list.
Eveleigh, Nash and Grayson, New Books, 1929-30.
Wells, Gardner, Darton and Co. Ltd., List of Plays.
Christophers, Educational Catalogue.
SECONDHAND BOOKSELLERS’ CATALOGUES.
Holland Bros., No. 347.
McLeish and Sons, No. 51.
MELBOURNE—George Cameron Kingscott


Although the book market to-day is very much bigger
than persons who live outside the bookselling world are
likely to think, still, relatively, it is small, and pub-
lishers are desirous of enlarging it. They are naturally
anxious to co-operate with authors, who can, by their
writings, lay the great democracy that we all serve under
obligations to them for a new impulse. And so we ask
that no stumbling block shall be put in the way of the
Australian publisher, or those publishers who are assisting
Australia to build up her literature.
We ask that the industry shall be left free and un-
trammelled in all its sections, realising that, as our
literature reaches a higher plane, so will the community
benefit in a marked degree, and literature cannot develop
as it should in this young country if the proposed handicap
is put upon it.
By the Chairman.—ln regard to the loss of employment
that you refer to, about 200 employees, would they not
be used up if the books were being published in Australia?
Those employees would still be engaged, would they not?
—I cannot see how they would be engaged in the distribut-
ing side of publishing.
Q. —These 200 are your employees here in Australia?
—No, I do not make that allusion.
Q. —I understood it was that way?—No, I am simply
alluding to the 200 additional employees that would be
required providing the duty acted in the way the appli-
cants think it would. I reduced the number of probable
employees additional in the trade to 200, and not 11,000.
They make the claim that there would be work for an
additional 11,000 employees. By a process of calculation,
on the figures they have given, I estimate the number
would be reduced to 200. The actual reduction of my
own staff is comparatively small. With a staff of seven,
only five of those probably would be placed out of employ-
ment, because, naturally, we would not stock here the
stocks we are now carrying if the duty went on. They
would simply be worked on an indent basis; there would
be no encouragement to establish a stock here under those
conditions.
Q. —What is the position in regard to the distribution
of your books. How is that arranged? You are not
stocking here?—We are stocking here.
Q. —You are stocking here?—Yes.
Q. —And can they have indent orders besides?—They
can have indent orders as well.
Q. —In connection with those books that you are stock-
ing here, are you representing the whole of the British
houses?—l am speaking on behalf of the members of our
Association, who represent about 120 British publishing
houses. Individually, I represent Sir Isaac Pitman and
Sons as a publishing firm.
Q. —So you are not the sole representative for the
British houses?—No. They number 14 members, some of
whom are present in the room to-day.
Q. —In regard to those indent orders, have the small
people the opportunity of placing orders on indent?—
Exactly the same as the large buyers.
Q. —You have your limits as regards the quantities they
order?—No.
Q. —Well, the man ordering a dozen would get the same
discount as a man ordering 200?—Exactly; just the same.
By Mr. Kelly.—Mr. Stanley Unwin mentions that there
is a tendency ?—I am speaking personally for Sir
Isaac Pitman and Sons; I am not speaking for other pub-
lishing houses.
Q. —He mentioned there—and, no doubt, you can en-
lighten us on this—that there is a tendency for publishers
to give monopolies to distributing agents in Australia?—
There is such a thing, known as market books,, but ques-
tions in that regard can very well be answered by a
witness representing one of the distributing firms. I do
not personally handle that class of book.
Bv the fhai-man.—You are not handling these maga-
zines at all?—No. dl
Q. —There will be witnesses later in regard to that posi-
tion?—Yes.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—These (indicating) are really the
books you handle?—That is a section on which I pay
royalties only.
By Mr. Kelly.—ln reference to your criticism of Mr.
Catts’ statement concerning those 140,000 copies, you
bring it down to 10,000 of Hall and Stevens’ Geometry?—
That is quite right.
Q. —Is there any other Hall and Stevens?—No; that
actual statement is supplied by the publishers’ represen-
tative concerned, who, naturally, has access to the figures.
Q. —You assert there could not be any other Hall and
Stevens’ book other than the geometry, which you limit
at most to 10,000 books?—That is so.
Q. —In reference to the lists you have handed in, these
could not be duplicated by representatives of other
houses?—Those are all our copyrights.
Q. —So that this would be the extent of the market in
Australia?—For those books, yes.
Q. —It would not be duplicated by any other?—No.
By the Chairman.—What is the difficulty in regard to
the Industry Board? Don’t you think those men would
be available in Australia ?—I do not suggest that, but I
do suggest that the composition of the men in the printing
industry only is not a desirable board to deal with a
question of this nature.
Q. —I doubt whether it was intended they should be
men in the printing industry only?—I took it that way
from the evidence. It may be a misunderstanding.
By Mr. Kelly.—You qualify it now?—Quite.
(Witness withdrew.)
CHARLES HAROLD PETERS.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As President of the Victorian Branch of the Aus-
tralian Booksellers’ Association. This report was adopted
at a meeting of the executive yesterday. I am also
appearing as a practical bookseller, the manager of
Robertson and Mullens Ltd., a large wholesale and retail
bookselling business, with a list of sixty-one publications,
and with distributing depots throughout the Common-
wealth.
Q. —What is the address of the Booksellers’ Association?
—8 Bourke street, care of the Secretary.
Q. —How many members would there be in the Associa-
tion?—We have 40 members.
Q. —Would that be representative of most of the book-
sellers ?—lt represents city, provincial, country and subur-
ban booksellers.
Q. —Would they be newsagents also? They would be
classed as booksellers, would they not?—Yes, we have
newsagents as well.
Q. —Forty would be a very small proportion?—Except
that the newsagents are represented by their organisa-
tion.
Q. —But you have newsagents also?—We have news-
agents also, but we also have the body in our member-
ship.
Q. —Forty would be a very small percentage of the
whole, would it not?.—No, it would not when you take
it into account that the newsagents, as such, come in as
a body. Forty is, perhaps, 25 per cent, of the total
number.
Q. —How many of those forty booksellers would not
be newsagents ?—I should say 35. That would be the
purely booksellers, and then, pf course, the purely news-
agents come in just as a class. I have prepared a state-
ment, which reads as follows:
The booksellers whom I represent are apnearing, not
as importers, nor as publishers, either local or abroad,
but as the distributors of books wherever produced
under the present system, and who would be called upon
to distribute under any altered conditions. I therefore
submit that their evidence is valuable, because expert;
MELBOURNE—George Cameron Kingscott


they are certainly interested, for, as I will later show,
their goodwill and continuity are concerned. It is not my
plan to traverse ground already covered, but I feel that
I should briefly affirm points already made, and endea-
vour to supply new facts where possible, and some
new points. Briefly, these are my points. Later, I shall
elaborate them.
We hold that;—
(a) There is no publishing industry requiring or
asking for protection.
(b) Sheltering by protective duties will not create
a publishing industry.
(c) Such a tariff would not be revenue-producing, for
the total money value of imported books is com-
paratively small, and with expensive details and
difficulties in collection it would result in little,
if any, net revenue.
(d) Employment in the trade of distributing books
would decrease.
I would like to add that the dislocation in this case,
and the decrease in business, would be immediate. I
want to stress that point very much. My statement con-
tinues;—
(e) The book distributing business would receive
serious and widespread injury. _ '
(f) Such a Customs duty would effect, grave injury
to the community.
(g) Australian authors would receive an additional
handicap, but no advantage.
Now, with regard to point (a) —“There is no publish-
ing industry requiring or asking for protection”—
Of the titles circulated in Australia, it is estimated
that about five per cent, are produced in the Common-
wealth, the result of a natural development, where local
tendencies have made a sufficient circulation possible.
Such tendencies indicate descriptive local books, guide
books, sporting books by local champions, local phases
of trade and the technical professions, and educational
textbooks written to suit some local curriculum. This
local tendency of the contents also confines the circu-
lation within Australia.
Also books concerning a visiting notability or a local
topical or important event.
Such natural development) will continue healthily
without the application of forcing-house measures, and
it is noticed that the Master Printers of Australia (with
the inconsiderable exception of the applicants for duty)
are averse to the imposition of a duty. They, from a
practical knowledge of the field, recognise the limi-
tations, and are content with the natural development.
None of those who produce books locally appears in
favour of the application—even Mr. George Robertson,
of Angus and Robertson, Sydney, New South Wales,
who has issued more books locally than any other, is
opposed to any duty on books; he, like the printers, is
satisfied to let the natural development proceed. It has
produced already 5 per cent, of the titles; as population
grows, so will development proceed.
An analysis of the purchases of one typical bookshop
(I have taken our own bookshop in this case), Robert-
son and Mullens Ltd., Melbourne, shows that of the
total book and periodical purchases 28.8 per cent, are
local. A generous estimated allowance for the transfer
of imported stock from other traders would be, say, 8
per cent., leaving local purchases at 20 per cent, of the
total—all this accomplished without any protective
duty, and due to natural development.
By Mr. Kelly.—That means that the local product has,
on the average, four times as big a circulation as the
average imported product?—No, that is wrong.
Q. —You say that the local product is limited to 5 per
cent.?—Titles I have given you there; but I am giving
you now figures which are actually of local purchases
compared with imported lines.
Q. —Assuming 5 per cent, is right, and 20 per cent, of
your circulation is local, it means that your local circula-
tion is four times greater than the proportion of titles,
does it not?—l think that is rather labouring it. I see
the way you are putting it, and I am just wondering if
we could deduce such facts from that.
Q.- —I mean it must be deducted from that?—l see your
point—that wo have got 5 per cent, of the total cities and
20 per cent, of the total business purchases, and therefore
the circulation must be four times as many.
Q. —The local must be four times greater than the
average of the imports ?■—lt would look that way, but I
do not think it is a reliable deduction. You will excuse
my saying so, but it looks that way to me. It would be
rather labouring it to take it out that way. My statement
continues:—
With regard to point (b) —“Sheltering by protective
duties will not create a publishing industry”—
Book distribution in Australia consists in handling
small quantities of many books, and it is the exception
where huge sales of one title are obtained; 10,347
different new titles which were published in Britain
during 1929 are substantially represented in Australian
bookshops, some common to most shops, other different
titles stocked only by specialists. One typical general
bookshop in Melbourne—and here I quote our own
figures, as being available to me for investigation
—Robertson and Mullens Ltd., imported 3527 different
titles, and of these much less than 2 per cent, (actually
1.58 per cent.) were in quantities exceeding 75 copies.
I have chosen to express these figures as 75 copies, for
I estimate (and with some supporting evidence from
publishers’ representatives) that the quoted shop ac-
counts for about 10 per cent, of the total imports;
therefore, 98 per cent, would have total circulations
of from six copies to 750 copies in all Australia, and
even the few at the higher figure of 750 copies could
never justify setting up an edition for Australia.
This is confirmed by an Australian novelist, popular
and read throughout the English-speaking world, who
tells that in the usual edition of 2000 copies British
sales were worth twice as much as Colonial sales (i.e.,
Australia, South Africa, New Zealand and India). So
you see 666 sales (less India, South Africa and New
Zealand, etc.) are insufficient to justify local production.
This author does not wish to have his name published,
but I can write it if the Board desires.
(Supplies name confidentially.)
The foregoing facts show that Australia takes only
a small proportion of total sales, but reaps a price
benefit by the purchases elsewhere, which brings down
the average cost, and a consequent retail price. If,
in the face of such facts, a duty were imposed, the
price of the few books forced into uneconomic produc-
tion locally would become prohibitive.
A book finds its way into circulation only when the
combined readers of Britain and the Empire provide
sufficient buyers to render possible a minimum edition
to cover expenses and a little over, the publisher de-
pending on the gamble of a best-seller appearing un-
expectedly from amongst them.
If circulations could be made possible, if the copy-
right problem could be surmounted, if the rights of
authors and English publishers could be arranged with-
out injustice—all very difficult—then how would the
book be published? Not by a printer, for the printer
will do the work only if some other pays, so an Aus-
tralian publisher must be found with unlimited capital
and the heart of a lion, and quite inexperienced and
injudicious, for in Britain, with all the world as their
market, new publishing businesses have heavy mor-
tality; the successful publishers of Britain to-day are,
with trifling exceptions, operating businesses built up
over centuries, and the catalogues of titles, too, built up
over that time, repeating to-day from plates and stereos
MELBOURNE—CharIes Harold Peters


Applicants’ Figures
referring to
Yehr-Book
Printing Industry.
Figures, 1928.
Value of buildings .. .. £9,310,538
£7,413,584
Number of factories . . 1,556
1,332
Machinery and plant . £8,187,155
£6,175,753
Number of employees .. 34,008
27,049
Wages £7,136,666
£5,977,979
Total output £20,810,370
£16,299,610
which have already had use, and so diminish average
cost.
Here I would also direct attention to that nil© of
catalogues (indicating), which is known as the Book-
sellers’ “Bible.”
I do not think such a publisher will be found, or, if
someone sufficiently unwise does appear, the future of
his business may be surely predicted as the bankruptcy
court.
Q. —You mean to say such a publisher would not have
the heart of a lion?—That would be the only condition
under which a business man would have the pluck, if he
did not know, for I may say here that concerned in the
business of book distribution in Australia are some quite
live men, and if there were anything in it they 1 would be
into it, but they know that there is not. My statement
continues;—
I cannot leave this point without noting that figures
supplied by the applicants are not correct. Here are
the comparative figures from the 1929 edition of the
Commonwealth Year-Book:
The applicants have evidently quoted figures where
printing is classed with books, paper, printing and
engraving industries.
The claimant also said that imported matter which
could and should be manufactured in Australia would
amount to £6,000,000. I challenge that figure, but my
point at the moment is not to do that, but to point
out that he later goes on and claims employment for
11,000 people. Well, calculatnig on this figure, and a
percentage of 25 per cent, for wages, which is a fair
thing, according to statistics that have been produced
quite lately on this subject, that would make available
£30,000 per annum for wages, and, taking that out at
£5 per week average wage, which I think is fair, there
is employment only for 6000. If you gave them only
an average wage of £3/10/ per week, the employment
would only be for 8571.
By the Chairman. —Which is the fairer figure—the £5
or the £3/10/? —£5, I think; but even if you drop it down
to a rate which is the minimum, you will see that the
applicants’ figures are still unreliable, and that is the
point I wanted to make. My statement-continues:—
Their figures relating to the expected advantages of
the duty are also seemingly incorrect, for, even to the
most optimistic view, they are impossible, and lam
sure cannot be supported by even a plausible detailed
estimate.
And now for point (c): —Such a tariff would not be
revenue-producing, for the total money value of im-
ported books is comparatively small, and* with ex-
pensive details and difficulties in collection, it would
result in little, if any, net revenue.
I have tried to prove that the proposed duty would
not justify printing here, because of insufficient circula-
tion, so books would continue to arrive from Britain, but
in quantities woefully depleted, because of the extra cost.
The bookseller’s best customer is rarely the prosperous
citizen, though we claim he is the best class of citizen.
Increased cost of books would reduce his quantity of
purchases, although he might continue to spend to the
limit of his ability. The casual buyer would probably b©
kept away by higher prices, schools could afford fewer
prizes, the libraries and students could afford fewer text-
books, and so imports would be materially reduced from
the present figure, which was only £1,294,466 during 1928.
This includes books, music and periodicals.
This figure is reliable, having been ascertained by
reference to the Commonwealth Year-Book. An estimate
is that books would represent about 40 per cent. —£517,785.
In support of that figure, of the total imports,- I have
here a letter from the Commonwealth Statistician. See-
ing that something quite different had been quoted, and
quoted variously, I thought it wise to ascertain the in-
formation officially. The letter, which I produce, is ad-
dressed to one of my staff, Mr. Campbell. My statement
continues:—
A duty such as proposed would reduce imports by
any proportion from one-third to one-half. Deduct the
lower percentage, thirtythree and one-third, and we
have imports of £345,190.
Q. —You heard what Professor Copland said this morn-
ing about one-half?—Yes; but, in my anxiety that in no
case to overstate the case, I suggest we take one-third,
rather than one-half. My statement continues;—
This figure of £345,190 includes educational books,
Bibles, scientific and technical and trade books, theo-
logical books and supplies for public libraries, which
even the proposers of this duty deem it wise to exclude
from their application. In value it is estimated that the
above classification will
leaving only £172,595 subject to duty.
From the estimated figure of £172,595 let us deduct
40 per cent, of the ascertained figure of exports of books,
periodicals and music to New Zealand—i.e., £62,005 —
giving a result of £24,802. These exports would cease,
and the total then would be estimated as only £147,793,
comparatively speaking a sum of small importance to
Customs even if the duty imposed were at the unusually
high rates proposed.
By Mr. Kelly.—-You mean to imply they are imported
here before they are exported to New Zealand?—Yes,
they come to New Zealand through Australia.
And a heavy proportion of this would be “border-line”
subjects, open to discussion and appeal if duty should be
imposed. In the index volume of that catalogue I pro-
duce there are 300,000 different titles. Therefore, de-
cisions, cases, difficult and intimate classifications of the
thousands of odd titles imported in petty quantities, would
come; the difficulties and expenses of collecting such a
duty, and the cost, might be in excess of any prospect of
revenue therefrom. Under conditions similar to 1928 the
Customs Department could be called upon for decisions
upon 10,347 new titles, besides many standard and cur-
rent books previously published, totalling decisions over
titles amounting to a quarter of a million, including a
heavy proportion subject to testing and to challenge, and
calling for organisations at every point of entry into Aus-
tralia.
By the Chairman.—Do you reckon it would be necessary
to challenge 10,347? Many of those would come in with-
out any challenge, do you not think?—l say decisions
over titles amounting to a quarter of a million. There are
many books that cannot be judged on their title. Many
books would have to be read before they could be classi-
fied. Many humorous stories are told of people who come
into bookshops to buy books on their title, expecting to
get something very bright, and, instead, get something
for their souls. It would be a very intensive study. We
do find instances of juniors putting books in the wrong
shelves at our place of business, and I think the propor-
tion would be very much heavier than the ten thousand
I have spoken, of.
To make a comparison of the financial unimportance of
the book trade, I will quote Sir Ernest Bonn, publisher
and economist, who compared Britain’s Imperial book
trade of only six millions with beer, wine and spirits of
£315,000,000; but, in quoting this financial insignificance,
we do not yield our claim to the importance of books in
nation-building and in individual development.
The higher rates proposed upon both intermediate and
MELBOURNE—Charles Harold Peters


foreign classification affect books only occasionally im-
ported—the foreign textbook for scientific, technical and
literary research workers, the records of valuable scien-
tific collections. Curiously, this small class, so important
to our national advancement, would be the most heavily
dutiable, and the duty the most difficult and expensive to
collect, while here, again, the revenue would be insignifi-
cant.
With regard to point (b) that employment would de-
•crease: —
This decrease of employment, and the dislocation of
the book trade, would be immediate on the imposition
of any duty.
The diminution of imports, and the impossibility of
replacing such with local production, would cause grave
unemployment in the trade of distributing books; small
shops would be closed, and the larger shops; with
diminished staffs, would be removed into back streets and
inconspicuous premises; a blow to the community, for the
better the method the greater the circulation of books
and the bigger the advancement of the nation.
By comparing percentages secured from four city book-
shops and one provincial shop, I have ascertained that
each £IOO of turnover provides £ls/12/ of wages, because
of the detailed nature of the work.
Considerable reduction in the book trade will not be
counterbalanced by any considerable increase in the print-
ing trade, and, therefore, wage-earners will be sufferers,
and would suffer immediately on the imposition of suet
duty.
Australian bookshops are largely public institutions,
and perform unpaid community services far in excess of
traders in more prosaic lines. From the reduction of
turnover, the last proportion, which carries the profit,
would disappear, and so would the shop, for the trade is
one of the greatest of detail and difficulty, and of small
profit, witnessed by the published balance-sheets of any
bookseller. Those who have profited have done so hy the
appreciation of freeholds, and to-day occupy premises
acquired in the past, which are put to use as bookshops
when they might more profitably be used otherwise.
It is trade in popular lines that enables a bookseller
to carry in stock worthy but slow-selling titles of small
circulation, but real importance. Increase the cost of
these popular lines by levying a duty, and you automatic-
ally reduce the general efficiency of the bookshop. I can
take you into one bookshop here and indicate £2OOO to
£3OOO of stock which sells at a less rate than one copy
per two years, but stocked as part of a real obligation to
the public. That is made possible, and rarely profitable,
by sales of popular sellers, fiction and hand-books.
Since 1918 three prominent bookshops have closed their
doors —the world-famous Cole’s Book Arcade, Hutchinson
son and Company (as a consequence of an advance of rent
when an old lease terminated), and Melville and Mullen,
for the same reason, amalgamated with Robertson’s, who
possessed a freehold, to form Robertson and Mullens
Limited. Also three smaller but good bookshops—■
Harvey’s, Kiek, and Barker—closed down.
Close bookshops, and you close the eyes of the nation
to all advancement and experience gained elsewhere.
May I point out, too, the difficulty which (if other diffi-
culties were surmounted) would face the bookseller in the
requirements of extra capital to finance stocks? I quote
one example of a bookshop with £90,000 of capital using
about £60,000 of capital for its books stocked, and re-
quiring eventually £27,000 extra to finance the duty (a
cash payment), a load of £IB9O extra interest.
Such extra capital would be required at the rate of
£BSOO per annum, and in about three years the whole
stock would have the duty added. I have worked out the
foregoing upon actual purchases and actual speed rates
of turnover, and could, if desired, send the workings to
the Board as a confidential document. On the above
£BSOO per annum for duty, interest alone, at 7 per cent.,
would be £595 per annum.
By Mr. Kelly.—That would not stand if your other
assumption is right?—l take your point. If the buying
was cut down, you would have no need for the extra
capital—not to the same extent—but even with the re-
duced trade you would want more..
Q. —Not if you cut one-third down. One-third down on
turnover would have about the same effect as one-third on
the duty?—Yes, that is it, of course; but that one-third
down on turnover would wreck your bookshop.
Q. —You could not work both arguments. One is rather
contradictory to the other. It seems to me the other
establishes the case. If you are going to lose your turn-
over you would lose your bookshop; you would not have
it both ways?—l take your point, and I think I had better
leave that out as a reasoned argument and ask you just
to note the matter of extra capital would probably become
necessary. The extra duty is a cash payment, and not
able to be financed as purchases are, and it would necessi-
tate a load of interest; but how this outlay could be re-
couped is difficult to say, and it is admitted that the work
or raising capital to finance the duty would be very diffi-
cult at any time, and at present impossible.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Do you take into consideration
exemptions?—No, that is the point I am caught on. Still,
in a lesser degree, the point is still made.
Another feature which has so far been overlooked is
that of the export of British books through Australia to
New Zealand. If the proposed duty were imposed, this
export trade would cease and the New Zealand booksellers
obtain all their supplies direct from the publishers in
Great Britain; thus export trade, which should be encour-
aged, would be lost to Australian wholesalers and to local
stock-carrying branches of British publishers, which pay
rates, wages, and represent a Briitsh investment in Aus-
tralia.
In the New Zealand Register of Shipping and Imports,
Part 1, the value of books, papers and music imported
from Australia during 1928 is shown as £62,005.
With regard to point (f), such a Customs duty would
effect grave injury upon the community.
Who would suffer? The bookseller, his assistants and
shareholders, who provide the capital for the book trade,
also the libraries and the library reader. Public libraries
are provided or subsidised by the State. Would it be
right for the Commonwealth to attack such important
utilities by imposing a duty which would cause their
revenue, already insufficient, to buy fewer books—about
50 per cent. less than at present?
Also the artisan, the technical and scientific worker,
the cleric and religious worker, the student, the devout,
who use prayer-books and Bibles, the University teacher,
the inventor; these represent the best of our citizens, who
should be encouraged, and not penalised.
Also the man who reads for amusement, for general
information, or special information; the man who perforce
adopts reading as the least expensive of amusements—.
this would include the countless subscribers to small cir-
culating libraries everywhere, with hardships to librarians.
The Workers’ Educational Association, the University
Extension Board, and similar organisations, testify to the
desire of the average wage-earner to increase his know-
ledge. These would suffer, for all instruction is based
upon books and spread over hundreds of titles. The
libraries, t00,,t0 which they refer, would be hampered by
smaller 1 stocks.
The modest man’s collection would suffer, and his
standard and classical library would be reduced in scope.
British publishers, with a world market, provide some
wonderful cheap reprints of worthy books, which the
U.S.A. with protection and 120,000.000 of population can
not do, for the U.S.A. has no cheap editions, such as
“Everyman’s” and Collins’ Classics, the Benn Library, and
the World’s Classics. All these would suffer, without any
commensurate advantage to the printing industry or to
MELBOURNE—CharIes Harold Peters


the Customs revenue. The reading of a community can-
not be standardised; we must have the best and all that
the world can offer.
There is an outside item which affects the position:
there are some unworthy books which are held out of
Australia by Customs censorship and prohibition. With
a reduced competition from imported lines, an attempt
would be made to produce them here, with, unfortunately,
because of their base nature, a chance for sales. Such
books are not handled by the regular booksellers, but
lately we have had the ridiculous spectacle of a returned
traveller stating in the newspapers that he possesses
rights to reprint certain books, which he will do if guaran-
teed against censorship. We cannot build a nation on
such base books, and under present conditions the Customs
Department offers the first defence against them.
With regard to point (g)—Australian authors would
receive an addition handicap, but no disadvantage.
The use of the Australian authors as a stalking-horse
is wrong. A Customs duty would work an injury by
limiting his sales through increased prices, without making
local publication profitable.
It is not any part of the circulation that makes publi-
cation possible, but the whole circulation, and if the Aus-
tralian circulation were deleted it might easily be the
factor which would prevent publication, for it is always
the last few hundred copies sold which carry the pub-
lisher’s profit, or, if unsold, create a loss.
Finally, the tide of book publishing flows from its
source in London to every cranny and corner of the British
Empire, and even to the Americas. This tide is channelled
by the permanent distributing organisation built up
through the years. The U.S.A. has tried to stem this
tide and failed, and, even with her 120 millions, still
imports largely from Britain. During 1929 they im-
ported 11,985,667 dollars’ worth of dutiable and duty free
books. To-day, Australia, with her seven millions, cannot
support nor justify a publishing industry; Taxation of
books by such a Customs duty would impoverish Aus-
tralia mentally, would not assist Customs revenue, except
to such a limited extent that it would cause heavy losses
administratively, would not, other than in a slight degree,
benefit printers, but would affect the bookselling trade
adversely, and cause heavy and widespread unemployment
amongst people who already have a hard fight in a
business so full of detail and special complication that
small profits only are available to the hardest endeavour.
Periodicals and Magazines.—l have not devoted special
attention to this subject, for this matter has been ably
handled in the Sydney evidence, and my experience along
this line is merely a “special” experience; but, reading
the Sydney evidence, I felt that I could' supplement it
with statistics which I have had gathered from the books
of Robertson and Mullens Limited, who conduct a retail
magazine subscription business.
There are handled 772 different periodicals imported
’from abroad, of which 648 are British and 224 foreign and
U.S.A. The total of titles published in Australia shows
up very well, as 136 different titles, of which 30 have a
greater circulation than six copies and 106 have a less
circulation.
These include trade, technical and class publications,
but-the total does show that here, again, natural develop-
ment, unassisted, has been, and in future should be, suffi-
cient for progress.
I have a further note here of a point that Sir
Harrison Moore wished to make, but which he passed on
to me. The point is that it is not the competition of the
English periodicals, such as “The Nation,” “The Spec-
tator,” the “Nineteenth Century,” and so on, that prevents
the publishing of similar publications here, but it is the
paucity of interest. If they had ten times the circulation
that they have in Australia it might be a proposition to
start an Australian periodical, but I do not think the
figure of ten times is enough. In my 25 years’ experience
in the trade I have seen different journals start out to
give that sort of stuff, and fail, not because they had no
protection, but because there were not enough people
interested to carry it through. Again, it is just like
books—you must have a circulation.
By the Chairman.—ls there matter there that would
appeal to them?—The matter is in “The Spectator,” “The
Nation,” and so on, which appeals to a limited number.
Perhaps, when we get our population of Australia up to-
-40 millions, we will be able to run a periodical such as
the English “Spectator,” or “The Nation,” or “The Athe-
naeum,” but even those papers have seen their troubles
lately. I think “The Athenaeum” has been absorbed in
“The Nation,” and that after 80 or 90 years, perhaps, of
useful life.
Q. —You refer here to the cheap reprints by the British
publishers. We have had a number of reprints here in
Australia, and the price of these has been very much
under the British prices. Can you tell us anything about
those, as to why that should be so?—Well, I think that
is a case of someone losing money. I remember reading
in the Sydney evidence that Mr. Gray gave you examples
of some that were done by Gordon and Gotch. I know
at the time I took over the management of Robertson
and Mullens there had been a publishing business in
connection with the old business of Robertson, which was
then defunct, and the hardest job of my life was to
clear away their remainders. They could not have had
more than about 2 per cent, successful ventures in all
that they had done.
Q. —There have been quite a number that have been suc-
cessful, have there not, of those reprints?—No, I do not
think so. I do recollect an advertisement which was sent
to me from Sydney—l am quoting now from memory—
referring to 150,000 of the New South Wales Bookstall
Company’s remainders, which were jobbed and sold at
about 2d. per copy.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—That was in the Sydney evidence
also?—Yes. I do not recollect anything about a reprint
which was successful.
By Mr. Kelly.—There was evidence in respect of such
books as “Difficulties,” by Seymour Hicks, for instance;
that would not compare with this type of reprint, but
they were cheaper than the original production?—“Diffi-
culties,” by Seymour Hicks, would come under the duty
here, but Seymour Hicks was an actor-manager, and was
spending a lot of money on publicity, and there seemed
to be a lot of publicity for Hicks in that. There, again,
that book has been quoted, but there is an English edition
of that book selling at 5/. I do not want you to get the
idea that there is no comparative value. I would like
to have the book here to show you there is 5/ worth in
that book.
Q. —That is the kind of evidence we would be glad to
get, because the original statement was it was 10/6 in
England and 4/6 here. That referred to the original
edition, and you say subsequent editions have come down
to 5/ ?—Yes, and it is a very nice book. I could send
away and get one to show you.
By the Chairman.—There is another one, “Why I Am a
Christian,” by Frank Crane—can you say anything about
that? —I do not know anything about that.
Q. —That book was quoted at 8/4 in America, and the
Australian edition at 4/6? —That is an American book.
Q. —We got that book here at 4/6, and it was quoted
in America at 8/6? —And that is in a country with a
protective tariff. The whole subject of reprints opens
up many difficulties. A reprint is a book which has
proved itself of some general interest. The first buyers
have got the book and paid the first buying price. Then
there comes the cheap edition, after waiting, perhaps a
couple of years. That is not special to the Australian
market: that happens in Great Britain and everywhere
else. The reprint comes out at a cheap price, because
it cost less; the publisher frequently has his plates set,
MELBOURNE—CharIes Harold Peters


which helps; even if that is not the case, they cost less
to reprint. The book is two years old, and its value is
depreciated because of that. To-day the call for reading
matter is not “how good,” but “how new.” People must
have the latest.
Q. —You are making a special point of the British pub-
lishers and their cheap reprints. It does seem to us that
there has been evidence of quite a number of reprints in
Australia, and the prices of these reprints have been
very much under the English prices?—l suppose you
have not had copies of those reprints before you at any
time. If you had, I should think they would be interest-
ing. I have had occasion to wonder how they are done.
I have spoken to people connected with the book trade
interested in that sort of thing, and asked them if it was
possible to do it. Certain books have taken my eye as
possible sellers, and I have been investigating along those
lines, with never a possibility of printing them. I cannot
volunteer anything about what is behind the printing of
those series to which you refer. It may be a rich man’s
hobby.
Q. —It may be of interest for you to have a look at
some of those books?—l think if you could see the pub-
lishing accounts for them, that would probably answer
your question.
Q. —In regard to the distribution of books, are they
distributed by the booksellers to the newsagents?—There
is a large wholesale business in Melbourne, which is
carried on by four or five wholesale people, but most of
the booksellers, the small and large concerns, are direct
importers to a degree.
Q. —The newsagents, are they importing direct, or
through their Association?—Many of them are importing
direct.
Q. —Is there any arrangement in regard to fixing prices
for the books and magazines?—l do not speak with any
authority on magazines; my experience with them has
been a special one.
Q. —What do you class as magazines—periodicals?—
Yes.
Q. —In regard to these books, they are at a fixed price ?
—Yes.
Q. —They are not allowed to undersell those books?—
No, but I might mention that it is a condition of sale
under which they are purchased from Great Britain.
Q. —There is no cutting of price as regards books,
except as remainders?—l wish I could say that; but that
is the idea.
Q. —It is not carried out?—No.
Q. —You mentioned Cole’s Book Arcade. Is Cole’s not
still in existence?—Not Cole’s Book Arcade.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—l suppose other bookshops have
opened?—l quote Barker as closing down.
Q. —You quote several as closing down?—Yes, Harvey
and Kiek. They all have opened and closed within three
years, I should say.
Q. —Have not new shops taken their place?—Since the
war I think there has only been one bookshop of any
considerable size opened in Melbourne. That is a very
fine show by Spencer, in Bourke street.
By the Chairman. —Taking that £IOO of turnover, and
£ls/12/ as representing the wages—is that a high per-
centage?—That is considered high.
Q. —You think that is a high cost of distribution?—Yes.
You asked Mr. Boys to produce a list of books that could
not be dutiable. If you would ask me I had that list ready.
I have it here. They are contained in that catalogue.
A question was asked about copyright. Copyright is
usually taken by the publisher, but it is subject to the
author’s right—that is, his equity in the right. _At times
the copyright is held by the author, with an obligation to
the publisher, so that the copyright cannot be said to be
either the author’s or the publisher’s in its entirety;
usually one holds the copyright, with an obligation to the
other, which makes it a joint affair.
By Mr. Kelly.—There would be exceptions to that?—•
Yes, there are exceptions, but they are not notable. A
question was asked about an increase in the price of
books since the war. Quoting from Stanley Unwin, the
increase in the material in a book is from two to three
times, and increase in the price is 66 per cent.
Q. —In reference to his book, you have probably read
his criticism in reference to the method of distribution in
Australia?—Yes. The question was raised with regard
to imposing a duty on books first printed in Australia and
then printed elsewhere. Really, it does not amount to very
much in any case, but I think it would be an unwise
provision in that it might very affect
the rights of authors. Recently I was very taken with
the production by an author here, at his own expense with
tho printer here, who gave the book a great deal of
publicity. He came along to me when there were a few
hundred left, and he said, “Will you take them over at
1/2?” and I said, “No, we will take them over at 1/9.”
We made the book a cheaper price and sold them very
quickly. An English publisher printed an edition to be
sold in Australia. The Australian edition already was
proved to have been unsuccessful. At the same time, Aus-
tralia taking a proportion of those reprints meant our
Australian author had a little extra life for his book.
Furthermore,the English edition led to an American edition,
so that such an edition, while, as I say, commercially, it
does not mean a very great deal, might easily hinder an
Australian author from any rights in another country.
There is another example; that is Kingsford Smith's book,
which was printed locally and sold well. It was later
printed in England, and not sold out here, because it
had lost its novelty. That is natural development again.
Q. —In the meantime is it not true that the publisher
here is safeguarded against the influx of the book re-
printed in England by the copyright?—ln the case of a
book like that, in which the edition had been exhausted,
I would say there would be no question of it.
Q. —There would be no requirement for protection if
the first edition had become exhausted, but supposing it
were not exhausted, he would have the right to restrict
importation of other editions into this market?—lt is a
matter of both copyright law and equity.
Q. —He has got absolute protection so long as the book
is made locally, by copyright law, without any duty?—
Yes, I know of no example where any hardship has been
worked in that way. I have discussed it with the pro-
fessional members of my staff, and they are all of that
opinion.
(Witness withdrew.)
DANIEL WRIXON THORPE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—What is the capacity in which you
appear?—l am Editor and Proprietor of “All About Books”
and “The Booksellers, Stationers and Fancy Goods
Journal,” and Honorary Secretary of the Australian Book-
sellers’ Association and the Associated Booksellers of
Australia and New Zealand. The address of the Associa-
tion is 245 William street, Melbourne. I have prepared
a statement, which is as follows;
As my evidence could not be prepared until reports from
other hearings of the Board had been received, and other
evidence to be given at this hearing had been considered,
it has been impossible to submit my statement to the
whole Executive of our Association, but it has been read
by three members of the executive resident in Melbourne,
and has their approval.
I do not wish members of the Board to look upon my
contribution to the evidence as a complete statement
against the proposal for a duty on books. I have endea-
voured to avoid the ground already covered by previous
witnesses and confine myself to new* evidence or the
81
MELBOURNE —Daniel Wrixon Thorpe


U.S.A.
England.
Everyman Library
3/4
2/
Henry VIII., by Hackett
12/6
12/6
Byron Maurois
21/
12/6
July, 1914
14/6
10/6
In Search of Scotland
12/6
7/6
The Christ of Every Road
6/3
5/
Gallipoli Memoirs
10/6
7/6
German Diplomatic Documents (four
vols.)
105/
84/
The Tiger, George Clemenceau ...
14/6
10/6
Travellers’ Library
4/2
3/6
Lincoln, by Ludwig
21/
21/
Captain Cook, Thiery
14/6
15/
Portrait of a Chinese Lady
21/
21/
All Our Yesterdays
10/6
8/6
Balzac, by Gubble
25/
21/
Good-bye to All That
12/6
10/6
Calvin Coolidge
12/6
10/6
New Worlds to Conquer, R. Halli-
burton
21/
16/
The Christopher Robin Story Book,
Miln
8/4
5/
Novels—44
10/5
7/6
„ 35
8/4
7/6
Typical Profit and Loss Account of a
Moderately Sue-
cessful First Novel of 95,000 Words.
Dr.
To Composition, including small type
and make-up (352 pp.) .. ..
£72
0
0
ft
ft
Machining 161 reams (1500) ..
Paper, Antique Wove, 30 x 40,
24
0
0
70 lb., for 1500 copies ....
18
0
0
ft
Author’s Corrections, 10 p.c. ..
Gross sheet cost, 1/7J ....
7
4
0
£121 4 0
ft
Tricolour Blocks for jacket ..
9
10
0
Artist’s fee, for design
6
6
0
Binding
45
0
0
tf
ft
Binder’s Blocks
Jackets, including printing tri-
2
0
0
ft
colour blocks
Gross binding cost, lljd. ..
36 Copies wrappered, on proof
9
0
0
— 71 16 0
paper, for Colonial buyers ..
1
16
0
ft
Postage on review copies ....
1
3
0
tt
Advertisements
55
0
0
amplification of evidence upon which there appeared to be
some doubt.
I wish first to mention one matter which has apparently
been overlooked both by those proposing a duty and those
who have opposed it, in the omission of religious books
from any of the classifications. Ido not know whether the
reason for this omission is because the proposers do not
think religious books are worthy of mention or considera-
tion, or whether it is left to the Customs officials to decide
if they are to be classified as “works of fiction” or “books
for the instruction of the blind.”
I take it for granted, therefore, that no one suggests
a duty be put on religious books. If there is any pro-
posal to place a duty on these works, I would suggest
that the Tariff Board list a special hearing to take
evidence from the great number of witnesses, I am sure,
who would wish to appear to oppose such a proposal.
We would like to remind the Board that the members
of our Association are not opposed to manufacturing or
publishing in Australia.
Some of the members of our Association have made
great efforts to help publishing in Australia, but, being
practical men, and having a knowledge of the whole trade,
they recognise that it is an industry in which the gains
of protection to our country would be minute and prob-
lematical, whilst the harm and disadvantages of a duty
on books would be tremendous and certain.
The question has frequently been asked as to what
effect the duty would have on the general price of books.
The United States of America has been quoted as the
only comparison we can make.
To compare prices, I went through the January issue
of “The Retail Bookseller of U.5.A.,” and I find in
that issue that there are 79 novels quoted with which I
could compare prices. These were all sold in Great Britain
at 7/6, but in U.S.A. 44 of the same novels were quoted
at 10/5 each and 35 titles at 8/4 each.
In general literature I noted the following books:—
Comparison of English and American Prices.
I might mention in that comparison I have left out
nothing that was unfavourable. There were no books
there which were cheaper in America than England, and
I draw special attention to the fact that the “Everyman”
Library, which is sold at 2/ in England, is priced at 3/4
in America. My statement continues:—
In every instance but one the price in U.S.A. was
dearer, the average extra price being 25 per cent, above
the English price.
In submitting his evidenec in favour of a duty on books
Mr. J. H. Catts mentioned that, prior to the tariff pro-
tection on account books, diaries, exercise books, sta-
tionery, etc., it was strongly urged that these lines could
not be economically produced in Australia, but that these
goods are now being made here at favourable prices.
The two classes of goods, printed books and exercise
books, etc., are in no way comparable, but of the items
mentioned as “being made here at favourable prices,” the
nearest line to printed books would be account books, and
manufacturing stationers have found it necessary to ask
for an increase of duty up to 60 per cent. British, with
higher rates for Intermediate and Foreign, in order to be
able to compete with account books imported from Great
Britain. Yet account books are comparatively easier to
make here than novels or other printed books.
I am a strong protectionist, and have appeared before
this Board in support of protective duties, but I think all
protectionists should investigate each proposal and see
whether the advantages gained are not altogether out-
weighed by the harm done. This would certainly be the
case with a duty on books, and this has been conclusively
demonstrated by the fact that the people who stand to
gain most by the proposals, the Master Printers’ Asso-
ciation and the publishers already established in Aus-
tralia, are not appearing in support of the duty.
I might have added that none of the Printers’ Unions
have supported it, though the matter was put before them,
I know, and they were asked to support it. By their
absence here they evidently did not think it was wise
to do so.
Q. —Mr. Catts was representing some of the employees,
was he not?—Not the Employees’ Unions. I think they have
some representation on that committee, but I know that
the actual Printers’ Unions were asked to support the
matter and officially. So far as I can trace, they have not
done so.
I notice that one of the witnesses has mentioned the
book by Mr. Stanley Unwin entitled “The Truth About
Publishing.” As I wish to use the figures quoted in this
book, I would like to mention that it is the standard book
on publishing, and, although it was originally printed as
late as 1926, is already in its third edition in England,
and a special edition has also been translated and published
in Germany and in Spain, also a special edition has been
produced in America. It has been received everywhere
with authority, and none of its statements nor figures
have been seriously questioned.
I mention that, because I read regularly all the trade
papers in connection with these matters, and it has never
been questioned.
I attach Form 2, a balance-sheet, which has been drawn
up by Mr. Unwin, showing a typical profit and loss account
of a moderately successful first novel of 95,000 words.
82
MELBOURNE—DanieI Wrixon Thorpe


»♦
Author’s royalty (if at 10 p.c.)
29
6
6
Moulds (if taken)
16
0
0
103
5
6
Insurance
—
—
—
»>
Working expenses
—
—
—
£296
5
6
Cr.
By Sales—
Circulating libraries, 230 at 4/9 £54
12
6
Ordinary sales, including repeat
orders frcm libraries, 220 at
5/
55
0
0
Other ordinary sales on varying
terms (210)
56
0
0
Colonial Editions, 376 at 3/3 ..
61
2
0
£226
14
6
Total sales 1036
Review copies 100
ff
Stock 364
1500
Deficit (as against which there
is surplus stock valued as “re-
mainders” at, say, £11/10/,
and possibly a small share in
American or other rights) ..
69
11
0
£296
5
6
In the above account not one penny has been allowed
for the publisher’s working expenses, which almost in-
variably exceed 20 per cent, of his turnover.
There are many lessons which can be learned from this
balance-sheet.
First of all, it proves conclusively that the evidence
given of various witnesses of the small sale of individual
books, even works of fiction, which are the largest sellers
in Australia, is in no way exaggerated.
Note particularly:—
(a) That the account is of a “fairly successful first
novel.”
(b) That the total sales of this novel for Great
Britain, Ireland and the whole of the Colonies
is only just over 1000 copies.
(c) That of its total sales more than one-third went
to the Colonies.
(d) That, even with the whole of Great Britain and
Ireland, plus the whole of the Colonies, for a
market, the production of this typical novel
shows a loss of over £69.
(e) That the total cost to the publisher works out
at over 3/11 per copy, without allowing anything
for insurance, working expenses, overhead, the
cost of the reader’s fee, or supervision of its
production by the publisher.
(f) That to produce extra copies would cost only
1/5 per copy. I think that is a little high, but
is safe.
(g) It conclusively proves that Mr. Catts has little
practical experience when he says “The setting
of a book like that (a similar novel) is not a
material thing at all.” It is the biggest indi-
vidual item in the cost.
(h) That, taking into consideration the increased
cost of production in Australia, which has already
been mentioned by the proposer of the duty, an
edition of at least 3000 copies of a similar publi-
cation would be required before any profit could
be made.
(i) That the difference in the cost of printing 1500
additional copies for Australia, and resetting and
reprinting the job in Australia, would be at least
£2OO, or 2/8 per copy extra expense.
I am sure that not only would a duty on books do great
harm educationally to our country, but also that the duty
would be ineffective, impracticable, unworkable and vexa-
tious.
It would be ineffective, because reference to the figures
already given proves that once the book is set up and
all the incidental expenses paid, and the machine running,
it costs only about 1/5 per copy to produce extra copies,
and unless there was a duty of about 100 per cent, it is
unlikely that publishers would reset the book in Australia
and have the printing of a new edition done here.
It would be unworkable and vexatious, because a very
large percentage of the books brought into Australia
come in per medium of the Post Office.
The question has been asked once or twice about buying
by the smaller newsagents and the booksellers. I might
say that they are able to buy direct from the publishers,
mainly because it is almost as cheap to get books out
through the book post as to get them out in bulk. The
bulk of the books imported into Australia, outside of the
very large booksellers, come through the Post Office.
Q. —They are in a position to buy direct?—Yes, and
at the same price.
Q. —Are they the same prices?—Practically all lines
they are able to buy at the same prices.
By Mr. Kelly.—The same for a small lot as a big lot?'—
Yes, the price for fiction is an average price from the
publishers at 3/3; it is the same whether you buy one or
fifty copies. Of course, there are exceptions to the rule,
but, speaking generally, the price is an average right
through.
Q. —The selling price is fixed?—Yes.
Q. —He is getting an extra profit—that is, the direct
indentor?—Yes, but in indenting direct he is running a
greater risk of dead stock, which, you already know, is a
very considerable item with the booksellers. I might say,
with regard to the fixing of the prices, the prices are not
fixed by the bookseller; they are fixed by the publishers
in England.
Q. —You mean the minimum prices?—Yes.
Q. —But they can, and do, exceed that as a general rule ?
—Not as a general rule, because, as a matter of fact, the
Association—l can tell you, perhaps, a good deal of that,
because I was one of the parties to the agreement with
regard to prices in Australia, which brought down the
prices considerably—made one of the clauses that they
are to be no higher, and certainly no lower.
Q. —I have noticed a little ring cut out very often when
I have bought a book where the figure ought to be ?—lt is
only the listed English publisher’s price, and as a matter
of fact the publishers frequently do that themselves.
Q. —I always take that as a polite intimation I am pay-
ing a good deal more than the figure originally printed
here?—Yes, and in some cases less. In the case of all
fiction you are paying less, because the price is 7/6 in
England and 6/ in Australia, and in an increasing section
of books the price now is the same in Australia as in
England, and it is increasing every year.
In my own office I have a list of 350 different publishers
in Great Britain and Ireland, and books have to be ordered
by Australian booksellers from these publishers. The
parcels from each are usually so small that the cheapest
way to get them out is per medium of book post, which
rate is a specially low one.
No doubt, members of the Board are already aware
that there is no more vexatious and delaying process than
to obtain articles through the Post Office which are duti-
able. If a duty is placed upon any section of books, it
will mean that the whole of the book importations will
have to pass through the Customs officers for inspection.
This will mean a tremendous amount of extra work for
the Post Office and the Customs authorities as well as
booksellers.
83
MELBOURNE —Daniel Wrixon Thorpe


I think that is an important point, even if a small
section of the whole of the books have to pass through
the Customs officers for inspection.
Members of the Board are probably aware of the pro-
cess which takes place with parcels coming through the
Post Office. A postcard is sent by the postal authorities,
advising the addressees that a parcel awaits them at the
post office, Spencer street, and unless it is called for,
opened for inspection, and the duty paid within a certain
period, demurrage charges will accrue. The addressee
has to attend the post office in person, or sign an authority
lor someone else to do so in his stead, and, speaking from
personal experience, it is very seldom that even a small
parcel can be obtained in this way in less than thirty
minutes. Think, then, of the work this will entail, with
dozens of parcels coming to each bookseller with each
mail.
I might say that when I submitted this statement to my
Executive they said sixty minutes would be nearer the
mark in getting a parcel through the Post Office.
With regard to parcels arriving for country districts, if
addressed to private individuals, the parcel is opened, the
duty assessed, and the parcel forwarded to the nearest
post office, and the addressee advised that on payment of
so much duty the parcel will be delivered. But in the
case of business houses in country districts the addressee
is advised by postcard, which instructs the addressee to
forward invoice and documents to Melbourne. The parcel
is then opened, the duty assessed, and forwarded to the
nearest post office, where, on payment of the duty, the
parcel is delivered. This means a tremendous amount of
extra work for the bookseller.
I would urge the Board to also obtain from the Postal
and Customs authorities an estimate of the extra work
this would add to their departments.
The exemptions which are proposed would also be un-
workable. The members of the Board know that articles
which are brought in free, or at reduced duties, under
regulations prescribed by the Minister of Customs, come
under very rigid rules and restrictions.
In the majority of cases the books which are bought
by public libraries, mechanics’ institutes, etc., are bought
after inspection at the various bookshops.
I think the only exceptions are the large libraries, such
as the Melbourne Public Library. This would now be
impracticable, and libraries would have to buy in the
dark and work from lists, a very severe handicap.
Let us, as an example, picture the process that would
be required by a country mechanics’ institute library after
they had selected the books they required. In the first
place, some form of application would have to be filled
in, giving the list of the books the committee - proposed
to import. This would have to be sent to the ■ Minister
of Customs, who, in turn, would send the necessary
authority.
Having obtained the authority, the order would then
be passed on to the bookseller, who, although he might
have many of the books on his shelf, would have paid
a duty on these, and would therefore be unable to supply
them at the price, minus the duty. The order would
therefore have to be forwarded to 20 or 30 publishers
in England for collection, and come out in 20 or 30 dif-
ferent parcels, unless a shipping agent was paid to collect
them and ship them in one parcel from London, which,
of course, would add additional cost. These books' would
be arriving in Australia at varying times, and the book-
seller in the country would have to pay some Customs
agent in Melbourne to have the entries put through and
the necessary bond be given that they were being imported
for this particular library under the regulations pre-
scribed by the Minister of Customs. All this trouble for
an order less than £lO. As a matter of fact, orders from
country libraries and country institutes usually average
much below this. It is obvious that it would be just as
cheap to pay the duty and save all this trouble and extra
work, so that the proposed exemption would be unwork-
able as far as libraries and institutes are concerned.
Orders for schools and Universities would be even more
complicated, because school teachers are never able to
tell exactly how many scholars they will have in their
form for the following year. The bookseller, therefore,
would have to import a quantity and enter into a bond
that these books would be sold only for educational pur-
poses, and, if the usual process is adopted, would have
to be able to show records to Customs officers proving
when and where every copy was sold. The number of
permits the Minister would have to consider would run
into thousands each year, and the extra work of keeping
all these records put upon booksellers would make the
handling of this business altogether unprofitable unless
much higher prices were charged.
It would also be unworkable, vexatious and impracti-
cable, because, if any classification is made exempting
certain books from duty, there would be continual queries
and disputes as to which books came under the classi-
fication.
• I do not know if Mr. Green and Mr. Ifould have yet
presented the lists of classifications promised the Board,
but, without having seen the list, I guarantee to produce
authorities of equal standing who will disagree with it,
so wide is the divergence of views of literary authorities.
Imagine, then, the confusion which would arise if any
committee set out to classify the hundred thousand titles
already published and listed (there are 340,000 different
books listed in the current catalogue), to say nothing of
the new titles coming forward at the rate of over a
thousand per month, and the confusion would be multiplied
by the fact that committees would have to be set up in
each State, or there would be months’ delay whilst Inter-
state queries were settled. We would have confusion
worse confounded—and that in an industry so necessary
to the development of our country on sound lines.
I have investigated the matter very thoroughly, and
consider I am estimating on the safe side when I say
that there are not two books out of every hundred that
come under the category of the books which would be
dutiable under the proposal that reach a sale of 3000
copies in Australia. Probably the number would not be
one in a hundred.
But, in taking it for granted that one out of the hundred
could be produced in Australia, we are overlooking the
fact that books cannot be produced unless the rights to
print have first been obtained from the author and pub-
lisher. and, before deciding to print an edition in Australia,
or sell the right to print it, the author and publisher
have to consider that in doing so they are materially
increasing the cost of their own English edition.
The average novel that would have a sale of 3000
copies in Australia would warrant an edition of at least
7500 copies in England, and on the basis of the balance-
sheet shown these would cost less than 2/ per copy. To
reprint in Australia, or to sell the right to do so. would
be increasing the cost of his edition from 6d. to 1/4 per
copy. Is he likely, therefore, to do this other than on
rare occasions?
As far as the question of the effect of the duty on our
best literature is concerned, I think a good indication
may be taken from the following:—
In the London “Observer” and the London “Sunday
Times,” Ralph Straus, J. G. Squire and Gerald Gould,
three leading English critics, each gave a list of what
they believed to be the best novels published in 1929. I
have gone carefully through the lists, and do not believe
there is one book in any of the lists which would have
sold in sufficient quantity to warrant the publication of
a separate edition in Australia, so that any duty on novels
would be a definite tax on the best literature, without any
corresponding gain.
I come, therefore, to the definite conclusion that even
50 per cent, protection, would mean taxing at least 199
MELBOURNE —Daniel Wrixon Thorpe


titles so that one might be produced in Australia, and the
placing of a duty on even one book in two hundred would
mean endless confusion, much extra work for booksellers,
Postal and Customs authorities, and the gain to Australian
publishing would be infinitesimal.
As a protectionist, I cannot see how such a duty could
possibly be justified. It would do great harm to our
country. I think that seldom has the Tariff Board had
such an array of commercially distinterested yet talented
men arraigned against any proposal. ’
I think, therefore, that the Board must agree that a
duty on books of any kind is impracticable, unworkable,
and also unnecessary.
You will notice that I have given you a list such as has
been asked for several times of fiction that is used in
school curriculum. That is by no means a complete list,
but all the books I have mentioned have been authorised
to be used in schools, colleges, etc. I have also attached
a letter from Professor Taylor, of the University of
Tasmania, where he gives some books also.
Some Novels Used in Schools, Colleges, etc.
Dickens—
Christmas Carol, Pickwick Papers, The Chimes, David
Copperfield, Nicholas Nickleby, Tale of Two Cities,
Great Expectations, Dombey and Son, Our Mutual
Friend, American Notes and Pictures of Italy, Oliver
Twist. Also any novel of.
Scott—
Ivanhoe, Quinton Durward, A Legend of Montrose,
The Talisman. Also any novel of.
Kingsley—
Hereward the Wake, The Heroes, Water Babies. Also
any novel of.
Stevenson—
Treasure Island, Kidnapped, The Master of Ballan-
trae, The Wrecker, Black Arrow.
Reade—
The Cloister and the Hearth, It’s Never Too Late to
Mend.
Blackmore—
Lorna Doone.
Kipling—
Puck of Pook’s Hill, Jungle Book.
Gunn—
We of the Never-Never.
Bcldrewood—
Robbery Under Arms.
Haggard—
Red Eve.
Goldsmith—
Vicar of Wakefield.
Austen—
Pride and Prejudice. Also any novel of.
Thackeray—
Esmond, The Newcombs, English Humorists, Vanity
Fair. Also any novel of.
Eliot—
Silas Marner.
Gaskell—
Cransford.
Collins—
Moonstone.
Meredith—
Diana of the Crossways.
Borrow—
Lavengro.
Conan Doyle—
Micah Clarke, White Company.
Morris—
King of the Golden River.
Carroll —
Alice in Wonderland, Through the Looking Glass.
Pierre—
Paul and Virginia.
Defoe—
Robinson Crusoe.
Ballantyne—
Coral Island.
Barrie—
Peter Pan.
Dumas—
Les Deux Freres.
Palgrave—
The Golden Treasury.
Hardy—
Far From the Madding Crowd, The Dynasts, Under
the Greenwood Tree. Also any novel of.
F. Tennyson Jesse—
Moonraker.
Winston Churchill—
The Crisis, Richard Carvel.
Naomi Hutchinson—
The Conquered.
Benson—
By What Authority; Come Rack, Come Rope.
Swift—
Gulliver’s Travels.
Fielding—
Tom Jones.
Smollett—
Humphrey Clinker.
In addition there are many hundreds of “Approved
Readers” for primary schools, South Australian s hools
alone having over 500 on their list. (See also letter :'rom
Professor Taylor):—
The University of Tasmania,
April 10th, 1930.
Dear Mr. Thorpe,—
Mr. W. E. Fuller has asked me to supply you with
a list of novelists whose books come within the scope
of University education, as assistance to the case
being prepared against the imposition of a tariff.
I take it that within this scope are included Uni-
versity Tutorial Classes and Public (School) Examina-
tion requirements.
Including all these classes, I submit the following
list as authors whose works have been used, are used,
and are likely to be used in the future for educational
purposes:—
18th Century.—Richardson, Fielding, Smollett,
Sterne, Goldsmith, Horace Walpole, Clara Reeve, Mrs,
Radcliffe, Fanny Burney.
19th Century.—Walter Scott, Jane Austen, M'” : a
Edgeworth, Dickens, Thackeray, Trollope, Mered'th,
the Kingsleys, the Brontes, D. Lytton, George Eliot,
Mrs. Gaskell, Hardy, Stevenson, R. 0. Blackmcre,
Shorthouse, Charlotte Yonge.
Modern.—Galsworthy, Arnold Bennett, H. G. We’ls,
Conan Doyle, Conrad, Sinclair Lewis, Hugh Walpo'-*.
I also think that any book presented for Universi y
or school classes should automatically be freed fr:m
duty.
Yours truly,
(Signed) A. B. TAYLOR,
Professor of EngT~h.
There was one matter which was asked particularly in
regard to the booksellers’ wages costs of distribute,
and it was mentioned that 15 per cent, was a high co-t.
Referring to Stanley Unwin’s book, I notice that the pub-
lisher’s expenses on wages and salaries are given at TO
per cent, on the total turnover, travelling and commission
at 3.75 per cent.; reader’s fees also, which would make
the cost of the publisher’s wages and salaries up to very
nearly 15 per cent. also.
Q. —That would be very different to distribution, I
should think?—That is their distribution; their work is
distributing the book just the same.
Q. —The publishers, you mean?—Yes, they distribute
to the bookseller.
Q. —What would the readers’ fees be?—Nearly all the
MELBOURNE —Daniel Wrixon Thorpe


publishers have professional readers, who read the manu-
scripts that come to them.
Q. —You would not have that in the distribution for
the booksellers?—No, there are other things the publisher
would have, and I was just showing that 15 per cent, was
not a high figure. Then there was a question of books
which have been printed here and have been reprinted
abroad. I have been unable to find anybody who knows
anything about it, or anything which would justify such
a proceeding as is proposed. I do not think there has
been any incident where that has reacted unfavourably
on a local publisher, and I think somebody has just put
it in, thinking that some good might accrue.
By Mr. Kelly.—On the assumption it looks better than
a plain negative?—l have got some names hare of School
Readers, and I noticed amongst them Coral Island, Mas-
terman Ready, Alice in Wonderland, Robinson Crusoe,
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, The Last of the Barons, Tom Brown’s
School Days, and under that classification it would mean
those books are dutiable.
Q. —Undoubtedly; that is what they are claiming; they
were very definite about that claim?—They gave no actual
evidence on it—that it has worked any hardship in the
past.
Q. —No, not that I can remember?—l can submit that
list, and I could easily prepare a list of books that have
been printed here.
Q. —We would like to have that?—l will supply it. On
the question also of reprints I think there has been a great
deal of confusion; and if you will refer to that balance-
sheet I have shown you, you will find that there are
certain figures brought out. You will find that there are
certain expenses which occur when the edition is first
printed. Take advertising, which is a very heavy expense
comparatively to the publisher; but once the book is made
known, then the cost of advertising is much smaller. You
will notice in the balance-sheet of the typical first novel
the advertising is put down at £55, whereas afterwards
the average advertising cost is 6 per cent. In one case
it is nearly 25 per cent, of the returns. Then, again, I
do not think the books themselves can be compared—Dr.
Crane’s book and Seymour Hicks’ book, for instance. I
do not think the Australian edition can compare with the
original edition. Not only that, but I think Mr. Robert-
son, who was in the witness box, had he wanted protec-
tion for those particular items, would have asked for it.
By the Chairman. —They were half the price?—Yes, but
you get books that come out at less than half the price.
You can buy “The Constant Nymph” for 7id. here and
6d. in London; but there are 6/ editions also. It is all
a matter of arrangement with the author and the quantity
that is printed. It is not a matter that it is cheap here,
but it is a matter of arrangement with the author and the
publisher. All sorts of questions come into it.
(Witness withdrew.)
ERNEST JAMES GOSBELL.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity do you appear?—l
am General Secretary in Victoria for the British and
Foreign Bible Society in London. I also represent our
Society in each of the other States of Australia. Our
address is 241 Flinders lane, Melbourne.
Mr. Kelly.—l do not think it was intended to include
Bibles as dutiable.
Mr. Berchdolt.—As a matter of fact, we asked the
question of the applicants in Sydney, whether Bibles
would be dutiable, and under his proposal they would be?
—I wrote myself to the Secretary of the Printing and
Allied Trades’ Tariff Committee, and asked if they did
intend to include Bibles, but I got no reply. I have
prepared a statement, which is as follows:
On behalf of the British and Foreign Bible Society, I
desire to oppose the request for increased rates of duty on
books. Under this heading is included the Bible, for the
circulation of which our Society has been in existence for
the past 126 years; and in order to make it available at
the cheapest possible price sells it at less than cost. We
submit the following reasons for our objection:—
1. That the right of printing the Bible is vested in
the King’s Printer and the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridge. Consequently it is not permissible
to undertake this work in Australia.
2. That even if authority were granted to print Bibles
in Australia, the risk of misprints and errors,
thereby degrading the work of the translators,
would be very great if the work were left to a
printer uncontrolled by any learned body, however
excellent the printing may be from the purely tech-
nical point of view.
3. That the printing of the Bible was recognised to be
of such paramount importance that 300 years ago
King Henry VIII. conferred upon the University of
Cambridge the privilege to safeguard, print and
publish the Holy Scriptures.
4. That if it were possible to print the Bible in Aus-
tralia the market would be a limited one, and this
would of necessity mean an increase in the price of
the books.
5. That in order to supply all the lines on our price-
list the following varieties would be required:—
Authorised Version Bibles.—2s separate types;
226 varieties of binding.
Authorised Version New Testaments.—Nine sepa-
rate types; 41 varieties of binding.
Authorised Version Portions of Scripture.—l 2
separate types; 26 varieties of binding.
Revised Version Bibles.—9 separate typos; 42
varieties of binding.
Revised Version New Testament.—One type; five
varieties of binding.
6. That we believe that many of the leather bindings
on the volumes as now imported cannot be produced
in Australia, and in those cases where this is pos-
sible the finish of the local binding, in most in-
stances, would not be comparable to those editions
which are now received from England.
7. That, as the greater part of our circulation of
226,744 copies of the Scriptures in the whole of
the Commonwealth last year consisted of 42,235
school editions of Bibles and New Testaments,
138,768 portions of Scripture, leaving only 44,741
copies made up of 50 distinct editions in better
bindings, it would not be a payable proposition to
print these versions in such small quantities in
Australia.
With reference to the publication of the Scriptures in
other forms of speech, of which our Society issues these
volumes in 622 different languages and dialects, and uses
more than 60 distinct forms of characters in the printing
of same, we claim that this work can be attended to more
efficiently by our editorial staff in London, which is in
touch with the best linguists in all parts of the world, and
very often arranges for the printing to be done in the
country where the particular language is spoken. The
quantity of these Scriptures required in Australia is not
sufficient to warrant the manufacture of the various forms
of type which would be necessary, or the printing of such
a limited number of copies. The total circulation of
foreign Scriptures over the whole of Australia for 1929
was only 8395 copies. The specimens of script in the
accompanying copy of “The Gospel in Many Tongues” will
give an indication of the impracticability of the proposal
to print these books in Australia. We trust, therefore,
that the request now under consideration by the Tariff
Board will not be granted, but that the existing conditions
as regards Bibles being imported into the Commonwealth
free of duty be continued.
MELBOURNE—Ernest James Gosbell


GEORGE JERVIS MANTON.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appearing ?
—I am an importer and agent, representing various pub-
lishers scattered throughout the world. My address is
37 Swanston street, Melbourne. I have prepared a state-
ment, which reads as follows;
My business consists of supplying trade journals and
technical books to manufacturers, wholesalers and re-
tailers throughout Australia; manufacturers of men’s,
women’s and children’s clothing, of footwear, of motor
car bodies and accessories, of furniture and furnishings;
to architects, metal craftsmen, etc. In order to conserve
the time of the Board I am summarising in my evidence
information which I have prepared for the Board. That
detailed information I am submitting in duplicate marked
“Exhibit A.”
Q. —These are explaining more what these journals
actually are?—Precisely, and giving you the circulations
—in some cases the definite circulations and in other
cases the estimated circulations.
By Mr. Kelly.—This (indicating) indicates the exact
particulars, so that when we are looking up any of these
matters we can refer to this and get the exact circulation?
—Yes.
Q. —This is not some of those magazines which were
referred to as being issued by pattern-makers, I presume ?
—No, none of these. None of these has been touched on
at all in any evidence. My statement continues:—
I am Australian agent for widely divergent trade
magazines published in London, New York, Chicago,
Boston, Paris, Vienna, Munich, Berlin, Madrid, etc. These
magazines are issued to give information to manufac-
turers, wholesalers and retailers throughout the world
(that is a point I would like to stress: these magazines
are not national, they are international), to provide a
medium for the exchange of information and ideas; to
give buyers fullest information governing their buying
operations, and help them to avoid mistakes and dead
stock; to supply the latest information regarding adver-
tising, selling, window dressing, shop fitting, planning,
lighting and inventions, and to supply advance infor-
mation regarding fashion, colour and design. I wish par-
ticularly to stress the point that the descriptions in many
of these magazines are published in two or three lan-
guages, the descriptions in “Die Schuhmode” being given
in four languages—German, French, English and Spanish.
I have examples of that, which I will show you if I am
asked to. In some cases I hold the sole agency for Aus-
tralia, and all subscriptions are handled, or known, in my
office. Consequently, I can speak with authority with
regard to Australian circulations. Exhibit “B,” sub-
mitted in duplicate, is a confidential list of some of the
circulations which I can correctly give. That is on that
further sheet. Exhibit “C,” on the same sheet, submitted
in duplicate, is a confidential list of shoe factories which
are subscribing to “Crispin’ (British-American edition).
Exhibit “D,” submitted in duplicate, is a confidential list
of the shoe factories which subscribe to “Die Schuhmode.”
Exhibit “E,” submitted in duplicate, is a confidential state-
ment of payments made to “Le Grand Chic” Company,
Vienna, for the year ending June, 1929, whose sole agency
for Australia I hold.
I am submitting a number of specimen copies of various
publications, and also a catalogue showing some of the
publications I handle. Among these samples is “Creations
de Paris,” published by “Le Grand Chic” Company,
Vienna, which is a high fashion journal. The largest
emulation that any of these trade journals enjoys in
Australia is 415 copies. Any or all of these trade journals
can only be profitably published by having a world cir-
culation. which is impossible from an Australian base.
The suggestion that Customs duty should be put upon
trade journals and technical books would, if carried, add
to the cost of manufacturing goods in Australia, without
appreciably increasing the revenue.
By taking a liberal but literal interpretation of item
339
“Books or publications on the application of science
to industries of all kinds”—
all of the publications which I handle would be admitted
free of duty, under this heading, because they all deal
with the application of science to industries.
Although, perhaps, not pertinent to this inquiry, I
submit that the present duty of 10 per cent, on fashion
journals published outside the British Empire should be
removed for these reasons:—
(1) That the tax is not protective, because there is
nothing to protect.
(2) That it is not revenue-producing, because the cost
of collecting the tax is greater than the revenue
produced.
(3) That it is a direct tax upon an important Aus-
tralian industry that needs fostering, and is un-
economic, time-wasting, iniquitous and vexatious
in operation.
By the Chairman.—Are there any magazines in Aus-
tralia to come anywhere near these that you have?—No,
it is not possible to produce them in Australia.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—Would you show me “Die Schuh-
mode”?—Yes. (Produced.) That is published four times
yearly, and enjoys an international circulation, but neces-
sarily small. “The Publisher and Bookseller’ has a cir-
culation in Australia of 117. It is issued under the
general control of the Publishers’ Association and the
Associated Booksellers of Great Britain and Ireland.
Q. —These journals are what we get our new shoes
from ?—They are essential to shoe manufacturers, and the
world does not know of these, because my bookselling
friends here have not seen most of these, as they are
not interested.
. By Mr. Kelly.—These are really in connection with the
raw material for the manufacturer?—That is for the
man inside the factory. It contains technical articles on
shoe production. There is only one competing journal in
the world, and that also is published in Boston. It is
called “American Shoe Making.” So far as I know those
are the only two publications in the world for the man
inside the shoe factory.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—l would like to see those Paris
creations?—This is one of them. (Produced.) That is
one of the most beautiful things in the world of its kind.
It is printed in Vienna—all the best fashion iournals in
the world are published in Vienna, despite evidence that
may have been given to the contrary. This particular
one is unique in its way, because it contains coloured
reproductions of Parisian creations that have been made.
(Supplies circulation confidentially.)
Q. —And the idea is that you get the-fashions early by
getting these books?—Yes. This (indicating), for instance,
shows the possibilities for next spring, and Australian
clothing manufacturers have already prepared some of
their next spring samples from designs shown in this and
similar works.
By Mr. Kelly.—You classify that as a fashion journal?
—The Customs do.
Q. —You do, really?—Yes, it is a fashion journal, un-
doubtedly. The publishers boast of this (indicating),
“The Leather Manufacturer,” that it is the only monthly
magazine in the world entirely devoted to the scientific
production of leather. They may be right. I cannot con-
tradict them, and I do not think anybody else can; but
they say it is the only monthly journal in the world
devoted entirely to the manufacture of leather.
Q. —You contend now that most of those are being read
by various manufacturers—most of those go to manu-
facturers?—Not most of them; all of them. They are of
no use to anybody else.
Q. —I mean all of them, in the sense that each one of
those goes to the manufacturers. I did not mean all of
MELBOURNE —George Jervis Manton


the leather went?—No, all of these (indicating). In fact,
virtually everything that I handle.
Q. —Is this for the raw material manufacturer?—That
is a list of footwear journals—entirely footwear. (Pro-
duced.) I can show you other samples here. People
speak of advertisements, but this has neither advertise-
ments nor description. It is only the shoe manufacturer
who is interested in these, and it is only by getting these
new world styles that he can produce.
Q. —You call them trade journals?—Yes, I call them
trade journals. Printers are not immune; they like to get
the world’s opinion, too. I have in my information there
quoted sundry trade journals, and this one (indicating
“The Inland Printer”) is the most popular of the trade
journals of the printing trade.
Q. —What do you mean by immune—did you choose that
word deliberately?—l do not know. What do you mean
by deliberately?
Q. —You usually speak of immune from a tax?—l mean
not immune, shall I say, from the advantages that other
trades enjoy by participating in world knowledge?
By the Chairman.—l just want to be clear in regard to
these exhibits. Exhibits “B,” “C’ and “D” and “E” are
confidential ?—Yes.
Q. —And “A” is not confidential?—No.
(See Exhibit “A” on following pages.)
The Witness.—When Mr. Dent, proprietor of “Every-
man’s” Library, was in Australia he was in my office one
day, and I was showing him some of these things printed
in America. He said, “Yes, they are very nice; we wish
we could do them, but, you see, they have the population.”
These (indicting) are published in two narts each month.
The pubfir-tion 0 f these things is impossible excepting
from a world centre.
Q. —We might call for some of those later if we want
them for reference; we will get in touch with you?—l
shall be glad to let you have them.
EXHIBIT “A.”
Information relating to a suggested Customs Duty on
Books, Periodicals and Fashion Journals.
My business consists of supplying Trade Journals
and Tecb" ; cal Books to manufacturers, wholesalers
and retailers throughout Australia:—
Manufacturers of Women’s Clothing, Men’s Clothing
and Children’s Clothing,
Manufacturers of Women’s Footwear, Men’s Foot-
wear and Children’s Footwear,
Manufacturers of Motor Car Bodies and Accessories,
Manufacturers of Furniture and Furnishings,
Architects, Metal Craftsmen, etc.
I am Australian agent for such widely divergent
trade magazines as are published by:—
Bell’s Fashion Bureau Ltd., London.
IlifFe and Son Ltd., London.
Temple Press Ltd., London.
“Le Grand Chic” Publications, Vienna.
“La Chaussure Francaise,” Paris.
“Tres Parisien” Series, Paris.
“Vienna Shoe Model Booklet,” Vienna.
Illustrated Milliner Company, New York.
National Trade Press Ltd., London.
Fairchild Publications Ltd., London.
J. Whitaker and Son, London.
“Societe Graphique,” Vienna.
“Parisian Shoe Fashion News Service.”
“Chiffons,” Paris.
“American Automobile,” New York.
“Mitchell Fashion Company,” New York, etc.
I have nothing for the wealthy or leisured class,
nor have I anything for the domestic woman or house-
holder, for the functions of trade journals are:—
To provide trade news to manufacturer, wholesaler
and to retailer, and to report changes and ten-
dencies.
To provide a medium for the exchange of infoi - -
mation and ideas.
To supply information about goods bought and sold.
To give buyers fullest information governing their
buying operations, helping them to avoid mistakes
and dead stock.
To supply readers with information regarding the
latest developments in advertising, selling, win-
dow-dressing, shop fitting, planning, lighting and
inventions.
To supply advance information about fashion,'
colour and design.
In some cases I hold the sole agency for Aus-
tralia, and all subscriptions are handled or known in
my office.
“The Publisher and Bookseller” (sample shown) is
a weekly publication issued under the joint control of
the Publishers’ Association and the Associated Book-
sellers of Great Britain and Ireland. The subscription
is 12/6 yearly for 52 copies post free. The circulation
in Australia is (?) copies weekly.
(The figures giving actual circulation were sup-
plied confidentially to the Board.)
“Man—and His Clothes” (sample shown) is a
monthly publication, of which the subscription price
has just been raised from 5/ yearly to 7/6 yearly,
for twelve copies, post free. “Man—and His Clothes”
is a typical trade journal providing a medium for the
exchange of information and ideas. The circulation
of “Man—and His Clothes” in Australia is (?) copies
monthly.
“Fairchild’s International Magazine” is published
monthly in Paris and London by the English branch of
the Fairchild Company. It is printed in England,
the subscription price is 10/ yearly, and the Aus-
tralian circulation is (?) copies monthly.
“The Watchmaker, Jeweller, Silversmith and Op-
tician” is a British monthly magazine, of which the
subscription price is 7/6 yearly, including postage.
This publication truly fills the description of a trade
journal, for the editor is a recognised expert in the
various branches of the trade. All news is given in
a concise form, with knowledge of trade conditions
and requirements. To this magazine I have eight
subscribers, but other copies come into the country
through other sources.
“The Dyer” is a semi-monthly publication, recog-
nised as the authority on dyeing, calico printing,
bleaching and finishing. It contains full and original
information on all trade matters, pattern cards of
new colouring matters or new shades, practical tech-
nical articles, and descriptions of new useful processes
and machinery. The subscription price is 12/6 yearly,
for 24 copies, post free. The circulation of this
magazine in Australia would probably not exceed 50
copies.
“The Illustrated Milliner,” published monthly in
New York, is a typical example of a combination of
trade journal and fashion journal. The January issue,
which I am showing, contains:—
On page 3, an article entitled “High Lights of
the Mode for February.”
On page 9, “Paris Presents—foil Spring and
Summer.”
On page 11, “London—Brimmed Hats are the
Hats for Early Spring.”
On page 17 is a directory of the season’s favoured
bodies.
Pages 23 and 24 contain measured drawings of
four hat designs, specially drawn and measured
to aid reproduction.
On page 32 is an article headed “The Newest in
New York.”
On page 52 is a modern millinery lesson, illus-
trated to aid local manufacture.
MELBOURNE —George Jervis Manton


The circulation in Australia is (?) copies monthly,
and, apart from the millinery manufacturers, there
are many milliners with small businesses who regard
the “Illustrated Milliner” as one of their chief sources
of inspiration and help, and distinctly as one of their
tools of trade. The subscription price is 42/ yearly.
“Crispin” is a “monthly practical magazine for
expert shoe builders.” Each number contains a tech-
nical article, which may prove valuable to the shoe
factory, and any issue may contain information
leading to decreased cost in manufacture. The cir-
culation of “Crispin” in Australia is (?) copies
monthly, and the subscription price, including post-
age, is 10/ yearly.
“American Shoemaking,” published weekly in Bos-
ton, is the only other technical journal for shoe fac-
tories that I know. Each copy contains a technical
article on factory production. The subscription price
is $5 yearly for 52 copies, including foreign postage.
The circulation in Australia is (?) copies weekly, all
of which go to Australian shoe factories.
“Die Schuhmode,” published four times yearly in
Munich, Germany, shows, as the title suggests, shoe
fashions. The descriptions of the models shown are
printed in four languages—German, French, English
and Spanish. The subscription is 25/ yearly, and the
circulation in Australia is (?) copies.
“The Leather Manufacturer” is a monthly maga-
zine, of which the publishers boast that it is “the
only journal in the world devoted exclusively to the
science of manufacturing leather.” The subscrip-
tion is $2 yearly, and it circulates wholly and solely
among tanners, and is technical in every sense of the
word.
“The American Automobile” is published monthly
in New York; the subscription price is $2 yearly.
The sample shown (March, 1920, issue) is largely
statistical, containing the 1930 World Motor Census.
The circulation in Australia is (?) copies monthly.
“Motor Vehicle Monthly,” published in Philadelphia,
price $3 yearly, is a trade journal devoted specially
to motor body construction, painting and trimming.
It is supplied to practically all the motor body
builders, painters and finishers in Australia.
“Automobile Engineer,” published monthly in Lon-
don, is a technical journal “devoted to the theory
and practice of automobile and aircraft production.”
So technical is this publication that it is beyond the
comprehension of the average skilled mechanic, need-
ing a University training to appreciate the value of
the technical articles. The subscription is 30/10 for
13 issues, and the circulation in Australia is probably
less than 100 copies.
“Automotive Industries” is published weekly in
Philadelphia, and the publishers will only supply
copies to those who are actually engaged in the
manufacturing branch of the business, executives or
engineers. Business card or letterhead must accom-
panv each owler, otherwise the remittance is returned.
“Motor World Wholesale” is a weekly magazine
entirely devoted to the interests of the wholesalers
of motor cars. The publishers will not supply “Motor
World Wholesale” to a garage or to a motor car
retailer. (Letter from the publishers exhibited.)
“American Printer.” This is a monthly magazine
issued in New York. It contains the latest advices
regarding printing machinery, printing office manage-
ment; shows examples of good printing and bad print-
ing, with constructive criticisms. The circulation in
Australia probably does not exceed 50 copies.
“British Printer” is, as the name implies, a British
publication. It is issued bi-monthly. It covers, more
or less, the same ground as the “American Printer,”
but has a greater proportion of news items from the
Eastern centre of civilisation. The subscription price
is 15/ yearly, and the subscription list is very small.
“Inland Printer,” published monthly in Chicago
(sample shown), is' the most popular, and probably
the best, trade journal of the printing trade. I have
two subscribers, but there are other sources of
supply, among them being Messrs. Alex. Cowan and
Sons, paper warehousemen, who encourage their cus-
tomers to purchase the “Inland Printer,” so that their
(the printers’) knowledge of the printing art may
be enlarged and improved.
“Gebrauchs-Graphik” (“International Advertising
Art”) is issued monthly in Germany, the leading
article being printed in two languages—German and
English. As the sub-title suggests, it contains good
examples of international advertising art, with a
critical commentary in two languages. The subscrip-
tion is 45/ yearly.
Other trade journals that are used by printers and
advertisers include:—“Der Offset Buch” (German),
“Printers’ Ink” (American), “Advertisers’ Weekly”
(British), “Printers’ Ink Monthly” (American), “Ad-
vertising Display” (British), “Advertising World”
(British), “Printed Salesmanship” (American),
“Western Advertising” (American), and it has been
facetiously said that the “Saturday Evening Post” is
the “Australian Advertising Man’s Bible.”
“Les Creations Parisiennes” is a monthly fashion
journal, which shows reproductions of many exclusive
Parisian model frocks. The subscription price is £2/6/
yearly, and (?) copies is the total circulation in Aus-
tralia. Descriptions of the models are printed in
French and English.
“Le Tailleur Pratique,” published six times yearly,
is considered by Australian order-tailors as the best
publication of its kind in the world. It is published
six times yearly—three issues for summer and three
for winter. The subscription price is 35/ yearly, and
there are (?) copies of each issue sold in Australia.
It is published by Bell’s Fashion Bureau, London, and
printed for them in Paris. From “Le Tailleur Pra-
tique” the order-tailor can give his customers an
idea of the current styles of fashion’s decree. De-
scriptions of the models are printed in French and
English.
“Creations de Paris,” published quarterly in Vienna,
is one of the most beautiful fashion publications in
the world. It contains exclusive designs of the latest
styles of women’s dress from the various fashion
centres of Europe. Such styles are invaluable to
dressmakers and women’s wear manufacturers in
Australia. Of this publication (?) copies of each
issue are imported. The subscription price is £3/10/
yearly.
A lithographer informs me that in one design in
this book ten colours are used, and throughout the
publication probably twenty or more colours are used,
so that if the suggested duty became operative it
would mean a duty of twenty times 25 per cent., in
addition to the suggested duty of 65 per cent.
“Creations de Haute Coutre” is published four times
yearly. Each issue contains 30 hand-coloured designs
of ladies’ fashions suitable for making up into ladies’
clothing in Australia. The subscription price is 50/
yearly for four numbers, and (?) copies are circu-
lated in Australia.
“Chiffons” is a fashion journal published monthly
in Paris, price 5 francs, of which the circulation in
Australia is probably less than 100 copies.
In quoting the above specific examples of trade
journals I have selected a wide variety to show the
Tariff Board how impossible it would be to have
the above or similar publications printed in Australia,
because of the small circulation. Any or all of the
foregoing trade journals can only be profitably pub-
lished by having a world circulation, which is impos-
MELBOURNE —George Jervis Manton


sible from an Australian base. The suggestion that a
Customs duty should be put upon trade journals and
technical books would, if carried out, merely add to
the cost of goods manufactured in Australia, with-
out appreciably increasing the revenue. On the other
hand, taking a liberal but literal interpretation of
item 339—“800ks or publications on the application of
science to industries of all kinds”—all of the publi-
cations aforementioned would be admitted free of
Customs duty under this heading.
At present fashion journals published outside the
British Empire are subject to a duty of 10 per cent.,
but I ask that this be removed because:—
1. The tax is not protective, for no competing
journals are published in Australia or within
the British Empire.
2. It is not revenue-producing, because the cost
of operation is, I am sure, greater than the
revenue produced.
3. It is a direct tax upon an important Australian
industry, because these trade fashion journals
are essential to Australian dressmakers and
clothing manufacturers, and are regarded in
the light of “Tools of Trade.”
In operation this tax is uneconomic, iniquitous and
vexatious. Particularly does this apply to Sydney,
where the officials are hampered by lack of working
room and the public is exasperated by the time lost
in waiting.
May I quote a specific example? When a copy of
“Chiffons” arrives from Paris it is separated from
other second-class mail matter by postal officials
and handed to a Customs officer. A card is then
written and sent to the addressee, which advises that
a dutiable parcel is lying at the Post Office and
must be called for and examined. This, although the
contents of the parcel ia clearly marked on the
wrapper.
Addressee presents the notification card at the
counter, where another card is written and handed
to a postal official, who searches for and finds the
parcel, which is then handed to the Customs officer,
who calls addressee by name and waits gravely while
the parcel is opened for inspection.
As shown on the wrapper, the parcel is found to
contain a copy of “Chiffons,” and on every copy of
“Chiffons” the price, 5 francs, is printed. Duty is
assessed on the retail price at Id. Addressee signs
the card as having taken delivery, pays Id. duty, two
tram fares, and has wasted the best part of half a
day.
I am citing “Chiffons” as an example, but might
quote many other fashion journals on which the duty
ranges from Id. to I/. The routine is the same, and
I claim that the duty is:—
1. Not protective, because there is nothing to pro-
tect.
2. Not revenue-producing, because the cost of
operation is greater than the revenue produced.
3. That it is a direct tax upon an important Aus-
tralian industry that needs fostering.
4. That it is uneconomic, time-wasting, iniquitous
and vexatious in operation.
(Witness withdrew.)
HEINRICH MATHIAS MARCARD.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairpian.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—l am the Deputy Director of Marcard, Lund and
Co. Ltd., 360 Post Office place, Melbourne.
Q. —What is the business of Marcard, Lund and Co.?—
We represent S. A. Chic Parisien, Vienna, the publishers
of fashion journals, fashion publications. I have prepared
a statement, which reads as follows:
We only handle !the Fashion Journals of S. A. Chic
Parisien, Vienna, which are sold to the manufacturing
trade, principally clothing and mantle manufacturers,
millinery, factories, manufacturing furriers, under-
clothing manufacturers, knitting mills, and, to a less
degree, to shoe factories.
We contend that there are no journals being published
in Australia suitable for these manufacturing trades;
neither would it be possible to have our books printed
in Australia, because, apart from the technical diffi-
culties, the large range required, and the relatively
small numbers of each, the industries mentioned must
have the advance styles from London, Paris and Vienna,
so as to prepare their sample ranges at least six months
ahead of the seasons.
These imported books are not only invaluable for
their suggestions and creative ideas for designs, but
also advise the trade of the types, colours and nature of
materials, for which they must also make their dis-
positions at least a season in advance.
Such service could not be offered if the books were
printed in Australia.
It is therefore apparent that any additional duty on
books of this character would not benefit the applicants,
but would only represent an extra overhead charge to
be borne by the secondary industries, for whom the
books are of paramount value in their endeavours to
compete against foreign models, imported garments
and other manufactured apparel.
We do not supply paper patterns with our journals;
only a few of the books have cutting charts enclosed.
Neither, however, is of any interest to the trade, and
we submit that the class of fashion books described
by us as for trade purposes imported without paper
patterns should receive separate consideration from, say,
other classes of books which may be reviewed under
Item 335. and we propose that the present ra f e of duty
be maintained at least for trade fashion journals, or,
alternatively, that same be admitted under Item 404.
Q. —You are back on 404 now?—l did that as an after-
thought. Ido not know whether they are material in the
manufacture, or whether they can be there.
By Mr. Berchdolt,—You claim they are material to
manufacture?—They are ma f erial to manufacture, but
the article is material in manufacture. Ido not know how
that could be regarded.
By the Chairman.—The rest of your evidence is endors-
ing the evidence already submitted by Mr. Manton in
regard to fashion journals ?—lt seems to coincide. I have
brought a sample of a book, just to show that it is really
only for the ideas. That is all they can get from them.
Q. —Is that printed in Paris?—Vienna. The ideas come
from London and Paris, of course, but the studios are in
Vienna.
By Mr. Kelly.—You claim that nothing produced locally
could replace those?—No, it is quite impossible.
Q. —Do you have a copyright for those?—l do not know
how the copyright matter stands at all in regard to
fashion books. We have nothing to do with it.
Q. —The suggestion has been put up that certain local
productions reproduce whatever is useful in these publi-
cations. If you found local productions reproducing these,
could you in any way restrict them ?—I have no knowledge
on that matter at all.
Q. —But you know, generally speaking, whether your
stuff is reproduced?—You mean in manufacture?
Q. —No?—To copy it again for printing?
Q. —Yes, copy it again for printing? You know that the
local fashions ?—Yes.
Q. —Do they reproduce your illustrations?—l could not
say.
Q. —You are not interested?—l could not gay whether
they copy the exact ones. It would be hard to memorise
them. These are only three out of thirtv-five journals.
The Chairman.—Do you know, Mr. Manton, whether
you can stop them?
MELBOURNE—Heinrich Mathias Marcard


Mr. Manton.—lt would be permissible for a periodical
to reproduce one or two of those, with acknowledgments,
but if they did reproduce them wholesale I would take
out a warrant to restrain them. I do not know how the
law of copyright operates, but certainly one would not
be permitted to reproduce those things in Australia, even
if they were able to.
The Chairman.—Do you know if it is taking place at
the present time?
Mr. Manton.—Yes, it is, more or less. For instance, in
our daily papers you see a little sketch produced in
Melbourne, but it is reproduced from a design that has
been shown elsewhere.
Mr. Berchdolt.—Do the local manufacturers who publish
fashion books in Australia get these books as quickly as
your clients?
Mr. Manton.—The local manufacturer who produces
fashion journals in Australia does not know of these
things. He has not heard about them. He gets what I
would call a domestic fashion journal. Ido not cater for
the domestic or the wholesale in any way. These are for
the professional trade.
Mr. Berchdolt.—And the local manufacturer probably
copies McCall’s or Butterick’s?
Mr. Manton.—The local fashion journals cater for the
domestic trade, which is quite distinct from the profes-
sional.
Mr. Kelly (to witness). —Can these be distinguished in
any way? Do you call yours fashion or trade journals?—
Fashion.
Q. —So that the term “fashion” covers a domestic
fashion journal as well as this?—Well, the correct inter-
pretation would be a trade journal, because it is partly
a trade journal. For instance, the Shoe book is distinctly
a trade journal.
Q. —The mere fact of you yourself having used the
words “fashion journal” indicates that it is pretty much
a fashion journal too?—They come under the tariff as
fashion journals. That is why I have done nothing in
regard to Item 404, because it is both free and 10 per
cent.
(Witness withdrew.)
The Chairman.—ls there anyone else present desirous
of giving evidence?
ARTHUR GERALD BYRNE.
Sworn and Examined.
By the Chairman.—ln what capacity are you appear-
ing?—As Secretary of the Authorised Newsagents’ Asso-
ciation of Victoria, 37 Swanston street, Melbourne. Bowing
to the expressed wishes of your Board, I have not touched
books at all. If you desire to ask me any questions in
regard to books, as you have indicated in previous evi-
dence, I will be able to supply the information; but in
order not to cover ground that has already been covered,
1 have just taken the distribution of the periodicals. Our
Association is a body of newsagents, having certain rights
for delivery and distribution of daily newspapers. The
Association is governed by a set of rules, a copy of which
I produce. The membership of the Association is volun-
tary; its numbers are approximately 190 in the metro-
politan area and 300 in the country districts. There are
approximately 2000 newsagents in Victoria. Though our
members number only 490, they are, however, responsible
for distribution of at least 75 per cent, of total circulation
of the daily newspapers and the smaller class of periodi-
cals. The Association considers that a tax on periodicals,
papers, and magazines would so materially affect the
circulation that it would necessitate the dismissal of num-
bers of employees in the trade, without any chance of
increasing employment in any other avenue. Nearly
every newsagent' employs one or two assistants, and if the
circulation of the English papers went down considerably
it would necessitate at least the dismissal of one of those
assistants, because it takes practically one assistant in a
big newsagent’s to attend to the outside distribution of
these publications.
Q. —You do not anticipate that there would be Aus-
tralian magazines to take their place?—No. The reason
why there would not be any Australian magazines to take
their place is that my experience, which goes over a
period of thirty years in the distribution of newspapers
and journals, has proved that the only way in which the
English journals can maintain their circulation is by a
rapid change in their titles and in their various characters
and make-up.
Q. —Now you are speaking of the cheaper and more
popular type?—Yes, of the more popular type.
Q. —The very opposite is true in regard to the more
serious?—Yes, the “Nineteenth Century” and such pub-
lications would never change, perhaps, in 50 or 60 years.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—The more saleable lines?—Well, as
far as our business is concerned, there are exceptions,
such as “Tit Bits” and those publications. The average
life of those, I should say, would not be more than five
years. They come in with a rush and go out just as
quickly. Then they change the type and change the title,
and they come in with a rush again and immediately boost
the circulation up to what it was, perhaps, five years
before, and we consider that no publication in Australia
could maintain its circulation in that way. It would be
unprofitable. There is only one publication of Australian
production that we are handling which has, comparatively
speaking, proved successful, and has held its circulation
for a number of years, and that is the “Woman’s Mirror,”
published by the Bulletin Company in Sydney. That has
been fairly successful all the time it has been in existence,
and has lasted longer, comparatively speaking, than any
other Australian publication of the cheaper type.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—That is a comparatively new paper,
too, is it not?—lt has been in existence for about five
years now. Illustrating how that operates, you can take
the journal that was published by the “Herald”—a boy’s,
book called “Pals.” The first two or three years of that
publication they maintained a fairly big circulation, but
they dropped considerably in the succeeding years, until
where we had been handling 100 copies a week we were
only handling about five, and consequently they went out.
That is our experience practically of all the cheaper pub-
lications, even overseas.
Q. —You must have novelty?—Yes, and they must have
change all the time.
By the Chairman.—We had evidence that there was
quite a number of Australian magazines for which there
was a very big sale?—There is a certain type of maga-
zine in Victoria which has a big sale. I would say that
the two magazines which have the biggest sale are the
“Woman’s Mirror”—a small weekly publication—and the
“Australian Journal”—which is published monthly—but
they only appeal to a certain type of reader, and you
could not compare them as filling a national want in re-
gard to magazines. I doubt whether any of you gentle-
men would have the “Australian Journal” in your homes,
but still it has a very large circulation. As I say, it does
appeal to a certain type of reader.
The circulation of these magazines, etc., which are
about 80 per cent. British, is brought about by the great
number of different papers which they would handle. This
parcel (indicating) is published by Messrs. Gordon and
Gotch, and it is for sale every Tuesday. It comprises all
sorts of small journals and comics, boys’ and girls’ papers
and ladies’ papers, and one agent, who is handling 2000
of these a week finds that there are 80 different books
included in that 2000. Then I take another case, where
approximately 1000 papers a week were sold. I found
that this agent was doing 60 different titles in his 1000
papers. It just shows you the very small circulation
of each particular one. which, in the aggregate, of course,
makes a fair circulation, but would almost make it an
impracticability of them being published here at any
91
MELBOURNE —Arthur Gerald Byrne


profit at all. Any duty on them would, of course, materi-
ally affect them, because they are low-priced, and the duty
on them would immediately increase the price to the extent
that it would practically put them right out of court
altogether.
Several attempts have been made with Australian maga-
zines and journals, and some of these are enjoying a
good circulation, because they fill a need in some direc-
tions, but their success has not in any way reduced the
numbers of English papers which, by their large variety,
hold their circulation. The “Woman’s Mirror” may over-
lap, perhaps, half-a-dozen small English journals, but it
has never made any difference to the English journals
that have come in, because it filled just a local need; but
it would not be continued for a very long period unless
they kept applying themselves to local conditions all the
time.
My Association had a meeting about this matter, and
passed a resolution that they would like the stereo blocks
of various publications to be forwarded here and the issue
printed here, but, of course, everyone knows that is almost
an impracticability, because the cost of producing the
stereo, shipping it here, and paying the duty would be
more than any cost there would be on the small publi-
cation. However, it is a resolution of the Association,
and I have been compelled to put it in as evidence, though
I do not believe myself it is at all practicable. I have
put these few statements before you because we are the
ones who do the distributing. There is no other body that
does the distributing in such a way as we do.
By the Chairman.—Are the selling prices fixed for all
these magazines?—We have an indication of what the
selling prices should be. Of course, the newsagents have
been fighting the selling prices of the English magazines,
because we consider we do not get anything like the
margin of profit that we should get, considering the risks
we take. For instance, taking the 1/3 or 1/4 magazines,
for which we pay 11/ and 12/ per dozen, and on which
we have to take the risk of return—we have no return on
them—we obtain 3d. on our outlay of 1/, and we have
always considered that that is not a sufficient item of
nrofit for us to work on.
Q. —Who fixes those selling prices?—The publishers, I
should say. We have an indication from Messrs. Gordon
and Gotch as to what the prices are. that they desire us
to sell at, and we have always contended that those prices
do not allow us a sufficient margin of profit.
Q. —Would you have many remainders?—Our men have
learned to be very wise, and they do not take the risk
on remainders now, but we do have occasionally a number
of remainders, especially of the 1/3 monthly journals,
such as “London,” “Royal,” “Windsor,” and so on. If you
take any risk at all on those, you are likely to get hit
pretty heavily.
Q. —I bought four comics at the station last night,
and they were all old ones?—That proves there have been
remainders.
Q. —It proves that they get rid of their remainders, I
think?—lf they get rid of remainders they have had to
reduce their ordinary circulation. Mention was made
about the individual importing of books of fiction by* our
members. Most of our members who are importing fiction
are doing it with one particular object, and that is to be
at least two or three weeks ahead of the ordinary sale
for the introduction of new books into their libraries.
Competition in other lines of our trade has become so
keen that most of our men now have established big
libraries. Some suburban libraries have from 3000 to
5000 volumes, and in order to be two or three weeks
ahead of the general sale of this fiction they have been
compelled to buy overseas themselves. I notice that the
average list of publishers that our men are dealing with
is about 37. Of course, as has been mentioned, there are
300 or 400 publishers, but the most popular ones amount
to 37. We are only interested in the popular works. If
there is a book listed, and we do not know the author, and
are not sure of the title, we leave that to the wholesaler
to bear the brunt. We do not bother ordering that; we
only order on the popular titles.
By Mr. Berchdolt.—You let them do the spadework?—
They take the risk.
(Witness withdrew.)
The Chairman. —Is there anybody else present desirous
of submitting evidence? (No response.) I declare the
inquiry closed.
92
MELBOURNE —Arthur Gerald Byrne
