

2So(
THIRD ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE
fegKgiitiomt Sfoiira rair fission of Victoria,
AND OF THE
FIRST ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE SUBSCRIBERS OF
®|if Coiipoptiomrl CoilugF,
Held in Melbourne, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday,
May llth, 12th, 13 th, 1863.


CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA.
Chairman.
REV. J. P. SUNDERLAND.
Secretaries.
REV. W. R. LEWIS, and REV. J. C. McMICHAEL.
Treasurer.
MR. HENRY BROOKS.
Committee,
REV, J. BEER. REV. T. ODELL.
R. CONNEBEE. J. L. POORE.
W. S. H. FIELDEN. MR. W. BATES.
T. H. JACKSON.
J. MIRAMS.
E. LANGTON.
R. SMITH.
J. WISEWOULD.
W. MOSS.
All Letters to be addressed to the Rev. J. C. McMichael, Carlton Gardens, and
all Remittances to be forwarded to Mr. Henry Brooks, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
Chairman.—R EV. J. P. SUNDERLAND.
Secretary.—REV. R. CONNEBEE, Kew.
Treasurer. —WILLIAM BATES, ESQ., Uxbridge House, Nicholson
Medical Referee.—Dß. EMBLING.
Collector.—M R. J. W, ALLEN
College
Council.
REV. J. BEER.
- E. DAY.
MR. J. W. ALLEN.
-• H. BROOKS.
J. BROWNING.
W. S. H. FIELDEN.
DR. EMBLING.
MR. S. HAIGH.
0. KEMP.
W. R. FLETCHER, M.A.
T. H. JACKSON.
W. MOSS.
J. MIRAMS.
E. LANGTON.
GEO. ROLFE.
R. SMITH.
J. WISEWOULD.
J. C. McMICHAEL.
J. L. POORE.'
J. P. SUNDERLAND.
Professors (pro tempore).
REV. J. C, McMICHAEL.
J. P. SUNDERLAND.
- J. L. POORE.
REV. R. CONNEBEE.
W. S. H. FIELDEN.
J. CARMICHAEL, Esq., M.A.
All applications for Students to supply, &c., must be sent to Rev. W. S. H. Fielden,
61, Hanover Street, Fitzroy.


EBPOET,
List of Ministers and Delegates.
Lonsdale-street—Rev. T. Odell; Messrs. Dunn,
Ward, McPherson, Fulton.
Prahran— Rev. W. Moss ; Messrs. Wisewould,
Haigh, Hick, Hicks, Taylor.
Richmond —Rev. J. P. Sunderland ; Messrs. BelL
Britton, Sharpe, Luke, Brooks.
Oxford-street— Rev. J. C. McMichael; Messrs.
Bates, Wilkinson, Walker, Stickland, De-
venish, Johnson.
Victoria-parade—Rev. W. S. H. Fielden ; Messrs 1
Kemp, Masters, Barlow, Langton.
East Melbourne—Rev. J. Beer; Dr. Embling, Mr.
Webber.
Kew—Messrs. French, Day, Judd.
Castlemaine —Rev. E. Day ; Messrs. Lavers, New-
ton, Chaplin.
Ballaarat, Dawson-street—Rev. A. Gosman
Sturt-street—Rev. M. Bradney; Mr.
Lonsdale.
Sebastopol—Rev. J. Farr.
Janefield—Messrs. Bell, Emms.
Sandhurst—Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A.; Messrs.
Gladstones, Adams, Griston.
Maryborough—Rev. J. J. Halley.
Geelong—Mr. Port.
Williamstown Rev. T. H. Jackson; Messrs.
White, Inglis.
Inglewood—Rev. A, Brunton.
Carlton—Messrs. Coltherd, Simmonds.
Emerald Hill—Messrs. Levi, Youl.
Warrnamhool —Rev. W. M. Pentland; Mr. Jukes.
St. Kilda—Messrs. Rolfe, Smith.
Brighton—Rev. W. R. Lewis ; Messrs. Dodgshun,
Hunt.
Portland—Rev, W. Hopkins.
Schnapper Point —Rev. H. Groube
Rev. W. Law, of Launceston, ''j
Rev. A. Stoker, of Rutherglen,
Rev. H. Guinness, of Dublin, Visitors.
Rev. W. Kidgell, Melbourne,
Rev. J. Mirams, J
Messrs. Griffiths,
Man by,
Richmond,
Coombs,
Churches not Represented & Special
Members Absent.
Forest Creek—Rev. F. Pitman.
Kyneton—Mr. Hutchinson.
Castlemaine, Wesley Hill —Rev. D. Jones.
Rev. B. Cuzens —Geelong.
Rev. J. Apperly—Geelong.
Mr. T. Fullager—Little River.
Rev. M. Butler—Sandhurst.
THIRD ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE
Congregational Union & Mission,
Monday Evening, May 11
A Special Prayer Meeting was held in the
East Melbourne Congregational Church. The
Rev. J. Mirams presided, and delivered a suitable
address; and prayer was offered by the Revs. J.
Beer, E. Day, H. Groube, T. H. Jackson, M, W.
Bradney, and W, M. Pentland. There was a
large attendance.
Tuesday Morning, May 12,
The ministers and delegates met in Council in
the Victoria Parade Congregational Church, at
ten o’clock.
The Rev. W. Moss, the retiring chairman,
presided, and after devotional exercises read the
following address: —
Men, Brethren and Fathers,—Another year
has passed away, and we meet once more as the
ministers and representatives of the Congrega
tional Churches of Victoria. In the good pro-
vidence of our Heavenly Father, we are permitted
again to look each other in the face, grasp each
other by the hand, and interchange words of
friendly greeting. For this great mercy, let us
be devoutly thankful, and let the language of
each heart be, “ 0 magnify the Lord with me,
and let us exalt his name together.”
We are reminded this morning by the pre-
sence of brethren who meet with us for the first
time, and by the absence of others who have
been wont to take counsel with us, at our
annual gatherings, —that we live in a world of
change We most heartily welcome our new
friends 1 in the name of Christ; and earnestly


pray that their association with us may be mand and encouragement, “Go ye into all the
productive of mutual good ; and, while we regret world and preach the Gospel to every creature,”
the absence of those, who in times past have
given us the pleasure of their presence, and the
benefit of their assistance, we yet rejoice in the
conviction that they are serving the Lord Christ,
in the neighbouring colonies, and though absent
in body are still with us in spirit.
When, at your last annual meeting, you
generously elected me to be your chairman, I
was constrained to declare my high appreciation
of the honour you thus conferred upon me; I
felt as one whose claims were not such as to
inspire the hope, that he would be raised so soon
to the highest post of denominational distinc-
tion. And now, in retiring from this position, I
again repeat my deep sense of your kindness, and
venture to express the hope, that it may never
appear that your confidence in me was misplaced,
or that the honour at your disposal was injudi-
ciously bestowed.
_ln anticipating this meeting, I have expe-
rienced some little perplexity in the selection of
a suitable topic upon which to address you.
Many important events have transpired during
the past year, any one of which wo'uld afford a
subject of remark sufficient to occupy the full
period allotted to this part of our proceedings. I
prefer, however, on the present occasion, to offer
a few observations on a topic in which we are
more directly interested. Meeting as the Con-
gregational Union and Mission of Victoria, it
may not be inappropriate to consider the objects
we have in view in thus associating,—to inquire
Low far those objects are attained,—and what
we require in order to a fuller and more satisfac-
tory realization of them. In the constitution
upon which this Union has been established, the
objects sought by it are set forth in several par-
ticulars, some of which I shall adopt as the basis
of my remarks.
Our first object we declare to be the promotion
of Evangelical religion. This object is first in
order and first in importance. Our aim is not
to build up a sect, or to secure for ourselves
political power, or even social influence, —it is
not to alleviate the physical sufferings,—or to
supply the temporal necessities, or to seek the
social or political elevation of our fellow men ;
but primarily and specifically the promulgation
of the Gospel of Christ, and the salvation of
souls through its instrumentality. We believe
that the religion of Jesus provides for man as a
sinner,—the only method of reconciliation to his
Maker, —that it affords to him, as an intelligent
and responsible being, the best instruction, and
the most valuable assistance, for the right
management of life ; and that it supplies to him
as an inhabitant of this region of infirmity and
sorrow, the most animating motives to virtue,
and the most elevating and sustaining prospects
of a glorious immortality. We believe that
Christ has committed the dissemination of this
religion to His believing people,—that He would
have all men to be saved and come to the know-
ledge of the truth,-and we hear His voice
addressing us in the mingled cadence of com- I
“ and 10, I am with you alway, even unto the end
of the world.” In seeking to do our part in
carrying out this commission, we desire to follow
the noble maxim of Dr. Arnold, “Be of one
party to the death, and that is Christ's.” Our
ambition is to stand side by side with all who
rally round the standard of the Cross, and to
proclaim with them, “ There is none other name
under heaven given among men whereby we
must be saved ” but the name of Jesus Christ.
But, further, we seek to advance Evangelical
religion in connexion with Congregational prin-
ciples. While ever keeping before us the increase
of pure and undefiled religion, we are not indif-
ferent to the minor distinctions which divide
those who desire the same great end. We would
not esteem lightly, nor hold loosely, the princi-
ples which distinguish us as Congregationalists.
We adhere tenaciously to those principles, not
simply because of their agreement with the
dictates of common sense, or their harmony with
the laws of human association, or their con-
sonance with the free and enlightened spirit of
the age,—important as these considerations are,
—but because we believe they have the sanction
of the New Testament. We hold that no argu-
mentative process, no human enactments, no
established usages, no dictates of expediency,
can equal in importance principles which may
fairly and honestly be shown to be the teachings
of the inspired Word. And, in our judgment, the
principles we profess have their origin and
exemplification in the Book of God. Moreover,
it is our conviction that Congregationalism is
most thoroughly adapted to conserve and pro-
pagate the essential doctrines of the Cross. For,
we affirm, that the New Testament is the only
standard of appeal in all matters of faith and
practice,—that the exercise of private judgment
is the inalienable right of every Christian, —and
that churches should be composed only of those
individuals who believe in, and have felt the
power of the truth. And we conceive that an
association of men, constituted on these princi-
ples, is most fitted to conserve the truth as it is
in Jesus. Speaking after the manner of men, the
truth is safer in the keeping of the many than
in that of the few, —and, if men in the exercise of
private judgment are guided solely by the
teachings of the New Testament they are not
likely to go far wrong. And, further, none, surely,
will be more anxious to preserve the Gospel in
its purity than those who have received it in the
love of it, and live in the enjoyment of its
blessings.
It was once asked by Robert Hall, “ In which
of two given situations will a doctrine last the
longest, when it is believed without being sub-
scribed. or when it is subscribed without being
believed?” In answer to this characteristic
question, we appeal with confidence to the
history of Congregational Nonconformity. The
churches of our order in Great Britain have
ever been distinguished by a marked and strong
adherence to the doctrines of the Cross. On this


point, the Rev. John Stoughton once said, often been our reproach, that Congregationalism
“ Ever do we speak with reverence and love of is a better thing than Congregationalists have
ii l r T /■'n • i. 1 _ of ronrnciAnfnrl if fo Vu*
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, looking especially at
that which lies at the very heart of it, which is
its core and kernel, —Christ and Him crucified, —
the incarnate Word,—God made man, —Divine
redeeming love, throbbing, speaking and work-
ing in human life, —and that love with righteous-
ness enduring unto death, —both glorified in
death, —the awful death of the great vicarious ex-
piatory sacrifice, —salvation offered in the Name
of Jesus,—acceptance with God through faith in
Him,—and the mission, presence, and glory of
the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Looking at all
that, as constituting the soul of the Gospel, we
do extol and praise the gift. We know how
it was valued by our fathers; how those who are
now “ the spirits of just men made perfect ”
spoke and wrote of this wisdom of God in a
mystery. We know how Owen, and Howe, and
Watts, and Doddridge, and all who are to us
beautiful household names, have exalted it in
argument and celebrated it in song. We know
how they,—and thousands of our predecessors,
and brethren since, in the last hours of
life, —those hours which are as crucibles in
the flames, testing the faith and hope
of men, —did then form anew and pro-
nounce afresh their judgment on the Gospel, as
good beyond all other goodness.”
Furthermore, we believe that Congrega-
tionalism is calculated to promote the propaga-
tion of the truth. Holding as we do, that it is
the duty of the churches to call forth and
support those who are qualified by the gifts and
graces of the Spirit to preach the gospel, —main-
taining “ that each disciple owes loving labour
to the church, and ‘personal service to the Lord,
and to the world for His sake, —service that can
be superseded by no hired agency or money
gifts,”—viewing each church as a voluntary
association, possessing self-regulating, self-sus-
taining powers in virtue of which it is compe-
tent to manage its own affairs independently of
all foreign control, and therefore fitted to foster
a spirit of self-reliance, energy, and Christian
willinghood, and, finally, believing that the
brotherhood should be composed only of the
spiritually-minded, and the prayerful,—of those
who depend alone upon the Spirit for success ;
looking at all these things, we affirm that
Congregational principles are singularly adapted
to help forward the Evangelization of the
world. It has indeed been said that Congrega-
tionalism may be very well in theory, but it does
not obtain so many adherents as other
modes. Of this argument, it has been justly
observed, “ that it extinguishes Protestantism
and sets up Popery, and pushed a little further
overturns both and yields the palm to Heathen-
dom.” Let it be remembered also that our
principles have not been fairly tried, - they have
not yet had, even in this land, what they ask, a
clear stage and no favor ; and while the majority
of Christians have not of course acted upon
them, those of us who profess them have not
wielded them in all their power. It has alas too
represented it to be.
Again, we seek as a Union, the cultivation of
brotherly affection and cordial co-operation
among the associated churches and ministers. —
We believe in Independency but not in isola-
tion, —we repudiate uniformity as unnatural and
unscriptural, but strive after unity as that which
is both possible and imperative,—we affirm there
may be variety without variance. As in na-
ture it is not one universal colour, or one series
of similar objects that constitutes the beauty of
the landscape, but the haimonious blending of
various tints and objects,—so the unity of the
brethren at which we aim, is not a rigid exact-
ness of thought nor a mere monotony of feeling,
but an intermingling of various sympathies, a
blending of the thoughts and a harmony of the
hearts of all. We read of the first disciples that
they were of one heart and one soul, their unity
was the unity of the Spirit,—for that we strive,
so that we may live and work in peace, and
that the God of love and peace may be with us.
Nor do we seek this unity simply for itseif, but
also as a means to an end, even the promotion
of Evangelical religion. We desire to cultivate
practical sympathy, the strong helping the
weak, and endeavour to realize unity as that
which will attract the attention and impress the
heart of the world, and give increased power to
the operations of the churches.
Another object we have before us is thus stated
—“ The maintenance and enlargement of reli-
gious liberty, rights and privileges.” Now,
while we have nothing of which to complain in
regard to liberty, there is yet one subject nearly
allied to it which still demands our earnest atten-
tion, viz., State-aid to religion. Would that
we had done with it, that this apple of discord
were cast from our midst for ever. We have to
lament that this event seems yet distant, that
while in one sister colony the question has long
since been set at rest, and in others there is an
approximation to its final adjustment, yet here
in Victoria it remains as it was, and the
battle which we fondly hoped had been fairly
won must be fought over again. On this subject
we cannot be silent ; we must not, we dare not
let it rest. Loyalty to Christ, fealty to his truth,
imperatively demand that we lift up our voice
against it. It is a form of State Churchism at
once the most specious,and the most detrimental,
to the interests of true religion ; extending as it
does the helping hand to systems diametrically
opposed to each other as light and darkness, its
influence on the ungodly must be baneful in the
extreme. Believing that the cause of Christ
will be advanced by the abolition of this system,
let us gird ourselves afresh for the conflict, and
never dream of laying down our weapons until
the churches of Christ in this fair land are free
not only from State control, but also from State
pay.
And, above all, let us keep continually and
distinctly before us the great object to which
every other must be made subservient, viz., the


extension of Christ’s kingdom and the glory of that there is a manifest distinction between the
his great name. In so far as we come short in conversions of the apostolic and those of modern
this we shall fail to fulfil the design of our Asso-
ciation. In vain our orthodoxy, our scriptural
polity, unless souls are converted through our
instrumentality and believers are gathered into
our churches.
It becomes us, then, to inquire how far we are
accomplishing our mission. What progress are
our principles making? How much of the
worlds darkness have we dispelled? How much
of its sin and misery have we removed ? What
amount of spiritual wealth are we adding to the
Universal Church year by year? How many
souls are saved through our efforts ? What re-
venue of glory are we bringing in to Christ ?
Can we, Christian brethren, deal with these
questions honestly in any of our religious
circles, even the most prosperous, without
realizing an humbling consciousness that
our work is not progressing as it ought or
as it might ? Now and then indeed there are in-
dications of advancement; here and there the
sword of the Spirit is not wielded in vain ; some
few are pricked to the heart and present the cry
“ Men and brethren, what shall we do ?” There
are proofs that the gospel has not lost its ancient
power, that the Spirit hath not altogether for-
saken us ; yet in the main and generally we
have to adopt the lamentation of the prophet—
“ Who hath believed our report and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed ?” The complaint
is not confined to us, it is uttered by all sections
of the Church, and is heard in every part of
Christendom. This general want of success has
awakened the attention and solicitude of the
most earnest and thoughtful men of the age,
and various are the theories they have pro-
pounded to alleviate the deep anxiety of those
who “ tremble for the ark of God.” By one we
are reminded that “in God’s world for those
who are in earnest there is no failure, no work
truly done, no word earnestly spoken, no sacri-
fice freely made was ever made in vain,” “ that
if ever failure seemed to rest upon a noble life,
it was when the Son of Man, deserted by his
friends, heard the cry which proclaimed that
the Pharisees had successfully drawn the net
round their divine victim. Yet from that very
hour of defeat and death there went forth the
world’s life,—from that very moment of apparent
failure there proceeded forth into the ages the
spirit of the conquering Cross.” By another we
are told that the multitudes who receive religious
instruction and yet remain ignorant of the
power of the gospel, “are like water wheels
standing still with well cut dry channels abut-
ting on the buckets. The channels are useless
and yet not useless; they cannot act instead of
water, but they are precious to hold and convey
the water when it comes. When the Spirit is
poured out like floods upon the dry ground, the
activity and fruitfulness of the church will be
very great. Let not the diggers of these chan-
nels weary of the work, or intermit the longing
look to heaven for the shower which will make
the work effectual.” By another it is suggested
times. “ Then conversions consisted in the
adoption of a new religion, whilst now it con-
sists, generally in the realizing of an old and
familiar one, —then it was a new faith espoused,
now it is only an old one quickened, —then the
conversion was sudden, now it is frequently a
gradual process extending over a lengthened
period, and therefore, though the results of
Christian effort are now less striking and demon-
strative, they are not so unimportant or dis-
couraging as they may at first appear.” Now,
while we hail these considerations as affording
some relief; as helping to keep the spirit from
weariness in well-doing ; yet they do not by any
means supply a satisfactory solution of the
question : Why is there not more real and more
apparent success experienced in the preaching of
the gospel and in the various evangelistic efforts
of the churches ? We are warranted by the ex-
press intimations of God’s word, by the clearly
revealed purpose of His will and the unfailing
assurance of His promises, to expect not only
more manifest but more enlarged success. What
then do we need in order to the actual realiza-
tion of this? Not a new gospel. The simple
message of the Cross proclaimed by the apostles
and first evangelists has not become impotent in
the lapse of ages, it is still the power of God
unto salvation. But what we do require is more
of the fire of prophets, more of the zeal of
apostles, more of the self-sacrificing spirit of
martyrs, more love for souls, more love for
Christ, more simple devotedness to His service,
more ardent desire for his glory. , We need to
feel more intensely our individual accountability.
One of the greatest drawbacks to which we are
exposed in this day of companies and societies is
to lose sight of our personal responsibility,
merging it in that of the association with which
we are connected. Many professing Christians
seem to excuse their idleness and meanness by
some vague notion they entertain concerning the
obligations of churches or committees. They
seem to forget that all such combinations are
composed of individuals, and that whatever re-
sponsibility may belong to the whole body must,
in a certain definite proportion, belong! to each
individual. There is one great want, however,
which comprehends all others, the increased im-
partation of the Holy Spirit. Let only this be
secured and then all else that we need for the
prosperity of Sion will follow. It is the power
of the blessed Spirit alone that can refresh all
the waste places and cause them to blossom as
the rose. We need not that the Spirit should
come in any new form, nor work in any new
method; but with more copiousness and with
more intensity. And let us remember that this
great gift is promised in answer to prayer,—ear-
nest, united, believing prayer. 0 then let us
awake and put on our strength. In private, at
the domestic altar, in the social prayer meeting,
let us supplicate the outpouring of the Spirit. “Ye
that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence,
and give him no rest till He establish and till


He make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.” themselves and enjoy social and
“ For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace and tag*.ofno.mean l
for Jerusalem's sake will I not rest, until the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness,
and the salvation thereof as a lamp that
hurneth.”
In the spirit of these remarks, Christian
brethren, let us prosecute the objects of our
union. Let us strive after more of the life of
religion in our own souls. Let us have more
heart in our work,- more of the mind of Christ,
more faith in what we profess and preach.
During the past year, we have endeavoured to
honour the memory, and to celebrate the deeds
of our Nonconformist forefathers,—the men to
whose genius, learning, piety and zealous labours,
not ourselves only, but the whole of Christen-
dom, owes so much. We felt that, even here,
the period was most opportune for bringing pro-
minently before our people, and the Christian
public generally, those great principles which
the Puritans held so dear, and in defence of
which they suffered so much. We conceived
that their lofty integrity, their high conscien-
tious attachment to religious truth and freedom,
might influence the hearts of many fur good.
Buc let us remember that unless the lives of
these holy men are permitted to exercise a salu-
tary influence upon our life, unless we are
stimulated by their lofty example of self-sacrifice
in the the defence and propagation of the truth,
then the story of the Two Thousand will have
lost its meaning for us. Be it ours then to drink
deeply into their spirit ; let us have same
strong confidence in God, the same spirit ot
unselfishness, the same faith in pray'er, and then,
God being with us, we shall become a power for
good in this young land. I believe we have in
our midst much of undeveloped power, mines of
unwrought wealth, and all that we need is the
spirit of the Puritans to bring it forth and con
secrate it to the service of the Lord. Our
system of Church polity will bear favourable
comparison with any other for its Scriptural
character, its simplicity, and its practical effi-
ciency. In its past history, it has little to be
ashamed of, much tor which to glorify God. Be-
lieving it to be divine, we recognize in it an
inherent vitality, and a never-failing adaptation
to the ever-varying circumstances of human
society. In its self-consistency, its freedom of
self action, its natural influence on the spirit and
character of private Christians, its healthy action
on the mind, labours and relative position of
ministers, its capability of almost indefinite ex-
pansion ;—in all these points, we see its intrinsic
excellence, and its peculiar adaptation to the
requirements of this colony. Let us then hold
last our principles, and prove their efficiency by
doing our part in the Evangelization of our
adopted land. We have made it our home, and,
in conjunction with our fellow-colonists, we aie
laying the foundation of what may some day be
a great nation. Unsurpassed in its pastoral,
agricultural, and mineral resources, and in the
possession of those who are members of the
great Anglo-Saxon family, who have secured tor
be one of increasing prosperity. But in yarn its
wealth, its unbounded resources, its social and
political freedom, if its soil be not trodden by
men whose minds are elevated with thought,
and whose hearts are influenced for good, who
seek to do justly, and to walk humbly with their
God. It beams upon us in the history of the
past, it is written as in characters of living light
in the brilliant career of our Fatherland, that a
nation’s true and permanent greatness consists
in the intelligence of her sons, the morality of
her citizens, and the piety of her Christians. Let
us see to it then, that the foundations of this
young nation are laid strong in truth and
righteousness, that true and, permanent prospe-
rity may be her inheritance. But, more than
this, as a Union of Christian Churches and
Ministers, we form a band in the great army of
the Church militant, and with all our fellow
soldiers of the Cross, we aim at nothing loss
than the actual and universal establishment of
Messiah’s reign. A comparatively small and
feeble band we may be, nevertheless, as every
rain-drop that falls into the ocean becomes an
integral part of that resistless force which under-
mines rocks, and engulfs the armadas of na-
tions, so we claim to be a part of that resist-
less force which is now undermining the
strongholds of ignorance and sin, and which,
sooner or later, will overthrow all antichrists.
Yea, we humbly claim to be co-workers with
Christ, to be identified with that redeeming a,nd
restoring work, to lay the foundation of which
He died, and to carry on which to certain and
complete success He now reigns. And, though
error may be putting on her most attractive
garb, and renewing the vigour of her youth,—
though vice is rampant and wickedness abounds,
—though the enemies ot Christ, and ofman, are
mustering their forces in uncommon numbers,—
and though the gleaming of their weapons flash-
ing on the eye, and the din of the conflict fall-
ing on the ear, may foretell that the battle will
be tierce and long, —yet will we still believe that
God's great day is coming, when might shall
be with the right, when the noiseless and
bloodless victories of truth over error shall bo
complete, when war shall cease, and man s pro-
gressive mind shall rise unfettered as its God
designed, when the world shall be subdued
and the church redeemed, and He shall reign,
whose right it is, and the whole earth be lilled
with His glory. “ Therefore, my beloved breth-
ren, be ye steadfast, unmoveable, always abound-
ing in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labour is not in vain in the
Mr. Wm. Bates moved, and Mr. Robert Smith
seconded the following resolution:—
» That the cordial thanks of this Council are
due, and are hereby given to the Rev. vi . Moss,
for the efficient manner in which he has dis-
charged his duties as chairman during the past
year, and for the judicious and excellent address
now read.” Carried unanimously.


The Eev. T. Odell brought up the resolution selves, and the changing character of our popu-
of a sub-committee, and moved that the Rev. lation in the town and country districts, have
J. P. Sunderland be the chairman of the Union
for the Union for the ensuing year. George
Rolfe, Fsq., seconded the nomination, which,
after a lengthened discussion on a point of order,
was carried unanimously. The Rev. W. Moss
then retired from the chair, and the Rev. J. P.
Sunderland occupied it.
George Rolfe, Esq,, moved, and the Rev. J.
Beer seconded—
“ That the hearty thanks of the Council are
due, and are hereby given to the Rev. J. P.
Sunderland, for his valuable services as one of
the secretaries.” Carried unanimously.
The Eev. W. S. H. Fielden moved, and the
Eev. T. H. Jackson seconded
“ That the cordial thanks of the Council are
due, and are hereby given to the Eev. W. R.
Lewis, for his valuable services as one of the
secretaries.” Carried unanimously.
The Eev. T. Odell moved, and the Eev. W.
Moss seconded—
“ That the Revs. W. R. Lewis and J. C.
McMichael be requested to act as secretaries
during the ensuing year.” Carried unani-
mously.
The Eev. J. C. McMichael read the following
report prepared by the Executive Committee;—
Beloved Brethren, —The return of the
Annual Meetings of the Congregational Union
and Mission of Victoria, devolves upon the
Executive Committee, the duty of laying before
the ministers and delegates of our churches, the
efforts which have been made to maintain the
cause of truth and to advance the interests of
the Congregational Denomination in Victoria,
during the past year. Experience shows the
value of this fellowship of ministers and
churches. The objects which the Union and
Mission have before them are so important and
diversified, as to tax the best energies of the
members of our denomination ; and onr princi-
ples are so well defined, yet so comprehensive,
that we can receive into our fellowship the
talent, the piety, and the zeal of all who are
anxious to enlarge the boundaries of the Re-
deemer’s kingdom, by preaching “ Christ and
Him crucified,” independently of State-Aid or
cumbersome ecclesiastical organization. r lhe
liberty of Congregationalism is well adapted for
quick and effective movements upon the moral
and spiritual destitution of this land, and the
existence of this Union and Mission is a suffi-
cient proof, that with the individual freedom of
every church of the Congregational body, there
may be the strongest combination for the pro-
motion of general interests.
'J he past twelve months do not furnish any
striking instances of rapid increase. There are
times lor consolidation, as well as of extension,
and your committee have had to contend with
difficulties of a peculiar and trying character
The want of suitable ministers, the inability,
to Jill lire openings which have presented them-
retarded our progress and called for the exercise
of faith and patience. We have had to wait
when we have desired to work. We have had
the pain of looking at open doors of usefulness,
but we have not been able to enter therein.
The establishment of the Congregational Col-
lege will, in time, give us men of our own train-
ing for the work of the ministry, and it is with
pleasure we record, that already we are deriving
advantage from the assistance the students are
able to giveito the churches. Your Committee
would here record, with humble submission to
the Divine Will, the removal by death, of Mr.
Frederick W. P. French, the senior student. The
acceptability of his services gave great promise of
future usefulness in the vineyard of the Lord,
but he now rests from his labours, and he has
left a good testimony behind him in his work
and piety.
Your Committee have endeavoured to carry out
the various resolutions which were adopted at
the last meeting of the General Council, and
the Half-yearly Assembly which was held at
Castlemaine.
Three new churches have been added to the
Association, viz., East Melbourne, Rev. Joseph
Beer, pastor; Carlton, and the Welsh Church,
Wesley-hill, Castlemaine, Rev. D. Jones, min-
ister.
Pecuniary help has been afforded to the
churches or congregations at Inglewood, Dun-
olly, Daylesford, Schnapper Point, Portland,
Wedderburne, Rutherglen, and West Geelong.
Your Committee have urgently pressed their
claims for ministerial help upon the Colonial
Missionary Society in England, but with little
success. For many months past, no ministers
have arrived from London. We understand,
however, by the last mail, that there are two or
three brethren on the way to Australia, and we
hope soon to give to them a hearty welcome
amongst us.
The educational movements of the Govern-
ment have been under the consideration of your
Committee, and a deputation from the Execu-
tive, in conjunction with members of other deno-
minations, waited upon the Chief Secretary, to
protest against the appointment of a gentleman
of the Jewish religion, as a member of the
Educational Board, to represent the Non-State
Aid-taking bodies. The protest was of no avail,
for in spite of remonstration, the obnoxious
candidate was appointed.
The question of State-Aid to religion has not
been overlooked. The Council at the half-yearly
meeting at Castlemaine, passed a resolution, —
That it was its decided opiniou, that Govern-
mental pecuniary aid to the churches is wrong
in principle: that under the present circum-
stances of the colony of Victoria, the Council
would approve of any proper scheme for the
gradual extinction of State-Aid to religion.
Your Committee have been watchful for an op-
portunity of furthering these views, but in the
present state of political parties, it has been


thought Letter to wait, so that when action is days since. It is a neat brick edifice, well
taken it may be with effect. There is little situated, and we trust that the blessing of the
111 tw the miestion will be settled until Most High may rest upon all the efforts which
hope that the question will be settled until
pressure is brought to bear upon the Legislative
Council, for the majority of its members is in
favour of the grant.
The Bicentenary of the year 1662, was an
event inthe history of Protestant Non-conformity
too important to be passed over without public
notice. Lectures and meetings were held in and
around Melbourne. The subject called forth the
expression of various opinions from the different
religious denominations. The daily journals
opened their columns to letters on both sides
of the question. Your Committee believe
that important ends were gained by the discus-
cion elicited by the celebration of the noble
deeds of our illustrious ancestors. The Congre-
gationalists had an opportunity of speaking
about those principles which promote the liberty,
the purity, and the power of the true Church of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
The distress in Lancashire called forth an ex-
pression of sympathy at the meeting ot the
General Council in November last, and your
Committee have been gratified with the response
which has been given to the appeal for help. A
considerable sum of money has been sent
through the Lev. J. L, Poore, to the dis-
tressed in the cotton districts, to be distributed
under the direction of the Central Committee in
MbiD chcstcr.
Your Committee would now revert to the in-
terests of the several churches and districts
which have come under their consideration :
Wedderburnb.— The Rev. J. Summers, who
laboured for a time at Wedderbourne, was
obliged to leave on account of health, and
although your Committee would have sent ano-
ther minister to take his place, yet the people
held out such faint hope of sustaining him,
that it was thought not desirable to continue
this station.
Daylesford. —The Congregational Church at
Daylesford, has been secured to the denomina-
tion. Your Committee have allowed the Presby-
terians to worship in it for the present, but they
hope at no distant date to be able to find a suit-
able minister for this rising township.
Dunolly.— The Rev. J. Sayer, who joined the
Congregational body during the year, has been
requested to labour at Dunolly. Your Commit-
tee have had a painful task to fulfil in the re-
moval of the previous minister, but they hope
that the present occupant of the pulpit will be
able to undo some of those evils which have be-
fallen this station, through the ministry of un-
faithful men. The Rev. J. (Sayer has the lull
confidence and esteem of bis brethren, and there
are already pleasing signs of success attending
his ministrations.
Inglewood. - The congregation at Inglewood
suffered the loss of its church by fire. The
Rev. A. Brunton, the indefatigable minister of
Inglewood, visited Melbourne, and obtained
subscriptions towards the erection of a now
building. The new church was opened a few
Most High may rest upon all the efforts which
are made for the spiritual welfare of the people.
Warrnambool.— The Rev. J. L. Poore visited
Warrnambool in June last. The Congrega-
tionalists and others expressed a wish to have a
minister, and promised to sustain him. The
Rev. W. M. Pentland, after a short probation,
accepted a call to become the pastor. r lhe
Rev. T. Odell visited Warrnambool, formed a
church, assisted in the recognition services of the
Rev. W. M. Pentland, as minister of the church,
and your Committee are gratified to report, that
great success has followed the ministrations
of the pastor, 'i he people are anxious to erect
a building of their own, as they have had hither-
to to worship in a hired hall,—and they will,
through their minister, seek help in Melbourne,
to enable them to accomplish this object.
Carlton. —Arrangements have been made by
which the Carlton Congregational Church has
been secured to the body, and it is hoped, that
soon they will be able to obtain a minister who
shall gather a large and influential congregation
in this important locality.
West Geelong.— The station at West Gee-
long, is supplied by lay-brethren, and Divine
Worship is conducted every Lord’s-day. The
M'Killop-street Church regards it as a branch,
and watches over its interests.
Rutherglen.— The Rev. J. Mirams, at the re-
quest of your Committee, visited and preached
there for a month. He was succeeded by Mr.
Stoker, who has occupied the pulpit for several
weeks. The spiritual destitution of this district
is great. A chapel had been built at Ruther-
glen, through the exertions of the Rev. C. Price,
of Wahgunyah, and persons of various religious
denominations united to support the preaching
of the Gospel. Mr. Stoker has accepted a cor-
dial invitation to become the minister of Ruther-
glen, and he will enter upon his stated labours
in a few days.
Williamstown. —The Rev. W. C. Robinson, of
Williamstown, received and accepted an invita-
tion from the Church at Brisbane-street, Hobart
Town, to become their minister; but we are
glad to record that the Rev. T. H. Jackson, late
of Geelong, has filled up the vacant charge at
Williamstown.
Your Committee has exercised the strictest
economy in the disbursement of the funds en-
trusted to their cate, and they would impress
upon the churches the necessity of increased
liberality. The sth Rule of the Constitution,
requires that a collection be made by each
church in the Union, and if this rule is acted
upon, and the churches are interested in the
important woik this Association is intended to
accomplish, there will be no lack of funds.
The question of increased ministerial help
has been one which has caused anxiety but we
hope that the ministers who are now on their
way to Victoria, will enable the Committee to
supply some of the vacancies which now exist,
I and that some satisfactory arrangements may


be entered into with the friends of the colonies
Brought forward... . £3Ol 13 3
in England to supply the demand which may be
Rent 5 0 0
Loan account (Daylesford) ... 17 L 0 0
made upon them to strengthen our hands in the
work of the Lord in Victoria.
Our watchword must be onward. We must
£477 13 3
be in earnest that we may do our part as Con-
gregationalists in spreading the truths of the
Balance in hand 66 10 8
Gospel throughout the length and breadth of
the colony. We must expect to meet with diffi
culties, —with failures: but we shall have success
CASH TO COUNTRY CHURCHES—
in proportion to our faith, our prayers, our zeal,
and our self-denial; therefore, brethren, “be ye
Portland 25 0 0
Inglewood 26 2 6
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
Daylesford 35 13 6
work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that
Schnapper Point ... 25 0 0
Warnambool 1 10 0
your labour is not in vain in the Lord.”
Ballaarat West deputation 2 7 6
Rutherglen 5 5 0
Mr. E. Langton moved, and the Rev. W. S. H
Fielden seconded—
Dunolly ,77 0 0
“ That the report now read be received and
197 18 6
Printing 15 11 6
adopted.” Carried unanimously.
Law Expenses 110
The Rev. J. C. McMichael read the minutes of
Postage 10 12 1
Tea Meeting, Oxford st 15 0 0
Interest account 8 0 0
the half-yearly meeting, held at Castiemaine
which were received and confirmed.
George Rolfe, Esq., the treasurer, read the fol-
lowing financial statement, which was unani-
mously received and adopted.
Freehold Property (Daylesford) ... 172 19 5
Balance carried down 66 10 8
£477 13 3
Balance in hand £67 6 3
Sundry collections—
Communion Meeting,
Prahran ... ... £7 8 0
Examined and found correct,
Edward Langton.
John Russell.
27th May, 1863.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and Mr. S.
Tea Meeting, Oxford-st.
Received for Tickets 14 17 6
Ballaarat West Church 4 0 0
Portland ... ... 3 0 0
Haigh seconded, that the Revs. W. S H. Fiel-
den, J. J. Halley, E. Day, and Mr. Thos. Wil-
CastlemaineHalf-Yearly
Meeting ... ... 914 0
kinson be appointed to act as a Business Com-
mittee during the present Conference. Carried.
Warrnambool ... ... 315 0
Alma-street Church, St.
Kilda... ... ... 7 6 4
Admission of Churches and Special
Members,
Oxford-st., Collingwood 10 10 4
East Melbourne ... 7 0 6
Sandhurst 6 0 0
The secretary read an application for admis-
sion into the Union, from the Congregational
Church, Ballaarat West, Rev. M. W. Bradney,
pastor.
The Rev. A. Gosman moved, and Mr. Wise-
would seconded—
Prahran 13 12 2
Castiemaine ... ... 616 7
Emerald Hill 2 0 0
Victoria.parade ... 6 0 0
102 0 5
AUXILIARY SOCIETIES—
“ That the application be granted.” Carried.
St. Kilda Auxiliary ... 26 3 0
Victoria-parade ... 15 3 6
Carlton 100
The Rev A. Gosman moved, and the Rev. M.
W. Bradney seconded —
42 6 6
“ That the Congregational Church, Sebastopol,
Ballaarat, be admitted to the Union.” Carried.
WORKING MEETINGS—
East St. Kilda Ladies’
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and the
Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., seconded—
Working Meeting ... 11 2 1
Richmond 5 0 0
“That the Rev. J. Mirams be admitted as a
special member.” Carried.
16 2 1
mothers’ prayer meeting—
The secretary read an application from the
Rev. J. Apperly, Newtown, Geelong, for admis-
sion as a special member.
Richmond 3 13 6
Subscriptions 63 17 0
Sundries 6 7 6
6 7 6
Mr. Port moved, and the Rev. T. H. Jackson
seconded—
Carried foiward £3Ol 13 3
"That the application be granted.” Carried,


The Rev. W. E. Fletcher, M.A., moved, and
Mr. Griston seconded—
“ That the Rev. Mark Butler, resident near
Sandhurst, without pastoral charge, be admitted
as a special member,” Carried.
The Rev. J. Beer moved, and Mr. Wisewould
seconded—
“ That the Rev. R. Kidgell, resident in Mel-
bourne, without pastoral charge, be admitted as
a special member,” Carried.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and the
Rev. T. Odell seconded—
“ That the Congregational Church at Warr-
nambool, Rev. W. M. Pentland, pastor, be ad-
mitted into the Union.” Carried.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael introduced the Rev.
W. Law, of Launceston, and the Rev. H, Guin-
ness, of Dublin, as visitors.
A hearty welcome was given by the Council
to these brethren, who expressed their thanks,
also their gratification at being present.
George Rolfe, Esq., having signified to the
Council the probability of his absence from the
colony for some time, and also that it would be
desirable to appoint a treasurer in his stead,
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and Mr. W.
Bates seconded—
“ That Mr. H. Brooks be requested to act as
treasurer.” Carried.
The Rev. J. Mirams proposed, and the Rev.
T. Odell seconded—
“ That the cordial thanks of this Council are
due, and are hereby given to George Rolfe, Esq.,
for his lengthened and valuable services as trea-
surer. Carried.
The Council then proceeded to ballot for the
Committee. The Revs. J. J. Halley, and VV. R,
Fletcher, M.A., were appointed scrutineers. The
list is printed at the beginning of the report.
The Rev. J. Beer moved, and George Rolfe,
Ei.q., seconded—
“ That an address be presented to their Royal
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales on
the occason of their marriage: that the Revs.
J. Beer, W. R. Fletcher, M.A., and Mr. E. Lang-
ton, be appointed to prepare it; and that the
chairman and secretaries sign it on behalf of the
Council.” Carried.
George Rolfe, Esq., brought forward a resolu-
tion in reference to the raising of a guarantee
fund, to be applied specially to the bringing out
and settlement of ministers. A lengthened dis-
cussion ensued ; and Mr. Wisewould moved, and
the Rev. E. Day seconded—
“ That the resolution be remitted to the com-
mittee to be brought up in another form on the
following day.”
The Rev. J. Mirams moved, and the Rev. A.
Gosman seconded—
“ That the Council now do adjourn until to-
morrow morning, at ten o’clock.” Carried,
The sitting closed with devotional exercises,
and the brethren partook of a substantial lunch
provided by the friends connected with the
Richmond and Oxford Street Churches.
Wednesday Morning, May 13.
The adjourned meeting of the Conference was
commenced with the usual devotional exercises.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and the Rev.
J. Mirams seconded—
“That this Council desires to acknowledge
with thanks the liberality and kindness of Air,
W. B. Stephens, in affording the accommoda-
tion of a room, free of charge, for the use of
the committees of both Union and College.”
Carried.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and the Rev,
J. Beer seconded—
“ That the executive committee be requested
to prepare, and print, reports of the Union and
College meetings.” Carried.
The Rev. A. Gosman moved, and the Rev. J>
J, Halley seconded—
“ That the half-yearly meetings of the Union
and Mission be held this year at Ballaarat, at
such time as the executive committee shall
decide.” Carried.
The Rev. J. Beer moved, and the Rev. J. C.
McMichael seconded—
“ That the Rev. Edwin Day be appointed to
preach the sermon at the half-yearly meetings
at Ballaarat.” Carried.
The Rev. J. Mirams moved, and Dr. Embling
seconded —
“ That the Colonial Missionary Society having
requested the Rev. J. L. Poore to visit England
during the present year, this Council embraces
the opportunity of expressing towards him its
unabated confidence and attachment, and its
hope and conviction that (if he complies with
their request) his visit will promote the interests
of Congregationalism in this colony, because his
full knowledge of the condition and wants of
our churches will enable him to urge our claims
with great power upon the Colonial Missionary
Society; and furthermore, this Council em-
powers and requests Mr. Poore to act as the re-
presentative of this Union and Mission, in the
Assembly of the Congregational Union of Eng-
land and Wales.” Carried.
The Rev. T. H. Jackson moved, and the Rev.
J. Mirams seconded—
“That this Council having learned that
several ministers are about to leave England for
this colony, and foreseeing increased operations
for the ensuing year, affirms the desirability of
increasing the annual income of the Union and
Mission to at least ±1(L0, and that the ministers
and delegates hereby pledge themselves to urge
on their respective churches the establishment
of some organization to accomplish this object.”
Carried.


The Rev. J. C. McMichael having read a short
paper on the subject of lay agency,
The Rev. Wm, Moss moved, and Dr. Embling
seconded —
“ That a committee be appointed to devise
some plan for the development and employment
of lay agency in connection with the various
districts of the Union, to report at the half-
yearly meeting at Castlemaine, and that such
committee consist of the Revds. W. S. H.
Fielden, J. P. Sunderland, J. C. McMichael,
Messrs. Bell, Broadbent, Wilkinson, and the
mover.” Carried.
The Rev. A. Gosman moved, and the Rev. J.
C. McMichael seconded —
“ That this Council having had its attention
directed to the existence of a discussion amongst
the Protestant Dissenters of England with the
view of promoting a closer union amongst the
churches distinguished by the principles of
Evangelical Non-conformity, would express its
hearty sympathy with, and approval of, the
end contemplated by that discussion; and
while fully convinced of the importance of
a closer union amongst the free churches
of this colony, would also express its firm
conviction that there ave special induce-
ments and facilities towards effecting such a
union in this land :—this Council would there-
fore direct the prayerful attention of the asso-
ciated churchee to this important subject; and
would respectfully urge upon them, on the
basis of a free Congregationalism, to remove
every barrier, and give every encouragement to
any practicable suggestion or general movement
calculated to draw the churches of Christ more
closely together in common sympathy and
work,” Carried,
The Rev. J. C. McMichael moved, and the
Rev. Edwin Day seconded —
“ That the thanks of this Council be presented
to Mr. Laurie for his kindness in preparing a
scheme for life insurance for the ministers in
Victoria, but that most of the ministers being
insured in various offices, it is not advisable at
present to entertain the question.” Carried.
The Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., moved, and
the Rev. W. Moss seconded—
“ That this Council renews its protest against
the granting of State-aid to religion in this
colony, and requests the chairman, through
some member of the Legislative Assembly, to
learn what becomes of the proportion of the
grant which should, on the census principle, be
appropriated to the Congregational body.” Car-
ried.
The Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., moved, and
the Rev. A. Gosman seconded—
“ That the thanks of the Council are hereby
given to the Oxford-street and the Richmond
Churches for the provision made for the comfort
of the ministers and delegates, and to those
friends who have kindly shown hospitality to
our country brethren.” Carried.
The Rev. W. S. H. Fielden moved, and the
Rev. J. J. Halley seconded—
“ That the secretaries be instructed to send a
correct list of ministers and churches to Eng-
land, for insertion in the Congregational Year
Book.” Carried.
The meeting closed with a devotional exer-
cise.
Public Meeting, held in ike Congregational
Church, Richmond, May 1 2th, 1863.
The Annual Public Meeting was held in the
above named church. There was a good attend-
ance. The Rev. J. P. Sunderland, chairman of
the Union presided. After singing, the Rev, J.
.1. Halley, of Maryborough, engaged in prayer.
The chairman in his opening remarks referred to
the honour done him in placing him in the
position he then occupied. He trusted that the
discharge of the duties, as chairman of the Union
would be pleasant, from the assistance and sup-
port he would receive from the ministers and
members of the association.
The Rev. J. C. McMichael read the third
annual report, which will be found in the pro-
ceedings of the council,
The Rev. T. Odell moved the first resolution,
viz.—
“ That the report now read be adopted and
printed for circulation under the direction of the
executive committee.”
The Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., of Sandhurst,
seconded the resolution, which was carried by
the meeting.
The second resolution was moved by the Rev.
E. Day, of Castlemaine, viz.—
“ That this meeting would express its devout
gratitude to God for the establishment and pro-
gress of the Congregational College of Victoria,
would earnestly commend that institution to the
warmest sympathy and most liberal support of
all our churches, and would invoke the Divine
blessing upon all connected with it.”
The Rev. J. C. McMichael seconded the above,
and the resolution was unanimously carried.
The third resolution embodying a summary
of Congregational principles, a renewed expres-
sion of antagonism to State Aid to Religion,
and to Sectarian Education at the expense of
the State, was moved by the Rev. W. S. H.
Fielden, seconded by the Rev. J. Beer, and
unanimously adopted by the meeting.
The Rev. J. J. Halley moved, and the Rev. W. R.
Fletcher, seconded, the last resolution, a vote of
thanks to the chairman.
A collection was made during the evening to-
wards the funds of the Union, and the proceed-
ings were brought to a close at a quarter to ten
o’clock.


UNITED COMMUNION.
On Wednesday evening, May 18th, the united
communion of all the churches was held in the
Oxford-street Congregational Church, at half-
past seven o’clock. There was a large attend-
ance of communicants. The body of the church
was filled, and the side seats were set apart for
spectators. The Eev. J. C. McMichael pre-
sided, and commenced the solemn service by
giving ou the 860th hymn, “New Congrega-
tional.” The Kev. W. Moss offered prayer.
The Rev. T. H. Jackson gave a short address
on the love of God, as displayed in the gift
of His Son Jesus Christ, for the salvation of
the world. The Eev. J. C. McMichael read ap-
propriate passages of Scripture, and called upon
the Eev. W. S. H. Fielden to pray. The bread
was then distributed, and another prayer was
offered by the Eev. J. J. Halley, when the sacra-
mental cup was passed to the communicants by
the deacons of the various churches who were
present. The Eev. J. E. Sunderland addressed
the church and spectators, after the distribution
of the elements, on the hallowing influence of
the Lord’s Supper, founding his remarks on the
words, “ Lord, it is good to be here.” The pre-
siding minister brought the engagements to a
close by prayer.
The united communion was a service of un-
usual interest, and all who were privileged to
take part in it expressed the pleasure and profit
they derived from it.
ORDINATION SERVICE,
On Thursday evening, May 14th, an Ordina-
tion service was held in the Prahran Congrega-
tional Church, when Mr. A. Stoker was set apart
to the work of the Christian ministry. There
was a good congregation, testifying to the in-
terest felt in the engagements of the evening.
The Eev. W. Moss opened the service by
giving out a hymn. The Eev. J. Mirams prayed
and read suitable passages of Scripture, The
Rev. J. P. Sunderland delivered the introductory
discourse, basing his remarks on the Acts of the
Apostles xiii, 1,2, 3, in which was briefly in-
volved the minister’s or missionary’s call, his
designation, and his work. The Eev. W. E.
Fletcher, M.A., asked the usual questions, when
Mr. Stoker gave a very interesting and satisfac-
tory account of his Christian experience, belief,
motives for entering the ministry, and his de-
sire to exercise his gifts amongst the Congrega-
tionalists. The Eev. T. Odell ottered the Ordina-
tion prayer, during which the ministers present
laid their hands ou the head of the candidate.
The Eev. J. C. McM ichael gave. an impressive
charge from the injunction of Paul to '1 imothy
(2 Timothy iv. 2), “Preach the word,” The
Eev. W. S. H. Fielden concluded this interest-
ing service by prayer and the benediction. The
Eev. A. Stoker commences his ministerial labours
at Eutherglen. He has a large and important
district ou which to operate, 'there is no other
minister at present resident in the town, so that
his services are greatly needed. May the bless-
ing of the Lord rest upon his work.
REPORT OF THE FIRST ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
The first annual meeting of the College Con-
stituency was held on Tuesday, May 12th, 1863,
at three o’clock in the afternoon, in the Victoria
Parade Congregational Church. The Eev. J.
P, Sunderland gave out a hymn. The Eev. J. J.
Halley offered prayer ; alter which, the Hon.
George Rolfe was unanimously voted to the
chair. The following report was read by the
Eev. W. S. H. Fielden: —
The committee of the “ Congregational Col-
lege of Victoria” have much satisfaction in thus
meeting their constituency, to present the
annual report, and to render back the responsi-
ble trust which was laid upon them twelve months
ago. The year has been marked by much ac-
tivity and real progress. That which last May
was a bare and unfurnished building, is now the
suitable and convenient home of our students,
and ready to welcome the resident Tutor when
he shall have been appointed. In carrying out
the plans to this end, your committee have exer-
cised all possible economy, and consider that the
College as it stands, with its handsome Library
and comfortable accommodation, is an admira-
ble result of the very moderate outlay which has
been made. Located as we are, in the midst of
a keenly commercial community, we are pre-
pared to challenge criticism, as it relates to this
side of our operations, and to express our grati-
tude for the expenditure of time and energy
which has brought forth these results.
During the year four students have been fully
admitted after piobation to the privileges of
college life, and three others are now passing
through the preliminary term, with the pro-
bability of full admission when it shall close.
Until the end of the academical year your
committee will not be able to present the usual
“ Examiners’ Eeports,” but from the testimony
of the tutors they have pleasure in expressing
their general confidence in the character, appli-
cation, and success of the students under their
charge.
A large number of preaching engagements
have been fulfilled during the year by the
students. The value of their services has been


gratefully recognised by the several pastors and
churches.
While the general health of the students
sufficiently indicates the salubrious situation of
the college, your committee regret to report the
sudden and premature death of the senior
student, Mr. F, W. P. French. His unaffected
piety and genial earnestness of character, had
endeared him to all with whom he had inter-
course. His perseverance in study and his
pulpit gifts gave promise of future acceptance
and success in the work of the ministry. In
November last he was sent at the urgent request
of the Union and Mission Committee to supply
the Congregational Church at Daylesford. His
services were highly valued, and made a deep
impression upon the people. He returned in
apparent health and was eagerly looking for-
ward to further usefulness, when he was myste-
riously smitten down, and died in the full flush
of youth and hope. On the 29th December your
committee joined with mournful resignation, in
what was in fact a public funeral—in the Kew
cemetery, where his body rests “ in sure and cer-
tain hope of a glorious resurrection.”
The meeting for the formal inauguration of
the college, held in the library of the institution
last May, was a “ red letter day” in the annals
of our Colonial Congregational history ! The
enthusiasm and liberality displayed—the long
table, which broke down under the load of books
presented as the foundation of our library—the
steady fire of donations and subscriptions—and
the devout Spirit of united earnest purpose for
the full success of our great object—all this con
stituted a magnificent omen of good, and was
accepted as an indication of the Divine approval,
without which we could hope for no success, for
“ except the Lord build the house, they labour in
vain, that build it.”
At that meeting, besides the settlement of
several important questions, and the appoint-
ment of the present committee, a resolution of
thanks was passed by acclamation to the
Keverend Thomas Binney, of London, for his
spontaneous and urgent pleading on behalf of
this institution in the Fatherland.
The first session of the college was opened by
a tea and public meeting, held on 2nd Septem-
ber, in the Carlton Congregational Church, the
Eev J. L. Poore presided. The Kev. W. K.
Fletcher, M.A., of Sandhurst, delivered a very
able and warm-hearted address to the students,
which was afterwards printed—the chairman of
the Union (Rev. William Moss) offered the
dedicatory prayer, and speeches were made by
the Revds. R. Connebee, J. C. M'Michael, Hon.
Geo. Rolfe, M.L.C., and Mr. Edward Laugton.
A scheme for the domestic management, and
the arrangement of a college curriculum for the
students, had been already drawn up and
adopted by your committee: they desire espe-
cially to record their appreciation ot the valua-
ble services rendered to the College and the
Denomination, by the gratuitous and self-deny-
ing labours of the five Ministers who have de-
voted time and energy, week by week, to the
work of college teaching, and are still willing to
do so, till the arrival or the appointment of a
permanent and resident Tutor. They also have
pleasure in stating that from the opening of the
present session they have secured the services of
John Carmichael, Esq., M.A., to give daily in-
struction in classics and mathematics, and gene-
rally to aid in approximating the course of study
to that pursued in the Melbourne University.
The students thus enjoy (as far as possible) all
the benefits of education in one of our English
Colleges.
Your committee, however, regret that these
ad interim arrangements should have been neces-
sary for so long a period, and that even yet they
have received no tidings of the departure of a
suitable tutor from England. They have
anxiously looked for intelligence by every mail,
and have done all that they could to quicken
the movements of the “ Colonial Missionary
Society’ in this matter —but hitherto without
success.
In addition to fourteen meetings of the general
committee which have been held during the
year, the finance and house sub-committees
have had frequent meetings, and by _ their
assiduity and care have much assisted in the
good management of the institution. Thanks
are also due to Messrs. Allen and Kemp, who
have rendered valuable service in canvassing
for, and collecting subscriptions. Your com-
mittee would also record their sense of obliga-
tion to James Wisewould, Esq., for his profes-
sional services, freely given to the institution,
and their conviction that the college deed will,
when in due time it is executed, be found to
contain all the powers, guards, and securities
which will ever need to be exercised.
Your committee would further express their
satisfaction at the appointment and services of
Mrs. Bracher (the resident college matron), who
has fully realised all the wishes and expectations
which were formed at the time of her appoint-
ment.
It is our pleasing duty to refer to a vote of
thanks given last November to the Hon. J. P.
Fawkner for the financial results of his lecturing
tour, generously devoted to aid the college funds.
The Library is a noble illustration of the power
of vvillinghood, and of the intelligence of the
donors. The munificent gift of more than 800
volumes from the library of the late Rev. Richard
Fletcher, would alone suffice to embalm his
memory, and show the interest of his family in
this project, which was the cherished hope of his
declining years. One wing of the library, with a
suitable inscription, will always be devoted to
this precious contribution of special and two-
fold value. We have also to record our grati-
tude to Ebenezer Herne, Esq., of London, and
his nephew, E. Homan, Esq.,for the gift of ,£3OO
and a large number of rare and valuable books,
which your committee have received through


their ardent friend and helper, the Rev. J. L.
Poore —to whom their obligation is great and
ever increasing, and from whose speedy visit to
England they hope for even richer fruits—both
golden and literary.
During the year, overtures have been made to
the Congregationalists of the neighbouring
Colonies to receive young men, on certain speci-
fied terms and under mutual pledges, for educa-
tion in your institution. Your committee have
to report valuable sympathy and help from cer-
tain gentlemen in Sydney, and they cheiish the
hope that ere long, students from the other
Colonies may be enjoying the advantages of your
institution, in friendly rivalry with our own
students, and that the college may become the
source from whence to every part of Australia,
Tasmania, and New Zealand, faithful ministers
shall go forth, to preach the Gospel of the grace
of God,
Thanks are due to a large number of friends
in the colony for presents of books and liberal
subscriptions. The committee have had the
pleasure also, of accepting an offer from Mrs.
Fletcher and her son, the Rev. W. R. I letcher,
of an annual sum of £lO, which is to be given
in two prizes one to the best University student
from the College in any future year; and the
second, for the best English essay, in open com-
petition, on any subject the committee may
select.
Your committee rejoice that the expenditure
for the past year has been kept below the income,
and that the sura of £5OO has been safely in
vested towards a permanent But,
of course, the arrival of a tutor would imme-
diately render a large augmentation of the sub-
scription-list imperatively necessary, and the
increase of students will necessitate the enlarge ■
ment of the College premises. We appeal, there-
fore, to the liberality of all the friends of the
denomination. Do not allow the College to be
crippled and its improvement to be retarded for
want of funds. The non-arrival of Ministers
from England in the face of such earnest and
repeated appeals—the various openings for minis-
terial labour which are so abundant about us on
every hand—and the services already rendered
to the churches by our students, in a time of
unprecedented ministerial scarcity these, and
many other considerations, confirm and justify
the action we have taken in opening this College.
With the boldness of Christian men, whose
principles and church life teach us self-reliance
and self help, we have shown the way, to the
larger and State-endowed denominations, who
are now panting in our rear. This noble
primacy in effort to secure an educated ministry,
is worthy of our traditions and of our past history.
But we must justify and maintain our rank by
large-hearted liberality. Having laid the foun-
dation, we must show that we are able to finish,
lest all that behold should begin to mock us.
Partial effort will not save us from this. Every
church and every individual in our churches
should lay this matter to heart, and determine
that the college shall be sustained—that all
needed money and sympathy, and prayer, shall
aid the energy and consecration of those upon
whom in succession the management will de-
volve. From some of the churches we have, as
yet, received only very small contributions. We
appeal to the pastors and deacons that this re-
proach may be taken away, and we also ask for
a collection in every church throughout the
coluny on the 23rd August next.
In resigning their trust into your hands, your
committee retire, conscious of the satisfaction
which results from honest endeavour to accom-
plish the duty you have devolved upon them.
They have sought earnestly the welfare of this
important institution. The treasurer’s balance
sheet will inform you of the details, and we be-
lieve will be a pleasing surprise to many, as to
what is possible in the economical working of
the subscription for current expenses. Apart
from the purchase and furnishing of the College
the present cost of weekly maintenance is much
less than the amount paid to students for their
sustentation under the previous arrangement.
And surely there is a value in “ a local habita-
tion and a name”—humble as are its preten-
sions, we feel pleasure and pride in the existence
of our College ! It is not a scheme merely, but
an accomplished and visible fact\ There is too,
a peculiar worth attaching to the mutual help
and friction of friendly rivalry, and common
residence beneath one collegiate roof. Our
students will love and venerate their alma mater
and “ take pleasure in her stones.” From such
a beginning, have arisen in succession the col-
leges of England and America, and even now
(despite much foolish talk about monks and
cloisters) the large majority still adhere, for
weighty and sufficient reasons, to this good old
system, which combines greater comfort with
more efficient management and control.
In conclusion, your committee resign their
trust with feelings of devout gratitude to
Almighty God for the past history and present
condition of the institution. They rejoice in
the safe and comparatively prosperous com-
mencement which has been realised. They
would invoke the Divine blessing upon the pro-
ceedings of this day, and upon those who may
succeed them in this important work. They
look with hope to the future. Here is the living
germ of a power which will leaven these lands,
they believe, with the spirit of free and earnest
godliness. May the Lord of the harvest raise up
and call many of our pious you th to give themselves
to this work, and to go forth from our walls, to be
“good ministers of Jesus Christ”—and so “ the
little one shall become a thousand, and a small
one a strong nation.”
It was then moved hy Rev. J. C. McMichael,
seconded by Dr. Embling, and carried—
“ That the report now read be adopted and
printed for circulation under the direction of the
College Council."


„ Beech worth Church 9 2
6
„ Ditto „ 6 16
6
- 183 14
1
Annual Subscription Fund
... 223
4
0
Furnishing Fund
33
19
0
£2,163
0
4
May
To cash in hand
... £115 12
8
prior to the opening of Con-
gregational College
110 11
0
„ „ for overdraft
16
0
0
Rev. W. R. Lewis, expenses to Bal-
laarat
2
7
0
«
Rev. W. R. Fletcher, expenses from
Sandhurst.,. ...
4
0
0
To postage
10
11
5
„ printing
8 12
6
„ sundries
11
1
8
„ mortgage, cash lent on mort-
gage at 10 per cent
500
0
0
F. W. P. French ... .
. ... Kew, deceased.
Ed. Griffith
. ... Ballaarat.
J. Manby
Oxford-street.
3
W. H. West
Sandhurst.
Students on
Probation.
Ed. Miles
Castlemaine.
G. J. Richmond ... .
. ... Oxford-street.
U. Coombes
Sandhurst.
The financial statement was submitted by the
treasurer, William Bates, Esq,
BALANCE SHEET,
Cash received, on account of Build-
ing and Endowment Fund ...£1722 3
From Kew Church ... £6O 2 2
„ Victoria Parade
Church ... 10 0 0
„ Prahran Church 810 6
„ Sandhurst Church 12 0 0
„ St. Kilda Church 22 7 1
„ Inkerman Road
Church ... 1 13 3
„ Geelong Church 12 9 3
„ Emerald Hill
Church ... 4 6 6
„ Maryborough
Church ... 4 8 2
„ Ballaarat Church 6 0 0
„ Collingwood
Oxford-street
Church ... 11 8 9
„ Castlemaine
Church ... 14 9 5
CashpaidforCongregational College £9OO 0 0
„ „ Improvements in do 152 16 0
„ „to the late Rev. R, Fletcher
and to the Rev. R. Connebee
for the education of students
„ House expenses for nine months 195 8 3
Paid for furniture for College ... 135 19 10
By balance at National Bank ... 115 12 8
£2,163 0 4
Examined and found correct,
John Russell, I . ...
Owen Kemp, j Auditors.
May 9tb, 1863.
Students Fully Admitted,
name. church.
It was moved by the Rev. J. P. Sunderland,
seconded by Owen Kemp, Esq., and carried—
“ That the treasurer’s balance-sheet, as au-
dited and now read, be adopted and printed.”
Moved by the Rev. A. Gosman, seconded by
the Hon. J. p. Fawkner, M.L.C., and carried
“ That the thanks of this meeting are due,
and are hereby presented to the treasurer, W.
Bates, Esq., the Rev. R. Connebee, the secre-
tary, and to the members of the retiring com-
mittee for their valuable services during the past
year.
Moved by the Rev. W. Moss, seconded by R.
Smith, Esq., and carried—
“ That this meeting desires to express its
earnest gratitude to the five Ministers (Messrs.
Connebee, Sunderland, Poore, McMichael and
Fielden), who have so ably discharged the
duties of College tuition, since the opening of
the Institution.”
At this stage of the proceedings the Secretary
submitted to the meeting, a draft of the College
Deed, which had been drawn by Jas. Wisewould,
Esq. He explained, that prior to its execution,
it would be necessary to pass certain formal
resolutions which had been prepared, and which
he would read in succession for the approval of
the meeting. Upon some of them there was
considerable discussion, but at length they were
unanimously adopted in the following terms:—
Moved by the Hon. J. P. Fawkner, M.L.C.,
seconded by S. Haigh, Esq., and carried—
“ That no person shall have the right here-
after to attend and vote at the public meetings
of the College Constituency, who is not a sub-
scriber of, at least, one guinea per annum,”
Moved by the Rev. J. P. Sunderland, seconded
by the Rev. J. C. McMichael, and carried—
“ That the College Council (to consist of
twenty members, besides the treasurer and secre-
tary), shall be elected annually at the public
meeting of the Constituency in the month of
May. That half the members of the Council
must be members of Congregational Churches,
and the other half ministers of the body, whose
status is recognized by the Congregational Union
of Victoria.”
Moved by the Rev. T. H. Jackson, seconded
by Robert Smith, Esq., and carried—
“ That it shall not be lawful hereafter for
any subscriber to introduce any business at the
annual or other general meetings of the Consti-
tuency, unless he shall have given seven days’


previous notice of the same to the secretary in
writing.”
Moved by the Rev. W. S. H. Fielden, seconded
by the Rev. W. Moss, and carried—
“ That this meeting hereby accepts and con-
firms the basis laid down in the minutes of the
the College Committee, held Nov. 18th, 1862,
for the reception into our Institution of Students
from the neighbouring colonies.”
[The subjoined minutes were read and ex-
plained prior to the passing of this resolution:—
I. q hat the Committee are'prepared to educate
and hoard Students sent by the Home Mis-
sionary Society of N. S. W. or of the other
adjacent colonies at a charge of £7O per annum
for each student, exclusive of any fees to be paid
to the University, should the student proceed to
matriculation.
11. The following arrangements will be made
by the Committee respecting the Students :
(1.) That the students sent and paid for by
other colonies shall engage to offer their services
in the Ministry to the Society by which their
educational charges have been met.
(2.) Should their services not be sought for in
the Colony whence they have been sent they
shall he free to accept a call to Ministerial labour
elsewhere.
(3.) This Committee engages itself not to
further the settlement of any student in Victoria
until permission has been given by the Com-
mittee sending him to the College.
(4.) The students so sent will he expected to
return and report themselves to their respective
Committees each long vacation.]
Moved by the Rev. J. P. Sunderland, seconded
by Owen Kemp, Esq., and carried —
“That the following gentlemen are hereby
appointed trustees of the College premises and
property ;—Revs. J. L. Poore, J, C. McMichael,
W. R. Fletcher, M.A., W. S. H. Fielden., T. H,
Jackson, Hon. Geo. Rolfe, and Hon. Geo. Harker;
Messrs. S. Haigh, Bates, E. Langton, F. Sargood,
jun., H. Brooks, and R. Clarke.”
Moved by Dr. Embling, seconded by Rev. E,
Day, and carried —
“ That the Council shall be hereby invested
with all necessary powers to decide all questions
which relate to the execution and provisions of
the College deed; that is to say, legal, doctri-
nal, and general. And that they are hereby em-
powered, and directed, to complete the same,
in conjunction with James Wisewould, Esq.,
and the trustees, who have this day been ap-
pointed.”
The meeting then proceeded to the nomina-
tion and appointment of the officers and Coun-
cil for the ensuing year.
William Bates, Esq., was re-appointed trea
surer; and the Rev. R. Connebee, secretary.
The following gentlemen were elected on the
Council:—Revs. J. Beer, E. Day, W. S. H. Fiel-
den, W. R. Fletcher, M.A., T. H. Jackson, J. C
McMichael, J. Mirams, W. Moss, J. L. Poore, J.
P. Sunderland ; and J. W. Allen, Henry Brooks,
John Browning, Dr. Embling, S. Haigh, O.
Kemp, E. Langton, Hon. George Rolfe, Robert
Smith, and J. Wisewould, Esqs.
During the meeting, the Rev. W. S. H. Fielden
announced, amid loud applause, that the Hon.
Chairman had authorized him to declare that
he was about to found a College Scholarship of
the annual value of £lO for open competition
among the students for the best English Essay,
and a Sermon,
The Rev. A. Gosman closed the proceedings
with prayer.
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
LIST OP CONTRIBUTIONS. —BUILDING AND
ENDOWMENT FUND.
George Harker, Esq ... £2OO 0 0
Ebenezer Herne, Esq., London, per
Rev. J. L. Poore 200 0 0
Ebenezer Homan, Esq., do. do. ... 100 0 0
Hon. George Rolfe ... ... ••• 100 0 0
Do. second donation ... ... 5 0 0
Robert Smith, Esq. 100 0 0
Henry Brooks, Esq. ... ... ... 100 0 0
Do. second donation 10 0 0
F. Sargood, Esq 100 0 0
F. Sargood, Esq., Jun. 100 0 0
James Wisewould, Esq. ... ... 100 0 0
Do. second donation 2 2 0
H. Hopkins, Esq. ... 100 0 0
John Browning, Esq. 100 0 0
William Bates, Esq 100 0 0
Do. second donation 76 6 0
Do. third donation 2 2 0
William Peterson, Esq 100 0 0
Dr. Embling 50 0 0
Mr. J.Hagger 50 0 0
Rev. J. L. Poore 30 0 0
„ R. Connebee 80 0 0
Mr. S. Haigh 30 0 0
„ James Port 30 0 0
Do. second donation 20 0 0
„ Johnson 25 0 0
„ Richard Clarke 25 0 0
W. Hitchcock ... 5 0 0
Collection—Public Meeting, Oxford-
street Church 21 17 0
W. Higgins, Esq 21 0 0
Mr. J. Lee 20 0 0
J. Jackson, Esq 20 0 0
Mr. W, H. Barlow 16 0 0
Rev. J. Beer 10 0 0
Mr. F. Richardson ... 10 0 0
„ J. Masters 10 0 0
F. Haller, Esq 10 0 0
R. A. Smith, Esq 10 0 0
Contributions—Beechworth Church 9 2 6
„ Second 6 16 6
The lata Rev. R. Fletcher 6 13 6
Mr, William Lee 6 12 6
„ T. Luke 5 0 0


Eev. T. Johnson, Sydney ... ... £5 0 0
„ W. Moss 5 0 0
6 0 0
„ James Mirams ...
Mr. William Hick
5 0 0
5 0 0
C. Dukes, Esq 5 0 0
Mr, E. Langton 5 0 0
„J. L. Kenuison ••• 50 0
„ Colin Brown ... ... ••• 50 0
Rev. C. J. T. Price 5 0 0
5 0 0
Mr. T. Walker 6 0 0
William Mills, Esq. & 0 0
Mr. Robson .. 0 0
„ John Russell ... 6 0 0
~ C. Reid ... 5 0 0
Eev. J. Strongman ... ,9 9
Kew Sunday-school Teachers ... 12 12 0
Mr. S. Lewis 9 9 9
„ Maxwell 9 9 9
.. Payne 9 9 9
John Connell, Esq 9 9 9
Mr. C. Kirwood 9 9 9
» T. Judd 2 2 0
» Armstrong o o n
„ McEwen o n n
„ Hassell ,19 9
Small sums collected 9 9
Mr. George Adams 9 9 9
A' * A • iiuwmo •• _ _
Messrs. Slade and Nicholson ... ”99
Mr. B. Hick 9 9 9
„ T. Wilkinson 2 2 0
„ McCann J 9 9
A Friend .99
10 0
Mr. Mathews *• V 9
Christie ... ... ... ... 0 10 0
Collected at St. Kilda Church ... 22 7 1
Do by Mr, Laurence, Inker-
man Road ... ... 1 3
Collected at Geelong Church ... 12 9 3
Do Sandhurst Church ... 12 0 0
Do Oxford-st., Collin gwood 11 8 9
Do Victoria-parade Church 10 0 0
Do Prahran Church ... 8 10 6
Do Emerald Hill Church... 4 6 6
Received from Lectures delivered by
the Hon. J. P. Fawkner 43 15 3
B. Haigh, Esq, London 10 0 0
Thompson, Esq. ... ... ••• 10 0 0
Collected at Maryborough Church... 4 8 2
Mr, Hendy, Geelong 25 0 0
~v O A A
2 0 0
„ John Green 2 0 U
John Fairfax, Esq., Sydney 25 0 0
G. A. Loyd., do. do 9
E. L. Threlkeld,do. do 10 0 0
D. Jones, do. do. ... ... 20 0 0
Miss Cooper, England 21 0 0
Collected at Ballaarat Church ... 6 0 0
Mr. Hutchinson 5 0 0
Captain Walker 100
Mr. Sayce ... ... ... ••• £2 0 0
Collected at Castlemaine Church ... 14 9 5
Miss Devenish, England ... ... 5 0 0
Miss A. Devenish, England 5 0 0
Rev. E. Day (conditionally) ... 75 0 0
Annual Subscriptions
Hon. G. Rolfe £26 0 0
Henry Brooks, Esq 25 0 0
Rev. R. Connebee ... 10 0 0
„ J. L. Poore 10 0 0
„ 'i'. H. Jackson 10 0 0
F. Haller, Esq 10 0 0
J. Wisewould, Esq. ... ... ... 10 0 0
J. Browning, Esq 10 0 0
W. M. Hitchcock, Esq 10 0 0
Eev. J. P. Sunderland 6 0 0
, ’W. C. Robinson 5 0 0
’’ , „ ~ , i k n n
9 J. C. McMichael 5 0 0
W. S. H. Fielden 5 0 0
„A. Gosman ... 6 0 0
Mr. F, Richardson 6 0 0
Clark 6 0 9
W. Mills 6 0 9
F raiser ® 9 9
„ S, Dunn 6 0 0
W. White 6 0 0
Masters 6 ® 9
w B - Rogers 9 9 9
„ J. L. Keunison 5 0 0
. C A A
”, Hughes 9 9 9
D. Robertson 6 0 0
S.Haigh 9 9 9
O. Kemp 4 4 0
Rev. W. Moss 4 0 0
J. Mellor, Esq., England 3 3 0
Mr. B. Hick 3 9 9
„ A. Eastgate 9 9 9
", F.’Flint 2 2 0
. . 00/4
„ John Taylor 2 2 0
Thomas Juke, Jun. ... ••• 2 0 0
„ S. J. Birtchnell... 2 2 0
H. Hughes 2 2 0
” 0 O n a
"„ Bell 2 0 0
„ John Browning, for his Grand-
son, per W. R. Fletcher ... ••• 20 0
„ A. Broadbent 2 0 0
”mg O A A
Messrs. E. and J. Lambton 2 0 0
Mr. J. M. Wallace 10 0
„ Hopkins {99
„ Hopper } 9 9
„ Pickles 1 0 9
” Hall ... ••• ••• 10 0
; ; x
Thomas Judd 1 1 9
99 * .. 1 A A
”, J. Staite 10 0


CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION.
Special attention is directed to the following extracts from the Con-
stitution of the Union :
V. The Funds of the Association shall be provided by contributions from the
Churches, and by individual subscriptions, donations, and bequests. Every
Church shall be required, as a condition of membership, to make at least one
contribution in the course of each year.
XV. Any Church in membership with the Union neglecting for one year to
send a contribution to the funds, after having been reminded by the 1 reasurer of
the omission, shall lose its membership. But if a contribution for the past year, and
also for the current year, shall be transmitted within twelve months after the
omission has been notified to the General Council, upon a statement to that effect
being made by the Treasurer, the Church shall again be received into the Union.
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
The College Council wish especially to request that all the Churches
will arrange for a simultaneous collection on the 23rd Augitst next, in
aid of the College funds. All remittances to be sent to Mr. William
Bates, Uxbridge House, Nicholson Street, Fitzroy.
N.B. —The financial year of the Mission, and also of the College,
closes on 30th April.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, 78, COLLINiS-STREET, MELBOURNE.


