

INDENTURED LABOUR
IN
FIJI.
AN INDEPENDENT ENQUIRY.
FEBREARY 1916.


REPORT
ON
INDENTURED LABOUR IN FIJI.
AN INDEPENDENT ENQUIRY.
FEBRUARY 1916.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.


(Ealftttta.
Printed at the STAR PRINTING WORKS,
30, Shibnarain Das Lane.


TO THE
MEMORY OF
GOPAL KRISHNA GOKHALK
February 19th 1916.


PREFACE.
This Report has been published immediately on our return from Fiji.
It attempts to show, on the one hand, the serious nature of the evils which
exist under the indenture system. On the other hand, it endeavours to explain
what painstaking efforts are now being' made by the Fiji Government to deal
justly by the Indian settlers.
C. F. ANDREWS.
W. W. PEARSON.


INDEX.
PART 1.
REPORT ON INDENTURE IN FIJI.
PART 2.
A PAPER CONCERNING THE CONDITION OF INDIANS IN FIJI.
A POSSIBLE BASIS OF RECONSTRUCTION FOR INDIAN LABOUR IN FIJI,
NOTES.
1. Lack of Freedom under Indenture.
2. Language Difficulties in Fiji.
3. Lack of Knowledge of Indian Customs.
4. Statistics of Crime.
5. The Profits of the C. S. R. Company.
6. Land Settlement Under the Company.
7. The Chaos of Indian Marriage Law in Fiji.
8. Land Troubles with the Fijians.
9. Education in other Crown Colonies.
10. Communal Labour.
11. Direct Steamer Service with Fiji.
12. Lack of Privacy in the Present Coolie “Lines”.
13. Free Contract Labour.
14. Agricultural Wages in India.
15. Fiji as an Indian Colony.
16. Fijians and Indians.
17. The Place of Fiji in the Pacific.


REPORT ON INDIAN
INDENTURED LABOUR IN FIJI.
PART I.


[X. B. —ln the following pages a few facts are recorded which were
witnessed by one of us, not both; hut, for convenience in writing a
joint report, we have ventured to use the pronoun ‘we’ throughout.J


Report
ON
Indentured Labour in Fiji.
When we speak in our present Report of the ‘lndenture System’ we have
specially in mind certain features, which have been common to this form of Indian
labour, ever since it was started in Natal more than half a century ago. These
have given to it the name and character it bears. They may be summed up as
follows :
Recruiting of individuals in India, at the rate of forty women for every
hundred men.
A five years’ term of compulsory, state regulated labour.
The absence of freedom to choose or to change either employment or
employer.
A minimum fixed rate of wages, which tends to remain stationary, even when
the price of food rises.
The payment of immigration charges by the employer.
In Fiji we were often asked whether we had a rooted objection to ‘indenture’
in any form or shape. We were informed that a large number of Englishmen,
all over to world, had gone out under ‘indenture’ to the Colonies. These English-
men had no objection to ‘indenture’. Why should the Indian object to it ?
When the matter was brought up in this form our answer was that the
whole question turned on the freedom, responsibility and intelligence of those
who entered into the agreement. In the case of the European immigrant, there
was a natural presumption that he understood the exact terms of the agreement
before starting, and. that he felt quite clear in his own mind that they were
neither oppressive nor degrading. Indeed, so far were his interests safeguarded
by those in authority, that in South Africa, we found, the contract itself was
not valid until it had been renewed after an interval had been allowed to the
immigrant to examine on the spot all the conditions. Only when he was
perfectly satisfied, after seeing things with his own eyes, was the contract finally
signed. We were told in Australia that no one is allowed to come out to the


Southern States under contract except with the permission of Government. In
Queensland, where European labour is badly needed, the limit that is allowed
for an agricultural contract is a single year.
These facts show clearly with what care and precaution the interests of
the European immigrant are safeguarded and assured. Further more, —and this
is the chief point of all, —the contract is a purely civil one. If the European
finds that the terms of the contract are not being faithfully kept, he has an
immediate remedy at hand in a court of law. He knows the method by which
he can get his agreement cancelled ; and if he can prove that there has been any
unfair advantage taken of his ignorance, he can be quite certain of a patient and
sympathetic hearing from the Magistrate, who is usually a fellow countryman
of his own.
The position may be briefly stated as follows. Contracts for personal service,
w hich are made, with ignorance on the one hand and intelligence on the other ;
or contracts which are brought about by the exploitation of the weak : or
contracts which are engaged in for an excessively long period of years —these
all tend to reproduce servile features. In these cases the new word ‘indenture’
is nearly equivalent to the old word ‘slavery’ writ large. Indeed, the wish to
possess such a form of labour proceeds from the same instinct—the instinct to
endeavour to get the service of a fellow human being on compulsory terms.
This then is the root objection to the present Indian ‘indenture’. It is
neither a free, nor an intelligent contract. It is not what a business man would
call a ‘square deal’. It is also fixed for a dangerously long period of years, and
thus is liable to lead to the abuse of individual liberty.
Other evils, peculiar to the condition of Indian recruitment, and to the
character of the coolie ‘lines’ in Fiji, will come up later, in this report, for exami-
nation. But the objection which has here been urged is valid against any form
of indentured labour, where the contract is made for too long a period, and is
engaged in under unequal conditions.
It will be best to deal first with the length of contract. It has been already
pointed out how strictly limited, in the case of Europeans, the period of contract
is, and with what safeguards it is endorsed. With regard to labour other than
European we found on enquiry in Johannesburg that the Kaffir contracts on
the Rand were usually for one and a half years. The Chinese contract, when
in operation, had been for five years, but for political as well as industrial and
moral causes, that form of labour had been abandoned. We would add that we
did not find in S. Africa a single good word said for the Chinese indenture system.
Its morals were regarded as unspeakably corrupt.


In Natal we found that the Indian indenture system with its low percentage
of women and its five years’ contract was still in force. We saw with our own
eyes its inherent evils and there were very few indeed in the Colony, outside
a small group of Planters, who were ready to uphold it. Since that time it has
been practically abandoned.
In the Malay States, indentured labour was first tried on the five years basis,
but this has now been brought to an end by a joint agreement of the Government
and the Planters, and a much freer and shorter form of contract has been substi-
tuted for it.
We were informed by one who had full knowledge of the labour conditions
in New Guinea, that in the Papuan plantations a yearly engagement had become
the rule of the employers; and this produced more satisfactory results than
a contract for a longer period.
In Hawaii, which is most near in its conditions of life to Fiji, the Americans,
as far as we could gather, have never taken to indentured labour. They secure
permanent employees by high wages and advantageous terms.
In Ceylon, the indenture system has never been in operation. Labour in
large quantities, is engaged on a monthly contract. An altogether different evil,
namely coolie indebtedness, has to be combated with, but the five years’
indenture has never been tried, nor would it be acceptable to the Planters.
It will thus be seen that, in the case of the immigrant labour, a contract is
not uncommon. But, wherever the period of contract has been prolonged, it has
led to a serious curtailment of individual liberty and to bad moral results. On the
other hand, a short contract has not been open to industrial objection, while
at the same time it has tended to preserve freedom.
Indeed, this special form of short contract labour (in return for passage paid)
is likely to become more and more common in future, now that ocean travel
has been made easier and quicker and cheaper. The flow of labour, under contract,
across the ocean is only another form of the migration of labour from a congested
area of population to an uncongested area, or from the villages for town factory
work. One of the most interesting recent developments of such migratory labour
has been the yearly transport of Italians to Argentina for harvesting purposes.
Such a migration would have seemed impossible only a short time ago.
There was scarcely any subject which the Fiji planters were more eager to
discuss with us than the continuance of the present term of five-yearly indenture.
We listened carefully to all they had to say from a business point of view. On
the other side, we stated our own invincible objection to such a long and


dangerous service. Our opinion on that point had been fixed, once for all, long ago
by what we had witnessed in Natal. We were understood, from the very first,
both by the Government and by the Planters to be unmoveable on that issue.
Three grounds were put forward by the Planters in favour of a longer
rather than a shorter contract in the case of Fiji. We felt that each of them
had weight but we felt also that the Planters’ difficulties should be met in
some other way than by the retention of a five years’ indenture.
First, they argued that the cost of the passage out to Fiji was very great.
If, in the future, they were obliged to bring out whole families rather than indi-
viduals, the cost would be greater still for every unit of labour. A family could
hardly cost less, in passage money, than 450 rupees. If the contract were a short
one, this heavy expense would have to be incurred again and again at very
short intervals.
Secondly, the Planters urged that sugar-planting itself was skilled work.
During the first six months, therefore, the labour done by the new worker was
of very little value. Only after a full year, they said, could the workman be
called efficient. So then, if the contract were too short, the labourer would be
taken away, just as he was getting into his work.
Thirdly, they insisted with great reiteration that the work itself was an
apprenticeship. Only those who had thoroughly learnt modern methods of
sugarcane cultivation, by working under a big employer, could hope themselves
in the future to undertake profitable plantation work on their own account. They
pointed out that Fiji was not like India in this respect, but rather like Java.
The best Indian growers of cane, they said, in Fiji had learned their business
during the five years of indenture. If they had had a shorter training they might
never have learnt at all.
Such were the points which were brought to our notice with regard to the
length of contract. We remained convinced in our opinion that a shorter period
of training on much freer and more equitable terms would bring about as good,
if not better, technical results ; while at the same time the moral and social value
of the greater freedom would be, even from the business point of view, very
high indeed.
We would next endeavour to make plain, by illustrations from our own
personal experience, how very widely the present system of Indian indentured
labour differs from the free, equal and intelligent contract entered into by
Europeans.
We shall best accomplish this-purpose by offering examples, which are chosen
as typical out of hundreds of interviews with Indians in Fiji. They expressed to


Us, with the utmost freedom, the circumstances in which they were first led to
come out to Fiji and their experiences on the plantations.
It will be seen from these what an amount of fraud and deception appears
to be at work in the process of recruiting. It will be seen, also, how unscrupulous
exploitation dogs the footsteps of the illiterate coolie from first to last. On every
side his path is beset with pitfalls and very few indeed escape disaster during their
long five years’ indenture.
In giving these examples, which came under our personal observation and
were entered down in our notes on the spot, we have purposely omitted the
coolies’ names. In very many cases their information was given in confidence,
with a request that their names should not be revealed. The peculiar state of fear
that exists among Indians throughout the Islands will be explained later on. It
was a common experience with both of us to have the question asked, “ Are you
the coolie agent sahib ?” Only when that question was satisfactorily settled
would conversation flow freely. Later on during our visit, when the report had
spread among the coolies about our coming, we were known as the “Calcutta-
wale Sahibs” and people would come from long distances to tell us their own story.
From all that we were able to gather from the indentured coolies’ own lips,
and also from the free Indians, it is probably not an exaggeration to state that, in
the case of 80 per cent of those who were indentured in India, some deceit was
practised by the recruiting agent. This man is actually paid so much per head
for his task by the Colonial Emigration authorities at 61 Garden Reach, Calcutta,
or elsewhere. He is given an extra bonus for every woman. The price paid in
the west of the United Provinces seems to be as high as forty-five rupees for
every man and fifty-five rupees for every woman ; in the East of the United
Pi •ovinces and in Madras we were told the fee was lower. But whatever the
price may be is immaterial ; such payments made, at so much per head, for men
and women, recall the worst features of the old slave system, and are quite
indefensible. They offer a premium to a very low class of agent to engage in
acts of cunning and fraud.
We have been ourselves into the recruiting areas of India and have ques-
tioned the villagers about the activities of these agents of the Colonial Emigration
Depots. Allowing for every exaggeration on the part of those who are illiterate
there can be no shadow of doubt that the frauds already practised by recruiting
agents have been immense. We found out another evil, which makes this unscru-
pulous recruiting more dangerous still. The recruiting agents represent them-
selves as subordinate Government officials and bring the name of Government in
to set forward their own plans. The villagers are often too simple to discover
2


this obvious fraud. Those of us who know the dread, in the ordinary villager’s
mind, of the power of the subordinate official,, will not need to be told what an
instrument of tyranny such a false representation may become. It will also be
understood what a prejudice against the Indian Government itself is likely to be
raised. But the evil goes still deeper. A missionary, of long experience in the
villages, whose word could be thoroughly trusted in such a matter, told us that
there was frequent collusion between the recruiting agents and the police, the
latter receiving from the former a commission.
The recruiting agent, becoming a man of power, carries the exercise of his
authority far beyond the limits of recruiting. He becomes not seldom a black-
mailer whom the villagers actually bribe in order to live in peace.
A typical case of this came under our own observation. A villager, named
Fakhira, had his wife and daughter decoyed from him by a recruiting agent, who
offered to return them to him on the payment of a sum of a money. F akhira
had not the sum ready to hand and could not borrow it. The wife and daughter
were missing. He never saw them again.
We had a long conversation with a coolie, who had escaped, after being
fraudulently recruited. He had been given datura. In this case, his mother
had almost lost her reason during his absence. The small village to which
he belonged was in a state of panic-fear. It is now a clearly-indicated fact
that, over large areas of the United Provinces, there has been added to the
other fears of the villager this new dread of the recruiting agent. The villagers
have in some districts actually banded themselves together against their common
enemy, and there have been cases of violent assaults upon the recruiting agent
when he has been found entering a village. Songs in vthe vernacular are now
sung from village to village warning people against the recruiter. The situation
is not altogether unlike the Mormon Scare in England, and the object of the
villagers is the same, namely, the protection of the chastity of their women and
the sanctity of their married life.
It was deeply instructive to find that the actual accounts of the coolies in
Fiji as to the manner of their own recruitment tallied exactly with the stories we
heard from the villages in the Indian recruiting districts. We listened, as it were,
to the same story from both ends, —from the fellow villagers and relations of
the recruited coolies in India and from the recruited coolies themselves in Fiji.
Piecing together the different stories and eliminating exaggerations, it is clear
that the recruiting agent in recent years has begun to fight shy of going direct to the
villages and inducing peple to come to the Depot from their own village homes.
He does not bargain with them there. Nearly every coolie we questioned in


Fiji said he was away from home when he was recruited. In a very large number
of cases the coolie’s own home people knew nothing about his recruitment. Very
possibly many such coolies were escaping from justice, or running away from some
family quarrel at the time. But others were clearly quite simple village people,
involved in no such trouble. They had lost, perhaps, their relations in a crowded
railway station. They were on a pilgrimage and did not know the way. They
were merely going from one village to another, when the recruiting agent came
along and tempted them with his story.
It was noticeable among the women how many were recruited at the pilgrim-
centres. The common narrative was, that the recruiting agent came up, offering
to take the woman to her relations, or to show her some sacred shrine, and then
took her to the depot instead. The evidence given of such practices was far too
circumstantial in detail, and far too frequently given with fresh detail and fresh
names of places, to allow of any doubt concerning its substantial accuracy.
The following is an account of a visit paid to Muttra to gather information
at first hand about up-country coolie recruiting.
We found, at the first depot, that all the coolies had been moved off to
Calcutta. At the second depot, a Mahomedan (who appeared to us a dangerous
person to be entrusted with the charge of Indian women) was manager of the
place. The first coolie, whom we saw, was evidently a prostitute. Four men
were also there, who told us they were ready to emigrate. One man, of very low
caste, was even eager to go. He told us he had been getting only two annas a
day in India. He had no idea where Fiji was and said he thought it was about
two hundred kos from Muttra. The last coolie was a woman, who was going out
again to Fiji. She told us that a man had lived with her in Fiji, but had deserted
her as soon as she landed in India. Now she was all alone. No one had anything
to do with her. She said that in Fiji there was plenty of money, but in India
she could make no money at all. She was in a very wretched condition. Evi-
dently she expected some other man to live with her, if she went out.
In the third depot, news of our coming had preceded us and feverish efforts
had been made to get things straight. There were only two coolies. One did
not appear at first, and when he came forward, he would hardly answer any
question. We told the Manager to leave us alone. Then the coolie began crying
and said he was in great trouble. He had been in the depot for four days and
had not been allowed to go out at all. He did not wish to go away to Fiji.
(When asked previously before the Manager, he had said he was willing). He
implored us to take him away. We called the Manager back and told him this.
He went up to the man and began to threaten him. The coolie at once got


frightened. We told the Manager to speak quietly, and the man then said that
he wished to go away. The Manager told him to fetch his bundle and go.
We then went to see a Gaur Brahman who had gone mad on account of his
wife being taken away by the recruiting agent. The whole neighbourhood
collected, showing their sympathy and pity. The madman was a pathetic sight
to witness.
The news had by this time spread widely that we were in the town, and the
relatives of those who had been taken away flocked round us. A respectable Jat
came up to us. His brother was blind and had an only son, who was taken by
the recruiters. The lad was sixteen years of age. Another boy had been taken
with him, but had been rejected on medical grounds. This second boy told the
blind father his son’s fate. The Jat informed us that he had gone to the Magis-
trate and asked for an order to stop the boy’s embarkation. The Magistrate
asked for a deposit of thirty rupees, which was paid, and a telegram was sent to
Calcutta. An answer had come from the depot that as the boy was going by his
own consent, his embarkation could not be delayed. The Jat thereupon asked
the Magistrate for an order to enter the Calcutta depot. He went to Calcutta,
and, as he described to us his treatment, we could understand the difficulties which
were placed in his way. In the end he was informed that the boy had already
sailed for Fiji. If he wished to get him back, a deposit must be made of 465 rupees.
A Hindu, by caste a Bania, spoke to us concerning his wife. She had been
taken by the recruiters, and he was very bitter against them. We asked him if
he had made any attempt to get her back. He said he had not, for when once
she had been inside the depot she was stained.
Some correspondence was given us concerning a coolie who had been shipped
to British Guiana. The following official letter is of interest
With reference to your endorsement, No. 2047 of the 4th instant,
I have the honour to inform you that a sum of Rs. 531, will be required for the
repatriation etc. of Radha Kishan No. 104, Mutlah 1912. (Details given). It will not
be possible for Radha Kishan to return to India till about August or September 1916.
The father of Badha Kishan was a villager earning four annas a day. He
told us he was going to try to borrow the money, because his son had written to
him in very great distress.
It was clear from the narratives of the women in Fiji that when once they
had crossed the threshold of the depot their terror became too great to allow them
to turn back. The recruiting agent seemed able to stupefy them with fear. He
was then able to coach them in the questions which they had to answer and they
very rarely refused to reply according to his directions when the time came.


With the men folk, the methods of the recruiting agents appear to be some-
what different. Here it is the ordinary villager’s cupidity which is the lever
most frequently used. If he is of the stupid ignorant type, then Fiji is referred
to as a district near to Calcutta where high wages are to be obtained. Incredible
though it may appear, we came across many cases where the indentured coolies
informed us, with every appearance of truth, that they were quite unaware of
their real destination, until they found themselves tossing and sea-sick in the
Bay of Bengal.
If the villager, on the other hand, is of the more intelligent type, then the
full details of the indenture are revealed. But the work is made out to be very
light indeed, and the most glowing prospects are given. Nothing is said about
the penal laws, or the hard conditions of compulsory labour. If. the Fiji conditions
were even normally fair and prosperous and wholesome, then little harm might
be done by mere exaggerations. The advertisements which attract emigrants from
England are often highly coloured. Yet on the whole the English emigrants are
satisfied. But in Fiji the amount of satisfaction we found was very limited indeed.
Here and there we discovered a set of coolies who were happy on the estates.
But this was the exception, not the rule.
The recruiting agent appears not to be content with finding his recruits
among the peasant classes only. He deals with all sorts and conditions of men
and women. Where he finds a Sikh or a Jat, who is ready to step into his
toils, he pictures Fiji as an ideal place for a soldier or a policeman, if only the
thumb mark is placed to the agreement. A whole group of Punjabis was once
recruited in this way, under false pretences. When they found out, on arrival,
how they had been cheated they broke out into open mutiny and held up a whole
district, for the time being, with fire-arms (which they managed somehow to
obtain) and the trouble was not stopped until Government separated them one
from another and distributed them among different coolie ‘lines’.
Sometimes the recruiting agent finds a raw youth fresh from school, with a
smattering of English education, and a boyish desire for adventure. He pictures
to him employment in Fiji, as a teacher, on fabulous rates of pay,—if only the
agreement is signed. We were startled every now and then to find in the coolie
‘lines’ a young lad of high caste and education, whose whole appearance showed
that he had no business at all in such a place. The condition of such lads, when
they arrive and have to be lodged in the same quarter with men of low morals
and unclean habits of life, is pitiable indeed.
There appears to us to be a clear need for an overhauling of the whole
system of recruitment in India, and for a closing of the up-country depots. We
3


have spoken to many of the Emigration Officers and Magistrates, in whose courts
the coolies’ agreements are signed, and not one has expressed himself satisfied
with what is going on. Each one has told us in turn that he had suspicions of
some secret fraudulent dealing, which was very difficult indeed to detect. One
who had the fullest opportunity of seeing the work of recruiting in up-country
districts spoke of it, in our hearing, as ‘dirty work,’ Our own very limited
experience corroborates that statement, and the narratives we heard in Fiji
endorse it. If the indenture system is abolished, and free labour to the Colonies
is allowed to go on, then it is most important that such labour shall only be
recruited under free conditions.
We found, further, on examination, that the agreement, which the coolie
signs before going out, does not truly represent the facts of coolie life in Fiji.
It is a misleading document. Not a word, for instance, is said concerning the
penalties which await the coolie, if, for any reason (which he may regard as valid)
he refuses to work. Another serious omission from the agreement (seeing that
those who sign it are for the most part ignorant and illiterate people) is the failure
to record the fact that food-rates in Fiji differ materially from those in India.
The coolie is told in the agreement, that he will be paid at the minimum rate of
twelve annas a day. But he is not told that the purchasing power of twelve
annas in Fiji is scarcely equal to that of five annas in India. He is not told, also, that
more is required in the way of clothing and other necessaries of life in Fiji than
in India. So that the bare living expenses are nearly three times as high in Fiji
as in India itself. One of the examples which follows will show what hardship
this low rate of wages involves. #
The Indian woman who comes out under indenture has a still more serious
charge to make against the signed agreement. These women are simple ignorant
Indian villagers who have been used to field work. They are told in the
agreement that they will have agricultural work to do in Fiji at the minimum
wage of nine annas per day for a completed task. They naturally picture to
themselves a state of labour in the field such as they have been used to in India.
But when they get to their work in Fiji, they find that all is changed. Those
who have seen the Indian woman working in the fields in India with her little
family playing near her, will realise the change when she is told to leave her
family behind in the coolie lines.’ The provision of regulation ‘fly-proof nurseries’
is no compensation to her for the loss of the privilege of looking after her own
* It is interesting to note that the English coinage of Fiji is given an ‘lndian’ value by the
coolies. A two shilling piece is called a rupee. A one shilling piece is called eight annas. Sixpence
is regularly called four annas. But this does not at all represent the true proportional value. For
eight annas in India would go considerably further than a shilling in Fiji,


children, and living her own natural life in her own natural way. She is not
told, also, in the agreement that she will be compelled, under penal clauses to work
incessantly, day in, day out, with no time to cook her own husband’s meals or
look after her own children. She is never told anything also of the condition of
the coolie dines’ in which she will be compelled to live, without any privacy or
even decency, for five years, with no possibility of change.
All this is hidden from the village woman who enters into the indenture
agreement in India. In these circumstances, as well as others, it cannot be called
a fair contract. For it is made on behalf of one party, the Fiji Government,
who is fully aware of the actual state of affairs as they exist in Fiji, with another,
the ignorant coolie woman, who is imagining entirely different conditions.
The facts which have hitherto been stated, for the most part in general
terms, may be illustrated and made more clear to the reader in India by the
following specific cases. They are a few out of a very large number of instances
which have come under our special notice.
1. A respectable woman, who told us that she had been on a pilgrimage to
Benares and had become confused in the strange crowd and separated from her
relations. A man had seen her crying and had promised to bring her to her
own people. He had taken her instead to the Depot. When she had found out
her true plight, she had been too frightened to resist. Asked why she had
answered the Magistrate’s questions, she said that she was too frightened to do
anything else. Asked whether she was told that she was to go on board ship and
settle across the sea, she said ‘No’.
[Very many circumstantial narratives of this kind were told us. It was noticeable to us how
very large a proportion of the women, whom we questioned, were recruited at the pilgrim centres.]
2. A well educated, delicate lad from a village near Delhi, who spoke
English fluently. He had been promised clerk’s work by the recruiting agent.
He was told nothing about being obliged to live m the coolie lines. When we
met him he was very unhappy. He had saved a little money and wished to buy
himself out, but was not allowed at the time to do so. His employer had been
kind to him and put him on light work, but nothing could remove the depression
he felt at being forced to live as a coolie in the coolie ‘lines’.
3. A Kayastha, who was met at Allahabad by a man wearing a sacfed
thread. The man pretended to be a Brahman, and promised the Kayastha
work as a Teacher in a school at Puri. He was taken instead to the Calcutta
Depot. This man was now out of indenture, and he was doing all he could in
Fiji to help those who were still in the coolie ‘lines.’ He gave us a great deal


of help, and we found his information accurate on the whole. Though educated
in his own vernacular and quite above the ‘coolie’ class in average intelligence
he was very deaf and at times appeared almost stupid. He was thus one who
could have been easily deceived in the first instance. He told us, that he had
actually found out his mistake, when in the Depot, but he had been too fearful
to run away. From all we saw of him, we were convinced that his own narrative
was substantially true.
4. A low caste Hindu, who was brought out under indenture for ‘agricultural
work’ and was set to cut up meat in a butchery. When asked by us how he, a
Hindu, could engage in such work, he replied that he could not help it, as he was
ordered to do it. He seemed much ashamed of himself, and hung down his head
while he answered our questions. His companions in the butchery were
Musalmans,
5. A Kabir Panthi, now out of indenture, who had been originally obliged
to do the same kind of work. He told us that he had continually refused and
had been imprisoned. We looked up his record on the estate and found he had
been given 692 days’ imprisonment while under indenture. When he came to see
us, he had clearly lost his moral character and his record in the Colony, since
he had become a free Indian, was a bad one. He had even been charged with
biting a man’s nose in a sordid quarrel and had been found guilty. But, in spite of
this, we found a simple and true side to his character. It was not altogether
undermined. It is not unlikely that he became a moral wreck through being
compelled to do a work, which was against his instincts and his conscience.
[We found some Madrasis of low caste who actually preferred to do this kind of butcher’s
work. But it is quite clear that the Government of India never contemplated such an occupa-
tion as butchery under the head of ‘agriculture’ in the agreement. We therefore gave our own
personal opinion to the Fiji authorities, that Hindus, however low in caste, should not be set
to do the work of slaughtering animals.]
6, A Brahman boy, aged about 15, who came out in 1915. He had been
deceived by the recruiting agent as to the nature of the work which he would
be required to do. He was told when in India that he would have garden work
given him in Fiji. His hands were quite unhardened, and he was very miserable,
and seemed to be quite a child still in every way. He begged very pitiably
to he allowed to go home to India.
[We found many eases of mere boys being indentured in India and brought out to Fiji.
In one case a child came to us, who was under indenture. He declared that he was only twelve
when he was recruited. He had been out nearly a year, and from his appearance we
should regard it as doubtful, if he could have been more than fourteen when we saw him. It


is surely open to question, whether a boy of such tender age can legally enter into a complicated
agreement which binds him for five years and in most eases settles his whole future. When we
looked at random into the books of the Immigration Department, we found the following
recent cases,
51500. Akkaru Ganges 1 1913 aged 15.
51954, Thaiary Nagadu——-Ganges 1—- —1913 aged 16.
56449. Kuda Baksh-^—Mutlah 1 1915 aged 17.
56296. Bacha Mutlah 1 1915 aged 17.
It should be noted that some of these ages are probably given on the higher side. We
found, for instance, a boy who could hardly be more than 15 entered in Fiji as aged 17. When
we had the Calcutta register examined, we found that he was entered there as 20 years of age.
The Fiji official told us that he had seen how impossible the age of 20 Was for a mere boy, and
had put down the age of 17 in the Fiji register as nearer the mark.
7. An intelligent coolie, labouring in the Mill, told us that he was obliged
to work on twelve hour shifts, and on alternate weeks had to go on night work
from 6p.m.t06 a. m. without extra pay. There is no mention of night work in
the agreement. We found out, still further, that a large amount of highly skilled
labour was being performed by the indentured coolies at an absurdly low rate of
pay. Among the coolies who had been thus engaged in looking after the machinery
of the Mills were some who had been discarded because of some accident. In one
Mill, three men came up to us who had each lost a limb and were crippled for
life. Yet no compensation had been made to them for this life-long injury. We
only heard of one case in the whole Colony, where such compensation had been
given by an employer for serious injury to a coolie ; and in that case the compen-
sation was extracted by Government pressure. Thus the mill-owners so used their
labour under the cover of the indenture system, that they obtained skilled work
from the more intelligent of the coolies at a rate of a quarter the market value,
and, when these coolies met with an accident in the performance of their duty,
refused to pay any compensation whatever except under pressure.
8. A Madrasi ; came out in 1913 on Sutlej IT aged 18. Laughed as he
narrated to us how he had been deceived by the recruiting agent. Described to us
his appearance before the Magistrate in India and how he hurried through the
performance of question and answer. His parents did not know anything about
where he had gone, till he wrote from Fiji; because he thought he was only going
to get employment a short way from home and then to return.
[A very large number of coolies told us that their relations knew nothing of their where-
abouts. Some told us they had never sent any letter home out of shame. Others told us
that there was great difficulty in getting letters written and posted. Many again informed us
that the}’ had never heard from home though they had written again and again. This was not
4


unlikely; because when we went into a central post office in the interior of the main island and
mentioned a coolie’s name (whose widow-mother had written to us on our arrival in Fiji asking
for news of her son), we found that a letter from the mother, properly addressed, had been
waiting for three months undelivered. The postal arrangements are very bad in the Colony out-
side Suva, the Capital. There must be an incalculable amount of misery amongst the relatives
left behind in India, owing to the bad postal arrangements in Fiji and to the evils of fraudulent
recruiting in India itself.]
9. A respectable married man who came out with his wife and two children
finding the struggle for existence very hard in India and hoping to get on better
in Fiji. But he found by experience that living was so expensive in the Colony,
that it was even more difficult than in India to keep his family and himself
supplied with proper food and clothing. When his wife was nursing her child
(she was the only woman with children in the coolie lines’) they were nearly
starving. The average cost of food alone for one person in Fiji is not less than
3 rupees per week, and at that time he was earning 4 rupees, 2 annas per week.
This man was very anxious to return home to Fyzabad in the United Provinces,
where he had been earning six annas a day. He told us that he could manage
to keep his wife and children better there than in Fiji.
[Even in this war-time, with higher prices for every commodity in Fiji, there has been no
substantive advance made in the coolies’ wages. Some employers have done a little to help
out the earnings of the indentured coolies by issuing tickets which can purchase rice and sharps
at pre-war rates. We were told by one employer that purchase by means of such “tickets” saved
the coolie six annas in every three rupees. But the “ticket” process is very cumbrous ; and very few
coolies took advantage of it. When we asked the General Manager of the C. S. R. Co., why the
company did not give the coolie an advance in actual wages, he replied that when wages once
rise, they have a tendency to keep up and not come down again. The company, therefore, had
devised the “ ticket” system. It was obvious to us, from this, that as far as wages are con-
cerned, the indenture system places the coolie completely at the mercy of his employers.]
10. Two young Telugus were interviewed by us in the coolie lines’. They
came out in 1915 What attracted them was the promise of twelve annas a day.
They were earning four annas a day in India. They told us that they were no
better off in their cost of living in Fiji. In hours of work, their condition was
far worse than in India. In Madras their days’ work was always over by noon ;
in Fiji they had to go on up to five or six o’clock in order to complete their task.
In Fiji they were very unhappy because no one in the coolie lines’ could speak
their own language, and they often could not understand the Manager’s or the
Sardar’s orders. They were very anxious to get back to India.
The hours of labour mentioned were borne out by what we saw elsewhere.
Late one evening a boy came over to the house where we were staying, about


3 miles away from some coolie ‘lines’, which we had visited 5. 30 p. m. that same
afternoon. When we asked him next morning why we did not see him in the
‘lines’ he said that he had been out in the field when we came, because he had
not completed his task. We were away when he came to see us that evening
but the Missionary with whom we were staying told us that he arrived in a very
exhausted condition. It was one of those cases of boy labour which troubled
us so much in Fiji. The Planter was in every way a good man, but this case
had escaped his notice. We asked for the boy to be put on three quarter task
with full pay and this was done.
11. A Madrasi of very low caste and low features came to us for protection
against a Sardar who had locked him up (so he told us) and beaten and starved
him. The Inspector, to whom we brought the case, was inclined to disbelieve
the coolie, because he had already obtained convictions against two Sardars quite
recently in the same coolie ‘lines’ for doing the samfe thing. We suggested that
a bad tradition having been once established in the coolie ‘ lines ’ it would be
difficult to get rid of it. At our express wish, therefore, the Inspector took up
the case ; and it resulted in the man’s story being found true. One Sardar
was convicted in the Magistrate’s court, another Sardar was acquitted on a
technical point of law, but an appeal to the Supreme Court has been lodged by
the Inspector. The English overseer through whose neglect the cruelties were
allowed to go on has been dismissed, owing to the firm action of the Agent
General of Immigration. The case was a striking testimony to us of the genuine
desire on the part of the Government authorities to obtain justice for the ‘coolie’.
At the same time it also revealed to us the extraordinary difficulty under which
coolies labour whose mother tongue is not Hindustani. It was, literally, a
matter of hours before we could get from this coolie the plain facts of his
story ; and the feeling that he was not understood made him nervous and
excited, and this gave us a false impression. The Inspector was in the same
difficulty as ourselves.
[The recent, immigration of Madrasi coolies, who speak Telugu, Tamil, Malayalam and
Canarese, has led to the greatest possible confusion. In a trial for murder before the Chief
Justice, held while we were in Suva, the accused prisoner only knew Malayalam. The Court
Interpreter only knew Tamil and English. A third party, therefore, had to be called in who
knew Malayalam. The Chief Justice was, in this way, twice removed by language barriers
from the prisoner at the bar. Yet, in these faulty circumstances, he was obliged to try the
Madrasi for his life, and actually to condemn him to death ]
12 A Hindustani girl of good caste and respectable Hindu parentage had
been decoyed from her father’s home by a neighbouring woman in her village.


The pretext was that a telegram had been received from her husband, who was
ill and wanted her to go to him at once. Her father, not being on good terms
with her husband’s father, had separated her from her husband. She went,
therefore, with this woman without letting her father know. Too late she found
out how she had been deceived. On board ship her honour was assailed and only
with the greatest possible difficulty had she been able to retain it. Now her
only hope is that her father and mother will think that she is dead, because she
feels that she has brought disgrace to her family. Though she has been nearly
two years in Fiji she has not yet recovered from her first despair. She is afraid
even to let her parents know where she is, because of the sense of degradation
at her present lot in life.
13. A Rajput who came out on the distinct understanding that he would
be able to join a regiment if he went to Fiji. He spoke under great excitement
when we saw him, as he was in prison and condemned to death. His words
were not easy to follow at one point, but we gathered that when signing, a Sahib
had assured him that this would be his lot. He said with great emphasis that
a Sahib could not tell a lie. He and his brother had been soldiers in India in
Rajputana. They were a military family. Then his brother inherited some land
and left his regiment and became a Zamindar. He joined his brother for a time,
but was hankering to get back to his old military life when the recruiting agent
came and deceived him. When he arrived in Fiji, he was told that he would
have to enter the coolie dines’ and serve with the sweepers-—as he expressed it.
In such compulsory degradation, as he thought it, his life went utterly to pieces.
He told us that the insults he received in the coolie ‘lines’ had been unbearable.
“They pulled my moustache” he said, and suited the action to the word. His
offence had been an act of murder in a quarrel with a Muhammadan over an
abandoned woman. The woman had slapped the Rajput’s face and he had stabbed
her. In spite* of his crime, there was a great nobility in his bearing when we
saw him. He only broke down, when one of us asked him if he would like his
parents to be visited and told about him ; or if he would wish to send them any
message. We were both more deeply affected by his whole story, and by the
fortitude with which he spoke to us, than it is possible to express in words. He
was condemned to be hanged, but owing to the clemency of the Governor the
sentence was commuted to penal servitude. We were very anxious about
this Rajput’s fate, when we left the Islands. The Governor had not yet
consulted his Executive Council. But he was good enough to cable to us,
on his own initiative, when our ship reached New Zealand, the news of the
reprieve.


In connexion with this case an extract may be given from a petition very
fully signed by Indians in Fiji and endorsed by many Europeans.
Respectfully showeth :
That under the existing system of Indian labour immigration there is a great disproportion
between the number of males and females.
That this disproportion is mostly responsible for the abnormal number of murders and
kindred crimes among Indians.
That the majority of those found guilty of such crimes are otherwise quiet and law-abiding j
and the murders, for which they are condemned to death, are not due to any murderous instinct
in them, but really to sexual jealousy.
That the proportion of crimes relative to the same class of people in India is, by far, much
lower than in this Colony.
That in the Colony of Mauritius, for over five years past, there has not been a single trial
of murder by Indians, who, as a mass, belong to the same class as those in Fiji.
That the death sentence does not, as a matter of fact, seem to deter Indians from crime in
this Colony, since the whole cause of the trouble here is sexual jealousy....
This petition was very favourably reported in the Fiji newspapers, and
leading Europeans in the Islands very warmly took up the matter of abolishing
the death sentence in these murder cases. Many Planters informed us that it
was invariably the finest and best Indian coolies who committed these
murders, never the worst. This was, to us, very striking news : its significance
will be seen, when the criminal statistics are examined later on in the
Report.
14. A Muhammadan Munshi, a cultured man and very intelligent. He
had been brought out under the promise that he would be given work in a
madrasa. He had been appointed Sardar in the coolie Tines’ and shewed us his
notes which he had kept. He told us that the custom was general of a com-
mission being paid to the Sardar by each coolie. Otherwise the Sardar was able
to bring petty tyranny to bear on the coolie who did not pay. A much worse
information, which he gave, was that the Sardars arranged, according to payment,
the location of women with certain favoured men. We had further accounts
of this at other centres, and from what we saw with our own eyes, within the
Tines,’ concerning the relation of the Sardar to the coolies, it seemed to us not
improbable. This Munshi had married by Muhammadan rites a wife, while still
living in the coolie lines. But this wife would not, in the ordinary course of
5


events, be set free, until two years after his own indenture had expired. We did
our best to get her ‘commuted,’ as the situation appeared to us highly
and the Munshi was a very respectable man.
15. A Punjabi, who was a thorough gentleman in his general bearing. He
had served for a considerable time in a Punjabi Regiment. He had been
quartered at Delhi and gave us the names of his English officers and spoke of his
Colonel with great warmth and affection. He had been brought out under the
promise of regimental service abroad. The effect of military discipline in the
past was noticeable. He had kept his respectability and neatness and good
manners in the midst of the coolie Tines’. He did not complain to us, but took
it as his fate.
16. A young Madrasi Christian who had kept his good character. He
spoke a little English and was fairly educated. This young lad was compelled by
the Law of Indenture to live in the midst of grossly immoral surroundings for
five years. There was a missionary near to these coolie Tines’ who wished to
buy him out and employ him as a Catechist and Teacher. While we were there
he wa§ able to do so, and the boy is now free. He told us he had been recruited
under entirely false information concerning the life to which he was coming out.
17. A young highly educated Indian, who could write and speak English
well. He was soon recognised as unfit for agriculture, and was given important
clerical work under Government. He was, however, kept strictly under inden-
ture, and paid a lower salary than he would be entitled to, as a free Indian.
Recently he applied for a rise in salary and asked also to be allowed to commute
his indenture ; for he had been able to save up enough money for that purpose.
The increase of salary was refused. He was further warned that, unless he gave
satisfaction to Government, not only would his request for commutation be
disallowed, but he might be sent back to the plantations under the Law of
Indenture.
The fact that a responsible and well-disposed Government, whose actions
were on the whole kindly and considerate (as this Report will show), could offer
such a threat to a highly educated man, struck us very much indeed. It seemed
to bear out our contention, that a five years’ indenture with penal clauses attached
is a bondage.
These examples may be sufficient to illustrate the fact that recruiting, as at
present carried on in India, is frequently unscrupulous and that the indenture
itself is neither a free nor an intelligent contract. So strongly did the facts about
fraudulent recruiting come home to us that we felt the necessity to cable direct


without delay to India, urging- that such harmful practices should be stopped.
We thought that this could only be accomplished by strong Indian public opinion
expressing itself in vigorous action.
We were often asked, in Fiji, to explain how it was possible for the
Indian coolies to pass through the examination of the Magistrate and Doctor and
Emigration Agent in India, without ever coming fully to understand, what the
exact conditions of labour in Fiji were. We have already pointed out the mis-
leading character of the Government agreement itself; how it does not represent
the true facts of life in Fiji. It is not unlikely that the Doctor and Magistrate in
India are more ignorant of the whole truth than those who drew up that agree-
ment. But, beyond this, it is also probable, that, in many cases, their official
work is perfunctorily undertaken. How, otherwise, should we find a mere child
(who could hardly have been more than 14 or 15) registered as 20 years of age ?
How, could educated high-caste boys, whose very hands would show that they
were unused to hard field labour, be sent out to work at the suger cane ? We
cannot avoid this inference from the actual cases that have been brought to our
notice in Fiji. A conclusion still more serious, was this, that, in addition to
collusion with the Police, there was collusion with the subordinate officials of the
larger central Depots, in order to keep the hesitating , coolies in a state of fear
right up to the end. The stories about these subordinate officials, and their
treatment of the coolies in the Depot, were too circumstantial to leave much
doubt in our own minds about the matter. Free Indians who had no reason for
telling us anything but the truth, were equally clear on this point with those
who were still under indenture. Even if the evidence of this corrupt practice
were not conclusive, yet it made us feel strongly the imperative need of
opening the Depots much more freely than at present to the Indian public.
We would also urge that, if recruiting still continues, a reference should be
made to the village and family of each person, who is taken into the Depot,
and that no one, under the age of twenty, should be recruited except as a
member of a family.
There have been lamentable and tragic cases of Indians, both men and
women, who have thrown themselves into the Hughli, in order to escape
from the emigrant ships, and also of actual suicides, occurring on the high
seas. It is difficult to give details of these, because ‘deaths’ are not separated
from ‘suicides’ and ‘desertions’ on the ships’ records. But we* heard the account
of one voyage in the year 1912 from an eye witness, who could be trusted. He
stated to us that one coolie had jumped overboard into the Hughli, and one
woman had committed suicide at sea. We find in the Indian Immigration


Report 1912, in a paragraph referring to the voyage of Ganges I, the record that
“Two male immigrants from Madras, missing at different dates, were supposed to
have been lost overboard.” This may possibly be the voyage referred to, though
the statements do not exactly tally.
We found out, in Fiji, another side of the coolie’s difficulties, when he is
first brought to the Depot as a recruit. There is nearly always present among
this class of Indian villagers (who rarely, if ever, in their lives come face to
face with Englishmen) a very potent and peculiar fear of the Sahib. “Why did
you not ask the Sahib to release you ?” was the question, which we very often
used to put to individual coolies, who had told us about some pitiable fraud of
the recruiting agent, practised upon them. The answer invariably came, ‘On
account of fear.’ In one case, a woman told us, how the recruiting agent had
terrified her about the Magistrate, assuring her, that if she did not answer the
Magistrate’s questions in a certain way, which he specified, the Sahib would put
her into prison. We have discovered that a great fear comes over the coolies
in the strange surroundings of the Depot, and they look with dread on the
functions and powers of the Sahib, Their one bewildered, dominant idea seems
to be, that they should try to please the Sahib at all costs. Sadly enough they
have little idea when they answer, in the way the recruiting agent has instructed
them, the Sahib’s questions, that they are throwing away their last chance of
release.
One further important point needs to be mentioned in order to make the
picture complete. Besides the growth, when in the Depot, of all this fear, sus-
picion and alarm, there is also a sense of hopelessness, like that of an animal who
has been caught in a trap and has given up the useless struggle to escape.
Again and again, the indentured coolies explained to us this feeling, and there
was a ring of truth about their utterance. It was their ‘fate’ ; so they spoke
of it to us ; and, in that one word ‘fate’ all the despair and misery of the situa-
tion seemed to be summed up. Those among them, who were respectable
women, had the overwhelming dread upon them, that they would never again
be taken back into their homes. Indeed, the recruiting agent appeared to know
only too well, that when once he had kept such a woman absent from her hus-
band, even for a single night, the rest of his work would be comparatively easy.
The woman would feel instinctively that her fate was sealed, and would give up
any further efforts to get free.
We found one strangely inaccurate idea current among the Planters in
Fiji, namely, that a large proportion of those who have already been out once
under indenture, return a second time. This erroneous statement was presented


to us again and again as the basis of an argument. It was said that it would be
quite impossible for the coolies in the various depots to remain unaware of the
conditions of indentured labour in Fiji, (even though these were not stated clearly
in the agreement) because so many were continually returning under indenture :
and such a class of men would not be likely to resist the temptation of telling
all they knew to the others. Also, a second argument was used with us, that
the indenture system could not be so black as we painted it, because, in that
case, so many coolies would not be likely to return under a new indenture.
It will be well to examine these arguments in the light of facts. The figures
are available for the years 1912, 1913 and 1914.
In 1912, there were 3,402 Indian immigrants landed in Fiji, of whom 5 men,
5 women and 4 children had previously served, or resided, in Fiji, i.e. 10 adults
out of a total of 3,402,
In 1913, there were 3,289 Indian immigrants who landed in Fiji, of whom
8 men, 2 women and 5 children had previously served, or resided, in Fiji, i.e.
10 adults out af a total of 3, 289.
In 1914, there were 1,572 Indian immigrants who landed in Fiji, of whom
19 men, 9 women and 4 children had previously served, or resided, in Fiji, i.e.
28 adults out of a total of 1,572.
Taking the year 1912, as a test of the worth of the first argument (viz : that
all the coolies in the various depots would be told the exact labour conditions in
Fiji by returning immigrants) it will be seen how very unlikely it would be
that five men (some of whom might have decided to go back at the last moment
before the ship sailed) could have communicated detailed information about
indentured labour in Fiji to 3,402 persons scattered over the depots of North
India and Madras Presidency.
Considering the second argument, namely, that the conditions of indentured
labour are so popular with those who have once experienced it, that large
numbers go out a second time, the figures seem to prove the very opposite.
For although the Indian coolies find by bitter experience, that they are
outcaste and homeless on their return to India, they scarcely ever decide to
go back again to Fiji. In the three years for which statistics are available only
32 men out of 8,261 immigrants made up their minds to return under indenture.
We met one such, a Natal coolie, who had come out as an indentured
immigrant to Fiji. He told us that he had first gone back from Natal to his
home in Madras, but had been outcasted. He wished to marry, and to settle
down in his village, but no one would receive him or marry him because he
6


had broken caste. He spent what little money he had brought back from
Natal in trying to get back into caste, but all in vain. When all his money
was spent, he came across a recruiting agent from Fiji, and in despair decided
to go out again under indenture.
In the light of such an undoubtedly true narrative as this, it will be
seen how little truth there is in the assumption, that all those, who come
back to Fiji under indenture, do so because they are satisfied with the indenture
system. This Natal coolie did not sign on again because he liked indentured
labour, but because he had given up hope of being ever received back into his
community in India. Among the almost infinitesimal proportion who do actually
re-indenture in India, there must be some at least who have had that Natal
coolie’s experience.
As we have already stated, therefore, the facts, when examined, go against
the very arguments which they are used to support. Tljey tell the other way.
And the assumptions are fallacious.
As, in a measure, a confirmation of this conclusion, that the indenture
system is almost universally disliked by the coolies themselves, one of us, while
talking with the overseer of a large estate in Fiji mentioned the word 'commuta-
tion’, suggesting that this should be always permitted (t. e. that coolies should
be allowed to commute their time of service by payment of a sum of money).
The overseer said significantly, “Why I The coolies in these lines would all com-
mute tomorrow, if only they had the chance 1”
There were many evidences in Fiji to show, that recruiting in North India
had become more and more unscrupulous in recent years. The number of
mere lads that were now being sent out was significant. Women, also, had
apparently been more difficult than ever to obtain, and the number of women
of abandoned character seemed to be on the increase. It was noticeable, also,
that the proportion of Madrasis had grown in comparison with Hindustanis,
The reason of this has been clearly the rise of wages in North India. While
the minimum wage of the indentured coolie in Fiji has remained stationary for
thirty-two years the wages of unskilled labour in the north of India have gone
up, sometimes as much as 200 per cent. It is becoming more and more unlikely
that the Indian peasant will go, of his own accord, thousands of miles across
the sea, to obtain a wage distinctly less, in actual value, than that which he
can get near at hand in his own motherland.
Why for instance, should an able-bodied villager, from Gurgaon or Rohtak, go
out across the seas to Fiji, in order to get a mere four rupees per week in wages.


when he could get more money by levelling the soil at New Delhi, with wheat selling
there at less than half the Fiji price. Clearly the fraud and lying must be very
deep indeed, which can induce people to go out to Fiji, at a time when labour is
so needed and wages are so high. Yet we found coolies who had been taken from
the Delhi district. Their story was that they had been deceived by false
prospects. Almost the same figures and rates might be quoted for the price
of hired labour in Behar. Yet we found men and women in Fiji wdio had been
recently recruited from districts such as these. In each case which we enquired
into, gross deception appeared to have been practised. The coolies complained,
that they had not at all understood the kind of work which would be required
of them, nor the price of food and clothing in Fiji, nor the penal clauses
of indenture.
In South India there seems to be less evidence of fraudulent recruiting than
in the North. Wages are much lower, and recruiter’s work may be easier on that
account. But it must be remembered also that we could only converse easily
with those Madrasis who had picked up a little knowledge of Hindustani ; and
we had practically no opportunity of hearing from the lips of Madrasi women their
own account of how they were recruited. It should be added that the introduction
of Madrasis into Fiji has been accompanied by a distinct rise in the rates of
suicide and violent crime. This has led to the opinion, now widely held among
the Planters in Fiji, that Madrasis are more prone to suicide and crimes of
emotional violence than Hindustanis. We pointed out again and again, that this
was not in accordance with the facts ; because the suicide rate in the Madras
Presidency was actually lower than that of the United Provinces and Behar. But
the whole question of the suicide rate must be left over for the present. It will
come up later in dealing with the proportion of the sexes.
Perhaps the most disconcerting effect of unscrupulous recruiting, in Fiji, is
the distrust of Government which it has engendered among the indentured and
free Indians alike. Government is regarded as having countenanced the deception
of the recruiter and, in consequence, State officials are both feared and suspected.
It is painful to find that the authorities are not looked upon by the Indians as
their friends. Even the Agent General of Immigration, whose duty it is to
protect the interests of indentured Indians, is not exempt from this distrust. This
is all the more discouraging, because the Agent himself and his staff have every
desire to do the Indians justice. Perhaps the most significant fact of all is, that the
Indians who are on the staff, although full of sympathy towards their fellow coun-
trymen, are regarded- with something of the same distrust. They felt keenly the
difficulty of this suspicious attitude, and spoke to us about it.


This distrust of Government has evidently started from the coolie dines.’
But it has not by any means stopped there. It has continued to spread among 1
the free Indians, even though there may be little occasion for it. The distrust
is kept out of sight, or covered by outward complaisance, because the free Indian
cannot get rid of his servile tradition quickly, and is suspicious and afraid. The
servile feeling, engendered in the coolie dines’ remains deep down in the heart,
and it is a menace to successful administration.
To illustrate this point,—we found invariably that whenever we went out
with the Immigration officers, we could never get from the coolies any frank and
open statements. It is impossible to describe in words their suspicious attitude, —
their sullen looks, their muttered whisperings. And then, on the other hand,
we could see their changed faces, when they were positively certain, at last, that
we had nothing to do with Government at all.
One of us had occasion to visit a free settlement of free Indians, who were
living on their own land. The visit was made in company with an immigration
officer, who had shown his sympathy with these same Indians on more than
one occasion. Yet the whole visit was a failure, simply because of his presence.
The free Indians remained silent and uncommunicative. Very early next
morning, however, they sent a deputation, privately, to ask for another visit, —
only the Government official should not be present. In that case they promised
to talk freely.
Not only in the country areas, but also in Suva, the Capital, this suspicion
lies very deep. It has already done untold injury to the contentment of the
colony, and it will *do far more unless it is speedily arrested.
The more carefully the whole question of recruitment is considered, the
more clear it becomes, that to send out people of the coolie class from India as
individuals, instead of in families, is wrong in principle. For they have never been
accustomed to live as individuals. They have been used to the communal life.
Women in India are all married at a very early age, and they are bound up with
their families and their homes. Men also, in India, are usually married early and
their life is bound up with their community. To recruit a man here and a woman
there, and to send them out to Fiji, away from all their communal and family
ties, is certain to lead to misery in India and also to immorality in Fiji. We
found pitiable cases of men, who had been living with one woman after another
in Fiji, while their own truly married wives and their legitimate children were
deserted in India. We found equally pitiable cases of Hindu and Muhammadan
wives reduced to leading a life of shame, while their true husbands were still


living in India. These cases were all the more pitiable because the poor, ignorant
coolies had apparently ceased to feel the moral degradation of it all.
The conclusion we reached on the whole subject was that men and women
from India should either be recruited by families, or not at all.
We obtained in Fiji a considerable body of evidence with regard to
conditions of life on board the large emigrant vessels, which carry the indentured
coolies. After discounting a great deal, as probably due to exaggeration, the
strong impression was still left in our minds, that little care is taken of the
privacy of the women, and of the manner of cooking the emigrants’ food. We
ourselves saw something of these conditions on our way to and from South
Africa, and we could understand what the coolies in Fiji told us. Many said
that they had been obliged during the voyage out to give up their old Hindu
habit of taking only vegetable food. Some who regarded it as a sin to take
animal food, went through tortures of fear ; for even if meat were not actually
present in the food, they were afraid that animal fat might have been used
while cooking it. The strict Hindu suffered accordingly. We were told in Fiji
that a very large percentage of Hindus began to abandon their vegetarian habits
from the time of the voyage out. It was a strange sight for us to see a butcher’s
shop in Suva, where beef as well as mutton was being sold, crowded with Hindus
waiting eagerly to obtain their purchases of meat.
Even more serious, on board ship, as far as we could gather on enquiry,
was the little care taken of the modesty of Indian women. Abandoned women
were mixed up in the same quarters with those who were respectable. Tempta-
tion to evil was ever present. We had facts given to us on this point which
were the plain records of eyewitnesses themselves, and not likely to be untrue.
Lastly, the number of deaths on board, among those who had quite
recently been twice passed by the Doctor as medically sound, tells its own
story. We were informed by trustworthy people in Fiji, who had themselves
made the voyage out as free Indians, that the vice and misery on board the
emigrant vessels were deplorable. The following are the statistics for the years
1912 to 1914 with regard to the deaths on the voyage out and in the Depot
on arrival.
Out of 3,428 emigrants embarked in 1912, 27 “deaths, desertions or missing”
occurred on the voyage ; 22 deaths (20 of which were children) occurred in the
7


Depot at Suva, and 9 unallotted immigrants died in the Colonial Hospital; a
total of 58, or one immigrant in 60.
Out of 3,306 immigrants embarked in 1913, 21 “deaths, desertions or missing”
occurred on the voyage. Eleven deaths (six of which were children) occurred
in the Depot at Suva, and 15 unallotted immigrants died in the Colonial
Hospital; a total of 47, or one in 70.
Out of 1,572 immigrants embarked in 1914, six “deaths, desertions or
missing” occurred on the voyage. Three deaths (all children) occurred in the
Depot, and two unallotted immigrants died in the Colonial Hospital ; a total
of 11, or one in 143.
One of the persistent features, which has marked the indentured system
from the beginning, has been the low proportion of adult women to adult men.
There have been financial reasons to account for this. For although the cost
of the voyage out is the same for a woman as for a man, the amount of work
which a woman can do is much less than that of a man. Where, therefore, cheap
labour is the first concern, it is inevitable that the employer should aim at
getting the largest possible number of men.
Thus the low proportion of indentured women is not something accidental,
which can be abandoned without modifying the system. Father, it is an integral
factor in the system itself, which, apart from this paucity of women, could not
be run at the high profits required by the employers. The moment that we
suggested to the planters in Fiji such reforms as would help to make a decent
family life possible among the coolies, we were met on all sides with the word
‘impossible.’ The expense, they declared, would be prohibitive.
The Indian Government has been blamed for allowing such a low proportion,
as that of forty adult women to every hundred men, to continue for so long
unaltered. But it should be remembered to Government’s credit, that it, and it
alone, has prevented the proportion from falling much lower still. If the employ-
ers as a body, had had their own way in the past there can be little doubt that
they would have brought the rate down long ago to twenty-five per cent, or even
less. Even today, the temptation is a pressing one, to pass out the emigrant
ships with something slightly less than the regulation number of women.
This introduces another important consideration, which shows still more
clearly how the whole Indian indenture system in its practical working hangs


together. With the method invariably adopted hitherto of recruiting individuals,
rather than whole families, it has been found exceedingly difficult to obtain
in India even as many as forty women for each hundred men, without drawing
largely on the prostitute class. Out on the plantations, we have been told,
it is this very class which is actually needed in order to make the indenture
system work. It is utterly repugnant to us to be obliged to enter into details
on such a subject, and we shall do so as sparingly as possible. But it will
easily be seen, that when the stronger men on an estate have taken to their
own possession an equal number of women, the remainder of the adult women
find themselves still more unequally matched in number. The disproportion
rises as high as one woman to four, or even to five, men. In these circum-
stances, the remark of one employer can be understood without comment. —
When one of us spoke to him about recruiting no more abandoned women, he
demurred and answered “Why! The system couldn’t go on without them.”
We heard of one estate where the Overseer made the regular practice, in order
to keep peace in the dines,’ of allotting so many men to each single woman.
This amounted to regulated prostitution.
We had both of us already witnessed in Natal the moral evils, in the coolie
quarters, connected with this disproportion of men to women. W e had received,
also, invaluable help from Mr. Gandhi, who was the first to make clear to us
the far reaching effects of these evils upon the free Indians. But what we
have now seen with our own eyes in Fiji, is far worse than anything we had
ever seen before. The moral evil in Fiji appears to have gone much deeper.
We cannot forget our first sight of the coolie ‘lines’ in Fiji. The looks on
the faces of the men and the women alike told one unmistakable tale of vice.
The sight of young children in such surroundings was unbearable to us. And,
again and again, as we went from one plantation to another, we saw the same
unmistakable look. It told us of a moral disease which was eating into the heart
and life of the people.
What else could be expected ? Indian villagers, who have lived the commu-
nal life of their own Indian homes, are first taken away, one from here, and one
from there, by the recruiting agents. They are completely separated from all
their old ties and associations. Then they are crowded together on board the
great emigrant ships, where decency can hardly be preserved, and every tempta-
tion is rife. Lastly in Fiji itself, they are crowded again into the coolie
Tines,’ which are more like stables than human dwellings ; and there they
are forced by law to remain, away from every restraint of custom or religion,


during- a period of five years. What else could be expected ? But that little
children should be born and brought up in this,^
Though we were no novices to conditions such as these, yet what we met
with in Fiji was far worse than we had ever anticipated. There seemed to be
some new and undefinable factor added, —-some strange unaccountable epidemic
of vice. We felt that vice was spreading, like a blight, o ver the Indian popu-
lation of Fiji. We began to fear that it would spread still further to the
indigenous Fijian population ; and we found that our fears were already shared
by others.
The demand was made quite insistently by the Planters that we should
explain to them the reason for the suicidal tendency among the indentured
coolies in Fiji. The long, never-ending roll of these suicides had shocked the
Government; and the Planters had felt it deeply also.
We were able to assure the Government on one point. As far as we could
see, there was much less actual ill-treatment of indentured coolies than we had
come across in Natal. The only reports that reached us which approached the
Natal plantations in this respect, were those that came from Navua.
Furthermore, we were both of us quite clear in our own minds, that the
inspection of the plantations was much more carefully carried out by the Immi-
gration Department in Fiji than in Natal.
Thirdly, much less racial feeling existed in Fiji than we had met in South
Africa. There was more humanity towards the Indians. The race question did
not come up with any great acuteness.
All these important things would have led us to expect, that the lot of
Indians in Fiji would be happier, and therefore the temptation to commit suicide
would be less marked. But as we have said, our actual experience led us to
believe that the moral evil had gained a far stronger hold in the ‘coolie’ lines
of Fiji than it had done in Natal. And, unfortunately, Government statistics
only confirmed this impression.
It may be well before going further to give a very brief summary of the
outstanding facts concerning suicide and crime among indentured Indians in Fiji.
In India itself, which is predominantly Hindu by religion, suicide is a very
rare occurrence. The Hindu has a deep religious and moral objection to taking


life, regarding it as a sin. For this reason, the Indian suicide rate is probably
the lowest in the world. Only one in every twenty thousand commits suicide
in India, or 50 per million per annum. Among the indentured Indians in Fiji
one in every 950 has committed suicide in each year, or over one thousand
per million per annum. This is the average taken for the last eight years. To
put it in other words, the suicide rate is twenty times as great as that of India.
These figures remain the same if only the two recruiting provinces of India
are taken.
With regard to the crime of murder, the facts are even more startling.
In the United Provinces and Madras there is only one conviction for murder
in every 250,000 people each year, or four per million per annum. In Fiji
among the indentured coolies, there has been one conviction for murder each
year in every 3,000 persons, or 333 per million per annum, That is to say,
the murder rate in Fiji is eighty times as high as that of India. It is noticeable
that the greater portion of people murdered are women. On the other hand,
almost all the suicides in Fiji are those of men. In India, what few suicides exist
are generally those of women.
If we make every possible allowance for minor inaccuracies, these figures
for suicide and murder remain very disconcerting. They are not the figures
for a single year, but an average for a considerable number of years, and it is
significant that the last years are the worst.
To take, for instance, the last recorded year, that of 1914: out of 15,603
indentured coolies in Fiji, eleven committed suicide, seven attempted to commit
suicide, ten were con victed of committing murder, seven were murdered, twenty-
seven were convicted of the violent crime of wounding, thirteen were wounded,
two were convicted of man-slaughter and three were killed by man-slaughter.
The number of coolies actually charged in Court for committing these crimes,
together with those who suffered under them, amounted to nearly one hundred
persons. This means that one in every 140 of the adult indentured coolies in
Fiji, during the year 1914, were involved in violent crime, ending in murder,
man-slaughter, suicide, or violent bodily assault.
Sadly enough, it is not possible to obtain a complete record even with such
authenticated figures as these. For in spite of the evident desire on the part
of Government to give accurate returns, it is practically impossible to do so
in the present condition of Fiji. Magistrates are very few in number, and
plantations are often far away from any centre. Hospitals, also, belong to the
employers, not to Government. It is all to the interest of the Planter to hush
8


up serious crime on his estate ; and in recent years, when the indenture
system itself has been known by every planter to be in danger, the tempta-
tion to hide facts, which might tell against the system, must have been very
great indeed. That these statistics are as accurate as they are, must be put
down to the credit of the Planters as well as to Government. But to give
one example of the minimising tendency at work, which came under our own
observation, a Planter told one of us in the course of ordinary talk, the story
of an attempted suicide on his estate, and when we asked him if he had in-
formed Government, he said he had not. One actual suicide, also, was reported
to us both, when we were in different parts of Fiji, long before any news of it
had reached the Immigration office. We were ourselves the first to give them
the report.
Very often a cutting from a newspaper gives the true situation more clearly
to an outsider than statistics. For it adds the atmosphere of the place, and is
not a bare record of figures. The following is taken from the ‘Western Pacific
Herald.”
“ News has just reached Suva of another of those ‘cutting up’ incidents, so common
amongst Indians in Fiji, which occurred on the Waidoi Estate. In this case the motive is the
usual one of jealousy, a woman being the victim and a man the aggressor. Although badly
hacked the woman is expected to recover. We understand that the owners of the estate were
aware that trouble was brewing but were prevented by the regulations from removing the
man to another plantation, which action would have prevented the crime. Another aspect of the
case is that if the assailant is sentenced to more than six months, his employers suffer by losing
the time, as the indentures cannot be extended for a longer period than six months. The law as
it stands has an undoubted tendency to encourage the employer to hush up any such eases which
may occur amongst his labourers.”
It is clear from this cutting, that however anxious the Immigration Depart-
ment may be to get at the true facts, their difficulties in Fiji are exceptional.
It will be made abundantly clear in this report how scrupulously just and fair
this Department itself was. Nevertheless allowance will have to be made
for the carelessness and neglect on the part of Planters to send to the office every
case of crime which occurred on their estate.
When we came to examine further the reasons for the almost complete
breakdown of moral sanctions in Fiji, which had resulted in such criminal records,
we found ourselves more and more bewildered about the causes, though more
certain than ever about the facts.
We were wholly unable to agree with one explanation, which was most
frequently put before us, namely, that the Indians, recruited for Fiji, were


the criminal class of India. We have already expressed our opinion concerning l
the Indian women. From them, indeed, we did undoubtedly gain an impression
that the number of prostitutes recruited must have been large, perhaps in excess
of Natal, or elsewhere. It also appeared to us, that this number was increasing
rather than diminishing. If so, that might itself account for a great deal.
But the men recruited were rather above, than below, the type we saw in
Natal. The Hindustanis represented a class of villager whom we knew well
in India : and these certainly did not come, in any large proportion, from the
lowest stratum of Hindu society. Those whom we saw in the Calcutta Depot
were villagers of a good class. The coolies also in the Madras Depot appeared
to be an average village type. It is interesting to note how the Fiji newspapers
have spoken of the recent shiploads of recruits as ‘an exceptionally fine set’ or
as ‘above the average.’ Yet it is these very Hindustanis and Madrasis who so
quickly go to pieces, and even in their first and second years begin committing
suicide and stabbing and murdering their fellows.
We were told again and again by barristers who practised in the Law Courts,
by Government officials, and by merchants, that the Indian had become ‘the
criminal of Fiji ; that it would be no exaggeration to say that over 90 per cent
of the violent crime in the Islands was ‘lndian crime’ : that there was a real
danger that this disease of ‘lndian crime’ would spread to the aborigines. We
found also that the Indians had got the reputation of being ‘the greatest
gamblers in the Colony,’ and from what we saw in the coolie ‘lines,’ there
can be little doubt that this reputation was not unfounded.
But by far the most terrible fact, which met us on every side, like a great
blight or devastation, was the loss of any idea of the sanctity of marriage and
the consequent sexual immorality that was rampant on every side. The evil
had spread in wider and wider circles from the coolie ‘lines,’ till it had infected
nearly the whole Indian population. Some one has described the condition of
the sexes in the coolie lines of Fiji as the ‘morals of the poultry yard,’ and the
phrase sticks in the mind : it is so painfully accurate of much that we were
obliged to see and hear.
We had at first supposed that these corrupt morals of the ‘lines’ would be
thrown off, in a great measure, by a healthy reaction, as soon as the Indian
became a free man. In Natal this had been the case, and we had seen with
our own eyes fairly healthy family life springing up in the numerous tiny
fruit-farms around Durban, where free Indians lived. But we found things
far more unsatisfactory in Fiji. There, the morals of the coolie ‘lines’ had be-
come ingrained in the free population. As one Indian explained the matter to


us : “Sahib,” he said, “our women have lost all shame : they change their
husbands as they change their dress.” An abominable trafficking in young girls
was prevalent, which the law seemed unable to check. It was a common
thing for a father to sell his daughter to one man, allowing the betrothal
ceremony to be performed, and then to sell her to another. Divorces were
equally common. Women left their husbands for the sake of jewellery and
went to live with other men. They seemed to do just what they pleased,
and to live just as they liked. Castes and religions were mixed together in a
common jumble. Hindu girls were sold in marriage to Muhammadans and
vice versa : sweepers’ children were sometimes married to Brahmans. If this
admixture had been due to enlightened motives of humanity and in accord-
ance with conscience, all might have been well. But it was just the
reverse, —a matter of greed and lust. As if to make the evil more deep-
seated, Government had done its best to banish Hindu and Muhammadan
religious marriage altogether from the land. Indian Christian marriage shared
the same fate in the eyes of the law. A Christian minister of religion, Mr.
Bavin, who performed the ceremony of marriage for two Indian Christians in
Church, was prosecuted for committing an illegal act. The only valid
marriage was said to be that drawn up in the office of the Immigration Depart-
ment, and this was a mere matter of payment and registration. An Indian had
merely to go to the Immigration office and register his name and that of his
intended wife, and pay five shillings. Then if no objection was lodged, after
three weeks he received a certificate from the office declaring that he had been
married. There was no ceremony :no solemn declaration: no mutual promise
in the presence of witnesses. These Immigration Department marriages are called
by the Indians “marit” : and it was always necessary in Fiji to ask a man, or
woman, if they had a “marit” : for nothing else was legal. In the prosecution
referred to above, the insecurity and the degradation to the whole Indian commu-
nity of this system was exposed in open court. A new marriage ordinance is now
in the making, which recognises the religious ceremony of each Indian religion,
and gives to it the respect that is due. But the harm that has been done during
the last thirty-two years by this neglect of the State authorities to give any
sanction at all to Hindu, Muhammadan and Indian Christian religious marriage
can hardly be overestimated.
The following story was told to us by a missionary, who knew the two
brothers concerned, and tried to get their sentences commuted. Two brothers
of a respectable Hindu family were guardians of their younger sister. They
caused her to be married by Hindu religious rites to a husband whom they


regarded as suitable. The Hindu religious ceremony was fully and duly perform-
ed. Then another man intervened and induced the sister to be married to him
by means of a “marit” at the Immigration office. This “marit” was legal. The
Hindu marriage was illegal. There was no redress. When the brothers knew
that there was no other remedy, they went and killed their sister • and gave
themselves into custody. They declared at the trial that they had done it for the
honour of their family and their religion. They had done it, they said, to preserve
Dharma. They were condemned to be hanged.
The following documents may serve to illustrate the confusion which has
been reached in the Indian marriage relations in Fiji,
(l). Memorandum of Agreement for Separation.
Made this eighteenth day of April 1913 between Jammu ex Pultala HI and
Parbati ex Fazilka IV husband and wife.
It is hereby agreed as follows, after full understanding and consent.
(<x) That in consideration of the sum of £lO-0-0 this day paid to Jammu by
Parbati the former relinquishes all his rights over Parbati as wife and gives her
permission to go wherever she pleases and live with whomsoever she likes. He will
not sue her for damages in any court of law or take any legal action against her.
(6) That Parbati relinquishes all rights over Jammu as her husband and gives
him permission to go wherever he pleases and live with whomsoever he likes. She
will not sue him for damages in any court of law or take any legal action against
him.
Thumb mark
of Jammu
Government
Stamp.
Thumb mark
of Parbati
[These agreements are, in the actual practice of the Islands, equivalent to a
divorce ; at least they are so regarded by all indentured coolies. They are drawn up
by certain Barristers-at-law practising in Suva and are signed in their presence. The
paraphernalia of the Government stamp and the legal form, in which they are
inscribed, make the illiterate Indians believe that they are valid in a court of law.
We have been told by lawyers since, that they are not worth the paper on which they
are written. Yet the charge of £5 is made to the coolies for them]
(2) A letter to the Agent General of Immigration.
Sir,
There is a man called Assu, ex Fultala I intending to leave for India. His
daughter Jagwanti has been married to my son, Nathu, according to Hindu rites, and
this marriage will have to be registered according to the law of this Colony.
9


I have spent £3O-0-0 for this marriage and as I apprehend that the girl’s mother,
Jamuni, is likely to sell her to someone else than my son I request you to be so kind
as to help me by taking steps to secure an undertaking by Assu that during his
absence nothing will happen to defraud me of my lawful rights.
I beg to suggest that he should be made to give me a written acknowledgment
of the expense incurred by the said marriage.
(3) Letter threatening legal proceedings.
To Lakshmi ex Fazilka 111.
You are my married wife. You have deserted me without any reason or excuse.
I hereby notifiy to you that you must return and co-habit with me within one week
of delivery of this notice; otherwise you must return me the Jewellery, valued
£ 20-0-0, which you had from me for wear, also the sum of £3O-0-0 in cash taken
away by you from our home, also our daughter Sunderbasia, aged 7 years, with
Jewellery valued £ 10-0-0 which she wears.
(Sd.) Indrua, his mark.
(4) Memorandum of Agreement.
Between Idu 36,193 and his wife Rajwantia 36,987 and Laehman ex Sangola V.
That in consideration of the sum of £ 5-0-0 paid this day to Idu by Laehman
and of the Jewellery returned to Idu by Rajwantia, Idu gives up all his rights over
Rajwantia, as his wife etc. etc.
(5) Charge or complaint.
Fiji to wit.
The charge of Assu in the district of Suva, taken this twenty-seventh day of
March in the year of our Lord 1913 before me, who saith that Bhikari, ex Clyde 1,
now residing with a man called Durgan, did on or about the 26th day of March instant
steal, or convert, to her own use one shikri valued 10 shillings, one pair of Jhumka
worth 7 shillings etc belonging to one Idu
( This is one of the very common charges for return of Jewellery made by a
husband, when his wife leaves him. )
(6) The case of a Sardar.
Letter No 1.
To the Agent General of Immigration, 22nd June 1914.
Sir,
The bearers Lachmania ex Ganges II and Puran ex Ganges I say as follows :
That Lachmania has been excused from work since her arrival in the Colony.
At first she was told to live with the man called Debi Singh, who was given up at the
instance of the Sardar in favour of the bearer Puran who paid £2-10-0 as the price
of the woman’s exemption from work for one year.


The said Sardar now desires the woman to give up Puran, with the intention o£
keeping the woman for himself.
The woman does not want to give up Puran
Letter No. 2.
From Immigration Department. 25th June, 1914.
Sir,
I have to state that Puran had previously complained to this Department regard-
ing the Sardar’s treatment of the woman Lachmania, and his complaint was inquired
into, with the result that his allegations against the Sardar were proved to be false.
Letter No. 3.
From the Manager, 18th November, 1914.
( Concerning another woman named Jagwanti and the same Sardar )
I am in receipt of your letter, which seems to have been written by you under
the misapprehension that Bhola and Jagwanti were husband and wife at the time the
Sardar made overtures to the woman to live with him. Bhola has informed me that
these overtures were made with his consent. Since Bhola and Jagwanti are now
married, the Sardar will have nothing further to do with the woman.
Letter No, 4.
From the same Sardar. 29th March, 1915.
Dear Sir,
I beg to inform you that Bhola came to me this morning and asked me for the
money, but I told him to go to you. I asked Jagwanti to come with me to court for
the marriage, but she told me that she will see about it by and by. By this I under-
stand that she wants to live with Madho, after being paid the sura. About the money
I have nothing to say. Do, please, as you like. Will you please put this condition
more in the agreement between me and Bhola and Jagwanti, that, after having been
paid the sum by me, if any body will keep the woman, he will have to pay me
£SO-0-0.
[We wish to draw no inferences as to the rights and wrongs in this case, but
simply to show from it the utterly abandoned morals of the “lines.” We heard of more
than one ease in which the Sardar sold the women, under his charge, first to one man
and then to another. ]
It would be impossible to explain in detail, how all these evils connected
with marriage have penetrated the home-life of the free Indian population, as
well as the coolie dines.’ We had opportunities of studying in Suva these strange
marriage relations in that centre of free Indians. We also went carefully through
files of correspondence, agreements and settlements, by which Indians were
struggling, either to strengthen or else to relax these complicated marriage ties.


We examined, besides, a large volume of evidence given in the Police courts.
We were thus able to see in detail how sexual jealousy had brought about all
kinds of misery and crime.
It would be scarcely too much to say, that these marriage evils have
almost obliterated the ideal of the married life from the memory of Hindus in
Fiji. They spoke to us of marriage and of women in a way that would be
revolting to Hindus in India. The tragedy of it all was this, that the whole
Hindu fabric had gone to wreck on this one rock of marriage, and there were
no leaders to bring the people back into the right paths. The best Hindus we
met were in despair about it.
One other aspect of this same deterioration may be described. The Hindu
woman in the coolie Tines/ having no semblance, even, of a separate home of
her own, which she can cherish, and divorced from all her old home ties, has
abandoned religion itself. The moral ruin is most pitiful on this side. Though
there are beautiful and stately rivers in Fiji, no women are seen making their
morning offerings : no temples rise on their banks : there is no household shrine.
The outward life, which the Hindu women in the Tines’ lead in Fiji, appears
to be without love and without worship,—a sordid round of mean and joyless
occupations. The contrast with India is seen in its saddest form during some
so-called Hindu religious festival in Fiji. Everything that could be recognised
as Hindu has departed, and with this, the religious spirit has departed also. The
yearly round of the sacred festivals, which form so much of the brightness of a
Hindu woman’s life in India, is confined in Fiji to a couple of days, of which the
greatest is no Hindu festival at all. The impoverishment of life, which has
taken place, can hardly be understood, in all its pathos, except by Hindus them-
selves. One who had recently come out to Fiji from Madras, a man of education,
wrote as follows : —“These festivities are meaningless in Fiji, with no object but
to partake in sweetmeats and rowdy cries. Indian women are present with no
intent to worship; but to a great degree as a spectacle to the white population,
who view with an inborn hateful laugh the coolie Indians and their so-called
religion. Hindu degradation could not go lower.”
Yet, as we went further in our enquiries, we met with hopeful signs of
another kind, which showed us that there was still present, below the surface,
the instinct and the memory of better things. We saw many lives of Hindu
women, which were true to Hindu traditions, winning reverent respect.


A high caste widow and her little daughter, who had passed through the
moral dangers of the coolie ‘lines’ unharmed, were reverenced by all the Hindus
of the district. When misfortune came upon this widow while we were in Fiji,
her Hindu neighbours came to us, offering monetary help up to 4,500 rupees.
They wished to purchase for her the small portion of land, which her husband
and her father had possessed. A Madrasi Hindu mother, in the North of the
main Island, had gathered round her, in an out-building, a group of Hindu
boys, to teach them their religion, together with a little English.
Among the men, a Swarni, loosely attached to the Arya Samaj in India,
and now dwelling in Suva, had gained instant respect from the Hindus, and
had helped in founding schools, where religion could be taught. On every
Land we found a longing for instruction to be given in religion, and this clearly
proceeded from a pure desire, that the children of Hindu parents in Fiji should
not lose all knowledge of their ancestral faith. It was touching to see what
emphasis was laid upon religion in their own education schemes.
Two phrases were constantly used in Fiji, when thoughtful Indians talked
over the whole matter intimately with us. The one implied that all their
religion had gone to pieces. The other implied that they had not lost their
inner appreciation of their old Hindu life.
The Muhammadans were very slightly represented in the main Island of
Fiji. We should have seen them in much greater strength, if we had been
able to go to the smaller Islands; but time would not allow this. In the main
Island, as far as we could observe, the religious decline had not been so rapid
with them as amongst Hindus. They held together more, and even though
they did not observe, to any great extent, the stated hours of prayer, yet
they were proud of the fact that they were Musalmans, and this gave them a
dignity of their own. There were very few leaders among them. They seemed
capable of getting on by themselves and of keeping some idea of religion. They
were equally eager, with the Hindus, to obtain religious education for their
children.
The Indian Christians were fewer still in number. Some of them held
too much aloof from the main Indian body and were inclined to lean upon
European support. But one feature was outstanding. Their home life was
good. Some of our happiest recollections were those of Indian Christian homes.
The Parsis, to our regret, were entirely absent from the Island. We could
not help remembering Parsi Rustomji, in Durban, and wishing that there might
be such a kindly Parsi home as his, in Suva, to give us welcome.
10


The brightest side of Indian life in Fiji (which, in a measure compensated
for its sorrows and gave hope for the future) was the love of India itself, which
was still kept warm within every heart. There was practically no religious
bitterness ; Hindus, Muhammadans and Christians lived amicably together side
by side, because the one tie of India itself bound them together in one.
This love for India kept their lives sweet, even in the midst of so much that
was corrupt and diseased.
In so far as it is possible to shorten the passage to India by direct Steamer
Service, and thus give opportunity to the younger generation of Indians to see
their motherland, it will be all to the good. For there is no sentiment, at the
present time, that is doing more to uphold the self-respect of Indians in Fiji
than this affection for India. With many whom we met, —men who have lost
for a time all the sanctions of religion,—this sentiment itself has become a
religion and a worship. Things can never be hopeless with Indians in Fiji, so
long as this remains.
There was another aspect of affairs in Fiji, which corrected our earlier
unfavourable impression in an important way, and gave us encouragement and
hope. We noticed that, whenever those who had come out of indenture were
given opportunities to settle on the land, holding it as their own and leading
their own free life upon it, the powers of recuperation very soon began to have
their effect. We were more and more impressed with this fact, tl*e longer we
stayed in Fiji. It made us feel quite convinced, that if only the fatal mistakes
of the present indenture system could be rectified, the Indian immigrants might
then recover themselves and become a healthy population. We were equally
convinced by what we saw that this life of settlement on the land could never
be made really wholesome, if it were connected with the present coolie ‘lines’.
For the evils of ‘lines’ extended outwards, and brought degradation to the
free Indians who were near at hand. It also made many Of the free Indians the
mere hawkers and hangers-on of the coolie ‘lines’.
[lt may be well to mention here, in a parenthesis, one of the most marked
and painful features of Indian life in Fiji, which immediately attracted our atten-
tion. The whole Indian population is divded up into two classes, an inferior
and a superior, called “indentured” and “free”, —“grimit-wala.” and “khalas”—
to give them their local names. One does not need to labour the point, that
to have people of one race in a small Island, some of whom are free and
some of whom are the reverse, is to countenance a most injurious class
distinction.


Though we found abundant sympathy among the free Indians with their less
fortunate countrymen, and though we came across noble instances of self sacrifice
on their behalf, yet it was almost inevitable that such an unnatural division
should tell, in time, upon them, and should give to the indentured Indians a
sense of degradation, and to the free Indians a sense of pride. It was
often noticeable to us, how an Indian would bristle up, if ever we made the
mistake of asking him if he was “grimit wala” when he was really “khalas
or how, on the other hand, a man would hang his head, if we said to him “Turn
khalas ho ?” when he had not yet obtained his freedom. There would be shame
and dejection expressed in the very shake of his head, as he sadly confessed to us
that he was still under indenture. Few things told us more truly than this
what was actually going on beneath the surface of people’s minds.
Far deeper evils still were connected with this class division, which can
only be mentioned very briefly. It brought out too often in the free Indians,
not those noble qualities of sympathy and sacrifice which have been referred to,
but those meaner qualities of avarice and greed, —the readiness, for the sake of
money, to exploit and trade upon the weak and depressed. There is always
something very dangerous in the close juxta-position of a privileged and an
unprivileged class, a servile and a free population ; and it is not to be wondered
at, if Indians, with their morals already corrupted by five years’ indenture,
should not be able to resist the dangers of their new position when they
became free.]
But where the contact with the coolie ‘lines’ was not especially marked, the
healthy life of settlement on the soil soon began to have its effect on Indians,
who had finished their indenture. This was especially noticeable in certain out-
of-the-way settlements, away from the coast, on the north side of the Island.
Nature has wonderful healing powers, and we witnessed them at work. The
difficulties concerning the marriage of children were still serious, on account of
the complete disproportion of men to women, in Fiji, among free, as well as
among indentured, Indians. But as life settled down, and more and more
children were born, even these difficulties became successfully surmounted ; and
a new life of hopefulness began -to spring up in these new Indian settlements
far away from anywhere. It was one of the greatest pleasures of our visit to
come across some such Indian settlement cleared out of the very jungle.
It recalled to our minds many of the best features of village life in India
itself.
It was very interesting and instructive to watch the difference between these
Indians settled, far away from anywhere, on the land, and those Indians who


hung about the outskirts of the coolie ‘lines.’ Among the free Indians, at the
coolie centres, there had been little or no purging out the moral evils of the
coolie ‘lines.’ The had atmosphere of the ‘lines’ still clung round about them.
But face to face with nature, and close to mother earth, the free Indians,
while they tilled their own land and built their own villages, in their own
way, recovered a healthier and cleaner moral life. The aspect of joy came
back into the women’s faces and into the looks of the children at their play.
The impression of servitude and moral degradation was lost, and a new found
happiness and pleasure in life had clearly taken its place. In one part of the
country we found that a little temple had been built in the middle of such a
Hindu village. This showed us that religion itself had begun once more to take
its true place in Hindu homes.
A few examples may be given of the state of affairs here generally described.
1. A small cultivator on the north side of the main Island had a small
holding of his own, purchased by promissory notes. He was a sweeper, and did
work in a store as well as on his own land. He had been eleven years in Fiji
and had received 800 rupees for his last crop. He spoke of further transactions
in land to the extent of 1500 rupees. He was very happy and prosperous, and
his wife and daughter seemed equally happy as they were seen by us on the day
of the Muharram festival.
2. A village settlement, five miles from Navua, which had originally been
formed by a small syndicate of four Indians who were now Zamindars. The
ground was all free-hold property and the crops looked very flourishing indeed.
There had been unfortunately some quarrel between the Indians about the land.
Though there was outward prosperity, there was clearly inward discontent.
Probably the settlement was too near to the large coolie ‘lines’ to be completely
independent, and Navua, as a district, bore an evil reputation.
3. A small settlement of Indians completely isolated and independent, far
in the interior of the Island, There was an air of quiet peace and happiness
about this village which touched us very deeply, after what we had seen for so
long in the coolie ‘lines.’ The men and women spoke with freedom, and the
children were evidently happy.
4. The following are typical cases of prosperous growers of sugar-cane
among the Indians in the north of the Island ;
Lachman has been three years out of indenture and was able to sell his cane
last year for Bs. 1,635.


Nathu, who has been five years out of indenture, has grown 531 tons of
sugar-cane on twenty-three acres of land. He received for his crop Rs. 7,200.
This man sold out his interest in the land and its standing crops for Rs. 13,500.
Ram Singh told us, that he had received Rs. 12,000 for his last year’s crop.
This sum however does not represent net profit. An encouraging fact in his
case was that he was following the example of the large European planters in
his cane cultivation by an extensive use of green manure. The small Indian
holders, we were told, had not made sufficient use of scientific cultivation, with
the inevitable result that their crops are inferior in quality, and the soil is
gradually becoming impoverished,
(In 1914 independent Indian growers of cane supplied to the Company’s mills at Lautoka,
on the north side of the Island, a total of 32,328 tons of cane, which realised 2,85,000 rupees,
at an average of eleven shillings and eight pence per ton. In 1915 form the same source
the estimate was 47,000 tons of cane which would realise 5,40,500 rupees at an average of
fifteen shillings and four pence per ton. In this Lautoka district 34 per cent of the total
sugar-cane land is already in Indian hands, and all along the north coast the percentage is
ever increasing. In the district of Nadi alone there is a population of 5,000 free Indians and
the monthly average applications for leases of land at the Magistrate’s court was fifty. There
are thus a large number of free Indians who are now growing sugar-cane, quite independently,
on holdings varying from five to three hundred acres in extent. The large Indian cultivators
employ numbers of free Indians to carry on the ploughing, manuring, weeding and cutting of
the cane.]
5. A settlement of free Indians on the border of a small European planta-
tion. These have recently come out of indenture and settled near their old
employer. The planter gave to them, at a very low rate, during the last
year of their indenture, a piece of ground for growing cane. He now uses
their free labour, at the heavy seasons of the year, paying them full wages.
In this way, he has been able to reduce the number of coolies under indenture
on his estate. The Indians seemed prosperous and contented. The planter was
evidently their friend, and they were some distance away from any large
coolie Tines.’
[The Colonial Sugar Refining Company has for some years past introduced this system
of settling indentured Indians on the land, near to their own estates, during the last year of
their indenture. They pick out carefully those coolies who show capacity for work among the
canes. In Lautoka 2,200 acres are thus leased out to 180 Indians under the Company’s settle-
ment scheme.]
From all this it will be clear that every year the interests of the Indian
free settler will have to be taken into consideration in an increasing measure.
For in the long run, if the present rate of progress continues, they will be the
chief growers and producers of cane in the Islands. Indeed, the time may be
11


not far distant, when the European cane grower will give place to the Indian
altogether, the organising work at the centres alone remaining in the Europeans’
hands. If the new offer of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company to place
£lOO,OOO at a low rate of interest at the disposal of the Fiji Government for
Indians’ settlement be accepted and the settlement carried out, this predominance
of the Indian cultivator as a grower of suger-cane for the Company’s Mills will be
practically assured.
While, on the whole, with many drawbacks and difficulties, the land settle-
ment of Indians has gone forward, the same cannot be said with regard to Indian
education. Indeed it would be hardly an exaggeration to state that the policy
of the Government of Fiji with regard to Indian education has been, up till
quite recently, one of almost complete neglet. Even with reference to the public
school education of European children, Fiji is far behind every other colony
in the Empire. With regard to Indian children, in spite of strong warnings from
the Indian Government and the Home authorities, the expenditure has hitherto
been nil. We have been told further, on reliable authority, that for many years
there was the strongest opposition on the part of the Sugar Companies to any
education being given to Indians at all. It was said that such education
would tend to take the Indian coolie away from the soil, and thus make him
‘spoilt’ for labour purposes. If the European sentiment with regard to Indian
education has somewhat changed to-day in Fiji, it is due to two chief causes, —
first, the brave struggle which the missionaries made against unenlightened
opposition, and, secondly, the strong external pressure which has been brought
to bear upon the Fiji Government by the Colonial Office in London. We may
well believe, also, that the criminal statistics of the Indian population have at
last begun to make people think. When we were asked to explain the suicide
and crime among Indians in Fiji, compared with other colonies, we used to
point to the education statistics. The absence of school life means the absence
also of educated teachers as well as of the school house. The teacher and his
wife are apt to set the standard to other families round them. Their home is
often a centre of great good in an illiterate community.
In the Fiji Blue Book for 1914 two pages only are given for education.
From the figures it appears that there are only two aided Public schools and
one Government school in the colony. The rest of the education is left entirely
to private enterprise.


Out of a total revenue of £279,844 in 1914, the sum of only £3,312 was
devoted to education, or less than 1.2 per cent of the total revenue ; and
none of this was for Indian education. In Suva itself, the capital of the
Islands, the anomaly occurred not long ago of rates being actually collected
from Indian rate-payers for public school purposes, without permission being
given to the children of such rate-payers to enter a public school. On an
appeal being made, the Indian rate-payers were informed that they wmuld not be
required to pay rates any longer. But admission to the public school was
persistently refused on racial grounds, and there is still no Government school
for Indian children in Suva, though the majority of the inhabitants are Indians.
This Municipal policy of Suva is unfortunately in keeping with other forms of
discrimination against the Indian, which have reduced him to a mere cipher in
Municipal affairs. Not only has the Indian been refused educational facilities
for his children, but at the same time he has been practically disfranchised.
If Fiji is to come into line with the standard set by the other Colonies she
ought to be spending at least £lO,OOO or £12,000 a year on education. At
present the Government of Fiji is throwing almost the whole of its responsibilty
for education on the Missionary Societies.
It is indeed pathetic to see the attempt made by the Indians themselves to
supply the educational need which ought to be supplied by Government. On
the North side of the main Island and elsewhere there are many instances which
show how keen is the desire of the free Indian settlers for education.
1. At Nadi, a small school was discovered which was being held in a stable, behind a small
store, with about a dozen small boys learning English from a Hindu woman. This woman had
learned English at a Mission School in the Madras Presidency before coming out to Fiji, under
indenture, some 12 years ago.
2. Near Ba there is a small school with about 20 boys on the roll who are taught English
by an aged Maulvi. At Ba itself, near one of the few mosques we saw in Fiji, two or three
boys are daily taught from the Quran.
3. At the same centre, Ba, the Indians themselves (both Hindu and Musalman) subscribed
and built a school-house a year ago. This unfortunately has been ever since, for want
of a suitable teacher, although the Indians are willing to contribute liberally towards the
support of a qualified man.
4. At another Indian settlement in the interior of the Island, on the banks of the Rewa
River, a similar School-house has been built by voluntary contributions. But this too is almost
useless for want of a suitable teacher.
5. We were told of an attempt to start a school in a country district in the South of the
main island. After a short time, however, the funds gave out and the school was closed. The
head teacher was then paid by the Mission and the school was re-opened by them.


6. An enthusiastic effort was made in Suva to found a School in which Hindus and
Muhammadans should be taught together. A two-storied building was given for the purpose
by a leading Musalman, on the understanding that the upper storey should be used for a mosque.
We attended many discussions with regard to this school. The opinion we formed was, that
though there were good intentions in abundance, yet there was very little practical leadership.
The Fiji Government is at last beginning to awake to its responsibility for
educating the increasing Indian population ; for it sees more clearly than before
that an unenlightened people is a danger to the wellbeing of the Colony. But
so far it has been unable to secure properly qualified men, on account of the low
salaries offered. Certainly there could be no finer opportunity for young men
of education and ideals who are anxious to serve their fellow-countrymen, than
to go out in educational service to Fiji. For, there, they would have the chance
of helping to shape a new country’s development, which may eventually become
an Indian Colony. Not only Government, but also the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company, has begun to take up the matter with some feeble interest. The
Company has just offered £3OO and a site to each of the missionary institutions
in order to relieve itself of the responsibility of running schools of its own. The
Vancouver Mill at Navua also gives a small contribution to the mission school
there.
But the subject of education needs to be taken up much more thoroughly and
seriously if the need is adequately to be met. For the whole future of Fiji
depends largely upon such a system of education being built up, amongst the
Indian population, as will render it a useful and stable element in the life of the
Colony.
When we were asked by the Fiji authorities what system and method of
education would be best suited for Indian needs, we expressed very strongly the
opinion, that it would be a mistake for Government to place everything in the
hands of the missionaries, and merely give grants-in-aid to them. We had abund-
ant opportunities of reaching’ the real opinion of the Indian community in Fiji,
and we were certain that such a policy would be looked upon as a very serious
infringement of the principle of religious neutrality. The Indians in Fiji are for
the most part quite illiterate. It is not to be expected that they will be able to
organise and collect funds for their own schools on the scale of the European
missionaries. For a very long time to come, therefore, it would not be possible
for them to meet the active missionary propaganda on equal terms of activity.
If the Fiji Government were simply to stand aside and distribute grants-in-aid,
the missionary societies would be certain to step in and reap all the financial
benefits. This would give the whole Indian education of the Islands a predominantly


Christian colour, even though the Indian parents might wish their children to be
educated in their own Hindu and Musalman religious precepts.
At the same time, we found no wish, on the part of Indians, to exclude the
missionaries from education altogether, or to ask for purely secular schools.
They had a great and natural respect for the work that the missionaries had done.
They recognised that the missionaries had been their friends and had made known
their grievances at a time when they themselves were mute and helpless. The
mission schools, also, had struggled on without any help from Government, at a
critical period when European sentiment in the colony was set against Indian
education altogether. The Indian community in Fiji, however ignorant and
illiterate, was generous and liberal in its appreciation of those who had helped in
the hour of need. There were no two English names more frequently on their
lips than those of Miss Dudley and Mr, Burton. They spoke of these two friends
and helpers with an affection amounting to reverence. It was the work of missio-
naries like these, struggling against overwhelming odds, that had saved the whole
Indian community from falling to the lowest level of ignorance and vice.
We can both of us recall vividly the scene we saw one afternoon in a Christian
orphan home in Fiji, the only Indian orphanage in the Islands. The house was
beautifully situated on a slightly rising ground near the banks of the broad Rewa
River opposite some crowded coolie lines’. We had just come from the inden-
tured Coolie quarters, and had seen the condition of the little children, living in
the midst of sights and sounds which innocent children ought never to see and
hear. Then, in this home across the river, we watched a group of tiny children
at their play. One baby was pointed out to us, whose mother had been murdered
in a quarrel in the lines’, and whose putative father had been hanged for the
murder. There were other children in the home who had a somewhat similar
history. We could not help contrasting the happiness and innocence of these
little ones with the evil and impurity of their former surroundings, and we were
only too thankful for this haven of pure childhood, which had been offered to them
for shelter.
While, therefore, the Indian community g'ave all due respect to the missio-
naries for what they had done and were doing, they were convinced that it would
be harmful to allow the whole Indian education of the Island to come into
missionary hands. They wished rather to have Government schools side by side
with missionary schools.
Our own decided opinion was in favour of this policy also. Apart from the
question of religious neutrality, which missionary institutions, by their very
12


character cannot observe, ..mission schools, if left to themselves, have a tendency
to become educationally inefficient. False economies are often made, and unquali-
fied teachers, taken from the ranks of catechists, are put in charge. On the other
hand, Government schools, if left to themselves, have a tendency to become
educationally extravagant. Useless expense is not seldom incurred according to
the whim of some new Director, or Inspector. But when the two systems exist
side by side-—the Government and the Missionary,—they are able to counteract
one another. The weakness of the one system is the strength of the other.
Liberty of conscience is also in a far greater measure preserved by such a
combination.
If such a combined system were adopted in Fiji, two further things would be
necessary. There should be the right of entry into every School for accredited
ministers of religion. There should, also, be especially liberal grants allowed to
any educational venture, Hindu, Musalman or Christian, that proceeded direct
from the Indian community itself and was financed by Indian money.
We have been obliged to go somewhat further in offering advice on this
subject of Indian Education than might possibly be regarded as fitting in a
Report of this kind. Our reason for doing so has been, that we were specially
asked by the Indian community to put forward their views, because they had
such great difficulty in doing so themselves. There was no subject on which
they were more unanimously anxious, and on which they laid greater emphasis.
They were wont, in a very touching manner, to look forward with confidence and
hope to the removal of all their moral evils, if only education could be given to
their children on right lines. After what we heard, in the Pacific, of the bene-
ficent results of liberal education in the Philippines, during recent years, we felt
that there was much to be said for their point of view.
It seemed more and more clear to us, the longer we stayed in the Island,
that there was no side of Indian life in Fiji, where the Government and the
people of India might offer more practical help, juncture, than by pressing
forward the urgency of a comprehensive educational policy with regard to Indians
in Fiji,—a policy large and wide enough to cover the wdiole of the Islands. We
hoped also that it might be possible to offer any initial aid that might be required.
We have reason to believe, that a representative from India sent out to assist in
such a greatly needed reform would be welcomed by the authorities in Fiji. He
would also receive from every section of the resident Indian community the
warmest possible welcome and support.


Medical aid to the Indian community has not shared the same fate as that of
Education. Owing to the express regulations, sanctioned by the Government of
India and enforced throughout the colony, the medical treatment of the Indian
indentured population has been, on the whole, satisfactorily undertaken. The
present Head of the Government Medical Department for the Islands,
Dr. Lynch, has taken the utmost pains to carry out the Government regulations,
not only in the letter, but in the spirit in which they were drawn up. The result
has been a low death-rate among indentured Indians. One unsatisfactory feature
remains,—the very high death-rate among infants. But this will never be put
right, so long as the mother is forced by the very Law of Indenture to neglect
her own children.
We were impressed by the ability, not only of the Head of the Department,
but also of the staff which he had under him; though it appeared to us to be too
small for such a highly important work. The hospital arrangements were also
satisfactory. We were not ourselves able, on account of the shortness of our
visit, to see any of the outlying Islands where medical aid must be much more
difficult to provide adequately. But what we did see was good. We heard also
from the Indians themselves about the truly noble work that was being done
among the lepers on the Leper Island.
The real medical difficulties among Indians (which Dr. Lynch was himself
the first to point out to us) are to be found mainly with the free population.
These, both in India itself and in the coolies dines,’ have been used to receiving
practically free medical assistance in times of sickness, and they cannot reconcile
themselves to beginning, late in life, to provide and pay for their own medical
treatment. They are very ignorant indeed, and not seldom very poor (though
some are prosperous) and it is regarded by them as a very great hardship when
they are compelled to pay heavy medical fees.
To give examples, when free Indians ask for admission into the hospitals,
which are built for the indentured population, they have to pay two shillings a
day, unless they can prove that they are destitute. To prove this, they have to
obtain a special order from the Magistrate or Immigration Officer. The delay
and hindrances in getting this, during times of sickness, are often so great, that
in order to obtain immediate medical aid, money is borrowed somehow, and the
high fees of an English Doctor are paid. Then, afterwards, the family of the
Indian, who has been ill, is weighed down by a heavy burden of debt. We were
told by one man that his wife’s confinement had cost him over Rs. 150 in medical
fees, and that he had been in debt ever since. Not seldom, in such cases,


hopelessly unskilled treatment is called in and the poor woman suffers agonies and
even death. It should be remembered that there is not a single qualified Indian
Doctor in the whole of Fiji. There is no possibility of treatment, also, by the
Ayurvedic or Yunani systems.
An English Medical Officer told us the instance of a whole Indian family,
which was ordered into the hospital, as a precaution against the spread of
typhoid. Each member of the family had to pay two shillings a day, for as long
a period as they were detained. The Doctor, who told us this, regarded this
charge as a great hardship and tried to get it removed.
In Suva there is an excellent hospital which admits free Indians without any
such heavy charges. It was a great pleasure to us to visit this and to find how
friendly the Fijians and Indians had become towards one another under its
common roof. In earlier days, for the sake of peace and quietness, they had
to be kept in different wards, but now they were quite happy even when one
ward overflowed into another and both races were mixed together.
We consulted with Doctor Lynch, at great length, concerning the possibility
of introducing Indian doctors into the Islands, at suitable rates of pay, who
might be able to come closely in touch with the whole Indian population. Doctor
Lynch was himself entirely in favour of such an introduction. We also discussed
with him the question of a complete State system of free medical and sanitary
aid for all Indians alike, similar to that which we were suggesting to the Fiji
Government with regard to education. In our own minds, one of the great
additional advantages of two such schemes would be, that these would provide
the Indians in the Colony with a respected class of their own fellow countrymen,
whom they might look up to as their natural leaders.
If a considerable number of such qualified doctors were introduced from
India, in addition to qualified teachers engaged in the education of the young,
then in a perfectly natural manner the illiterate and depressed Indian population
would obtain that very leadership which it now so sadly requires. As such men,
by their very profession, would have a good standing in the Colony, they would
give to the Indian community a weight and dignity which is wholly lacking at
present. They would restore to the Indians themselves, not only health and
knowledge, but also self-respect.
The emphasis which we have laid on the need of building up, entirely anew,
from the very beginning, what we have called the ‘leadership’ of the Indian
community in Fiji, may appear strange to those who have not witnessed with
their own eyes the present condition of Indians in the Islands. To us, as we


saw thing's on the spot, this one question of ‘leadership’ seemed to be more
important, in dealing with the future, than any other. Assuming that the present
fatal disproportion of the sexes will be altered and the indenture system abolished,
there is one thing further that will be required, namely, the recovery of self-
respect. The free Indian population has to be built up anew into a self-respecting
community, —a community in which such vices as now are rampant will be
condemned in no uncertain way by public opinion. But such public opinion can
only be formed by leaders ; and at present no leaders exist.
If the conception of attempting to plan out a new leadership be regarded
as artificial, and it is argued that leaders, like poets, are born and not made, then
the answer may be given that educational and medical reforms are, for their own
sake, sorely needed in Fiji. They are not artificial wants at all. Therefore, all
that is asked for, or required, is that the men who are sent out to carry through
these reforms should be worthy men, carefully and wisely chosen. The rest will
follow of itself. Some, at least, among such men will have the gift of leadership,
and, what is more important still, the whole of them together will fill a gap, in
what is now an entirely artificial and unnatural social structure, namely, an
Indian community without any responsible leaders.
As in the matter of education, so in the case of medical aid, we have reason
to believe that the Fijian Government would welcome most warmly a represen-
tative from India, who fully understood the needs of the Indian people, and could
help and advise Dr. Lynch himself in carrying out his far-reaching and progressive
ideas.
We discussed with the medical authorities one further question of great
importance. This was the restoration of the burning ghat for the last rites
of the Hindus. We found to our great surprise that 4 the sanitary, religious
custom of burning the dead, along with all its ceremonial, had been entirely
abandoned by all Hindus, —even by Brahmans. The insanitary custom of burying
the dead, often in shallow ground only slightly below the surface, had been
substituted for it. As far as we could see there was no religion, and scarcely any
decency, in this function. Broad rivers and open sea shores abound in Fiji on
every side, and it would be quite easy to restore the ancient Hindu custom of
cremation at the water’s edge, if only the desire for it was still present among
the people. But religion has ceased to be a daily reality among Hindus in Fiji.
Things have worked themselves out in a vicious circle. The loss of outward
observance has led to a decay of the inner religious spirit, while the decay of
the inner religious spirit has now almost obliterated the desire for the restoration
13


of ceremonial rite and worship. And, as we have pointed out, the abandonment
of religion has led to an abandonment of morals. Whatever may help to bring
back religion will help to bring back morals also.
It is a relief to turn from this < chequered picture of light and shade to
describe what we expect for the future.
When the present indenture system has been abolished and the present
recruiting system stopped, we have every hope that a rapid recovery of the
morals of the Indian population will ensue. With the improvement in morals,
other changes will follow in their turn.
We wish to state, in conclusion, the reasons which we have for this hope.
First, our whole experience in Fiji has taught us to place a great faith in
the powers of nature and of mother earth to bring back a wholesome moral
life to those Indians who settle on the land. Again and again, the evidence of
this fact cheered us in Fiji, and it is one of the most striking pieces of evidence
which we have brought back with us. For countless generations in India, the
villager has lived close to the soil and he has gained certain moral qualities
thereby. He has lost these, for the moment, by the unnatural life in the coolie
‘lines’ of Fiji. But he has not lost them altogether. They are far too deep-
seated for that. They may be very rapidly recovered. And when they are re-
covered, we could hardly imagine any country in the world which could give
them more scope than Fiji.
It was wonderful to notice how nature, with all its beauty, appealed still
to the Indian coolies, even in the midst of their squalid surroundings. They
often used to speak to us about it. “Sahib,” one woman said to us, “this
place is more beautiful than India. But man is much worse here.” This,
indeed, was a commonly expressed opinion. We heard it on all sides.
Among the Indians living in the towns, squalour still prevailed. Even on
the outskirts of towns the aspect of free Indian settlements was not pleasing.
But far away in the country, the whole character of life was quite different.
Both in Fiji, and in Natal, we found that a love of nature, and a delight in
the soil, are ingrained in the Indian villager. The moment conditions are
favourable, the flower of this love blossoms and healthier moral conditions
follow.


The land of Fiji is still virgin soil, over vast areas. Only a fringe of the coast
and of the river valleys has been touched by cultivation. The climate is very
healthy indeed. It was a pleasure to see the chubby little Indian children in the
free Indian settlements, so different from those we knew in malaria-stricken
Bengal and in the up-country districts of India. The crops of rice and maize are
good, where they have been sown, and there is no over-crowded population.
Not only is there a natural aptitude in the Indian settler to build up a healthy
family life on the land, when the artificial hindrances are removed, but, in the
matter of land settlement the Government is now fully awake to its own respon-
sibilites. The Sugar Companies, also, have seen the great advantage to them-
selves of a free resident population occupying the soil in the neighbourhood of
their cane crushing mills. Hitherto there have been great difficulties and hard-
ships owing to the leases being held by the Fijian communal tribes. A lease
could only be entered into with the whole tribe. But Government, while obser-
ving strictly the rights of the Fijians, is now at last acting for them on a great
scale in the matter of leases. Thus the Indian villager, in future, will be able
to obtain his land direct from Government, a method of ownership which he has
been used to in India itself. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company has placed
fifteen lakhs at the disposal of Government for Indian settlement alone, —the
rate of interest charged being only four per cent. They would be prepared to
offer still greater amounts of money to Government if this first adventure turns
out to be a success. The Company’s capital, invested in the Islands, already
amounts to five crores, so that they are able to do things on a large scale. They
have now found out, by practical experience, the great value of the Indian
settler as a cultivator of the soil and are anxious to retain him. Therefore, from
a stictly business point of view, it is certain that they will offer to him every
inducement to become an independent farmer sending his sugar cane to their
mills.
Our second "’cause of hopefulness is the character of the administration in
Fiji. There has been very much indeed in the past, which has been mistaken
and even foolish. The continuance of the old marriage regulations for over
thirty years is a case in point. There has been a strange negligence in getting
expert advice from India, which has frequently led to disaster. The difficulty of
the problem of Indian immigration was hardly realised, and things were allowed
to go on in an haphazard way. All this, and more, might be said with regard
to the past.
But we found today in Fiji, a just and enlightened Government, sincerely
anxious to do its duty by the Indians. We discovered, on our arrival, that they


had already taken in hand in a liberal and broad-minded spirit, some of the
very reforms which our own experience in Natal had made us anticipate to be
necessary in Fiji. The question of land settlement, was one of these. The
complete revision of the Marriage Law was another. The practical abolition of all
penal clauses from the present Law of Indenture was a third. Many other
questions of great interest to the Indian population had been carefully considered
There were two separate committees in session dealing with these matters while
we were in the Islands.
We would wish, at this point, to express our sense of the very great benefit
which has come to the Indian community in Fiji owing to the visit of the
Government of India’s Commisson to the Islands more than two years ago. It
will be seen by those who have read the Commission Report that the conclusions
arrived at by the two Commissioners did not go so far as our own. Neverthe-
less, there Avere facts mentioned about excessive prosecutions, frequent suicides,
and sexual immorality, which were serious enough to make the thoughtful
reader pause. And so far as the Commissioners had been able to reach the
facts, they had attempted fairly to face them. They suggested also important
improvements.
From the time of the Commission onwards, all these recent changes have
taken place, and all these new schemes have been carried forward, especially
those with regard to land settlement and marriage,—the two subjects which
appeared to us of vital importance for Indians in Fiji. There have been valiant
attempts, also, to bolster up the indenture system itself, in order to make it look
respectable. Fines are to take the place of imprisonment, commutation of
indenture is to be allowed, schools are to be built, coolie Tines’ are to be pulled
down. The activity has been great since the Government of India’s Commission
came. Though we cannot but regard all these things as palliatives, while inden-
ture is still in force, there will be much that can be utilised for further progress,
when indenture is abolished.
Along with legislation, both immediate and prospective, we found that ad-
ministration had gone forward also. We had a continually increasing experience,
as soon as we were able to make a comparison with the past, that justice to-
wards the Indian, both on the estates and in the courts of law, was much more
impartially administered than it had been in days gone by. The old scandals of
administration had almost disappeared.
The following examples may serve to illustrate some of the general statements
which have been made in the preceding paragraphs.


1. We were much struck by the genuine kindly feelings towards those Indians
who had taken up domestic service with Europeans. We found by chance an Indian
lad in Suva Hospital, suffering from consumption. He told us with touching affection
how the ‘Mem Sahib had sent him down extra diet of cream every day and how the
Sahib had been down to visit him. When we asked the Sahib’s name, we found him
to be a leading member of His Majesty’s Government.
2. We were deeply interested, in the North of the Island, to see the earnest
endeavour made by the Manager of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company to help
forward in every way those capable and industrious Indians who wished to settle on
the land. He had evidently bestowed great pains and forethought over this matter,
and, as figures quoted elsewhere will show, he had met with considerable success.
3. We found an extremely well-conducted Indian Police Force in Suva. These
Indians, who were Sikhs, were paid a good monthly wage and expressed themselves,
on the whole, contented with their position. They had come out under an agreement,
but there was nothing about it which was servile. Their passage out was quite
different from that of ordinary coolies. One of them told us he had travelled second
class. They were treated well by their superior officers, who spoke highly of their
men.
But the most striking thing about them was that they did not take bribes. We
found out from all classes of Indians, that there was practically no bribery among the
Indian Police in Fiji. We asked very frequently the question. “Do the Police take
bribes ?” and the answer invariably was “ No, Sahib ”. We felt, at once, that this
was a very remarkable fact, and we determined to enquire into it thoroughly. The
more we did so, the more clearly we discovered, that it was chiefly a question of
self-respect, —that, and a decent living wage. With these Indian Police, self-respect
had been preserved. They could live in a respectable manner, and they were treated
with respect by their officers. With the Indian labourers under indenture almost
every particle of self-respect seemed to have vanished.
One of the Sikh policemen put the same thing very tersely to us, from another
point of view,—“ Sahib ” he said “ these junglis (Fijians) respect us, but they do not
respect our brothers (the indentured Indians.)”
Some of these policemen had come from Shanghai and Hongkong. They told
us that the Fiji Police Service was the best.
In corroboration of this estimate of the Fiji Indian Police, we met an indentured
labourer from Fiji, soon after our return to India, whose first complaint to us in India
was that the Police in his district took bribes and committed ‘ zulm ’, but they had
nothing like that in Fiji.
4. Considerable misunderstanding has arisen in India owing to one-sided reports
about the municipal vote in Suva. The vote has certainly been taken away. When
we were in the Capital, we condemned openly, in no measured terms, the injustice
which the Municipality has done in practically disfranchising the Indian citizens.
14


But the fact remains, that, up to last year, the franchise was so wide open to all races
that the Indians had the predominant vote in the elections, though ninety-five per cent
of them could not speak English, and a large proportion of the remainder could not
read or write in any language at all, and had to give their thumb-marks in order to
register their vote. There can be no question that the election of 1914 became a
farce, owing to the illiterate Indian voters registering all their votes for one particular
candidate, and returning him at the head of the poll in a most unintelligent manner.
What we protested against, therefore, was not the exclusion of illiterate, but the
exclusion of literate voters, whose language was Hindustani, not Engligh. That
appeared to us quite unfair, and we had many promises from leading European
citizens that this wrong should be righted as speedily as possible. At the same time,
in spite of what had happened last year, when we went into all the facts, what struck
us most was the extremely liberal character of Municipal franchise in Fiji before this
action took place. We felt certain that a country, which had been so very wide in its
franchise once, would be liberal again, and that what had happened was only a tem-
porary set-back, not a permanent disfranchisement. There are always tides of
action and reaction in politics. The events of last year represented the furthest
reaction.
We would mention in this connexion that we had many talks with the Acting
Governor and the Colonial Secretary concerning the appointment of an Indian repre-
sentative to the Legislative Council, in the same way that a Fijian representative had
been appointed. This would already have been done, had it not been for the servile
condition of the Indians under indenture and the very little chance which they have of
obtaining education and thus qualifying themselves for such a responsible post. If
there had been a body of Indians in the Islands from the first, of higher education
and position, we feel certain that the Indian community would have been represented
long ago. There was practically nothing of what might be called a ‘racial’ attitude
on the part of the Europeans in this matter. Those with whom we talked were very
keenly in its favour.
[One of the greatest differences of all between what we found in South Africa and
what we found in Fiji was this : —-In South Africa the Indian community had leaders.
In Fiji they had none. This has been a serious drawback to Fiji.]
5. We came across very little marked racial prejudice in the Islands. The
population is much too cosmopolitan to allow of such a thing. It is usually when
only two different races are face to face with one another in large numbers that the
strongest race prejudice arises. When there are many races, the prejudice is likely
to be less. In Fiji, this ‘mingling of all races’ is bound to increase very rapidly, as
it has done in Honolulu and Samoa, and it is sure to bring with it the ‘cosmopolitan’
rather than the ‘racial’ spirit. Japanese, Chinese and Samoans are coming into Fiji
in considerable numbers as traders and market gardeners. There appears very little
chance indeed of any very large increase of the Australian population. We were told
that Fiji would never become a ‘white man’s country’.


One of our surprises, in the course of our travels, was to find that the Australian
himself had not got any very strong race prejudice. We had misunderstood him.
His ‘ White Australia ’ policy is almost entirely economic, and even that is breaking
down. On board ship we were struck by the £ hail-fellow-well-met ’ attitude of the
Australians generally towards some Indian passengers. There is extraordinarily little
class distinction in Australia. A man is valued at what he is worth, —whether he is
a duke, or a bricklayer.
There is little danger, therefore, that strong racial feeling will develop in Fiji
from the Australian side, and if only the Indian were raised out of his present degra-
dation, there would be no danger at all. It was interesting to see the way in which
the young Australian police officers respected the Indian policemen. One of these
told us that they themselves were quite ready to propose Indian commissions.
The New Zealander is, if anything, still more free from race prejudice than the
Australian. Indeed, in all the world, we doubt if there is any country in which race
prejudice has been conquered more completely than in New Zealand. The Maories
there have every political privilege. They are accepted as volunteers. They send
their children to the public schools. They intermarry without any injurious
marriage bar.
We found some ordinary Indian labourers at Tamaranui who were getting ten
shillings a day for unskilled labour, —the full Trades Union wage. They had votes,
and like the Maories, could send their own children to the public schools.
These facts with regard to our travels have been given, becausee the European
population of Fiji comes almost entirely from New Zealand and Australia. There
will probably never arise a situation equivalent to that in the Southern States of
America, or in South Africa. The Indian will be judged by his character, not by
anything else. It is all the more necessary, therefore, that those Indians, who go
out to Fiji, should go out under decent conditions for character building. And we
could imagine no personal and monetary aid more valuable than that given in
spreading education among the neglected Indian population in Fiji.
6. We were able to watch the administration of justice at more than one centre.
We found that there was a great amount of ignorance of Indian habits and Indian
vernaculars, but we found also a very true independence from outside influence among
the Magistrates in giving their decisions. The Chief Justice of the Islands has
evidently done his best to increase the efficiency of the courts and to punish mal-
practices. Where we felt a real weakness existing was with regard to some barristers
who made their money out of Indian law-suits and the drawing up of quasi-legal
agreements. Here, unquestionably, greater strictness would be wholly beneficial.
The ignorant, illiterate coolie needs protection against practices which the lawyer’s
profession itself should be the first to discountenance.
To show the desire for justice,—in the case of a coolie at Navna, who had
complained of ill-treatment while we were there, the Immigration Department took


up the case foi the coolie and the Acting Governor sent down the Attorney General
to act on his behalf. As far as we were able to judge, every step had been taken
in order to ensure justice. The case ended in the coolie’s complaint being found
true and the offender being punished.
7. We were much struck by the perfect freedom allowed to us by a European
gentleman (at whose house we were staying) to bring Indians often from the
ordinary coolie class, —into his house in order to hear their long stories. He would
come up himself and join with us in talk, as far|as his knowledge of the vernacular
allowed. It would have been impossible for Indian coolies to have been treated
more courteously and freely ; and the trouble caused to him by such a daily stream
of visitors, from morning till night, was by no means inconsiderable. Yet he put up
with it all with the utmost eonsidertion. The Indians, who came, felt his kindness
as much as ourselves.
8. We went very carefully into the case of a European Overseer who had been
found guilty of committing offences with the women in the coolie dines’. The man
was dismissed, and an undertaking given to Government that he should never be
allowed to be in charge of coolie dines’ again. We were told on high authoritv that
this was always done, wherever a ease was clearly proved, and that this offence has
grown far less frequent in the Colony. We felt, however, that, with the state of
morals among the Indian women which clearly existed (through no fault of their
own, but because of the indenture system) it was altogether wrong to employ un-
married European overseers and unmarried Indian Sardars. The temptation of such
a position was too great. We placed before the Immigration Department and before
the Acting Governor a strong expression of our opinion on the matter, and we believe
that already steps have been taken so that only overseers living with their own wives
and sardars who are married men, shall in future be set over the dines.’
9. One excellent law is in force throughout the whole Colony, which prevents
any intoxicating liquor being sold to Indians, under any circumstance whatever,
without a written doctor s order. There was considerable grumbling among some
of the Indians in Suva concerning this law, because it did not apply to Europeans
also. But, however that may be, there can be no question whatevever that the law
has had a very beneficial effect. It is not a law on paper. It is strictly enforced.
While we were in the Islands, the case occurred of an English publican selling l< slv
grog ” to an Indian, and he was fined seven hundred and fifty rupees, or six months’
imprisonment. We never saw a single Indian who was intoxicated during the whole
time we were in Fiji. This, again, is strikingly different from what we saw in
South Africa. Gambling, however, is terribly prevalent in Fiji and there seems
little effort made to prevent it. The street called “ The Street of all Nations ” in
Suva (where Chinese, Japanese, Samoans, Fijians, Indians and half-castes live all
mixed up together) is notorious for its gambling and vice. But there were very
few signs of drink.


These are examples, which might be multiplied a hundred times over from
our own experience. They gave us a strong general impression, that, whatever
might have been the case in the past, the Fiji Government was now wide awake
to its responsibilities, and would only be too anxious to do anything that was
possible to remedy the moral evils which prevailed among the Indian population.
And what was equally important, there appeared to be no strongly marked racial
prejudice, which would stand in the way of ultimate Indian citizenship. We ’are
confident that the Indians of the Colony will win, in good time, their full civic
rights, just as the Fijians are now well on the way to win theirs. What is most
needed is a body of responsible and educated Indians, of good position in the
Islands, who will be able to represent their community when fuller rights of
citizenship are given.
A third consideration, which makes for greater hopefulness, is the changed
outlook towards India which has been spreading in recent years over the whole of
the South Pacific, and has given rise to kindlier feelings and more intelligent views.
This change began, more than three years ago, when ‘Gitanjali’ was first
published. We were often told in Australia how unique was the appeal which
that one small volume made to thoughtful Australian men and women. It went
direct to the heart, and won its way by its own inner beauty. Amid the rush and
noise of modern life, in a vast and undeveloped country, it brought a message of
peace. Wherever we went, we came in contact with those who were looking out
upon the world with different eyes, and upon India with newer, kindlier senti-
ments, since they had read ‘ Gitanjali. ’ Its influence has been like a seed growing
secretly. For a time it may pass almost unnoticed. But when the seed is full
grown, it will bring forth much fruit.
The war had carried forward this change of outlook towards India in quite a
different direction. It had touched the imagination of the masses, and had given
them a new conception of the bravery of the Indian soldiers. The old attitude
of the common people, which prevailed before the war, was one of blank ignorance
of India, not unmixed with contempt. The new attitude is one of almost unmixed
admiration.
Gallipoli had touched the masses. There could be no doubt about that.
Stories of the bravery of the Gurkhas were on everybody’s lips. The shops had
silver kukris, made up into brooches, and Australian girls were wearing
them. The man in the street had ‘discovered’ India. He had found out that
India was not a land of down-trodden coolies, but a land of bravery and romance.
What was more, —India was suddenly found to be the next-door neighbour to
Australia itself.
15


It is quite possible that much of this new attitude of the masses will be a war
sensation only, which may die down again when the war is over. But two things
appeared to us to be tending towards closeness of a more permanent kind. First,
the educated classes in Australia have now been deeply moved towards India in
intellect and thought, and this movement is not likely to die down. Secondly,
the geographical closeness of Australia to India has been more clearly understood
by all. The modern appliances of steam and electricity are making this nearness
a patent and obvious fact. When the trans-continental railway is completed,
in a year’s time, Melbourne and Sydney will only be twelve days distant from
Colombo. As the barriers of land and sea are thus broken down, the barriers of
ignorance and prejudice will be overpassed also.
Indeed, so far had things gone from the Australian side, that, when we were
travelling through the country, listening to opinions openly expressed on all
sides, we seemed to find in the air a new sentiment towards India in the very
making. At public meetings in Melbourne and Sydney, when we openly and
plainly condemned the White Australia Policy’, we were heartily cheered.
People rose up in their places and declared before the whole audience, that
educated Australians, one and all, were opposed to the disrespect shown to
educated Indians in their statutes, and that the country would soon be with
them in demanding a revision of their ordinance.
With regard to the abolition of the indenture system of Indian labour in
Fiji there was a strong desire for this everywhere expressed. Practically all
whom we met, in Australia and New Zealand, wished that indenture should be
abolished without any further delay. Their great wonder was that India had
not taken up the matter long before.
“Some years ago”, they said, “we were in the same position with regard to
our Kanaka labour in North Queensland. The revelations made by the Royal
Commission on that indentured labour shocked the whole of Australia. We
found that ‘blackbirding’ (i. e. kidnapping) had become a traffic, and that
immorality and suicide were rife. We had no peace, till we had abolished the
whole evil.”
The figures which we mentioned about Indian suicides in Fiji did not come
as a surprise to them. They had had even worse facts than these in North
Queensland.
We felt that this new and friendly attitude of Australia towards India
was of great importance to the Indians in Fiji. Australian influence is
already strong in the Colony, because most of the European settlers come


from Australia. Indeed, it is not at all unlikely that the Islands may pass under
the direct administration of Australia and New Zealand at the end of the war.
This was openly talked of in Australia as one of the probable ‘war changes.’
However that may be, the growth of respect for India in the South Pacific is
bound to leave its mark upon the Indians settled in the Islands. A more kindly
feeling and a greater willingness to help them is certain to ensue. It rests with
India, the motherland of these her distant children, to give them such good
conditions that they may worthily represent her in the Pacific.
A fourth consideration, which gives hope, is the present attitude of the
Colonial Sug’ar Refining Company. As the amount of their capital invested in
the Islands is over five crores of rupees, their relation to Indian settlers cannot
fail to be of very great importance.
One of the most difficult parts of our enquiry was to get at the real soul of
this Company,—if a money-making business can ever be said to possess a soul.
The composite personality of the Company seemed to be something like the
character of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in Robert Louis Stevenson’s novel.
On the one side, the Company appeared to be a hard business concern,
exacting the last farthing of profit, grinding down the faces of the poor
with less than a living wage, refusing to allow compensation for labourers
who had been maimed for life in the performance of their duty, while the share-
holders were reaping profits which were so large that they had to be carefully
concealed. So much for the harsher side. Then, on the other hand, we found
the same Company in the character of a benevolent philanthropist, offering huge
sums of money for Indian settlement on the land, preparing schemes for colonisa-
tion and carrying them out in practice, appearing before the Indian Government
authorities with pamphlets to prove that the coolie on the estates was
cared for like a favoured child of fortune, —and actually believing its own
statements.
Just as in the novel, so with the Company, the extraordinary thing was this,
that not one, but both characters were true. When therefore, we write of the
present attitude of the Company as hopeful, we mean that the benevolent gentle-
man in the concern is, apparently, overcoming for the time being the harsher
element. Certainly in the past two years, since the Government of India’s
Commission, this philanthropic side has been more than usually in evidence. One
thing is certain. The help, that the Napoleonic finance and business capacity of
the Company may give to the solution of the Indian problem in Fiji, may be very
great indeed.


The last and greatest cause of hope lies in the changed attitude of educated
Indians themselves towards the whole question of Indian emigration. The people
of India will clearly never allow such things to happen again, as have be e
allowed to pass unnoticed before. If today a regulation were proposed by the
Government of India, that forty women should emigrate with every hundred men,
it would be at once put out of court as unthinkable. This simple fact, by itself,
may serve to mark the change which has taken place.
In the future, every act of the colonies, which employ Indian labour, will
be scrutinised with eyes that nothing will escape. We are certain that the
public conscience will never rest content, till it has swept away the last of the
abuses, which have flourished like rank weeds wherever indentured labour has
gone. We have now witnessed with out own eyes, in two different parts of the
world, what this awakened public conscience can accomplish. We base on this,
therefore, more than on any other single cause, our strongest hopes for the future.
We would not wish to end this Report without paying one more tribute of
respect to the Indian coolies themselves, whom we have now seen working
under indenture, both in South Africa and in Fiji.
Owing to the conditions under which they have been obliged to live, we
found them, men and women alike, in a degraded state. We have had to speak
quite plainly and openly about that degradation. But we came away with a feeling,
not so much of pity, as of respect. Their patience and fortitude and simplicity won
our continual regard. Through all the evil and misery of their fate, they had kept
the soul of goodness. Every now and then, some beautiful action would come
to light, which showed that the sweetness of haman relations had not been lost,
and that the pure ideal of womanhood still held its ground. The one action
which seemed to us most typical of this has already been mentioned. Yet it will
bear repeating, because is sums up the whole picture which we would wish to
leave impressed on the mind.
It was the scene of that group of Indian coolies, who had come many miles
to see us, and brought with them the widow and her little daughter whom they
reverenced and loved. With an extravagance, that was out of all proportion to
their wealth, they were willing to pay any sum of money asked for, if only the
wish of the widow might be granted, and she might not be compelled to leave the
piece of ground, where her husband had lived and died.


We left Shantiniketan, Bolpur, on September 15, 1915, in order to go out to
Fiji. The memory and inspiration of the Ashram, and of those who dwelt there,
was with us through all our long journey. The freedom of its life made us the
more sensitive to the misery which we witnessed in the coolie ‘lines.. ’ We
remembered also constantly the villagers of India whom we had left behind.
These memories gave colour to our thoughts and their influence will be felt in all
that we have written. Now, when we return to India, after the voyage is ended,
and see its fields and its villages once more, the longing rises that the day may
not be far distant when the Indian home-steads in the beautiful Islands of the
Pacific shall be a true image of the best village life of India itself.
It is impossible for us to return thanks by name to all the many friends,
both Indian and European, who have helped us with their counsel and given us
their hospitality. We met with a courtesy throughout our visit to Fiji that was
practically unbroken. We were treated by the Government authorities and by
the planters with a generous freedom which left nothing to be desired.
We felt this trust all the more deeply, because we came without any
credentials or letters of introduction. We had some difficulties at the Sydney
headquarters of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company in making our position
understood, but we received from them a permission to go over their mills in
Fiji, which was of great service to us. Their managers, both in the North and
and South of the main Island, offered us every help that was in their power.
Most of all, we feel gratitude towards the Indian labourers on the estates,
both men and women, who gave us their complete confidence and answered our
questions without fear. To them also, we came without credentials and without
introduction. We were members of another race, speaking their mother language
very imperfectly. They could not be certain whether they would not get into
trouble, even for speaking to us at all. At times, the dread of this must have
been very heavy upon them. Nevertheless, they accepted us, at once, without
any reserve, as their friends. They told us fearlessly everything which was in
their mind.
We trust that we have not betrayed in any way the confidence of these coolies
by anything which we have written about them. We would add, to avoid
16


misunderstanding, that in every case in this Report where a coolie’s name has been
specially mentioned, the name of the actual coolie has been changed and a different
name given.
Great political and commercial interests are bound up with the question of
Indian labour in Fiji. Many secondary reasons may be brought forward to
postpone the immediate abolition of indenture. Yet we would urge, with all the
strength that is in our power, that the pathetic appeal, which the Indian coolies
made to us so unceasingly for help in their distress, should be lifted above the
level of these lower interests, and made to depend upon the higher sovereign
claims of humanity itself,
February, 1916.
C. F. ANDREWS.
W. W. PEARSON.


PART 2.
(а) A PAPER CONCERNING THE CONDITION OF INDIANS IN FIJI.
(б) A POSSIBLE BASIS OF RECONSTRUCTION.
(c) SOME NOTES ON THE REPORT.




A PAPER WRITTEN FOR THE ACTING
GOVERNOR OF FIJI.
The following pages are the substance of a paper written for the Fiji authori-
ties describing the conditions of Hindu life in India itself. It has been abbreviated
for want of space, and to avoid repetition of parts of the report; it has also been
very slightly revised. The paper was circulated by H. E. the Acting Governor
of Fiji for the information of his officials.
As the Indian population of Fiji is predominantly Hindu this paper will deal
chiefly with their problem.
To understand Hindu life it is always necessary to go back patiently and
enquiringly to religion : for this has formed, for countless generations, the central
feature of Indian History. It is not ‘religion’ in the sense of church-going that is
implied, but rather the religion of doing all the little and great acts of common
life in a religious way,—the daily eating, drinking, bathing, rising, sleeping,—the
marrying and giving in marriage,—the religious social life. With the Hindu, it
has been rightly said, the whole round of life, from birth and even before birth, to
death and even after death, is one perpetual act of religion. To keep Hharma —
religion, that is the ideal. Any appeal to conscience on that side will find an
immediate response. Hharma is righteousness : Adharma is unrighteousness.
This religious sense among the Indian people, ever welling up in their lives,
has been the sap in the tree of Hindu civilisation. It has produced an almost
unrivalled expansion of the intellect and emotion, which has left, for many centu-
ries, its mark upon the common people. Even today this intellectual and artistic
aspect of life is found to be flourishing in most unlikely quarters. I have found
here in Fiji, among the indentured coolies, Hindu men and women, whose hearts
are filled , with the poetry of nature and of God. The beauty of the risers, and
the sunsets, and the sea, and the clouds, and the night with all its stars, has not
been lost upon them. They have frequently spoken of these things to me in
simple and natural ways. One of them, a mere lad, told me that everything that
God had made was beautiful in Fiji, and only man was vile. There is no doubt
that, by the word ‘man, he meant chiefly the indenture system under which he
himself had been brotight up.


The ultimate danger, as far as I can see it with clear eyes, is that the Colony
may attempt to transplant the tree of this Hindu civilisation, while allowing the
sap of religion inside to dry up. If this is done, and no care is taken about
Dharma, then inevitably the people will deteriorate. They will lose those very
qualities which made them at the first desirable settlers. Their distinctive
character will wither, their peaceableness, their quiet home life, their industry,
their patience. Some other noxious growth of violence and passion will take its
place. And the process will be far more rapid than among other people, because
Hindu life has still a communal, rathar than an individual, religious basis. The
Hindu character is an organic growth of a very delicate and complex kind. You
cannot pull it to pieces and put it together again. You may prune it, and lop off
its branches. With great care you may even transplant it. But you must never
handle it in such a way that its sap will dry up. I repeat once more, —the sap of
Hindu life is Dharma, Religion.
Let me explain some central factors in the Hindu Dharma in order to come
closer to the problems of these Islands.
The Hindu genius stands out pre-eminent in the world’s history by the posi-
tion it has given to marriage in its religious ideal. Marriage, with all the duties
it involves, has been made, as it were, the one supreme religious act in a woman’s
life, —her Dharma, her religion. To look forward to marriage, to go through a full
marriage ceremony when still almost a child, to remain true to her marriage vow,
through life and through death, to worship her home and her husband as the very
shrine of God on earth, —that has been the simple faith of countless millions of
Hindu women in the past, and it still sums up their life history today. They
have lived, and are living still in India, very close indeed to that ideal, —the ideal
of Sita, embodied in the Bamayana of Tulsidas.
This attitude towards life, even with all its extravagances in the past, appears
to me to be one of the greatest achievements in the religious history of our race,
and one of the greatest and purest gifts which God has given to mankind. It has
made the womanhood of India devout and chaste. It has enshrined worship in
every Hindu home, and every Hindu woman’s heart. Hindu India can never be
irreligious, or fail as a great civilisation so long as the marriage life holds this
central place of worship among Hindu women.
Closely connected with this central position of marriage in Hindu religion,
comes the striking feature of caste. Caste, to the Hindu, is intimately associated
with marriage, just as marriage is intimately associated with religion. This may
be seen most clearly in the case of the wild tribes of India, who are settling down
within the borders of Hinduism, and are trying to get taken into the caste


system. They invariably begin to do so by tightening up, as it were, their
marriage relations. They introduce some Brahman, to perform their marriage
ceremonies correctly, and refuse to marry outside a certain group. They give
their girls in marriage at the age of puberty, and thus prevent the continuance
of former laxity of pre-marital relations. They keep strictly the principle of
refusing to allow their widows to marry again, in order to heighten among
women the ideal of marriage itself. When this process of greater strictness has
been going on for some years, then they begin to claim recognition by caste
Hindus. For the most necessary step has been taken towards ultimate inclusion
in the caste system, and their ambition now soon finds its desired end. Such a
process of new caste formation from below is going on rapidly in India even
today. Indeed, it is probable that caste is being far more rapidly built up from
below than pulled down from above. For the caste system has the tenacity of
some island coral reef. The moment the hurricane of a Scythian, or a Moghul,
or a European invasion sweeps over it above, the busy process of laying broader
foundations starts in reaction from below, and the inner waters of Hinduism
inside the barrier reef have been, in this way, kept safe from violent
storms.
But, it may be asked, what is the religious value of this barrier of caste ?
First of all, it has kept the marriage relation strict among the masses of Hindus,
and religious devotion, among Hindu women at least, centres largely in marriage
and the home. Caste is, as it were, the larger circle, having the same centre as
the smaller circle of marriage. But caste, among Hindu men, has served another
and a wider purpose. It has been both the church and the social club of
Hinduism, split up into a thousand denominations and branches. It has formed,
in the past, a very wonderful organ of self government, with its own self-imposed
ordinances, rules and sanctions. The higher the caste, the stricter the rules and
sanctions. Large areas of life are still entirely governed by caste rules, which
have been in former days as inviolable as the laws of the Medes and Persians.
What I wish to point out is this, that the caste life is a strict life, a discip-
lined life, and its strictness has a religious basis. It is a part of Hharma, a
religious duty.
This caste strictness, today, is weakening, and it must necessarily weaken as
modern civilisation advances. It must change completely its present form, which,
,has become a bar to progress. . But thoughtful men watch, sadly and regretfully,
when the old caste land-marks disappear and no others take their place : just as
(to take a parallel instance) good Scotsmen today look sadly when they see the
old Sabbath restrictions thrown overboard, and no equivalent religious duty, no
a


Dharma, filling up the vacuum created. Above all, the thoughtful Hindus fear
that, with the weakening of caste, there may come in, like a flood, a weakening
of the marriage bond, a laxity in marriage.
The social relations of marriage and caste being thus intimately wrapt up
with the Hindu religion, it is not surprising that among the masses of the
common people the worship of God has taken a homely form which is the reflex
and counterpart of this initial worship of marriage.
The idea of God is intensely concrete among the masses, and the baby God
as well as the married God and the mother God enter largely into it. Even the
domestic animal world is not left out of count, and nature with its river banks
and trees and flowers and sunshine is a near symbol of the Divine. In the house,
and in the temple, and at the river side, the image of God is bathed and fed and
offered flowers, with a crude simplicity of child-like faith that may shock the
Englishman at first sight, until he realises the devotion and the tenderness that
overflow in it. A Roman Catholic, (especially one who has lived in Southern
Europe,) may understand it : but it is hard for a Protestant of Northern Europe
to do so. But there it is, whatever may be thought of it, —this concrete intimate
homely worship. And it has spread all over India, from North to South and
from East to West. Worship at the household shrine, or at the village temple,
or at some pilgrim centre, such as Hardwar, or Benares, or Puri, takes up a very
large portion of a Hindu woman’s life, and gives to it much of its peculiar tender-
ness and devotion and unworldliness.
If I were to go further into the Hindu religion I should have to bring
forward facts which seem at first to be the very contrary of all that I have said.
But T can only refer to them now to prevent false conclusions being drawn. The
Hindu is not bound fast to the conception that marriage, caste, and concrete
outward worship are ultimate things in religion. They are rather, in his mind, a
process, a stage in life’s religious drama—a stage which, whatever other races
may do, his own race has been called upon, in its evolution, to pass through on
its way to the Eternal. The Hindu, who has traversed faithfully these earlier
stages, may renounce the intimate social ties of home, may break his own sacred
thread of caste, may abandon all forms of worship and all religious ceremonial,
and retire to the inner contemplation of the Formless. This last stage, the
sanyasi stage, is a vital part of Hindu religion. Hindus today may be found,
not seldom, who have lived the full married life, who have won distinction in the
world, who have imbibed all the learning and culture of the East and West, and
yet when the, call comes, will renounce all, without a sigh, except a sigh of relief,


in order to enter, while still living, that unseen silent world where there is neither
marriage, nor caste, nor outward form in worship.
In all that I have said, I have not dwelt upon certain abuses which
have crept into Hinduism with regard to caste and marriage and idolatry.
These have filled the pages of popular books and magazines, and there is
little need to bring them up again. In the case of marriage, these abuses
will be found chiefly to be the extravagant attempts to maintain a high
ideal.
Let me repeat the sum and substance of what I have already said. It
is this. Religion has been for countless generations the very warp and woof
of Hindu civilisation in India. Religion runs in the blood, and blood is
thicker than water, It has moulded the lives of Hindu women most of all,
and has implanted in them a kind of worship of the married life. The men
have been influenced in a lesser degree, but with the men caste influence
has come in besides to strengthen the ties of religion : and caste influence
has strictly regulated marriage. This Hindu life of marriage and caste has
been united with a religious worship of an outward and concrete kind,
which the women tenderly and ardently engage in day by day, at the house-
hold shrine or at the river side. In this atmosphere of religion they are
happy and contented, even in the midst of what others would regard as the
direct poverty. They are also law-abiding and gentle in manners beyond all
other nations. Their home life is chaste and has a beauty of its own. They
are peaceable and industrious. Apart from this religious life they appear to
become wretched and down-cast and often morally degraded.
If I have drawn at all correctly the picture of the ordinary Indian
village life, which Hindu immigrants to this Colony already know, then it
will be clear that statesmanship of the highest order will be needed to trans-
plant such a delicate and complex growth into a foreign soil.
There is a worse cruelty, however ignorant and unconscious, than the
destruction of the body of a people. There is a cruelty of neglect and
indifference which kills, not the body, but the soul. The danger among
Hindus in Fiji is this, —they are losing the soul of their religion, and, with this
overthrow of religion, morals are going shipwreck also. I have seen and heard
of things done here by decent Hindus that I could hardly have believed credible
when I left India, things that have eaten into the heart of the people. I am quite
certain, now, that this is due to the utter break-down of religion among Hindus
that has taken place in the . present coolie lines.


This dees not end at the coolie lines. It goes on, from thence, direct to the
free Indian population.
The last sight I saw before leaving Calcutta was that of a group of coolies
who were waiting to be transferred to Fiji. I looked at them long and carefully—
their physique, their faces, their eyes, their general appearance. I saw
from what class they had come. It was a class I knew quite well—a typical,
simple village class. I know the morals of this class. I know their religion. I
know their habits of life. Since then I have continually compared that picture in
my mind with the sights which I have witnessed in the coolie lines in Fiji.
I cannot exactly describe the impression in words but it is one of almost
irreparable loss. The spirit has become different. The faces have changed for
the worse. A subtle but unmistakable deterioration has set in. All the
best people among the free Indians, whom we have met, have acknow-
ledged the same fact to us. They cannot account for it : they cannot understand
it. But one and all have told us that the Indians in Fiji have become a degraded
people. And the facts are both palpable and evident.
It will be noticed what very great and special stress I have laid upon
marriage in my account of Indian religion. I feel certain that here, in the
question of marriage, more than anywhere else, lies the cause of the present
disintegration of the Indians in Fiji. For more than thirty years, under the
indenture system, men and women have been coming out to this country
from India in the unnatural and inhuman proportion of three men to one woman,
all of the marriageable age. The disproportion of the sexes in the coolie lines
becomes rapidly even worse than that ; for when a certain number of the stronger
men have paired off with the same number of women, the rest of the men are
obliged to live with the small remainder of the women in a life of common
prostitution.
This inherent evil seems almost to have obliterated the ideal of married
life from the memory of Hindus in Fiji. They speak of marriage and of women
in a way that is revolting to those who have lived among Hindus in India. The
little children in the coolie lines know and see things that no little children
ought to see and know. The evil of all this in Fiji has been increased out of
all proportion by the failure of Government hitherto to recognise the Hindu
ceremonial of marriage, which is, as I have- shown, so vital a power in a Hindu
womans life. The Hindu woman in this country is like a rudderless vessel with
its mast broken drifting on to the rocks ; or like a canoe being whirled down the
rapids of a great river without any controlling hand. She passes from one man
to another, and has lost even the sense of shame in doing so.


Among Hindu men the feature of disintegration that is most prominent is
the break-up of the organic village life. The men live and move and have their
being in Fiji as separate and helpless units—not in communities at all. Nothing
has, as yet, arisen here to take the place of caste. With the complete loss of caste
has gone also the last vestige of respect for Hindu marriage. A wife is a matter
for huckstering and bargaining, for fighting and suicides, for jealousy and murder.
The proportion of murders, suicides and crimes of violence in this country, arising
out of sexual relations, is nothing less than appalling. It shows in hard cold
figures, the terrible fact that the old Hindu system with its sanctions, disciplines,
and ordinances has broken down. Nothing remains of it but a shattered memory
of the past. The Hindu population know and feel their own degradation.
It may be asked what immediate steps are necessary in order to bring back
some part, at least, of the ideal of the past and to recover ground which has been
already lost. I would say at once, that lam by no means of the opinion that
things have gone so far as to be irremediable. There are wonderful recuperative
powers in this Colony which may be expected to act rapidly and wholesomely, if
once the root of the present evil is removed.
The first remedy appears to me to be the immediate prevention of any further
increase in the disproportion of the sexes. None, except married families,
should be brought out, and Indian women of loose character should be refused
admission to the Colony. If the new admissions into the Colony come from a
more decent class, and under more decent conditions, there is a hope that things
may gradually right themselves among the Indians already living in Fiji. The
disease, as I have stated, may be stopped at this stage, but it must on no account
be allowed to get a stronger hold.
The second remedy would be the introduction of a new Marriage Ordinance.
Every care should be taken to encourage and support among Hindus the religious
ceremony of marriage and to discourage any further civil marriages. In all forms
of labour ample holiday should be allowed for the religious ceremony itself, and
repect should be shown to the wishes of Hindus in such a vitally important
matter. Care also should be taken to include under the Ordinance, as officials
in Hindu marriage, only those who were respected by the Hindu Community
itself. My own fear, as to the present Ordinance, is with regard to the permis-
sion given for divorce. This appears to me to be contrary to the genius of
Hindu religion, and to introduce a laxity where strictness is required.
A third remedy would be to make illegal the present common practice of a
Hindu wife obtaining by a written agreement, drawn up by a lawyer, a virtual
b


divorce from her husband without resort to a Court of Law. I do not know in
what way this present laxity can be stopped, but I do not think it should be
beyond the range of good government to bring back strictness in this matter.
But by far the most effective remedy will be the gradual settlement of the
Indians on the land in small groups. These should, as far as possible, be built
up into village communities, such as Hindus themselves are used to in their own
motherland. Already, in this Colony, the Indians are beginning to reproduce
their own village life in their new settlements, in the North of the Island.
The Fiji Government and the Colonial Sugar Refining Company might materially
help this process forward, in sound and wholesome ways, if there were expert
knowledge of indigenous Indian conditions. It is the village system of India
which has been the support and stay of the Hindu marriage system. It is in
the villages that the Hindu married life remains most strict and pure. If Hindus
are encouraged to get away from the town centres, and to live over again their
simple Indian village life, manage purity will not suffer such grievous loss in
Fiji as it does before our eyes today.
In connexion with the same village system the Panchayats of India should be
very carefully studied. While it may not be either practical or advisable to
encourage the building up of a caste system in Fiji, the panchayat system (the rule
of the five village representatives) might well be revived and promoted, and much
of the petty civil litigation might be entrusted to its charge. Also, marriage
strictness might come under the Panchayat’s powers of persuasion, though not of
their legal direction.
A further remedy for the present state of affairs among Indians in Fiji would
be the Government support of the village school, post office, and dispensary.
These, in a large proportion of villages, are the modern enlightening influences,
among our vast Indian village population. Without them, whatever progress
has been made in the last century could never have been effected. The building
up of this new side of Indian village life has brought the Indian agriculturalists
within the area of the world’s progress, without taking from them their old good
conservative habits. It has also given them natural leaders and advisers, respon-
sible to Government on the one hand and in touch with the people on the other.
What may be done in Fiji to restore the Hindu religious life itself, in i s
daily worship, among Hindu women, is a question that I feel unable to answer.
Yet I cannot but feel that here is the crux of the whole position, and that
until religion is re-established in the hearts of the people, the basis of Hindu
social life in Fiji is radically unsound.


A few suggestions may be made. The breaking up of the present coolie ‘lines’
into separate dwellings should be undertaken, in order to make possible in each
home the daily practice of Hindu religious worship. Care should be taken by
Government, at each village centre, to set apart a pathway to any river or pool
where bathing ceremonies could be engaged in by the villagers. It may not, also,
even yet be too late to consider whether a space for a burning ghat might not be
needed, and the wholly sanitary custom of cremation receive Government sanction
and support. Furthermore, if a real wish were expressed by the people for a
piece of land, on which to build a village temple, Government would be well ad-
vised, in my opinion, to g'rant a free-hold for that purpose.
I am painfully conscious that what I have said may appear feeble and incon-
clusive, in view of the greatness of the present evil. If I may express a personal
opinion, I am trusting most of all to two things,—the restoration of equal propor-
tion between Hindu men and Hindu women, and the wonderful recuperative
powers, in a new Colony, of Indian settlement on the land. But I do not think
that these alone will solve the problem for the Fiji Government, unless at the
same time care is taken to watch every avenue by which the evil has spread in
the last thirty years. The guiding principle will be found in this aphorism which
may be taken as roughly true for India itself; —“The central fact in the history
of Hindu civilisation is religion, and the central fact of Hindu religion is the
sanctity of marriage.”
A POSSIBLE BASIS OF RECONSTRUCTION FOR
INDIAN LABOUR IN FIJI.
We were asked, both by the Acting Governor and also by the Planters’
Association, to set before them some tentative basis of reconstruction of Indian
labour, on the hypothesis that indenture was likely to be abolished. They asked,
what we supposed would be the minimum requirements, which would not infringe
on the rights of the labourer on the one hand, nor deprive the employer of a return
for his payment of the passage out on the other. We put do wn, in a very general
manner, some conditions, which we regarded as vital, if the present moral degra-
dation were to be checked. We made clear to the Government and to the Plan-
ters, that we were in no way in a position to enter into any political negotiations.
We had come out for humanitarian, not for political, reasons. Anything that
we put forward could only be our private opinion, given with regard to what we
thought in keeping with the dictates of humanity. We committed no one else
except ourselves. Furthermore, we expressed a desire to leave ourselves perfectly
free to revise our own conclusions in the light of any subsequent experience. We


promised that we would inform the Fiji Government of any material change in
our own views, and also that we would present our conclusions, such as they were,
before those who had asked us to make this independent enquiry. On these
understandings we made a statement, both to a Special Committee appointed by
the Fiji Government to deal with the question, and also before the Executive
Committee of the Planters’ Association.
The first point we urged, as immediately necessary, was to stop all recruiting
whatsoever in its present form. In any future immigration, the equal proportion
of the sexes must be the main consideration for some years to come. Also, where
morality had reached so low an ebb, and marriage had fallen into such disrepute,
no more prostitutes should on any account be recruited. Furthermore, no more
single adult men should be allowed to come out for agricultural work until the
sex ratio were set right. Families alone should be allowed to enter the Colony
as labourers.
The second point we urged, with equal insistence, was that Indian labour
must be free in every sense of the word. There must be no penal clauses, no
compulsory labour, no invidious State regulations. This did not prevent an
agreement being entered into, in return for the passage out. It meant that the
agreement should be free and non-penal,—what we termed a free civil contract.
No fines, no sentences of imprisonment, must be attached to it, but only an action
for damages in the civil court of law. If the employer should object that the
Indian labourer would have no property, from which damages might be recovered,
the answer would be that the employer might have the labour on the terms of a
free civil contract, or not at all. The coolie took a very great risk in coming out
to a foreign country for labour ; the employer must be prepared to take a risk
also. The employer’s guarantee was the Indian labourer’s well known industrious
habits, and his readiness to work under a good employer who was prepared to
treat him kindly.
With regard to the length of the agreement, which might be entered into by
the Indian labourer, in return for the payment of a passage for himself, his wife
and family, we urged that in no case should the term of service be longer than
two years. At first, we had only before us the proposition of an agreement be-
tween the Indian labourer and the individual employer. But, later on, we saw
the advantage, both to the employer and to the labourer, if the free labour
contract took some such form as that outlined in Note 13, which should be care-
fully studied in this connexion. The State would then undertake the whole
liability, if the labourer did not fulfil his engagement. Thus the employers’
monetary risk would be minimised. The Indian labourer, on his part, would be


free to change his employer whenever he wished, and thus his risk of being
obliged to serve under a bad employer would be minimised. Under such a system,
the good employers would have abundant offers of service, while the employers,
who treated their labour badly, would have none. This is as it should be. For
when all is said and done, this complete freedom of choice is the final guarantee to
the coolie of good treatment from the employer.
With regard to a return passage to India, we felt that in such a country as
Fiji, this might be left out of the agreement altogether. At the present time,
comparatively few take advantage of it, and many of these could easily pay the
passage themselves. Money is very plentiful in Fiji for free Indians, and the
return passage is not very costly. The offer of a free return passage is pauperi-
sing. No such offer is inserted in ordinary labour contracts drawn up with
Europeans. It is assumed that they would be able to make their own way in
the world, and save money enough for themselves to do what they wish. Every
Indian in Fiji, with whom we discussed this matter, regarded the offer of a free
return passage as undesirable. Any hard cases, such as a break-down in health,
or a sudden call to India, might be met from the Distressed Immigrants’ Fund
which already exists. In present circumstances, it is often a wretched sight to
watch able-bodied Indian labourers sitting idle in the Depot, waiting for the
return passage, when they might be up and doing. The whole thing has the
taint of pauperism, and it should be abolished.
We urged, very strongly indeed, that a regular monthly steamer service
should be started between Calcutta and Auckland via Suva. This would prevent
much of the evil that is so common on the present emigrant vessels. It would
also take away a certain stigma, which must always attach to emigrant ships,
when they are employed for coolies and coolies only. The families who leave
India for Fiji, in future, should feel, from the start, that they are free people, not
bondsmen. It might be found quite possible to do away with the Depots
altogether, and simply to issue passage-tickets, to be countersigned by a Presi-
dency Magistrate, a Doctor, and a representative of the Colony, in Calcutta or
Madras. This would bring Indian labour emigration more in accord with custo-
mary procedure in Europe.
The other suggestions which we made are simple and easy to follow. It will
be seen that they have one main object in view, namely, the recovery of marriage
and the family life.
The last proposal, in the schedule which we put forward, needs the most
careful consideration of all. It forms the constructive and positive aspect of the
whole matter. For what is needed, is not merely the remedying of existing
c


evils, but the encouragement of all that is good. We felt most keenly the need
of building up the community by the introduction of new educated leaders, who
should win respect for Indians in the. Colony by their very presence. As matters
stand, there is far too much of a low, dead, uniform level, and far too little of
higher intellectual life. Unless the people in India are prepared to send out
good men from India as teachers and doctors, there is very little hope of progress.
The Fiji authorities are now in earnest and will do their full share, but India
must be called upon to do its own share also.
We should regard it as probably necessary, in order not to do things on a
mean and inadequate scale, to provide from India as soon as possible about thirty
qualified teachers of good standing and respectability. Only married men should
be chosen. Their incomes should not be less than 250 rupees per month, and
house rent and pension should be provided. The same number of qualified
doctors would be needed also. In stirring times such as these, in India, when
educated men have shewn their readiness to go to the front’, it should not be
difficult to get competent volunteers for this form of service. But the final choice,
from among those who offered, should be made with great care. A failure here
would mean disaster.
One further action appeared to us to be necessary, if it could be accomplished
without dislocation of labour in Fiji altogether. This was, that a pause should
now be made, before further immigration took place. A break in the flow of
immigration for a period of two years would do much to set many things right.
One of the most important needs in Fiji is to destroy, once and for all, the
distinction between the free Indian and the indentured Indian. This distinction
must be wholly obliterated, if self-respect is to be restored. It must be made
quite clear, throughout the Islands, that all Indians are free, and none whatever
are in an inferior position. This is necessary, not only in order to remove a most
invidious class distinction among Indians themselves, but also to prevent the
aboriginal Fijian despising the Indians as an inferior race, a thing which he is
already inclined to do.
If the question of the Planters’ profits be raised, the answer would be that
more use might be made, during the interval, of the free Indians who are already
in the Islands. With sugar at the present ‘war’ price, the Companies can easily
afford to pay a little more for the sugar-cane that is crushed in their Mills. They
and the planters can get enough free Indians to work, if they are ready to pay
higher wages. There could be no better time than the present to bring about
the change.


Indian immigration to the West Indies experienced such a pause and break
during the year 1914 to 1915 on account of the war. Yet the sugar industry
was prosperous in the West Indies during that year. The same would probably
be the case in Fiji. The gain to the whole Colony, through getting things
righted once for all would be far greater than any question of extra profits for the
great Sugar Companies.
We set down below in the form of a schedule the outline of the proposals
which we made. We have already sent to the acting Governor of Fiji our fuller
opinion on the fourth item, namely, a free civil labour contract. This will be
found given at full length in Note 13. We have also sent to him our suggestion
with regard to the need of a break in the flow of Indian immigration.
Tentative Proposal for Future Reconstruction
of Indian Labour in Fiji.
1. Immigrants to come from India in future by families, rather than as
individuals. Prostitute immigrants to be excluded.
2. A regular Steamer Service to run between Suva and Calcutta, bringing
immigrants in smaller numbers, and at more frequent intervals.
3. Only the passage from India to be paid in future. Free return passage
no longer needed in the case of Fiji. The Fiji authorities to deal
liberally with any hard cases.
4. Only a free civil contract to be allowed. No penal clauses, no fines, no
compulsory labour. Any civil contract entered into for a longer period
than two years to be made illegal. (See note 13 for our fuller opinion on
this point).
5. Married women not to be called upon for field work except of their own
accord. An allowance to be made to the husband, where the wife, for
family reasons, is unable to work.
6. Separate dwellings, combined with a small piece of ground, to be given
to each family.
7. As far as may be, only married overseers and married sardars to be
employed on plantations.
8. The full civil sanction to be given to Hindu and Muhammadan religious
marriages throughout the Colony. Leave to be granted for religious
rites on the estates especially in connection with marriage. More religi-
ous holidays to be allowed.
9. Education and medical aid to be provided for all Indians in the Islands,
with help from India in the matter of teachers and doctors, and possibly
a grant-in-aid.


NOTES.
The following notes may help to elucidate some of the points which have been mentioned in
the Report and to show the state of things which we found in Fiji.
NOTE 1.
Lack of Freedom under Indenture.
As examples of the lack of freedom in the matter of choice or change of employment and
employer the following examples may suffice to illustrate the difficulties under which the
indentured Indian labours.
1. One of us happened to visit some banana plantations in the interior of the Island. Within
two miles of each other there wefe two planters employing practically the same number of
indentured Indians viz :16 adults. On one of these plantations the coolies were found to be not
only contented, but as happy as the day was long. They spoke of their employer as a devata (i.e.
a god) and had not a single complaint to make of either their treatment or their wages.
On the other plantation there was nothing but bitter dissatisfaction expressed. And this was
confirmed by the fact that 2 out of the 16 adults at the time of our visit, were imprisoned for two
months in goal for refusing to work, while a third had been arrested by the police on his way to
complain against his employer at the Immigration Office in Suva. This planter paid.only the
statutory wage of ss. 6d. per week and was employing a bright and intelligent boy, the son of one
of his indentured Indians, as a house servant on the munificent wage of 6d a week (with certain
rations and cloths) working him from six in the morning till late at night.
When we happened to be in the Immigration Office a week or 'ten days after this visit, a
coolie from this very estate arrived to complain against his employer. He told us that, as he was a
Tamil-speaking man, he found it difficult to understand his master’s orders as he could not speak
Tamil, and thus trouble had arisen.
We noticed that on the last visit of the visiting Inspector of Immigrants to this estate “no
complaints were made ” to him by the indentured Indians.
On enquiry from the other employer, who seemed to have completely satisfied his labourers,
it was found that he was a man of very wide experience and paid his labourers by giving them
areas to do by contract, treating them to all intents and purposes as free men. He declared that
although the men got exceptionally high wages, he found he got such good work out of them that
it paid him to give them far beyond the minimum coolie wage.
Here, then, we have labourers of exactly the same class and experience, working side by side
under two masters, one of whom may be regarded as a type of the good master, and the other as a
type of the bad master, and yet they are so bound that they cannot during the whole five years of
their indenture change from the bad employer to the good one. This shows how the indenture
system gives to the bad employer an unfair hold over his labour.
A


2. We interviewed the employer of the Hindu (mentioned elsewhere in this report) who was
doing butcher’s work, and in the course of conversation he remarked “I prefer indentured
Indians, of course, because they can’t get away from you. They are bound for the tive
years.” Later in the same conversation he said, “For the life of me I can’t see the difference
between being under indenture and being in gaol !” And when it was suggested that perhaps
under indenture the man was more free, he replied “Oh no, not a bit of it ! ”
We were warned not to regard this employer as typical of the planters in Fiji, but that only
strengthened the conviction that it is the bad employer who benefits by the indenture system, and
that, under a free system of labour, the bad employer would suffer and the good employer would
gain,—a perfectly fair and just proposition.
We visited an estate at Navua where the overseer had not long ago committed such atrocities
upon the coolies in his c lines ’ that he was obliged at last to fly from the colony, fearing a convic-
tion for murder. For months this man had terrorised the coolies on the plantation. Yet these
same coolies were compelled by the Law of Indenture to remain on this estate. Fresh newly-
arrived coolies would, in the course of things, be sent direct from the ship to serve on this estate
without any power of refusal.
NOTE 2.
Language Difficulties in Fiji.
Everyone knows how friction arises between an employer and his servants when the former
has but an imperfect knowledge of the servants’ language. The master often thinks that, by
raising his voice and bullying his servant, he can make up for imperfection in his knowledge of
the vernacular. Indeed he often accuses the unfortunate servant of the stupidity, when the
stupidity is all on the side of the master. Nothing illustrates the point better than the way in
which the work of a P and O liner is carried on. There are numerous English officers in charge
of a crew of Lascars and perhaps Punjabi stokers, but one never hears a raised voice. The work
is carried on so silently and regularly that, as an Australian fellow passenger remarked to us on
our return voyage, “ You would hardly know the fellows were there, would you ?” And yet the
ship is kept spick and span, and both the officers and the crew are contented and satisfied.
The secret is simply that they understand each other. One officer on a P and O boat, who
had been 33 years in the Company, said of the Lascars, “ They do their work splendidly so long
as they have a man over them, who knows a little of their language, and understands their
ways.”—“ But ”he added “if you shout at them and bully them, they only get confused and
flurried,” We only wished that the same harmony existed between employer and employed in
Fiji. For certainly one reason for the large number of cases between the planters and the coolies,
which are recorded in court, is an imperfect knowledge of the coolies’ language and habits.
One planter told us how one year he had got a new lot of coolies, all of whom talked Tamil.
For these he employed as interpreter, for a time, a free Indian who talked Tamil. The next
year he applied again for Madrasis, but when they arrived, they all talked Telugu ; and no
Telugu-speaking interpreter was available. In the third year a contingent arrived who could talk
neither Tamil, nor Telugu, for they were Malaya lam speaking people, and so confusion became
worse confounded.


We may give a single instance of the ‘ pigeon ’ Hindustani of a Madrasi coolie. One of us
had the following conversation with him. A translation is appended where needed.
Madrasi. Sahib baitho ? (Was the Sahib there ? )
A. Han, sahib baitho.
Madrasi. Sahib bolo ?
A. Han sahib bolo.
Madrasi. Sahib bolo, jano ? (Did the sahib say he knew ? )
A. Nahin, Sahib bolo nahin jano.
Madrasi. Sahib bolo, na jano ?
A. Han, Sahib bolo, na jano.
Madrasi. Sahib jano ! (The sahib did know !)
The overseers, in the Islands, have also a ‘pigeon’ Hindustani of their own, almost worse than
this of the Madrasi coolie. One of us heard an overseer say over and over again to a new Hindus-
tani coolie “ Gae chale jao ! Gae chale jao ! Gae chale jao !” As far as w r e could make him
out, he meant to tell him to take the cows home. But it was difficult for the newly arrived coolie
to understand him.
NOTE 8.
Lack of Knowledge of Indian Customs,
One of the features in the relation between the Indians in Fiji and their employers that struck
us very much was the wide spread ignorance displayed by the latter with regard to the Indians
themselves. We were at first astonished, as we passed Indians on the road, to observe them
remove their turbans, just as an English villager removes his cap to the squire. On enquiry we
were told by the Indians that the sahibs had ordered them to do so, little knowing that according
to the Indian ideas, to remove one’s turban is no sign of respect at all. This ignorance goes,
however, far deeper than mere externals, and is illustrated by the way in which, throughout the
Colony, it was assumed that the coolie class in India are a criminal and vicious class, which the
Government of India must be glad to get rid of. Little seemed to be known of the communal
life of the village people of India, or of the strong moral obligations imposed upon them by caste
and communal ties. The idea of sending picked men to India to study, on the spot, the ways
of life and the customs of the population, from Avhieh the labouring classes in Fiji have been
drawn, never seemed to have crossed the mind, even, of that efficient business concern, the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company. This Company spares neither money, nor trouble in studying the
conditions under which sugar-cane can be grown so as to produce the maximum amount of pure
cane sugar. The Company will send experts to other sugar-growing countries to study conditions
of cane cultivation there, and, if in the cane-crushing mills, defective machinery, or wrong chemi-
cal combinations cause waste in production, the Company will think nothing of spending thou-
sands of pounds in an effort to reduce that waste. But although there lias been obvious defect
in the machinery of their labour, and an obvious waste through murders and suicide and all the
friction that murders and suicide imply under the surface, the Company has never sent a labour
expert to study the conditions under which the Indian labourers live in India itself, A man of


experience, who had seen in Fiji the wasteful results caused by the murderous and suicidal ten-
dency amongst the labourers, could by one year’s careful study of the conditions of their life, in
their own Indian surroundings, have put his finger on the weaknesses of the system by which
labour was being introduced. By rectifying that system, they could have so improved conditions
amongst the labourers, that not only would they have been better working units, but untold
misery and vice would have been spared. But this idea seems never to have entered into the
minds of the Company’s responsible officials.
NOTE 4.
Statistics of Crime.
(1) Suicide Rate.
Year. Actual suicides. Attempted suicides.
1912 ... 18 ... 1
1918 ... 20 ... 3
1914 ... 11 ... 7
1915 (11 months) ... 17 ... No figures available, except 2
in the Navua district.
One more suicide must be added to 1915 making the total 18 ; for a suicide of a
young indentured coolie took place in the North of the Island, in November, but had not
been officially reported before our departure on December 9th.
We found that attempted suicides are not in every ease reported. One such attempted
suicide was related to us as happening in 1914. The planter himself told us about it in
November 1915, and when asked if he had reported it, he said he had not; he had merely
given the boy a good scolding.
The significance of these figures may be seen in the following way. In the four years
1912-1915 no less than one in every 930 of the coolies under indenture has committed
suicide. And when the years 1908 to 1912 are taken, the proportion is scarcely appreciably lower.
In the Report, published by the Immigration Department for 1912, it is stated as
“probable that in the majority of eases sexual jealousy was the principal factor.” Though
this may be true of the majority of suicides, yet in a certain number of eases, especially
where the immigrant is quite young, depression and home-sickness seem to be the more
likely cause. Out of the 17 cases reported for 1915, five occurred during the coolies’ first
year of indenture; while out of 9 eases, which have taken place in the Navua Plantations
since 1912, 6 eases occurred during the first year out from home, two of these being in
the first month, a state of things which is a most serious reflection on the condition of
indentured immigrants on the Navua Plantations. In addition to these there have been four
eases of attempted suicide in the Navua District since January 1914.
(In the tables giving the death-rates, published by the Fiji Medical Department, Navua
has a very bad record also. For the years 1912-15 it has had an adult death-rate practically
double that of the highest recorded death-rate of any other district in Fiji.)


(2) Crimes of Violence.
Murder.
Vear. Persons Persons Persons
concerned murdered convicted
1912 5 5 3
1913 5 5 3
1914 21 7 10
Wounding.
‘Year. Persons Persons Persons
concerned wounded convicted
1912 8 6 5
1913 18 18 16
1914 29 13 27
Assault.
Year. Persons Persons Persons
concerned assaulted convicted
1912 11 1
1913 21 2
1914 3 3 (manslaughter) 2
In the report on Indian Immigration for 1914 we have a table showing the number
of indentured coolies murdered each year from 1905-1914 inclusive. The average works
out to about one in every 3,000. The worst year comes up to the rate of one in every 1,500.
These figures for violent crime are hardly less startling than those with regard to
suicide. Out of a total of 41 adults murdered, 29 were females, a fact which seems to
bear out the almost unanimous opinion (expressed to us both by planters and magistrates)
that sexual jealousy is responsible for most of the murders among the indentured Indians.
While the suicide rate is more than twenty times as high as that of the United
Provinces and Madras, the murder rate is more than eighty times as high as that of
these two provinces from which the indentured coolies are taken.
NOTE 5.
The Profits of the C. S*R. Company.
With reference to the profits made by the C. S. R. Company it is difficult to arrive
at an accurate estimate, owing to the fact that a large proportion of the profits has
been used in developing the business and not disclosed in the published accounts. This
can be clearly seen from the unwilling admissions made by Mr. Edward Knox, the
Chairman of the C. S. R. Company, in his evidence before the Royal Commission on the Sugar
Industry.
The paid-up Capital of the Company is £3,000,000 of which £625,000 represent
capitalized profits (see statement made by Mr. Knox p. 1,008 Sugar Commission’s Report).


To this sum must be added a further amount of “between £2,000,000 and £3,000,000
representing the whole of the assets outside Australia, or in “Fiji” which Mr. Knox declared
in answer to question 27,345 to “have been covered by undivided profits” (see also question
26,918). Or to put it in the words of the Chairman of the Sugar Commission (Questions
27,347-50) addressed to Mr. Knox :
“The paid-up cash capital is only £2,375,000. After paying your dividend you put
aside £3,000,000 plus £625,000 capitalised profits in shares.”
“The actual amount of cash paid up by shareholders is £2,375,000. Then they received
shares from capitalized profits £625,000. That makes £3,000,000, the stated capital of
the Company. In addition there are £3,000,000 of inner reserves.”
Mr. Knox acknowledged these statements to be correct. Thus the profits of the
Company have been so large that it has been able to pay not only 10 per cent on its
actual paid-up capital of £2,375,000, but also on its capitalized profits of £625,000, and
also it has accumulated out of its profits £3,000,000, which has been used to develop
its business “outside Australia.”
In question 27,356 the profits for Fiji and New Zealand alone, for the year 1911,
were calculated by the Chairman of the Commission from statements made by Mr. Knox to be
£345,000. The year 1911 was referred to as an exceptional year because the Company
received £2 a ton more for their sugar. (Q. 27,361 and 27,362)
Since the beginning of the war in August, 1914, we hear on good authority that
they have been receiving £5, a ton, more for their sugar and in twelve months produced
90,000 tons of sugar in Fiji alone (representing an increase of £450,000 for the sugar-
sold in addition to the ordinary profit).
Taking the estimated profits of the Company for 1911 viz ; —£775,000 on the capital
actually paid up, it is found to be equivalent to a dividend of 321 per cent per annum
(see question 27,366). The dividend in war-time would be still greater.
Compare with these figures the amount of the savings transmitted by Indians in Fiji, to
India, which, taking the figures available for the three years 1912-1914, average only
£4,836, a year (equal to about 6s 8d per head for the indentured population.) The larger amounts
(e. g. £16,760 in 1913,) declared by Indians returning to India, represent the savings of
free, and not indentured Indians.
NOTE 6.
Land Settlement under the Company.
The following extract from the Report of the Immigration Department for 1914 will
make clear how the land settlement scheme put forward by the C. S. R. Company is
intended to work. (This scheme must be distinguished from their large offer of £IOO,OOO to
Government at 4 per cent for purchase of Fijian leases.)
The Report says as follows :
“A step which promises, I think, to be of considerable value to the indentured Indians,
has been taken by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited ; it should help to render


easy for the labourers the transition from indentured to free residence. Many Indians on
coming out of indenture drift into habits of comparative idleness, while others exhaust
savings in overcoming the well-known difficulties experienced in an effort to acquire the lease of
a piece of native land.
The step referred to is a scheme started by the Company, during the year, for the
settlement on ready-made farms of Indians serving the last year under indenture, and for their
occupation when their indentures have expired.
The Company has, at all its mill centres, set apart large areas in which fields have been
subdivided into plots varying from two and a half to four acres. Each man has assigned to
him at take-over value : —One plot under plant cane ; a second under ratoons : a third ready
for planting for the following year ; a fourth, which is temporarily retained by the Company,
for fallowing under green manure and preparation for future planting. The above rotation
ensures to each man a regular annual crop of plants and ratoons.
Men in their fourth or fifth year of indenture are taking up these holdings. Whilst they
remain under indenture, they continue to live in the dines’ and are subject to the Immigration
Laws ; but they soon free themselves and their wives, settle on the outskirts of the plantation,
and devote their energies to the hand cultivation of their plots. Horse cultivation is done for
them by the Company at fixed rates, and the cost, together with other advances made on the
crops, rent, &c., are deducted from the proceeds after harvest. The result depends largely on the
industry of the individuals themselves ; some do very well, while others appear to do only
moderately well ; but the following figures show what the 47 men, who have taken up settle-
ment in the Lautoka district, have achieved during 1914 :—The total take-over value of the
property amounted to £3,182 ; they cropped 278 acres yielding 6,920 tons of cane to the value
of £4,264. These men, after paying all expenses and a proportion of their take-over debt drew
cash at the rate of £2B per head in addition to having received the statutory wage of ss. 6d. per
week during the year. After liquidating their take-over debt their incomes will be proportionately
increased.”
So far as it is possible t to judge at this early stage of the experiment there can be no doubt
that it is a great advantage to the Indian to have the benefit of horse ploughing, green manuring,
and the scientific experience of the Company to improve his crop. For none of these could be
applied to his own land, if he took up a small holding on his own account.
The chief criticism of the scheme, offered by the Indians themselves, is that they find the
oversight which the Company feels bound, in its own interests, to exercise, every irksome. (As
they put it—“ It is not much different from being under indenture.”) Many of them would
prefer a lower return on their holdings, if it meant a greater freedom of action. This, however, is
a matter which ought easily to be adjusted, in process of time, when experience has taught
both the Company and the Indian cultivator to understand and appreciate each other’s point of
view.
It is, in any ease, an admirable experiment, and shows how the Company has learnt to value
the Indian as a settler, and not merely as an indentured coolie.


NOTE 7.
The Chaos of the Indian Marriage Law in Fiji.
The following statement made by Mr. Crompton, counsel for the defence, in the case Rex v.
Bavin, at the Suva Police Court, October 2nd, 1913 will show the chaos of the Fiji marriage law
with regard to Indians. It is taken from a summaxy of his concluding speech at a famous trial
in the Islands, which caused a great sensation at the time.
“Mr. Crompton said that the gist of the action against the accused was that a Christian
minister, for marrying two Christian Indians, according to Christian rites, was to be subjected
to penal servitude for a term of five years, or to a fine of £SOO, because, before he married them he
did not obtain a certificate from Mr. Coates, the Agent General of Immigration, to say that
they had been already married. Even the most hardened criminals x’eeeived far less punishment
on conviction than that. It was a public scandal to subject a minister of religion to a greater
punishment than these, because he had performed the Christian ceremony of marriage The
Indian Marriage Ordinance did not provide for a marriage at all. In one place it provided for
polygamy, in another ease it prohibited polygamy. It was a comedy of eri’ors. Mr. Coates, the
Agent General of Irnmigi-ation, and Administrator of the Ordinance, was the Indian Marriage
Ordinance personified. If anyone knew what the Ordinance contained, it was Mr. Coates,
because he administered it. Yet he (the counsel) had tried to find out from Mr. Coates, when,
where and by whom, the marriage was performed. Mr. Coates, even after several houiV cross-
examination, was unable to tell him. As a matter of fact, Mr. Coates had no authority whatever
over the parties before the court. It was absurd for a Minister of the Crown to swear that a
notice of intention to many, and a certificate to say that no objection exists, constitute a
marriage. People could not be married by sending them a postcard. Mr. Coates admitted that in all
the marriages that he had performed, he had never declared any parties to be man and wife
Once a person gave notice of his intention to marry and paid him 5 shillings, the automatic
process went on, and some day in due course he would receive a letter, through the post, telling
him that some weeks ago he was married to so and so. He submitted that, under the present
Marriage Ordinance, there was no provision for marriage of any kind. Thei’e was provision for
notice of intention to marry, provision for the banns, but no provision for actual marriage.”
NOTE 8.
Land Troubles with the Fijians.
There is a tendency amongst the small-holders to traffic in land, or rather in leases of land ;
that is, they get the lease of a piece of land from a Fijian, and, after cultivating it for a couple of
years, they sell the lease to another free Indian at a considerable profit and then repeat the process
This tendency, together with the fact that there is little or no free-hold land held by Indians,
causes constant shifting of the population and i*esults in the free Indians being content with mere
huts, —a great contrast to the comfortable and x’oomy houses built by free Indians in Natal on
their agricultural plots. In Natal small-holders occupied houses which cost £6O to £2OO to build,
whereas the value of the average house of the free Indian in Fiji would be scarcely more than


Rent for 10 acres ... ... ... ...
£
10
Expenses for himself and famil} r , food, clothes etc at £2 a month.
£
24
If he has no bullocks or horses of his own, first ploughing will cost
him £1 an acre, second ploughing will cost him ten shillings
an acre.
£
15
Expenses during cutting season, £1 an acre
£
10
Hut tax, dog licence, etc.
£
1
Total
£
60
150 rupees. Another practice, which is common in Fiji, is for a free Indian to buy a lease from
another Indian, by means of promissory notes, which are met each year when the crop is gathered
in. It is rare for a man to pay cash for the land he occupies, and, consequently, the money he
receives for his cane generally goes, for the first three years, in paying off his debt on his land.
A man will often, in addition, have to pay as much as £2O in “keri keri” (somewhat similar to the
‘salaami’ demanded by the Indian Zamindar in India) to the Fijian, before he can obtain
the Fijian owner’s consent to the lease of a ten acre holding.
Thus, for example, a man who has ten acreas of land will, in addition to the initial bribe to the
Fijian have the following expenses to meet, at a rough calculation.
If he has bought the lease from another Indian, he has to meet his promissory notes for the first
3 years, say £30 a year. This means that his expenses are £90 a year. From 10 acres he might
get £120 worth of cane, which leaves him £30 profit for the year.
NOTE 9.
Education in other Crown Colonies.
The following facts and figures, gathered from other Crown Colonies, which possess condi-
tions similar to Fiji, are given for purposes of comparison.
Population Revenue Education Particulars.
Fiji. 155,000 £279,844 1 Government and 2 aided Public schools with
average attendance of 365. Total expenditure, for
1914, £3,312 or 1.2 per cent of the total revenue.
Barbados. 171,000 £213,000 166 grant-aided schools. Total expenditure, for
1910, £19,209 or 9 per cent of the total revenue.
B. Guiana. 290,000 £563,000 224 gi'ant-aided schools with average attendance
of 21,555. £8,294 distributed in grants, or about 5 per
cent of the total revenue. School gardening and train-
ing in agi'ieulture a speciality.
Jamaica. 831,000 £1,161,000 698 grant-aided schools with average attendance
of 61,669. £60,503 distributed in grants or 5| per cent
of the total revenue. No serious crime in the colony.
No capital punishment in 1911-12.
c


Leewards. 128,000 £164,000 24,573 on the roll of grant-aided and Government
schools ; also 7 secondary schools aided.
Mauritius. 369,000 £720,000 67 Government and 90 grant-aided schools.
Trinidad. 368,000 £948,000 210 grant-aided schools with average attendance of
47,000. £51,111 spent on education, or 5 per cent of the
total revenue. Practical agriculture and Nature study
in nearly all primary schools.
NOTE 10.
Communal Labour.
The large labour immigration which takes place every year from India to Ceylon and to the
Malay States is communal rather than individual. It is of the utmost practical importance to
note that whenever that individual basis has been tried (men and women being taken out apart
from their families) it has always failed. On the other hand communal labour immigration from
India has often proved a success.
Immigration to Ceylon, for instance, has been going on for seventy-five years, and the natural
flow of family life has gone with it, and has not been interrupted. The ties of home have never
been broken. On the contrary whole families and even villages have been successfully trans-
planted.
The whole secret of success in this direction, as far as we were able to gather from enquiry
on the spot, lies in the fact that the Planters have refused to recruit individuals. The kangani has
brought over his family group, however small—always a group, never an individual. The kangani
has been responsible for the group.
We made a study, as far as we were able, of the kangani system in Ceylon. There have
undoubtedly been many evils mixed up with it : and, in certain respects, it has distinctly servile
features. We saw some ‘fundus’ as they are called, i. e. kangani certificates of coolies, each with
a debt against his name. These debts in a great measure enslave the coolie, and have been
encouraged, as a guarantee that the coolie will not run away, or become a ‘bolter’.
The planters themselves are beginning to find that this indebtedness is more trouble than it is
worth. Great efforts are being made to reduce, rather than to foster the debt.
But though these evils have existed, yet on one point all who gave us information were quite
unanimous. Communal labour preserves the family life and the family morals. In Ceylon, the
Tamils reproduce the exact features of Tamil village life in Madras. Even the religious worship re-
mains the same in Ceylon. A little temple or shrine can be seen on each estate close to the coolie
quarters, the site and part of the cost being often borne by the Planter himself. When we spoke to
the Planters in Ceylon about suicides and murders among the coolies, they told us that there was
practically nothing abnormal under those heads in Ceylon. When we spoke about sexual jealousies
and rivalries and fights about the possession of women their answer was the same. Whatever
moral sanctions are prevalent in Madras were kept unbroken in Ceylon. The people, if anything,
were slightly better morally, rather than worse ; because education, and more abundant food, and


quiet regular work gradually helped to build up their character in wholesome ways. Meanwhile,
they told us, nothing gave way, nothing broke down. There was no moral collapse.
On this one point we made every enquiry possible in the time at our disposal. We were able
to get the opinion of the Bishop of the Island and more than one of his clergy, who have visited
every part of Ceylon, and enquired into this very thing. We asked the planters themselves, one
of whom was a Ceylonese. We asked business men also. Their opinions differed widely on the
question of the indebtedness of the Tamil coolies how far it was harmful, —but on one point
they were entirely agreed, namely, that the family life among the Tamils went on exactly as
before. They also agreed that suicides and murders were very rare indeed.
It would surely be possible, without reproducing the money advances and indebtedness of the
kangani system, to obtain immigrants, from Madras Presidency, for the future, by families and
family groups. In all probability, more than a hundred thousand coolies go backwards and
forwards across the sea every year, in this very manner, from the Madras Coast. It would surely
not be difficult to deflect a very small portion of that great stream towards Fiji, if only the
prospects were made attractive for whole families to come over. A leading planter, of 85 years’
experience in Ceylon, said to us, “We would not take the individual coolie, even if we could get
him. He would only be a nuisance.” In Fiji, as we have seen, he is often much more than a
nuisance. He becomes a criminal.
NOTE 11.
Direct Steamer Service with Fiji.
Very great hardships are experienced at present in Fiji, on account of the lack of direct
steamer connexion with India. Except on the immigrant vessels, the only way to Fiji is via
Australia and New Zealand. Indians are unable to change from one ship to another, in an
Australian port, without depositing 1,509 rupees and being obliged to pass an objectionable educa-
tional test. Some Gujerati store keepers were on the point of embarking on this adventure just
after we came to Suva. Even if they were allowed to tranship, the voyage would take, in all, over a
month and be very expensive.
A ship, called the Aparema, makes regular voyages direct from Auckland to Calcutta via
Singapore. It would be quite easy, by means of a small subsidy, to get this steamer to call at
Suva, Fiji. If the passenger trade and cargo trade proved profitable, a monthly steamer service
could be arranged.
If there were a monthly service, two great advantages would be obtained. First, intending
immigrants would go out in small numbers, month by month, and there would be nothing like
the same moral danger as now exists. Secondly, Indians would return home much more fre-
quently than they do at present, and Fiji and India would thus be brought more closely together.
The price of India commodities, also, such as dhal and spices would be very greatly reduced.
NOTE 12.
Lack of Privacy in the Present Coolie 'Lines.’
If family life is to be restored among the coolies in Fiji one of the first matters to be set
right will be the condition under which the people now live in the 'lines.’ One intelligent lad


summed up the whole present situation in the words ‘Estabel ke muafiq’ i.e. like a stable. The
indentured coolies told us that they could hear every word which was said through the thin
wooden partition. They could tell exactly what a man or woman was doing next door, at all
hours. A coolie could even get up on a box and look over the partition into the next room, so
that the privacy of married life became impossible and all sense of shame and decency was lost.
We frequently went into the quarters where the coolies lived and found that this was the
case.
We are not sufficiently acquainted with the habits of the Tamil villagers to know whether
such strong objections to the present * lines ’ hold with them. We were told in Ceylon that they
prefer to crowd together in families, because of their instinctive fear of evil spirits : but we had
no means of finding out clearly from the Tamils themselves. We are quite certain, however,
that the Tamils dislike the present complete lack of privacy. Among the Hindustanis this was
a matter of bitter complaint. They would tell us, with indignation, that they were made to live
‘ like animals.’
NOTE 13.
Free Contract Labour.
The vital issue appeared to us more and more to be summed up in one main point, namely,
the removal of all compulsion whatever from the conditions of Indian labour. With people so
illiterate, and often so ignorant, as Indian labourers in a new country usually are, any form of
compulsion is certain sooner or later to be abused and no amount of Government regulations can
prevent it. The labourer’s own freedom of will, in this matter, is his only guarantee : it must
in no circumstance be forced.
To imprison for refusal to work : to impose fines, with imprisonment always in the back-
ground, in ease of non-payment : to insist that the labourer shall do so much compulsory lubour
on the estate, if he is unable to pay the fine, —all these appeared to us equally objectionable, as
having compulsion in some form or other involved in them.
An agreement which seemed to us, to be quite workable in a small Colony such as Fiji may
be described as follows :
(1) The Indian labourer, in return for the full payment of passage out for himself and his
family, engages to undertake agricultural work as a wage-earner, during the first two years of
his residence in the Colony, and not to engage in private business.
(2) The labourer may go to any employer who is in need of labour and enter with him on
a monthly agreement. If either he himself, or his employer, wishes to end this agreement before
the month is over, then the labourer will forfeit his month’s pay if he should wish to terminate
the agreement, or the employer will pay the labourer a full month’s wages should he wish to
do so.
(3) With regard to the payment of passage out, the Government of Fiji will be responsible
and not any individual employer. Government recovers this money from the whole body of
employers by charging them a fee according to the average of labour shown in each employer’s
monthly wages bill.


(4) If the Indian labourer wishes to terminate his agreement with Government, and engage
in private business, before the two years are completed, then he is free to do so after payment of
the balance of the passage money. But this money will only be recoverable by a civil action for
damages in a court of law. In no ease will there be penal consequences. But any property that
the labourer has may be attached.
(5) There shall be no law put into force preventing the labourer from going from one
Island to another in search of work, or from returning to India itself at his own expense.
(6) A registered certificate will be given to each immigration labourer showing, from the
monthly wages returns, how far he has completed his term of service as a wage-earner. Employ-
ers who may wish to employ immigrant labour will be registered also.
(7) While a minium wage may be fixed by Government there shall be no statutory wage
which cannot be exceeded. The labourer shall be free to make his own terms with the employer,
and the employer with the labourer, so long as the minimum wage limit is not transgressed.
(8) Government shall fulfil its own responsibilities towards this immigrant labour, by
adequate inspection of all labour conditions on the estate as heretofore. It shall be able to
exclude from its own list of registered employers any employer who transgresses the Government
labour regulations.
In such a free labour contract there would be, of course, a certain risk incurred by Govern-
ment. Each year there would be a percentage of loss through labourers running away and
all trace of them being lost. There would also be a number of bad debts. But these losses
would in no ease fall upon a single employer : they would be spread over the whole
body, and the well-known industrious habits of the Indian labourers would make any heavy
loss under these heads unlikely. For, when once the labourers get settled on estates, and are
treated well by their employers, they are, in nine cases out of ten, content to stop where they
are and not go further. Only a very small proportion have enterprise and initiative enough
to wish immediately to launch forth into adventure on their own account. And Indian
labourers are, for the most part, faithful in their observance of agreements and in their pay-
ments of money due to Government.
NOTE 14.
Agricultural wages in India.
The following statement is made in the Indian Year Book for 1915 :
“It is difficult to get reliable statistics as to agricultural labour, as the rates vary so
enormously in different parts of India, being comparatively low in South India, and in cer-
tain districts of North India remarkably high.”
This is especially true of the districts which have been opened up by irrigation, as
the following figures (obtained from the Encyclopaedia Britanniea Year Book for 1913] show :
“In harvest time, labour fetches Rs. 2 a day, and in one year the single district of Lyallpur
remraitted £147,000 by money order to other districts.”
The numbers of settlers on irrigated areas increase with great rapidity every year.
D


The Chenab Colony has a total area of 3,900 square miles and was, until 1892, sparsely
inhabited by nomad pastoral tribes, whose total numbers were estimated at less than 70,000.
Immigrant peasants, including men from the best agricultural districts in the Punjab, began to
settle in the Colony in such numbers that, in September, 1912, the total population had
risen to over 1,111,000.
From the district of Lyallpur alone, in one year, 150,000 tons of wheat were exported.
A concession of some importance was made to peasant colonists in the Punjab, in 1910, when
it was decided to allow them to purchase proprietary rights, on very favourable terms, in all
Colonies except the Jhelum Colony. (For further facts on the Irrigation Policy of the
Government of India see pp. 206 to 215 of “The Indian Year Book” for 1915).
The following quotation from “The Indian Year Book” for 1915 page 224 shows that this
rise in wages is general all over India.
“It is necessary to refer to the rise in the price of labour (wages) which has had, specially
in Bombay, an important effect on the year’s industry. From an examination of returns supplied
by leading industries, cotton (Bombay), woollen (Cawnpore), jute (Bengal), paper (Bengal), rice
(Rangoon), mining (Bengal) and brewing (Punjab), it has been found that there has been a
general rise in wages in these industries of 3 per cent in 1913-14. The greatest rise is a rise
of 9 per cent in the cotton industry in Bombay, and in the woollen mills in Upper India. The
insufficiency of operatives in the cotton factories in Bombay has been of serious hindrance
to the industry, and is due to the great demand for unskilled labour elsewhere, chiefly in the
Public Works Department and at the docks.”
“ But the rise in the wage of industrial labour has not been so great as in the case of agri-
cultural labourers and village artisans”.
“An examination of Indian wages statistics during the last decade shows that this is
certainly the labourers’ day.”
If it be urged that the Punjab stands apart from the rest of India in the sturdy
character of its agricultural workers, and in the astonishing rapidity of its recent agricultural
development, then it is possible to obtain almost equally striking figures in connexion with the
jute districts in Eastern Bengal. There the labourer can earn one rupee per day all through the
jute season, and there is plenty of high paid work offering all the year round. The present
small stream of emigration to the colonies could be absorbed, ten times over, in this one district
of India alone, without lowering at all the present rate of wages. And there are several other
equally well paid labour centres, which are crying out for more labour. As we have pointed out
in this Report, the price of food and clothing is immensely cheaper in India than in Fiji, and this
must always be taken into account when instituting any comparison between the two countries.
In recent times the question has frequently been raised, whether all emigration should not be
stopped, in order to meet adequately these industrial needs of India itself. An important section
of the educated Indian community has begun to hold strongly this opinion, and to suggest that
only educated Indians should go abroad, while coolie emigration should be discouraged.
But it is well to consider whether, under more favourable conditions, the emigration of a
small proportion of the agricultural classes may not be good on the whole. What India appears


to need at the present time is the spirit of enterprise and adventure. This will not penetrate
the somewhat stagnant life of the villages of India, if only educated Indians go abroad. The
spirit of adventure is needed in the villages themselves. If it be urged, that enterprise and
adventure may be found by passing from one part of India to another, and that this form of
internal emigration will give all that is needed, there is considerable force in the argument. But
an indefinable something is added by voyages across the sea, by travels to distant lands, by
meeting strange people, by overcoming all kinds of new difficulties in foreign countries, which
cannot be obtained by passing from Bengal to Gujrat, or from the Punjab to Madras.
It appears to be true of Indian history, as well as of English history, that the period of
maritime adventure, when Indian ships traversed the seas and left the mark of Indian civilisation
on distant lands, was a golden age. It produced great poetry and great art. There is nothing
so wholesome as a breath of fresh sea air, for driving away outward conventions and making
human life free and courageous.
NOTE 15.
Fiji as an Indian Colony.
We had not been long in Fiji before it was made quite clear to us that, bound up with the
question of indenture, was the far broader issue of colonisation. It was the deliberate intention
of the Government of Fiji to make the Islands into an Indian colony. If the present rate of
increase of population should continue, this might easily be accomplished in the present generation.
For, at a time when the indigenous population remains stationary, and even shows signs of dying
out, the Indian population has increased out of all proportion.
It might be true, as was often told us, that the further success of the great Sugar Companies
was necessary for the full prosperity of the Islands. But we found it also true, in a much wider
and larger sense, that the prosperity of the Islands depended on the morals of the Indian immi-
grants. In other words, ultimate success in colonisation, was far more a moral issue than a
financial one. The good citizenship of the Indian settlers was a greater asset than any sugar
industry, however flourishing.
A simple illustration may be taken from the sugar estates in Queensland. There the method
of encouraging European immigration has been adopted by the Queensland Government. So far,
conditions are similar. But, when further comparison is made, a remarkable difference of treat-
ment is at once apparent. In Queensland, every possible care is taken beforehand to make the
environment of the labourer healthy and wholesome. For it jis fully realised, that he
will become the permanent settler on the soil, and bring up his children as the future •citizens of
the country. No interests of capital, therefore, however important in a secondary sense, are
allowed to interfere with this result. It is thought far better to develop the country more
slowly, and bring up a race of morally and physically healthy citizens, than to develop the country
rapidly by allowing a small group of private capitalists to make rapid profits by exploitation.
Assuming that the problem of colonisation in Fiji is the same as that of Queensland, then
it is clear that the moral welfare of the Indian labourer should be regarded as a primary
consideration in Fiji. For he comes, not merely to fill a gap in the supply of labour, but as
a Colonist. And, if the Indian labourer in Fiji tends to become more and more degraded, then


the future of Fiji will become more and more degraded also. Quick returns made by the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, even if shared by the Indians themselves, could do nothing to mitigate
the evil, if once moral degradation should set in. They would rather tend to increase it. Because
the money that would accrue to Indians, under bad conditions, would be spent in vicious ways,
and vice gains an alarming power of reproduction in a new Colony. Indeed, when once
colonisation has taken a wrong turn and been given a bad start, then it sometimes happens that
all the palliatives in the world cannot stop the evil.
In the ease of the Indian settlers in Fiji there was need of more than ordinary care in
planning out beforehand the manner of immigration. For the village life in India is a complex
whole, which needs to be transplanted bodily, or not at all. To transfer broken units merely,
and then to expect these units to sort themselves and come together again,—this was to court
disaster from the first. When, on the top of this, a break-down of the marriage relation was
added, disaster was inevitable. But no one seemed to understand what was happening, and so
the evil went on, until the suicide and murder rates disclosed it to the civilised world.
The warning was frequently given us in Fiji, that the Colony would be ruined, if the
indentured system of Indian labour were discontinued. Our deliberate conclusion, from what
we have seen with our own eyes, is this, that the Colony would be ruined if the indentured
system of Indian labour were allowed to go on.
NOTE 16.
Fijians and Indians.
Perhaps an even more important question than the relation between Indians and Euro-
peans is that of the attitude of the Indians towards the Fijians, The population of Fiji, at
present, is made up roughly of 90,000 Fijians. 60,000 Indians, 3,000 Europeans, and 8,000
of other races, including half-castes.
The Fijian has only recently emerged from savagery and cannibalism. Practically the
whole of the islands are now Christian, and their conversion to Christianity has had a remark-
ably good effect on their morals. Immorality is not common. The Fijians are a distinetlv
moral people. Crime is singularly rare. They are great singers and church-goers, andthey enjoy
their religious services. They are very strict Sabbatarians, and the keeping of Sunday very care-
fully, as a sacred day, forms a considerable part of their new religion. At first the Fijians
utterly despised the Indians who came to the Islands under the bond of indenture. Thev
looked upon them as slaves and thoroughly disliked them. Unfortunately the Fijian name
for ‘dog’ is ‘coolie’ (kuli) and, when they heard the Indians always called ‘coolie’ and treated
in a semi-servile way, their contempt for them grew very strong indeed. They regarded
them as equal to their name. The Indian on his side, was inclined to return scorn with
scorn. He called the Fijian from the first ‘jungli’ and the name still sticks.
At one time it appeared as if a strong and bitter race prejudice would spring up bet-
ween the two communities, but that time has long ago passed by. The Indian, now, is much
more kindly disposed towards the Fijian. And the Fijian has learnt that the Indian is far
more clever, than himself, though not morally superior. On all sides we found the fear


expressed by good and thoughtful men that the Fijian, now that he has become more friendly
towards the Indian, may get contaminated by his morals.
The one person, among Indians, whom the Fijian really respects from the bottom of
his heart is the Sikh Policeman.
NOTE. 17.
The Place of Fiji in the Pacific.
The importance of Fiji in the Pacific has hardly yet been realised by people in India.
Fiji has become an outlying naval base, a king of ‘Heligoland,’ for Australia and New
Zealand. It is also a chief port of call for the great liners, which pass to and fro from
America to Australasia. We do not wish to enter into the political question, namely, the
danger of colonising such an important outpost with a weak and degraded population,
though much might be said upon that subject. But we cannot pass over the relation of the
Fijian Indian population to the place which India itself holds in the eyes of the civilised
world. For that question is more than political, it affects the moral intercourse of the nations
of the world.
Fiji is, at present, like a great flaring advertisement, saying, in big letters, to all who
travel to and fro across the Pacific, —‘This is India.’ Each traveller from America and
Australia goes home to spread the news about India which he has learnt in Fiji. We
felt, more than we can express, the terrible wrong which was being done to India by such
a false advertisement. We found ourselves protesting every day of our journey to our
fellow passengers, —‘This is not India.’ But the patent fact remained. The advertisement
went flashing across the Pacific, ‘This is India.’—lt was the only ‘lndia’ which the travellers
fn the Pacific saw.
If the fair name of India is to be saved from further disrepute, it is abundantly
evident that this degradation should not be allowed to go on for a day longer. But there
is a higher appeal still. It is this. By strange neglect and indifference in the past, India
has permitted these weakest of her own children to sink lower and lower. Now, at last,
the wrong that has been done has been seen with clear eyes. Humanity itself makes the
claim that this wrong should be set right with afll possible speed.




