

f (U
REPORT
OP THE
CONFERENCE
BETWEEN
Delegates of the Queensland Labourers’ Union and the
General Labourers' Union of Australasia,
HELD IN
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
FBEBUABY IS, 1891.
The Conference opened on Monday, February 16th, in the
banqueting hall of the Adelaide Town Hall. The representatives of
the Queensland Labourers’ Union were Messrs. George Taylor and W.
J. Bennett.
The following delegates to the conference of the General Labourers’
Union attended : —Messrs. J. Kemp and A. W. Blaxland; A. Boynton,
H. Craven, M. King, Bourke; B. W. Tates, Cobar; J. Mclnerney,
Young ; L. A. Garry, Scone; A. W. Hunter and A. Tremayne, Cres-
wick ; W. B. Reynolds, Wagga; T. M. HeWarre, Moree ; T. McEwan
and P. Power, Casterton. The president (Mr. Slattery) and the secre-
tary (Mr. Spence) were also present as representatives of the G.L.U.
Several members of the Amalgamated Shearers’ Union also
followed the proceedings, and two or three of them joined in the
discussions.
Mr. Bennett said: I attend here as a representative of the Q.L.U.,
and the object we have in view is a simple one, that is, the interchange
of tickets between the two unions without any additional cost to the
men, and to have a discussion on federation for the purpose of con-
sidering measures of offence and defence as occasion may arise. So
far as federation is concerned, I would suggest the most entire local
self-government.


Mr. Taylor:—l am here in the same capacity as Mr. Bennett, that
is, to bring about an interchange of tickets. The first proposal of the
Q.L.U. is as follows :—“ That the members of the Gr.L.U. coming into
Queensland shall be admitted as members of the Q.L.U. and supplied
with tickets, differing in color to the ordinary ticket, known as exchange
cards, in exchange for their Gr.L.U. tickets without payment of
personal fees. Members of the Q.L.U. coming into other colonies to
be admitted to the G.L.U on same conditions. All exchange cards
collected by delegates, agents, and organisers, to be forwarded to the
head office of each society before the expiration of the financial year,
and after the exchange cards have been balanced the society holding
the least number to pay the difference to the other society.”
Mr. De Warre ; What is your entrance fee ?
Mr. Taylor: No entrance fee, but an annual subscription of ten
shillings, and our union, in the other proposals we have here, suggest
that you should assimulate your fees to ours. The reason why we
should adopt the same rate on the border line is that the organisers are
most anxious to have the same rate as further in Queensland. At one
time we had only one rate for the whole of tlie colony, but at our last
meeting we decided to form branches, each of which were to have com-
plete local self-government, so that power was given to them to alter
the rate of wages as may be suitable for each district. On the border
we were able to demand more, as the demand for labour was greater
than on the coast. We think it would be better, and would prevent
friction if you would adopt the same rates along the border as we have
adopted. We have secured our rate of pay without much trouble, but
if you adopt a lower rate it would cause difficulty, so we think it would
be better to come to some general decision.
Mr. Poynton: I would point out that in the constitution we
adopted the other day, arrangements were made for the interchange of
members without any entrance fee, but no arrangements were made
for the interchange of tickets.
Mr. De Warre said: The system proposed by the Q.L.U. would
result in one union being taxed to support another.
Mr. Bennett: If the Queensland Union had the lesser number of
tickets by means of this exchange it would be paid bj the G-.L.U.,
and be a perfect guarantee of the man paying to the union under
which they received protection, and that there would be no loss between
the societies.
Mr. Tremayne: The amount involved is very slight, and the
expense of collecting the tickets would not be very great.
Mr. Bing : We should not work between one another as though
we were separate colonies, but as federated Australia.
Mr. Blaxland: I have very much pleasure in supporting the
motion brought forward. If we wish to bring about the federation of
Australia it must be by the interchange of cards and by that means
only.


Mr. Poynton: We will have to alter our annual contribution
before we can accept the proposal.
Mr. Bennett: lam sorry I was not here the first day to take part
in the fixing of the contribution, I believe the members will pay 10s,
as readily as 7s. 6d,
Mr. De Warre : Instead of adopting this interchange of cards I
think it would be better for the members crossing the border to join
the union.
Mr. Spence: I would urge you all to be careful in this matter,
especially as the Gr.L.U. is a very young union. Why should a transfer
be denied because a man crosses an imaginary border ? You spend a
great deal of money in organising a union, and in obtaining men who
will embrace unionism; yet, when one of these men crosses the
border, the union that secured him as a unionist has to pay for him
doing so, according to the proposal of the Queensland Labourers’
Union. I would like to see some reasons brought forward for
adopting this proposal. The fact that the men crossed into Queens-
land as unionists should be sufficient. But, if they insisted upon
them paying, they ignored the fact that they are unionists. It would
be far better if both sides recognised each other’s tickets and worked
together. If there is any unfairness in that it should be arranged in
some other form. It looks as though we are separating the colonies,
which I have always opposed. We should deal with the matter as
members of one large union, and recognise each other as such.
Mr. Poynton : How many members are there in the Q.L.U. ?
Mr. Bennett: 8000. There are some 200 or 300 members crossing
the border continually, and whereas those that leave Queensland are
unionists those that come in are non-unionists. It is not fair that a
large number of men from the South should come into Queensland
and get the protection of the Q.L.U. without paying anything towards
its funds ; and the only way of making a satisfactory arrangement is
for the societies to pay the difference by means of the interchange of cards.
Mr. Taylor: If a hundred men come into Queensland, and they
have paid into the Gr.L.U., we allow them to work with us without
paying any contribution. We consider them unionists, but there is no-
body better able to pay for them than the societies to which they have
contributed. If we give them a ticket in exchange for theirs, we frank
them throughout the colonies; and they have the protection of the
Q.L.U. as well. If we accept men who only say they are members of
Gr.L.U., we make them financial members, but we have to pay 6s.
each for them to the District Council, and they have not paid a
fraction. That amount has to come out of the pcckets of men who
have formed a union which has been fighting the wages question during
the past two or three years. I assure you we do not wish to obtain
any undue influence over the Gr.L.U.
Mr. Spence: How would you manage if a man went back to Hew
South Wales ?


Mr. Taylor : He would be recognised throughout Australia. His
ticket, as soon as he exchanges it for the Q.L.U. ticket, is sent to the
central office, and wherever that man went he would he recognised as
a member throughout Australia. When he comes back to Queensland
he presents his ticket from the Gf.L.IJ., and we know that he has
previously been a member of our society, and that card franks him all
over the colonies.
Mr. Bennett: Thecostofcollectingcardswouldonlybeafewshillings.
Mr. De Warre: I maintain that, if a man comes into our district
he should pay our entrance foe of 7s. 6d. to join our union. I think
it would be better for the men to pay the amount individually than for
the union to do it collectively. The members residing near Adelaide,
Port Augusta, and Wagga, would seldom cross the Queensland border,
but they have to pay for men who do.
Mr. Craven : If members pay their entrance fee it will save all
this trouble about the interchange of tickets.
Mr. Power : I would point out that there will be a great difficulty
with regard to the difference between the amount of the contributions.
You would charge us 10s. against our 7s. 6d.
Mr. Taylor: Mr. De Warre appears to think that the money
would come out of the consolidated funds, and that the unionists
would be at the loss on the members who went to Queensland. Well,
I think it is better for the unionists to be at a loss than that the
members themselves should have to pay again to enter another society.
It is only fair that the society which protects the men should have the
benefit of the payment of their fees, and the same should apply to the
members of the Q.L.U. that went out of that colony. What is caus-
ing trouble is that in some parts the men are not organised, and con-
sequently the employers refuse to give us the rates asked for by us.
Supposing a strike were to occur in Queensland we would have to pay
for them, and that is the reasen why the interchange of cards is desired
in Queensland.
Mr. Bennett, in answer to Mr. Ring, said that the basis of pay-
ment would be last year’s membership.
Mr. Spence : You say you pay 6s. a head as the cost of organising.
The cost is the same with us for organising.
Mr. Taylor : We have to pay it. Por every man we put on our
books there’s 6s. to come. You’ve no society yet, or recognised rules.
You are not in force.
Mr. Ring: The GKL.U. is established now.
Mr. Taylor: Yes, but how many stations are working under your
rules? We in Queensland are fighting the great labour battle against
the pastoralists, who are trying to flood us with cheap coloured labour
and chinamen. Forming a union is nothing; the point is, what does
the union do when it is formed ? How does it work ? If we had the
matter in our own hands in Queensland we could stop the importation
of blacklegs, and win hands down.


Mr, De Warre: Its absurd to expect our union to pay 10s.
Mr. Garry looked upon this as an attempt to create barriers.
What was unionism coming to if an imaginary border line was to be
recognised? One ticket should frank a man the whole length and
breadth of the land.
Mr. Bennett: The last speaker has made a nice little stage speech.
He would explain to Mr. Boynton that the 6s. paid to the District
Council for each man provided the fund for meeting the expense of
organising.
Mr. De Warre : Unionism ought to be universal. That was its
main principle. A London docker can come Over and join the Sydney
Wharf Labourers without the payment of an entrance fee.
Mr. Tremayne moved: “ That the G.L.U. assent to the first
proposal of the Q.L.U.”
Mr. Taylor: If one hundred G.L.U. men come into Queensland
we have 100 tickets in the head office, which represent £5O, while if
200 of our men cross into N.S.W. they give their tickets to the G.L.U.
organiser, and these would be equal to £lOO. Consequently when a
balance was struck the Q.L.U. would have to pay £5O. The G.L.U.
is not an organised society yet, and the Q.L.U. will do its best to help
you. We will not rat on you. AVith regard to the statement that
there*are 600 unemployed in Queensland, I admit that it is true, but
at the same time they would not rat on the unionists in order to obtain
employment. A great many of them have been out of work since the
great strike, and they are good unionists. (Hear, hear). Mr. S. W.
Brooks, the organiser for the Employers’ Association, has offered to
pay the passage of these men up, so as to put down the shearers when
they were on strike, but he failed to get the men to go. (Cheers).
Consequently the .employers had to come to the southern colonies to
get men to rat on us. The unemployed were asking for support from
the Government and the Premier, to open up public works so that they
could be supplied with employment. This is the reason why the un-
employed question is so prominently before the public of Queens-
land.
Mr. De Warre: I move—“ That the tickets of the G.L.U. and
the Q.L.U. frank a man in either colony without entrance, subscription,
or any other fee. If members are not financial they shall pay into the
branch in which they may be working, and that this be submitted to
the Q.L.U.”
Mr. Kemp: I second that.
Mr. Taylor: I would like to ask how it would work if the Q.L.U.
came into H.S.W. or Victoria. The rate of pay in Queensland is 30s.
per week for a shed hand. A man comes to N.S.W., where the rate
of wages is lower—even down to 15s. per week —do you expect him to
adhere to your rules in your territory or to work under ours P Unless
there is an interchange of tickets to let that society have some control
over him it will be very awkward.


Mr. Eae (a member of the Shearers’ Union, but not a delegate at
this conference) : I have listened to this debate with some interest,
and I find that both sides seem very full of the spirit of unionism in
the theory, but when they come to the practical part they differ. I
have been struck by the fairness of the proposals of the Queensland
Labourers’ Union. If a certain section of the continent organises better
than another section and spends more money in organising, it is only
fair that they should be recognised as having done so, and be paid
accordingly. We must all recognise that so far as general labour is
concerned Queensland is far ahead of this colony.
Mr. De Warre : We have already pointed out the difference in
the subscription fees to the two unions, and that is a great dif-
culty.
Mr. Taylor : It has been lost sight of that, though we have such
a number of unemployed, they cannot whip us till they come to the
southern colonies for scabs. The Government has placed £lOO,OOO on
the estimates to bring out Italians and other cheap labourers to beat
us with. We go for federation, and federation is what we want. We
have realised the fact that we want the closest federation of labour.
Capitalists have found that they cannot fight us unless they form the
closest association, and the only chance for us is to make a complete
federation of labour. *
Mr. Bennett: If you carry the amendment it will do more harm
than good.
Mr. Poynton : Why not accept a free interchange of tickets ?
Mr. Bennett: The Queensland people would be put to much loss
if they did so.
Mr. Spence: We might carry both the amendment and the motion.
Mr. Taylor : There is no means of our members being called to-
gether again before twelve months hence, as we only meet annually. The
District Council cannot alter any of the rules, as it is only a body to
see that the rules are carried out. If this motion is not carried mem-
bers of the G.L.U. coming into Queensland will have to pay 10s.
Any other labourer joining the union would have to do so ; but we
consider that one entrance fee should be sufficient to allow a unionist
being recognised throughout the colonies.
Mr. Kemp : Are you prepared to meet us half way ?
Mr. Bennett: Can you show us a scheme that would meet the
case on parallel lines ?
Mr. Kemp: If each union paid the same annual contribution
there would be no cause for this interchange of tickets, as the tickets
of each union would be recognised in the different colonies.
The President: It appears that this proposal of Mr. de Warre
will prevent any chance of the other suggestion coming into force till
next December. If any of our members go to Queensland they will
have to pay a subscription. There will be no harmony in the matter,
but on the contrary there will be two unions. Nevertheless lam in


sympathy with Mr. de Warre, as it is not practicable at the present
time to agree to the Q.L.U.’s suggestion.
Mr. MTnerney : The delegates have explained that they have to
be guided by us in a certain measure, but they have not come here
with supreme control of the Queensland business, and only ask us to
agree to their proposals for twelve months. Therefore I think we might
well agree to meet them.
Mr. Poynton : They point out our weakness so I think they might
give in to us.
Mr. Spence : We will have either to accept these proposals or our
members going into Queensland will have to pay 10s. In one way our
members who go to Queensland will have to pay £l, and in the other
10s.
Mr. Poynton : I think their suggestions are quite contrary to the
true spirit of federation.
Mr. Bennett: We are not asking for a concession; we are simply
asking for a purely business right.
Mr. Poynton: You say to us—Unless you accept our proposals,
every member entering our colony will have to pay 10s. for the year.
Mr. Bennett: We are two independent bodies to-day. We get
no concessions nor do we want any.
The Proposition was then agreed to by ten votes to three, and Mr.
De Warre’s motion was also carried. The dissentients to the
proposition of the Queensland delegates were Messrs. De Warre,
Garry, and Craven. Mr. De Warre’s motion met with no opposition
on being put.
The Conference then adjourned until the evening.
The Conference resumed its sitting at eight o’clock the same
evening in the Prince Alfred Hotel, Adelaide. The question of rates
of wages came on for discussion.
The following recommendations were made by the sub-committee
as to rates of wages for the border districts of New South Wales and
Queensland: —“ Shed-hands, branders, musterers, drafters, and cooks
for 10 or less, 30s. per week and accommodation ; cooks, over 10, 3s.
per man per week. Assistant cooks, to 30 men, 40s. per week;
40 men and over, 455. per week; to 50, 50s. Woolpressing —Por less
than 12 shearers, 40s. per week, board and accommodation; more than
12, 60s. When the pressing is by contract all parties shall share
equally in the terms of contract at the following rates —Greasy wool,
hand pressing, 7d. per cwt. ; do., steam, 6d. ; scoured wool, 15.,; do.,
steam, 9d.; greasy wool for station, scour hand, 6d. ; greasy do.,
steam, sd. per cwt., with accommodation.
The Queensland Delegates then moved—-“ That the G.L.U. be
induced to adopt in their border districts the same rates of wages as
have been adopted by the Q.L.U. ; also the same annual subscription,
viz., 10s. per year, with no entrance-fee.”
This was agreed to.


On the proposition —“ That the political border line be recognised
as the limit of the jurisdiction of either society,” considerable discussion
took place.
In proposing the adoption of this motion, Mr. Bennett pointed
out the necessity of the adoption of some border line and said that the
object was to promote local self-government without, at the same
time, interfering with federation. They must, therefore, have definite
boundaries.
Mr. Yeates was opposed to anything in the shape of a boundary
line, as it would be against the principle of unionism.
Mr. Boynton expressed similar views and thought the A.S.U.
must be consulted before they could accept this proposal of the Q.L.U.
The President said they would have to fix some boundary, or the
agents of the two unions would overlap in their work.
Mr. Spence spoke to the same effect.
Mr. De Warre: I move “ That this stand over, and let the
ordinary line laid down by the A.S.U. be adhered to by the Gr.L.TJ.”
The executive will eventually have to deal with it. We have adopted
the ordinary line, and as a representative of a border branch I must
stand by the action of the A.S.U.
Mr. Beunett: Ido not know what position the A.S.U. is going to
take up, but we must insist upon the line we have suggested being drawn.
The President: This question of insistance should not be men-
tioned by either side. The Shearer’s Union is a strong one, and re-
presents three colonies, as we do.
Mr. Percy: I consider that there should be no boundary line while
we are all working together. This little petty grievance should be
allowed to drop, and this boundary line be dropped too. We have to
contend against capital and should not have a controversy between one
another.
Mr. De Warre : This meeting agreed that a boundary line should
be decided upon, and we cannot turn round now and say that no line
shall be agreed to.
Mr. Tremayne: That is not the resolution.
Mr. Bennett: If the whole of the colonies were under the G-.L.U.
it would still be necessary to have a boundary line. This line does not
separate the spirit of unionism a single inch, but for the sake of
ordinary detail the matter must be dealt with. It is not necessary that
the union should be one great mass, as in Queensland we go in for
local self-government, and that is the only thing to make the men
united against the common enemy.
Mr. Poynton: I say that the motion is a proper one for us to deal
with, because it will decide the boundary between Queensland and us.
We are placed at a disadvantage, as the Q.L.U. delegates come here
with one fixed idea, and are not prepared to take anything else. The
resolution that was carried was only done because we did not wish to
punish our own men.


Mr. Bennett: We consider that it is only fair that this political
line should he fixed as the boundaries between districts.
Mr. Boynton : The A.U.S. have to be consulted in this, and the
boundary should be ratified by them.
Mr. Taylor: Unless some boundary be fixed upon, how are we
going to work ? The political boundary is the easiest one for all of us
to understand. I fail to see how any difficulty is going to crop up
between the A.S.U. and the Gr.L.U., as the A.S.U. is just as firm as the
Q.L.U. The A.S.U. have come out in Queensland to support the
Q.L.U., and the Q.S.U. have done the same thing. I think you all
know the resolution that we passed, that the A.S.U. stand by all
kindred societies, and therefore it is exactly the same if the A.S.U,
come into Queensland. They will not shear with non-union rouse-
abouts. It makes no difference with regard to the political boundary.
Mr. Spence : In forming a boundary line we have usually ignored
political boundaries and the same boundaries will have to be formed
between the A.S.U. and Q.S.U., and the only question is that the
A.S.U. and the Q.L.U. having run together, there will be some difficulty
in running together in future. It will be necessary to have some
boundary definitely fixed upon.
Mr. Bennett': Why should any change be made from the boundary
that has existed for the last two or three years P,
Mr. Tremayne : The A.S.U. had done its work now, and for us to
show no consideration for any views they may hold would be grossly
unfair treatment to them.
Mr. De Warre: If the Gr.L.U. fixes one boundary, and the A.S.U.
fixes another, it will result in complications, and we could not work
amicably, and I maintain that this matter must be left till the A.S.U.
meet the Q.L.U., and then it will be left to the executive whether we
accept the same boundary or not.
Mr. Taylor : As far as the Q.S.U. are concerned they are willing
to work together. We do not want the Q.L.U. and the Gr.L.U. to
interfere with any past troubles. If they adopted a different border
line to the A.S.U, they would not be able to work in harmony ; but I
think the A.S.U. members in Queensland will work in harmony with
the Q.L.U.
Mr. Spence : There is only a desire to work in accord with the
A.S.U., and not to cause friction between the Q.L.U. and the Gr.L.U.
Mr. A. J. Cook (Secretary of the A.S.U. of South Australia, but
not a delegate to this Conference) : I think the political borders should
be done away with, as the conditions under which the men work are
the same on one side of the border as the other, and the men therefore
hold that as they have paid to become unionists they should be allowed
to cross the border, and go into any shed without any trouble about
the interchange of cards on the payment of an extra subscription.
Mr. Taylor : We want to go back, and I would like to know how
long this decision would take to arrive at if the amendment were agreed


to, and how long it would be before we can define a boundary upon
which we can work.
The President: The Shearer’s Conference will not last more than
two or three days longer, and we will try to get it over as soon as
possible.
Mr. De Warre’s amendment was carried. It was expressed as
follows “ That the question of border lines be postponed till after
this matter has been dealt with by the Q.S.U. and the A.S.U.
The following suggestions were then taken into consideration :
“ That every assistance be given to the G-.L.U. in gaining recognition
of their rules and scales of wages ; that the Q.L.XJ. earnestly desires
to see it advance and prosper; and that the Q.L.XL looks upon it as
another division of the great industrial army which is and has been
fighting for the wage-earners of the Australian Colonies. That
any member of the Q.D.IL blacklegging on the Gr.L.TJ. shall be fined
in the sum of £2 ; that federation be advocated.”
Mr. Garry moved that they be agreed to.
Mr. De Warre seconded.
Mr. Taylor: We have no scheme of'the federation of the two
bodies to submit to the conference. If this conference appoints two
delegates to meet us in conference and draw up a mutual scheme of
federation to be submitted to the whole of the members for their
approval, I think it could be considered and adopted at the next
meeting. By this means a year would be saved, and the sooner we
federate the better it will be. #
Mr. Ring: There is not one in the room who is not unanimous
with regard to the question of federation.
Mr. Poynton : I would point out that the motion moved by Mr.
De Warre and carried this afternoon will practically give effect to
federation.
Mr. Taylor: At the same time I think it best for us not to
federate in much haste. Any scheme that is submitted should go
before the members of the societies. They are the people who have to
conform to the rules, and they are the people who should make them.
The President: There is a resolution carried for the interchange
of cards, and that is federation by itself.
Mr. Taylor: We want to devise a scheme for the government of
federation, and we could not govern it without drawing up a scheme.
Mr. De Warre: If we meet your delegates, have they any scheme
to propose ? . .
Mr. Taylor: We have a scheme which can be submitted to them
or to the Conference.
Mr. De Warre: If so, I am perfectly willing to meet your two
delegates, because, at the present time, we have expressed our views,
but you have not expressed yours.
Mr. Tremayne: I think the Queensland members should submit
the heads of their scheme before it is referred to a committee. There


is at present nothing for us to go on with, and I think it should be put
in writing for us to consider.
The President: It is simply put here that federation should be
agreed to, and we are all willing to agree to that. When we once
agree to federation, that is all that is wanted in the interests of
members.
Mr. Taylor: We will assist you to draw up a mutual scheme
which can be considered at our meeting in December next. We are
now practically federated, as we would stand by you, and you would
do the same by us.
Mr. Spence : I think there is more required than for us to simply
to agree to-day to bring about federation. The motion carried to-day
will make the societies one so far as our objects are concerned; but it
would be necessary to draw up details, and these would have to be
first considered by a sub-committee.
Messrs. De Warre and Tremayne were appointed a committee to
meet the Queensland delegates for the purpose of drawing up a scheme
for the federation of the Labourers’ Unions.
A vote of thanks to Messrs. Taylor and Bennett, the Queensland
Delegates, brought the meeting to a conclusion.


PROCEEDINGS OF FEDERATION COMMITTEE.
On Wednesday, 17th February, 1891, the Delegates, Messrs. O.
Taylor and W. J. Bennett, representing the Q.L.U., and Messrs.
Tremayne and De Warre, representing the Q-.L.U., met in the
Napoleon Hotel. The Q.L.U. delegates presented an outline scheme
of Federation to the G.L.U. representatives. After some general
discussion of the scheme, the G.L.U. representatives retired to consider
the scheme more fully in private.
SCHEME.
Maintenance of Rules.
No member of the Federation shall act in contravention of the rules of
any federated union within its jurisdiction. Any person so offending shall
be dealt with by the union so offended, whose decision shall be maintained
and enforced by the other unions also, provided that appeal may be made
to the Council at its next sitting.
Authority.
The authority of the Council shall be confined to mutual arrangements
satisfactory to the respective unions. If any matter affecting all unions be
brought before it upon which the Council cannot agree, it shall be obligatory
upon each of the federated unions promptly to test the feeling of its
members upon any recommendation or question of the Council on which a
plebiscite is requested by the Council.
Jurisdiction.
Tlje Federated Labour Unions of Australasia shall mutually arrange the
boundary and jurisdiction of each Federated Union.
Membership and Exchange of Members.
The Federated Labour Unions shall arrange conditions (if any) upon
which interchange of members can be conducted to mutual advantage and
without injury to the funds of any federated union.
Name.
1. The Federated Labour Unions of Australasia.
Conditions.
2. The Federated Labour Unions of Australasia shall consist of the
Queensland Labourers’ Union and the General Labourers’ Union, and such
other unions as may affiliate for the furtherance of labour interests
generally.


Objects.
3. The following shall be the objects of the Federated Labour Unions
of Australasia :
(a) To improve the conditions, maintain rates of remuneration, and other-
wise protect the interests of the Federation and of other classes of
labour.
(b) To discuss, consider, and put in force, when approved of, any scheme for
the better guidance and extension of labour organisation.
(c) To secure the adoption of just and equitable agreements between em-
ployers and employees.
(d) To devise means for the settlement of any difference occurring between
members of the Federation and their employers, and, by an aggrega-
tion of power, to enforce legitimate and necessiry claims where a
single union would hud the task beyond its individual strength.
Council.
4, The Council of the Federated Labour Unions'shall consist of not
more than two delegates from each union, who shall meet at such time
and place as may be mutually agreed upon, when necessary in the interests
of the federated unions, appoint a chairman, and shall be equally appor-
tioned upon basis of membership.
18th February.
Meeting resumed in the Napoleon Hotel, and after about two hours’
discussion Mr. Tremayne resigned bis position, not being in accord
with the scheme presented, and being of the opinion that the proposals
would interfere with the proposed Intercolonial Federation Scheme, in
addition he was of the opinion that whatever basis was adopted by
the A.S. and Q.L. Unions would serve the G.L.U.
Mr. De Warre wrota and signed a letter (Q.L.U. delegate also
signing) requesting the Executive to appoint a delegate to fill the
vacancy. No answer was received.
19th February.
Messrs. Taylor and Bennett interviewed Mr. Slattery, President
of the G.L.U., requesting him to take immediate steps in the appoint-
ment of another delegate;. He was of the opinion that nothing more
need be done, as the conclusions arrived at by the A.B.U. and Q.L.U.
would be sufficient.


Napoleon Hotel,
20 th February, 1891 (9.30 A.M.)
Mr. Spence, Secretary, G.L.U.
Sir, —
The Queensland delegates leave Adelaide this afternoon by
rail; are we to leave without again meeting your delegates re Federation
Proposals ? Must we leave without an understanding as to boundaries
from your Executive ? Do you think our report of the past three days’
work will make the members of the Q.L.U. disposed to again meet your
Union’s representatives in the same open-handed friendly spirit that we
have met you this year.
Your president, Mr. Slattery, yesterday morning promised us a written
reply to our business proceedings, but we have received no communication
whatever from your society.
Yours very truly,
W. J. BENNETT.
G. TAYLOR.
P.S.—An answer before the train leaves will much oblige.
[Reply.]
Adelaide, South Australia,
20 th February , 1891.
Messrs. W. J, Bennett and G. Taylor,
Gentlemen, —
On behalf of the newly-established G. L. Union we
beg through you to convey to the officers and members of the Q. L. Union
our hearty thanks for the good wishes conveyed to us by you, and trust
that the most cordial relations may always obtain between the two bodies.
We are prepared to work in harmony with the Q. L. Union, and have
therefore accepted the suggestion that there should be a change of tickets
during the coming year. At the same time we would prefer that members
of one union going to work in districts under the jurisdiction of the other
should be recognised as in same position as members of the union in whose
territory they may be working.
We wish, therefore, that you will lay our proposal before your members.
We are of opinion that some scheme calculated to draw both unions
closer together in federal bonds should be laid before the members of both
organisations.
It would be advisable for each union to consider some scheme and
submit such proposals as they may consider best fitted to accomplish the
end in view.
Trusting that all our efforts may speedily result in raising the workers
tr their true position,
We are, yours in unity,
JAS. SLATTERY, President.
W. G. SPENCE, Secretary.


Napoleon Hotel,
February 20, 1891 (10.20 A.M.).
Me. Spence, Secretary G.L.U.
Silt -
Ite interchange of cards of membership, you write “ during
the coming year.” Do you not mean this present year? Re boundaries,
does your Executive accept the political border line as the jurisdiction of
either society at which exchange cards may be given ? Does your Executive
desire that proposals re federation should for the moment be discontinued,
and in future considered by correspondence by the Executive of either
union. _ . .
Yours very truly,
W. J. BENNETT.
[Reply.]
Adelaide, S. Austealia,
February 20, 1891.
W. J. Bennett, Esq.
Deae Sie,—
In reply to your favour of to-day, we suggest that the
question of federation be suspended for the time being and be further dealt
with by correspondence. Re exchange cards, we mean coming season or
present year. In regard to question of boundary, we are awaiting final
issue of conference between A.S.U. and Q.S.U., when our Executive will
finally decide. We may state that we will be careful to avoid all causes of
friction and will not allow any difference existing between A.S.U. and
Q.S.U. to be brought in between our bodies.
Yours truly,
W. G. SPENCE, Sec. G.L.U.
1.30 p.m.
Messrs. Slattery and Spence called and promised that a telegram
should he sent to Brisbane, addressed Messrs. Bennett and laylor,
with the decision of the G.L.U. Executive re boundary.
Beisbane, 27 th January , 1891.
Received the following telegram, addressed Messrs. Bennett and
Taylor, Brisbane; — .
J ’ 9S/9/Q1
Adelaide, 23/2/91.
Decided to accept political border as boundary between unions.
Wishing success, Jab. Slatteey, President G.L.U.
w. J. BENNETT.
GEORGE TAYLOR.
Beisbane, 27 th February, 1891,


Instructions to Mr. George Taylor, re the Adelaide
Conference.
1. That the members of the G.L.U. coming into Queensland shall
be admitted as members of the Q.L.U., and supplied with tickets
differing in color to the ordinary ticket (known as exchange cards) in
exchange for their G.L.U. tickets, without payment of personal fees.
All exchange cards collected by delegates, agents, and organisers
to be forwarded to the head office of each society before the expiration
of the financial year, and after the exchange cards have been balanced
the society holding the least number to pay the' difference to the other
society.
2. That the G.L.U. be induced to adopt in their border districts
the same rate of wages as have been adopted by the Q.L.U., also the
same annual subscription, viz., 10s. a year, with no entrance fee.
3. That the political border line be recognised as the limit of the
jurisdiction of either society.
4. That every assistance be given to the G.L.U. in gaining re-
cognition of their rules and scales of wages.
5. That the Q.L.U. earnestly desires to see it advance and prosper
and that the Q.L.U. looks upon it as another division of the great
industrial army which is and has been fighting for justice for the
wage-earners of the Australian colonies; a motion being tabled to
the following effect: “ Thafany member of the Q.L.U. ‘ blacklegging ’
on the G.L.U. shall be fined in the sum of £2.”
S. That federation be advocated.
HUGH 0. BLACKWELL,
Secretary.
PRINTED BY TUB BRISBANE CO-OPBRATIVE PRINTING COMPANY LIMITED, EDWARD STREET.
