

1956-57
VICTORIA
REPORT
OF THE
INSPECTOR APPOINTED TO INVESTIGATE
THE AFFAIRS OF WOLLOMBA RIVER OYSTER
LEASES PROPRIETARY LIMITED AND OYSTER
DEVELOPMENT (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE
COMPANIES (SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS)
ACT 1940
RETURN to an Order of the House
Dated 12th November, 1957
The Report of the Inspector appointed to investigate
the affairs of Wollomba River Oyster Leases
Proprietary Limited and Oyster Development
(Australia) Limited pursuant to the provisions of
the Companies (Special Investigations) Act 1940
(Mr. Rylah)
Ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be printed, 12 th November, 1957
[No. C.1.]— 10807/57.— PRICE 1s.


IN THE MATTER OF THE COMPANIES (SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS) ACT 1940
and
IN THE MATTER OF WOLLOMBA RIVER OYSTER LEASES PROPRIETARY
LIMITED AND OYSTER DEVELOPMENT (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
To the Honorable the Attorney-General.
Wm.
On the 7th day of August, 1957, His Excellency the Lieutenant-(Governor by and
with the advice of the Executive Council appointed me pursuant to the Companies
(Special Investigations) Act 1940 to be an inspector to investigate the affairs of Wollomba
River Oyster Leases Proprietary Limited and Oyster Development (Australia) Limited.
I now have the honour to present ray report upon the affairs of the said Companies.
Wollomba River Oyster Leases Proprietary Limited was incorporated on 23rd May,
1949. At that stage it had two shareholders, Alan Giles and his father Allan Giles, who
were both directors. The issued capita] was £2.
The Memorandum of Association shows that the primary object of the Company
was to take over as a going concern the business carried on by Alan Giles and Allan
Giles under the name of Wollomba River Oyster Leases, together with the goodwill,
oyster farm leases and growers' rights, and to adopt and carry into effect the agreement
referred to in Clause 3 of the Articles of Association, and made between Alan Giles and
Allan Giles and one Townsend, a solicitor, on behalf of the Company.
This agreement when produced proved to be undated. It provided for the sale
to the proposed Company of the goodwill of the vendors’ business, the oyster farm leases
and all growers’ rights and any other contracts, rights or choses in action belonging to the
said business. The total consideration was to be £7,500, which was to be satisfied by the
allotment of shares to the vendors.
In order to be legally effective, it was necessary that this agreement should be
adopted by the Company after its incorporation. But at the first meeting of directors
held on 3rd June, 1949, the directors, who were of course also the vendors, resolved to
modify the agreement.
The result of the modifications was that the Company purchased the goodwill of
the vendors’ business without any of the tangible assets at a price to be later determined.
No price has yet been determined.
Alan Giles “ covenanted ” that the oyster farm leases in his name would not be
disposed of, sold, or otherwise impaired unless with the full knowledge and consent of the
Board’of Directors of the Company, and that the Company will have the first right of
purchase at a time and price to be determined.
The present shareholding in. Wollomba River Oyster Leases Proprietary Limited
is—Alan Giles 25 shares, his wife 100 shares, Allan Giles 25 shares, and his wife 100 shares.
All shares are of £1 each.
It will be seen that the Company has acquired from the vendors the goodwill of
their business at a price which the vendors and their wives may fix up to any amount
they choose. It has no interest in any of the oyster farm leases which, according to the
agreement as originally drawn, were to be sold to it and it can only purchase those leases
at a price which may be arbitrarily fixed by Alan Giles.
The first meeting of directors also resolved that Alan Giles be authorized to acquire
oyster farm leases on behalf of the Company, but it was further resolved that Alan Giles
might at his discretion apply for and take up leases in his own name as nominee lessee
for himself and Allan Giles.
10807/57.—2


Three leases were purchased in the name of the Company from a man named Cain
for £5OO. All other leases were acquired in the name of Alan Giles presumably on behalf
of himself and his father. Apart from the three leases just mentioned, the Company has
never had any tangible assets.
Even before the Company was incorporated, there was in operation a scheme for
obtaining money from the public in exchange for what were called “growers’ rights”.
About £30,000 was raised in this way by the partners, but after the Company was
incorporated, this method of obtaining money was vigorously pursued until at the present
time the total amount of money subscribed bv the public for “growers’ rights” is over
£689,000.
In form, the “ grower’s right ” is an acknowledgment by the Company of the
terms upon which it has received payment of £250 from the particular investor. Before
setting out the terms, I should point out that, notwithstanding the terms of the document,
the Company has never received any of the money so subscribed. All the money was in
fact received by a firm, Lee Thomas and Co., of which Alan Giles and Allan Giles were the
members. Alan Giles swore that each investor at the time of making payment was told
that the Company did not receive the money and “ they were told to make their cheques
payable to Lee Thomas and Co., and were also told Lee Thomas and Co. was a partnership
of my father and" myself and that that money was retained by Lee Thomas and Co. or by
A. Giles and Co., which Lee Thomas and Co. was part of, and it was not paid to the
Company direct, and the reason for it was for the purpose of placing the Company in a
better position in relation to taxation.”
I am not able to accept this evidence. One witness, Piercey, told me that when ■
he asked why his cheque should be made payable to Lee Thomas and Co., he was informed
that this was the name of a broker who would deduct his brokerage fee and then remit
the money to the Company. I see no reason to doubt this evidence which was supported
by the evidence of Garnsworthy. Another witness, Garner, said he never discovered the
relationship between Lee Thomas and Co. and the Company; and I accept his evidence
also.
I must now outline the terms on which the Company acknowledged having received
£250. These varied slightly from time to time, but what follows may be taken as a
description sufficiently accurate for the purposes of this inquiry.
In the first place, each person who subscribed £250 obtained the right to cultivate
oysters on a specified area of one-tenth of an acre on an oyster lease which was also
specified. But the cultivation of oysters was to be done by the Company as the agent of
the invester, and the Company undertook to buy the oysters from the investor as and
when the Company is of opinion that they are fit to be removed. Payment for oysters
then purchased was to be made, not to the vendor, but to a trustee appointed by Alan
Giles.
The price payable by the Company was £5 per sack for the first three sacks
removed from the block in each year, and for the remainder not more than £1 13s. 4d. per
sack was to be paid to the vendor-grower, £1 I3s. 4d. to the Company (presumably as
reward for having cultivated the oysters), and £1 13s. 4d. to a maintenance reserve fund.
For some years, the wholesale price of oysters has been about £lO per sack, so that the
investor, apart from the first three sacks, could not receive more than one-sixth of the
value of the oysters grown on his behalf unless he had some interest in the maintenance
reserve fund. The grower’s right certificate provides that this fund shall be applied by
the trustee first in payment to the Company of an amount not exceeding £5O each year,
providing that no such payment shall have the effect of depleting the fund by more than
one-half of the total amount paid into it.
It should be observed at this point that there would have to be 33 sacks of
oysters produced on the area of one-tenth of an acre each year before £5O was paid
into the maintenance reserve fund.
The balance of the maintenance reserve fund is to be utilized by the Company to
develop additional areas of oyster cultivation, the profits from which are to be equally
divided between the “ grower ” and the Company. But each time the maintenance
reserve fund contains a total of £250, the grower is to have the option of either receiving
the £250 in cash as the full.surrender value of the grower’s right, or of receiving from the
Company an additional grower’s right over a similar area of an oyster lease controlled by
the Company in which event the £250 is to be paid to the Company.


This might seem to give investors a chance of getting their capital back. But,
unfortunately, except for a brief period in the early stages, no money was ever paid into
any maintenance reserve fund. No investor has ever had the opportunity of getting his
£250 back, and in my opinion, none ever will.
I can find no justification for the Company abandoning the system of maintaining
the reserve funds as it had promised to do. Alan Giles suggested that it was due to the
fact that the investors were receiving a return which bore no direct relation to the oysters
grown on their respective blocks. This does not appear a satisfactory reason for breaking
the contract between the Company and the investor.
That contract provided that the whole of the purchase price for oysters was to be
paid by the Company to the trustee, who was then to divide it and pay the appropriate
amount back to the Company to form the maintenance reserve fund. The trustee, an
elderly accountant named Robert Bruce Alexander, knew that the keeping of maintenance
reserve funds had been abandoned, but he did nothing about it, because, as he said, Alan
Giles told him that he had informed the growers of the change. Even if this be true, it
does not explain why Alexander remained trustee when the Company gave up paying him
moneys which it was his duty to receive.
I formed the impression that Alexander was a mere tool of Alan Giles, and that he
never attempted to protect the interests of the investors whom he was supposed to
represent.
I need say very little about the trust deed, except that Alan Giles and Alexander
regarded themselves as entitled to alter its terms whenever and however it suited them
without reference to the investors whose interests it was supposed in some way to
protect. The truth is that the trust deed, like so much else connected with this Company,
was a mere facade which was never intended to achieve anything.
I have already pointed out that each grower’s right related to a specific area of
one-tenth of an acre. But in fact no attempt was made, either on the ground or by way
of bookkeeping, to treat each area as the subject of a separate transaction between the
Company and the holder of the relevant grower’s right. The business was run by the
Giles as a single enterprise, and the results pooled regardless of the terms of the grower’s
right certificates.
Alan Giles said that investors were all told about this and agreed to it. On the
evidence I heard, lam satisfied that this is untrue. The most that was told to investors
was that during the first three years, while the oysters on their particular block were
maturing, they would receive 6 per cent, per annum on the amount invested which would
come from the profits of the enterprise as a whole.
As I have already stated, the Company was, by the terms of the grower’s right
certificate, appointed as the investois’ agent to cultivate oysters on his block. The
Company in fact employed the firm of A. Giles and Co. to do the work involved in
cultivation. This is hardly surprising since the Company had no resources with which
to carry out its obligations.
According to Alan Giles, the firm has not yet been paid for this work by the Company
but the Company’s books are, in my opinion, inconsistent with this part of his evidence.
The oysters which were purchased by the Company from the investors were
simultaneously sold by the Company to A. Giles and Co. at the same price. This meant
that A. Giles and Co. supplied the Company with the funds necessary to induce the
investors to believe that their money was invested with a prosperous trading Company.
It also meant that the profit to be made when the oysters were ultimately marketed went
exclusively to A. Giles and Co. and not to the Company. Indeed, the Company never
has made and while controlled by the Giles family, never will make any profit. Alan
Giles claimed that its affairs had been specially organized in this way so that the Company
would not have to pay income tax. Assuming that to be true, it affords neither
advantage nor consolation to those to have been induced to invest in growers’ rights.
It might be thought, from the facts above stated, that the firm of A. Giles and Co.
would have made large profits. But it has furnished returns for income tax which show
that for the last eight years at least, it has made no profit at all. The Commissioner of
Taxation, being naturally sceptical, called for a statement of the assets and liabilities of


the partners. He must have been somewhat surprised to find the liabilities of eaeli
partner are alleged considerably to exceed his assets. It is perhaps not within the scope
of this inquiry to discover what precisely has become of the £689,000 which the public
has invested in the purchase of growers’ rights. I can only say that the money has never
reached the Company and 1 have not discovered what has become of it.
That the amount subscribed was so large is, 1 am sure, largely due to the ” high
pressure ” methods employed in selling growers’ rights. Some people who held gilt edged
stocks or first-rate industrial shares were persuaded to exchange them for growers’ rights.
Others were induced to part with real estate of considerable value. But 1 have considered
it my duty not to investigate whether fraudulent methods were employed by the (files
or the salesmen whom they engaged. There is already one action pending in which
serious allegations of fraud are made, and it may be that others are in contemplation. In
these circumstances, it seemed to me improper that I should express any opinion on
matters which might later have to be determined by the Court, and equally improper that
I should seek to obtain evidence on such matters from people who might later have to
appear in the witness box.
But whatever may have been the methods employed in selling growers’ rights, it
is quite clear that the business of this Company can only be described as a swindle on a
large scale. It might be thought that consistently with what I have so far described,
there was a flourishing business of oyster farming conducted by the Giles for their own
benefit, if not for the benefit of the Company. But I have seen returns rendered to the
Inspector of Fisheries (New South Wales), and signed by Alan Giles. These show that
at Wallis Lake, where most of the leases are located, the number of bags of oysters
produced were as follows :
Year ended 30th June, 1950 .. . . . . 8 bags
~ ~ 30th June, 1951 .. .. .. 75 ~
~ ~ 30th June, 1953 .. .. .. 296 ~
~ ~ 30th June, 1954 .. .. .. 543 „
„ „ 30th June, 1955 .. .. .. 1,000 „
No return had been filed up to 26th February, 1957, for the year ended 30th June,
1956, but according to Alan Giles, the crop for that year was ruined by floods. For the
Georges River area, the returns show :
Year ended 30th June, 1954 .. .. .. 20 bags -
~ ~ 30th June, 1955 .. .. . . 1,075 ~
No other returns have been rendered, except one for Meerimbula Lake of
37 bags for the year ended 30th June, 1956, Assuming the price of £lO per bag
wholesale, the gross receipts from oysters seem pitifully small on the amount of money
provided by investors.
It seems clear enough that the annual return being paid to investors was not
derived from trading profits, but from the sale of still more growers’ rights. So long as
these continued, the financial weakness of the Company would not become apparent. But
on 13th December, 1955, the Victorian Parliament passed Act No. 5935, which was
proclaimed on Ist February, 1956, thus bringing Section 10 of the Act into operation on
Ist May, 1956. From that date, it became illegal for the Company to offer growers’
rights to the public.
At a meeting of directors held on 4th January, 1956, it was resolved to suspend all
payments to growers for the time being. The expressed reason for this was the severity
of credit restrictions recently imposed by the Commonwealth Government. These
restrictions did not affect the Company directly, but were said to have had a serious effect
on the position of A. Giles and Co.
The minute records that the firm was unable to obtain bank accommodation in
excess of an overdraft of £5,000 against the real estate assets held by them of an
approximate value in excess of £100,000.”
In February, 1956, there was some flooding in the coastal areas of New South
Wales, and a certain amount of damage was done to the oyster leases at Wallis Lake.
The oysters on the leases at Georges River, Burill Lakes, and Merrimbuk were not affected


by the Hoods.. Ami there were no oysters on the leases ab Port Stephens or the
Hawkesburv River. These Hoods were utilized to the utmost by the Riles. A report
dated 6th July, 1956, was sent to all growers informing them that enormous losses of
oysters had occurred on the leases controlled by the Company—" including the areas
covered by your growers' rights and have been the direct cause of the cessation of
payments to you ’’
This is of course, a gross misstatement. More than half of the areas comprised in
the growers' rights were entirely unaffected by the Hoods, and payments to growers had
been suspended" for at least a month before the floods occurred.
It appears from the minutes of a meeting of directors held on 27th April, 1956,
that Alan Riles had, before that date, been discussing with the Company’s solicitors and
with Counsel the effect of Section 10 of the Companies Act 1955 upon the sale by the
Company o f further growers’ rights. The position was said to be “ obscure It was
resolved to cease selling growers' rights on 30th April, 1956 (the last permissible day), and
to review the situation ” when the legal position was properly clarified ”.
After July, 1956, some of the holders of growers’ rights became dissatisfied, and
meetings were called to see what could be done. In November, 1956, a writ was issued
by a man named Rhodes and some others alleging fraud and conspiracy. It was
this action which led to the allotment of 100 shares to the wife of each of the two
existing shareholders. For it occurred to someone that since Clause 85 of the Articles of
Association precluded a director from voting on a matter in which lie was personally
interested, much of what the directors had done was probably invalid in law. The two
ladies were promptly appointed directors, and if one can believe the minute book, a meeting
of directors was field at 10.15 p.m. on 13th November, 1956. The minutes of all previous
meetings of directors were read by Alan Riles as Secretary, and discussed in detail, and
the two new directors obligingly ratified and confirmed whatever their husbands had clone
in the last seven years. Since this was a meeting of directors and not of shareholders,
its legal efficacy is perhaps not beyond doubt.
In December, 1956, proceedings were taken by a number of investors to have
Alexander removed from his position as trustee. Both these proceedings and Rhodes’s
action arc still pending, and I therefore say nothing about them.
Section 10 (h) of the Com panics Act 1955 provides that every Company shall, not
less than seven days before the first or only ordinary general meeting of the year, post to
each holder of any " interest ’’ a copy of the balance-sheet, profit and loss account, and
directors’ report of the Company.
Investors who have subscribed for growers’ rights are, in my opinion, holders of an
■‘interest’’ as that term is defined in Section 10 (1) of the same Act. For they have
rights, either actual, prospective, or contingent, to participate in the profits or realization
of the business undertaking or scheme of cultivating oysters.
1 am also of opinion that Section 10 (8) applies to a proprietary Company which
has ceased to offer such interests to the public after Section 10 became operative. But
the obligation to post the specified documents to holders of growers’ rights did not arise
until Section 10 became operative on Ist May, 1956. In these circumstances, it is
perhaps not surprising that the Company held its annual general meeting on ,27th April,
1956, at which the accounts for the year ended 30th June. 1955, were presented. There
was, in my opinion, no obligation to post a copy of these accounts to the holders of
growers’ rights.
The accounts for the year ended 30th June, 1956, would have to be sent to holders
of growers’ rights if they were presented at the first or only ordinary general meeting of
the year ; but in fact, they wore presented at a general meeting held on 28th December,
1956, and described as the third ordinary general meeting of the year. So far as I am
aware, no copies of the relevant documents have been posted to any of the holders of
growers’ rights, though I have not, of course, attempted to inquire from all the numerous
holders of growers’ rights.


Failure to comply witli Section 10 (8) ( b ) would involve the Company and each
director in an offence for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for twelve months
or a fine of £5OO. But, in my opinion “ the first or only ordinary general meeting ” in
Section 10 (8) (6) means “ the first or only ordinary general meeting in the calendar
year ” —(compare Section 10 (8) (a)); and, if this is correct, the Company and the
directors, by presenting the accounts at the third ordinary general meeting of the year
1956, have so far avoided a breach of the provision.
A most important question is whether the investors who hold growers’ rights
certificates are creditors of the Company. To solve the problem, it is necessary to turn
again to the precise terms of the certificate.
Clause 5 provides.- —The Company undertakes to cultivate the block to the
maximum degree possible at all times, and specifically guarantees to produce not less than
three standard sacks of oysters from the block during the course of each twelve months
from the date hereof, such guarantee being backed by the entire reserves of oysters held
by the Company which may be drawn upon to implement the terms of this guarantee.
Clause 6. —In consideration of the Company carrying out the cultivation of oysters
on the block, the grower agrees to allow the Company to purchase all oysters growing or
to be grown on the block at such times as it may be determined by the Company that any
or all of the oysters contained thereon are ready to be removed from the block, and the
Company agrees to buy the said oysters and to pay for them at the price and in the
manner hereinafter set out.
Clause 7.—The Company undertakes to pay to the trustee the amount of £5 per
standard sack for the first three sacks removed from the block in each year, and the ruling
market prices at the time of removal for all oysters so removed in each year in excess of
three standard sacks, with the proviso that £5 per standard sack shall be the maximum
price payable by the Company at any time.
As I have already stated, no oysters have been grown on blocks comprised in
leases at Port Stephens, the Hawkesbury River, or Burrill Lake. About 1 300 growers’
rights were issued in respect of blocks in those areas. The Company has clearly defaulted
in its obligation to produce not less than three standard sacks of oysters per annum from
each of those blocks. Until the end of 1955, however, the owners of these growers’ rights
received payments from the trustee at least equivalent to the £l5 which would be
received if the guaranteed production had taken place. Up to that stage, no damage was
suffered by the breach of the undertaking contained in Clause 5. But no payments have
been made to the holders of growers’ rights since the beginning of the year 1956.
It follows, in my opinion, that holders of growers’ rights in the areas mentioned
have valid claims for damages to the amount of £l5 per grower’s right in respect of at
least one year’s failure to produce the guaranteed quantity of oysters from the block. In
this respect, they are in my opinion, creditors of the Company.
I have little doubt that many of the holders of growers’ rights in other areas are
creditors for the same reason. But it would require a great deal of time and trouble to
ascertain which particular investors fall within this category, and I do not think it is
necessary for me to pursue the matter.
Apart from the guaranteed minimum, the position of the investors is more doubtful.
For the Company’s obligation to purchase oysters from them arises only when the Company
determines that the oysters are ready to be removed from the block ; and, except in cases
where the Company had actually removed oysters from a particular block, I do not see
how it would be possible to prove that the Company was in breach of its obligation to
buy.
No doubt some oysters were removed and sold during 1956, and the holders of the
relevant growers’ rights would have a claim for the price against either Alexander (if he
had received the money as their agent), or against the Company (if he had not). But I
am not in a position to say which investors (if any) are creditors of the Company on this
account.


Under Section 166 (1) (//) of ti e Companics Ad 1938 as amended by Section 15 of
Act No. 5935, a Company may be wound up by the Court if—
(g) an inspector l as, under subdivision (8) of Division 5 of this Part, or under
the said subdivision as applied for the purposes of the Companies
(Special Investigations) Act 1940, reported that he is of opinion that the
Company cannot pay its debts and should be wound up.
I now formally report that 1 am of opinion that Wollomba River Oyster Leases
Proprietary Limited cannot pay its debts and should be wound up.
I also recommend that the Attorney-General should present a petition under
Section 5 of the Companies (Special Investigations) Act 1940 for the winding up of the said
Company on the ground that it is just and equitable that the Company should be wound
up. I make this recommendation because, in my opinion, the Company has (apart from
three oyster leases) no assets, and was never intended to have any ; and that it was
formed to enable Alan Giles and Allan Giles to obtain money from the public by
fraudulent means.
I turn now to Oyster Development (Australia) Limited. This Company was
incorporated on 19th September, 1956, with a nominal capital of £l,OOO divided into
shares of ss. each. The subscribers to the Memorandum of Association were Alan Giles
and Allan Giles, and some clerks in the office of the Company’s solicitors. The sole
directors were Alan Giles and Allan Giles. The statement in lieu of prospectus showed
that the Company did not propose to acquire any business.
On 13th November, 1956, the wife of each of the directors was allotted 50 shares
of ss. each for cash and appointed to the Board. The present shareholding of each of
these ladies is 980 shares of ss. each.
On 24th June, 1957, 3,995,000 shares of ss. each were consolidated and divided
into 3,995 shares of £250 each.
Of these shares, 1,220 have been allotted to Alan Giles, and 1,220 to Allan Giles.
The allotment is expressed to be for cash, but this is a mere pretence. The shareholders
sold to the Company assets expressed to be worth £61,490, against which shares were
issued to them to the like amount. Cheques were exchanged to give an appearance of
payment in cash, but this was a mere formality. No attempt was made to have the
assets valued by any independent person, and the bona fides of the transaction can be
tested by observing what the assets included. Mrs. Alan Giles sold to the Company some
carpets, a mattress, and a lounge suite for £393. The freehold of a week-end house property
at Cannons Creek which had cost £l,OOO was sold to the Company for £2,000. Certain
cameras and photographic equipment, a motor mower, a copy of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, and the furniture and fittings at the residence of Alan Giles in Bpringvale-road
were also included.
All of these articles remain where they were before the sale to the Company.
There is a resolution of the directors professing to let them back to their former
owners at rentals which may or may not be adequate. What is more important is that
no rent has ever been paid to the Company.
As soon as it commenced business, the Company proceeded by advertisement to
invite the public to deposit money with it at high rates of interest. Had this continued
for long enough, it might have provided sufficient money to resume payments to the
holders of growers’ rights in Wollomba River Oyster Leases Proprietary Limited. The
total amount received from depositors is £5,190, and all of it has been lent to A. Giles and
Co. without security. Ostensibly, A. Giles and Co. must repay the money on demand
with interest at 12 per cent, per annum, but since the Giles family control the Company,
there is little likelihood of a demand ever being made and no means of enforcing it.
The Company has had only one other business transaction. On 26th April, 1957,
it purchased from Alan Giles, Allan Giles, and Mrs. Alan Giles, the contents of a private
hotel at Mordialloc for £5,000. About a month later, it resold these articles by auction for
£6,400, the whole of which it promptly lent to A. Giles and Co. on demand with interest at
12 per cent, per annum.


1 am satisfied that there is no legitimate commercial reason for the Company's
existence, but the question remains what should be done. So far, depositors have duly
received payment of their interest. Whether they will receive their capital back depends
upon the financial position of the firm of A. (tiles and Co. This is not easy to discover,
but I see no reason why 1 should not accept the statements made by the partners to the
Commissioner of Taxation that they are both, in fact, insolvent.
If this is correct, the Companv's only assets are those which its shareholders have
sold to it, and while they may have been overvalued at £61,490, they should be more than
sufficient-to pay £5,190 to the depositors. I cannot say, therefore, that the Company is
unable to pay its debts.
At the same time if is. in my opinion, just and equitable that the Company should
be wound up, and 1 recommend that the Attorney-General present a petition accordingly.
For 1 can see no other way in which repayment by A. (files and Co. to the Company of
moneys lent to that firm will ever be enforced, and it seems to me desirable in the interests
of depositors that the sales of assets to which 1 have referred should be investigated by a
liquidator. Moreover, 1 regard the Company as having no legitimate business, and as
formed solely to provide the members of the (Tiles family with money.
All the facts which, in my opinion, support this conclusion are to be found in the
books of the Company which I recommend should be retained by the Attorney-General
until proceedings are launched.
In the case of both the Companies whose affairs I have investigated, if a winding
up order is obtained, consideration should be given, in ray opinion, to the possibility of
obtaining an order under Section 217 or Section 275 (4) of the Companies Act 1938 which
would prevent Alan Giles for sometime from being a director or manager of any Company.
I do not think I should say more than that I think the public interest would be served
by the making of such an order.
I cannot conclude without expressing my indebtedness to Senior Detective Gar vie
and Mr. C. A. Mitchell of the Crown Solicitor’s office for the assistance they have both
given me in the conduct of this inquiry.
E. G. COPPEL.
Equity Cl) ambers,
30th, October, 1957.
Authority; W. M. Houston, Government Printer, Melbourne.
10
