

REPORT
OF
THE COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
UPON
DISTILLATION.
5TH OCTOBER, 1838.




HOBART TOWN,
8th October , 1838.
SIR,
His Honor, the Chief Justice, and the Colonial Secretary,
having been prevented by other pressing duties, from attending the
Committee of the Legislative Council, appointed by Your Excellency
in August last, for inquiring into the operation of the Distillation Act,
the Office of Chairman devolved upon myself, as the next Senior Member,
and in that capacity I now do myself the honor of submitting to Your
Excellency the Report of the Committee, together with the Minutes of
Evidence taken by them.
I have the honor,
Sfc. fyc.
JOHN GREGORY,
Colonial Treasurer *
His Excellency,
Sir John Franklin, K. C. H.




HOBART TOWN,
5th October, 1838.
REPORT of the Committee of the Legislative Council
of Van Diemen’s Land appointed hy the Lieutenant-
Governor on the Qnd August , 1838, at the request of
the Council , “to take into consideration the necessity
of amending the present Colonial Distillation Act, so as
to afford protection to the Commercial and Financial
interests of the Colony, which have suffered so much
since the passing of the Act.”
The Act for regulating Distilleries, 6 William 4, No. 14, was passed
on the 16th May, 1836, and came into operation on the 10th of the
following month. In passing through its several stages, it excited
considerable discussion as to the policy of the measure ; but as it had
become notorious that Distillation had been carried on in Hobart Town
to a large extent from sugar and other articles without the payment of any
duty to the Crown, the question resolved itself into two alternatives,
either to put an end to Distillation altogether, or to subject it to such
regulations as would insure the collection of the public revenue and
prevent smuggling.
The majority of the Council were not prepared to go the length of
prohibiting Distillation, but acquiesced in the passing of an Act by which
the duty on Colonial spirits was fixed at four shillings per gallon, power
being given to the Lieutenant-Governor to lower the rate of duty from
time to time, “in order to meet occasional fluctuations in the price of
grain.”
No sooner however had the Act come into operation, than the Distillers
urged *upon the Lieutenant-Governor the necessity of his issuing a
Proclamation for lowering the duty from 4s. to 2s. a gallon. They claimed
this on two grounds; first, because with the then price of grain, *jfs. 6d.
per bushel, it was impossible for the .Distiller to pay a higher rate of


duty than 25.; and secondly, because a pledge had been given by the
Attorney-General (Mr. Stephen) to one of the Distillers, (Mr. Hackett)
that the duty to be imposed on the Act’s first coming into operation,
should not be higher than 2s. a gallon.
The Attorney-General having substantially admitted the existence of
an understanding to this effect between the Distiller and himself, and
having moreover been strongly impressed with a belief (whether well
founded or not it is now too late to inquire) that the majority of the
Council voted for the passing of the Act, with an understanding that 2s.
was to be the duty to be imposed at that time, the Lieutenant-Governor,
with the advice of the Executive Council, issued a Proclamation* lowering
the duty from 4s. to 25., for the limited period however of six months.
At the end of that time the Distillers renewed their claim, and a Pro-
clamation was again issued for three months, and it has been successively
renewed from quarter to quarter up to the 30th of last month ; the duty
however for the last twenty-one months having been fixed at 2s. 3 d.,
instead of 25., as in the first six months after the act came into operation.
The question upon which we are now called upon to pronounce an
opinion, is, whether the objects contemplated by the Legislature have
been attained ; or whether, on the the other hand, the Act has operated
prejudicially upon the interests of the Colony.
It appears from the concurrent testimony of all the witnesses we have
examined, (and they are persons who have had ample means of ascer-
taining the fact) that on this side of the Island Colonial spirits are rarely,
if indeed ever, sold by retail as Colonial spirits- —that nothing is ever
asked for in the public-houses but Rum, Hollands, or Brandy—and that
Colonial spirits are mixed with Rum in very large proportions, approx-
imating not unfrequently to half-and-half, notwithstanding the heavy
penalty imposed by the Act.f
One of the results of this is, that the lower orders of people drink the
adultered spirit, believing it to be Rum-—and that the mixture itself is
in the highest degree injurious to health.
Another result is, that the Revenue suffers to a very great extent.
The duty on Rum being the produce of British Possession, is,
Per gallon 9s. Od.
The duty on Colonial spirits has been 2s. 3d.
6s. 9 d.
So that for every gallon of Colonial spirits consumed under the appel-
lation of Hum, the Revenue loses 6s. 9d, ; while for every gallon of
Colonial spirits consumed under the name of Brandy, upon which the
duty is 1 2s. o d., the Revenue loses 9s. 9d.
# 16th June, 1836.
f Clause 36.—Penalty, £lO to £lOO,


Now the quantity of Colonial spirits removed under permits from the
Distilleries at Hobart Town and Launceston, (the only two in the Island)
from the 31st July,* 1836, to the 31st August, 1838, embracing twenty-
five months, was .54,068 gallons—and the total amount of duty paid
thereon was £5,900 13s. 6c?. The average therefore is 25,952 gallons
per annum, producing a Pievenue per annum of only £2,919 Os. o d.
Whereas if the same quantity of genuine Rum had
paid duty, the Revenue from it would have
amounted to £11,678 Os. 0c?.
Thus exhibiting an annual loss of £8,759 Os. o d.
Which must be still larger if the Colonial spirits are mixed with Brandy,
which all the witnesses concur in stating to be the fact to a large extent.
Independently, however, of the loss here described, the Revenue
(there is too much reason to apprehend) is suffering a still larger loss
from spirits which find their way into consumption, without the payment
of any duty at all.
The loss, however, which the Revenue is suffering from the admixture
of spirits, cannot be attributed altogether to the operation of the Act of
1836—for it must be borne in mind, that before the passing of that Act,
Colonial spirits had been distilled both at Hobart Town and Launceston—
and had been subjected, under the authority of a Proclamation issued by
Sir Thomas Brisbane, while Van Diemen’s Land formed part of the
Government of New South Wales, to a duty of 4s. 2 d. per gallon.
It appears that from June, 1834, to June, 1836, at which latter date
the present Act came into force, the total amount of duty paid on
Colonial spirits was £2,149 —that is to say, £1,074 a-year—so that in
those days there -must have been a consumption of Colonial spirits to the
extent of at least 5,155 gallons a-year. In fact, the quantity consumed,
though not having paid duty, must have been much larger than that here
stated—for it was notorious that large quantities of Colonial spirits were
distilled in Hobart Town, and passed into consumption without the pay-
ment of any duty at all, in consequence of the absence (as it was
believed) of any legal authority for imposing a duty on spirits distilled
from sugar , which was then used largely for the purpose. We have no
means of ascertaining the exact quantity of Colonial spirits which found
their way into consumption before the Act of 1836 passed—but we
entertain no doubt that at Hobart Town and Launceston together, it
reached at least 15,000 gallons per annum.
It therefore appears that large as the loss may have been which the
Revenue has suffered from the consumption of Colonial spirits under the
names of Rum and Brandy, it is not wholly attributable to the Act of
1836, though there is little doubt that the direct legalization of Dis-
tilleries has considerably increased the manufacture and consequent con-
sumption of Colonial spirits.
* No spirits were removed from 10th June 1836, when the Act began, to 31st July 1836.


Be this however as it may, we are convinced that had the Legislature,
in 1836, been aware of the extent to which the mixture of Colonial
spirits with Rum and Brandy had been, and was likely still farther to be,
carried, they never would have consented to the passing of the Act.
The question now arises—by what legislative ,means the injury
sustained by the Revenue can be most effectually guarded against ?
There are three ways of doing this :
The first is by introducing such portions of the British Excise Laws,
as would effectually prevent the mixture of Foreign and ColoniaLspirits.
The second is by imposing so high a duty as to render it impracticable
for the Distiller to carry on his trade, and
The third is by prohibiting Distillation altogether.
With regard to the first mode, we feel assured that the introduction of
so considerable a portion of the British Excise Laws, as would be required
for the purpose of preventing the mixture of spirits, and of guarding
against other frauds which may be too easily resorted to under present
circumstances, would not only give rise to very general dissatisfaction in
the community, but would require far too large and expensive a machi-
nery for the Colonial finances to bear.
If the second mode should be thought advisable, we are of opinion that
the duty to be fixed should be the same as that on West India Rum,
namely, nine shillings per gallon ; for as the Distillers, in 1836, urged
their inability to pay more than two shillings per gallon, it is to be infer-
red that a duty of 9s. would be tantamount to prohibition.
With regard to the third mode, there can be no doubt that it would
be the most effectual, but it appears to be a matter of some doubt
whether it would be competent for the Local Legislature to pass an Act
that should declare it to be illegal, for one of Her Majesty’s subjects to
carry on the business of a Distiller,
It is possible however that His Excellency, the Lieutenant-Governor,
and the majority of the Legislative Council, may take a different view
of the question from that which we take, and may not think it absolutely
necessary or expedient to resort to so strong a measure as that of either
directly or indirectly prohibiting Distillation; and it is therefore right that
we should proceed to state what rate of duty we think the Distiller could
afford to pay, so as still to reap a fair and reasonable profit from his
trade.
The cost of one gallon of West India Rum may be stated at 4s. 6d.
To which must be added the duty of. 9s* Od.
The total cost therefore amounts to 13s. 6d.


But the ordinary price at which a gallon of what is called Rum
is sold by the dealers is 11s. o d.
thus proving that nothing but the mixture of Colonial spirit with it
could possibly admit of its passing into consumption at a price so obvi-
ously below the cost of the Foreign article. -
It may further be stated, that one bushel of grain should produce
rather more than two gallons of spirits. One gallon therefore may be
procured from half a bushel of grain, which at the medium price of 6s.
per bushel would cost the Distiller 3s. o d.
The expense of manufacture, consisting of the annual
license, £SO, rent of buildings, human labour, houses, carts, coals,
wood, and other items, may be stated at eighteen pence a gallon is. 6d.
And supposing the duty to be levied at the maximum rate
authorised by the Act 4s. o d.
It follows that the whole cost to the Distiller is Bs. 6d.
Now he can sell it for 9s. 6d.
And thus reap a profit on each gallon of Is. o d.
which supposing him to distil 16,000 gallons would produce a total profit
of £BOO per annum; but supposing him to distil (as the evidence shows
to be the case in one of the Distilleries) from smutty wheat, which can be
purchased at an average for 3s. a bushel, it will be seen that he would
then reap a profit of 2s. 6d. a gallon, even though called upon to pay a
duty of four shillings.
If the Distiller however cannot afford to sell his spirit for less than 10s.
or 11s., it would not meet with a sale at all, for no one (at least on this
side of the Island) will drink it in its pure state, and as to mixing it with
rum, it would not be worth the dealer’s while to run the risk of adultera-
tion, if there was no greater disparity between the cost of the two arti-
cles than that which exists between 13s. 6d. and 11s.
Upon the whole, therefore, we are of opinion that Distillation is to be
allowed to continue, no higher rate of duty than ss. 6d. a gallon could be
paid by the Distiller, so as to leave him a reasonable profit.
But the more we weigh the evil consequences of Colonial Distillation,
the more convinced we are that the sooner it is substantially prohibited,
the better it will be for all parties except the Distillers; and we are pre-
pared to admit that in that case they should be adequately compensated.
In the first place, the revenue will no longer suffer the serious loss to
which it has been subjected for some years past.
In the second place, the lower orders of the population will cease to
be imposed upon as they now are by an adulterated and deleterious
mixture.*


In the third place, the respectable dealer in spirits who acts with honesty
towards the public, will no longer be interfered with, and perhaps ruined,
by the more successful competition of men who have no such scruples in
imposing the adulterated spirit upon their customers.
In the fourth place, the commerce of the colony will be to a certain
extent benefitted by it; for supposing 25,000 gallons of foreign spirits
to be annually imported, in addition to the present average quantity
brought into the Island, they would serve as dead weight, and lead to
the chartering of so many more ships for Van Diemen’s Land.
In the fifth place, we would observe, that though one of the objects
contemplated by the Legislature in 1836 when they passed the Act, was
to promote the interests of the Colonial Agriculturist, by insuring to him
a certain market for his grain, the belief on the minds of ourselves, and
of most of the witnesses we have examined, is, that the farmer has not
reaped any perceptible advantage from the operation of the Act. Our
information on this point is very imperfect, as the Inspector of Distilleries
can throw little or no light upon it, and we have no other means of
knowing what description of grain is used in the Distilleries. It appears
that Indian Corn or Maize was on one occasion used, but it is believed
for the purposes of trial only. At all events, the total quantity distilled
in the Colony is said not to exceed 26,000 gallons a-year; and it would
therefore appear, that the whole agricultural interests of the Colony are
not benefitted to a larger extent than 12,500 bushels, even ‘ assuming
that Colonial grain is exclusively used for the purpose.
It is satisfactory however to perceive, that the interests of the Colony
generally, and of the farmers particularly, are likely, from present appear-
ances, to be benefitted in the most unobjectionable way, by the increasing
taste of the community for Colonial Porter, Ale, and Beer ; and we should
strongly recommend that every encouragement should be given to the
several Breweries which have been of late years established in the Island.
Any loss which the Revenue from Spirits may suffer from the competition
of untased Beer, will be amply compensated to the Colony at large, by
the substitution of a wholesome for a deleterious beverage amongst the
labouring classes of its population, and by the consequent prevention of
those numerous evils, both moral and physical, which follow the use of
ardent spirits.
We are unwilling to close this Report without stating, that we thought
it right to invite the attendance of Mr. Hackett, who was the proprietor of
the Hobart Town Distillery before the Act passed, and has since become
a Rectifier, intending to afford him that opportunity of communicating
his sentiments, as a practical Distiller, upon the question of Colonial
Distillation. He accordingly attended the Committee, but declined to
afford us any information, except upon the understanding that we should
recommend that he should receive compensation from the Government in
the event of Distillation being prohibited. It is scarcely necessary for
us to say, that we could not become parties to any such pledge or under-
standing, and Mr. Hackett therefore withdrew without giving us the


benefit of his practical information. Mr. Turnbull, however, who now
carries on the Distillery in Hobart Town, attended and freely answered
all the questions we thought it fair to put to him, [2nd October,
1838 ;] and he has since addressed a communication to us, which accom-
panies this report, and in which he offers in a spirit of fairness
towards the Government, a series of useful suggestions for the establish-
ment of more efficient checks on the part of the Revenue officers, in
superintending and watching the successive stages of Distillation.
John Gregory,
Colonial Treasurer.
G, W. Barnes,
Collector of Customs.
C. Swanston.
Charles M‘Lachlan.
M. Forster.


“ Sin,
“ I have the honor to address you, as the Chairman of the Committee
of the Legislative Council, on the Distillery Laws.
“ I understand that Mr. Hackett has offered to make known to the
Council certain improvements in the Distillery Laws, provided that he
receives some stipulated remuneration for his information. Considering,
as I cannot but do, that this infers that there are illicit proceedings
practised by the Distillers, I feel it my duty freely and voluntarily,
without any stipulation whatever, to make known to the Government,
through you as the Chairman of the Committee, every measure of pre-
caution which can be by possibility adopted to secure the Revenue from
fraud; and which, if carried into effect, will effectually prevent any
illicit practices on the part of either Distillers or Rectifiers, against which
latter the Revenue requires quite as much protection as against the
former.' In asserting that the communications I am about to make will
afford the Government complete protection, I believe I may state, that
having been brought up a Distiller from my earliest youth in one of
the largest Distilleries in Europe, that of Messrs. Stein & Co., near
Edinburgh, I am fully competent to do so.
“ In submitting to you the regulations and provisions which will be
necessary for the above purpose, you will be quite aware, that the
descriptions I am about to furnish you will necessarily require verbal
explanation, in order to enable the Government to carry them into
effectual operation. lam ready to furnish that explanation, and all other
necessary information, whenever I am called upon so to do.
“ The regulations necessary for the full and complete protection
against illicit practices of any sort may be taken in the following order;—
“ Ist—Her Majesty’s Revenue Officer, the Supervisor, or Inspector
of Distilleries, shall be provided, as in Britain, with a Government Seal,
the imitating which to be a serious misdemeanor. All the vessels here-
after mentioned, to be furnished with locks and keys for Her Majesty’s
Officer, who is to lock up and affix the Government Seal to the spirit
receiver, the strong faint receiver, the low wine receiver, and the weak
faint receiver. Neither of these to be opened but by the Officer, and
not by him until after four hours’ notice. He is to be present (or some
Sub-Officer) at all times when the Distiller uses these vessels, after
which he locks them and seals them, not to be opened until after notice
as above.
“ 2nd—That the charge and discharge locks of the stills shall be under
the lock and seal of the Officer, not to be opened but by him, and after
six hours’ notice, whereby they cannot be set to work without the Officer’s
knowledge.
“3rd—lf there are any fixed pumps in the receiver, they are also to
be under the lock and seal of the Officer, not to be opened but at«four
hours’ notice, whereby no spirit could be removed from the receiver
without the knowledge of the Officer, who by comparison of his dips
could prevent the possibility of fraud.
“ 4th—That the safe at the worm end shall not exceed in size twelve
inches by nine inches, so as to prevent any adequately sized vessel being
introduced to carry away the spirit.


“ 3th—That no separate brewings be mixed together, whereby the
fraud will be prevented of mixing the worts of different brewings, which
deprives the Officer of the check of ascertaining the gravity of each
brewing, and in order to further protection that no yeast be added to
those brewings until the Officer makes his charge against the Distiller
upon each separate wort.
,6th —Her Majesty’s Officer shall keep a duplicate minute-book in
the Distillery, which he shall leave there, and in which shall be entered
in presence of the Distiller, or his Superintendent, every dip taken by
the Officer upon each survey.
(i 7th —The Officer to survey the work every four hours, day and
night, if he shall consider it necessary, at uncertain times, and without
any previous notice.
“ Bth—The stock to be taken daily at least, or more frequently at the
discretion of the Officer.
“ gth —All Rectifiers to be subject to these regulations.
“ 10th—No Rectifier to send out spirits but with the Officer’s permit,
which is not to be granted but upon the production by the Rectifier of a
corresponding permit of its distillation origin.
“ All these regulations to be enforced by heavy penalties. In Scotland
they extend to £3,000.
“ It will be absolutely necessary to the protection of the Revenue,
that the Officer be assisted by two inferior Officers, who should be
respectable persons, so as to confirm their integrity, and place it beyond
the suspicion of corruption.
“ I beg leave to repeat, that these regulations being strictly enforced,
it will be utterly impossible for any illicit conduct to be practised by
either Distiller or Rectifier. They embrace the essence of the Scots
Distillery Laws, which are the most perfect in the United Kingdom.
“ I have also to repeat, that personal explanation will be necessary
upon several collateral points, which I am ready at any time to afford to
the Government.
“ In making this communication, I trust I shall have shown the
anxiety which I feel to afford the Government every protection against
illicit practices, which the fair trader must be desirous to prevent the
possibility of his being suspected of.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your respectful servant,
JOHN SCOTT TURNBULL.
Distillery, Macquarie-street,
October 2, 1838. J
To
John Gregory, Esq.,
Chairman of* the Committee of Council,
&c. &c. &c.
