

"VeTH fPr-w
GENERAL SURVEY
VICTO R I A .
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY’S COMMAND.
Bp autfjoritp:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
No, 38.




REPOET
ON THE
GENERAL SURVEY OF VICTORIA.
The object of a systematic survey of a new country should be to combine, with a
delineation of the natural features, the marking out the boundaries of allotments for
sale on some uniform plan, one of the most important objects being to afford a description
of any portion of alienated land which shall truly define the position, and give the true
area linear and angular dimensions. Upon this description rests the legal value of the
transfer.
The question naturally arises, whether the modes hitherto pursued in the survey of
this colony have to any extent met these requirements. It must be borne in mind that
the elements of correct description are, uniform and accurate linear dimensions, and
accordance of direction. With reference to linear dimensions, it must be stated that, in
the past surveys of the colony, even a bare uniformity of measure has never been
attempted, much less the adoption of the fixed imperial standard, —and the compass
having been the only means (with a few late exceptions) used for obtaining the azimuth
or direction of the lines, it will be unnecessary to explain that the accordance or uniformity
of direction must be very uncertain. In America and Canada, the results of the same
unsystematic mode of surveying proved most disastrous, from the amounts expended in
resurveying and private litigation,- But, to come nearer home, we need only glance at the
fences erected on the lines of survey in the neighbourhood of Melbourne, and executed, too,
under the favorable circumstances of open country, to see the evil effects of magnetic surveys.
In some counties, the parish maps show a continuous straight line of survey for many
miles, the descriptions in the deeds of the adjacent allotments corresponding to this
assumed straightness, while a glance shows that on the ground they have no straight line
in common, many of them differing at the rate of from one to seven chains in a mile. In
such cases, when the survey marks become obliterated, the deed is of no value as a guide
(which is one of its intentions) to re-adjust the boundaries. Our oldest surveys are of but
comparatively recent date, and in a majority of cases the original survey marks may be
readily discovered. This, with the testimony of living witnesses to the erection of fences
and definition of boundaries, prevent, for the time being, our realising the evil conse-
quences which have in all other countries inevitably followed such an unsystematic mode
of survey. The mode referred to, from its inability to give accordance of direction,
precludes the possibility of two separate surveys “ closing/' or in other words, the boundary
line which is common to both surveys will be described in the individual deeds of the
allotments on the opposite sides of the line as having different bearings : for instance, the
deeds of the land on one side will describe the southern boundary of an allotment as
bearing east and west, while the self-same line, forming the northern boundary of an
adjacent allotment, is in its deed described as having a bearing seriously differing from
east and west.


Enquiry as to the most With this manifestly defective mode of survey, it becomes evident that the objects
efficient and economical . ,
mode of surveying a 0 f a systematic survey of a new country cannot be attained. It is therefore necessary to
determine what system supplying the requisite conditions should be adopted, combining
expedition with economy.
A purely trigonometrical It may be advanced that we have the examples of other countries to guide us in the
survey° able selection, and that the trigonometrical mode has generally been adopted in older countries;
but it must be recollected that the survey of an old and settled country, where every field
and estate has had its boundaries defined from time immemorial is very different from that
of a new country, like the Australian Colonies, where the survey has to be combined with
the subdivision of unsettled lands.
We must look to new and comparatively unsettled countries, for example, America,
Canada, Algeria, &c. Colonel Dawson, of the Royal Engineers, wrote a report “On
Surveying as applicable to the Colonies/' at the instance of the Secretary of the State
for the Colonies, Lord J. Russell, in 1840. This report was ordered to be printed, by the
Houses of Parliament, and its general recommendations are embodied in the following :
Extract from Colonel “ Colonial surveying is distinguished from the usual land surveying by a marked difference in
Dawson’s report on jn
colonial surveying. its objects.
Colonel Dawson explains “In cultivated countries in which every portion of the land is claimed by a proprietor and an
the requirements of the .....
surveying an old and occupier, and the surface of which is divided into estates with known boundaries, or separated into
settled country. r
legal and ecclesiastical divisions, the business of the surveyor consists in making on a plan a faithful
representation of the existing demarcations and artificial objects, as well as of the natural features, and
in collecting and arranging all data which may contribute to convey a knowledge of the physical aspect
G °thc e difference between coun t r y- In new colonies, on the contrary, the first purpose of the surveyor, instead of being
colonial and survey of directed to the measurement of existing lines and boundaries, consists in actually setting out on the
older countries. ° °
ground the limits of stated quantities of land or “sections ” previously to their being conveyed to the
purchaser.
Colonel Dawson’s objec- “ Trigonometrical surveying necessarily involves, in its prosecution, both considerable expendi-
tion to a trigonometrical ” J 0 . . *
survey, on account of ture of money and great consumption of time. In a new country, probably covered with timber, or
the time and money p . ,i-i - ii- , . , , 1
expended thereon. dense and tangled underwood, intersected by impassable rivers, and inaccessible marshes, and
presenting other serious physical obstacles, the consumption of time and money must be proportionably
Colonel Dawson explains increased. Yet, assuming the trigonometrical survey to be accomplished, and the interior detail of the
that the complete execu- 00 ~
tion of trigonometrical natural features, such as rivers, streams, mountain ridges., as also the boundaries of coasts, &c., to have
survey will not have .
Axed or laid off a single been measured and protracted, nothing will yet have been done to assist in the immediate purpose of
allotment. . r J ...
location; not a smgle allotment or section of land will have been set out, preparatory to its being
Colonel Dawson shows conveyed to, and occupied by, the purchaser. And thus, the preliminary operations cannot, as yet, be
s*urvoy made subservient to the immediate wants of the settler, the lines defining the boundaries of each
awe a/i/und:ny ihiesJ 1 ' location still remaining to be set out on the ground, as the points and lines determined by the trigono-
metrical survey are not those required for the immediate purpose of location.”
W. M. Gillespie, LL.D., Professor of Engineering in the Union College, U.S., in
his work on surveying, and speaking of the surveys of new countries, says :
Professor Gillespie shows “ The operations of laying out lands for the purposes of settlers are required on a large scale in
metricainor new countries in combination with their survey. There is great difficulty in uniting the necessary
thT f °a precision, rapidity and cheapness. Triangular surveying will ensure the first of these qualities, but is
deficient in the last two, and leaves the laying out the lots to he subsequently executed. Compass
I>r tiie SS( ti'jormf^h s6 'efflcfacy surveying possesses the last two qualities, but not the first. The United States system for surveying
parallel the laying out public lands admirably combines an accurate determination of standard lines
United states. (meridians and parallels), with a cheap and rapid subdivision.”
In the survey of Algeria, the “ meridian and parallel," or geodetic, has been most
advantageously and successfully adopted.
Objects of a trigonometri-
cal survey.
The great Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom, and other great national
surveys of old countries, have generally been trigonometrical surveys : but their objects
have invariably been to determine the figure of the earth, to obtain accurate knowledge of
areas for the adjustment of local burdens, and for forming correct maps of the natural and
artificial features of the country as they actually exist, but never as a means to subdivide
land for sale.


For several years past a small party of sappers and miners have, und(>r the orders Progress made during last
" x x x tew y ears towards the
of Captain Clarke, been employed clearing mountains, hill tops, &c., and erecting stations tmn'S
for the commencement of a trigonometrical survey. The stations thus prepared will enable colony '
a very good primary triangulation to be made over a great portion of the colony, and which
will become of very great value in carrying out a geodetic survey, and be invaluable in
conducting a coast survey. But if it could be seen desirable to carry out a trigonometrical Difficulties and expense of
. . . . . . . . - , a complete trigonome-
survey in its entirety in Victoria, it must be taken into consideration that a secondary and tricai survey.
in many cases tertiary triangulation must be completed within the primary one, after that
is carried out, before it becomes available for dividing land for settlement.
It is only a 'portion of the stations for a primary triangulation that have yet been
completed ; and, as very few substantial objects, such as churches, mills, manufactory chim-
neys, &c., exist here, which form proper and convenient points in carrying out the secondary
triangulations, and which are so dispersed over old countries, stations for the lesser trian-
gulations would nearly all have to be specially formed, which, in a majority of cases, would
involve much clearing. The stations already cleared have averaged a cost of about i? 500
per station ; to each station now cleared, the intervening distances being so large, from 20
to 70 miles, not less than twenty secondary ones would be required ; the expense thus Difficulties and expense of
, a trigonometrical snr-
involved in the mere preparation would become enormous, and up to the time when all vey.
the observations and computations are completed, not a single allotment will have been laid
out, as Colonel Dawson states, for the purchaser. It might be mentioned, that the
triangulation of England, which offered no obstacles in the form of heavily timbered
mountain chains, dense forests, scrub, but on the contrary possessed already every facility,
lasted over twenty years.
It has thus been shown that neither an unconnected survey like that hitherto
adopted here, nor a perfect trigonometrical one like that of Great Britain and Ireland, meet
the requirements of this colony ; it was therefore judged to be inadvisable to perpetuate
the one or attempt the other, but rather to adopt the less expensive, more expeditious,
and for all practical purposes, equally accurate system of “parallel and meridian”
surveying, so successfully pursued in America, Algeria, &c., and known as the geodetic
survey.
A misconception seems to have arisen as to the signification of “ geodetic survey.” Tho term „ geodetic snr .
The term “ geodetic,” as applied to surveying, is one of common use, and is applicable to vty ‘
all systematic surveys; a “trigonometrical” is purely a “geodetic survey,” but it has
been more especially applied to this method, so known, because its lines conform to the
true meridians and parallels, while the lines of a trigonometrical survey do not, although
equally dependent on “ geodetic elements ” for their determination.
The geodetic survey has for its most important aim the dividing of the country
into primary squares by main lines corresponding in their position and direction to
meridians of longitude and parallels of latitude. Each of the squares average in area
Size of the geodetic blocks.
about 25,000 acres, while the sides are the tenth part of a degree of latitude and
longitude respectively, each side measuring on the average about six miles. Beyond the
marking out of these squares the geodetic survey does not extend. These lines being Sub(liviS i on .
defined, the subdivisional or detail survey within them will be carried on with the
theodolite and chain by the usual surveyors, or by contract.
It must not be for a moment supposed that it was ever intended that the Not intended to always
..... ... , ... . adhere to geodetic form
boundaries of all allotments should conform in direction to the meridians and parallels m subdivision.
except where convenient. But where the natural features of the country, roads, water-
courses, reserves, and sold land, require a deviation from these directions, such Exceptions.
conformation would not be attempted ; yet in all cases the lines will be referred in their
bearings to the meridians and parallels bounding the block in which they are included.
The blocks are of a most convenient size for detail survey, while at the same time it has Form and size of blocks
... . , convenient for subdivi-
been found by experience that a surveyor with the ordinary portable instruments ot the sionai survey.
No. 38, a.


best class cannot with any ordinary degree of accuracy attempt the survey of a much
larger extent.
sty This geodetic system of survey possesses considerable advantages over either the
and mapping. present or a trigonometrical survey in the simplicity and certainty of conveyance and the
facility and economy in the compilation of maps. The mapping of the work executed
by this method may be done with greater accuracy, and for at least one-half the cost of
that laid down by triangulation or the trigonometric method.
The system of surveying by the geodetic method may be seen by reference to the
accompanying map. The thicker lines show respectively primary'meridians and parallels,
and are one degree of longitude and latitude apart. Of these certain convenient ones are
standard meridian and selected as standards. The double lines show those already chosen. On the laying out of
narallcls and the, method * jo
parallels and the method * J j &
positiou erminlns their th ese standard meridians and parallels all the work depends, and on those all the care and
accuracy attainable with the best instruments will be expended. It is only on the
standards that absolute measurements (applied by means of the primary triangulation) will
be made ; and most of the astronomical observations necessary in the survey will be
confined to those lines and the determination of the astronomical position of the primary
meridians. The great mass of the work consists in the running of the subsidiary meridians
Facility and certainty of and parallels which divide the country into the proper sized blocks. All this is done very
skuary °meridians and simply: the starting points and azimuthal direction being already determined on the
standard meridians and parallels, it only remains to trace the subsidiary lines with proper
instruments, occasionally, only, making a few simple astronomical observations, in order that
these lines, through any accident, may not run off their true direction. Thus it will be
seen that the mere running of these lines after the standards are laid out completes the
division into blocks of proper and accurate dimensions. The intersections of the subsidiary
lines with any ordinary amount of care occur in their exact places without any further
mariis left at intersections measuring or observation. At the intersection of the lines a permanent mark (a stayed
of main lines or corners o l \ j
of main lines or corners
of geodetic blocks.
post deep sunk, standing one foot out of the ground, and covered with an iron cap, with
reference marks on the same) is left, so as to become a permanent point for the starting of
the future sub-division.
Emm .1 and undulating The fact that the country presents rugged features rather facilitates the running
offering advantages over J y 00
nin--long U £ for run ' g e °detic lines than otherwise, as they enable distant points for “ running to” to be
obtained, thereby preventing error, and generally ensuring greater expedition.
use r the primary trian- It has been before mentioned that the primary triangulation as it advances
gulation. . t Jr J 0 .
will greatly assist in the geodetic survey, affording one of the best means of determining
the relative positions of the primary lines, of measuring the standards, and enabling
the geodetic survey to commence in isolated portions of the colony with uniformity.
The observations for the primary triangulation have been commenced some time back, and
the chief base line is now under measurement, in order that the already existing stations
may be fixed so as to become available.
T an easy! lt is a generally formed opinion that running the parallels of latitude is a difficult
I,od ‘ ° ptratloll ‘ and tedious operation ; but this is not the case, for, with the exception of the occasional
taking of a horizontal angle, they are as easily “ run” as any other line.
And again, it might be objected by those who had not experience in this mode
of surveying that the fixing the different meridians and parallels astronomically was both
Astronomical determina- difficult and expensive. But when it is explained that no more astronomical determi-
tions neither numerous 1 1
nor uncertain. nofl one Orn fToo ta xirrvnlrl r»/-.nAnr<nvTr in +vi fYAn Am nlri no 1 cmrirmr OTA/1 fil"l O T
nations are made than would be generally necessary in a trigonometrical survey, and that
the only points fixed astronomically, are the positions and intersections of the standard
meridians and parallels, the objection ceases. The obtaining the true direction for running
the meridians and parallels are simple azimuth observations.
° f t!ie geodeUc The geodedic survey was commenced in September, 1858. The first work was
the determination of the standard (145th) meridian : this was completed about the middle
of October. This meridian was then carried up as far as 37° latitude, and subsequently to


the Murray. Afterwards, the geographical positions of Mount Macedon, Warreneep, the
intersection of the 37th parallel with the 145th meridian, as well as the 2nd primary
meridian (144th), were determined astronomically. In Apiil last, the determination and
measurement of the Ist standard parallel was commenced (the secondary one of lat. 87° 48'
was chosen as most eligible). As this was a work of great importance, and forms the
groundwork of a great portion of the survey, all the care possible was bestowed on it.
The measurements, by which the intersections of the ten subsidiary meridians were fixed, Measurement of standard
’ J J parallel.
Avere made by a most rigid triangulation along the parallel. The sth and 6th secondary
meridians have been run from the standard parallel over the dividing ranges, and are now
being pushed forward to the Murray. The 37th parallel has been run eastwards through
Anglesey, and meridians for immediately laying out geodetic blocks are in progress.
Some blocks are also being laid out on the Ist standard meridian at the Murray.
About 350 miles of lines have been run, and from the expenditure incurred it is cost of geodetic survey,
found that the geodetic lines have cost at the rede of a -penny an acre, and will cost much
less; at the same time the cost of the detail survey within the blocks will be reduced by
that amount.
CH. W. LIGAR,
Surveyor General.
By Authority : John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.
7


