

FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY
f*
REPORTS
REV. GEORGE BROWN,
SPECIAL COMMISSIONER
CONFERENCE
TO TOINTGKA..
AUSTRALASIAN WESLEYAN METHODIST GENERAL
JArp 6/6UQ
Jjjrfrnen :
S. E. LEES, PRINTER, LEES COURT, OFF KING STREET.




'A'ivf-r
For Private Circulation only.]
FIRST REPORT BY REV. GEO. BROWN,
Special Commissioner of Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist General Conference to Tonga.
Sydney, December, 1888.
I LANDED in Tonga on August 7th, and left for Sydney on
December 7th, so that I was exactly four months in the
Group. I could converse with the natives from the beginning,
and preached to them eighteen days after our arrival, so that I
was able not only to take up the work at once, but also to
ascertain the feelings and opinions of the people.
It is right for me to express here the principles on which I
decided to act, and by which, as a matter of fact, all my subse-
quent actions were governed.
1. I determined to cultivate the most friendly relations
possible with the Rev. J. B. Watkin, the Hon S. W. Baker, the
Premier, and with all the members of the Free Church party.
2. That I would not concern myself with the past history of
the Tongan troubles, more especially those which happened prior
to the investigation conducted by Sir C. Mitchell. My policy, I
decided, was to accept the present situation, and to do what lay
in my power to remedy the evils which exist. I was not only
willing but anxious that the past should all be forgotten and
forgiven.
3. That I would do all that I possibly could to assure His
Majesty and all the members of the Free Church of the earnest
desire of the Conference that our Church in Tonga should be
re-united, and of our readiness to adopt and sanction any right
and proper plan which would conduce to that end.
4. That I would endeavour in every way possible to prepare
our own people for union with the Free Church party.
5. That though my own opinion was that Tonga is not yet
far enough advanced to be constituted one of the Annual Con-
ferences in connection with the General Conference, I was yet
prepared to recommend as the least of two evils that this request
should be granted and that if the other difficulties could be
settled and union effected, we should recognise the present
President of the Free Church and the Native Ministers as fully
accredited ministers of our Church.
6. That in all these matters it was essential that the feelings
and wishes of our own faithful people must be carefully cons-i
dered. I felt that the first thing to be done was to promote a
better state of feeling between the two churches, and in every


way possible to lessen the existing breach, and to promote
friendly and brotherly intercourse between the people.
I will briefly describe now the plans I adopted in carrying
out these ideas : ,
1. I called on the Hon. S. W. Baker and the Rev. J. B.
Watkin in the evening of the first day of my arrival in Tonga,
and expressed to them my hearty wishes and intentions to work
with them in every way possible for the welfare of the Tongan
people.
2. I called upon the King, and presented him with a tine
portrait of himself, which 1 had taken down for that purpose. I
assured His Majesty of the esteem and respect of the Conference,
and of our earnest desires for the welfare of himself and people.
3. I found that two English services were held on alternate
Sundays. One was held in the Free Church, and practically was
only attended by Government officials and those of the whites
who were favourable to the Free Church. The other service was
conducted by Mr. Moulton in Tubou College, and this was prac-
tically attended only by those who sided with Mr. Moulton and
his party.' I determined to set my face against this state of
affairs, and from the very first Sunday to the time of my coming
away my family and I have regularly attended service in the
Free Church, even when Mr. Watkin himself was not preaching.
I also proposed to Mr. Watkin that instead of having English
services in two separate buildings, we should have a united
service in the Parliament House, which would be a neutral place
to which all could go; that he and I should take the service
there alternately, and so endeavour to destroy the party feeling
which existed, and to prepare the way for union. This proposi-
tion, however, was not adopted by Mr. Watkin. I must also
state here that neither Mr. Baker nor Mr. Watkin ever once
attended any of the services conducted by me in Tubou College,
though, as before stated, my family and I were regularly attending
the service conducted in the Free Church.
4. I found also that the British Consul had been obliged to
have two separate days for lawn tennis at the Consulate, one for
members of each party, as the “ Bakerites ” would not meet the
“ Moultonites,” and vice versa. I stopped that scandal at once
by going with my family on the day set apart for the opposite
party, as well as on that set apart for our own friends.
5. These may seem trivial things to mention here, but it
must be remembered that party spirit was very high indeed in
Tonga, and that the very fact of my doing these things was
likely to create an uneasy impression on the minds of many, both
Europeans and natives, that I was more inclined to side with
the Free Church party than with our own people. It was not ai.
all pleasant for me even to appear to take the part of those who
in the opinion of our own people had done them such cruel


wrong. I felt, however, that it was necessary to show that I
was prepared to meet with the other party, and that I did not
intend to countenance, much less to help on, a state of dissension
and ill-will.
6. I called several times on the Premier and the Rev. J. R.
Watkin, on matters connected with my mission, and I am glad
to he able to say that I was always received with the greatest
courtesy and respect. Mr. and Mrs. Watkin called upon us soon
after our arrival, and any friendly call made by Mrs. Brown and
myself was always returned by Mr. and Mrs. Watkin.
7. I prepared a carefully worded letter to our people. This
I had printed and ready for distribution, but first showed a copy
privately to the Premier, and on his opinion, given privately
and unofficially, I did not then issue it.
I will now describe the position of affairs on my landing,
and the principal incidents of my mission ;
1. I found that our people had been prepared by Mr. Moulton
to give us a kind and hearty reception. They had, of course,
been troubled by the decision of the General Conference in re
Mr. Moulton's removal and my appointment. They had, not
unnaturally perhaps, been afraid that I was more disposed to
favour the Free Church party than that to which they and
Mr. Moulton belonged. They had, of course, heard of the
opinions which I had expressed from time to time in the New
South Wales and Queensland Conference with regard to the
advisability or otherwise of Mr. Moulton’s continued residence
in Tonga, and notwithstanding all the care which we exercised
last year, it was, perhaps, impossible for them to avoid the
impression that somehow or other Mr. Fletcher and I were
opposed to Mr. Moulton and to their interests, which he repre-
sented. lam very glad, however, to state that Mr. Moulton had
evidently done all that he could to remove any such impressions,
if they ever existed. He had spoken in the kindest manner
about me, and had assured the people that they would be quite
safe under my care. In this respect, therefore, my work began
under very favourable circumstances, and I may say with truth
that I had the full confidence of our people from the first week
of our arrival in Tonga.
2. I found that no active persecution was carried on against
our people, but that they were still subject to many disabilities
and to treatment which certainly amounted in many cases to
very decided persecution.
3. There was no outward manifestation of ill-feeling on
either side, but it was very soon evident to me that any attempt
to force on any plans of re-union at that time would be ill-advised
and premature, and would probably defeat the object.
4. For some weeks after my landing there was little or
nothing done. I felt that it was necessary to act with extreme


caution, and though complaints were frequently made to me, I
thought it well not to press for any investigation at that time,
but urged our people to bear patiently for awhile until I was in
a position to decide upon the best plan of action.
5. So long as this state of affairs lasted everything was
apparently satisfactory to the Free Church party, and Mr. Baker
assured me that he was surprised at the change which had taken
place in the relations of the two Churches, but at the same time
nothing was done or proposed by them, and no attempts were
made on their part voluntarily to remedy the wrongs which our
people undoubtedly suffered.
6. When our Missionary Meetings were being held, I was
brought into direct contact with all our people in every part of
the Tongatabu Circuit. I felt then that it was absolutely neces-
sary for me to explain to the people the facts connected with my
appointment as Special Commissioner and the wishes of the
Conference on the question of the re-union of our Church. Ido
not think it necessary to give a long description of my speeches.
They were practically very much alike, and were based upon the
letter which I had printed, but not then issued. I found that our
people had been told that I was coming down to sell some of the
churches to the Free Church, to burn the remainder, and to pass
over all lands, &c., to the Free Church Conference. In answer to
these statements i told them about my appointment by the Con-
ference, that I was sent to promote peace and goodwill amongst
all parties, that my message was to His Majesty and to the Free
Church, as well as to themselves, and that the great object of my
mission was to bring about, if possible, a settlement of all the
troubles which had so long disturbed our Church. At the same
time I felt that I must assure them that there was no truth
whatever in any report that I was going to extinguish our
Church, that I had no instruction whatever to do anything of
the kind, but on the contrary, I was certain that I expressed the
feelings not only of the Conference but of the Methodist Church
everywhere that our Church should remain in Tonga for ever
and ever ( e taeyata hea taeyata). I use the exact words here
because I date from my use of them in public the revival of
persecution and the adoption of measures which were certainly
well adapted to inspire fear amongst our people. At my first
interview with Mr. Baker and Mr. Watkin, after I had used
these words, he told me that every speech of mine had been duly
reported to him as soon as delivered, and that he was sorxy that
I had undone much of the good already effected by my former
actions. I asked for particulars, and he told me that the wrong
was in my saying that the Wesleyan Church in Tonga would
stand for ever and ever. I readily admitted having done so, so
I said, “ Surely, Mr. Baker, you never expected that I could do
otherwise; you know well that we have no intention whatever of


abandoning our faithful people, and I cannot see how any wrong
has been done by my words.” He said that it made it appear to
Tongans that they, the Free Church, would have to come back
to us, bow down and submit, and ask to be taken back again.
I replied that no sane Tongan man could in my opinion attach
such a meaning to my words. I told him, however, that I would
take care and explain fully at all my next meetings that I did
not mean that at all, and this I have regularly done ever since.
Another point to which he took exception, but for which he said
he could not blame me, Avas that [ had told the people that they,
the Free Church, had sent 1000 dollars away to Babalagi. I
told him that I had seen the report in the Auckland papers from
our own correspondent, and that, as he well knew, I had only
spoken in terms of commendation of the action of the Conference.
He fully admitted this, but said the people had made a bad use
of it. The fact is that the Free Church people were all very
much surprised to hear of it. They had always taunted our
people Avith the assertion that the Free Church Avas established
in order to keep the money in Tonga, and they Avere quite vexed
to find that their own Conference had voted money away. I
simply mentioned this matter in telling to our people of the
large suras of money already spent in Tonga by our Church, and
saying that it Avas their duty to help others as they themselves
had been helped. I said that all Churches recognised this duty,
and instanced the Free Church as a case in point.
7. Just about the time of our Missionary Meetings the
people had begun to get a little more confidence, and several
joined us in the different villages. There Avere no attempts made
on our part to influence them, but in some villages tAvo or three
people at a time rejoined us, as Ave heard no more stories at that
time of another outbreak of active persecution, such as had
been common previous to my arrival in the Croup. We soon
found, however, that other and well-tried means Avere still being
used to keep up the old fear, and to assure the people that to be
a member of our Church involved, at all events, the displeasure
of those in power. I will give tAvo or three instances of this
Henry Taliai, avlio is Avell known to many in the colony, heard
me address our people in Yavau at a public meeting, at which a
large number of the Free Church Avere present. At this meeting
I spoke in the kindest possible manner of the Tongan people,
and praised them especially for their noble work as pioneers of
Christianity to Fiji, Samoa, and other places. I spoke also most
kindly of the Free Church, assured them of our love for them,
and strongly impressed upon our people that they should forget
all that was past, and should in every possible Avay manifest their
love for them. There was quite a good feeling in the meeting,
especially when I expressed the hope that I would live to see the
day when our Church would be again united and Avhen Tonga


should again take her place in mission work, and send out her
own sons and daughters to commence a mission in the Solomons.
I said that there was no reason whatever for the continued
disruption of our Church, that we had one God and Father and
one Saviour, and that our doctrine and discipline were precisely
the same. 1 said in conclusion that I could not think that the
disruption of our Church and the evil it had caused were in
accordance with God’s will, hut that it was, in my opinion, the
work of the Devil, who had caused it, and was using it for his
own purposes. There was no mention of the Free Church, and
my remarks applied simply to the disruption of our own Methodist
Church. Taliai was in the country some time afterwards, and a
man asked him what I had said at the meeting. He told him,
of course, what I had said, and a few days afterwards he got a
summons accusing him of saying that the Free Church was the
work of the Devil. The case was tried before Togatea, who
sentenced him to two years’ labour and costs, against which
Taliai appealed. Another case may be given as an illustration
of the means which are being used to inspire terror into the
hearts of the people. Asaeli, of Eua, has recently returned to
us, and of course became a marked man in consequence. He
was talking one day with his brother Luke, and in the course of
conversation he said, “ I say, our minister says that Mr. Brown
said at a Missionary meeting at Tonga that the Free Church
Conference had sent away 1000 dollars to Babalagi, viz.,
500 dollars to London, 250 dollars to Melbourne, and 250
dollars to Hew Zealand.” His brother replied, “Oh, Mr.
Watkin has gone to New Zealand to print some hymns and
a Book of Forms, and I expect that is what the money is for.”
Asaeli replied, “I expect that is it, after all.” Nothing else
passed between them. The subsequent proceedings, however, I
will summarize-Luke (the brother) repeated the conversation
that was heard in Ohonua, the principal town in Eua. A
policeman was sent out to Luke, and he wrote down Luke’s
account. This did not tally with the report in Ohonua —it was
not strong enough, so the policeman was sent out again, and
another letter was written, which was made to agree with the
reports current. On this Asaeli was summoned to Tonga on a
charge of libelling Mr. Baker, by saying that he (Mr. Baker) had
taken away 1000 dollars to Babalagi (i.e., white man’s land),
and that the Tongans did not know of it. Asaeli asserted
most positively, and wished to be allowed to swear to the
truthfulness of his assertion : (1.) That he never once
mentioned Mr. Baker’s name; (2.) That he never once said
that no Tongan knew of it. No witnesses were called, and
there was only the unsworn letter which had been pro-
cured from Luke by the policeman. The case was adjourned,
and Asaeli was told that he must procure witnesses to


prove bis innocence. It was in vain he protested that no one
was present but Luke and himself; he was given to understand
that if no witnesses were forthcoming he would be sentenced. The
poor fellow came to me, and I wrote privately to Mr. Baker
about the extraordinary departure from all justice that a
man should be held to be guilty until he can prove that he is
innocent. To this I got no reply, but I presume it had some
effect, as on the next trial Asaeli was not asked for witnesses,
but a witness was called for the prosecution. To the amazement
of all, however, this man simply confirmed Asaeli’s statement ;
and during a severe abusing, for about two hours, from Neami,
who was acting for Mr. Baker, he positively refused to admit
that he had heard Asaeli mention Mr. Baker’s name, or that he
had heard him say that no Tongan knew of it. He was called a
liar by both Neami and the Judge, but he refused to swear to
anything but the simple truth. It was all, however, of no use ;
and in the face .of the facts that not a single witness could be
called to confirm the unsworn statement of Luke ; that Luke
himself was not present at the trial; that the statement had been
twice written and amended by the policeman to suit the reports
current; that it expressed far more than Luke had at first given as
the first substance of their conversation, and that the only
witness called by the prosecution was virtually a very strong
witness for the defence, as he confirmed Asaeli’s statements,
the Judge sentenced him to a fine of 150 dollars, to be paid to
Mr. Baker, with costs, and two years’ labour on the roads or
public works. By my advice the defendant appealed. Another
man, Silivenusi, is actually serving a sentence of two years’
labour, with a fine of 50 dollars and costs, for repeating a story
to the effect that one of the Free Church ministers had said in
their Conference that some proposed plan would be practicable if
David Tonga had been with them, but otherwise he did not
think they could manage it.
I do not think it necessary to give more cases than these to
illustrate the means which are still being made use of to keep
people from again joining us. I think it best to give now the
substance of the conversation I have had with Mr. Baker and
Mr. Watkin on these matters.
I would first, however, state, that on my arrival I told Mr,
Baker that I would not take any matter to the British Consul,
but that I would bring all matters connected with the Govern-
ment under his notice ; that I would not do this officially, but
simply in my unofficial capacity in the first place, and that I
felt confident he would do what was right and proper. I did
this because I know (1) That Mr. Baker is very sensitive to
anything like interferences from the Consulate (2) That he re-
sented in the strongest manner possible that Mr. Moulton should,
to use his own words, pose as the Saviour of the Tongans. He


virtually admitted to me that the fact of Mr. Moulton taking up
a man’s case always injured him, as he (Mr. B.) would not
countenance Mr. Moulton’s interference in any way. He has
told me several times that he was glad I had not written
officially to him, and I quite understood the inference that if
I had done so he would not have taken any notice of it.
Whether I have gained anything by taking the other course is,
however, an open question. I have got promises, but they have
borne as yet little fruit.
I also told Mr. Watkin that if I had anything to complain
of in Church matters I would go to him personally with my
witnesses, and I asked him to do the same with me if he had any
complaints to make against any member of our Church, and I
promised him that I would attend to it at once.
During the months I have been in Tonga I have had
several conversations with Mr. Baker, at most of which Mr.
Watkin was also present. At such times I have spokon on
those matters which, in my opinion, ought to be attended to
before union could be considered with aiiy probability of success.
I may state, however, that the desire for union has been entirely
confined to myself ; neither Mr. Baker nor Mr. Watkin have
ever manifested any desire for it, and certainly have never
expressed it to me. I told Mr. Baker once that I did not think
they wished for union at all. His answer was why did we ask
for it then ? My reply was that the union which was apparently
desired was simply the absorption of our people ; and this was
confirmed by Mr. Baker’s further remark that they (the Free
Church) were willing to receive all our people, with the exception
of a few of the native ministers and preachers who had rendered
themselves particularly obnoxious to them. That they have no
idea of union was also made very clear to me by a chance
remark of Mr. Baker’s at one of our meetings. We were talk-
ing about the leased lands and the multiplication of Churches,
and he said that the leases granted to the Free Church were
exactly the same as those held by us, with the exception that no
foreign power could ever interfere with them. Then speaking
of the churches which are being built by the Free Church, he
said “ You may rest assured that whatever terms are made these
Churches shall be the Churches of the future,” meaning, of course,
that in the event of union their Churches shall be the buildings
of the united Church, and the land now held by us must revert
to the Government.
I am quite satisfied in my own mind that there is no desire
at all in the mind of Mr. Baker or Mr. Watkin for any scheme
which does not provide for the complete surrender of our Church
and the abandonment of our joeople, and the recognition of the
Free Church as a Conference in which they, of course, have the
sole control.


2. I have repeatedly spoken to Mr. Baker about the men
and women in Tofua and in Fiji, but I have not felt it right to
do so officially, because these matters have been brought before
the High Commissioner. I cannot here give the particulars of
the cases, but may perha*ps furnish them in a separate paper. It
will be sufficient for me to give the substance of several conversa-
tions with Mr. Baker about them. I have repeatedly urged him
to attend to these cases as an absolute preliminary measure to
any attempt at union. I said, “ Mr. Baker, how can I talk
about union or recognition of you as a Church under existing
circumstances ? There are many who know the facts of these
cases, and they will naturally ask why we should unite with a
Church which has banished our people to Tofua and to Fiji for
no crime whatever, but simply because they are Wesleyans, and
which still keeps these men and women there, though you profess
now that the Church' to which they belong has full right to exist
in Tonga, and you seek to unite with it. There are men there in
exile for no crime, unless it be a crime to go to family prayer at
Mr. Moulton’s house, and there are others who were sent for an
alleged refusal to take the Military oath whose sentences have
long since expired, but are still kept there in defiance of all law
and justice. Why,” I asked, “ should men like David Tonga and
others be exiled from their own land, for there are many in Fiji
against whom no charge of crime has ever been made 1 Surely,”
I said, “your own sense of justice will compel you to set these
matters right.” His reply has always been that the men at
Tofua would have been attended to long ago had it not been for
the interference of Mr. Crosby arid the British Consul. In the
meantime, however, he is having inquiries made, and some who
are there will no doubt be allowed to come away. There are
some, however, notably Esafe Katoa, whom the King will never
allow to come aw r ay until he does what he has been told to do,
but which he refuses to do. He (Mr. Baker) did not know of
any reason why men like David Tonga should not return, but
with regard to most of the men in Fiji, he said that if they did
return they would be dealt with under the confining order which
has been recently passed
3. I also spoke to Mr. Baker several times about those libel
cases, and represented to him the monstrous injustice of the
proceedings in Court and the sentences which were inflicted.
He promised to attend to them, and a few minutes before I left
Nukualofa he told me that Silivenusi’s sentence would be
materially lessened. He stayed proceedings, I believe, in Taliai’s
case, but only until some other judge can go there to try it.
When I spoke to him he simply said that the cases would not
come before him until after the verdict of the Court, when lie
would attend to them. In the meantime, however, the mischief
is done, and experience so far does not justify us in hoping that
much will be done to remove it. These so-called libel cases are


simply gross outrages upon all principles of justice and right,
and are a disgrace to any Government which allows them. They
are also in direct violation of the law, which only provides for a
libel against an individual. The men only repeated, when asked
to do so, a statement which I had made publicly, which was
perfectly true, and about a matter which I had justified as a
meritorious act, and yet heavy sentences are inflicted upon them.
The objects to be gained are the intimidation of the people, to
pi’event them joining us, and to punish the man who had returned
to us.
4. Another matter which I brought under Mr. Baker’s
notice was the injustice of imposing upon us restrictions with
regard to our worship which were not imposed upon Roman
Catholics or Free Church people. Even in places where we have
large numbers of people, we cannot hold a service until after the
Free Church have finished; but the Roman Catholics can hold
them at any time. The consequence is that in some places the
Free Church bell is not rung until late on Sunday morning, so
that our service has to be held very late, and the Sunday School
is seriously interfered with. Then, again, the evening service is
kept so late that it is night befoi’e our service is finished, and
then the preacher has perhaps a long way to go home. These may
seem little things, but they are galling and annoying because of the
bad spirit which they manifest. The Roman Catholics are quite
free from all these restrictions, no matter how close their church
may be.
5. In order to perpetuate, if possible, these things, the Free
Church in many places built their churches quite close to ours. At
one place, Nukunuku, they have built within 55 feet of our
church, right in front of our building, though they had the whole
village to choose a site in. In many other places the same thing
has been done.
6. As another instance of injustice and persecution, I may
mention the fact that in all Tonga there is not a single Govern-
ment official in any position who is a Wesleyan. Any man who
becomes Wesleyan is at once deprived of any position he may
hold. I drew Mr. Baker’s attention to this, and he told me that
we had not enough people in a town to justify his appointing one
of them as Town Ruler or Policeman. This, however, is not the
case, and as a matter of fact he has appointed Roman Catholics to
these offices, even where there is only a very few of them in a
town.
7. Some of our churches are still in possession of the Free
Church, and are being used by them. I did not think it right
to take any decided steps about them, as they were all taken in
Mr. Moulton’s time. The Mua Church, however, is peculiar.
We have here a very tine church, which is finished, but not
opened. It is unfortunately not built on leased land. Tugi is


the chief there, and when the church was begun, he wished to
have it erected upon the present site. He signed a document,
which we now hold, stating that lie would execute a lease as soon
as the Premier returned, for the land in exchange for that upon
which the old church stands, and for which we have a proper
lease. Mr. Baker now will not allow Tugi to lease, and refuses
us permission to enter upon the land. I have represented this
case to him, but he says that Tugi will not be allowed to execute
a lease. If we want the church we must move it away from
the land. This of course will involve great expense, though our
leased land is only a few yards distant.
8. Some of our people at Kologa have not yet got their abis
back. Mr. Baker has declared that all people are to have them,
but Nuku, the Chief, positively refused to give them in some
cases.
I may now perhaps summarize the opinions I have formed :—
1. lam quite satisfied that the action taken by the General
Conference was decidedly right. Had some similar action been
taken some years ago, I am sure that our position in Tonga would
have been much stronger than it is to-day. I think I am
justified in the assertion that much as our people love Mr. Moulton
for his noble work in Tonga, they will readily admit that they
are far stronger and in a much better position from his absence
than they were whilst he was still with them in Tonga. They
do not blame Mr. Moulton for this, but they all know that he
was personally obnoxious to the Government, and that their own
sufferings and disabilities were increased by that fact. I have
been assured of this by very many of those who love and respect
Mr. Moulton, and whom he rightly numbers amongst his best
friends. We are also, I think, in a better position now as regards
the outside public. There is little doubt that the known fact of
the long-continued feud between Mr. Baker and Mr. Moulton
caused many of our own people, and others also, to discount very
materially any statement made by Mr. Moulton, even though
they were perfectly correct. It was undoubtedly felt by many
that the personal element interfered much to prevent any settle-
ment of the matters, and that were this removed, the troubles in
Tonga would soon cease.
We are alsd made stronger by this action, because we have
now a strong ground of appeal to the Imperial authorities for
the redress of any actual wrongs. Sir Charles Mitchell, as is
well known, advised that Mr. Moulton should leave Tonga, and
our compliance with this wish, and our adoption of all the other
suggestions made by the High Commissioner, will undoubtedly
strengthen very materially any appeal which we may have to
make for freedom of worship in Tonga, and for the removal of
the disabilities from which our people suffer.


2. The great majority of the Tongaxi people would be
heartily glad to return to us at once. Their sympathies are
entirely with us, and they only remain in the Free Church (a),
some because it is the King’s wish, (e) others, and these
by far the greater number, because they are made afraid
of another outbreak of persecution by the stories which
are from time to time circulated amongst them; (/) others
because they regard it now as a party question, and one
chief or one section in a village is not willing to appear to
be overcome by another chief or section in the same village;
(o) others, and notably the Free Church ministers who have left
us, fear that they would lose their positions by the change, and
these men will, many of them, light against all union now. It
is very largely, I fear, a matter of monetary gain to many of
them. Some, however, of the Native ministers would probably
be glad to return, and there are many of them whom we might
gladly receive back again.
3. There is no real desire for union on the part of Mr. Baker
or Mr. Watkin. They simply stand by their demand to be
constituted a separate Conference in connection with the General
Conference. They would, so Mr. Baker told me, receive most of
our agents, and give them similar positions to those they now hold.
Some, however, they would not consent to receive. They simply
wish to absorb our people, and have no wish for anything else.
4. I cannot think it desirable at the present time to press
the matter of union upon our people. We must certainly wait
until the disabilities under which they are still placed are
removed, and until the mean and cowardly persecutions which
are inflicted upon them cease. lam very sorry, indeed,
to say that these atrocious libel cases are instituted not
only with the sanction, but at the instigation, of those who
virtually control the Free Church, and I cannot think that union
under existing circumstances is right or desirable.
We must, I think, still stand by our people, and wait as
patiently as we can for brighter days. There is a much better
feeling amongst the Tongans than there was when I first landed.
It was growing steadily, and the people were coming over to us
two or three at a time; but these libel cases have somewhat
served the purpose for which they were no doubt begun. If we
have peace for a while, and that perfect freedom of worship
which is guaranteed by the Constitution, we may, I think, hope
for a very large increase in our Church.
I was not able to propose any plan or to make any re-
commendations to the Committee for the consideration of the
Annual Conference other than that we should maintain our work;
that Mr. Moulton should be appointed to a Circuit in the
Colonies ; that Mr. Crosby should remain for the present, and that
another Minister should be appointed in Mr. Moulton’s place.


SECOND REPORT OF SPECIAL COM-
MISSIONER.
1. Leaving Sydney on April 26tli, 1889, for Fiji, I reached
Suva on May 6th, and had. an interview with Sir J. B. Thurston
on the same day. His Excellency received me very cour-
teously, gave me full information about the exiles, and assured
me that the Government were ready to do everything which it
was possible to do for them during their residence in the Group.
T may mention here that His Excellency very kindly gave
instructions that the cases containing presents of clothing for
the exiles from friends in the Colonies which I took down with
me should be passed free of duty, on my assurance that they
were only to be used for charitable purposes. On my arrival in
Levuka, I chartered a small vessel and visited the exiles at Koro.
They were of course delighted to see me, and to receive the
presents of clothing, kerosene, soap, boat sails, paint, medicines,
&c., with which I was able to supply them, and of which they were
in great need. I had long conversations with the Native ministers
o o
and with all the people. The King’s daughter, Princess Charlotte,
Yaea, one of the principal chiefs in Tonga, who had just been
refused permission to land in Tonga, William Maealiuaki and
other chiefs, were all present. I called over the names of all,
and asked each one as to his or her wish with regard to their
return to Tonga. Without one single exception they all stated
that they were anxious to return to their own land as soon as
possible. There are about one hundred of them, including several
ordained ministers, who are members of the New South Wales
and Queensland Conference.
2. I reached Nukualofa on May 14th, and left on the same
day for Yavau, where the King and most of the chiefs and
people then were. They were engaged in a large lakalaka, a
series of native dances. Whilst in Yavau I called upon the
King, and was very kindly received by him.
3. In writing this report, I think it best, in order to avoid
confusion, to state under their respective headings the whole of
the correspondence, and my actions thereon, relating to the prin-
cipal subjects which occupied my attention in Tonga on this my
second visit, and, so far as possible, to complete the history of
each subject under consideration without strict adherence to the
chronological order of the correspondence. Before leaving Yavau
I wrote a respectful letter to His Majesty on behalf of some
of our people who are called
I.— The Military Oath Prisoners.
4. The case of these men is a very hard one indeed. They
were sentenced to two years imprisonment for not taking the


Military Oath. As a matter of fact, they did not refuse to take
it, but wished first to have it read to them, and to be informed
as to the time which they were expected to serve. They simply
refused to take an oath, the nature and conditions of which the
officials refused to inform them. (See Sir C. Mitchell’s Report,
par. 37 and 38). In my letter to the King, however, I did not
impugn the justice of the sentence which was passed, but simply
directed His Majesty’s attention td absolute facts: (1) That
the men were sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. (2) That
their time had long been completed, but they were still kept as
prisoners at Yavau, although the men in Tonga and Haabai who
were sentenced at the same time, and for the same offence, had
all been set at liberty. (3) That under the law of Tonga no
money payment can be taken for the offence for which the men
were sentenced, and as a matter of fact the gaoler refused to
allow them to pay for all or any part of the sentence when they
were first confined, and yet now he claims that all days on which
they were sick or unable from any cause to work shall not count
in the term of their confinement. I asked for His Majesty’s kind
consideration for these prisoners in the most respectful manner.
This letter was sent to the King as I was Having Yavau for
Tonga.
5. To this letter, written on May 15, I received a reply,
dated July 13, from Tuuhetoka, the Minister of Police, in which
he states that the King had received a letter from the gaoler at
Yavau, stating that not one of the prisoners there had completed
his term of service. He also enclosed an extract from the laws,
declaring that all who were not confined in dark cells or in one
of the Government Penal Settlements should not count time, but
only the days which they actually worked. No reference is
given as to the date when this law was passed, or as to when and
where it was published.
6. During the time, however, which elapsed between the
date of my letter to the King and Tuuhetoka’s reply, one of the
prisoners had appealed to the Judge at Yavau against the
decision of the gaoler. The man stated the facts; that he had
been sentenced to two years’ imprisonment; that the term of his
imprisonment had long expired; that others sentenced at the
same time for the same offence and for the same term had been
released, but that the gaoler at Yavau refused to count Sundays,
days on which anyone had been sick, or rainy days on which
no work had been done. The Judge, who certainly could not
have known of the law as quoted by Tuuhetoka to me, or must
have judged it to be inapplicable to the case, released the
appellant, and as this was a test case, all the others being in the
same position, it was thought that all of them would also be
released on their application. This, however, was not done.
The result was that my colleague, the Rev. E. E. Crosby, from


motives of humanity, advanced to seven of these men the sum of
£2 each, to enable each of them to pay his appeal fees, and they
were set at liberty.
7. In my reply of July 26th to the letter of Tuuhetoka, I
respectfully asked whether these fees would not be returned by
the Government to the men, as the case had been decided in
their favour. No reply to this letter having been received, I
again wrote on September 30, reminding the Minister of Police
of the matter. In reply I received a letter of apology, informing
me also that my letter had been mislaid and lost, and asking for
a copy. This I forwarded at once, and on October 3rd I received
a letter stating that the money could not be returned, because it
was not the custom of the Government to do so, and advising
me to tell the liberated prisoners that they must pay back to
Mr. Crosby the money which he gave them to pay for their
appeal.
8. I then decided to appeal direct to the Premier on the
subject. This I did in a letter dated October 4th, in which,
after furnishing the Premier with a short statement of the facts,
I wrote as follows ;
“ The poor men had no money with which to pay the fees
required for an appeal, and so the Rev. Mr. Crosby very kindly
advanced them tjie money, and I now apply to the Government
for the refund of this amount (£l4), as I have, as Chairman
of the District, repaid it to Mr. Crosby. I hope you will at
once see the justice of this appeal. Surely, no fee can be charged
against a prisoner of the Crown in his appeal from the decision
of a subordinate official as the gaoler to the Chief Judge of the
District, when his appeal is held to be a just one, and the Judge
admits by his decision that the man has been illegally detained
as a prisoner long after his sentence had expired. We cannot, I
think, imagine it to be possible that a prisoner, say in Darling-
hurst Gaol, could be detained in custody after the expiration of
his sentence by the will of the Governor of that gaol, still less
can we imagine it to be possible that a sum of £2 should be
demanded before the prisoner can be heard, and that this sum
should be retained by the Government after the man’s appeal
had been sustained and the gaoler’s decision reversed and declared
to be illegal. I trust, therefore, that my request for a refund of
the amount paid by these men may receive your favourable
consideration.”
9. Mr. Baker replied to this letter on October Bth, and
informed me “that the Minister of Police has appealed to the
Privy Council against the decision of the District Judge at
Nuafu in re said prisoner ;
1. That the said Judge has no jurisdiction in the case.
2. That the decision of the J udge was contrary to the law,
which is as follows.” (This I have already quoted. See par. 5.)


Mr. Baker then informs me that the Privy Council has not
met for some time, and says:—“Until such meeting lias been
held I am not at liberty to reply to your remarks, saving that
there is no comparison whatever between prisoners at Darling-
hurst and the prisoners at Yavau. In the one case it is a term
of confinement, in the other an amount of days’ work to be done ;
in the one case the prisoners are shut up within walls, in the
other they sleep in their own houses or the houses of their friends,
and can spend their evenings as they like, and are in no way
restricted ; if they wish to have a day occasionally to visit their
friends or attend meetings it is very seldom refused them. With
reference to the refund of the amount paid, I will bring it before
the Privy Council when the same shall meet.”
10. In my reply to the Premier, dated October 9th, I
acknowledged the receipt of the information that the Minister
of Police had appealed to the Privy Council against the decision
of the Judge, and said : “In reply, I beg to submit that this has
nothing to do with the matter, and cannot in any way affect the
question. The simple facts remain, viz., that certain prisoners
who held that they were illegally detained in custody after the
expiration of their sentences, appealed from the decision of the
gaoler to the highest Court within their reach; that the Judge,
who may be presumed to have known the law which you quote,
but which, so far as I can discover, has not been printed in any
of the Books of Laws, held that they were illegally detained in
custody, and ordered their release, and that they had to pay for
the appeal which they made, some two pounds each, though the
decision was given in their favour. I am utterly astounded at
your remarks on the comparison which I made between a prisoner
in Darlinghurst Gaol and one in Yavau. Will you allow me to
quote the words which I used, which were as follows : (See in
par. 8, beginning with the words “We cannot, I think, imagine.”)
Instead of answering my argument, you favour me with a
most fanciful description of the happy lot of a prisoner of the
Crown in Tonga as compared with one in New South Wales.
Any prisoner in the British dominions can be brought up under
a writ of habeas corpus , and his case will be at once carefully
and impartially considered; but these poor unfortunate Wesleyans
were compelled to serve for weary months after their sentences
had expired, and then were compelled to pay for the privilege of
appeal against injustice and wrong. You must pardon me for
saying that I read your remarks upon this matter with feelings
of sorrow and shame. . . . Your remarks about the lot of
an ordinary prisoner were no doubt intended to convey the idea
that the poor Wesleyans were treated in the way you describe,
but no one knows better than you do that this is absolutely
contrary to the facts of the case. . . . As a matter of fact,
the description is not correct in any single particular as regards


these men. Five of them, I believe, were sentenced to work for
a year in irons, and, as I am informed, the irons were only
removed after they had been worn for ‘ more than a hundred
days ’ by the interference of the Acting British Vice-Consul.
The Haabai men were sent to an island which is practically a penal
settlement. They had to build their own houses, and were not
allowed to visit at all their friends on the other islands. The
Vavau men certainly were not allowed ‘to spend their evenings
where they liked,’ for they, as I am informed, had to sleep in the
prison buildings every night. The truth is that these men were
Pr isoners in every sense of the term, and were regarded and
treated as such. It is fortunately not difficult to ascertain the
actual facts of this case, and when these are known I am quite
content to leave the decision both as regards the justice of the
sentence and the accuracy of your description to any man who
is possessed of an ordinary amount of simple humanity and plain
common sense, and who has an Englishman’s respect for justice
and abhorrence of persecution and wrong.”
11. To this letter I received no reply. As the case now stands,
most of the men are free, though the Government threatens to
reverse the Judge’s decision. The Chief Judicial Commissioner,
in his remarks upon the evidence given at the inquiry, says;
u Liability to military service was made a means of oppressing
the Wesleyans. Some old men were evidently retained on
account of their being Wesleyans, and this was done at Mr.
Baker’s instigation. The trial of the two men by court-
martial by Mr. Baker’s orders was a distinct act of oppression,
for which Mr. Baker is directly answerable.” (Blue Book,
p. 19.) Sir Charles Mitchell also states : u Mr. Baker directed
a court-martial to be held on two of these students, who
had been acquitted by the magistrate, and himself directed, in
writing, that they should be sentenced to two years’ imprison-
ment.” (Report, par. 38.) Some of the men who were sentenced
were set at liberty by their Chiefs on their promising to join the
Free Church, but those who were faithful to our Church were
kept in imprisonment for months after their sentences expired,
and were only released then by the persistent action of Mr. Crosby
and his expenditure of £l4 on their behalf.
The next subject in chronological order is
Mr. Baker’s Letter of May 11th.
12. The Lubeck arrived on May 24th, and I received from the
Rev. J. B. Waterhouse a copy of this letter, which had been
addressed to me at Sydney, and was opened by Mr. Waterhouse
at the Mission Office.
13. On May 30th the Richmond arrived from Auckland, and I
received the original letter, which Mr. Baker himself had posted


on his arrival in Tonga. This letter contains some statements
and assertions about myself personally, and also against the
British officials and others, which have been described by a
distinguished official as being “ mendacious and slanderous in the
highest degree,” but which, acting under advice, I do not
reproduce in this Report.
14. To this letter I replied on June Ist, simply stating that I
did not hold myself answerable for newspaper reports or for
editorial comments ; I also stated that I did not care to answer
the insinuations and charges made against me, that I was sure
he would be sorry some day that he had ever made them,
and I was content to wait. In concluding my letter I said :
“ I only wish to remind you that for years I, with some
others, have endured much pain by my endeavours to present
your conduct to the Conferences in the most favourable light. I,
with others, thought that the solution of the difficulty would be
arrived at when Rev. J. E. Moulton was removed from Tonga.
I believed then, as I do now, that Mr. Moulton was a good man,
and a faithful, devoted minister of our Church, but, that owing
to the personal differences which existed between you, and also
between His Majesty and Mr. Moulton, there was no hope of
peace so long as he remained in Tonga. When Mr. Moulton
had left the Group I had good hopes that the wrongs which our
people suffer would be removed. I endeavoured in every way
possible to work with you and through you. I made no attempt
to see the King or to seek for the good offices of H.B.M. Consul in
Tonga, but in every way I sought to induce you to act with me, and
up to the time of my departure for Sydney in December last, and
for some time afterwards, I still cherished some faint hopes of
success. All this my official report to the Committee shows, and
I beg to state that I shall be very glad to read you every line of
my report if you will favour me with a visit at the Mission
House. I need not refer to the persecution of Silivenusi, Taliai,
Asaeli, Paila and others, or to the disabilities under which
Wesleyans suffer, but from which Roman Catholics are exempt,
to show that my efforts were never met by any concessions on
your part. Men, women, and children are still in exile in Tofua
and Fiji, though I entreated you from time to time to use your
influence with His Majesty to have them brought back to their
own land ; whilst churches are still being built within a few feet
of our own ; our hours of service are interfered with, whilst
the Catholics can arrange their own ; and men are still deposed
from any Government office unless they will abandon our Church.
Still I held on, hoping against hope, until finally the circular
letter which you sent throughout the colonies showed me that
nothing would satisfy you but the total abandonment of our
Mission in Tonga, to which I for one will never consent. lam


still prepared to advocate an honourable union between the two
churches. lam willing to afford you every possible opportunity
of vindicating your character before the world, and to help you
if possible in doing this. lam ready to acknowledge the Free
Church of Tonga as an independent Church, and to treat with its
representatives in the most courteous manner as representatives
of such Church, but we must meet on equal terms. We cannot
legislate under threats, or whilst our people still suffer such cruel
wrongs. Let there be but the slightest desire on your part for
re-union ; let such desire be shown by a removal of the disabili-
ties under which our people are placed solely on account of their
fidelity to the Church of their fathers, and I will gladly recognise
the status of Ministers, Office Bearers, and members of the Free
Church, and will be prepared to recommend that they shall
occupy the same positions in the re-united Church, and I have
little doubt that the Conference will assent to this. At all events,
you can easily make this a condition of any negotiations. Until
this is done, I must endeavour to carry out to the best of my
ability the instructions given me to conserve our work here until
I am relieved of my duties by the General Conference.”
15. No answer to this was received by me until July Bth,
when I received a letter dated July Ist, in which Mr. Baker, after
acknowledging receipt of my letter, says ; “As in that letter you
refer officially to many things, I must beg to decline to answer
officially what is a reply to a private letter.”
16. I replied on the same day, stating that I could not con-
sider the letter of May 11th as a private letter, as a copy of it was
sent to my official address in Sydney and opened there, and
another copy was sent to the President of the General Conference,
who is the official head of our Church,
17. On the following day I received a letter from Mr. Baker,
saying that a copy of his private letter (of May 11th) was
addressed officially by mistake, and that his letter to Rev. J. C.
Symons was not sent to him as President of the Conference, but
in a letter marked “ Private and confidential.” I also received
at the same time a letter from Mr. S. W. Baker, jun., saying
that he had addressed the letters officially in mistake. In
acknowledging the receipt of these letters, I repeated my former
declaration that I could not consider the letter of May 11th as a
private letter.
18. On July 11th I wrote to His Excellency the Governor of
Fiji, enclosing certified extracts from Mr. Baker’s letter of
May 11th, together with copies of correspondence thereon. I
also asked His Excellency to inform me whether he was aware
of any such agreement having been made between the officials of
the British Government and the late Revs. Chapman and Hurst,


as Mr. Baker declares and affirms I also gave a short resume
of the facts connected with certain actions of mine in New
Britain, and the subsequent inquiries thereon, and asked His
Excellency whether he considered such resume to be a correct
statement of the facts.
19. On September 11th I received a letter from Mr. Baker of
same date, in which he says : “In reference to our conversation
this morning, and your statement that you were willing to accept
a withdrawal of my letter of May 11th, 1889, marked “ Private,”
a copy of which was unfortunately sent by accident to your
official address in Sydney, I beg leave to apologise for said letter,
and withdraw the same.”
20 To this I replied on thesame day, and stated as follows :
“ You must have very much misunderstood my remarks, which
were simply to the effect that I had hoped that on the receipt of
my reply to your letter you would at once have apologised for
the statements relative to my personal character, and would have
requested to withdraw them. I certainly did not say that I was
willing at this time to accept the withdrawal of the letter, as I
do not feel free to do so without further consideration and advice, >
though I note with satisfaction your apology for the statements
contained therein. This I did because at this time I had not
received the reply from the Governor of Fiji to my letter, and
because I do not consider the mere withdrawal of the letter as
sufficient satisfaction for the statements contained therein.”
21. On September 20th I received from the Private Secretary
of the Governor a letter dated Suva, Sept. 9th, informing me by
direction of His Excellency that the allegations made by Mr.
Baker respecting an alleged agreement between the officials of
the British Government and Messrs. Chapman and Hurst, are
without foundation in fact. A reply in the affirmative was also
given to my categorical inquiries whether the brief statements
contained in paragraph 10 of my letter, and marked a to g
inclusive, may be taken as a correct resume of the history of the
case in question. A copy of the officially recorded address or
communication made to me by His Excellency Sir Arthur
Gordon, on Nov. 12, 1889, and an extract from the Fiji Times ,
of Nov. 15, 1889, were also enclosed. The letter concludes as
follows “ From the foregoing and the enclosure it will be seen
that the affirmation of Mr. Baker that there was collusion
between the officials of the British Government and Messrs.
Chapman and Hurst for the purpose or object declared by
Mr. Baker, or otherwise, is mendacious and slanderous in the
highest degree, whether as regards yourself or such officers.”
22 During my recent visit to Fiji, I was informed by His
Excellency of his action with regard to the statements made by


Mr. Baker in his letter. I was also furnished with the following
O
extracts from the correspondence :
23. Copy.— Extract from Letter of Secretary to High Commissioner
for the Western Pacific to Mr. Baker, dated 9th September,
1889.
“ I am to inform you that unless within the course of six
weeks from the date of the arrival of this despatch at Tonga the
High Commissioner shall have received a full apology, and a
complete retraction of the libel against the Court of the High
Commissioner contained in your letter to the Rev. Geo. Brown
and the Rev. J. C. Symons, dated on or about 11th of May last,
and of which an extract is enclosed, legal proceedings against
you will be instituted.”
24. Extracts from Letter of Mr. Baker to Secretary to the High
Commissioner, dated Bth October, 1889.
“ Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your despatch dated Suva, September 9th, 1889, and in reply to
ask you to respectfully inform His Excellency the High Commis-
sioner that the letter sent to the Rev. George Brown was marked
‘ Private,’ and the copy sent to the Rev. J. C. Symons was not
sent to him as President of the Wesleyan General Conference,
but as a private gentleman, and was enclosed in a letter marked
‘ Private and confidential.’
“4. Will you please inform His Excellency that before I
received your letter I had already apologised to the Rev. George
Brown and withdrawn the letter, and now, as desired by His
Excellency, I would fully apologise for and completely retract
the statement made in my letter to the Rev. George Brown, a
copy of which was forwarded to the Rev. J. C. Symons, and of
which an extract was enclosed in your despatch to me of the
9th September instant.”
25. I have received, in addition to the legal opinion given me
by Messrs. Whitaker and Russell, Auckland, another one, which
was procured for me in Melbourne by the President on behalf of
the Tonga Committee. Both these opinions practically agree,
but no further steps have been taken by me.
CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE KING.
26. My first letter to His Majesty during this my second term
of residence in Tonga was on behalf of the Military Oath
prisoners, and has been already presented in this Report.


27. The next letter which I wrote was dated June 6th, and
was delivered to His Majesty whilst still at Vavau by the Rev. C.
E. James. At this time the King with nearly all the principal
Chiefs and large numbers of the people were at Vavau engaged
in holding a very large native lakalaka, or series of old Tongan
dances and feasts. Mr. Baker had strongly opposed this, and
it was currently reported and believed that he had written a
letter from Auckland in which he told the King that he was
violating the Constitution. This, it was said, annoyed the King
very much, and as we were told, he replied by asking Mr. Baker
who it was that had first violated the Constitution by the feast
at the opening of the wharf, at the exhibition which was held in
Tonga some years ago, and in other instances which he mentioned.
Who had violated the Constitution, he was said to have asked, by
the persecution of the Wesleyans, and who had driven out of
Tonga one of the best friends which Tonga ever had ? These
stories may or may not be absolutely correct, but it is very certain
that we heard them on all sides, and from some people who may
reasonably be supposed to have a correct knowledge of the facts.
The King, at all events, decided to go on with the lakalaka.
This, together with the letter, it is said alarmed Mr. Baker, and he
wrote to apologise. The accounts given of the reception of this
letter are, I think, accurate, as the King read the letter to his
chiefs when on board the schooner as they were going to Vavau,
and all accounts agree. “ Listen,” he is reported to have said, “to
what the Papalangi (white man) says.” He then read the letter,
which, as we were told, commenced with an apology for the
statement about violating the Constitution to which the King
had objected, and then stated that he (Mr. Baker) was not well,
that he was tired of his work, and was going to resign, but in-
tended first to look out for another Premier for them. Then, as
we were told, the King said, “ What! is he King that he should
choose Premier? Who told him that we want another white man
as Premier? If I choose to make that lad,” pointing to a boy
about 10 years old, “ Premier, he will be Premier because I say so.”
These and many other similar stories were continually repeated,
and there was a very general belief that the King was very much
dissatisfied at that time with Mr. Baker.
28. Then it must be remembered that I had just received Mr.
Baker’s abusive letter of May 11th, and I knew very well that
we had absolutely nothing to expect from him but the most
detei’mined opposition, whilst there was certainly a possibility,
and apparently a great probability, of our being able to weaken
his very undesirable influence over the King.
29. Another reason which induced me to write at this time was
the necessity of placing before His Majesty my opinions and
proposals, re the union of the two Churches in such a manner as
would ensure their being received by His Majesty. I was also


of opinion that the King would probably read the letter to the
chiefs, and I felt that it was very desirable that they should
know what I had proposed.
30. In my letter, after first giving a short narrative of my
appointment, of the course of events, and my actions up to date,
I made known to His Majesty the mind of the General Con-
ference towards himself, the Government, and the two Churches.
(1.) The great love of the Conference to His Majesty, the
Queen, Chiefs, and Government.
(2.) I repudiated the assertions that the Conference wished
in any way whatever to make money out of Tonga. I stated
the fact that we had already spent more than £lOO,OOO in giving
the Gospel to Tonga ; that we were still spending money for
that purpose; and I reminded the King that the origin of the
present trouble was the disapprobation of the Conference with
regard to the modes adopted by Mr. Baker for increasing the
contributions from Tonga.
(3.) I stated that I was of opinion that when the proper
time came the Conference would not object to create Tonga an
Annual Conference. I reminded His Majesty of the fact that
Tonga had been made an Independent District at his request,
and stated that if the Churches were re-united, and at peace, I
felt certain that the Conference would not refuse his request if
then presented.
(4.) Of this fourth paragraph I prefer to give a literal
translation of the principal portion, which is as follows : —“But
you will graciously pardon what I am about to say, for I say
it from my respect to your Majesty. They (/>., the Conference)
have not faith in Mr. Baker, and have no wish that he should
rule in the Church. They are of opinion that he is the origin of
the unbecoming things which are done in Tonga. Many are of
opinion that he does not seek the things which are profitable for
the work of God, but the things for himself. His conduct is
known to all the world. If there is an evil thing done in Tonga
which the world hates, then he shelters behind your name, and
says, that was done by the King, but the people will know that
lie alone did it. But if any good thing is done, then he wishes
to appear good, and says I myself did that. If you will read
the newspapers which are printed in Melbourne, Adelaide, and
other cities, you will know that my story is true.”
(5.) After some complimentary remarks referring to the
King’s past services, and especially to his work in Samoa, I then
formally and respectfully stated to His Majesty what I thought
should be done to restore peace and union between the twm
Churches.
a. That he would graciously grant to the Wesleyan Church
here the freedom of worship which is enjoyed by the Free Church
and by the Roman Catholics.


e. Tliat he would graciously consider my respectful petition
already made to him on behalf of the Military Oath prisoners
whose sentences had already expired, and also on behalf of the
exiles in Fiji and Tofua.
i. That if His Majesty would be ofagoodmindconcerningthese
things, I was of opinion that it would be possible to unite the two
Churches, to obtain for Tonga a Conference the same as for Sydney
and Melbourne, and that the ministers and people of the two Churches
should all be received into and united with the Wesleyan Church,
which had first brought light and good to Tonga; also, that all
the lands, leases, and churches of the two Churches should be
given to that (Tongan) Conference, to be governed in accordance
with the laws of the General Conference of Australasia.
“ You are aware, Tubou,” I added, “ that I do not decide these
myself alone, but if you agree to what I say, I will declare it
to our Church and the General Conference, and I have great
hope that they also will agree to it.”
The conclusion of the letter is exhortatory and expressive
of good wishes. From first to last it was couched in respectful
terms. Some of the highest Chiefs in Tonga remarked that it was
“exceedingly good and very respectful.”
31. Soon after this letter was forwarded the King returned to
Tonga. Mr. Baker, it was said, went at once and told the King
that he was going to leave Tonga by the “ Richmond,” and
this so frightened him that he begged him not to desert him,
as he would have no one to carry on the Government. This may
or may not be true, but the fact remains that Mr. Baker at once
regained, apparently, all his old influence and power over the
King, which, as everyone had then hoped, had been seriously
affected.
32. The result of this was that on July 3rd I received a letter,
to which the King’s name is signed, dated June 27th, 1889. Of
this document I give the following digest:—-The letter commences
with an expression of pain at my letter, then follows a long
eulogium of Mr. Baker; some violent abuse of David and Rachel
Tonga; further abuse of our Church in connection with the
attempted assassination of Mr. Baker, which, I am told, was
originated by and in which our Church took part; another long
eulogium of Mr. Baker, as being the author of all the many
blessings which Tonga enjoys; a little more abuse of our Church
for protecting the Church lands, &c., as being British property,
and especially because we do not give up the churches which are
not being used; and a statement that if we had acted rightly
they would long ago have paid all the debts.
Then follows a denial of certain newspaper reports about
the conduct of Tuuhetoka at the executions at Malenoa, also
about the two women who were commanded to jump into
the sea at Kao, and a complaint that no retraction of these


statements has appeared in our Church papers. Then fol-
lows a denial of a statement that an American and his wife
were ill-treated in Haabai, and the statement that the captain
of an American ship of war said it was a lie. Then the
letter goes on to state that he (the King) thought that after
the enquiry our Church would be quiet, but that it appears
we do not want quiet, but to “ scratch up ” (vakuvaku) still and
make it our “ fishing ground for dollars.” Then follows
a complaint that no words of sorrow have been sent by any
meetings or by the Conference to Mr. Baker about the injury
done to his son and daughter ; and this is a confirmation that
they unite with Mr. Moulton in the murder which was done
(i he fakabo nae fai) that which he knew was being planned, but
which he did not prevent. Then follows a statement about the
King’s action in Samoa, Niua and Tonga, in which we are told that
“ lie killed a great many, in order that they should be Wesleyans,”
and we applauded him to the skies. Then lam accused of distri-
buting copies of the King’s letters to Sir Charles Mitchell. lam
then told that with regard to the people who were banished to Fiji
that it was their desire, for they threatened that tlmy would go
and seek for a land of their own, that Mr. Moulton should be
their King, and they would live in peace under the shelter of the
British Flag, and pay no taxes, and, therefore, I (the King) said let
them go and seek land. And do 1 want them back again 1 No, let
them find out what will be done for them by their King, Mr.
Moulton. The letter then states that many of them were re-
bellious, that it is good that they should stay in Fiji, and whilst
he, the King, lives they shall not return. The people in Tofua r
it is said, lied to him (the King), and leave them to eat the fruit
of their lies. The Military Oath prisoners are to abide by the
decision of the Minister of Police. Then follows a statement
with regard to Tubou College, that some students had entered it
without permission ; and another that he referred all matters
about the two Churches to Mr. Watkin and the Conference, as he
would have nothing to do with it.
33. I describe this letter as one to which the King’s signature
is attached, because I am very sure that it is not the King’s
letter, and that it was not even written at his dictation. No
sane man who has the slightest knowledge of native character
and modes of thought would ever dream of attributing such a
letter to any Polynesian, much less to an old Tongan Chief and
gentleman like King George. The whole letter is full of expres-
sions utterly contrary to Polynesian thought, of which, getting
money out of widows and fatherless ones, praising me to the
skies, etc., may be taken as samples. Then just imagine, if it be
possible to do so, a grand old speaker like King George using
such terribly mixed-up metaphor almost in the same sentence as
scratching up (the soil) in order to fish for dollars !


34. Those of us who are familiar with Mr. Baker’s account of
the Jubilee Meetings, as published in the Notices, that “the
28th day of June, 1876, will undoubtedly be a red letter day in
the calendar of Tongan events, and be long kept green in the
memory ” of the people (the italics are mine) can easily see that
long practice in letter writing has not yet enabled him to avoid
some of his old peculiarities of diction when his feelings are
much moved.
35. I, of course, made all enquiries possible, and I venture to
assert that the whole letter is English and not Tongan com-
position ; that the English is Mr. Baker’s English, and that
Mr. Baker’s thoughts, arguments, and grievances are all written
above the signature of King George.
36. I need not point out in this report the inaccuracies of some
of the statements made, or the fallacy of the arguments used.
They have all been disproved over and over again, and one of
them concerning the exiles will be dealt with further on. It will
be sufficient to notice here.
a That with regard to David and Rachel Tonga Mr. Baker
himself, when Chairman of the Tonga district, sent them first to
Sydney.
e That the unoccupied Churches would be filled at once if
the people were free. Let the King’s solemn promise to Sir C.
Mitchell be carried out, and the question can be settled at once.
In the meantime, the Lands and Churches are kept in sacred
trust for Tonga.
i That with regard to no letter of sympathy being sent to
Mr. Baker, it is an undoubted fact that Mr. Moulton, as the
official head of our Church in Tonga, called at the Palace
immediately after the attempted assassination to present our
condolence and sympathy, and to express our sorrow, but his card
was torn up in his presence, and he himself reviled in language
which I do not care to repeat.
o That with regard to the charge against Mr. Moulton of
having a guilty knowledge of the attempt on Mr. Baker’s life,
Sir C. Mitchell’s report, par. 62, and the Tonga Blue Book, par.
75, afford the most complete refutation. It is horrible to find
this vile slander made in such a cowardly way after Mr. Baker’s
statements before the Court.
u That the accusation made against me of circulating copies
of the King’s letter to Sir C. Mitchell is absolutely false, as is
proved by the letter of Consul Leefe on the subject.
37. I replied to this letter on July 9th, 1889. In this letter I
respectfully acknowledged the receipt of the letter of June 27th ;
stated that it was difficult for me to enter into controversy with
His Majesty, because of my respect for him, though it was not
difficult to answer the letter. That I would therefore content
myself with thanking him for his attention to my letter, and


solicit pardon if anything said was displeasing to him. At the
same time I wished to state—•
a That neither David nor Rachel had ever uttered a single
disrespectful word about His Majesty.
e That I had nothing whatever to do with the printing of
the King’s letter to Sir C. Mitchell, nor did I distribute it.
i That I did not believe that His Majesty had ever written
this disrespectful letter against our Church, but that I saw
Mr. Baker’s hand and heard his voice in it all. I alluded to
His Majesty’s good work in the past, and to the letters in which
he thanked the Conference for their love to Tonga. I then
deprecated in a few words the language used against the Church
which had brought the Gospel to Tonga, the Church in which
Mr. Thomas, Mr. Rabone, Mr. Watkin and others had laboured
so long. I assured His Majesty that I would write to Rev. J. B.
Watkin on his return, in accordance with His Majesty’s words.
38. In forwarding this letter I informed Mr. Baker that having
heard a rumour that he was going to print in Tonga my letter to
the King and the reply to it, I desired to inform him that whilst
I had no objection whatever to his doing so, I should in such
case feel free to translate and circulate in Tonga my remarks to
the Committee on Tongan affairs on that letter, together with
any extracts from the N otices or from English or Colonial papers
which might bear upon the subject. Nothing was printed, but
the Rev. J. B. Watkin went all over the Group reading at the
Quarterly Meetings the letter signed by the King.
39. I do not think for one moment that any harm whatever
has resulted from these letters, but on the contrary that they
have had a good effect upon many of the Chiefs and people. We
have continued to make steady progress in Tonga ever since.
The King’s mind was well known, and that which bitter and
cruel persecution had failed to accomplish was not likely to
be effected by a letter which no one believed to be the King’s
own production As a matter of fact, several of the Free Church
Chiefs have spoken of my letter in terms of high commendation
and praise.
Erection op Free Church Buildings in close Proximity to
our Churches.
As the correspondence on this matter is very large I can
give only a comparatively short outline.
40. On June 3rd, 1889, I wrote to Rev. J. B. Watkin, direct-
ing his attention “to the great injustice done to the Wesleyan
Church in Tonga, and the serious offence against all principles
of Christian courtesy which is being caused by the erection of
your Church buildings in close proximity to the existing Wesleyan
Churches in many of the towns and villages in Tonga.” I gave


him as instances the church at Nukunuku, erected about 54 feet
from our church, and placed directly in front of it so as to
shut it out from the road. Ahau, placed in a similar position,
is only 6 feet from our boundary; Matahau, about 50 feet,
Faahefa and Haavakatolo, being other cases in point. I
directed Mr. Watkin’s attention to the fact that our churches
were the first built, and had been standing on their respec-
tive sites for years; that the Rulers had the whole of the
respective villages from which to choose sites, but that such
sites were deliberately chosen to insult and annoy our people,
and to bring the two churches under the unjust law of the
300 fathoms, so that no service could be held by us until the
Free Church party had finished. 1 also complained that in the
matter also of the services we were most unjustly treated, as the
Roman Catholics were allowed to hold their services simul-
taneously with the Free Church in villages where the two
churches were much nearer than ours ; that in fact the law was
not applied to them in any single instance. I had previously
spoken to Mr. Watkin on the subject, but he referred me to
Mr. Baker, and said further that it was the Chiefs’ doing. I
therefore concluded my letter by saying, “ I hold strongly to the
opinion, which will be confirmed by any of the old missionaries,
or by any of the Europeans resident in Tonga, that although you
say the acts are committed by the Chiefs of the respective
villages, they would not be so done in the face of any serious
opposition from yourself, and I in common with every right
thinking man, as I believe, must therefore hold you, as President
and head of the Free Church, responsible for them ; and in all
kindness to yourself I ask you to stop, as you can easily do,
these grievous scandals to our common Christianity.
41. To this letter I received a reply, dated June 12, in which
Mr. Watkin states he does not think that the new churches are
being built in close proximity to our churches, and that the sites
are deliberately chosen so as to offend our people.
With regard to several of the places I mention, he says that
our churches do not stand on the lands specified in the leases,
and this may have actuated the ( hiefs. Mr. Watkin does not
think I am correct in saying that the Rulers can choose any site.
He regrets that I was disturbed at Matahau, and will endeavour
to prevent a repetition of the same annoyance, and will endeavour
to prevent, if possible, any more of their churches being built
too near the Wesleyan churches. He could not remember at
present any Roman Catholic services being held concurrently
with. theirs ; it may be so in a few instances, but as a rule he
thinks they are held at different hours.
42. As the whole case under consideration up to July last is
fairly put in the following letters, and as Mr. Baker’s letter of


July 2nd was evidently written for publication, I deem it best to
give the correspondence in full.
43. On June 10th I wrote to Mr. Baker as follows;
“Nukualofa, June 10, 1889.
“ The Hon. S. W. Baker,
“ Premier of Tonga.
“Sir, —I desire most respectfully to bring under your notice
the following facts :
“ 1. At Yaotuu yesterday I had to wait as usual until the
Free Church service was over before I could commence my service.
I very naturally thought that we should then be allowed to have
our service in peace, but instead of that a number of the Free
Church people at once commenced a Class or Prayer Meeting, not,
however, in the same building in which they had just held their
service, which is some distance away, but in the very next house
to our church, and only about 50 or 60 feet distant from it.
They were singing and praying nearly the whole time whilst our
service was being held, and of course they interfered much with
our worship, though we had submissively waited until their service
was over. As I understand from your letter to the Rev. J. C.
Symons, the President of the General Conference, that every
man in Tonga has freedom to worship God according to the
dictates of his own conscience, and also that no one is permitted
‘ to perform public acts of worship in places and at times which
may be a nuisance to his neighbour and tend to break the peace
of the land,’ I venture to express the hope that you will at once
take the necessary steps to prevent such a gross breach of your
instructions as that which is committed at Yaotuu and in many
other places every Sunday during the year.
“ 2. I beg also most respectfully to inform you that the new
Free Church building at Yaotuu is being erected so close to the
existing Wesleyan church, being only about 50 feet distant from
it, that it will be impossible to hold services in both buildings
concurrently. This is being done in face of the fact that there
is plenty of room in the village and a number of sites from
which to choose.
“3, In the evident desire, however, to place the new Free
Church as to the Wesleyan church as possible, the Yaotuu
people have in this instance, I think, broken one of the laws of
Tonga, as the new church building is placed so as almost to
block up the whole of the main Government road which runs
through the village. It so appeared to me yesterday, and the
natives assured me that part of the church was erected upon the
road. As I cannot think that they have secured your permission
to do this, and as the church is only just commenced, I again
venture to express the hope that you will cause the necessary
steps to be taken to prevent this breach of the laws of Tonga.


“ 4. I beg to state for your information that I have already
written to the President of the Free Church (Rev. J. B. Watkin),
directing his attention to several similar cases in regard to
Church buildings, and asking him to prevent these serious offences
against all principles of Christian courtesy, but as yet I have
not received any acknowledgment of the receipt of my communi-
cation.
“5. I had also the honour of forwarding to you on Ist
instant a communication in re Church matters in Tonga, which I
hope you duly received.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“GEO. BROWN,
“Special Commissioner of the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist General Conference to Tonga.”
44. To this Mr. Baker did not reply until July 2nd, when I
received the following letter : —-
“ Office of the Premier Minister, Foreign Affairs,
“Nukualofa, Tonga, July 2, 1889.
“ Sir, — I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of June 10th instant, and also of a communication
of yours dated June 3, addressed to the Rev. J. B. Watkin
(which he has forwarded to the Government), and in reply to
say :
“1. As to your complaint relative to the prevention of
holding your services in accordance with the law requiring where
two churches are in close proximity or less than three hundred
(300) fathoms apart, that the public services of both cannot be
held at the same time, so as to prevent a breach of the peace,
I have informed the person who is at present in charge at Yaotuu,
and also the Buie Kolo at Matahau, that His Majesty has
instructed me to say that immediately the public service of the
Free Church is finished they must wait for holding their
Class Meetings until the Public Service of the Wesleyan Church
is over, when they can hold the same and such other services as
may be appointed. The usual meeting of the Kau Buie Kolo
(Mayors) will be held in a few days, when the above instructions
will be issued to all. I regret that you should have been annoyed
by the thoughtlessness of the persons in charge of the said towns,
but I do not think it was done for the purpose of annoyance.
“ I note in your letter to the Rev. J. B. Watkin that you
state ‘that the law does not apply to the Roman Catholics.’ I
beg to state that it equally applies to all, and I am not aware of
any place where both services are held at the same time, and
there are not many places to which such regulation could apply
in their case.


“I do not think there was any necessity of your reminding
me of my remarks to the Rev, J, C. Symons, President of the
Conference, ‘ that every man in Tonga has freedom to worship
God according to the dictates of his own conscience,’ and also
that ‘no one is permitted to perform public acts of worship in
places and at times which may be a nuisance to his neighbour
and tend to break the peace of the land,’ for as far as the
Government is concerned, it was not aware of these annoyances,
and had it been brought under its notice, it would have been
rectified before.
“As to this law, I am sure you will admit its justice, as
you have previously done, when the close proximity of many of
the churches is taken into consideration. Two congregations
meeting in native reed or thatched buildings, singing, praying,
and preaching at the same time, every syllable being distinctly
heard (and not only so, but preventing either of the congregations
in many instances hearing what their own preacher or speaker-
says), to allow this would simply be a caricature on religion, and
is more than what any chief would put up with, and would
certainly lead to breaches of the peace. But that the law should
be carried out in fairness is only what all have a right to expect.
And the Government will not allow any Church, as requested in
your letter to the Rev, J. B. Watkin, to perform public acts of
worship in places and at times which are a nuisance to their
neighbours — that is, to commit any breaches in the fair carrying
out of this regulation.
“ 2. As to your complaint relative to the nearness of the sites
of the new Free Church places of worship to the old sites, they
being less than three hundred (300) fathoms distant from the old
church sites, I must certainly demur to the correctness of your
statement in your letter to the Rev. J. B. Watkin, ‘that the
town rulers have the whole of their respective villages in their
jurisdiction from which to select sites, and that these sites are
deliberately chosen so as to offend your people, and to place the
two churches within the law of the three hundred (300) fathoms,
so that you cannot hold your services at the same time as the
Free Church.’
“Such a statement is not only untrue, but shows your ignor-
ance of Tonga customs or laws. I most emphatically deny the
town rulers have any jurisdiction over any site other than that of
their own abi, or of land which has been set apart for Govern-
ment purposes. All the towns are divided out to tax payers;
and as long as they pay their taxes and comply with the muni-
cipal requirements no one can touch their abis. And in almost
every instance the abis that have been given to the Free Church
have been the abis of the chiefs themselves. You cannot expect
the chiefs of the various towns would be willing to put their
churches in a corner, or on a less suitable site than your own church


if they could do otherwise; and as their own abi invariably
adjoins the old public malae, or square, of the town, and on which
during the first years of the lotu most of the churches were
built which are now in your possession, hence the close proximity
in many instances of the two churches. To say that it has been
deliberately done so as to offend your people, and so as to place
the two churches within the three hundred (300) fathoms is a
gross misstatement, for many vff the chiefs have tried to get
other premises, and have had at last to give their own. And not
only so, in your very next paragraph you yourself give the denial
to what you thus state, for you say you are of course aware that
outside of Nukualofa, Mua, and one or two other places, it would
be impossible to place the two churches within the bounds of the
village so as to be three hundied fathoms (300) apart. Why,
then, do you charge the town rulers with doing what you yourself
admit is impossible for them to do 1 For it is certainly correct
that many of the villages, in fact all those of which you complain,
are not three hundred (300) fathoms in extent. And as you
yourself admit in your letter, it is impossible to hold service at
the same time in two buildings any way near, as in this tropical
country the doors and windows are always open. The law, there-
fore, is a just one, and it simply resolves into this, that it is
impossible in all these cases to hold services at the same time,
and it matters very little whether the churches are near or at
each end of the town; but as the Wesleyan Church is generally
in the middle of the village on the old public malae of the town,
such an arrangement could not be carried out.
“ 1 will briefly refer to the churches of which you complain :
“ Sukunuku. —The Wesleyan Church there is not built on
leased land. The town was removed to the road by the late Chief
Tuivakano, and the land leased to the Wesleyan Church is some
bttle distance towards the beach. When the secession took place,
Tuivakano claimed the church as his, as it was built on his own
land. I asked him not to do anything just then, for when an
arrangement was come to, as it was noton Church land, I did not
think the Wesleyan Church had any legal claim to it, but he was
not to complicate matters just then. When I was away in New
Zealand I found he had built a temporary church, and had it put
up on a part of the land, for he said he was not going to give up
possession of his land, and that the church was only temporary,
for he was not going to give up his claim to the church he had
built. This is how the affair at Nukunuku stands.
“Matahau. —The site on which the Wesleyan Church stands
at Matahau is not leased, but belongs to the King. The site
leased to the Wesleyan Church is in the old town of Matahau,
now no longer used as a site for a town. The whole length of the
present town is not two hundred (200) fathoms, and you have
only some eight adults there.


“ Faahefa. —I am informed the Wesleyan Church is not on
leased land, but cannot say positively. The town of Faahefa is
divided into two parts, Faahefa and Haautu. The few people
you have there reside at Haautu, saving one who lives at Faahefa
proper, whereas all the others at Faahefa belong to the Free
Church.
“ Haavakatolo. —Here the Chief has had to give his own
abi as a site for the Free Church, but the whole town is so small
that it could not matter much where the church was put, as two
services could not be held at the same time.
“ Vaotuu. —ln your letter to me you refer to the building of
the Free Church on a part of the Government road. I am
informed by the Minister of Police that it is not built on the
high Government road, but on part of one of the town roads,
which was made by the Chief himself for their own convenience.
That the Chief had given a part of his own abi for that purpose,
and is willing to give another portion in exchange for the same,
as his abi on which the new Free Church is now being built was
not large enough unless some addition was made to it. The
Minister of Police also informs me that the Government had
given permission to make such exchange before my return from
jS ew Zealand.
“ I may also say as regards all these sites I never attached
much importance to them or thought they would create any
difficulty in the future, because I was in hopes that at the next
General Conference the two churches would be united, a hope
which your late visit to the colonies has destroyed.
“ I am informed that you should have stated in the colonies
that as an instance of the fact that persecutions are still going on,
you have referred to the persecutions of certain natives for libel,
viz. ;—Silivenusi, Taliai, Asaeli and Paila. How you can make
out such cases to be persecutions, or a proof of the disabilities
under which you say Wesieyans suffer, I am at a loss to know.
“In reference to Silivenusi. He was prosecuted by a
native minister of the Free Church, named Uikilife Fuji, for
having stated that he (Uikilife Fuji) got up in the Conference of
the Free Church and stated * that it was no use their trying ; they
could not carry on as a Free Church unless David Tonga came to
their help.’ A bigger falsehood was never uttered, and it was
calculated to do Uikilife Fuji a deal of harm in the sight of the
Chiefs, hence he prosecuted the man for libel ] and I am certain
any unprejudiced person will admit that he was perfectly justified
in prosecuting in such a case.
“The next is that of Taliai, who stated that he repeated
what you are reported to have said in a public meeting in Yavau
—‘ That the Free Church was the work of the Devil.’ The Chiefs
were not likely to allow such a remark to pass unchallenged, inti-
mating as it did that the King had been influenced by the Devil


in establishing the Free Church, although you state such was not
your meaning; yet certainly it was how Taliai understood it, or
else he would not have repeated it; but, as he appealed to the
District Court from the Police Court, in accordance with the
promise I gave you the case has not been gone on with. How,
then, you can refer to this as a case of persecution I cannot make
out. Certainly he was the aggressor, and, so as to stop what
would likely end in a breach of the peace, he was prosecuted, and
now you call it persecution.
“ The next case is that of Asaeli, a young man who, after he
had left the Free Church, in consequence of being angry with his
chief, who, after he had been three days a Wesleyan, in order to
show he was a Tongan Wesleyan of the true type, must needs
commence to abuse the Government, and myself in particular, and
say that I had taken the Free Church moneys to the colonies and
spent them, and that if the native ministers of the Free Church
knew they would not dare to say a thing to me.
“ I sent over to enquire if it were true, and it having been
reported to me by the police that it was true, I ordered him to be
prosecuted, and I think if I heard of your saying the same I
would certainly prosecute you. He was tried, and found guilty,
two witnesses swearing on oath they heard him say so, and he
appealed to a higher Court, and, as you requested, the case has
not been proceeded with.
“ Where the persecution comes in I cannot make out. I
cannot but say I consider your conduct very mean in the matter.
“ The next is that of Paila. The King himself, in my absence,
commanded him to be prosecuted for implying that the King had
committed perjury.
“ What vexed His Majesty was that your people seem to
think neither his name nor words are any longer sacred, but that
the lowest scamp in Tonga seems permitted by your Church to
get up and talk freely of the King, imputing motives and things
to him for which a few years ago he would have been clubbed on
the spot. If your people would only content themselves with
holding their religious services, and refrain from any remarks
about the King or his Government, there would not be such
annoyances as these. As, however, no punishment has been in-
flicted on Paila, I fail even here to see what persecution there can be
in this matter. No one spoke to him about his being a Wesleyan,
but he must need get up in a public meeting and bring in the
King’s name with a lot of nonsense, which he himself was not able
to explain.
“ The statement reported to the Governor of Fiji, that the
Police Magistrate should have asked Paila : ‘ When did the King
say every man in Tonga could worship God according to his
own conscience,’ has been denied in toto by the Police Magistrate
and the officers of the Court.


“If, these be the disabilities under which you complain the
Wesleyans suffer, I think the whole world will denounce the cry
of persecution which has been set up for the simple purpose of
creating a false sympathy for the purpose of raising funds, especi-
ally when these are all the cases you are able to bring forward
during the last twelve months and more.
“ With regard to another statement you are reported to have
made, that men are still deposed from any Government appoint-
ment unless they abandon your Church, I give the same a most
unqualified denial, as I am not aware of any one holding an
appointment being requested to abandon your Church.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“Your obedient Servant,
“SHIRLEY W. BA.KER,
“ Premier of Tonga.”
45. My reply was as follows
“Tonga, July 15th, 1889.
“To the Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier.
“ Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of July 2nd in reply to a communication of mine,
dated June 3rd, and in reply I beg to state :
“ I. That I desire to express my thanks for your attention
to the charges which I made in re the cases at Matahau and
Yaotuu. I note that you did not think that the services were
held by the persons in charge of the said towns for the purpose
of annoyance. In reply, I would say that this excuse can scarcely
be considered to be a valid one in the case of the Free Church
officials at Yaotuu, in face of the fact that they were in the
habit of leaving the building in which their public service was
held, and holding the other service in the nearest building only
a few feet away from our Church.
“ 2. It may be perfectly true, as you state, that the law applies
equally to all, but it is none the less true that it is not so applied.
You state that you are not aware of any places where both services,
Roman Catholic and Free Church, are held at the same time.
Permit me to give you as examples, Maofaga, Folaha, Fatai,
Teekiu, Matahau, Houma, Niutoua, Nukuleka, Hologa, Fuamotu,
Utulau, Bea, &c., here, and Lefuka in Haabai. Yavau, I
have not got any information about. The plain, simple, un-
questionable fact is that the Roman Catholics are not interfered
with as to their times of holding service. lam positively assured
of this fact by Father Ollier, the resident priest in Nukualofa.
He says that one attempt was made at Houma, and he was told
that he must wait until the Free Church service was first held.
He positively refused to alter his hours of service, and he has not
been again interfered with.


“ 3. You state that with regard to the law, ‘ that no one is
permitted to perform public acts of worship in places and at a
time which may be a nuisance to his neighbours,’ that you are
sure I will admit its justice, as I have previously done, when the
close proximity of many of the churches is taken into considera-
tion. To this I agree, provided that equal justice be done to
both parties when two! churches are unavoidably placed in close
proximity ; but what are the facts in these cases 1 Let me state
them briefly. Our churches stand upon lands granted by lease
from the Government. You yourself were the principal instru-
ment in securing these leases for the purposes of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church. On these lands our churches have been built
and occupied for years. You then start the Free Church, and
leaving the rest of the land in the respective villages alone, you
build your churches in many instances within fifty or sixty feet of
our churches, thus making it impossible to hold services in both
buildings at the same time. Then, when you have caused the
nuisance, you compel us, who are the aggrieved parties, to wait
until you, who are the aggressors, have held your service. We
have not moved our churches, they stand yet upon the ground
which you yourself secured. Surely if you had wished to prevent
‘ a caricature on your religion,’ you would not have placed the
churches where they are being placed. The simple fact is that
you have had the power and you have used it. You are strong,
and we are weak.
“4. I note also that you demur to the correctness of my
statement in a letter to the Rev. J. B. Watkin, ‘ that the Town
Rulers have the whole of their respective villages in their juris-
diction from which to select sites, and that these sites are de-
liberately chosen so as to offend our people and to place the two
churches within the law of the three hundred (300) fathoms, so
that we cannot hold our services at the same time as the Free
Church.’ With reference to this you say— ‘ Such a statement is
not only untrue, but shows your ignorance of Tonga customs or
laws.’ You say, also, that you ‘most emphatically deny the
Town Rulers have any jurisdiction over any site other than that
of their own abi, or of land which has been set apart for Govern-
ment purposes.’ Whether the Town Rulers have by law this
jurisdiction or not, Ido not know; what I do know is that they
exercise it, and, when they do so exercise it in favour of the Free
Church, they are not interfered with. You yourself made a dis-
tinct promise to Captain , of one of Her Majesty’s ships,
that such a case as that of ISTukunuku should not occur again in
Tonga; but at Houma the very thing which was threatened has
been allowed, and the woman has had to go away from the town,
because the land upon which she would otherwise have been
allowed to live was wanted, in order to place the Free Church
next door to our minister’s house. If Town Rulers have no such


jurisdiction, why, I may ask, was a Roman Catholic’s leased land
taken away from him at Maofaga only a few weeks ago, because
the site was also wanted for a Free Church 1 He, I am told,
appealed to the Government to protect him in his property, but in
vain. That man paid his taxes, and complied with the municipal
requirements, but some one did ‘ touch ’ his •* abi.’ But this
does not touch the fact, which every visitor to Tonga can vouch
for, that these churches are erected close to our existing churches,
and I venture to assert that you will not find one unprejudiced
European resident or visitor who will endorse your opinion that
they are not so placed for the purpose of annoyance. The fact is
so glaring that no one can be deceived. I feel perfectly sure that
you yourself are also conscious of the great weakness of your case
when you find it necessary not only to employ such arguments as
you have used, but also to mutilate a quotation from my letter to
assist you in your attempt to place the matter before the public in
the light in which you wish them to view it. Past experience
has taught me that it is very necessary to examine what are given
as quotations, and so when I find myself accused of being a
participator in other people’s evil actions, and when my words are
quoted as evidence against me, I naturally enough examine the
quotation, and I find that you have again, as in other cases, de-
liberately left out words which completely alter or affect the mean-
ing of the sentences. Surely a cause must be a very weak one
when such means are thought necessary for its support.
“ 5. You quote me assaying that outside of Nukualofa, Mua,
and one or two other places, it would be impossible to place the
two churches within the bounds of the village so as to be three
hundred fathoms apart, and then you ask— ‘ Why, then, do you
charge the Town Rulers with doing what you yourself admit is
impossible for them to do?’ I must confess that this sentence is
beyond me ; I have honestly tided to understand it, but as yet it
is not clear to me. But what is clear to me, and what, I believe,
will be clear to every right-thinking man, is that, in leaving out
the words ‘and so I do not contend for the two churches being
more than a reasonable distance apart,’ you have left out the
words which were necessary to enable anyone to understand the
precise meaning of those words which you quoted, and that the
argument you have built up on this half quotation crumbles to
pieces at once It is not necessary for me to examine in detail
your statements about the churches of Nukunuku, Matahau,
Faahefa, Haavakatolo, and Yaotuu. The fact is, that the present
church sites were in our possession at the time of the disruption ;
many, if not all of them, were built upon when you were Chairman
of the District ; our title was never disputed, and the Chiefs then
had the power to make exchanges. I say this not yet having
examined the leases, but presuming that all your statements are
correct. As to the truthfulness or otherwise of my statement,


that the Free Church at Yaotuu is actually built upon part of a
Government road in order to place it somewhat nearer to our
church than it could otherwise have been placed, this can easily
be proved by actual inspection. Even if it were a town road,
which it is not, for I myself and thousands of others have travelled
it for miles, the fact remains that it is inspected, as all other Go-
vernment roads are by Government officials, and the same rules
and regulations apply to it as apply to other roads.
“ 6. I am pleased to note that at one time you had ‘ hopes
that at the next General Conference the two Churches would be
united/ and so you did not attach much importance to these sites.
I deeply regret that you kept these hopes so entirely to yourself,
and also that your actions towards our Church were so utterly
inconsistent with the possession of them. I must also here take
the opportunity of denying most respectfully, and yet most em-
phatically, a statement made in your letter to Rev. J, C. Symons
to the effect that your last words to me were on the Tonga wharf be-
forelsailedto Sydney. So far this iscorrect,but Imost emphatically
and most solemnly deny that you ever said as you write, ‘do
nothing and say nothing which will imperil peace, for my firm
impression is that at the next General Conference all will be
right.’ Is it credible that I should ever have heard such words
as these, for which I had been waiting and working so long, and
pay no heed to them 1 never mention them in my report 1 and never
repeat them to a single person 1 Such words, I repeat, were never
used in my hearing. The only words which you used at all, bear-
ing on this matter, were these : ‘ Now be careful about your Report.’
All your policy and actions showed very plainly that nothing
would satisfy you but the total abandonment of our Church and
people.
“ 7. Whether the cases of Silivenusi, Taliai, and others, were
examples of persecution can easily be settled by the verdict of any
number of right-thinking, intelligent men of any nationality or
sect. That they have not been gone on with to the bitter end
surely shows that they were most unjust and cruel, and that this
was so patent that even a Tongan official must hesitate to brave
the opinion of the whole civilized world about them. Take
Silivenusi’s case. Even allowing it to be true that he did repeat
a bit of local gossip which he had heard, to quote your own words,
‘that it was no use their (the Free Church) trying, they could not
carry on as a Free Church unless David Tonga came to their help.’
For this he has to work for two years on the roads or Govern-
ment plantations. Take Taliai’s case. He was accused of having
said to a friend that I had said that the Free Church was the
work of the Devil. He denied, and still denies, that he ever said
it, for he never heard me say it. Again a two years’ sentence !
Take Asaeli’s case. He is accused of having said that he had
heardmesay that youhad taken SIOOO to the Colonies,and had given


SSOO of these to the Church in London (Metropolitan Chapel Build-
ing Fund), $250 to the Chinese Mission in Victoria, and $250 to
the Maori Mission. He denies this in toto, and declares that he
repeated truly that which I had stated on the authority of ‘ Our
Own Correspondent,' and I presume you will not question that
gentleman’s veracity. The only man to whom he was reported to
have made this statement was not brought over—an unsworn
letter was put in evidence. There was no witness the first time
the case was heard, but the Magistrate told Asaeli that if he did
not bring witnesses to prove his innocence (!!) he would be punished.
The next time the case was heard the witness for the prosecution be-
came a most valuable witness for the accused, but it was all of no
avail, and he was sentenced to pay to you a fine of $l5O and two
years’ hard labour with costs. We appealed, and had to pay the
costs of appeal in this as well as in other cases, but these have
never been returned. It is useless to question these facts, for the
Interpreter to the High Commissioner’s Court was present, and
took the evidence. If there was any libel, why was I not pro-
ceeded against 1 I am amenable to the law, and it is very easy
to prosecute me if wrong was done. The simple ti’uth is that
these cases were got up in order to frighten the people. Ido not
say that they were thus got up by your orders, but you are re-
sponsible for them, and if you cannot see £ where the persecution
comes in ’ I feel very sure that your perceptive faculties are very
different to those which are possessed by the greater number of
your fellow countrymen.
“ Paila’s case is even more clear than the preceding one, but
I cannot give all the details now. It is sufficient to say that the
proceedings have all been fully reported, and, as the report made
by the Special Commissioner of the Sydney Morning Herald will
show, are well-known in Tonga.
“ Just one word, in conclusion, about the remarkable comment
you make upon the statement that men are deposed from any
Government appointment unless they abandon your (our) Church.
You give this ‘ a most unqualified denial’; and, as you use the
present tense, you are perfectly safe in doing this, for the simple
reason that you have done your work so effectively that there is
not now a single Wesleyan in Tonga who holds any Government
appointment. It is very easy to say this after every man who
preferred to be faithful to our Church has been deposed from his
office, no matter how humble his position may have been, if he
would not join the Free Church, though a Homan Catholic may
still hold his office, I presume that you do not call it persecution
to take away a man’s title, or to depose him from his position as
scribe, policeman, bale kolo (mayor), or schoolmaster, or any other
office, because he remains a Wesleyan; but I am inclined to be-
lieve that most right-thinking men will call such action by its


proper name, and will denounce not only the action, but also the
motive which prompted it.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“Your obedient servant,
“GEORGE BROWN,
“ Special Commissioner of Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist General Conference to Tonga.”
46. The plain indisputable facts are as follows: There is a law
passed that where churches are within 300 fathoms of each other
the Chief, or Town Ruler, can fix the time of service. This law
is so worked that in every instance we have to wait until the
Free Church service is finished; and some of the men com-
menced their service so late that our service was driven into the
dark. This law is put in force often when there is not the
slightest necessity or justification for doing so. In one case,
Neiafu, there was no Free Church in the village, but in process
of time one was erected in an adjoining village. There was no
possibility of any disturbance or annoyance, as the buildings there,
so far as I can remember, were about 200 fathoms apart. The
Town Ruler of the adjoining village had no authority in Neiafu,
and the affair was so monstrous, even as judged by Tongan
custom, that I felt certain that I had only to mention it to have
it put right; but in spite of my appeals we were not allowed to
hold service at the same time. Mr. Crosby had held service at
Yavau for about three years at the same time as the Free Church,
by the direction of the late Crown Prince, and there was never a
complaint of any disturbance or unpleasantness ; but soon after
the death of the Crown Prince he was ordered not to hold his
service until the Free Church service was finished. There is
no possibility of doubt as to the reason of this order. It was
done solely for the purpose of annoying and insulting Mr. Crosby
and our people. The significant part of the affair is that the
Roman Catholics are allowed to hold their service when they
please, because the priest will not allow of any interference.
Any stranger visiting Tonga will at once confirm the statement
that the Free Church buildings are in many cases erected right
in front of ours, simply to annoy and insult the Wesleyans. In
one case, Ahau, their church is only about six feet from our
boundary.
47. I am glad to say that Mr. Baker recently informed us that
if the Free Church service was not finished at 4 p.m. we could
commence our service. He also told us that he would inform
the Town Ruler of this regulation. This, if carried out, will prevent
one great source of annoyance.


The Exiles in Fiji and Tofua.
48. This subject deserves the most serious consideration of the
Committee, not only on account of the cruel wrong which is still
being inflicted on these unfortunate people, but because I shall be
compelled to dissent from the remarks of the Chief Judicial
Commissioner on this matter, and also from those of Sir Charles
Mitchell, the late Governor of Fiji and High Commissioner, as given
in his report.
49. The Chief Judicial Commissioner, in his remarks after the
evidence of Akabusi, Thomas Fakailoatoga, and Mr. E. M.
James, says : “ I do not think that there was any real cruelty in
the manner of their incarceration.” (Blue Book, p. 25); and Sir
Charles Mitchell says with regard to the banishment : “ This
occurrence forms, I think somewhat unreasonably, the ground of
two of Mr. Moulton’s charges, the first two of charge 6 of the
second series. The so-called ‘ banishment ’of these people was
really their voluntary withdrawal in order to avoid joining the
Free Church.” (See Report, par. 59).
50. I am very unwilling indeed to record my dissent to both of
these assertions as being directly contrary to .the undoubted facts
of the case, because I am glad to be able to testify that the re-
marks of the Chief Judicial Commissioner and the report of Sir
C. Mitchell show that the inquiry was most carefully and
impartially conducted, and we have no reason to complain of most
of the decisions which were given. I wish also to state that in
my opinion these remarks would never have been made if the
proper evidence could have been produced.
51. The real facts of the Haabaicase are, in brief, as follows :
(a) Some thirty people, including five children, after being
confined to the Mission premises for some weeks, during which
time they could neither go to get food nor bathe in the sea without
first obtaining a permit from the Governor, were many of them
compelled, on their refusal to join the Free Church, to go out be-
tween a double line of soldiers, who struck and beat the poor people
with their fists,and butted them with their gunsasthey passed along.
( e ) They were then taken one by one before Maatu, the
Governor of Nina Foou, and the following statement was made
to them :—“ We have come from Tubou, and this is the
last question which will be asked you : Will you be Free Church
or Wesleyan 1 Free Church, and stay in Tonga; Wesleyan,
banished for ever.” One of these men, Rev. David Tonga, began
to explain why he wished to remain still in connection with our
Church, but he was at once stopped, and told that no statement
was wanted, but simply an answer to the question, “ Will you be
Free Church or Wesleyan V He and his companions then said,
“We will remain Wesleyans.” Then the Chief said, “Take them
away, and throw them ‘li’ into the prison.”


(i) Many of these people were most cruelly beaten. One
man in particular, David Faubula, the son of the late Rev. John
Faubula, was so beaten that blood was flowing freely from his
mouth, nose and ears. He was quite unconscious, and apparently
dead. The Princess Salote (Charlotte), the King’s daughter,
who was one of the prisoners, cried out, “Why have you brought
this dead man here ; do you think we have a graveyard (faitoka)
here? You have killed him, so take him away and bury him.”
The man was three days unconscious, and neither ate nor spoke
during that time.
(o) No food was given them by the Government during the
week that they were confined in the prison. The few white men
in Lefuka, to their honour be it said, took food to keep the poor
people from starving, and also supplied some needful clothes for
some of the women, whose clothes had beeh torn from them ;
and after a while some of the friends of the prisoners got per-
mission from Maatu to take them some food.
( u ) I have seen the place in which they were confined. It
is a weather-board house, say about 30 or 35 feet in length by
about 16 feet in width, and has a galvanized iron roof. Two-thirds
of this is closely boarded off, and in the other third, about 12x16
feet, to the best of my judgment, these thirty men, women and
children were confined, with the windows and doors closed for moat
of the time. I have the exact measurements of this room, but, un-
fortunately, they are left in Tonga, but, even if we allow the ex-
treme measurement given by one of the witnesses, which was 20
by 16, it was surely an act of the greatest cruelty to confine 30
men, women and children, in such a climate, for seven days and
nights, with not sufficient room for them all to lie down at the
same time. I can only say that when we saw the room we
shuddered at the thought of the suffering the poor creatures
must have endured in such a place when heated by the tropical
sun.
52. As to the fact of most of them being banished in the fullest
sense of the word, there is not the slightest shadow of a doubt;
and I can only account for the statement made by His Excellency
the High Commissioner by the supposition that he must have
been misled by the fact that some of our people in Tonga, who
were suffering at that time a very grievous persecution, asked
permission through Messrs. Leefe and Moulton to go to some
other land. His Excellency cannot, however, have known that
although the King replied that some 25 might go, he afterwards
withdrew that permission; that the people were gathered together
immediately afterwards, and told that they were to be banished to
Ata (Pylstart Islands); that they went on board under the
impression that they were being banished there, and that it was
not until they were on their way that they were told that they
were going to Fiji. As regards the men, women, and children


from Haabai, they were most undoubtedly forcibly deported from
the group. It is, however, true that some 14 people did after-
wards voluntarily join the exiles in Fiji, in order to avoid joining
the Free Church.
. 53, Amongst the number of the exiles are six of our ministers
who are duly accredited members of the New South Wales and
Queensland Conference, two Catechists, six Local Preachers, fifteen
Class Leaders, and eleven members of our Church.
54. In Tofua there are eight people who were taken there for
being Wesleyans, four who were taken for no other crime than
that of attending family prayer at Mr. Moulton’s. There was a
fifth with these at prayer, David Nau, who was also sentenced to
six months’ for theft. He turned Free Church, and is not now on
Tofua. Of the other four, the Chief Judicial Commissioner re-
marks : “It does not appear that the others (these four) had com-
mitted any offence.” Their only offence was kneeling at prayer
at Mr. Moulton’s house. There are three others who were taken
as prisoners. One of them was sentenced to two years’ imprison-
ment for saying, “Does not the land belong to Jehovah 1" ; and
the Chief Judicial Commissioner remarks on this case: “Very
much on a par with the sentence on Jioeli Nau, supra" (that is,
“ a monstrous sentence”). The sentences of these men expired long
ago, but they are still kept as prisoners. In addition to these,
there are eight others who have gone on account of husband or
wife.
55. I have twice visited the exiles in Fiji, and I would most
earnestly direct the attention of the Committee to the gross in-
justice and cruel wrong which are being inflicted upon these suffer-
ing people. They are all longing to return to their own land, and
entreated me most earnestly to bring their case before the Confer-
ence and our people everywhere.
End of Correspondence in re Re union.
56. It will be remembered that in my letter to the King, of
June 6th, I distinctly proposed a scheme for re-union, on the
following lines :
( a ) That the Wesleyan Church have the same freedom of
worship as the Free Church and the Roman Catholics enjoyed.
(e) That the King would graciously consider my petition on
behalf of the Military Oath prisoners, and the exiles in Fiji and
Tofua.
( i ) That if His Majesty will be of a good mind concerning
those things, I would propose the union of the two Churches
under a Tongan Conference—all ministers, office-bearers, and
members of the two Churches to occupy the same position in the
re-united Church, and all lands, leases, buildings, &c., to become
the property of the Tongan Conference, subject only to the laws
of the General Conference of Australasia.


57. In the letter signed by the King, I am referred to the
Rev. J. B. Watkin and the Free Church Conference, “as it is
with them whether anything shall be done/’
58. On July 12th I received a letter from Mr. Baker, in which he
says that on account of my letter to the King about himself, he
will, “ for the future, refrain from taking any action in the
matter, as long as it is your (my) hands.”
59. In my reply to this letter, on July 16th, after expressing
my surprise and sorrow at his determination, I said, “ I regret
this determination on your part, as f consider such a union very
desirable; and I am certain that you could do more than any
other man to further it. I venture to express the hope that
you will, on further consideration, be induced to alter your
decision, and to co-operate with us for the furtherance and
accomplishment of a plan which has for its object the best
interests of the Tongan people.”
60. On September 6th I wrote the following letter to Rev.
J. B. Watkin, President of the Free Church, Tonga :
“ Dear Sir, —As I purpose returning to Sydney at an early
date, I think it extremely desirable that I should be in full
possession of your present views and opinions with regard to the
possibility or probability of any union between the Free Church
of Tonga and the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church. I
would therefore respectfully ask you, if in accordance with your
own views, to kindly appoint a time and place that we may meet
together to discuss the present' position of Church affairs in
Tonga; to make any explanations, personal or otherwise, that
may be necessary ; to consider in detail the proposals which I
had the honour to make to His Majesty in my letter of June 6,
and which His Majesty in his reply referred to your consideration,
and, generally, to converse about any matters which may tend
to promote peace and harmony between the two Churehes.
“If you wish for the presence of the Hon. S. W. Baker at
our interview, which I also think desirable, I would suggest that
the Rev. C. E. James may also be present.
61. Mr. Watkin’s reply was as follows :
“Rev. and dear Sir, —Your letter of September 6 to hand,
and in reply to same, would respectfully say that the resolution
passed by the Conference of the Free Church of Tonga will not
allow of my complying with the request you make, ‘to appoint a
time and place that we may meet together to discuss the present
position of Church affairs in Tonga.’ I send a copy of the
resolution :
“ That no further communication will take place between
the Free Church of Tonga and the Rev. G. Brown, Special
Commissioner of the General Conference, in connection with


Church matters, owing to the action taken by the Rev. G. Brown
during his deputation tour through the Australian Colonies ; and
also on account of the irritating letter which he wrote to His
Majesty the King of Tonga on the 6th of June, 1889.”
62. As the questions opened up by this correspondence involve
the consideration of the whole of my actions and those of the
leaders of the Free Church during the term of my appointment, I
think it best to reserve my remarks, as 1 cannot well deal with
it in this Report. I may, however, direct attention to the fact
that the alleged reasons given by the leaders of the Free Church
do not in any way account for their actions prior to my deputa-
tion tour as given in my first Report. I must again express- my
decided opinion and conviction that they have never at any
period desired union on any terms but those of the absorption and
extinction of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga.
Damages done to Property, Churches, Lands and Property
TAKEN AWAY.
63. These matters will require special consideration, and cannot
well be dealt with in this report. It will be sufficient to say here
that no compensationhas yet been given for the resumption of all our
school buildings and lands by the Government, that several of our
Churches are still retained by the Free Church, that lands which
were given for the purpose of training school and other Church
uses have been taken away, and drums, bells, pulpits, and other
property in many villages have been forcibly taken possession of.
64. One case was so flagrant that I departed from my usual
custom in such matters, and on Sept. 16th I wrote to the Premier
upon the matter. In my letter I said ; —“1 am informed that at a
fono (public meeting) held some weeks ago the Assistant-Premier
informed the meeting that His Majesty had given the windows
and other property of our Havelu church to the Free Church in
that town, and also the boards of our church at Bea.”
“With reference to the Havelu case, I am aware that the
people there bad already taken the goods, but I am unwilling to
believe that His Majesty would sanction this act of spoliation if
he were aware of the undoubted fact that the goods taken have
never been paid for by the Havelu people, but on the contrary
they are indebted to the Chairman of this district to the amount
of $123.1.10, I shall be glad at any time to submit the account
for your inspection in proof of this statement.”
65. No answer having been sent to this, I wrote again,
Sept. 30th, reminding Mr. Baker most respectfully of the letter,
and asking him to give the matter his consideration, as I was then
leaving Tonga.
66. I received a letter the same day stating that His Majesty
had been waiting for the return of Rev. Mr. Watkin in order to
confer with him relative to the matter.


67. I replied on Oct. 2nd, stating that I could not perceive how
Rev. Mr. Watkin was concerned in the matter in any way what-
ever, that I was afraid, from the nature of the reply, that I had
not expressed myself with sufficient clearness, and then said
“The information which 1 respectfully ask for is: (1.) Did the
Assistant Premier make the declaration he is stated to have
made in open fonol (2.) Was this done by His Majesty’s
command 1 (3.) If so, then I respectfully ask you, as the official
adviser to His Majesty, to kindly furnish me with the reasons
which may have influenced His Majesty in taking this extreme
action.”
68. To this I received a reply, dated Oct. 8, in which I am in-
formed that the King had brought the matter before Mr. Watkin ;
that when His Majesty gave the order he was informed that the
property had been paid for; that with respect to Havelu His
Majesty thinks that the four sashes taken would only have cost
some few shillings, and not $123.1.0 as mentioned in ray letter. I
am also informed that if, on investigation, His Majesty finds
that the four sashes have not been paid for, he will command that
the amount be immediately paid.
69. I replied on Oct. 8, respectfully submitting that my ques-
tions had not been answered • that if the Bea and Havelu people had
any claims upon the property such claims should have been made
in the properly constituted Court, and legally adjudicated in such
Court. I stated that I had never said that the Havelu sashes
alone cost SI23T, and respectfully declined to receive payment,
as I held that the property had been unlawfully seized, and that
the whole matter was one of far greater importance than the
cost of the articles in question.
70. Previous to my departure from Tonga, I forwarded the
following letter to Mr. Baker :
“Nukualofa, October 9th, 1889.
“ The Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier of Tonga.
“ Sir, —I am informed that certain properties in Niua Foou
and elsewhere, now held in trust for the purposes of the Austral-
asian Wesleyan Methodist Church, are now being measured and
interfered with, presumably with a view to their being resumed
by the Government, or for purposes of the Free Church. I desire,
therefore, officially to protest against any interference with these
properties (whether the lease be disputed or not), other than for
Trust purposes, until each case has been adjudicated upon by a
properly-constituted Court qualified and entitled to deal with it.
I need not remind you that you, as one of the Trustees, are
legally responsible for the preservation of these properties for the
purposes of the several Trusts. I beg also to inform you that a
copy of this letter will be forwarded by me to the British Vice-
Consul and Deputy Commissioner, R. B. Leefe, Esq., for his
information.”


Police Court Cases.
71. The Police Court has for a long time been used for the
purpose of intimidating the people, in order to prevent them from
joining us. It has been very clearly made known tq them that
no favour is shown to a Wesleyan, and that in many cases they
have to suffer acts of injustice amounting, in my opinion, to very
decided persecution.
72. It is true that in some cases, when the attention of the
Government had been persistently directed to some particular
cases, notably those of Taliai, Asaeli, and Paila, the decisions of
the Court have not been carried out, and in others, such as the
Malabo case, and, as I am recently informed, in those of Silivenusi
and Lamatau, some remission has been made ; but it is equally
true that the purpose for which most of these and other charges
were instituted has been fully accomplished.
73. Silivenusi’s case I have already referred to. He was sen-
tenced in August, 1888, to two years’ imprisonment and a fine of
£lO and costs for repeating a bit of local gossip, to the effect that
a Free Church minister had stated in the Free Church Conference
that they (the Free Church) could not get on without the help of
David Tonga. I appealed personally to Mr. Baker and by special
letter to the Rev. J. B. Watkin on the man’s behalf, pointing out
to both the monstrous injustice of the sentence. I got a promise
from Mr. Baker in December last, but no reply from Mr. Watkin.
Again and again I have directed attention to this case, but with
no result until a few weeks ago, when, as I presume, as the result
of a conversation which I had with Mr. Baker on the Wainui, the
remainder of his sentence has, I hear, been remitted. He must,
however, have served about 15 months of his sentence.
74. A Wesleyan in Haabai named Balu had some boards and
other property stolen from him during the time of the perse-
cutions there. The man who had taken the property was well
known, and the property is still in his possession. After re-
peated appeals for the restoration of the property, a summons
was applied for and issued. The case was tried, and clearly
proved, but the Magistrate refused to sentence the man for the
theft and to order the restoration of the property, on the ground
that if he did so there would be a number of similar cases at
once. We have appealed to the British authorities on the
matter, but as yet in vain.
75. A short time ago our people at Vavau were thatching our
church. Some friendly Free Church people were looking on, and
one actually helped a little in the work. One Government
official was so vexed at his name being mentioned as having
assisted that he prosecuted a man for libel in having said that
he had helped to thatch the Wesleyan church. The man was
sentenced to three months labour, and a small fine for the
grievous “ libel.”


76. A Wesleyan in Vavau has just been sentenced to six months
for stealing under the following circumstances. Some friends
of his visited him from Haabai. At the time he had no pig he
could kill, and so welcome them according to Tongan fashion.
He therefore went to his two younger brothers, who live together,
one of them being married, to beg a pig from them. Only the
younger was at home, but he at once told him to go and help
himself to one of their pigs. He did so and returned home with
the pig, walking through the town and in the middle of the day,
thus showing he had no thought of stealing it. By and bye the
wife of the elder of the two returned home, and presently going
to look at the pigs, saw that one that belonged to her was
missing. She did not see the younger brother, and at once went
into the town to inquire about it. A neighbour told her that
the Wesleyan, Moala, had taken it. At once she reported the
case to a policeman. Later on her husband and his brother
came home, and everything was explained. Of course, they were
all very sorry, and immediately sought the policeman and begged
him to drop the case, as it had been explained satisfactorily.
But the policeman has shown himself one of our bitterest
enemies in Vavau, and he refused to drop the case. They then
arranged among themselves that no one should appear at Court
to prosecute, and they would pay the costs. But when the case
was called and there was no prosecutor, the policeman came
forward and acted as prosecutor. And though there was no
witness and the defendant related the above facts, the magistrate,
Tongatea, gave Moala six months. Against this sentence there
is no appeal !
77. The following, though most unhappily a clear case of
stealing, appears to be one of the most atrocious sentences ever
heard of :
During the days of the plundering a Wesleyan family in
Koulo, Haabai, suffered severely. Lately they resolved to be
revenged upon their plunderers. The Police Court was not open
to them, as was plainly seen in Balu’s case, so that they could not
recover their lost property. Accordingly this family, consisting
of four Wesleyans and two Free Churchmen killed and ate a pig
belonging to the father of a young fellow who had been most
active in killing the pigs and fowls of the Wesleyans. It was
found out, and though they pleaded guilty, the magistrate said
the case was too serious for him to decide. Accordingly it was
sent on to the Chief Judge, Isileli Fehoko, the Chief who
attained such unenviable notoriety at Sir C. Mitchell’s enquiry.
He decided that the case came under the Law of Treason, because
one of their number had been told off to watch while three others
stole the pig. He therefore passed sentence of 14 (fourteen)
years each upon five of them, the sixth he let off with five years.
The four who were directly concerned in the theft he also fined


£lO each and costs for trespass ; and he ordered them to give to
the prosecutor three pigs in place of the one stolen.
Such is justice in Tonga. A Wesleyan (r.y., Balu) cannot
even recover his own property—that is one extreme. The other
extreme is the above sentence, amounting to some 75 years’
labour, some £SO in cash, and three pigs for stealing one. The
usual sentence is one year. The above sentence simply staggered
all who heard it.
78. It would be very easy to multiply instances, but these will
be sufficient to show that the Police Courts are still used to
intimidate and to persecute our people.
Remarks and Recommendations.
a. There is, in my opinion, no hope of re-union at present.
The King does not, I think, desire it, and it is very certain that
Mr. Baker, Mr. Watkin, and a considerable number of the Free
Church Native Ministers are opposed to it. With regard to the
great majority of the Tongan Chiefs and people, they would,
I believe, be glad to return to us if they were free to do
so. Most of them remain in the Free Church because it is the
King’s wish, and it is very difficult, indeed, for a Tongan to do
anything in opposition to the will of one who is so loved and
feared as King George. They are also afraid that if any of
them were to join our Church he would at once lose his title or
be deposed from any office he might hold in the Government.
B. Our Church, in spite of all opposition, is making steady
progress. Last year we were only able to report 2167 attendant
on public worship ; this year we report 2351. Our membership
last year was 819 ; this year it is 945. Tubou College is in a
prosperous condition. Several of our churches have been restored,
and in place of reed walls and earth floors they are now weather-
boarded, floored, and painted, at a considerable expense to the
people. We know well that we still possess the confidence and
love of the vast majority of the Tsngan people.
C. We must, I think, maintain and strengthen our Church
in Tonga, and I recommend that we continue to appoint at least
two European ministers to the Tonga District to conserve and
extend our work, and that as our people may not for a short
time be able to meet all the financial obligations of the District,
an annual allowance, not to exceed £4OO, be granted to the
District from the funds of the Foreign Missionary Society, to
assist in supporting the European ministers.
D. I recommend that the attention of Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment be directed to the fact—
a. That in the Report issued by Sir C. B. H. Mitchell, late
Governor of Fiji and High Commissioner for the Western
Pacific, he reports as follows to Her Majesty’s Government;—
“ I should undoubtedly have exercised the power vested in me


under the Western Pacific Order in Council of prohibiting
Mr. Baker from remaining in Tonga for a period had it not been
that I felt that his presence with the King would, after the
warning which my visit to Tonga had given, be the best means
of preserving peace.”
e. That His Excellency abstained, “as regards Mr. Baker,
from exercising the powers vested ” in his office on receiving an
intimation of His Majesty’s concurrence in certain steps which
His Excellency advised His Majesty to take.
i. That His Majesty’s concurrence was declared in a letter
to the High Commissioner, dated King’s Palace, Tonga," April 26,
1887, in which letter His Majesty promised to grant the first
two of the High Commissioner's requests, which were to proclaim
an amnesty, and that all political prisoners now in confinement
should be released under such conditions as to His Majesty
should seem right; that a proclamation should be issued restoring
in the fullest degree liberty to His Majesty’s subjects to worship
in accordance with their conscience, and that His Majesty would
intimate to the various chiefs that his grave displeasure would
follow any acts on their part designed to prevent the enjoyment
by his people of their full religious rights.
o. That in the opinion of the Conference, from the evidence
produced these promises have not been carried out by His Majesty’s
Government as they were understood and received by the High
Commissioner; that the amnesty has not been granted, for some
men are still banished from Tonga, and political prisoners are not
yet released ; that some are still working, whilst those who turned
to the Free Church have been released; ihat no proclamation of
religious liberty has been made, and if His Majesty did intimate
to the Chiefs that the Constitution should be carried out, and
“ that every man is free to perform his worship according to the
dictates of their own conscience, and should any Chief act other-
wise he shall be brought up to he punished according to the law,’’
that announcement has not been made known to the people, and
when a Chief has violently interfered with the public worship of
our people, he has not been punished by the Government when
the case was duly reported.
u. That freedom of worship is not enjoyed by Wesleyans in
Tonga, for anyone who may be appointed to any position is at
once deposed unless he will consent to abandon the Wesleyan
Church ; that as an instance of this, a man named Mau was duly
appointed to the position of schoolmaster in his village, but was
soon informed by the Inspector of Schools (Lijiati Fifita) that he
could be no longer a schoolmaster, as he was a Wesleyan, but
that if he would be Fiee Church he should still hold his position,
otherwise a new teacher would be appointed; and that this case
is not peculiar, for there is not a single Wesleyan in the Group


who holds any office under the Government, though the Roman
Catholics are considered eligible for and are appointed to any
office.
/. That numbers of Wesleyans now in Fiji, some of whom
went there to escape the persecution and ill-treatment to which
they were subjected because they wished to remain in the Wes-
leyan Church, and others who were beaten and imprisoned, and
then forcibly deported and banished because they declined to join
the Free Church, are still in exile, and are refused permission to
return to their own land. That as a proof of this, a principal
Chief, named Vaea, who was deposed from his official rank because
he decided to remain in connection with the Wesleyan Church,
and afterwards went to Fiji, was not allowed to land from the
steamer at any place in Tonga when desirous of so doing, but
was compelled to return to Fiji, though no crime had ever been
charged against him.
g. That a number of Wesleyans are still held as prisoners
and exiles in Tofua, though the term of their banishment has
long expired ; and that some of these men were deported simply
because they attended worship at Mr. Moulton’s house.
f. That we therefore earnestly solicit, through the High
Commissioner, the good offices of Her Majesty’s Government,
to secure the fulfilment of the promises made by His Majesty to
the late High Commissioner, more especially as regards the
proclamation of freedom of worship, the removal of existing dis-
abilities, and the return of the exiles in Fiji and Tofua.
e. I also recommend that steps be taken to bring this
matter prominently under the notice of the Churches in England
and America, and that the attention of the Imperial authorities
be directed without further delay to the great injustice which is
being done to us in Tonga.
e. I desire to express my thanks for the very valuable help
given to me by Rev. E. E. Crosby during each of my visits.
Mr, Crosby’s position in Tonga has been a most painful one; but
no man has been more loyal to our Church, and few have suffered
so much for their devotion to our suffering people. I also received
willing assistance from Rev. 0. E. James during my last visit,
and also from all our native ministers and office-bearers in
the Church, for which I am very grateful. I am sorry that I
have not been able to secure the ‘ honourable and lasting union
of the two Churches,’ but trust that something has been done
towards the conservation of our work, and the promotion of the
welfare of the Tongan people.


"J'A f f
F") h 4




