

REPORT
of the
BOARD OF INQUIRY
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Department of the Army
appointed to investigate
THE TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF OFFENCES AGAINST
MILITARY LAW AND THE ADMINISTRATION OF PLACES
OF CONFINEMENT OF MILITARY OFFENDERS




REPORT
of the
BOARD OF INQUIRY
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Department of the Army
appointed to investigate
THE TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF OFFENCES AGAINST
MILITARY LAW AND THE ADMINISTRATION OF PLACES
OF CONFINEMENT OF MILITARY OFFENDERS




REPORT.
1. By an instrument dated 3rd August, 1945, a Board was appointed by the Minister of State for the
Army, the Right Honourable Francis Michael Forde, to inquire into and report upon the matters which appear
in the copy of the instrument of appointment which is set out in Appendix A.
2. The Board so constituted entered upon the discharge of their duties, and proceeded to take evidence
at public sittings and otherwise to gather information. They also completed the inspection of all detention bar-
racks on the mainland, and interviewed the staff and S.U.S. in those barracks.
3. Chaplain-General, the Reverend T. C. Rentoul, one of the members of the Board, most unfortunately
died on 28th December, 1945. The Minister of State for the Army thereupon by instrument dated 9th January,
1946 (copy of which appears as Appendix B) appointed the present Board.
4. The expression “the Board” at times refers to the original Board.
5. The evidence and other material on which this report is based consist partly of what was obtained
by the original Board and partly of what the present Board have secured. They also had the advantage of
frequent discussions with their late colleague, mostly on the matters relating to detention barracks, and a
number of their conclusions express opinions that he held.
6. The matters expressly mentioned in the terms of reference, and some others upon which the Board
have thought it desirable to report under para. 3 of those terms, are discussed under various headings, a sum-
mary of which is set out at pages 175-8. A list of the matters mentioned in the terms of reference with notes
of the relevant provisions of the Defence Act, certain Statutes and Regulations, A.M.R. & 0., the Army Act,
and the Rules of Procedure, and to the paragraphs of this Report where they are discussed, will be found in
Appendix C.
7. For the sake of brevity certain abbreviations and short references have been used, and the following
is a glossary:—
“Defence Act” means the Defence Act, 1903-45 of the Commonwealth of Australia.
“Army Act” refers to the Army Act of the Imperial Parliament.
“A.M.R. & O.” refers to the official Army publication containing the Defence Act and the consolidation
of the Australian Military Regulations and Military Board Orders. Numbers following the abbre-
viation “A.M.R. & O.” (e.g. “A.M.R. & O. 425”) refers to the paragraph number of the con-
solidation.
“Soldier” means any person subject to military law other than a person subject to military law as an
officer.
“Non-commissioned officer” does NOT include a warrant officer, unless a contrary intention is indicated.
“Private soldier” means every soldier other than a warrant officer or non-commissioned officer.
“Military Law Lectures” (abbrev. M.L.L.) refers to the official printed Summary of Military Law
Lectures given at the L.H.Q. School of Military Law (notified in General Orders dated 31st January,
1945.)
“Manual of Military Law” (abbrev. M.M.L.) refers to the Australian Edition of the Manual of Military
Law (1941).
“Notes on Administration of Discipline on War Service” refers to the official Army pamphlet of that
title as amended from time to time issued by command of the C-inC on Ist May, 1943 and notified
in General Orders dated 31st May, 1943.
“Soldier under Sentence” (abbrev. S.U.S.) means (unless the contrary intention is indicated) a soldier
undergoing a sentence of detention in a military place of detention whether by sentence of a court
martial or summary award of an officer, and includes an ex-soldier.
“Detention Barracks Regulations” refers to the official Army consolidation of the Australian Military
(Places of Detention) Regulations and the Standing Orders of the Military Board relating to military
places of detention. Paragraph references to the Detention Barracks Regulations are to the para-
graphs of the consolidation.
Unless a contrary intention is indicated, expressions such as “commanding officer , company, etc.,
commander”, “formation, etc., commander” have the same meaning as they have in the Australian
Military Regulations.
The following abbreviations are used freely throughout this report and have the meanings indicated
below ;
A.M.R. &O. Australian Military Regulations and Orders.
A.A. The Army Act of the Imperial Parliament.
A.M.F. Australian Military Forces.
A.I.F. Australian Imperial Force.
A.W.L. Absence without Leave.
A.A.L.C. Australian Army Legal Corps.
C. Commanding Officer.
C-in-C Commander-in-Chief, Australian Military Forces.
D. District Court-Martial.
D.L.S. Director of Legal Services.
F. Field General Court-Martial.
G. General Court-Martial.
G.R.O. General Routine Orders by the C-in-C, A.M.F.
G.O.C. General Officer Commanding.


J.A.G. Judge-Advocate-General.
L. of C. Area Lines of Communication Area.
N.C.O. Non-commissioned Officer.
P.D. 1 No. 1 scale punishment diet as provided for in para. 170 of the Detention Barracks
Regulations.
P.D. 2 No. 2 scale punishment diet as provided for in para. 171 of the Detention Barracks
Regulations.
R. Rules of Procedure.
S. Soldier under Sentence.
W.O. Warrant Officer.
8. This report is divided into three parts as follows:
Part I. Introductory.
Part 11. The Trial and Punishment of Offences against Military Law—which deals with all matters
from the laying of charges, through the preliminary investigation and trial, up to the
sentencing of the accused.
Part 111. The Confinement of Offenders against Military Law —which deals with the administration of
places in which offenders against military law may be confined.
A summary of the principal conclusions and recommendations in Parts I and II of the Report will be
found at pages 86-94 and in Part 111 of the Report at pages 164-72.


PART I—INTRODUCTORY
9. Immediately after the first meeting of the Board the terms of reference were forwarded to the press
through the Ministerial Press Relations Officer, and members of the public who desired to give evidence were
by this means invited to communicate with the Secretary to the Board.
10. The Board have held public sittings in the capital city of each State. Every opportunity has been
taken to invite all persons having any information or opinion relevant to any aspect of the inquiry to attend
as witnesses, or forward a statement to the Board. The views of various organizations such as the Returned
Sailors’, Soldiers’ and Airmen’s Imperial League of Australia, the Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women, and
the Demobolized Sailors’, Soldiers’ and Airmen’s Association of Australia, have also been sought.
11. A large number of persons responded to the Board’s invitation. Many were examined on oath at
public sittings, and no person seeking to give evidence that the Board considered to be relevant was refused a
hearing.
12. The Board have also received written statements from a number of others and some of these have
been put in as exhibits. A list of all exhibits appears as Appendix D, and in it will be found an indication
of those that are forwarded with this report.
13. A transcript of the evidence taken in public accompanies this report.
Xhe records of the Army Department were placed at the Board’s disposal and the index books
dealing with summary powers of punishment, courts-martial, and detention barracks, wer e examined by the
Secretary to the Board. Several scores of files were obtained and examined, and those which appeared to be
likely to assist the Board were referred either to counsel assisting the Board or to one of the members.
15. The Board have read or referred to many reports, documents and manuals. Among them may be
mentioned; —
(a) The report of the Committee constituted by the Army Council to enquire Into the Law and Rules
of Procedure regulating Military Courts-martial, 1919 (referred to as the “Darling” Report).
(b) The Report of the Army and Air Force Courts-martial Committee, 1849, (referred to as the
“Oliver” Report).
(c) The Report of the Committee appointed by the C-in-C Australian Military Forces, in 1943, to
consider the legal organization of the Australian Military Forces (referred to as the O Bryan
Report).
(d) Report of the Prime Minister’s Committee of Enquiry into Detention Barracks, 1943, (United
Kingdom) (referred to as the “Second Oliver” Report).
16 The Board inspected all the Detention Barracks in Australia that were in use and interviewed in
each one the staff and the men confined there. Further reference to the interviews will be found in paras.
320-325.
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN PEACE TIME.
17 The provisions relating to the trial and punishment of offences against military law differ according
as the miliJry forcl, a," or ar/not on war service A. between the two cases the procedure of the var.ous
tribunals does not vary materially, but there are differences as regards-
(a) the persons subject to their jurisdiction,
(b) the offences triable; and
(c) their powers of punishment.
t«. That such differences should exist is
vice in peace and in war differ so widely. ; od of the ; r serv ice. l n peace time,
and remain continuously subject to aut p serve continuously, members of the Citizen Forces may not
however, although members of the Permanent t-orces serve cuuuuuuu
do so.
19 Those who join the Permanent Forces make the Army their livelihood. Disciplinary action taken
against a member of the Permanent Forces could affect him throughout the remamder of h.s serv.ce.
„ ~ . r C \uve n Forces are at present subject to military authority only when on duty or in
20. emb^ s of J he h e C disciplinary powers which the various military tribunals should exercise oyer them
uniform. The extent of the ? „ Effected by the nature of the service which the Government decides they
in peace time may be very materially attectea oy
shall undertake.
71 For two reasons the Board have made few recommendations regarding the jurisdiction and powers
of punishment of military tribunals in
sufficient Ac projected organisation of the Military Forces in peace time.
. t x r ~,v,prp the Board make a recommendation regarding
22. As a general rule then it may be taken o{ summary jurisdiction, the recommendation is
the procedure of courts-martial, or incidental to t e a recommendation is made as to jurisdiction or
intended to apply in peace time and on war serv .£ a cont intention is indicated, to apply to war
powers of punishment of tribunals, it may be taken, un
time conditions only.


PART II —TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF OFFENCES AGAINST
MILITARY LAW.
23. Considerable thought was given by the Board to the best method of informing themselves on the many
questions arising on this aspect of the inquiry.
24. Because of the great importance of summary punishment, and to ensure that the views of men with
experience in a wide variety of units were obtained, the Board secured from the Military Secretary’s Branch
a list of officers who had been commanding officers of units and who had recently been transferred to the
Reserve of Officers. A number of the officers whose names were on the list were asked to submit their views
in writing, and did so. From these statements, and the evidence of witnesses the Board have been able to
get the views of men with experience as commanding officers of Infantry, Artillery and Engineer Units, of
General Details Depots, Leave and Transit Depots and as Commanding Officers, Metropolitan Troops. Many
of them had been promoted to the command of higher formations. For example, Lieut-General Savige had
commanded in turn the 17th Brigade, the 3rd Divisionand the 2nd Australian Corps, and Maj-General Wootten
had commanded the 18th Infantry Brigade and later the 9th Australian Division.
25. The opinions of many officers well acquainted with every phase of court-martial work were also
obtained. Men with extensive experience as convening and confirming officers, as presidents and members of
courts-martial, prosecuting officers, defending officers, judge-advocates and reviewing officers were examined.
Where possible the Board sought the evidence of officers recently transfrred to the Reserve; but in many in-
stances, officers on full time duty appeared.
26. In the course of their interviews with soldiers under sentence, the Board obtained a number of
statements expressing the views of men who had been tried and punished summarily, or by court-martial.
.. . 2 J\ Fi "ally, comments ° n CV l ry su gS estion of a °y merit in this section of the Board’s inquiries were
D.“”^D*^‘ be of' uSi'Se™cT '°' rA ' he DePU ' y AdiU,am Genera ' (Per!onal Servi “ s) ” "
MILITARY LAW AND PERSONS SUBJECT THERETO.
28. The Parliament of the Commonwealth has power by virtue of Section 51 (vi) of the Constitution to
make laws with respect to the Naval and Military defence of the Commonwealth, and of the several States
This is an exclusive power and consequently State Legislatures have no authority with respect to defence
As, however, the power exists subject to the Constitution, the Commonwealth Parliament in the exercise of
it may not validly go outside the limits of what the Constitution authorises.
29. The Defence Act contains provisions enacted by the Commonwealth Parliament pursuant to the
power just mentioned. Although parts of the Act relate to the Naval, Military, and Air Forces of the Com-
monwealth, it mostly concerns the Military Forces.
rftnfprr 3 i Regulations have from time to time been made by the Governor-General in Council under the power
conferred Section 124 of the Defence Act. The publication known as Australian Military Regulations
• ? r h ° \ <: onta m s the principal regulations relating to the Military Forces, as well af Orders
issued by the Military Board for the Australian Military Forces and Senior Cadets.
cJ I; . “ M,lltar y Law” has been defined as “the law governing the status of officers and soldiers including
L 3 ’ l a f mcidents u of status’’ (M.L.L. page 1). It has also been defined as “an entirely d"s
such at d pn' /• ' WhIC J I goV " ns , the members of the Army and regulates the conduct of officers and soldiers as
such at all times and at all places, in peace and in war, at home and abroad”. (M.M.L. page 2).
AC JS P „X S tha'. ’ac,also’to^o’^uch’o/th^^Army^Ac^f ’the* 1 Imperial e r Ce
«“ d s t P pp e ned° f b Pro s“ dU 8 r 8 e oM*} r ith A « o’) t' I
regulation* fo, the time being in (1 „ A . Ct t,™' prov . ,s . ,ons lh « *° Wied are the laws and
evidence) and powers of courfs-martial in ill' gw “ '''“I 1 "?? procedure (including the reception of
consequences of the findings and sentences of LX* cof,f. U ” L , a ”f P °j CeS ; ' he . r f v,s ! on ’ confirmation, effect and
tation of the sentences thereby imposed. s-marttal, and the mitigation, remission and comnu-
rte’protds^ons’^if^tlm 1 Defenr ° "“f 0 ' ' he Commonwealth, the Military
as is no, inconsistent withTnd otherwise al'°nk° n k . a " d S °, m “ ch of Army Ac.
(Defence Act Sec. 55). The Section authorise* tt, • adapted by the Defence Act and the regulations:
in addition to or in substitution for the punishment *l°? ° , a not exceedin g for an offence either
of the amount of a fine provided by t ’ and the increa se or reduction
same section'l" “"e'spondtag',l °/h service'-, which by the
defining the expression “on active service » However )b ™. rds “ Sec. 189 (1) of the Arm) Act
proclamation dated 14th April 1942 (made nod .1. ’ ' ' e lin (' n been added to by regulation. By a
Of the areas comprising X cimmonw«f.h"and' declared, in respect
subject to military law serving in these areas are L Terr ! tor , l , es ° A f tbe Commonwealth, that persons
the proclamation is still in force. active service. At the time of making this report
war service “subject to" A ™ y Act shall apply to the Military Forces on
«e P ,°oTe 'MibX A ™ y p
Commonweelth Parliament. Considerable °' ,he


36. By the law of Australia as well as of England a man who joins the Army, whether as an officer
or as a soldier, does not cease to be a citizen. With a few exceptions his position under the ordinary law of
the land remains unaffected. The criminal law applicable in Australia is almost entirely a matter of State
law, determined by the common and statutory law in force in the respective States.
37. For the purposes of the application to and in relation to the Military Forces and the members
thereof of the provisions of the Army Act, (that is, when on war service) they are deemed to be persons
subject to military law within the meaning of that expression as used in the Army Act; (A.M.R. & O. 296 A).
38. In the circumstances mentioned in A.M.R. & O. 297 the persons referred to therein when not
subject to the Army Act (that is, when not on war service) are subject to military law within the meaning of
the regulations. Included in those mentioned are every member of the Permanent Forces at all times, every
member of the Citizen Forces, when on duty or in uniform, and every person during any term of detention,
imprisonment, or penal servitude imposed for an offence against the Army Act or the Defence Act or any regu-
lation made under either Act, and who, at the time of the imposition of the sentence or at the time of the
commission of the offence, was a member of the Military Forces.
39. The persons subject to military law include not only members of the Military Forces but also former
members who when on war service have been sentenced to penal servitude, imprisonment or detention. By
the operation of Sec. 55 of the Defence Act, the Army Act continues to apply to such persons during the terms
of their sentences, and they may be dealt with as if they continued to be subject to military law: (Army Act
Sec. 158 (2)).
OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW
40 When not on war service the offences that may be committed by persons subject to military law
are those laid down in the Defence Act and the regulations. A large number of the offences are stated
in A.M.R. & O. 328, and they correspond very closely to offences set out in various sections of the Army Act
from Sec. 6 to Sec. 40, those selected being apparently such as may be committed under peace time conditions.
There is however no provision In the Defence Act or the regulations corresponding to Sec. 41 of the Army Act,
under which a person subject to military law may be tried by court-martial, and punished, if he commits any
of the offences mentioned in the section, which are offences punishable by the ordinary law of England.
41 When on war service however members of the Military Forces are subject to a wider range of
prohibition, as the offences they may commit include those contained in the Army Act which as alre ady me "*
tioned then applies by the effect of Sec. 55 of the Defence Act, but subject to such modifications and adapta-
tions as are prescribed by the regulations and save so far as not inconsistent with the Defence Act. Sec. 41
of the Army Act therefore comes into force with respect to members of the Military Forces on war service.
42. For the purpose of the summary and minor punishment of soldiers the word “offence” is defined
in AMR & O 418 in relation to soldiers on war service and also in relation to soldiers not on war service.
One of the principal distinctions between the two classes is with regard to the punishments that may be
inflicted.
43. It may be useful to describe very briefly the general course of the investigation and trial of a charge
for an offence against military law, when it is dealt with under military jurisdiction. The same proce ure is
applicable whether the member is or is not on war service or active service, except where otherwise stated.
44. A charge alleging an offence against military law is usually made in a charge report when the
alleged offender is committed into custody, but it may be made in other ways.
45 A charge alleging an offence on the part of an officer must be investigated in the first instance by
his commandin' officer who will either dismiss it, or, if he decides there is a prima face case, will remand it
m simeHor authority either with a recommendation that the officer be dealt with summarily, or with an appli-
cation for trial by court-martial. Such a charge may may be referred to a court of inquiry, and need not
unless the officer requires it, be formally investigated before his commanding officer.
46. A charge against a warrant officer must be investigated in the first instance by his company, etc.,
commander, and if not dismissed, by his commanding officer The commanding officer also has Puerto dismiss
the charge if in his discretion he thinks it ought not to be proceeded with, but he has no authority to make
any award.
47 On war service, officers below the rank of lieut-colonel and _ warrant officers may be dealt with
summarily by general officers commanding, certain brigadiers, and certain other officers not below the rank of
major-general, and all officers and warrant officers may be tried by general court-martial. In peace time,
the power to deal summarily with officers is restricted to officers below the rank of major.
48 Everv charge against a warrant officer, non-commissioned officer or private is first investigated
withouf delay in his presence by the company, etc., commander. By virtue of A.M.R. & O. 394 (4) a company,
7tc commanded wherethe company, etc., forms part of a larger unit of which there is a commanding officer,
has’ power to dismiss the charge if he, in his discretion, thinks that it ought not to be proceeded with, unless
his powers have been limited by his commanding officer. It is to be noted that all charges are t 0 invest f a
without delay usually before morning parade, by the company, etc., commander so that an offender reserved
for disposal by the commanding officer can be passed on to him on the same day A company etc“ nder
has certain limited powers of awarding punishment, an epitome of which will be found in paragraphs 102 to 0 .
49 After a charge against a N.C.O. or private soldier has been reserved by the company, etc., com-
mander for disposal by the C. 0., the accused is brought before the CO. who in the accused s Presence, r
the charge and takes statements by witnesses, who may be cross-examined by the accused ■ lf e Jr° h ”
hearing these witnesses, considers that a prima facie case has not been ma e ou ag i s ,
dismiss the charge. If, however, the C.O. considers that a prima facie case has been made out, the hearing
may take one of several courses.


SO. If it is a serious case, the normal procedure is for the C.O. to remand the accused for trial by court-
“art>a* without giving him any opportunity to elect to be dealt with summarily by the C.O. However, if
the C.O. has power to deal with the case, and he considers that it is not so serious as to require trial 'by
courtmartial in any event, the course to be followed will depend on the punishment which the C.O. intends to
inflict if he finds the accused guilty. If the C.O. intends to inflict only one of the “minor” punishments
enumerated in A.M.R. & O. 418, or if the making of an award against the soldier would not involve a
forfeiture of pay exceeding f 3, he will dispose of the case summarliy without giving the accused an oppor-
tunity to elect trial by court-martial. If, however, he intends to inflict one of the “summary” punishments
enumerated in A.M.R. & O. 418,, or if the making of an award against the soldier would involve a forfeiture
o pay exceeding ±3, he must give the accused the right to elect trial by court-martial. A C.O may also
refer a case to a superior military authority with a request that he be authorised to deal with it summarily
and, if directed to re-hear it, he may make a summary award, subject to the right of the accused to elect
trial by court-martial.
51 When dealing with a case summarily, the C. 0., after hearing what is alleged against the accused,
does not ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. On the contrary, the C.O. is bound to warn the
accused that he is not bound to say anything in answer to the charge, and to inform him that he may call
witnesses in his defence, and may himself make a sworn or unsworn statement, which may be used in evidence.
After any evidence on behalf of the accused has been heard, the C. 0., if not satisfied of his guilt beyond
doubt must dismiss the charge; but if so satisfied he may deal with the accused by imposing a
summary or minor punishment. y v g
52. In A.M.R. & O. 409 will be found a list of the offences with which a C.O. may deal without
reference to superior authority Before a C.O. may deal with any other, he must be authorized to do so by
proper superior military authority (A.M.R. &O. 409 (4)). It would appear that some revision of these
powers u desirable on account of the conditions at times arising as a consequence of the definition of “war
servme . For example a C.O. cannot deal with a charge against a soldier who while acting as sentinel is
drunk on his post even though that post is at a base camp in Australia.
• S - T the CO- . considers tha t the charge should be dealt with by court-martial, or if the accused must
be given the opportunity to elect trial by court-martial, and he so elects, the C.O. remands the accused and
directs a summary of evidence m writing to be taken in the accused’s presence. Upon his consideration of
the summary when taken the C.O. again considers whether the matter should proceed, and if he so decides
the papers are forwarded with the proposed charge to the formation, etc., commander. If the latter considers
‘ CMe t f r a court to be convened, which will consist of officer, who,"
number and rank depend upon the nature of the court-martial ordered, whether general or district.
54. There are certain safeguards surrounding the exercise of a C.O’s. jurisdiction. They are
(a) The right given to the accused in certain circumstances to elect to be tried by a court-martial
tyT*° n “** Wkh Which 3 C - may deal without 'eferen.* to “superior military
(C) by c!os Utiny ° f thC ° ffenCe reP ° rtS (FOrm 82 ° 69) Which COntain details of nummary awards made
(d) The power of “superior officers” to vary, remit or commute the award under A.M R & O 431
of the a - a - l - c - in
ffie purfms^of 1 adWsin^the*court a PP^ n ted at district courts-martial a judge-advocate
in the evidence and summfng up He £ToTTm °\ ’ t 0 dear Up any doubtful P°i"ts
in court or out of court. S P ’ available to give advice to the prosecutor or the accused either
tence if operltive V°'! Sente ”£ e i s passed °“ him . finding nor sen-
convening office! confirmed by the confirmmg author.ty, who is usually, but not always, the
and reported on in ’ accordance ffh T M r’’ *' fin dlng aa d sentence of the court-martial must be reviewed
occurs, is reviewed by the Judge-Advocate General or his IS fTI b ? court-martial, no matter where it
IS any defect in point of law invalidating the nrnee H' * f ° r the P^ r P ose o{ ascertaining whether there
defect results in the prompt quashing 0 f a conS ST u The of any such
or sentence in accordance with A.M.R. & Q. 589 Th ed has the right t 0 Petition against a finding
the whole system for the trial oToffencT l° f reference th f y are called upon to investigate
every detail of it. They do, however feel fuTfiJ-I 7 ° r , t 0 examine and express an opinion upon
tmns that are subsequently made, and which in their ooink^wil? ® th 3t ’ subject t 0 the recommenda-
visions for the trial of offences against military law f nTT T™ T l yst ? m generally - the present pro-
persons with due regard to the maintenance of the d’iscLbSS ’ T™’! enSUre justice t 0 accused
be contrary to the evidence and to common sense to conrSir Forces - In the Board’s opinion it would
upon the system by some of the witnesses Nor TT T ex ravagant which has been bestowed
br3nch. witnesses. Nor do they accept the views of some who condemn it root and
JURISDICTION TO TRY CHARGES.
Appendix E V TrT tr found lS a h sTater C nt Sd of ti these° T* Tu geS f ° r ° ffences against military law In
tion, the persons subject to its jurisTct 0 n ff S ’u the basis of the Jurisdiction of each itsTmnosi
may m fllct . Th will also be found in that *T y 3nd the P-ishment wSch t
reviewing the findings and awards ofas


61. Jurisdiction is based to a certain extent on the nature of the offence and on the rank of the accused.
The Board see no reason to recommend any departure in regard to jurisdiction from the present system. Its
operation in particular cases may at times be open to criticism, but there is no evidence that any injustice or
failure of justice that may have occurred is so serious as to demand any substantial amendment or alteration of
the system in this regard.
62. Attention may be drawn to the power vested in civil courts (by which is meant either courts of
summary jurisdiction or the High Court of Australia or the appropriate courts of the States (see Sec. 102 of the
Defence Act)), to try and punish any member of the Defence Force charged with any offence against the Act,
which by the definition in Sec. 4 includes the regulations. This power is also possessed by courts-martial.
63. The only suggestion made to the Board that any of the tribunals mentioned in Appendix E should
be abolished was that the provision for the constitution of wffiat is commonly called a “one-man D.C.M.”
should be repealed. This type of court-martial was introduced in 1943 by an amendment to Sec. 48 of the Army
Act (which was effected by A.M.R. &O. 497 (a) (iiia)) and which is as follows:
“(a) A.A. Sec. 48 shall be read as if—
(iiia) After the word “years” in paragraph (4) the following provision was added; —
“Provided that, for the trial of a person charged with deserting or attempting to desert His
Majesty’s Service under section 12, or with absenting himself without leave under section 15 of this
Act a district court-martial may consist of one officer of field rank—
(a) who has served as an officer on the active list for not less than three years in some arm of the
service other than the Australian Army Legal Corps or Australian Army Medical Corps and who
is a duly admitted Barrister or Solicitor of the High Court of Australia or of the Supreme Court
of a State of at least five years standing, or
(b) is certified by the Director of Legal Services to have had sufficient commissioned service and
legal training to fit him for appointment as sole member of such a court,
and that officer shall exercise every power and function vested in the President of a district court-
martial by this Act requisite or necessary to carry out the functions of a district court-martial, and
any provision contained in this Act, or the Rules of Procedure applicable to a district court-martial
shall apply so far as it is applicable to a district court-martial consisting of one officer as herein-
before provided, except that a district court-martial so constituted shall not award a sentence of
detention exceeding twelve months and shall not award any sentence of imprisonment.”
64. The amendment was recommended by a majority of the Committee presided over by Mr. Justice
O’Bryan particularly to meet the situation that had arisen in 1942 owing to the very considerable congestion of
cases of A.W.L. and desertion awaiting trial by court-martial.
65. According to the evidence little if any use has been made of this provision. Indeed the Board
were not informed of any case in which a “one-man D.C.M.” had been appointed. The general opinion appears
to be that a trial by such a court-martial would not be considered very satisfactory. The objections to it are
based on the belief that an accused might consider that he was being deprived of the judgment of three officers
and compelled to accept that of one, and also on the expectation that an officer constituting such a court-martial
might tend to get out of touch with service conditions and adopt too legalistic an attitude.
66 As the recommendation for the constitution of this type of court-martial was made for a
particular purpose, and for a special reason, the Board suggest that the Minister might deem it desirable to
have inquiries made as to whether the continuance of the provision for such a court-martial is necessary The
Board take the liberty of suggesting also that the Minister might deem it desirable to consult the members of
Mr. Justice O’Bryan’s committee to ascertain their views.
67 The Board have received a number of suggestions that jurisdiction should be conferred upon per-
sons or tribunals not at present authorised to try offences against military law. These are—
(a) That the regimental court-martial should be re-introduced.
(b) The military magistrates should be appointed with authority to try certain types of cases in the
place of courts-martial.
(c) That permanent or standing courts-martial should be established.
(d) That brigade commanders should be invested with certain summary powers.
68 The Board do not recommend the adoption of any of the first three proposals. The regimental court-
martial 'was abolished in 1920 and no substantial reason has been advanced for its re-introduction. It was
urged by some witnesses that the creation of a system of military magistrates would enable regimental and
other officers to devote more time to normal Army training, and would bring about the more speedy despatch
of cases These results would probably follow from the adoption of such a scheme, but the disadvantages that
luTd LwTrom"would in the Board's opinion outweigh any benefits of the nature suggested The reasons
on which this view is based will sufficiently appear from what is said in paragraphs 157 and 158 The pro-
posal for the establishment of permanent or standing courts-martial is not recommended for substantially the
same reasons The Board, however, recommend that brigade commanders should be given certain powers of
summary punishment in respect of staff-sergeants and sergeants as will be found in paragraph 117.
69 There is no evidence to show that there is any necessity to relieve formation etc., commanders of
the whole or anv part of their powers as regards officers and warrant officers, or that those powers have been
used unjustly. In the Board’s opinion it is desirable that as far as possible persons accused of offences against
military law should be dealt with by officers who are removed from immediate and close contact with them.
It is for that reason that the Board do not recommend that brigade commanders generally should be given sum-
mary powers in respect of officers. It may be expected that a brigadier wi 1 have a more intimate knowledge
of tie officers in his brigade than is possessed by the divisional commander, but that knowledge may be more
of a hindrance than an advantage if he is called upon to deal with charges against therm Warrant officers at
present are on the same footing as officers for the purposes of summary punishment, and no reason has been
advanced for placing them upon any different basis.


MILITARY AND CIVIL TRIBUNALS.
70. Courts-martial and other tribunals authorised to try offences against military law possess their juris-
diction as a result of the exercise by the Commonwealth Parliament of the defence power. In the case of
The King v. Bevan (66 C.L.R. 452) the opinion was expressed by three Justices of the High Court that legis-
ation providing for trial by court-martial of members of the defence forces is a valid exercise of the defence
power and it is not open to objection as an invalid grant of judicial power. Courts-martial and other tribunals
cannot therefore legally have jurisdiction except for the maintenance of discipline, or otherwise in relation to
defence. But any system to enforce discipline by the punishment of offences must be considered, not only from
the aspect of its constitutional validity, but also from the point of view of whether it is the most satisfactory
way by which to do so.
71 As is pointed out elsewhere in the report, most offenders are tried and punished under the present
system by tribunals consisting of officers and civil courts and civilians can play very little part in it. In the
course of the inquiry the present system has been criticised in a way that suggests that there are serious objec-
tions to it on that ground. For example, a few witnesses have recommended the introduction of appeals to
civil courts from the decisions of courts-martial, or from reviewing authorities, their opinion apparently being
that purely military tribunals are so liable to error and likely to work injustice that final decisions should not
in fairness to accused persons be left to them.
72. * Officers in command of units, and particularly commanding officers of battalions, etc., are respon-
sible for the discipline of their units. At times, owing to the conditions of service, discipline must be main-
tained among troops who are in action, or who are veryclose to contact with the enemy. In such cases military
offences may have a peculiar significance. In base areas, leave and transit depots, and other such places the
commission of a military offence is perhaps not of equal importance. Nevertheless in all cases whether in action,
in training, or on leave, members of the forces must be subject to the discipline of their officers, and if they
commit offences that discipline in almost all instances will be affected.
73. Persons authorized to try charges for offences against military law must have either from their
own experience, or by evidence placed before them, a knowledge of Army conditions and of all those matters
that are comprehended by the phrase “the custom of the service.” Without that knowledge justice may not be
done.
74. Any suggestion for the introduction of civil tribunals into the system for the trial of offences against
military law must in the Board’s opinion be judged by reference to the considerations to which they have adverted.
A trained lawyer is probably more likely to possess the necessary legal knowledge and judicial capacity than
many officers who are called upon to sit in judgment, but whose experience has not extended to legal matters.
The advantages that migh accrue if decisions were given by civil courts or lawyers must, however, be weighed
against the disadvantages that would result from the absence of officers with experience or Army life and
conditions.
75. In the Board’s view any proposal under which civil courts, civilians or legal officers without regi-
mental experience would be given jurisdiction to try charges for offences against military law, should not be
entertained. The Board have pointed out elsewhere in this report how trials conducted by members of courts-
martial, by C.Os and others, who have not been adequately trained in military law, may be unsatisfactory.
If that training is provided many defects will disappear. But even with any drawbacks it is in the Board’s
opinion preferable to continue the present system. Under it offences which affect in one way or another the
discipline of a unit or of the Army generally, are dealt with by those who are responsible for the maintenance
of that discipline and who have the necessary knowledge and experience to provide the background against
which the question of guilt or innocence should be determined. , Furthermore, safeguards are provided as
decisions of first instance are subject to review, and legal advice is in most cases available: (Compare the
“Darling” Report, para. 103, and the “Oliver” Report, para. 22.)
76. The Board do not desire to be taken as suggesting that a civil court would be likely to be a source
of injustice. But as the punishment of offences against military law is intimately associated with the main-
tenance of discipline in the forces, and specialised knowledge is essential if charges for those offences are to
be dealt with properly, no system of appeals to a civil tribunal should be instituted unless it is abundantly clear
that no other way of securing justice for the members of the forces can be found. In the Board’s opinion, that
situation has not arisen in the Australian Military Forces.
77. A good many witnesses have strongly urged that the form in which military law is at present
stated is most unsatisfactory and confusing, that there is an imperative need for its clarification, and that as
far as possible it should be simplified. The evidence overwhelmingly proves these allegations and the Board can
add their own testimony to what has been placed before them on this aspect of the inquiry. It is in the Board’s
opinion beyond question that the complicated and perplexing form in which military law at present exists has
contributed in no small measure to the difficulties which have undoubtedly arisen in the administration of mili-
tary law, particularly as regards C.Os. and company,etc., commanders.
78. The Board’s recommendation is that all offences against military law, the punishments therefor,
and all matters relating to the trial and punishment of offences against military law should be contained in
one separate code, and that in it should be stated the provisions that are applicable both in peace and in war.
This result could be achieved by passing a separate Army Act and making regulations thereunder. The Board
consider that it would be highly desirable that the offences which may be committed and the punishments
therefore should be contained in a statute, and thereby remain under direct Paraliamentary control. Most if not
all of the other necessary provisions could be contained in regulations. In view of the circumstances under
which such a code would have to be used both in peace and in war, the provisions should be simple and clear
and couched in language that will permit as far as possible of no misunderstanding by those who will have to
refer to them.
79. The recommendations in this report are made with respect to the present provisions that govern
military law. While they suggest that those that are relevant should be adopted in the new form of military law
recommended in para. 78, the Board strongly urge that in any event immediate action should be taken to have
a draft code prepared, and that as soon as possible the necessary legislation should be introduced to give effect
to it.


80. Consideration might be given to abolishing the distinction which at present exists between “war
service” and “active service” (see Sec. 4 of the Defence Act and Sec. 189 of the Army Act) which has given
rise to some difficulties during the recent hostilities. Under conditions of modern warfare it is difficult and
is becoming more difficult to ascertain under which category a man is serving when the present definitions are
applied.
81. The Board do not know whether this distinction is relevant in any phase of military administration
other than the trial and punishment of offenders against military law. However, by reason of the application
of the Army Act to the Australian Military Forces in time of war, some types of punishment can be inflicted only
when troops are on active service. The Board recommend that, whether or not the distinction between war
service and active service is abolished for all purposes, any punishments which at present apply only on active
service should be altered to apply on war service.
TRAINING IN MILITARY LAW.
82. The system for the trial of offences against military law is administered by officers of the military
forces, except so far as advice may be tendered by the Judge-Advocate-General, who must be a civilian: (see
A.M.R. & O. 1016 (2)). Although the punishment of offences against military law is one means whereby dis-
cipline is maintained, the trial of a charge must proceed according to the Rules of Procedure and the law
of evidence and if it should deviate from what they prescribe, a conviction will normally be set aside. A
knowledge of the relevant provisions is therefore essential if trials are to be conducted in a proper manner,
and those who sit in judgment should as far as possible possess judicial qualities as well as a capacity for
arriving at correct findings of fact on the evidence. Furthermore, sentences should neither be harsh nor unduly
lenient, and should be determined with due regard to the requirements of discipline in the area in question.
83. As already pointed out a charge against a soldier goes in the first place to the company, etc., com-
mander for investigation. That officer usually holds the rank of captain, but under active service conditions
he may be a lieutenant whose duty it has become to take command. The powers of the company, etc., com-
mander of inflicting punishment are not extensive, but the duty is sometimes cast upon him of reaching a deci-
sion as to whether or not a charge should proceed. A commanding officer usually holds the rank of lieut-
colonel, but owing to the definition of “commanding officer” in A.M.R. & O. 389, he may at times hold a lower
rank.
84. The provisions for the constitution of courts-martial require that in the case of a district court-martial,
it shall consist of not less than three officers, each of whom must have been an officer during not less than two
years. A general court-martial must consist of not less than five officers, each of whom must have been an officer
during not less than three years, and of whom not less than four must be of a rank not below that of captain:
(A.A. Sec. 48). It is further provided by that section that an officer under the rank of captain shall not be a
member of a court-martial for the trial of a field officer. Rules of Procedure 19, 20 and 21 contain further pro-
visions with regard to the appointment of officers as members of courts-martial.
85. The practice has been that, subject to the provisions referred to in the preceding paragraph, a dis-
trict court-martial is normally presided over by an officer not under the rank of a field officer (A.A. Sec. 48
(9)), and the members are normally under the rank of major. A general court-martial usually consists of a
colonel or lieut-colonel as president and three officers of field rank and one captain as members.
86. The Board have adverted to the matters mentioned in the preceding three paragraphs for the pur-
pose of drawing attention to the extent to which the administration of military law is in the hands of officers
of or below the rank of lieut-colonel. Most of them have had little training in military law. Their task
would be less difficult if the provisions to be administered were readily accessible and clear. The Notes on
the Administration of Discipline first issued in May, 1943, were no doubt very helpful, but they are by no
means complete, and reference to the Manual of Military Law and A.M.R. & O. is often necessary.
87. The administration in time of war of a code of military law, a large part of which is brought into
force only on the outbreak of hostilities, by officers who in most cases have had little if any training in its
application must inevitably result in delays and at time injustice. The task of thousands of officers who were
called upon to take part in the trial of offences against military law was in the Board’s opinion rendered much
more difficult by the inadequate training that they received in that branch of their duties, and at times by
their almost complete ignorance of the rules to be applied in particular situations. As has already been pointed
out the difficulties created in this way were increased by the complexity and in some cases almost inaccessibility
of the provisions which they were called upon to apply.
88. The weight of the evidence indicates beyond doubt that a high degree of training in military law is
necessary for regimental officers, and particularly for commanding officers or those who are likely to receive
such an appointment. The Board are satisfied that mistakes have occurred in trials for offences against mili-
tary law, particularly in the case of the exercise of summary jurisdiction by commanding officers, which have
been due to a lack of knowledge of military law.
89. It must be conceded that the rapid expansion of the A.M.F. duirng the war necessitated extensive
training in the use of weapons, in tactics and all other matters immediately connected with the defeat of our
enemies. Nevertheless, as the maintenance of discipline is a most Important factor in attaining the end which
is sought to be accomplished by the use of weapons, defects in the administration of military law must in-
evitably prejudice the morale of the forces by creating a sense of injustice, and engendering a lack of confidence
in leaders. By that means the fighting efficiency of a unit may easily be impaired: (cf. the article “Law in War”
in Vol. 47 Army Quarterly Review, page 230).
90. The Board hesitate to criticise the policy which was adopted, which no doubt had as its object the
training of the military forces as rapidly and efficiently as possible to accomplish the purpose for which they
were enlisted. Nevertheless the evidence compels the Board to say that in their opinion the degree of training
that was generally given to officers in those aspects of military law with which they would be concerned was
not sufficient, and did not ensure that officers were possessed of that knowledge of this subject which is essential
for the satisfactory discharge of their duties. The Board strongly recommend that officers should receive
adequate training in military law and are of the opinion that a course which is no longer than from two to
three hours is entirely inadequate. The evidence shows that much more extensive training than was usually
provided can be given, and that it can be done without any undue interference with training in other sub-
jects: (compare Syllabus—Exhibit 64).


91 The Board also recommend that as far as practicable adequate training in military law, commen-
surate with the responsibilities he will have to undertake, should be a pre-requisite to the appointment of any
officer or to his promotion to a higher rank. In particular it is highly desirable that those officers who are
empowered to inflict punishment should be fully acquainted with the consequences, financial and otherwise, of
the awards they are authorised to make.
92. It may be suggested that the expansion of the Australian Army Legal Corps may have brought
about a tendency to rely on legal assistance being available rather than take action to provide that adequate
training for regimental officers which the Board have already found was lacking. There may perhaps be some
force in this suggestion, particularly as the Board understand that the advice of officers of the A.A.L.C. was
sought in a great many cases. But any tendency to rely upon the help of experts in legal matters to the detri-
ment of the training of regimental officers should be strongly resisted, as the latter exercise what are in effect
judicial functions, and are responsible for decisions in respect of charges.
93. A great deal of what has just been said relates to war time conditions. Although the size of the
forces has been decreased since the cessation of hostilities the necessity for the training of officers in military
law will not disappear. The Board recommend that full advantage be taken of the opportunities that will
arise in the future to ensure that every officer is properly trained in military law.
LAYING OF CHARGES.
94. The rule which determines what persons are entitled to lay charges for alleged offences against mili-
tary law is not entirely clear. Mr. Bowie Wilson, until lately the Judge-Advocate-General, expressed the
opinion that there is no clear limitation on what is said to be the right of any civilian, or of any person sub-
ject to military law, to lay a charge for investigation and hearing under the provisions of military law.
95. In the vast majority of cases no difficulty arises in this respect as a charge is normally laid by a
non-commissioned officer, warrant officer or officer, when an allegation is made that there has been a breach of
military law'. This course will normally be followed even though the allegation is made by a private soldier
against an officer. But the Board have reason to think that the point may become important with regard
to allegations by soldiers or discharged personnel in detention barracks of ill-treatment or some such conduct
on the part of members of the staff.
96. In one case that came to the notice of the Board a soldier under sentence had alleged that he had
been the victim of ill-treatment at the hands of the commandant and two members of the staff of the detention
barrack in which he was confined. His complaint was not made the subject of a charge, although it was
transmitted to higher authority. The only course taken by that authority in the first place was to refer the
matter to the commandant of the barrack for a report. The Board were not surprised to learn that the com-
mandant’s report was, in effect, that there was no foundation for the complaint. After the Board had ex-
pressed their disapproval of this procedure, they subsequently learned that the matter had been enquired into
by an investigating officer. This case is discussed at a later stage in paragraphs 500-SO2. It will be suffi-
cient for the present purpose to say that in the Board’s opinion the S.U.S. was not given a fair opportunity to
present his complaint, or of having it investigated, and that if a charge had been laid by him the matter must
have proceeded in a manner which would at least have brought about a proper investigation of what he
alleged.
97. The Board are of the opinion and recommend that there should be an express provision that any
person subject to military law shall have the right to lay a charge against any other person subject to military
law. The possibility that such a right may be abused has not been overlooked. If a charge is laid entirely
without justification—which is not likely to happen more than occasionally—the offender could be dealt with on
a charge of conduct to the prejudice of good order and military discipline, or under a provision expressly
designed to meet such a situation.
98. Subject to the last recommendation and to the comments next following the Board regard the pre-
sent provisions for the laying and investigation of charges as being satisfactory.
99. Note 1 to Rule of Procedure 3 (M.M.L. page 542) contains the statement “The Army Act and
Rules do not require the investigation to be made by the C. 0., but make him responsible for the decision; A.A.
46 (1).” If this is intended to mean that a C.O. can appoint some other officer to conduct the investigation
(other than by taking a summary of evidence) the Board do not agree with the procedure and recommend that
it should be clearly provided that a C.O. must personally make the investigation in any case where he decides
that it is required.
100. At page 32 of the Notes on Administration of Discipline (as amended in January, 1945) there is
a statement that—“ The time at which a company, etc., commander or C.O. investigating a charge should give
the accused the right to elect trial by court-martial (as mentioned in Clause (a)) is normally at the conclusion
of the hearing of the charge, i.e. of the evidence for the prosecution, when he has made up his mind, if he finds
the accused guilty, to make a summary award against the accused, or an award which involves the forfeiture
of pay exceeding three pounds.” That statement appears to be at variance with a possible construction of the
provisions of A.M.R. & O. 401. The Board consider the procedure as laid down in the statement quoted from
page 42 of the Notes to be desirable, and accordingly recommend that the statement should receive the authority
of a regulation.
CHARGES OF CONDUCT TO THE PREJUDICE OF GOOD ORDER AND
MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
101. Allegations have been made by some witnesses that charges of conduct to the prejudice of good
order and military discipline (A.A. Sec. 40) are frequently laid without justification. The evidence does not
support these allegations. It may of course happen on occasions that a charge of that nature is laid without
justification but the evidence does not suggest that this occurs more often than very occasionally. Furthermore
the Board have not heard of any case in which such a charge was laid without 1 justification and resulted in
injustice. The proviso to the section is a safeguard against abuse and so long as it is enforced no injustice will
he caused.


POWERS OF PUNISHMENT OF COMPANY, ETC., COMMANDERS.
102. As indicated in paragraph 48 above every charge against a warrant officer, non-commissioned officer
or private soldier is first investigated by his company, etc., commander. The procedure adopted by the com-
pany, etc., commander during this investigation is the same as that followed by a commanding officer when
investigating a charge.
103. The company, etc., commander may, in exercise of the powers conferred on him by A.M.R. & O.
394 (4), dismiss the charge, or, is satisfied that a prima facie case has been made out against the accused,
he may either remand the case to the C. 0., or impose one of the minor punishments mentioned in A.M.R. & O. 423.
104. A company, etc., commander should remand a charge for hearing by the C.O. in the following
circumstances; —
(a) Where the charge is one which should not be dealt with except after reference to superior
authority is required by A.M.R. & O. 409 or 437;
(b) Where the charge is one which the C.O. has directed in accordance with A.M.R. & O 394 (4)
should not be disposed of by a company, etc., commander;
(c) Where the charge is one in respect of which it appears that if the accused were found guilty
a greater punishment than the company, etc., commander has power to award should be imposed;
and
(d) Where a soldier entitled to do so elects to be tried by court-martial (A.M.R. & O. 432 (4)).
105. If the company, etc., commander is satisfied that the charge is not one that should be remanded to
the C. 0., and if, after hearing the accused, he is satisfied of the accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt, he
may, unless further limited by his commanding officer under A.M.R. & O. 394 (4), make an award within the
limits prescribed by A.M.R. & O. 423.
106. A company, etc., commander may make an award only if the accused is a N.C.O. below the rank
of sergeant or the appointment of lance-sergeant or is a private soldier.
107. In the case of N.C.Os., his powers are limited to reprimand (but not severe reprimand) and
admonition.
108. In the case of private soldiers, his powers vary according as the forces are or are not in war
service, but are limited to the following classes of punishment:—
(i) Fines for drunkenness;
(ii) Confinement to barracks for a period not exceeding seven days;
(Hi) Deduction under Sec. 138 (4) of the Army Act not exceeding £3 (war service only) ;
(iv) Extra guards and picquets;
(v) Admonition;
(vi) A fine not exceeding 5/- (members of the Citizen Forces not on war service only).
109. Evidence has been given both for and against an enlargement of the powers of a company, etc.,
commander. Probably the most weighty argument in favour of enlarging his power arises from his respon-
sibility for administering discipline in his unit. However, most company, etc., commanders have had very
little training in military law, and probably have not had much opportunity of gaining experience in the
administration of it. Furthermore, any enlargement of the powers of a company, etc., commander would almost
necessarily involve giving every accused a right of appeal by way of re-hearing by the C.O. That in the
Board’s opinion would not be desirable. Under such a system a C.O. might well find it difficult to maintain
effective discipline within his command, and the award of the company, etc., commander might be upheld
without a full enquiry into the merits of the case. It would also be unfortunate if the impression were created
that appeals were dealt with in that manner.
110. The Board do not recommend that the powers of a company, etc., commander should be enlarged,
and they are not in favour of reducing them. It is not desirable that every offence committed in a company,
etc., should be triable only by the C. 0., particularly as some offences are trivial, and it is more convenient and
better for discipline that they should be dealt with by the officer in charge of the unit in which they are
committed.
SUMMARY POWERS OF COMMANDING OFFICERS AND OTHERS.
11l The power of a C.O. to award summary punishment is most important and may be regarded as
the pivot’of the whole system. A substantial number of witnesses have suggested that a commanding officer’s
powers should be enlarged, while a number of others have claimed that the present powers are satisfactory.
The majority recommended that his powers should be enlarged in respect of N.C.Os., and some witnesses
advocated in addition various others powers.
112. Under the present regulations a C.O. has power to award certain summary and minor punishments
in respect of N.C.Os. He may as a summary punishment reduce to the ranks a N.C.O. of the rank of corporal
or bombardier (which includes an acting or lance N.C.0.), and as a minor punishment he may award a severe
reprimand, or an admonition, or a deduction from ordinary pay (under Army Act Sec. 138 (4)) not exceeding
£5. A deduction from ordinary pay may be awarded separately or conjointly with any other punishment but
no other conjoint award can be made.
113 It will be seen that although a corporal can be reduced to the ranks summarily, the C.O. has no
power to'fine him. The power to reduce a corporal or bombardier to the ranks was conferred on C.Os. by
an amendment to the regulations which was made during the war The Board understand that power to fine
a N.C.O. was not conferred, because the opinion was held that a N.C.Os conduct should be blameless, and
that if his offence merits a fine he should in any event be reduced to the ranks.


114. It may be pointed out that officers and wairant officers may be fined summarily (A.A. Sec. 47 (2)
(aa)) and that private soldiers may be fined summarily. Furthermore, a N.C.O. may be fined by a court-martial
(A.A. Sec. 44 (ramm)). The imposition of a fine does not of itself effect reduction to the ranks; but an award
of penal servitude, imprisonment, detention or field punishment has that result (A.A. Sec. 183 (4) ).
115. The Board admit the force of the view that a N.C.O’s conduct should be beyond question. Never-
theless in their opinion there are cases, and particularly on active service, where reduction to the ranks is too
severe a penalty, but a fine would be adequate. Under his present powers a C.O. who does not wish to
deprive a corporal of his stripes would probably administer only a reprimand or a severe reprimand. In
some cases such a punishment might be inadequate for the gravity of the offence. A feeling of dissatisfaction
among other ranks might quite easily be created, if private soldiers are fined, and a corporal receives only a
reprimand, when they were all guilty of the same conduct on the one occasion. The Board recommend that
C.Os. have power to fine a corporal or bombardier up to £5.
116. N.C.Os. holding the rank of staff-sergeant or sergeant are, in the Board’s opinion, in an entirely
different category from other N.C.Os. They are very often potential officers, and in any event their duties in a
unit are of great importance. Under the present regulations a C.O. has no power, except when not on war
service, to fine or reduce in rank any staff-sergeant or sergeant. He may award a minor punishment but if
that is considered to be inadequate he must remand the accused for trial by court-martial. He has no power
to award a summary punishment except when not on war service (see A.M.R. & O. 418 (2) (c) (d) (e)
and (f) ).
117. In the Board’s opinion it is desirable that there should be additional power to deal summarily
with staff-sergeants and sergeants on war service, but they consider that it should be conferred upon an authority
superior to a C.O. The extension of the powers of a C.O. to enable him to deal summarily with a staff-sergeant
or sergeant is not recommended for the reason that these ranks approximate more closely to those of the
warrant officers than to the subordinate N.C.Os. In the Board’s opinion, the power to deal with them should
correspond as far as possible with the power to deal summarily with warrant officers. The Board’s recom-
mendation is that a G.0.C., etc. (as hereinafter defined) should have power to deal summarily with staff-
sergeants and sergeants in accordance with the following provisions:—
(a) A charge against a staff-sergeant or sergeant shall in the first place be investigated in the same
way as is now provided in respect of warrant officers.
(b) If the C.O. does not dismiss the charge or inflict a minor punishment he shall send it on to the
G.0.C., etc., with a recommendation either that the case be dealt with summarily, or that appli-
cation be made for a court-martial, at the same time forwarding a summary of evidence.
(c) The G.0.C., etc., ma)' —
(i) with or without hearing evidence dismiss the charge;
(ii) make application for trial by or (if authorized to do so) convene a court-martial;
(iii) after hearing the evidence or, if the accused consents, after reading the summary of evidence,
deal summarily with the case. The accused must be given a copy of the summary of evidence
(compare R.P. 9).
(d) The G.0.C., etc., when dealing summarily with a charge shall have power to impose the following
punishments :
(i) Severe reprimand;
(ii) Reprimand;
(iii) Fine not exceeding £10;
(iv) Deduction from pay as provided for in Army Act Sec. 138 (4);
(v) Reduction to the ranks or to a lower grade (Compare A.M.R. & O. 345 (1) (b) (iv));
(vi) Forfeiture of seniority of rank
Deduction from pay may be made conjointly with any other award, but no other conjoint
award can be made.
(e) If the G.0.C., etc., intends to award a punishment other than a fine not exceeding £S, severe repri-
mand, reprimand or deduction from pay not exceeding £5, he must give the accused the opportunity
of electing trial by court-martial: (compare the provisions of Army Act Sec. 47 (3)) irrespective
of whether or not the accused has consented to be dealt with on the written evidence.
(f) Provision should be made for the revision by superior military authority of any summary punish-
ments imposed under this power: (compare R.P. 10).
(g) The expression “G.0.C., etc.” in this recommendation means;—
“Any officer authorized to deal summarily with male officers below the rank of lieutenant-colonel
and warrant officers and any officer not below the rank of colonel authorized bv the Adintam
General for the purpose.” ’
• • j ll . 8 ’ . , Th l recomm . endatlon in the last paragraph is made to give effect to the view already stated that
it is desirable that certain powers should be vested in brigade commanders (see paragraph 68). After consider-
able discussion and inquiry it was found that no satisfactory scheme could be evolved under which the neres
sary powers could be vested solely in officers of the rank of brigadier. No difficulty would arise in respect
of certam arms, but the organisation of some of the services and other formations is such that it is no*- practic
°n!ra,t°d Tth tVpow™' m any ° th ' r " ay and achieve compara>lve of rank among those to be
S ° me s ugg estio ns that were made for enlarging the powers of a C.O. need not be mentioned
paragraphs' advanCed ’ 3nd the Board ’ s recommendation in respect of each, are set out in the following’
_ 120. Of the witnesses who recommended enlarging the powers of a C. 0., two suggested that he should
be given authority to impose detention for more than 28 days. The reasons on which this proposal was based
til 11 S “f u k Under present conditions it would in the Board’s opinion be undesirable that COs
generally should be empowered to award more than that period of detention. It is perhaps not realized in
some quarters how severe a sentence of 28 days detention may be. pernaps not realized in


121. One of the witnesses proposed that a C.O. should have power to fine up to £lO and that this power
should be conferred along with authority to impose detention of up to 56 days. The Board consider that it
would be most undesirable that a C.O’s power to fine should be increased, and do not recommend the adoption
of this suggestion for substantially the same reasons as those upon which they have rejected the proposal to
increase the power to award detention.
122. A suggestion was received from one witness that a lance-corporal should be placed on the same basis
as a private soldier. The Board can see no good reason for altering the situation in which he is at present
and do not support this recommendation.
123. Another suggestion was that a C.O. should have power to award 7 days’ reduced diet. The Board
reject this recommendation as being impracticable, and also as being a method of punishment for offences other
than breaches of detention barrack regulations which does not meet with their approval.
124. A further suggestion was made that a C.O. should be given some measure of jurisdiction over
“junior officers,” by which term presumably is to be understood lieutenants. The Board do not recommend
that such a power should be conferred upon a commanding officer. It has already been recommended that
power to deal summarily with staff-sergeants and sergeants should be vested in an authority of higher rank
than a C.O. The reasons for that recommendation are even stronger in respect of junior officers.
125. It was also suggested that an award of extra fatigues should be added to the list of minor punish-
ments. The evidence is not in the Board’s opinion sufficiently strong to justify a recommendation to this
effect. In connection with the subject of minor punishment it may be suggested that the present power to
award extra guards and picquets as a punishment is degrading an honourable duty.
126. The Board’s attention was directed to the present procedure for scrutinizing awards made by C.Os.,
and it was suggested that a more adequate check on these awards is desirable. In order to bring about this
result it would be necessary for superior authority to have more information concerning awards than is at
present available. The Form 82069 does not contain any details that enable superior authority to pass
judgment on the justice of an award, except so far as regards what may be called jurisdictional matters. As
a means of furnishing such information it was suggested that notes should be taken of the evidence on which
a C.O. acts when imposing a summary award. In the Board’s opinion these suggestions are impracticable, at
least when on war service, so long as the present system is in substance retained.
127. As a means of ensuring that orderly rooms are conducted in accordance with the regulations the
suggestion was made that legal officers should be given jurisdiction to conduct orderly rooms. That is not
recommended. In the Board’s opinion, it would have a very bad effect on the administration of discipline by
the C. 0., and the impression might be formed in the unit that he was not capable of conducting an orderly room
himself. The assistance of a legal officer would no doubt be welcomed by most C.Os., but as under the pre-
sent organisation if has not been possible to provide one to advise each C.O. even assistance of this nature
cannot be recommended.
128. The Board do not support a recommendation that an accused person should be entitled to plead
when appearing before his C.O. The adoption of such a proposal might work injustice in some cases, and in
others difficulties would be created because the C.O. would not necessarily have the power to deal with the
case, and in that event some other tribunal would have to be specially constituted to impose punishment.
129. The Board recommend the adoption of a suggestion that an accused should sign a form if he
elected to be tried summarily by his C.O. The form should include a statement that the accused has been
fully informed of his rights, and should be forwarded duly completed with the Offence Report Form 8.2069.
130. For the reasons stated in paragraphs 132-142, the Board’s view is that a C.O. should have power
to impose a fine with field punishment, but that forfeiture of pay as a punishment should be abolished .
131. The Board therefore recommend that a C.O’s powers of summary punishment in respect of private
soldiers on war service should be: —
(a) Detention not exceeding 28 days;
(b) Field punishment not exceeding 28 days;
(c) Fine not exceeding £S ;
(d) Deduction as provided in Army Act Sec. 138 (4) not exceeding £5;
That a fine and deduction may be awarded conjointly and either or both may be awarded with any
other summary punishment.
FORFEITURE OF PAY AS A PUNISHMENT.
132. It will be observed that the Board do not recommend the continuance of a C.O’s power to award
forfeiture of pay as a summary punishment.
133. Under proviso (6) to Sec. 44 of the Army Act a court-martial may in respect of an offence com-
mitted by a soldier on active service, order that he forfeit all ordinary pay for a period commencing on the day
of the sentence and not exceeding three months.
134. Under his present powers a C.O. in the case of a private soldier may award a fine of £5 together
with forfeiture of pay for 28 days which together make a total financial award of some il4.
135. There is, however, no evidence to suggest that it has been the practice for a court-martial or a
C.O. to award a forfeiture of pay as a punishment not connected with any other punishment.
136. It is understood that one of the principal objects of giving a C.O. the power to award forfeiture
of pay was to meet the circumstances which may arise following an award of field punishment. According
to Note 9 to Sec. 46 of the Army Act (M.M.L., page 440) when it is desired to order forfeiture of pay for a
period in excess of the field punishment awarded, for example, 10 days field punishment and an additional
forfeiture of 14 days ordinary pay, it is necessary to award the offender 10 days field punishment with for-
feiture of 24 days pay, because both awards take effect on the same day. Forfeiture of pay during a period
of field punishment is also governed by other provisions.


137. Section 119 of the Defence Act provides that:—
“No member of the Defence Force shall, except as prescribed, receive any pay 01
while under any charge of which he is afterwards convicted by any Court or by his Commanding
Officer, or while under sentence of penal servitude, imprisonment, detention or held punishment by
any Court or by his commanding officer, or during absence from duty without leave.
138. A.M.R. &O. 490 (1) (g) states in effect that the pay or allowances of a soldier shall not be stopped
under Sec 119 of the Defence Act in respect of any day during which or part of which a soldier undergoing
held punishment is not in custody, unless he has been ordered to forfeit pay for that day under Sec. 44 or
Sec. 46 of the Army Act.
139. A.M.R. &O. 418 (6) provides that:— . . . .
“Field punishment and forfeiture of ordinary pay may be awarded separately or conjointly, but
a conjoint award should not be made unless it is intended that the period of forfeiture of pay shall
extend beyond the period of held punishment, or that pay shall be forfeited for days during the
period of held punishment during which the soldier is not in custody.”
140 Under the various circumstances in which held punishment may be served, when a unit is on
the move or when it is halted, (see paragraph 248 post) there may be some difficulty in determining whether
a soldier is or is not “in custody” within the meaning of A.M.R. &O. 418 (6). It would appear that fre-
quently a deduction of pay for the term of held punishment awarded is made in the records as soon as the
award is seen in Routine Orders Part 11. At times it turns out that this entry does not accord with the actual
forfeitures because for the whole or part of the term imposed the soldier has not been In custody. The
necessary adjustment should then be made in the records, but that may be overlooked.
141. The suggestion that a C.O. should be deprived of the power to award forfeiture of pay as a
summary punishment was not specifically raised at the public sittings, although a number of witnesses recom-
mended that the C.O’s powers should not be reduced. After the public sittings had been concluded the Board
considered the matter in all its aspects and they are unable to find any good reason why the power should
be retained as a form of punishment, if the recommendation that a fine may be imposed in addition to field
punishment as well as in addition to detention is adopted.
142. As a general principle the Board consider that forfeiture of pay in respect of any day on which
a soldier performs ordinary duty is not just or desirable, and that a financial penalty for any offence should
take the form of a fine. The result sought to be achieved by Sec. 119 of the Defence Act and A.M.R. & O.
418 (6) can be secured quite simply by a provision to that effect in the Act or Regulations. If that were
done there would be no reason for the existence of the power to award forfeiture of pay as a penalty.
143. The Board therefore recommend that forfeiture of pay as a punishment be abolished.
SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE.
144. A C.O. investigating a charge has power to remand the accused and direct a summary of evidence
to be taken. His power to do so arises from R.P.4 (B), the effect of which may be stated as being that at the con-
clusion of the hearing of a charge, if the C.O. is of opinion that the charge ought to be proceeded with, he shall,
without unnecessary delay do one of three things including:—
“(m) adjourn the case for the purpose of having the evidence reduced to writing.”
145. By R.P.4 (C) the evidence is to be taken down in writing in the presence of the accused before the
C.O. or such officer as he directs. The usual practice is for some other officer to be directed to act when the
evidence is taken down.
146. R.P.4 (E) provides that after all the evidence against the accused has been given the accused will
be asked the question and given the warning therein mentioned, and also that any statement or evidence of the
accused will be taken down but he will not be cross-examined upon it.
147. It is also provided by R.P.4 (E) that:—
“If the accused is remanded for trial by court-martial no evidence will be admitted at his trial of
any statement which he may have made, or evidence which he may have given, at the taking of the
summary of evidence before such caution was addressed to him.”
148. At page 26 of the Notes on the Administration of Discipline there is a statement that :
“(ii) If at any stage of hearing the evidence for the prosecution or after completion of that evidence,
a C.O. investigating a charge considers:—
(a) that the charge can be more conveniently considered by him if the evidence is reduced to
writing he should remand the accused and direct a summary of evidence to be
taken.”
149. The Board have been unable to obtain any authority for the statement just quoted. If the pro-
cedure is used in this way the result may be that a C.O. will remand an accused for a summary of evidence
before he has determined that there is a priraa facie case against him. If that is done the accused will be called
upon when the summary is taken to elect whether or not to make a statement, which will be at a time when the
question whether there is a prima facie case has not been considered. That would be contrary to the general
rule that an accused shall not be asked to say anything until a prima facie case has been made out against him.
150. The Board consider that the practice laid down on page 26 of the Notes on Administration of
Discipline is convenient and desirable and should receive recognition by regulation or order. There may be
cases, particularly of a serious or complicated nature, in which it would be most convenient to have the evi-
dence reduced to writing almost immediately after the charge has been placed before the C.O.


151. It is important however to ensure that the accused will not suffer injustice by being called upon
to make a statement before the C.O. has considered the question whether there is a prima facie case against
him. An adequate safeguard would be a rule requiring a C. 0., when he remands an accused for a summary
of evidence, to consider whether at that stage a prima facie case has been made out. If he decides that it has
been made out he will sign a certificate to that effect, which will be placed before the officer taking the sum-
mary of evidence. If no certificate is produced to that officer, he will not be entitled to call upon the accused
under R.P.4 (E), and his only duty will be to take the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution with any
cross-examination by the accused, and send the result back to the C.O.
152. In a case where a C.O. proceeds with the hearing after a summary of evidence has been taken
under the circumstances last mentioned he will, either Immediately, or after further evidence has been given,
consider whether a prima facie case has been made out. When he has so decided, but not before, he will call
upon the accused as directed in R.P.4 (E).
153. A suggestion was made by some witnesses that if he so desires an accused should have legal
representation at the taking of a summary of evidence. Other witnesses opposed this suggestion on the ground
that the provision of legal representation at that stage is unnecessary, and that in any event it would be
impracticable to supply it.
154. In most cases there is no necessity for an accused to have legal representation at the taking of a
summary of evidence as there is no likelihood of his suffering injustice if he is not so represented. Neverthe-
less an accused person may at times be prejudiced if he does not have the benefit of advice from a legal
officer, or some other officer, either before the taking of the summary or while it is being taken.
155. The practical solution the Board recommend is that it be provided by regulation that when a
C.O. remands an accused for the taking of a summary of evidence
(a) The C.O. must consider and determine whether the circumstances of the case are such that
injustice might result to the accused if he does not have an opportunity of obtaining legal
advice.
(b) If in the C.O’s. opinion the case is of that nature he shall ask the accused if he wishes to
have advice.
(c) If the accused requests that advice be made available the C.O. shall as as practicable
arrange that a legal officer or, in his absence a regimental officer, is made available to advise
the accused.
156. The Board are satisfied that in many cases a summary of evidence has not been properly taken
because the officer taking it did not possess an adequate knowledge of the nature and purpose of the summary
and of the rules of evidence. The Board’s attention has been directed to some cases in which a summary of
evidence taken by an officer was so inadequate that a second summary was ordered to be taken by another
officer. It is highly desirable that steps be taken to ensure that only experienced or properly instructed offi-
cers are allotted for this duty.
THE CONVENING AND COMPOSITION OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
157. A suggestion was made that provision should be made to establish standing courts-martial to
take the place of the present practice under which a court-martial is convened to try each individual case
or a number of specified cases. It was also suggested that in each formation a certain number of officers
should be detailed from time to time for court-martial duty for a specified period.
158. The Board do not recommend the adoption of either of these proposals. In their opinion it is
highly desirable that courts-martial should preserve a due balance between legal knowledge and regimental
experience. The adoption of the proposal for standing courts-martial might easily disturb this balance, and
result in too legalistic an approach to the hearing of the cases. The suggestion to detail a number of officers
for court-martial duty is open to the objection that a court-martial constituted in this way would be likely to
comprise either officers whose services were least valued in a unit, or officers out of touch with regimental
experience.
159 Some suggestions were made for altering the provisions at present governing the qualifications
of members of courts-martial. The Board see no reason to recommend any alteration in the present system.
A member of any court-martial must have been an officer for at least two years, and this Is a safeguard
against inexperience. The suggestion that no officer under a certain age, for example 25 years, should be
eligible to sit on a court-martial, if adopted, would inevitably decrease to a serious extent the number of
officers available for this duty, and under modern conditions would in the Board’s opinion bring about no
compensating benefits.
160 Some evidence was given with regard to the appointment of what are usually called permanent
presidents of courts-martial. Although in fact such an appointment is authorized, the practice has been for
formation, etc., commanders to appoint the same officer as the president of each court-martial convened during
a certain period, and not to appoint an officer as “permanent president.
161 It is to be said in favour of this system that a permanent president usually possesses considerable
experience and a good knowledge of military law. That consideration was advanced by some witnesses as a
strong reason in favour of the system, although others suggested that a permanent president is likely to be-
come, and at times has become, too favourable to the prosecution.
162 The Board recommend the continuance of the present practice. On the evidence the system has
worked well and it would be undesirable to interfere with it. Any tendency on the part of a president to be-
come too favourable to the prosecution will be counteracted by the other members of the court so long as their
experience and standing are such that they are not likely to be improperly influenced by the president’s
opinion.


FIELD GENERAL COURTS-MARTIAL.
163. A field general court-martial may be convened under the circumstances and in accordance with
the provisions appearing in Secs. 48 and 49 (10) of the Army Act, and its proceedings are governed by Rules
of Procedure 105-122. Mr. Bowie Wilson, the former Judge-Advocate-General, expressed his view as being
that no officer can convene a field general court-martial without a delegation from the Governor-General
because the provisions of Secs. 86 and 87 of the Defence Act override Sec. 49 of the Army Act in this regard.
164. The latest delegation from the Governor-General in relation to field general courts-martial was
made on 11th January, 1946, and published in the Gazette on 17th January, 1946. The delegation enables
every officer in command of any detachment or portion of troops belonging to the Military Forces on war ser-
vice and every commanding officer of a corps or portion of a corps of the Military Forces and every officer
in immediate command of a body of the Military Forces on war service to convene field general courts-
martial, but only if, in the opinion of the officer convening the court, it is not practicable that the offence be
tried by an ordinary court-martial. A field general court-martial must consist of two if the convening officer
is of opinion that three officers are not available, having regard to the public service.
165. In comparison with other forms of court-martial, the procedure of a field general court-martial
is more speedy, it has more latitude and it is not subject to the limitations on sentence that exist in the case
of a district court-martial. As far as the Board can ascertain, not many field general courts-martial were
convened in the Australian Army, and very little evidence has been given regarding this kind of court-
martial. The view of Mr. Bowie Wilson was that the field general court-martial was meant to be used only
in very exceptional circumstances, and he told the Board that he had quashed the finding of one held in the
Middle East because it was quite clear that the officer who convened it had power to convene a district court-
martial. Another witness, Lieut-Col. Fry, expressed the view that a field general court-martial should be re-
sorted to “only in an emergency, when it is absolutely essential.”
166. The Board understand that from 1940 to 1945 the use of the district court-martial practically
ceased in the British Army, and field general courts-martial were extensively used in the United Kingdom.
167. The record of the proceedings at a field general court-martial need not be nearly as detailed as
that required in other cases. The evidence of the witnesses need not be taken in full, as it is sufficient if the
judge-advocate, or if there is none, the president, takes down or causes to be taken down, a short summary of
the evidence of all the witnesses at the trial. But even that may be dispensed with if it appears to the con-
vening officer that military exigencies or other circumstances prevent compliance with the direction for a
summary to be taken: (see R.P. 114(B) ).
168. The Board were informed that in the Middle East an order was issued that the records of a
field general court-martial should be kept in accordance with the requirements for other courts-martial. It
would appear that there was no legal authority for that order.
169. So long as it is expressly provided that a field general court-martial cannot be convened except
by an officer with a delegation from the Governor-General authorizing him to do so, and provided that the
classes of officers to whom such delegations can be made are defined in the enactment enabling such delega-
tions, there would appear to be no danger of error in the use of this form of trial. It may well be that one
reason for the mistakes that were committed in the earlier part of the war Mr. Bowie Wilson said “at
that time field general courts-martial were burying their errors” was inadequate knowledge of military
law.
170. If at any time it should happen that injustice is likely to be caused by the use of an abbreviated
form of recording the evidence, or by no summary of it being taken, steps should be taken to prevent the
possibility by requiring that the forms applicable to other courts-martial shall be used at a field general court-
martial, but that, in any case where it appears to the convening officer that military exigencies prevent com-
pliance with that rule, he may authorize such departure from the forms as may be necessary under the
circumstances.
DELAYS IN TRIALS.
171. The evidence establishes beyond question that in the early stages of the war, in Australia and
overseas, serious delays occurred, both in bringing accused persons to trial, and in the’ promulgation of
sentences.
172. It appears that as the war progressed delays were reduced to a reasonable minimum. This was
undoubtedly brought about largely as a result of the increasing efficiency and experience of officers perform-
ing court-martial duty, the increase in the number of legal officers, and later of the establishment and exnanslnn
of the Australian Army Legal Corps. **
173. The Board see no reason to think that the present system should not function satisfactorily so
long as an adequate number of officers is available to deal with the cases, and that those who are directed to
act are properly trained in and have the \equisite knowledge of military law.
JUDGE ADVOCATES.
174. A judge-advocate must be appointed to every general court-martial, and one may be annointed
to a district court-martial. The Board assume that the practice has been to appoint a judge-advocate tn *
district court-martial where there is reason to think that questions of law may arise for determination.
175. Under the present system each judge-advocate is usually an officer of the Australian Army Legal
Corps. The system does not provide for the appointment of permanent judge-advocates and in practice offi
cers who act at times as judge-advocates on other occasions act as prosecuting or defending officers
t \ 7 , 6 -. Board do not recommend that any substantial change should be made in the present system
It would, in the Board s opinion, not be desirable to appoint permanent judge-advocates As anv
undertaking such an appointment would almost certainly be deprived of the onnortunitv of ♦ * •
r P tin” services ' “ might be difficuit ,o p " suad ' -wrt


177. A suggestion was made by some witnesses that the judge-advocate should be present while a
court-martial is considering its finding. Under the present practice the judge-advocate retires with the court
while the sentence is being considered, but is not entitled to be present during the consideration of the finding.
178. The Board are opposed to and do not recommend any alteration in the present practice. A
judge-advocate in the course of a trial may have to take some part in the examination of witnesses. Whether
he has done so or not, his presence with the members of the court-martial during the consideration of the
finding might very easily create the appearance of injustice. If a court-martial desires advice upon a point
of law after the court has closed for consideration of finding there is power to re-open the court and obtain
a ruling from the judge-advocate. Under that procedure any statement by the judge-advocate regarding the
law is made in the presence of the prosecuting officer, the accused and the defending officer.
179. The Board are not in favour of discontinuing the present practice under which a judge-advo-
cate is present while the court-martial is considering the sentence, provided the Board’s recommendation that
the finding of a court-martial should be announced in open court is adopted. Some difficulties of a technical
nature may be encountered while consideration is being given to the question of the sentence, and it is desir-
able that legal advice should be available. It would not be desirable for advice that may be desired in the
course of a discussion on sentence to be given in open Court. The only practicable course appears to be the
present practice.
180. The suggestion that the same officer should not act as prosecuting and defending officer on the
same day is approved in principle. It appears that the practice generally has been to avoid this situation,
although at times, perhaps due to an adjournment overnight, it has not been possible to avoid the situation.
PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
181. Very little was suggested by way of amendment to the present provisions governing the procedure
and evidence of courts-martial. Subject to the recommendations made as to a few matters, it may be said
that the rules regulating the procedure of courts-martial are satisfactory. The rules of evidence are those
which apply in the civil courts in England: (A.A. Sec. 128) and they are to be used both in peace and war:
(cf. Defence Act Sec. 88).
182. If the recommendation for one code of military law is adopted, (see paragraph 78) provision
would have to be made in it for the procedure and rules of evidence to be applied by courts-martial and per-
sons exercising jurisdiction under military law. The Board recommend that, subject to the alterations they
have proposed, the present provisions of Sec. 88 of the Defence Act should continue to apply in respect of all
courts-martial, except those for the trial of civil offences in Australia or a Territory, in which cases the rules
of evidence should be those applicable under the law of the State in which the offence is alleged to have been
committed; (cf. Judiciary Act, Sec. 79).
183. As a matter of convenience it was suggested that the convening authority should have power to
subpoena witnesses. The Board recommend that this proposal be adopted. At present a court-martial or the
members may summon witnesses to give evidence and produce documents; (Defence Act Sec. 94). Con-
sequently, until the court is constituted a witness cannot be summoned. The Board have reason to think that
there are cases where time would be saved and inconvenience would be obviated if the convening authority
had power to summon witnesses. This is the present English practice: (R.P. 78). The Australian practice is
no doubt based on a construction of Sec. 94 of the Defence Act.
184. The Board approve in principle the suggestion that as far as practicable no man should be
tried in the absence of his conduct sheet, by which is to be understood that the conduct sheet should be avail-
able for inspection by the court-martial if he is found guilty. It would appear that at times, in order to save
long delays, a man has been tried, found guilty, and sentenced in the absence of his conduct sheet, which when
later produced showed that he had more convictions than were known at the time of the trial. The adoption
of the policy of trying men in their units or formations would to a large extent prevent happenings of this
nature: (see paragraphs 301-302).
185. One witness suggested that the form used for court-martial proceedings should be further simpli-
fied. The form at present in use (Exhibit 32C) was introduced in March 1944, when the previous form was
revised. That and the original form were very much longer. A comparison of Exhibit 32C with the form
in use in the British Army (Exhibit 39) shows that a few more specific matters have been included in the
Australian form, but that these are only additional safeguards to ensure that the correct procedure is followed.
186. The Board regard the present form (Exhibit 32C) as entirely satisfactory, and do not recom-
mend that it be altered in any way. This statement is directed to the contents of the form, and not to the
manner in which they are set out. Perhaps with some advantage greater space might be used, which should
now be possible.
187. Some criticism was levelled by certain witnesses at the procedure adopted by courts-martial con-
vened and held in a certain L of C Area, under which large numbers of cases were usually disposed of in
one day. The Board have no reason to think that the procedure adopted resulted in injustice. If however,
it should appear at any time that the speed with which cases are disposed of by court-martial is creating the
impression that justice has not been done, prompt action should be taken to ensure that the cases are not
disposed of so rapidly.
188. The procedure in accordance with which the finding and sentence of a court-martial are to be
arrived at is laid down in R.P. 69, in conjunction with A.A. Sec. S 3. The Board see no reason to recom-
mend any alteration of the present system. The suggestion has been made by one or two witnesses that junior
officers who are members of courts-martial might be influenced in their decisions by considerations to which
they should pay no attention. It scarcely needs saying that it would be most improper for any senior officer
to attempt to influence a junior officer who is a member of a court-martial. If in fact any junior officer does
allow improper considerations to interfere with the discharge of his duty as a member of a court-martial, the
Board cannot offer any suggestion which would overcome such difficulty, except to emphasize that further
training in military law would most likely reduce the possibility of such regrettable occurrences.
189. A good deal of evidence was given with regard to the suggestion that both the finding and the
sentence of a court-martial should be pronounced in open court.


190. The present practice is that the finding of the court in respect of any charge of which the ac-
cused is found guilty is not announced, and that after the court-martial has determined the sentence it is not
communicated to the accused.
191. The Board regard the evidence in favour of the proposal that both the finding and the sentence
should be pronounced in open court as being very strong and indeed as overwhelming.
192. This matter has been considered by the “Darling” Committee (paragraphs 81-83), the “Oliver”
Committee (paragraph 30), and the “O’Bryan” Committee (paragraph 27 (d) ). A recommendation that the
finding and sentence of a court-martial be communicated to the accused in writing in a sealed envelope was
adopted in 1943, but was later abandoned. It would appear that one of the reasons, if not the principal one,
for the alteration of the procedure was that it was considered that to inform the accused of his sentence might
create a dangerous situation as he might attempt to escape. Indeed it is understood that some attempts at
escape were probably made as a result of knowledge of a sentence obtained in this way: (see Army Depart-
ment file 72/1/128).
193. The Board recommend that the finding of a court-martial on any charge should be announced in
open court; and that the sentence determined by the court-martial should also be announced in open court with
an intimation to the accused that the finding and sentence are subject to confirmation, but that the sentence
cannot be increased. The adoption of this procedure would offer in many cases a better opportunity for an
address by the defending officer on the question of penalty than exists under the present practice.
194. The adoption of the procedure recommended would necessitate alterations in the oaths of the
president and members of a court-martial, of any officers under instruction, and of the judge-advocate: (see
M.M.L. page 694).
REVIEW OF FINDINGS AND SENTENCES.
195. The finding and sentence of a court-martial are transmitted to the convening authority for con-
sideration and he has various powers with regard thereto. The finding and sentence are very often confirmed,
but in some cases, although the finding is confirmed, the punishment is mitigated or commuted, or the whole
or part of it is remitted. The power to suspend a sentence and the practice in respect thereto are discussed
in paragraphs 256-265.
196. After confirmation the finding and sentence are promulgated to the accused.
197. Within 14 days after confirmation of a finding and sentence, or of the acquittal of the accused,
as the case may be, the proceedings are to be forwarded through the proper channels to the Military Board
or, where a C-in-C has been appointed, to him, unless there is a Deputy Judge-Advocate-General attached
to the body of the Military Forces with which the accused is serving at the time of confirmation. In the last
mentioned case the proceedings, after consideration by the Deputy Judge-Advocate-General, are forwarded
with his report to the Military Board or the C-in-C: (see A.M.R. & O. 576 (2) (ii) and 585 (2) ). The Board
understand that the practice has been for the proceedings to be forwarded direct from the confirming authority
to Army Headquarters for the Judge-Advocate-General and the Board approve this procedure.
198. Prior to confirmation the confirming authority receives the advice of the legal officer attached to
his formation. Subsequently the proceedings, after being considered by the Judge-Advocate-General or one
of his staff, are dealt with by superior authority, who is usually the Deputy Adjutant-General (Personal
Services).
199. The system just described provides in effect two examinations of the finding and sentence of a
court-martial, namely, one by the confirming authority on the advice of his legal officer; the other by a re-
presentative of the Military Board or C-in-C on the advice of the Judge-Advocate-General. The Board con-
sider that the supervision which is so required is adequate as a safeguard against possible errors in the
proceedings of courts-martial, or in their findings or sentences. It also serves as a means of reviewing the
decisions of confirming authorities.
200. In paragraphs 213 to 220 will be found a recommendation of the Board that the review of the
decisions of confirming authorities should be carried out by the Director of Legal Services or his officers
subject to the provisions therein contained. The adoption of that proposal would in the Board’s opinion
provide a safeguard equally as satisfactory as that existing at the present time, and would also effect the
improvements in respect of petitions and appeals that are indicated in those paragraphs.
201 A suggestion was made that the review of findings and sentences of courts-martial should be de-
centralized down to Corps and L of C Areas. There seems to be no very strong reason to support this pro-
posal, and if it were adopted it might result in considerable disparity of sentences. The present system
appears to be satisfactory and to be calculated to work well, provided there are no undue delays in its
operation. If at any time it is found that delay is being occasioned as a result of the present svstem the
situation might be met by the appointment of a Deputy Judge-Advocate-General. In the Board’s opinion
centralization in this regard has the advantages of ensuring as far as possible uniformity of and
of providing an opportunity to obtain a complete view of the discipline of the Army generally.
♦ k 2 a 2 'u A ?i° rdin V t ° f th n e Y idence of Mr Bowie Wilson the practice has been for court-martial proceedings
to be dealt with in the following manner. During the latter years of the War the TAG personally re id
all the proceedings that related to officers, or in which a sentence of two years of more hid^b™imposed
and also all other cases where a member of his staff had read the proceedings and recommended that a letter
of advice should be written All proceedings not read personally by the J.A.G. were read and considered
by one or more members of his staff. J I,u consiQ erea
203. The Deputy Adjutant-General (Personal Services) has been the a.ittmniv „ .
(or at HQ AMF or at LHQ) charged with the duty of review and the fnd Y Head( * uarters
martial which have been quashed have been disposed of largely’ if not entirelvV hfm of courts-
been for the J.A.G. to discuss with that officer any case which in his oninffin LnM u Pr3Ct f haS
(Pers^^et^rtn
!t has been proved that the* 00.^ A.1 .T (mII.)' b “'


PETITIONS AGAINST FINDINGS AND SENTENCES.
205. The right to petition is given to any person convicted by court-martial who feels himself ag-
grieved by the finding or sentence: (A.M.R. &O. 589). Such a petition may be forwarded to the confirming
authority, or if the finding and sentence have been confirmed, to any authority empowered under A.M.R. & O.
584 to quash the finding and sentence. The following provisions of that regulation indicate what authorities
have power to quash
“(7) The power of quashing under this regulation any finding or sentence confirmed in the
Commonwealth may be exercised by .
(a) the Governor-General; or
(b) the Adjutant-General; or
(ba) the Deputy Adjutant-General (Personal Services); or
(c) an officer in chief command of a body of the Military Forces on war service in the
Commonwealth:
Provided that the power shall not be exercised by an officer inferior to the authority
by whom confirmation was effected without the consent of that authority or of a superior
authority.
(8) The power of quashing under this regulation any finding or sentence confirmed out of the
Commonwealth may be exercised by:—
(a) the Governor-General; or
(aa) the Adjutant-General; or
(b) an officer in chief command of a body of the Military Forces out of the Commonwealth:
Provided that the power shall not be exercised by an officer inferior to the authority
by whom confirmation was effected without the consent of that authority or of a superior
authority.”
206. AM.R. & O. 589 (2) provides that a petition shall be referred for report and advice to the
J.A.G. or a D.J.A.G. before consideration by the appropriate authority.
207. Although a convicted person is given the right to petition the authority having power to quash a
finding or sentence, it apparently has usually been the case that a petition is not addressed to any particular
quashing authority. There is no evidence specifically to this effect, but the conclusion would appear to be
amply justified by what has come out during the course of the inquiry. On the other hand there has been
nothing to suggest that any petition addressed specifically to a quashing authority has not been dealt with by that
authority.
208. The practice that has been followed in respect of any petition not addressed to a particular
quashing authority has been that, after the J.A.G. has considered the case, he refers it to the Deputy Adjutant-
General (Personal Services) who then makes a decision on the petition.
209. The evidence shows that where the J.A.G. is of opinion that a court-martial is in order the
Deputy Adjutant-General (Personal Services) automatically accepts his advice. It appears that no intima-
tion of a decision not to interfere with the finding or sentence is given to the confirming authority.
210. As a result of the operation of the provisions of the regulations mentioned, and of the practice,
the J.A.G. is responsible for giving advice both in respect of courts-martial that have been confirmed, and also
in respect of petitions. It may be that the particular officer who considers a court-martial after it has been
confirmed is not the officer who considers the case when a petition has been lodged, but responsibility to advise
on both occasions rests on the J.A.G.
211. In the Board’s opinion it is most desirable that petitions should, as far as possible, be dealt with
by an authority who has no responsibility with respect to the consideration which is to be given to courts-
martial immediately after confirmation, and is not concerned with such reviews. It may be that in fact very
little injustice, if any, is caused by the present procedure in individual cases, but a system under which the
same body of men consider and decide appeals as well as review the original hearings is open to grave
objection.
212. The following scheme is recommended as a solution of the difficulties which at present arise in
connection with the review of court-martial proceedings and the consideration of petitions.
213. Following confirmation by the confirming authority of a finding and sentence within Australia,
the proceedings will be sent direct to the Director of Legal Services for review and report. The papers will
be read either by the D.L.S. or one of his officers in a manner similar to that at present followed by the
J.A.G. and his officers.
214. If the D.L.S. is of the opinion that the finding is not open to objection on legal grounds (for
example, for want of jurisdiction, wrongful admission of evidence, the finding being against the weight of
evidence, etc.) he will then consider the sentence. On the other hand, if he is satisfied that the finding should
be quashed, or has any doubts as to the legal validity thereof, he will refer the matter to the J.A.G.
215. If the J.A.G. on consideration of the finding is of the opinion that it should be quashed on legal
grounds, he will quash it, and his decision will be final.
216. If however on consideration of a finding the J.A.G. is in doubt as to whether it should be quashed
or should stand, he will have power to invite the convicted person or his representative to submit a written
argument or, in the J.A.G.’s. discretion, to invite argument before him by representatives of the Army and of
the convicted person before he reaches a decision.
217. The intention of this recommendation is that any finding which in the opinion of the J.A.G. should
be quashed, shall be quashed without reference to any other authority, that is, that his opinion on questions of
law shall be final. If the recommendation is adopted it would follow that the power to quash a finding at
present possessed by certain authorities under A.M.R. & O. 584 should be withdrawn.
218. If the J.A.G. directs that a finding be quashed notification of it will be effected by the D.L.S.
through the usual channels.
219. If the D.L.S. sees no reason to refer a finding to the J.A.G., or if after consideration the J.A.G.
decides that the finding should stand, the question of sentence will be considered by the D.L.S.


220. If the D.L.S. is of the opinion that the sentence is excessive and should be mitigated, remitted or
commuted, he will submit the sentence with his opinion to one of the authorities having power to mitigate,
remit, or commute sentences (as in A.A. Sec. 57 (2) and A.M.R. &O. 593) who will decide the matter.
221. Petitions against findings and sentences may be presented to the J.A.G. who shall be the sole
authority with power to consider them, and make orders thereon. The J.A.G. will have the same power to
invite the submission of a written argument, or the appearance of both sides to argue a case orally, as is
recommended above. As to the desirability of the J.A.G. being able to obtain assistance on questions of law
reference may be made to the “Oliver” Report, paragraph 25, where it is recommended that
“when the J.A.G. is faced with a point of law of novelty or exceptional difficulty, means should
be provided whereby the opinion of the Court of Criminal Appeal upon the question can be
obtained.”
However, for the reasons stated in paragraphs 74- 76, the Board do not recommend that any civil court
should be invested with jurisdiction in military matters.
222. Although the intention is that petitions against findings and sentences should go to the J.A.G.,
and that he is to have the power to deal with petitions and make orders thereon, it is not suggested that the
ordinary common law right to petition the Governor-General should be abrogated. But otherwise it is recom-
mended that the present provisions under which petitions may be dealt with by certain authorities should be
repealed.
223. It is recommended that petitions should go through ordinary Army channels, and ultimately
through the D.L.S. When a petition is forwarded to the J.A.G., a report should be attached stating the
reasons adopted by the D.L.S. for refusing to interfere with the finding and/or sentence of the court-martial.
This procedure should ensure that petitions do not go astray, and that there will be a minimum of delay in
their reaching the J.A.G.
224. It is also recommended that the D.L.S. should send weekly or monthly to the J.A.G. a return of
court-martial proceedings reviewed, setting out briefly the nature of each offence, the sentence, and any other
necessary particulars. By that means the J.A.G. would be kept informed of the conditions prevailing in the
various areas and branches of the service, and would be able to estimate the general standards of punishment
which it is found necessary to maintain in various places for the purpose of enforcing discipline.
225. It is considered that the adoption of this system would do much to remove the present impres-
sion, which is very common, that as petitions are dealt with in effect by the same authorities as try and
convict soldiers it is almost useless to lodge a petition. It should also make somewhat easier the task of
those who have the responsibility of deciding these matters by removing the necessity which sometimes arises
of giving a second decision on a matter that has already been considered. Steps should be taken, if this
proposal is adopted, to inform members of the Forces of the procedure, and to impress upon them that peti-
tions must be dealt with by a civilian, who is in no way subject to Army control or influence. Furthermore,
the removal of the main reviewing function from the J.A.G. to the D.L.S. should assist in creating a correct
impression.
226. Under A.M.R. & O. 1016 (3) no J.A.G. or D.J.A.G. except in time of war can hold office for
more than four years unless re-appointed. It is recommended that the appointment of the J.A.G. should be
for a considerably longer period than four years. The Board consider it to be highly desirable, and in view
of their recommendation, essential, that the present system by which the J.A.G. must be a civilian should be
continued.
227. Division 6A of Part VII of A.M.R. &O. (paragraph 1017 and following paragraphs) relates to
the Australian Army Legal Corps. There appears to be no express provision that the Director of Legal
Services shall be the principal officer of that Corps, but the fact is recognized in such a way that the inference
can be drawn that he is to hold the appointment. If there is any doubt on this point it should be made clear
in the regulations that the D.L.S. holds that position, and his appointment should be provided for in such a
way that he may hold it for a fairly lengthy period. It is suggested that the present provision for the ap-
pointment of the J.A.G. for not more than four years would be appropriate for the D.L.S. The D.L.S. might
or might not be a part-time officer, and if necessary Sections 11A and 148 of the Defence Act should be
amended to include the A.A.L.C.
228. As a result of the amendments to A.M.R. & O. consequent on the report of the “O’Bryan” Com-
mittee, the J.A.G’s. duties were divorced from the proceedings of courts-martial prior to the confirmation of
finding and sentence. In any event that situation should be strictly maintained. If the Board’s recommenda-
tions with regard to reviews after confirmation and petitions are adopted the J.A.G. would be even further
removed from prosecutions.
229. To carry out the scheme which has been proposed it might be necessary to appoint a Deputy
Judge-Advocate-General and a Deputy Director of Legal Services to exercise the powers and functions of the
J.A.G. and D.L.S. respectively if troops were serving outside Australia, as it might be found to be im-
practicable for the J.A.G. and D.L.S. to act in respect of court-martial proceedings taking place overseas. Any
Deputy Judge-Advocate-General so appointed should be, in the Board’s opinion, a civilian. Although he would
thereby be deprived of some Service associations his position would be strengthened, and the uniformity of
the system would be preserved.
230. The practice has been that when a petition is dismissed the convicted person is not informed why
it has been rejected. It was suggested that it is desirable that the reasons upon which a petition is dismissed
should be communicated to the convicted person. The Board consider that this procedure should be adopted
and recommend that where the J.A.G. dismisses a petition the reasons for doing so should be communicated
in writing to the convicted person at the same time as the notification of dismissal is given
231. Several suggestions were made for the constitution of some form of appellate tribunal to consider
petitions against the findings and sentences of courts-martial. One proposal was that there should be some
form of ultimate appeal to a civil court. For the reasons stated in paragraphs 74- 76 the Board do not
commend giving authority to any civil court or tribunal composed of civilians to deal with appeals from the
decisions of courts-martial, or from any other authority having power to review them What has
injustice ***** ° f 3PPea,S by J - A ‘ G - should Trevent anypoSiii* of


232. It was suggested that provision should be made that an officer whose commission has been can-
celled, and a soldier who has been discharged otherwise than in pursuance of an award of a court-martial,
should have a right of appeal. The Board do not recommend the adoption of the proposal. It would interfere
with the right of the Crown to dismiss officers and soldiers at pleasure. Furthermore, if the present regula-
tions are properly administered, there is no reason to think that officers or men will be dismissed or discharged
unjustly, or without proper inquiry or trial.
233. A number of witnesses gave evidence with regard to the advice which is or may be given to a
person convicted by court-martial of his right to petition, and with regard to assistance in the preparation and
presentation of a petition. It was suggested that in some cases convicted persons have not been able to
obtain such advice, and that at times they are entirely unaware that they are entitled to petition.
234. The Board have already recommended that both the finding and the sentence of a court-martial
should be announced in open court, and that the accused should be informed at the time that the finding and
sentence are subject to confirmation.
235. In order to prevent possible injustice the Board recommend that when the sentence of a court-
martial is announced the court should give the convicted persons advice as to his right to petition. That time
appears to be the best for the purpose. If the accused is represented by a defending officer he will be present,
and so will know what the sentence is, and will be immediately available to advise the accused with regard
to a petition, or to make an appointment to give that advice.
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW.
236. The punishments which at present may be awarded summarily or by court-martial for offences
against military law are indicated in the tables set out in Appendices F and G. Subject to what is recom-
mended in this report the Board have no other comments to offer with respect to punishments.
237. If the recommendation for a new code of military law is adopted it would be necessary to pro-
vide in it punishments for various offences which at present when committed on war service may be punished
under Sec. 44 of Army Act, as well as those for other offences. As the Board have no information regarding
the post-war Army they cannot offer any suggestions as to what punishments should be provided for offences
committed by members of it.
238. Penal servitude is one of the punishments that may be awarded in an appropriate case by a
general court-martial for offences committed by officers and soldiers. By Sec. 106 of the Defence Act it is
provided that:—
“Where the punishment for any offence against the Army Act, the Naval Discipline Act or the
Air Force Act is penal servitude the Court may, in lieu of sentencing the offender to penal ser-
vitude, sentence him to imprisonment with or without hard labour for the same period as that
for which he might have been sentenced to penal servitude or for any less period.”
239. The punishment of penal servitude is not common to all the Australian States. It is provided
for by the law of England, under which imprisonment cannot be awarded for a greater term than two years,
but a sentence of penal servitude must be for not less than three years.
240. In respect of a sentence of penal servitude awarded in Australia by a court-martial (and which
is not commuted to imprisonment) it would appear that if the laws of the State in which the soldier is to
serve his sentence include provisions for penal servitude, he will be required to serve his sentence in ac-
cordance with those provisions. If on the other hand the laws of the State do not provide for penal servitude
he will be imprisoned as under a sentence of imprisonment with hard labour.
241. As under the law of England a sentence of penal servitude must be for not less than three
years it is possible that an Australian court-martial awarding punishment for an offence against the pro-
visions of Army Act, and observing that penal servitude is a proper sentence, may award a term of imprison-
ment in lieu of it without a proper appreciation of the position or of the consequence of a sentence of penal
servitude imposed in England.
242. For the sake of uniformity and to prevent confusion the Board recommend that the punishment
of penal servitude for offences against military law be abolished.
243 According to Note 6on page 434 of the Manual of Military Law, a sentence that an officer be
cashiered'or dismissed from His Majesty’s service has the effect of cashiering or dismissing the accused not
only from the Army, but also from any other service in which he may hold His Majesty s commission. T e
Board suggest that the legal effect of such a sentence in respect of officers in the Australian Military Forces
should receive consideration in relation to the Constitution, and the limited nature of the defence power
under Sec 51 (vi). It would appear to be open to question whether such a sentence can in Australia have the
full effect that it has in England, particularly with regard to appointments or commissions held under State
laws.
244 For the reasons already stated in paragraphs 132 to 142, the Board recommend that forfeiture
of pay as a punishment be abolished. Attention may here be drawn to the Boards remarks in those para-
graphs with regard to automatic forfeiture of pay.
245 Severe reprimand, reprimand and admonitions are awards which at the present time may be
made under certain circumstances. The Board consider that at least in the regimental ranks within the Army
no practical distinction is drawn between admonition and reprimand. Accordingly, and as a means of simpli-
fying punishments, the Board recommend that admonition be abolished, both in peace time and on war
service.
246. A useful distinction however can be drawn between reprimand and severe reprimand. The
Board are unable to find any good reason why a commanding officer and a company, etc commander have
the power to reprimand a N.C.O. but not to reprimand a private soldier. They accordingly recommend that
the power to reprimand or severely reprimand a private soldier be given both to commanding officers and
company, etc., commanders, in peace time and on war service.
247. The Board also recommend that in the case of private soldiers power to award a severe repri-
mand be given to courts-martial. There appears to be no good reason why a court-martial should have power
to award this form of punishment to a N.C.O. but not to a private soldier.


248. Field punishment is one of the punishments at present on active service. A court-
martial may award up to three months, and a C.O. exercising summary jurisdiction up to 28 days. The nature
of the punishment is somewhat obscure. Rules regulating it were passed in England in 1923 pursuant to t e
power contained in Section 44 of the Army Act (see M.M.L. page 705). They provide that field punishment
shall be carried out regimentally when the unit to which the offender belongs or is attached is actually on
the move, but that when the unit is halted at any place where there is a Provost Marshal or Assistant
Provost Marshal it will be carried out under that officer.
249. Paragraph 2 of the Rules contains provisions as to the methods which may be applied to restrain
a soldier, and also provides that he may be subjected to the like labour, employment and restraint, and dealt
with in like manner as if he were under sentence of imprisonment with hard labour, in both cases subject
to any direction to the contrary by the court-martial or commanding officer.
250. The actual enforcement of field punishment carried out regimentally apparently varies from
unit to unit. Field punishment centres were established during the war in several places. Some, for example,
those at Churchill and Yungaburra were in many respects similar to detention barracks.
251. Military law draws a distinction between detention and field punishment, and the latter is re-
garded as a less severe form of punishment than the former: (compare as to commutation of punishments
A.M.R. &O. 414 (b) and A.A. Sec. 44 (10)). It was suggested by two witnesses that the distinction between
detention barracks and field punishment centres should be abolished, and that detention ancl field punishment
should be amalgamated.
252. It may be that in particular cases a soldier will be called upon to do as much in the way of hard
work in a field punishment centre as in a detention barrack, and perhaps more. Nevertheless, with the exist-
ing distinction between detention and field punishment, and the circumstances as the Board have found them
to exist, a greater stigma attaches as the result of an award of detention than is the case when field punish-
ment is ordered.
253. Field punishment is intended to interfere as little as possible with a soldier’s training, as it is
only when the unit comes to a halt that he may be transferred to a field punishment centre. Amalgamation
of the two forms of punishment would hamper the object of that provision, as offenders would no doubt be
sent to barracks to serve their sentences. In some cases that would be too severe a penalty.
254. The flexibility of a sentence of field punishment and the opportunities it affords for rehabilitation
should not be removed. The Board consider that the present distinction between detention and field punish-
ment should be continued.
255. The Board strongly recommend that steps be taken to make regulations to take the place of the
present rules, by which the nature of field punishment will be clearly defined, and provision will be made with
respect to the training and restraint of soldiers undergoing it. The language of paragraph 2 of the rules
now in force may suggest to inexperienced regimental officers, N.C.Os., regimental police and others, that
field punishment is to be regarded as being as severe as imprisonment with hard labour, and may result in
field punishment centres being set up and managed in such a way that conditions in them will be beyond the
proper limits of such a punishment. The regulations should therefore be so framed as to exclude the pos-
sibility that a man sentenced to field punishment will be dealt with in a way that would be justified only by
a more severe sentence. The regulations should also clearly define the powers of a commandant of a field
punishment centre to punish offences committed by men detained in them. There has been some difference
of opinion on this point, and as to the effect of Sec. 74 of the Army Act.
REVIEW AND SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES.
256. The practice has been that the confirming authority fixes a date for review of the sentence when
he confirms it. He is not, however, obliged to do so.
257. By A.M.R. &O. 563 a court-martial may recommend the suspension of the currency of a sentence.
Any such recommendation and the reasons for it must be entered in the form part of the proceedings.
258. Sec. 86 (1) (d) of the Defence Act empowers the Governor-General to mitigate or remit the
punishment, or any part of the punishment, awarded by any sentence of a court-martial or commute the punish-
ment for any less punishment to which the offender might have been sentenced by the court-martial. Sec. 86 (1)
(e) gives the Governor-General power to suspend the execution or currency of any sentence on such terms and
conditions (if any) as he thinks fit. Sec. 87 authorizes the Governor-General to delegate any of his powers
under Sec. 86. r
... 259, . S / c - , 124 J l .) («) and . (S a ). °. f th e Defence Act authorize the making of regulations (inter alia)
with regard to the mitigation and remission and commutation of the punishments of courts-martial, and the
suspension of the execution or currency of their sentences,
26°. In Appendix IV to the orders of the Military Board (A.M.R. & O. pp 486 et seq) there is a
summary of the delegations that have been made of powers in relation to courts-martial under Secs 86 and
Tables A BCan D ? delegations which are shown at the commencement of the
A, B, C and D, and the powers delegated are set out in each case. The delegations are fairly numerous.
2 61. There is no express provision under the Act or regulations for review as such This seems to he
o? 'whether ** C ° nsidered for the P ur P° se
of ,he soldier since his -vi«T„°„ n ha: r br rssT.sS'K
notified*. thI h memb a e C r tIC a e t the* t lm e" of °p rolnu lead.""'sfe ‘ 2! /U * d *,? ‘Z f, vie £’ and for this e ° be
v,.ions a, to the Form All which must be elected if the .entente ie M be revTewed “ C ° n ' a ' nS Pr °'


264. It may be open to question whether the practice which has been adopted under which superior
authority at times alters the date fixed for review is legally justified under the provisions of the Defence Act
and regulations as they stand at present. However, as a matter of policy and general practice, the system
would appear to be beyond objection, except as regards the provision for notification to a soldier of the date
for review when the sentence is promulgated to him.
265. The Board understand that cases have occurred where, after a review date has been fixed and
notified at the time of promulgation, lengthy periods of up to two months have elapsed, and the soldier has
then been told that his sentence will not be reviewed either at all, or until some time subsequent to the date
originally fixed. The Board strongly urge that decisions regarding dates for review should be arrived at
with the utmost possible despatch, and they recommend that no information as to the date for the review of
his sentence be given a soldier until a decision as to the date has been made by superior authority.
266. A suggestion was made that courts-martial should have power to suspend sentences. There is
something to be said in favour of this suggestion, as a court-martial has the opportunity of seeing the accused
and of considering the circumstances of his case as disclosed at the trial. In determining a sentence a court-
martial may, for reasons thought to be in the interests of discipline, decide upon a lengthy term of imprison-
ment or detention, but with the intention that only part of it should be served. The court may recommend
suspension but superior authority may take a different view of the case, and although it cannot increase the
sentence it is not bound to reduce it or to agree with the court’s recommendation.
267. Against the proposal it may be said that if a court-martial is to have this power, and if it is to
be effective, superior authority should not have the right to interfere with the decision. That might raise
difficulties. It might unduly interfere with the general policy by which superior authority is entitled to review
the decisions of courts-martial, and it might at times result in a failure of justice if superior authority has
information about the soldier which is not available to the court-martial. There is also the legal difficulty
raised by Mr. Bowie Wilson in evidence (transcript p. V 566) that as a sentence of a court-martial is not
valid until confirmed, no provision for its suspension can become operative until confirmation. The Board do
not recommend the adoption of the proposal.
268. There are certain provisions for the revocation of the suspension of a sentence, and the point
has been raised that as they stand at present, the suspension of a sentence may be revoked in appropriate
circumstances at a time after the term of the sentence has expired. For example, if a man is sentenced to
six months detention, and his sentence is suspended at the end of three months, he may be called upon to serve
the balance of the sentence two years later. Furthermore, cases have occurred where a soldier has gone into
detention under a confirmed sentence for a lengthy period, but has not been informed, until shortly prior to
the expiry of such sentence, that the suspension of a previous sentence has been revoked, and that he will be
required to serve the balance of the suspended sentence.
269 Sections 57 (1) and 57A (as modified and adapted) of the Army Act contain provisions for the
suspension of sentences. The power of suspension in Sec. 57A has almost invariably been used in Australia.
A distinction apparently has been drawn between a suspension of the execution of a sentence and a suspension
of its currency, as a result of which a soldier may not or may be ordered into imprisonment or detention at a
time after the expiration of the term of the sentence. A suspension under Sec. 57A is not limited to any
period.
270 A suspension has been regarded by some men as the equivalent of a bond to be of good behaviour
for the balance of the term of the sentence. The Board consider that this is a view for which there is much
to be said, particularly as it does not appear to them to be in the best interests of discipline if a man has the
balance of a sentence hanging over his head for an indefinite period. If he offends again after the term of
the sentence has expired he can be dealt with by the imposition of an appropriate punishment The Board
accordingly recommend that the necessary amendments be made to prohibit the revocation of the suspension
of a sentence at a time subsequent to the date at which the term of the sentence, if served in full, would
have expired This recommendation is made subject to the proviso that in the case of a soldier who has
escaped from a place of confinement during the currency of his sentence the period which elapses from the
date of such escape until the date of his apprehension or surrender shall not be taken into consideration
when calculating the date at which the term of his sentence, if served in full, would have expired.
271 The Board also understand that no express provision exists that the revocation of a suspended
sentence shall be notified to the soldier concerned, or that any notification which is given shall be com-
municated at any particular time. The Board consider it to be most desirable and accordingly recommend
that provision should be made that when a suspension of a sentence is revoked, the soldier should be informed
forthwith.
DISMISSAL OR DISCHARGE FROM THE FORCES BY SENTENCE OF COURT-
MARTIAL.
272 Sec 97 of the Defence Act gives a court-martial power, when awarding a sentence, to dismiss or
discharge' the offender from the Defence Force. Dismissal applies to officers, and discharge to soldiers. _ Sec
44 Cdl and (e) of the Army Act authorize cashiering and dismissal of officers from His Majesty s Service, and
Sec 44 HI and (ii) provide for discharge with ignominy from His Majesty’s Service, and discharge from the
Defence Force of the Commonwealth of Australia, in each case as a sentence that can be awarded by a
court-martial. The punishments set out in Sec. 44 of the Army Act, including those just mentioned may be
awarded by an Australian court-martial only to members, on war service. . dism.ssal and discharge of
members not on war service are governed by other provisions. By virtue of A.M.R. & O 595 (2 a sentence
of dismissal or discharge takes effect on the day of promulgation, unless the execution of the sentence
is suspended, or on the day on which suspension of the execution ceases.
273 The sentence of a court-martial that a soldier be discharged is not effective until confirmed, but
administrative action may be taken to discharge a member convicted by court-martial even though that is
not part of the sentence. A G.O.C. in any event has the power to discharge a man for certain reasons: (see
A.M.R. & O. 253 and 253 A; G.R.O. 23/1946, para 12).


274. If the sentence of a court-martial includes an award that a member be dismissed or discharged,
and the sentence is confirmed and promulgated, the dismissal or discharge will be effective before the finding
and sentence have been reviewed by the Judge-Advocate-General. If on review, it is considered that although
the finding of the court is legal the sentence of dismissal or discharge is excessive, it appears that the dis-
missal or discharge remains effective nevertheless, and the man can be reinstated only by re-enlistment.
Some stigma is likely to attach even though that is done. In view of A.M.R. & O. 584 (3) the position might
be obscure if on review it was considered that the finding on which the sentence of dismissal or discharge
was based was illegal or involved injustice to the accused.
275. The Board recommend that where a sentence of dismissal or discharge is pronounced by a
court-martial, that part of the sentence should not be promulgated to the officer or soldier concerned, and that
it should be provided that no sentence of dismissal or discharge shall have any effect until after the case
has been considered by the D.L.S., or, If appropriate, by the J.A.G., and that promulgation of the sentence of
dismissal or discharge should not take place until after that stage.
276. One witness made the suggestion that a conviction for desertion should result in dishonourable
discharge with the consequent loss of certain civil rights. This raises the question of the reasons upon which
discharges are effected, and the consequences following generally on discharge with ignominy, or on a dis-
charge based on disciplinary reasons. There have been differences of opinion as to the particular ground on
which certain men should be discharged, for example, whether for “misconduct,” or “services no longer re-
quired.” At the present time G.R.O. 65/1946 provides that men discharged for certain reasons shall be in-
eligible for service and other benefits including the “Returned from Active Service” badge. This method of
regulating the consequences of a discharge might also be used with other results. The Board recommend that
the consequences of discharges for disciplinary reasons should be laid down by regulation, so that they will
be determined by the Governor-General in Council.
OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW AND CIVIL LAW.
277. Sec. 102 of the Defence Act authorizes a court-martial or a civil court to try and punish any
member of the Defence Force charged with any offence against the Defence Act which by Sec. 4 includes all
regulations made under the Act. Sec. 41 of the Army Act, which applies in respect of the Military Forces
whilst on war service (Defence Act Sec. 55), gives a court-martial power to try and punish persons subject
to military law who commit offences punishable by the ordinary law of England. The section, however, is
subject to certain limitations, and Sec. 41A of the Army Act preserves the jurisdiction of any civil court to
try a person subject to military law for any offence.
278. Sec. 162 of the Army Act is directed to the adjustment of military and civil law. Sub-sec. (1)
provides that when a person has been sentenced by court-martial to punishment for an offence, and is after-
wards tried by a civil court for the same offence, that court shall, in awarding punishment, have regard to
the military punishment he may have already undergone; and sub-sec. (6) stipulate that where a person sub-
ject to military law has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a competent civil court he shall not be
liable to be tried in respect of that offence under the Army Act.
279. The result of the present provisions is that members of the Military Forces on war service may
be tried by an Australian court-martial in respect of a very considerable number of offences against the
ordinary law of England. Under Sec. 41 (5) of the Army Act a court-martial which convicts for an offence
against the law of England may award punishment either as provided for such offence by the section, or
otherwise by the law of England, or as might be awarded under the Army Act in respect of an act to the pre-
judice of good order and military discipline.
280. Although the Commonwealth Crimes Act creates certain offences, some of which are most per-
tinent in time of war, it would appear that a court-martial has no jurisdiction over a member of the Military
Forces as regards any offence against that Act. Nor can a court-martial try any person for offences against
the civil law of any of the States.
281. A court-martial has no jurisdiction to try a member of the Military Forces who is not on war
service for any offence against the civil law, except as authorized by Sec. 102 of the Defence Act that is
for offences against that Act and the regulations. The position would be obscure if a member convicted by
a court-martial for an offence against the Defence Act were subsequently charged for the same offence before
a civil court.
282. A recommendation has already been made that there should be one code containing the law
applicable in respect of the Military Forces, and the provisions which are to apply in peace and war In
such a code it would be necessary to make provision as regards the offences against civil law which might
be tried by court-martial.
283. When troops are out of Australia they may be serving in a country which is governed bv a
system of law entirely dissimilar from that generally applying in England and Australia. In such a case it
would be desirable that they should be subject to civil laws similar as far as possible to those which apply
to them in their own country. For that reason, and as Australian and British troops might be serving to-
adopV m that C ° Untry ’ the CIVI aw of En S land would appear to be the most suitable and convenient to
n ., 284, . If , at ?. ny tin }? t! ? e Go . v l ernm ent should enter into an arrangement with the Government of any
other country for the appl.Mt.on, either of the law of that country, or of some other body of law, to the Aus-
? I X in "• that bod >' of law *0 d »nbt "Ottid be enforceable through the court-tnkrtial system
On the other hand if an arrangement were made that the Australian Forces should be subject to their own
code of civil law it would be desirable and convenient that the law of England should be applicable.
21S. The Board therefore recommend that when the Australian Military Forces are serving outside
2LSSST l olfenl TST'iusS'„ 5 m a Sy Sa; 0r „ d rjby W „r 0 „c,a E m g | and *
another body of law is made applicable and 'Scm^l. * £


286. An offence against the law of England may be one which has little if any significance in Aus-
tralia, and the ingredients of an offence under that law may not be precisely the same as those of a similar
offence under the law of a State. It is somewhat anomalous that an offence against the law of England may
be punished by court-martial if committed in Australia, while an offence against the law of the Common-
wealth, or of any of the States, triable in the ordinary civil courts is beyond the jurisdiction of the military
tribunal.
287. A good many civil offences committed by members of the Forces are perpetrated in circum-
stances having a very close relation to military discipline. While it is desirable that courts-martial should
have authority to deal with such offences, the accused should in fairness be tried on the same basis as he would
be in a civil court. For example, a member of the Forces who is charged in a civil court with an offence
against the civil law of Queensland, will be tried and punished for that offence according to the law of
Queensland, and will be entitled to the benefit of any defence afforded by the law of the State. If he is to be
tried by court-martial on the same charge as a breach of military law, he should in fairness be placed in
the same situation as if he were being tried in the civil court. In the same way, if the member is charged
in a civil court with an offence against the law of the Commonwealth he will be entitled to the benefit of any
provisions of Commonwealth law which afford him a defence, or otherwise limit the nature of the offence.
There may be no such answer to a somewhat similar offence against the law of England, and so, on a trial
by court-martial, the accused may be deprived of the benefit of a provision which would be available in a
civil court.
288. The Board’s recommendation is that members of the Military Forces on war service in Australia
should be triable by court-martial for
(a) any offence against the civil law of the State in which the offence is alleged to have been
committed; and
(b) any offence against the law of the Commonwealth alleged to have been committed in Aus-
tralia or any Territory;
and that such offences be made offences against military law.
289. As a corollary to this recommendation, the Board recommend that offences against the ordinary
law of England should be punishable by court-martial as offences against Australian military law only when
the Australian Military Forces are serving outside the Commonwealth and the Territories, and then subject
to the exception set out in para. 285.
290. The Board do not recommend any alteration in the present provisions by which it is decided
whether a member should be tried by court-martial or by a civil court. So long as due attention is paid to
the direction in this regard there will not be any likelihood of injustice, and members will not be deprived
of the right to trial by jury where it is proper that they should be so tried.
ALTERATION OF REGULATIONS BY G.R.Os.
291. Evidence has been given which shows that on occasions a G.R.O. has been issued which purports
to effect alterations to a regulation or regulations made under the Defence Act. This is entirely unauthorized,
and such attempts should not be made.
292. The Board’s attention has been drawn to some G.R.Os. (for example, G.R.O. AB/45 para. 7,
directing C.Os. not to try cases of A.W.L. over 28 days) by which persons invested with jurisdiction under
the Act or regulations are restricted in the exercise of it, either by a direction that it is not to be exercised in
certain types of cases, or that it is to be exercised in a particular manner. In the opinion of the Board this
practice should not be followed, and G.R.Os. should not be issued in this form. Any alteration of powers
conferred by the Act or regulations should be effected by amendment.
294. The Board recognizes however that it is desirable in some cases that by G.R.O. or in some other
way, advice and assistance should be given by superior authority to officers of lower rank as to such matters
as the state of discipline in the Army or in a particular area, what should be taken into consideration in the
exercise of the powers conferred by the Act and regulations and so on.
RULINGS AND OPINIONS OF THE JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL.
295. A.M.R. & O. 1016 (10) provides that all members of the Australian Military Forces shall be
bound by the rulings and opinions on questions of military law given by the J.A.G. or, during his absence or
a vacancy in the office of J.A.G., by the senior D.J.A.G. at the headquarters of the Military Forces in the
Commonwealth. The amended form of A.M.R. & O. 1016 (10) was introduced in conjunction with some
other amendments following the report of the “O’Bryan” Committee, which however did not recommend this
particular amendment.
296. According to the Military Law Lectures page 4 a distinction is drawn between rulings and
opinions. A.M.R. & O. 1016 (10) relates to rulings and opinions, and provides that both shall be binding.
297. Some of the rulings given by the J.A.G. are issued in the form of J.A.G’s. Circulars which are
contained in several volumes, at present 10 in number. These rulings are mostly given in relation to the facts
of particular cases. The circulars are distributed to legal officers (formerly legal staff officers). The Board
have been informed that this is the only distribution of the circulars.
298. The Board have also been informed that all the rulings and opinions of the J.A.G. are not pub-
lished in the circulars. At the present time no distinction is drawn between published and non-published
rulings and opinions, but according to A.M.R. & O. 1016 (10) any ruling or opinion given by the J.A.G. is
binding.
299. As a result of the regulation a court martial is bound by the J.A.G’s. rulings and opinions, and
the judge-advocate is under a duty to advise the court on the law in accordance with them. At times neither
the court nor the judge-advocate may have a copy of a relevant ruling, and may not even know of its existence.
It is desirable in the Board’s opinion, that courts-martial and judge-advocates should themselves be responsible
for declaring and applying the law, and should be free to reach a conclusion on any argument advanced by
a prosecuting or defending officer without being under an obligation to adopt a particular view.
300. The Board accordingly recommend that A.M.R. &O. 1016 (10) be repealed. They entertain no
doubt that if that were done, the J.A.G’s. rulings and opinions would continue to receive great respect, and to
be of great assistance.


TRIALS OF MEMBERS AWAY FROM UNITS.
301. Several witnesses suggested that any person taken into custody on a charge for an offence at a
time when he is away from his unit should be returned there for trial. There are weighty reasons in favour
of such a course, except perhaps where an offence has been committed by a member while on leave, when it
is almost necessary that he be dealt with elsewhere because of the circumstances, for example, if the witnesses
are all in an area some distance from the unit. However, in many cases, particularly where the charge is
for absence without leave or desertion, the accused’s unit or formation is undoubtedly the appropriate place
in which to deal with him. By so doing many of the troubles will be avoided which at present arise as a
result of a man being tried in an L of C Area, or at a Leave and Transit Depot by a court-martial or a
C.O. unaware of the circumstances prevailing in the unit at the time.
302. The Board recognise the serious difficulties that have existed in connection with the transport
of men back to their units, but they consider that as far as possible the policy should be adopted, except in
cases where no good purpose at all would be served by returning a man to his unit.
OFFENCES BY MEMBERS OF WOMEN’S SERVICES.
303. The trial and punishment of offences committed by members of those Women’s services which
form part of the Australian Military Forces are governed by the National Security (Women’s Services) Re-
gulations, and the Military Forces (Women’s Services) Regulations: (see Appendix XII to A.M.R. & O.).
304. Regulation 4 of National Security (Women’s Services) Regulations provides that a member of
a Women’s Service shall not have a right to elect to be tried by court-martial, or be liable to trial by court-
martial, for any offence, or be eligible to sit or otherwise act as a member of a court-martial. Regulation 5
then goes on to prohibit members of the Women’s Services from doing any act, or being guilty of any conduct,
which by certain specified sections of the Army Act is prescribed to be an offence, or to be punishable under
that Act. Such offences accordingly become offences against the National Security Act and are punishable as
such.
305. Part VI of Military Forces (Women’s Services) Regulations makes provision for the summary
punishment of offences by members of the Women’s Services in the A.M.F.
306. Regulation 25 reads as follows :
“The Army Act in its application to a Women’s Service or any member thereof shall be read as
if any provision rendering a member liable to trial and punishment by court-martial were a
provision rendering the member liable to be dealt with summarily for that offence.”
307. The summary punishments which may be awarded for offences by a member of a Women’s Ser-
vice are set out in reg. 26, and the officers authorized to deal summarily with offences are set out in reg. 27.
308. It is further provided in reg. 26 that if an officer authorized to deal summarily with a charge
against a member of a Women’s Service considers that she has committed an offence against the National
Security Act, he may adjourn the case and take the necessary steps for her prosecution for that offence.
309. The purpose and effect of this legislation is to place all offences by members of the Women’s
Services outside the jurisdiction of courts-martial; to make all offences by such members punishable summarily
and to bring certain offences which are regarded as being too serious to be dealt with summarily within the
jurisdiction of the civil courts.
310. None of the witnesses who gave evidence before the Board on this topic supported the Australian
procedure of excluding members of the Women’s Services from trial by court-martial. Both in Canada and
in the United Kingdom members of the Women s Services are triable by court-martial, and that arrange-
ment according to the evidence given before this Board commends itself to the heads of the Women’s Ser-
vices in the A.M.F. In England a court-martial for the trial of a woman must number at least one woman
member in a court of three members, and at least two women members in a court of five members.
. Jl 1 -, The Board consider that members of the Women’s Services should be triable by court-martial
and that the English provisions for the A T.S. should be adopted with any modifications that may be necessary
to allow for Australian conditions. If that were done, a substantial revision of the penalties provided for
offences would also be necessary. v
(nV« t wt C?L Murphy the Assistant Adjutant-General (Women’s Services) stated in evidence
(p.y.600) that in view of the stage which the war had reached, the Women’s Services had come to the con-
clusion that a change in the method of enforcing discipline would not be advisable. Accordingly the Board
suggest hat the recommendation contained in paragraph 311 above should not be put into effert so far as
personnel enhsted during the war are concerned, but should apply to any future scheme of enlistment of
women, whether in peace time or in time of war. enlistment or
tot R c A ua LEGALLY QUALIFIED OTHER RANKS AS COUNSEL BEFORE
COURTS MARTIAL,
martial may be assisted in his defence by MR°& (^aluFb
fcSS..SS? * " ° f ** “
. • . 31 i Evidence was given before the Board that three soldiers who were to be tried bv court-martial
desired that a comrade who was not a comm ssioned officer hut y court martial
Court of Western Australia, should defend them 'at Z^ur^
no objection on the part of the soldier’s unit to his appearing aTcounselbut he * * , there: was
because of the provisions of G.R O 268 of 1943, paragraph lof which reads as follows-" t 0 S °
Other ranks, even if they possess legal qualifications will not he nprmitt.j .
martial as counsel, prosecutor or defending officer.” P Ud to a PP ear at courts


315. The reason for the prohibition contained in G.R.O. 268 is apparently that it is feared that discip-
line might be detrimentally affected if the position arose where a commissioned officer or possibly a soldier’s
commanding officer were cross-examined by an other rank, who might be a soldier under his command.
316. The Board concede the force of this objection but consider that the danger is not serious. An
other rank who is a legally qualified practitioner of the High Court of Australia or of the Supreme Court of
a State would in all probability be sufficiently alive to his responsibilities to guard against the possibility of
using his position as counsel before a court-martial in such a way that discipline would be prejudiced. In the
unlikely event of his abusing his position expressly for that purpose the court-martial would have adequate
powers to control the situation.
317. There is, in the opinion of the Board, considerable doubt as to whether there is a sound legal
basis for G.R.O. 268 of 1943. However, without expressing an opinion on that point the Board consider as
a matter of policy that the prohibition should be withdrawn.
TRIAL OF CHARGES OF TREASON BY COURT-MARTIAL.
318. There have been some references in the press recently to the case of a military officer who is
alleged to have broadcast over Japanese controlled radio whilst a prisoner of war in Tokio, some of which
have been couched in terms which might give the impression that the officer had not been brought to trial
by court-martial because of “a gap in the provisions of Military Law.”
319. As the case is now before a civil court the Board refrain from saying anything about it except
that a charge of treason may be laid under Sec. 41 of the Army Act against a member of the Forces on war
service, but by virtue of the provisions of Sec. 103 of the Defence Act a person shall not be so tried for such
an offence unless the trial begins within three years after the commission of the offence.


SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS IN PARTS I AND II
OF THE REPORT.
GENERAL.
1. Recommendations regarding the procedure of courts-martial or incidental to the exercise of sum-
mary jurisdiction are intended to apply in peace time and on war service unless a contrary intention is
indicated. Recommendations as to the jurisdiction or powers of punishment of military tribunals are intended
to apply to war time conditions only unless a contrary intention is indicated, (para. 22).
2. Subject to the recommendation subsequently made, the present provisions for the trial of offences
against military law, if properly observed, should ensure justice to accused persons with due regard to the
maintenance of the discipline of the Forces, (para. 59).
3. The list of offences with which a C.O. may not deal without reference to higher authority requires
revision, (para. 52).
TRIBUNALS WITH JURISDICTION TO TRY CHARGES.
4. Enquiries should be made as to the advisability of maintaining the existing provision for ‘one-
man’ district courts-martial, (para. 66).
5. Apart from the last preceding recommendation and recommendation No. 15 below, no alterations
should be made to the present list of tribunals having authority to try offences against military law. (para.
68).
FORM OF MILITARY LAW.
6. A clear and simple disciplinary code containing the provisions applicable in peace and war should
be compiled, (para. 78).
7. Consideration should be given to the abolition of the distinction between “war service” and “active
service.” (para. 80).
8. Whether or not the distinction between war service and active service is abolished for all pur-
poses, any punishments which at present apply only on active service should be altered to apply on war ser-
vice. (para. 81).
TRAINING IN MILITARY LAW.
9. More training in military law should be given to officers, (paras. 90-91).
LAYING AND INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES.
10. It should be provided by regulation that any person subject to military law should have the right
to lay a charge against any other person subject to military law. (para. 97).
11. It should be clearly provided by regulation that a C.O. who has not decided to dismiss a charge
at the outset must personally conduct the investigation of it. (para. 99).
12. It should be provided by regulation that the time at which an accused person should be given the
right to elect trial by court-martial is at the conclusion of the evidence for the prosecution.
SUMMARY POWERS OF COMMANDING OFFICERS AND OTHERS.
13. The powers of punishment of company, etc., commanders should not be enlarged, (para. 110).
14. C.Os. should be given power to fine N.C.Os. of the rank of corporal or bombardier up to i 5
(para, 115). v
. Sumnr V ar y powers of punishment of staff-sergeants and sergeants on war service should be vested
in G.0.C., etc. (para. 117).
, 1^^ PerI ° d ° f detention which ma y be awarded by a C.O. should not be increased beyond 28 days.
17. Maximum fine which can be imposed by a C.O. should not be increased to £lO. (para. 121)
18. No alteration should be made to the C.O’s. summary powers over lance-corporals. (para. 122).
(para SUggestlon that 3 CO- should have power to order 7 days reduced diet should not be adopted.
be adopted Th (pa S ra gß l24° n <hi “ “ C '°' Sh °“ M b ' g ‘ Ven summary i urisdicti «" over junior officers should not
adopted’' ("ra. S JfsT i °° ' ha ' ““ ,ra fa,ig “ S ” b ' “ ' h ' Ust of minor Punishments should not be
22. The suggestion that notes be taken of the evidence on which a CO art, wh™
"?aT„ed" ar (tara. i T 2 T' iCable ** When SerVi “ ” lOng M ' he
adopted 3 ' (iTa b ra. S U7 g )" ,:0n ' ba ' '' Sa ' ° ffiC " S b ' giv '” iurisdiction to conduct orderly rooms should not be
no, be 2 adopTed e a " per “ b ' spearing before his C.O. should
25. Accused should sign a form if he elects to be tried summarily, (para. 129).
26. Power to award forfeiture of pay as a punishment should be abolished, (paras. 132-42).


SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE.
27. A C.O. should have power at any time during the investigation of a charge to direct that a sum-
mary of evidence be taken, but no statement should be taken from the accused unless C.O. certifies that he is
satisfied a prima facie case has been made out against the accused, (paras. 144-52).
28. Provision should be made that, if a C.O. considers that injustice might result if accused does not
have legal advice at the taking of a summary of evidence, he shall ask the accused if he desires advice, and,
if the accused does so desire, the C.O. shall as far as practicable arrange that a legal officer, or in his
absence a regimental officer, is made available to advise the accused, (paras. 153-55).
29. Only experienced or properly instructed officers should be allotted to take summaries of evidence,
(para. 156).
THE CONVENING AND COMPOSITION OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
30. The suggestion that “standing” courts-martial be established in lieu of convening a court-martial
to try each individual case or a number of cases should not be adopted, (para. 158).
31. The suggestion that a number of officers be detailed from each formation for court-martial duty
for a specified time should not be adopted, (para. 158).
32. No alteration is necessary to the provisions governing the qualifications of members of courts-
martial. (para. 159).
33. The present practice of appointing “permanent presidents of courts-martial” should continue,
(para. 162).
FIELD GENERAL COURTS-MARTIAL.
34. So long as it is expressly provided that a field general court-martial cannot be convened except by
an officer with a delegation from the Governor-General authorizing him to do so, and provided that the
classes of officers to whom such delegations can be made are defined in the enactment enabling such delega-
tions, there would appear to be no danger of error in the use of the field general court-martial as a form of
trial, (para. 169).
35. If at any time it should happen that injustice is likely to be caused by the use of an abbreviated
form of recording of evidence, steps should be taken to prevent the possibility by requiring that the forms
applicable to other courts-martial shall be used at a field general court-martial, (para. 170).
DELAYS IN TRIALS.
36. In the early stages of the war, in Australia and overseas, serious delays occurred, both in bringing
accused persons to trial, and in the promulgation of sentences. As the war progressed delays were reduced
to a reasonable minimum, (para. 171-172).
JUDGE-ADVOCATES.
37. The suggestion that officers be appointed permanent judge-advocates should not be adopted.
38. The present practice whereby the judge-advocate does not retire with the court when it is con-
sidering its finding should continue, (para. 178).
39. The present practice whereby the judge-advocate is present while the court is considering its
sentence should continue provided that recommendation No. 46 below is adopted, (para. 179).
40. As far as possible the same officer should not act as prosecuting officer and defending officer on
the same day. (para. 180).
PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
41. Convening officers should have power to subpoena witnesses, (para. 183).
42. As far as practicable a man should not be tried in absence of his conduct sheet, (para. 184).
43. The present form (AA Form A 9) used at courts-martial is satisfactory, (para. 186).
44. If the speed with which cases are dealt with by court-martial creates the impression that justice
is not being done, cases should not be disposed of so rapidly.
45. No alteration in the present procedure in accordance with which the finding and sentence of a
court-martial are to be arrived at is recommended, (para. 188).
46. The finding and sentence of a court-martial should be announced in open court, (para. 193).
REVIEW OF FINDINGS AND SENTENCES OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
47. The present practice whereby the proceedings of courts-martial are forwarded direct from the
confirming authority to Army Headquarters for the Judge-Advocate-General is approved. (para. 197).
48. The review of the findings and sentences of courts-martial should not be decentralized down to
Corps and L. of C. Areas, (para. 201).


PETITIONS AGAINST FINDINGS AND SENTENCES OF COURTS-MARTIAL.
49. The function of reviewing courts-martial should be transferred from the Judge-Advocate-General
to the Director of Legal Services, (paras. 213-20).
50. The Judge-Advocate-General should have power to quash sentences on legal grounds. (para.
215).
51. If on consideration of a finding the J.A.G. is in doubt as to whether it should be quashed or
should stand, he will have power to invite the convicted person or his representative to submit a written
argument or, in the J.A.G’s. discretion, to invite argument before him by representatives of the Army and
of the convicted person before he reaches a decision, (para. 216).
52. Power to quash findings should be withdrawn from authorities mentioned in A.M.R. & O. 584.
(para. 217).
53. Petitions (other than those in exercise of common law right of petition to Governor-General)
should be presented to the J.A.G. who should be the sole authority to deal with them and make orders
thereon. (paras. 221-2).
54. The D.L.S. should send weekly or monthly to the J.A.G. a return of court-martial proceedings
reviewed, setting out briefly the nature of each offence, the sentence and any other necessary particulars so
that the J.A.G. will be kept informed of the conditions prevailing in the various areas and branches of the
service, (para. 224).
55. The J.A.G. should continue to be a civilian, (para. 226).
56. The appointment and functions of the D.L.S. should be clearly provided for in the regulations, and
his appointment should be provided for in such a way that he may hold it for a fairly lengthy period,
(para. 227).
57. Any D.J.A.G. appointed to a body of troops serving outside Australia should be a civilian, (para.
229).
58. When the J.A.G. dismisses a petition, the reasons for doing so should be communicated in writing
to the convicted person at the same time as the notification of dismissal is given, (para. 230).
59. There should be no appeal from courts-martial to civil tribunals, (para. 231).
60. The suggestion that an officer whose commmission has been cancelled, or a soldier who has been
discharged otherwise than by an award of a court-martial, should have a right of appeal is not recommended,
(para. 232).
61. Persons convicted by courts-martial should be notified of the right to petition at the time of noti-
fication of finding and sentence, (paras. 233-5).
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW.
242) 62 PCnal Servitude as a P unishment for offences against military law should be abolished. (para.
6 . 3 - Effects of a sentence of cashiering should receive consideration in relation to the Constitution and
the limited nature of the defence power, (para. 243).
64. Admonition” as a form of punishment should be abolished both in peace time and on war ser-
vice. (para. 245).
65. Severe reprimand ’ and “Reprimand” should be punishments applicable to private soldiers both
in peace time and on war service, (paras. 246-7).
66. The present distinction between detention and field punishment should be retained, (paras. 251-4).
i,- u R^ gulatlons should be made to take the place of the present rules relating to field punishment by
w ich the nature of field punishment would be clearly defined and provision made with respect to the training
and restraint of soldiers undergoing it. (para. 255). 8
REVIEW AND SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES.
. , 68 ‘ A , r^view d ? te should not be communicated to a convicted person until a decision as to the date
has been made by superior authority, (para. 265). uecision as to the date
69. Courts-martial should not have power to suspend sentences, (paras. 266-7).
70. The necessary amendments should be made to prohibit the revoration .i, . ,
sentence at a time subsequent to the date at wh.Vh th* (A m revocat . lon of the suspension of a
expired, (para. 270). C the term ° f the sentence > served in full, would have
informed fonhwit" (pS m)™*' ‘ ha ' Wh '" 8 SUSpeMion ° f • «««ce i, revoked, the soldier should be
DISCHARGE FROM THE FORCES.
not become effective or be promulgated 3 'Stil’I’after" 1 ’after" revkw. 11131 ' PBrt ° f the sentence shou,d
not by G.R.O. (parade)? 8 ° f dlscharge for d ‘sciplinary reasons should be governed by regulations and


OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW AND CIVIL LAW.
74. When the Australian Military Forces are serving outside the Commonwealth and Territories, of-
fences against the ordinary law of England should be punishable by courts-martial as offences against Aus-
tralian military law, unless by proclamation, or in some other way, another body of law is made applicable,
(paras. 282-5).
75. Members of the Military Forces on war serivec in Australia should be triable by court-martial
for:—
(a) any offence against the civil law of the State in which the offence is alleged to have been
committed; and
(b) any offence against the law of the Commonwealth alleged to have been committed in Aus-
tralia or any Territory;
and such offences should be offences against military law. (paras. 287-8).
76. The present provisions by which it is decided whether a member should be tried by court-martial
or a civil court should not be altered, (para. 290).
ALTERATION OF REGULATIONS BY G.R.Os.
77. Jurisdiction or discretionary powers vested in military officers by regulation should not be re-
stricted by administrative instructions in the form of G.R.Os. (para. 293).
RULINGS AND OPINIONS OF THE J.A.G.
78. The provision making the J.A.G’s. rulings and opinions binding on all members of the military
forces should be repealed, (para. 300).
TRIAL OF MEMBERS AWAY FROM UNITS.
79. As far as possible, all members should be returned to their units for trial, (paras. 301-2).
•
OFFENCES BY MEMBERS OF WOMEN’S SERVICES.
80. Members of the Women’s Services should be triable by court-martial and the English provisions
for the A.T.S. should be adopted with any modifications that may be necessary to allow for Australian condi-
tions. A substantial revision of the penalties provided for offences would be necessary, (para. 311).
APPEARANCE OF OTHER RANKS AS COUNSEL BEFORE COURTS-MARTIAL.
81. The present prohibition against the appearance of other ranks as counsel before courts-martial
(G.R.O. 268/1943) should be removed, (para. 317).


PART III-CONFINEMENT OF OFFENDERS AGAINST MILITARY LAW.
320. At the outset of the inquiry, the Board were very much concerned to ensure that the true views
of the soldiers under sentence were obtained. After full consideration, the following procedure was adopted.
When the Board visited a detention barrack all the soldiers under sentence were collected in one room, and
were interviewed in a body by the Board out of sight and hearing of the staff and of all others. In some of
the larger barracks, the soldiers under sentence had to be taken in two or more groups,
321. At each interview the object of the Board’s visit was explained to the soldiers under sentence,
and any who had any complaints or felt that they had suffered injustice in any way were asked to come
forward. They were also told that no man need give his name unless he so desired, and were promised
that nothing anyone might say would be passed on by the Board without his permission. About 15 per cent,
of the men who were seen availed themselves of the opportunity to come forward.
322. As well as interviewing the soldiers under sentence in each barrack the Board saw the N.C.O. and
private soldier members of the staff by themselves, and invited them to inform the Board of any injustices or
complaints. The regimental sergeant-major and officer members of the staff were interviewed separately.
323. In each detention barrack the Board examined the books required to be kept under the regula-
tions and inspected the barrack. As a result of discussions with commandants many matters of complaint were
adjusted on the spot. Col. G. F. Murphy, the Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks, was present
when each inspection was made, and was very helpful in that way.
324. Many soldiers under sentence gave instances of ill-treatment in detention barracks. The Board have
taken the view that their function was to examine the detention barrack system and its working and for that
reason they did not stop to investigate every allegation of ill-treatment. Indeed had they endeavoured to
do so, the inquiry must have been unduly protracted. Moreover when such allegations are investigated, it is
almost without exception very difficult to arrive at the truth. They usually relate to incidents that have taken
place some time previously, and witnesses are not readily available or cannot be found.
325. Although the Board have not inquired into every allegation of ill-treatment or many of the com-
plaints that were made, they have been able to reach certain general conclusions regarding the detention
barrack system generally, as will be found in the subsequent paragraphs of this report.
PUNISHMENT GENERALLY.
326. Offences against military law may be punished in a variety of ways. The terms of reference
however require the Board to deal in this Part only with those forms of punishment under which persons con-
victed of offences against military law may be committed to “institutions,” which are; —
(a) Civil gaols;
(b) Military Prisons;
(c) Detention Barracks;
(d) Field punishment Centres.
327. Soldiers awaiting trial may be confined in guard tents, guard rooms, guard compounds and
also in detention barracks. Persons convicted of offences against military law are at times confined in guard
compounds pending promulgation of finding and sentence. Such persons also at times serve their sentences or
portion of them in barrack detention rooms. The Board have considered that their inquiries should not be
extended to cover the serving of sentences or the confinement of persons under those circumstances or in those
places.
328. Punishments are regarded as being in a relative scale of severity. Thus field punishment is a less
severe form of punishment than detention, and detention is less severe than imprisonment. A.M.R. & O. 558 (8)
states that detention was introduced into the scale of punishments in order that soldiers who are convicted of
offences which do not call for discharge need not be subject to the stigma attached to imprisonment.
329. The rehabilitation and reformation of offenders against military law have been stated as being
the principal objects of depriving soldiers of their liberty and subjecting them to any form of confinement
In June, 1943, however a decision was reached that those soldiers who were considered unlikely to respond to
attempts to reform them, should be discharged from the Army but should nevertheless serve the sentences im-
posed on them.
330. The view that is taken of the importance of endeavouring to rehabilitate soldiers sentenced to
undergo detention is illustrated by paras. 10 and 11 of the Detention Barracks Regulations which are as
follows: ’
“10. The Commandant will exercise his authority with firmness, good temper and humanity and
enforce similar conduct on the staff. He will endeavour to instil soldierlike and moral principles
into the mind of every soldier under sentence, letting him see that an interest is being taken in his
welfare, and by good advice and kindly admonition endeavour to convince him of his error and
to encourage him to aim at future good conduct and the attainment of a respectable character in
lllSumcr'hi/progre^tdliM.'te 3 faV ° Urable report h " “" d “« “ "i» undoubtedly
11. Members of the staff employed in charge of soldiers under sentence should strive to acquire a
moral influence over them by performing their duties conscientiously, but without harshness They
should especially try to raise the mind of the soldier to a proper feeling of moral obi gation by
the example of their own uniform regard for truth and integrity, even in the smallest matters.”
331 Offenders who are committed to civil gaols pass completely or almost so out of the control of the
Army, and undergo their sentences in all respects in the same wnv -r a . control or tne
same institutions. Any action taken in civil e“oj» to eLctXTX™.? T " ° ff "’ ders committed to the
also fot the benefit of lenders agaU miihL^Vvvho tSi°n Pmon " S ,h "' f ° re


332. Whatever efforts are made to effect the reformation of offenders, any system of punishment, to be
effective, must include rigorous discipline. The institutions in which sentences of detention or imprisonment
are to be served must not be more comfortable, or provide better conditions of living, than are available for
serving soldiers who are at times required to carry out their duties under most adverse circumstances. The
Board are strongly opposed to any suggestion that conditions in a detention barrack, or in any other institution
where offenders against military law are required to serve their sentences, should be better than those under
which the Army generally lives.
333. It would appear to be essential that any programme for the reformation of military offenders should
include training designed to inculcate better habits and improve character. It has been pointed out that even
under the most effective scheme it may not be possible to make much progress with some men unless they
are detained for long periods. If what may be called the reformative theory, as expounded by some of the
witnesses, is taken to its logical conclusion many prisoners would have in effect to serve indeterminate sen-
tences, as it would be most unlikely that attempts to reform them would ever succeed. A consequence of too
much stress being placed on that view might well be a tendency on the part of those awarding punishments
to inflict longer terms of detention or imprisonment than would be appropriate if the deterrent aspect were
given more weight, as it might be thought that by so doing there would be greater opportunities for effecting
reformation.
334. The policy of reviewing and suspending sentences imposed by courts-martial appears to the Board
to be calculated to promote reformation. In many cases when a sentence has been reviewed and suspended at
the expiration of a short period and the soldier has been released to return to his unit, he has not offended
again. The fear that future bad conduct may result in the revocation of the suspension, and liability to serve the
balance of the sentence, no doubt is a powerful influence on the soldier’s future conduct. The Board however
express this opinion subject to their remarks in other parts of this report regarding the way in which the present
system functions, and their recommendation regarding review and suspensions generally: (see paras. 431-46).
335. The Board have come to the conclusion that in some instances the sentences of courts-martial, par-
ticularly for the offence of A.W.L., have been somewhat excessive. It is probably the case that most if not all of
the sentences that are open to criticism in this way have been fixed with a view to their deterrent effect, par-
ticularly as to other soldiers, and in the expectation that as the system of review and suspension will be carried
out, the offender will probably not be called upon to serve more than a portion of the sentence. The effect
of the suspension of a somewhat lengthy sentence may be beneficial, and in some cases may even bring about
complete reformation.
336. The just punishment of offenders against military law is a matter in which the members of the
Military Forces are interested. Failure to bring an offender to book, or the imposition of too light a sentence,
will have an effect on the minds of those members who are conscientiously discharging their duty without trans-
gression, and will have some effect on discipline. But sentences which, in the opinion of numbers of mem-
bers of the Forces are excessive, may also have undesirable consequences by affronting that sense of justice
and fairness which exists among soldiers. (Compare M.M.L. page 63).
337. When a soldier has been sentenced to imprisonment or detention and has been discharged, his
sentence cannot be suspended. In such a case if he is to be released before the expiration of the term of
the sentence, the balance of it must be remitted. The court-martial that imposes a sentence may not know
whether or not the soldier will be discharged. After the policy of discharging men was put into effect, most
courts-martial probably knew what men were likely to be dealt with in that way, and the confirming and
reviewing authorities certainly had the knowledge as discharges were ordered by one or other of them.
338. It is very difficult to express an opinion as to whether or not as a general practice the sentences
of men to be discharged, or likely to be, were fixed by courts-martial or were mitigated on confirmation or re-
view, so as to make some allowance for the circumstances that no suspension of a sentence was possible. In-
deed there may not have been any degree of uniformity that would justify a conclusion that there was a
general practice. But the Board nevertheless consider that they have sufficient information to warrant the
opinion that in many cases a man’s sentence was determined, or was confirmed, at a fairly lengthy term,
which would have been more reasonable if suspension of it had been possible.
339. Sentences of ex-members required to serve detention are generally reviewed, although in some
cases superior authority directs that there shall be no review at all. The practice is to fix a review date,
and if, when that date arrives, the conduct of the ex-member is not considered to have been satisfactory, to
fix another date, and so on. If at any time when the sentence comes up for review, the report is favourable,
the balance of the sentence is remitted. Remissions are granted at other times, sometimes on compassionate
grounds.
340. By what they have said the Board do not intend to belittle the importance of the reformation
of offenders against military law. All possible efforts should be made to effect it in every case. They have
discussed the matter as some witnesses raised it and appeared to be in favour of lengthy sentences being
imposed as an essential foundation for reformation. It has been pointed out how, if that policy is adopted,
the principle that “the proper amount of punishment to be inflicted is the least amount by which discipline
can be efficiently maintained” may be overlooked. That principle is sound, and should be maintained.
DELINQUENCY IN THE ARMY.
341. A good deal of evidence was given regarding delinquency in the Army and its causes. The evi-
dence is valuable and interesting, but Is directed to a matter which is mostly outside the scope of the inquiry.
In the same way the measures which have been or should be taken to prevent or reduce offences and other
breaches of discipline do not directly concern the Board. However, the problems arising from these matters
are to an extent relevant for the purpose of considering, amongst other things, the measures that were
taken in dealing with the very large number of men who were sentenced for offences against military law,
and were awarded terms of detention or imprisonment.
342. The very high rate of delinquency in the Army at the end of 1942 and early 1943 was most
alarming. Absence without leave was by far the most common offence. The ratio of delinquents to the total
male strength of the A.M.F. at 12th August, 1944, was 2.8%, delinquents being the total number of illegal
absentees( i.e., those who had been absent from their units for more than 21 days), and those in detention or
civil gaols, irrespective of the tribunal which imposed the sentence. The Board sought details of the delin-
quency rate in the British Army, and the information supplied may be obtained by reference to the Army
Department file 161/1/235.


343. By far the greatest proportion of members of the Military Forces committed to detention were
sentenced either for absence without leave or desertion. Col. Murphy gave the Board statistics for t e wee
ending 21st August, 1943, which he considered was a typical week. The total number in detention was 2533,
of whom 2303 had been sentenced for absence without leave. Convictions for other offences numbered 2 ,
and so those who had been sentenced for absence without leave were 90.2% of the total in detention, it is
generally accepted that this percentage remained fairly constant up to the termination of hostilities.
344. Undoubtedly, one factor which contributed materially to the very large number of cases of
absence without leave was the presence in Australia for lengthy periods of thousands of soldiers under con i
tions somewhat different from those of normal active service. There was a long period of training during
which the troops were not engaged in active operations against the enemy and were fairly close proximity
to their homes. It is beyond question that that state of affairs seriously affected the discharge of their duty
by many soldiers. Domestic troubles and business anxieties led many to go absent without leave. Such con-
duct cannot be palliated, but it is undoubtedly a fact that many offences were committed for those reasons.
345. The evidence is clear that the problem of delinquency and particularly the prevalence of absence
without leave caused great concern. Steps were taken to investigate the causes of delinquency and to intro-
duce measures with the object of bringing about a reduction in the alarming number of cases of absence
without leave. It is beyond the Board’s function to express any opinion as to why there were so many cases,
or with regard to the measures taken to reduce them but they may perhaps be permitted to say that a some-
what more liberal outlook in the granting of compassionate, occupational and seasonal leave and the like,
and a better appreciation of the reasons for men going A.W.L., might perhaps have considerably reduced the
number of such offences. It appears that investigations in connection with applications for leave were very
often carried out by men not sufficiently trained for such duty. The Board consider that a greater use of the
services of Chaplains and trained social workers would probably have prevented many cases of absence with-
out leave.
346. It has been claimed by some witnesses that the presence in the Army of persons who have been
described as “criminals” accounted to some extent for the high rate of delinquency, particularly in relation to
A.W.L., and otherwise created many difficulties that would not have arisen if these men had been excluded
from the Military Forces.
347. Figures that have been produced to the Board undoubtedly show that there were in the Army
numbers of men who had been convicted by civil courts. Many of those men may well be described as
“criminals,” because their convictions were for the more serious offences against the criminal law. It is
beyond question that men of this type have very often caused trouble in detention barracks. They have
created many difficulties in the administration of the barracks and have put the country to a great deal of
expense. Many serious problems would not have arisen, or would have been less difficult to solve, if men of
this type had been excluded from the fighting forces, and had been diverted into some other form of national
service.
348. On 14th May, 1940, the Military Board decided that no person would be voluntarily enlisted in
the A.M.F. or A.I.F. if he had been convicted by a civil court, other than a court of summary jurisdiction,
and that in respect of any man convicted by a court of summary jurisdiction the decision was to be left to
the discretion of the formation, etc., commander. The Military Board’s decision appears in Army File
275/750/1322. When only the system of voluntary enlistment was in force it was probably less difficult to
ascertain what applicants for enlistment had been so convicted than when compulsory enlistment was intro-
duced as well. There is no doubt however that quite a number of men with prior civil convictions were
enlisted, and many of them found their way into detention barracks.
349. Exhibits 10A, 108, and 10C are graphs relating to 977 persons discharged from the Forces and
held to serve sentences of detention. From these graphs may be ascertained as on 30th May, 1944, the propor-
tion of men with civil convictions, and the types and numbers of convictions of these men. It appears that of
the 977 cases, 34.5% or 336 individuals had prior civil convictions. Of those, 36.5% had been convicted of
offences of larceny or common stealing; 8.8% had been convicted of breaking, entering and stealing; 6.1%
had committed offences involving physical injury; 22.1% had been found guilty of offences grouped under the
heading “Social Dereliction” and 17% had been convicted of “Statutory Offences.” Reference may also be
made to Exhibit 25, which shows the proportion of men with civil convictions among members sentenced by
certain courts-martial at Sydney.
350. This problem has been the subject of considerable investigation, and has exercised the minds of
those concerned with the administration of the Army. Some proposals have from time to tirtie been made to
evolve a satisfactory system under which men with civil records who attempt to enlist, or who are called
up for service, will be identified. At one time the proposal was made that all volunteers for the AI F
should be finger printed: (see Army Department file 85/1/463). It was however considered impracticable to
adopt this suggestion. The Board are strongly in favour of any practical course being taken that would en-
sure as far as possible that undesirable persons are excluded from the Military Forces.
351. It is not intended to suggest that no man with a civil conviction will make a good soldier The
contrary has been proved in many instances. But men who have committed certain types of offences in civil
life are likely to continue their activities if they become soldiers, and thereby seriously prejudice discipline
and administration. v
PLACES IN WHICH SENTENCES ARE TO BE SERVED.
352. Sec. 116 of the Defence Act provides that any member of the Defence Force sentenced to nenal
servitude, imprisonment or detention for any Naval, Military or Air Force offence may if the Governor
General by regulation or otherwise directs, be imprisoned or undergo penal servitude or detention in anJ
place appointed by the Governor-General instead of in a prison. y
353. Both at the time when Sec. 116 was enacted, and when it was subsequently amended, the Statute
of Westminster had not been adopted by the Commonwealth Parliament. The question of the present aoDli
cation of the section in respect of sentences to be served outside the Commonwealth need not be discussed


354. Section 132 (1) of the Army Act provides (inter alia) that it shall be lawful for a Secretary of
State to set apart any building or part of a building under his control as a military prison or detention bar-
racks. By sub-sec. (2), a Secretary of State may make, alter and repeal rules with relation to military prisons
and detention barracks. A.M.R. & O. 296 provides that, for the purpose of the application of the Army Act
and Rules of Procedure to the Military Forces (when not otherwise enacted in the Australian Military Regu-
lations) references to a Secretary of State shall be read as including the Minister. Sec. 133 of the Army Act
contains provisions as to military prisons and detention barracks in any country in which operations against
the enemy are being conducted, and thereunder the powers of a Secretary of State under Sec. 132 are
exercisable by the officer commanding in the field.
355. The terms of reference direct the Board to inquire into and report (inter alia) upon “the adminis-
tration of institutions to which persons convicted of offences against military law may be committed.” The
Board have taken this direction as extending and applying mainly to institutions set up within the Common-
wealth, and consequently have not thought it necessary to inspect any institution outside the Commonwealth,
although they have obtained information about some of them.
356. Sec. 120 of the Constitution provides that every State shall make provision for the detention in
its prisons of persons accused or convicted of offences against the laws of the Commonwealth, and for the
punishment of persons convicted of such offences, and empowers the Parliament of the Commonwealth to
make laws to give effect to this provision.
357. A.M.R. & O. 597 contains provisions relating to military prisoners and soldiers under sentence
of detention. Para. 1 directs that a military prisoner shall undergo his sentence in a military prison, or in a
place of detention, or in military custody, or in a civil prison, or by any two or more of these methods.
Para. 2 provides that a soldier under sentence of detention shall undergo his sentence in a place of detention,
or in military custody, or by both these methods, but not in a place of imprisonment. Attention is directed to
the other provisions of A.M.R. & O. 597, which need not be quoted except para (3) which provides that
(3) A military prisoner or soldier under sentence of detention, sentenced or undergoing his sen-
tence in the Commonwealth, shall not be committed or transferred to a place of imprison-
ment oj place of detention out of the Commonwealth, other than a place of imprisonment,
or a place of detention in a territory in which, if he is a member of the Permanent Forces,
he enlisted, or, if he is a member of the Permanent Forces or Citizen Forces, in which his
usual place of residence is:
Provided that nothing in this sub-regulation shall prevent the commitment to a place of
imprisonment or place of detention out of the Commonwealth of a military prisoner or soldier
under sentence of detention, when the suspension of the currency of a sentence passed in the
Commonwealth is revoked outside the Commonwealth.
358. A.M.R. &O. 599, under the heading “Military Convicts”, contains provisions relating to the
serving of sentences of penal servitude.
359. A.M.R. & O. 601 (6) provides that a military prisoner or military convict, while in a civil
prison or penal servitude prison, may be confined and dealt with in respect of hard labour and otherwise, in
the same manner as if his sentence had been passed by a civil court in the State, territory, country or place
in which for the time being he is.
360. Division 19 of Part IV of A.M.R. & O. relates to military prisons and places of detention. By
A.M.R. & O. 630 the Governor-General may appoint any place in or out of the Commonwealth to be a military
prison or a detention barrack.
361. By A.M.R. &O. 631 certain places are appointed places of detention In which any member of
the Military Forces sentenced to detention for any “naval or military offence” may undergo detention. These
are
(a) Every detention barrack.
(b) Every barrack occupied by Permanent Forces.
(c) Every camp of continuous training.
(d) Every place occupied or exclusively used by any part of the Military Forces.
(e) Every other place approved by the Governor-General.
Sub-paragraph 2 relates to the determination of places to be used as barrack detention rooms.
362. A.M.R. & O. 632 contains provisions relating to the control of military prisons and places of
detention. They are to be under the control of the Military Board, by whose authority orders and instructions
in relation to the management, inspection, discipline, interior economy and military training therein, not in-
consistent with the regulations may be issued.
CIVIL GAOLS.
363. Reference has already been made (para. 356) to Sec. 120 of the Constitution under which every
State is to make provision for the detention in its prisons of persons convicted of offences against the laws
of the Commonwealth. Men sentenced to penal servitude or imprisonment have been confined in civil gaols
in all States in pursuance of that section. From a decision given in the Supreme Court of Tasmania it
would appear that an ex-member of the Forces confined in a civil gaol may not in all respects be subject to
the provision applying to the civil offenders serving sentences in it. Other references to civil goals and mili-
tary offenders will be found elsewhere in this report.
MILITARY PRISONS.
364. No military prison has been established in Australia. Proposals were at one time made that one
should be set up for the reception of the worst type of offenders, but the scheme was abandoned. It was
considered by the C-in-C that the number of offenders did not call for the establishment of such an institution.
365. For the three months ended 31st January, 1944, there were approximately 110 members of the
Army who had had their sentences of imprisonment confirmed at L.H.Q. On the other hand, some sentences of
imprisonment had been commuted to detention. Prior to October, 1943, 46 men were awarded imprisonment,
mainly for offences of a civil character in the Middle East. In May, 1945, 474 members and ex-members
of the A.M.F. were serving sentences of imprisonment in civil gaols, which had been imposed by courts-
martial: (see Appendix A to War Cabinet Agendum 370/45).


366. According to a minute dated sth March, 1943, from the Adjutant-General to the Secretary, De-
partment of the Army, (included in Army Department file 85/1/54) the proposal to establish a military pnso
was made for the purpose of avoiding the necessity for committing to civil prisons soldiers sentenced to
imprisonment by military courts, and whose services it was desired to retain in t e rm>, u w ose o
fences called for imprisonment and not detention. It was intended that when a military prison was established
soldiers sentenced to imprisonment by courts-martial and whose services it was not desired to retain, would
serve their sentences in civil gaols.
367. Shortly after the date of the minute just referred to, the policy was adopted of discharging
from the A.M.F. men who had been convicted of offences against military law, and who were regarded as
not likely to make efficient soldiers.
368. As a result of the adoption of this policy there were probably few if any men sentenced to
terms of imprisonment who were not discharged from the Army at the time of, or shortly after, their convic-
tions. Accordingly there was very little if any reason from early in 1943 onwards for the establishment of
a military prison to hold men awarded imprisonment, but whose services in the Forces were to be retained.
It would appear however that the decision against the establishment of a military prison was not made for
that reason.
369. It is clear that in the public mind a stigma attaches to a soldier who has served a court-martial
sentence in a civil gaol. It is not desirable that a stigma of this nature should attach to a man in all cases
where imprisonment has been awarded by a court-martial, particularly if he has been convicted of a military
offence. On the other hand, there is no good reason why a person subject to military law who is punished by
the award of a court-martial for a civil offence, and is sentenced to imprisonment should not serve his sen-
tence in a civil gaol in the same way as any civilian offender.
370. Paragraph 64 of chapter 3 of the Manual of Military Law (page 24) states that the introduction
in 1906 of the punishment of detention was effected with the object of saving soldiers convicted of offences
against discipline under the Army Act, and not discharged with ignominy, from being subject to the stigma
attaching to imprisonment. It is there laid down that a court-martial ought not to sentence to imprisonment
a soldier convicted of a purely military offence; and that if the court imposes imprisonment in contravention
of this principle confirming authorities should, except in very special circumstances, dbmmute the sentence to
a sentence of detention.
371. The conditions which obtain in the civil gaols of the various States are not uniform, and the pro-
visions for remissions for good conduct are not the same under the law of each State. Normally the remissions
which can be earned by an offender against military law, who is sent to serve his sentence in a civil gaol, are
determined by the State law. Although the Army retains the power to remit sentences, it is very seldom exer-
cised, and at one time directions were given that the remissions granted to civil prisoners should be applied. As
a consequence one prisoner may earn a greater remission than another who is serving his sentence in a
different State. This discrimination would have been prevented to a large extent if military prisons had been
established.
372. In the later stages of the war there were numbers of discharged personnel in the detention barracks
who had civil convictions. Probably most of those men had been sentenced for purely military offences, for
example, A.W.L. and desertion. As there was very little segregation in the barracks, some of them were able to
influence in an injurious way many other inmates, and so cause trouble and disaffection. It would have been
better from all aspects of the problem if such men had been effectively segregated, or had been sentenced to
imprisonment and confined in a military prison.
373. Para. 2of L.H.Q. circular 58691 of the 2nd May, 1944, (quoted by Col. Vail at p. N. 99 of the
transcript) directed that imprisonment with or without hard labour should be confined to cases where a mem-
ber has been convicted under the A.A. Secs. 4,5, 17, 18, or 41 or of striking or using or offering violence to his
superior officer, or escaping from a detention barrack or has previously been sentenced to imprisonment by
court-martial, or has previous civil convictions for which he has been sentenced to imprisonment. The Board
do not know how far that policy was followed, but it was quite obviously not adopted in every case where a
man who was sentenced by court-martial, had previous civil convictions for which he had been sentenced to
imprisonment.
374. In Victoria the Geelong and Bendigo gaols and in N.S.W. the Albury gaol were taken over as
detention barracks. An arrangement was made with the Victorian Inspector General of Penal Establishments
and Gaols that only a very few men those the Army considered it could not deal with satisfactorily
should be sent to other Victorian gaols. Many men who would otherwise most probably have been sentenced
to imprisonment and sent to a civil gaol were confined in the Albury barrack.
375. The Board’s opinion Is that a military prison for the reception of men with civil convictions of
the more serious nature should have been established, so that sentences of imprisonment might have been
awarded by courts-martial more freely in appropriate cases, and it would not have been necessary to com-
mute so many sentences of imprisonment to detention. If that had been done it would have been possible to
avoid many of the difficulties that arose, and at the same time save from the stigma of service in a civil
gaol those men whose offences did not merit it.
DETENTION BARRACKS.
376. A number of places have been appointed by the Governor-General as detention barracks, and
particulars relating to the detention barracks and guard compounds as at 21st August, 1945, appear in Exhibit
2. In Exhibit 35 the position as regards detention barracks and guard compounds as at 31st January, 1946,
is shown. These exhibits will be found reproduced as Appendices H and I respectively.
377. It will be seen from these exhibits that there are three types of detention barracks —A, B and C.
This classification relates to the numbers of men to be held in the various types, and to the establishments of
staff in them.
378. There appears to be no regulation providing that the construction of a detention barrack shall
be of a particular kind, or that a place shall not be appointed as a detention barrack unless it complies with
certain conditions. But A.M.R. & O. 635 (which is an order) provides that ;
(1) A room in a military prison or place of detention in the Commonwealth is not to be oc-
cupied until it has been certified, in accordance with instructions of the Military Board, to
be of such size, and to be ventilated and fitted up in such a manner as is necessary for the
health or the occupants.


(2) Outside the Commonwealth the suitability of rooms in military prisons, and places of deten-
tion is to be similarly certified by an officer appointed for the purpose by the officer com-
manding the Military Forces at the place where the military prison or place of detention is.
The staff officer will be assisted in his inspection by an officer of Engineers and a medical
officer.
(3) The C.O. of a unit will ascertain on arrival at a station what rooms in places of detention
have been certified fit for occupation.
(4) The officer commanding a station will ascertain before permitting soldiers to be committed
to a place of detention that the requirements of this paragraph have been satisfied.
379. Referring to Appendices H and I attention is directed to the fact that seven Type A Barracks
were civilian gaols and two others were not. The Type B Detention Barracks included one which was por-
tion of a civil gaol while of the others some were hutted and some tented or partly so. One Type C Barrack
was hutted, the other was tented. There was, therefore, no uniformity in any type of detention barrack.
The Board understand that when a detention barrack is to be erected, the design and details of construction
are determined, and plans are prepared, as a result of discussions between various Branches and Services,
including the Detention Barrack Service and the Engineers. Exhibit 33 Engineer-in-Chief’s Technical In-
struction 47 (Revised) relating to construction in “forward areas” would no doubt be used with regard to
detention barracks to be established in forward areas, and presumably other technical instructions of the
Engineer-in-Chief would be consulted in relation to barracks not so situated.
380. The provision to be made in the way of detention barracks in a particular area will depend on
the estimate that is made from time to time of the total number of S.U.S. likely to be detained. The course
followed regarding the establishment of detention barracks is described by Col. Murphy at pages V. 249 et
seq. It will be seen from that statement that the responsibility for initiating action to provide detention bar-
racks rests largely with the formation, etc., commander. A detention barrack may also be established merely
by taking over an existing building such as a civil gaol.
381. The accommodation to be provided for field units falls under three headings Scale A, Stale
B and Scale C, which apparently apply in the construction of detention barracks to be used in forward areas.
Scale A provides only minimum accommodation, and under It provision for sleeping quarters is apparently
to be in tents. Scale B accommodation may be added to Scale A at the discretion of the formation com-
mander when the situation permits, and resources in labour and materials are available. This scale provides
for the building of mess huts and certain additional amenities. Scale C may be added to Scale B at the dis-
cretion of the formation commander to provide additional amenities for troops, and under it sleeping huts are
provided. It is under Scale C that the only instruction regarding floor space in sleeping huts appears. For
other ranks the floor space is given as 45 sq. ft per man. Paragraph 48 of the Detention Barracks Regula-
tions provides that each soldier under sentence or temporarily committed for safe keeping will usually occupy
a room or cell by himself by day and night.
382. The Board’s view is that the institutions and conditions therein and under which men in deten-
tion are to serve their sentences should as far as practicable be uniform. For this reason the Board are
strongly opposed to the policy of taking over civil gaols as detention barracks. The use of these institutions
has caused a great deal of trouble, and has resulted in some men having to serve their sentences under con-
ditions entirely different from others.
383. The practical difficulties surrounding the provision and construction of detention barracks that
arose under the changing conditions of the war are beyond question. The movement of large bodies of
troops from one part of the Commonwealth to another, the return from overseas of considerable forces, and
the great increase in the number of offences following on that return, undoubtedly made it difficult to provide
the necessary or appropriate accommodation for men sentenced to detention.
384. The present provisions for establishing detention barracks, which have been briefly outlined,
should work satisfactorily if properly applied. Adequate representation of the Detention Barrack Service in
each area is essential if the necessary advice and representations with regard to the requirements and proper
functioning of the Service are to be made to the formation commander. In the opinion of the Board there
has not been in every case adequate representation of the Service in the various areas.
FIELD PUNISHMENT CENTRES.
385. A sentence of field punishment may be served regimentally or in a field punishment centre. The
Board have not heard of any regulation which prescribes the particular type of structure in which a sentence
is to be served, either in a unit or at a field punishment centre. It would probably be impracticable to pro-
vide for all cases as the conditions of service vary so much.
386. Field punishment centres were established during the war at Churchill and Yungaburra in Aus-
tralia, and at other places in the Middle East and New Guinea. The two centres mentioned apparent y
were, for all practical purposes, the equivalent of detention barracks, as they were established for fairly
lengthy periods, and were staffed and administered in much the same way.
387 The Board have already dealt with field punishment (paragraphs 248-255). The rules governing
It which are set ourat page 70S of Manual of Military Law were made by a Secretary of State under
proviso (5) to Sec 44 of the Army Act, which directs that all rules with respect to field punishment made
fn pursuance of that section shall be laid before Parliament which in this instance means the Par-
liament and not the Commonwealth Parliament. The Board in paragraph 255 of art . 11 r / ri ? a t eH Tf th
recommended that the existing rules governing field punishment should be comply If . “J
Board’s further recommendation for a new code of military law is adopted, such new rules would no doubt
be included in the regulations.


ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PUNISHMENT.
. • • f A ivt P Hr n 3Q7 a sentence of imprisonment may be served in two or
m „e T. zt%zr,;zT:—of£JL\™o. bc *- - • b-
ract c L.der that it is undesirable to transit ■. z IsTecognized
tence either to a higher or lower grade during the term o' »«v _ q stands a man serving imprisonment
so far as sentences of detention are concerned, but as the eg evidence that this has ever
in a civil gaol may be transferred to a detention barrack : e Z[ d e t o prevent the possibility. A
been done. However, in the Board s opinion, provision dea j t w i t h by suspension or remission
man serving imprisonment who is conducting himsel we sentenced to imprisonment
of sentence rather than by transfer to detention. Som,l imes ajan ™ h “ 9 .“f barrack. Regula-
cannot be committed to a prison immediately and must .v_ P irh men are kept separate from others who
tions should be made to govern that situation, and ensure that such men are kept sepa
are serving sentences of detention.
390. Under the regulations a sentence of detention may be served-whoHy °V n ; par * p” *of a serving
ment centre: (A.M.R. &O. 597). The provision, it rnay be «sumed can "as care "L taken in thf
soldier. In the Board’s opinion there is no objection to that regulation g
selection of any men to serve detention in that way.
391 Paragraph sof G.R.O. 141 of 1945 provides that when a member is sentenced to de * ent *°£
14 days or less he should not normally be committed to a detention barrack to re U his unit
serve it in a barrack detention room which whenever practicable, should be included in a regulation,
is situated. The Board recommend the continuance of that rule, and that it should be included in a regu.ar
392 Paragraphs 647-660 of A.M.R. &O. relate to barrack detention rooms, and para. 648 directs
that when a detention barrack is not available, soldiers under sentence of detention not exceeding ree
months will usually serve their sentences in barrack detention rooms .
DETENTION AND DETENTION BARRACKS.
393 Before discussing particular aspects of the administration of detention barracks and conditions
therein, and so on, some observations about the system generally and the Board s impressions gained dun g
their inspections may be made.
394. The precise nature of the punishment of detention is not entirely clear, and it is said b Y some
that the word “detention” supplies its own definition. The punishment has been adopted from the British
system, and a reference has already been made in para. 370 to the reason for its introduction Some mdma;
tion of the nature of the punishment may be gathered from sub-para, (i) of the proviso to bee. 132_ (2) of the
Army Act which provides that any rules governing what may be broadly described as the administration o
military prisons and detention barracks shall not “authorize corporal punishment to be inflicted for any offence,
nor render the imprisonment or detention more severe than it is under the law in force for the time being in
any public prison in England subject to the Prison Act, 1877”. In Australia the administration of such in-
stitutions is governed by regulations made under the Defence Act and by Orders issued in pursuance of
A.M.R. & O. 632, references to which will be found in paras. 362 and 404 of this report.
395. A soldier sentenced to detention must be detained in military custody In one of the places authorized
for the purpose. While there he is still subject to lawful military commands, but is not permitted the liber-
ties he might be granted in his unit. He is made to undergo training under rigorous conditions. The object
of detention apart from the deterrent aspect, is, speaking generally, to inculcate discipline, reform the offen-
der and make him a good soldier, fit to take his place in the Forces.
396. The Board’s inspections of the various barracks extended from September, 1945, to February,
1946, but all but one of the barracks were visited in September, October and November, 1945. A list of the
barracks visited and the dates of the Board’s visits are set out in Appendix K. Hostilities ceased shortly
before the inspections commenced. The proportion of ex-members in detention among nearly 2,000 men seen
by the Board was substantial: (cf. para. 554).
397. Of the barracks in which serving soldiers were confined only one appeared to the Board to be
satisfactory from the aspects of administration, discipline and training, and the accommodation in it was
good. In one of the others which was visited in September, 1945, the situation regarding administration and
staff was so unsatisfactory that the Board felt compelled to make immediate urgent representations to the
Minister.
398. Attention has been directed elsewhere in this Report to the various types of places used as deten-
tion barracks, some civil gaols, and some huts or tents. The Board were not favourably impressed by the
barracks in which mostly ex-members were serving sentences. Staff problems were acute in most of them, at
times because the staff was inadequate for the work, but mostly because the majority of the staff were unsuit-
able for this kind of duty. In many cases members of the staff had ben detailed when they were almost due
for discharge from the Army. For that and other reasons it was the case in some barracks that the staff had
little or no interest in their work, and were content to let discipline relax. Indeed in one barrack the situa-
tion had got so much out of hand that the S.U.S. were virtually in control of the place, and no discipline
was being enforced. In others discipline was not good.
399. Such matters as accommodation, hygiene, and so on, are discussed later. As will be seen the Board
consider that in many instances better accommodation, and more satisfactory sanitary arrangements should
have been provided. The Board do not suggest for one moment that offenders should be pampered. Their
opinion is based on the view that even wrong-doers should be entitled to certain minimum standards in these
matters, and particularly so when they are undergoing sentences that are said to be less severe than im-
prisonment, and which do not imprint the stigma that attaches to men who are sent to civil gaols.
400. As they have said elsewhere, the Board do not overlook the difficulties that confronted the
authorities in providing accommodation for a rapidly increasing number of men sentenced to detention, and
many of whom had rendered little if any effective service to their country, even in Australia. However if
more accommodation and better conditions had been provided the deleterious effects of the system might have
been largely avoided. More segregation and better facilities for training and work, particularly for ex-
members, would have been possible, and better discipline would have resulted.


401. Col. Murphy gave the Board a calculation of the cost of delinquency for six years (V 247-8),
which he estimated as being in excess of £3,000,000. The figure is based on a fairly extensive range of items
of cost. There were undoubtedly difficulties in getting materials, and manpower was not plentiful. Never-
theless, the Board cannot believe that it was impossible to have done more with regard to detention barracks.
Money, materials and manpower surely could have been made available for the purpose.
402. A word may be said regarding the claim sometimes advanced that the administration of and
discipline in detention barracks were seriously prejudiced by ill-founded allegations of ill-treatment and bad
conditions in them that were made in many quarters, particularly in relation to what is commonly called “the
Wilson case.” It is unfortunately the fact that some such allegations have been made without foundation and
that other matters have been exaggerated. Furthermore, the public have not always appreciated, and probably
many do not even now appreciate, the difficult task that confronts the Detention Barrack Service and those
who have charge of or are on the staff of detention barracks. A great deal of prejudice and hatred which
is quite unjustified has arisen in the minds of many members of the public, at times with most unfortunate
results with regard to staff, many of whom have been ordered into the service against their inclination.
403. Public opinion undoubtedly is easily inflamed, and it is beyond question that it has been in error
on many occasions with regard to detention barracks. But it would be idle to assert or adopt the attitude that
nothing wrong ever occurred in them. While not suggesting that such a claim has been made the Board
venture the opinion that an effective way of removing suspicion in the public’s mind would be to give them
as much information as is possible as to the facts of any matter complained of, and the steps that are taken
to remedy anything that is shown to be wrong.
ADMINISTRATION OF DETENTION BARRACKS.
404. The Australian Military (Places of Detention) Regulations and Standing Orders contain the re-
gulations, orders and instructions in relation to the management, inspection, discipline, interior economy and
military training of and in places of detention.
405. Prior to 27th April, 1943, the administration of detention barracks had been under the control of
the Provost Marshal. The Detention Barrack Service was then established, and thereafter that Service has
been responsible for the supervision of the staff of detention barracks and the tendering of technical advice
to the Adjutant-General. As explained by Col. Murphy, the Directorate became responsible for the imple-
mentation of policy regarding the control and administration of guard compounds, detention barracks and
military prisons. These duties included advising on the suitability of existing or proposed new sites and
buildings, the training of soldiers under sentence, and obtaining the discharge from the Army of unsuitable
personnel undergoing sentence. The barracks remained under the command of the local authorities, who
were also responsible for local administration and discipline.
406. Exhibit 7 consists of extracts from Field Service Regulations Vol. I relating to organization and
administration. These references show the relation between a Service and the Principal Staff Officer who
determines the policy to be adopted by the Service. In the case of the Detention Barrack Service the Ad-
jutant-General is the Principal Staff Officer.
407. The result of the relationship between the head of a service and the principal staff officer and
the Branch under whose direction he functions, is that the head of the service has only a limited authority in
matters of administration. The policy to be adopted is determined by the principal staff officer. The head
of the service or his representative is free to make all arrangements for carrying out the duties of his ser-
vice within the bounds of the policy so laid down.
408. According to the evidence of Brig. Urquhart, the Deputy Adjutant-General (Personal Services) it
is not easy “to put in words” the relationship between the staff on the one hand and the service on the other.
The principal staff officer is responsible for deciding what is to be done, and his instructions are put into
effect by the staff officers of subordinate formations. Both the principal staff officer and the staff officers on
subordinate formations receive technical advice pertaining to a service. The head of a service issues instruc-
tions to his representatives on subordinate formations only on technical matters.
409. The staff for each type of detention barrack, it will be seen from Exhibit 2, is laid down in the
war establishment. The personnel to be posted to any particular detention barrack are the responsibility of
the Adjutant-General or his representatives. The Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks is
entitled to make recommendations with regard to the appointment or discharge of members of the staff of the
service, and his recommendation or advice is usually accepted. However, any action contemplated with regard
to staff must necessarily be considered in the light of the requirements of the Army as a whole.
410. The nature of the responsibilities of the head of a service was explained by Brigadier Urquhart
in his evidence as follows
“The head of the Service is really responsible for the technical control and efficiency of that
Service. That is putting it rather broadly. He exercises that control in accordance with various
instructions that are issued from time to time by the Staff. It is his job to directly control the
Service, to know all about it, to ensure that it works smoothly and efficiently in accordance with
the regulations and instructions governing it, to bring anything to notice that requires adjustment
or further Staff action, and generally all technical matters connected with the Service he is
responsible for.
The Staff, of course, depend upon him for reports and information, and advice about what
is going on, and what requires doing, and then it becomes their responsibility to decide what
should be done to rectify any position that is beyond the authority of the Director, and to take
whatever action they can to rectify it or to improve matters.”
411. The Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks has from time to time issued technical
instructions for the guidance of the staff of the service. These will be found in Exhibit 1.
412. The actual administration of a detention barrack, and the maintenance and supervision of dis-
cipline therein, are very largely in the hands of the commandant. Paragraph 8 of the Detention Barracks
Regulations provides that the commandant shall be charged with the general discipline, management and
care of the detention barrack or military prison under his command. Although he is the commanding officer
of the warrant and non-commissioned officers on the staff of the barrack or prison under his control, the
commanding officer of the men serving sentences is an officer of field rank not on the staff of the barrack or
prison who is appointed as such by the proper authority: (see para. 8A).


413. The Detention Barrack, Regulation,
mandant, for example, with regard to the keeping of books attention to the training
of S.U.S. and other matters arising in the administration of the bar
4.4. During their inspection of the de. e n.ion Jfta'
held a rank above that of major. On occasions e h commandant of any detention barrack of
he was a lieutenant. The Board are strongly of the opinion that he c°mmanaam ° j ence suitab i e for this
whatever size should hold a rank not lo ?" of some of the commandants that they met is that
Lc V es,.ry for S* kind of work, however valuable their serv.ce,
might be in other spheres. , , , . • •
415 xhe maintenance of discipline in a detention barrack, with due regard both to achieving the
objects of detention, and to obtaining a sympathetic understanding of the
is a task which calls for special qualities that are not to be found in every office . ,
exacting and if properly carried out will occupy a great part of each day.
416 The offences against the Detention Barracks Regulations which may be committed by a soldier
under sentence or temporarfly committed for safe keeping, are set out in para 161 of the Detention Barracks
Regulations. The powers of a commandant or commanding officer to deal with these offences appear in para
163. If in the opinion of the commanding officer the punishments which he is authorized to inflict are too
lenient, having regard to the nature of the offence or offences committed by a soldier under sentence he m y
in his discretion report the case to the proper authority with a view to the assembling of a Board °f Visitors
or in an appropriate case charging the accused with an offence against the Army Act, the Defence Act or the
Australian Military Regulations.
417 The provisions for the constitution of a Board of Visitors and their powers appear in paras. 165
to 167 of the Detention Barracks Regulations. Such a Board may award close confinement for a period not
exceeding 14 days and/or No. 1 scale of punishment diet (usually referred to as P.D.I) for a period not ex-
ceeding 15 days.
418. One of the punishments which a commandant may inflict is P.D.I, which is usually awarded in
conjunction with close confinement. P.D.I consists of one pound of bread per day and water (para. 170 (1) ).
If a man is placed on P.D.I for a period in excess of 3 days his diet shall consist of bread and water as
just mentioned for periods of one, two or three days, alternating with periods of corresponding duration on
the ordinary diet of a detention barrack or prison as the case may be: (para. 170 (2) ).
419. The remaining sub-paragraphs of para. 170 contain various provisions with regard to P.D.I and
in particular that while a man is placed on this diet he shall not be required to attend parades during the
whole period for which the punishment is imposed.
420. P.D.2 is another punishment that may be awarded by a commandant under para. 163. As far as
the Board can gather it has not often been awarded. The diet and the provisions with regard to service of
the punishment are set out in para. 171.
421. Some objection perhaps may be raised to a very reduced diet as a method of punishment. Some
S.U.S. however are of such a nature, and are so difficult to deal with that some means must be found of en-
forcing discipline. Apart from close confinement and some form of punishment diet it would appear to be
extremely difficult to find any effective way of dealing with such offenders. So long as the full diet was
obtainable even close confinement would most likely be ineffective to deter some of them. Such men might
even commit breaches of the regulations with the express object of avoiding all but the lightest duties as a
result of being confined by themselves. Their employment would be extremely difficult and would require
additional supervision.
422. The Board’s opinion is that the power to award close confinement and P.D.I should only be
exercised so far as discipline cannot be maintained without resort to it. From their observations in various
detention barracks, and from statements made by S.U.S., the Board have reason to think that at times too
great a use has been made of this form of punishment. The existence of the power, the exercise of which
does not appear to be subject to any effective supervision, may easily tempt a commandant who is faced with
difficulty in maintaining discipline to resort to it instead of using other measures. That is one of the reasons
why commandants should be of such a calibre that they can be trusted to act with even-handed justice.
423. The Board are of the opinion that if at any time it is found that undue use is being made of the
power to inflict this form of punishment, steps should be taken either to remove the commandant or to limit
his powers so that with close confinement he can award not less than half rations, and entrust some higher
authority with the power to inflict P.D.I.
REMISSIONS OF SENTENCES.
424. Prior to the amendment in 1944 to para. 159 of the Detention Barracks Regulations, provision
existed for the establishment by the Military Board of a system of progressive stages determined by the
allotment of marks for good conduct, with specific privileges attached to each stage. So far as can be ascer-
tained no such system was ever established, and the paragraph mentioned was deleted by the amendment.
425. The remissions of sentences which a commandant is authorized to make are governed by para.
160 of the Detention Barracks Regulations which provides that
“160. (R. 19) (1) If a soldier sentenced to imprisonment or detention for a period of or exceeding
twenty-eight days has displayed
(a) special industry and good conduct; and
(b) (except in the case of a soldier sentenced to discharge from the Military Forces on the ex-
piration of a term of imprisonment or detention) proficiency in and attention to drill and
military training,
the Commandant may remit any such part of the term of imprisonment or detention of that
soldier as does not exceed
(a) one-fourth of the period of the term, when the soldier has not previously been sentenced to
a term of imprisonment or detention of or exceeding twenty-eight days;


(b) one-fifth of the period of the term, when the soldier has on one previous occasion been sen-
tenced to a term of imprisonment or detention of or exceeding twenty-eight days; or
(c) one-sixth of the term, when the soldier has on two or more previous occasions been sentenced
to a term of imprisonment or detention of or exceeding twenty-eight days.
(2) The Commandant shall not remit any part of a term of imprisonment or detention im-
posed for escaping or attempting to escape from lawful custody or from any prison or place of
detention.
There has not been entire uniformity in the administration of this system in the various barracks, and slightly
different views have been taken as to what constitutes “special industry” and “good conduct” for the purpose
of the regulation.
426. Under para. 160 of the Detention Barracks Regulations a man sentenced to less than 28 days
detention cannot obtain any remission of his sentence from a commandant. There is evidence that some
C.Os. have awarded 27 days detention with the object of preventing the allowance of any remission. Such
an award is lawful, but such a reason for making it is open to criticism. The Board recommend that re-
missions should be authorized in respect of sentences of 14 days and upwards. That would give men in de-
tention an additional incentive to behave.
427. S.U.S. at times are confused as to what they must do to earn remissions. Some men who do not
get into trouble consider that their conduct is sufficiently good to entitle them to remissions. Some men are
incapable of appreciating what is meant by “special industry” and “good conduct.”
428. Under the usual practice in detention barracks a man does not ascertain whether he will obtain
a remission until shortly before the time when it is granted. This is not entirely satisfactory, and it appears
to be desirable that a man should have an opportunity of learning the view that is being taken of his conduct
from time to time.
429. Some types of marks systems are undoubtedly impracticable because they are too cumbersome to
administer. On the other hand it should be possible to devise a system which will not be an undue burden
to administer. By this means each S.U.S. would progressively know how his conduct is likely to be regarded
for the purpose of a remission and would have an opportunity of mending his conduct if he finds it is not
satisfactory. In the Board’s opinion discipline would be promoted under such a scheme.
430. One possible method of awarding marks which might be easily adopted, would be to record
marks only for disorderly conduct or idleness. If these were the only matters to be watched no other entries
would be necessary, and men who did not have marks, or some number, recorded against them would auto-
matically qualify for remissions.
431. The difficulties mentioned in paragraphs 427 and 428 are not confined to “commandant’s remis-
sions,” but apply also to the remission and review of sentences by formation or L. of C. Commanders. The
Board found that the regulations and orders governing these matters were not administered uniformly in the
various States.
432. It is fully appreciated that discretionary powers will be exercised differently by different men;
and it is appreciated too, that what is appropriate for the enforcement of discipline in one area may not be
appropriate for another. But the disparities which the Board encountered could not be justified on either of
those grounds.
433. In one State the Board found that a system had been introduced after the termination of hostili-
ties whereby all sentences were reviewed when one half of the sentence as reduced by the general amnesty
granted to mark the termination of hostilities had been completed. That system existed in no other State. In
another State, the Board found that when sentences came up for review, it often occurred that they were not
suspended or remitted even in cases where the report from the detention barrack was a favourable one. In
other States the requirements of para. 6 (d) of G.R.O. 444/1943 were more closely followed.
434. Disparities in administration from State to State or from one part of a State to another quickly
became known amongst the S.U.S. When disparities appear in matters so important to the S.U.S. as the re-
view and suspension or remission of sentences, the discipline of the S.U.S. will Inevitably suffer.
435. The Board consider that it is highly desirable firstly that suspensions and remission of sentences
should be governed by a policy uniform throughout the Commonwealth, and secondly that the S.U.S. be fully
informed of what is involved in such phrases as “exceptionally good conduct,” “special industry and good
conduct” or “proficiency in and attention to drill and military training.”
436. It may be in point to mention that it frequently occurs that when a sentence is brought up for
review, the papers are endorsed by the formation or L. of C. commander: “Sentence to be served in full.”
That expression is intended to mean no more than that the sentence will not be reviewed again by the forma-
tion or L. of C. commander. In some cases, however, it occurred that the commandant of the detention bar-
rack construed this as a direction that he was not to grant any “commandant’s remission.” When any such
cases came under the notice of the Board, Col. Murphy was informed and the position was rectified im-
mediately. The Board recommend that a Technical Instruction be issued by the Detention Barrack Service
to prevent the repetition of such occurrences.
STAFF OF DETENTION BARRACKS.
437. In their interim report dated 18th December, 1945, which was forwarded after previous repre-
sentations to the Minister on two occasions, the Board dealt with the staffing of detention barracks, and drew
attention to the necessity which in their opinion exists for an ample staff of properly trained men to be pro-
vided for every detention barrack. The Board also directed attention in that report to the failure which in
their opinion has occurred in many Instances to providean adequate staff of men properly trained for this type
of work.
438. The Board are strongly of the opinion that, at any rate from the time when the detention barrack
service was established, sufficient A Class personnel were never posted to the service. The Board say this as
a statement of fact and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the opposing views that apparently
exist. It is clear however that the Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks frequently asked that
more A Class personnel should be made available, and that the number he asked for was never supplied. The
result has been the creation of many difficulties in the administration of detention barracks with consequent ill-
effects on the discipline of the S.U.S.


439. There is undoubtedly room for a difference of opinion as to whether or not addlt ' onal m ®“ of , thl ®
class should or could have been supplied. The Board have perused a number of Serldre
material relating to the question, and can appreciate the points of view both of the Detention Barrack Service
and the Director of Organization. While expressing no view on the difference of opinion they feel justified
in saying that it is to be regretted that it was not found possible to depart in small measure from the
policy that was adopted, and to make available a few more A Class men for duty in detention barracks.
440. The Committee set up by the Prime Minister of Great Britain in 1943 to inquire into the adminis-
tration of detention barracks in England (the second “Oliver” Committee) state at page 9 o t eir report.
“To be a really efficient warder of people in confinement a man needs many qualities, including
besides firmness and technical knowledge and military skill, tact and, above all, patience. It should
not be forgotten that many men in detention are most difficult, unwilling, insubordinate and in-
solent. A few are dangerous .... The whole problem of securing really efficient and trained
staff for these places is beset with the greatest difficulties in these days of shortage of manpower
and especially of efficient manpower. The qualities of a capable warder referred to above are the
very qualities of an efficient N.C.O. with a combatant unit, and for obvious reasons such men
should not be advanced in years. It is further apparent that they should be volunteers.
441. The Board are in complete agreement with the statement just quoted, and desire to emphasize as
strongly as possible the necessity of providing for detention barracks a staff that is adequate, fit and properly
trained. It is perhaps more easy to detail men in a somewhat haphazard way than to take the necessary
action to provide appropriate personnel. That tendency in the Board’s opinion should be resisted as strongly
as possible, as the effects of placing unsuitable personnel in charge of S.U.S. are serious and lasting.
ACCOMMODATION IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
442. The primary purpose of a detention barrack is to confine serving soldiers who are expected to
return to their units, or some other form of military service, at the conclusion of their sentence. While in
detention men are given military training and subjected to discipline with the object of turning them into
good soldiers. The proper type of accommodation for such men would appear to be barracks, huts or tents
in which they will live under conditions approximating to those of ordinary army life.
443. The Board do not regard cellular accommodation as appropriate for serving soldiers in detention,
except so far as it may be used for the punishment of offenders against the regulations which apply to men in
detention. Accommodation in civil gaols is much less suitable or desirable for serving soldiers in detention.
The Board express this opinion largely as a result of their inspection of the various detention barracks.
444. Discharged personnel who are required to serve sentences of detention should not be confined in
civil gaols. Attention has already been drawn to the very different conditions under which men detained in
a gaol have to serve as compared with those obtaining in other detention barracks. The actual accommo-
dation in the civil gaols that the Board saw was in most cases out of date, even for a penal establishment,
and in one the ventilation was so bad that a member of the staff told the Board that he was sometimes sick
when he opened the cells of a morning because of the foul air. However in some gaols there was no undue
hardship except that arising from the fact that it was a gaol.
445. One of the principal complaints about accommodation in huts was with regard to the size of the
cells which In many cases three men had to occupy from about 5 p.m. on each day to 6.30 a.ra. the next
morning. The floor space in many of these cells was between 60 and 70 square feet, on which the three men
slept, and on which the sanitary can was kept.
446. According to the directions contained in Exhibit 33 (see para. 379) the minimum floor space per
man should be 45 square feet. It appears to the Board that the cells in the huts now under discussion were
designed for the use of one man only, and that when the large increase in the number of men awarded
detention took place, they were used for three as a means of finding accommodation for all to be detained.
For obvious reasons two men are not permitted to occupy the one cell.
447. It has not been established that the health of any man was affected as a consequence of his being
confined in such a small cell with two other men. There was undoubtedly discomfort as a result, but no
more, and probably less, than troops experience on active service. The ventilation of the cells was not in some
places very good.
448. Probably the worst feature of the arrangement was the presence in the cell of the sanitary can
—very often a small tin —provided for the use of the three men during the hours they were locked in
together. To visit the latrine a man has to summon one of the night watchmen, but as there are not many
on duty and two have to accompany the man, it may be some time before he is attended to.
449. In some barracks, including some civil gaols used as such, there are rooms or dormitories where
a number of men are locked in together for the night, that is from 5 o’clock in the evening to 6.30 on the
following morning. In nearly all cases the sanitary arrangement is a bucket with a seat. The result of its
use is usually just as unpleasant as in the case of a can in a cell.
450. As the Board have said elsewhere the provision of more huts or tents would have had good
results in various ways. In addition to facilitating segregation, improving discipline and so on, more space
would by such means have been available for each man, and no doubt more dormitories could have been pro-
vided. It should be practicable to build a separate water closet or latrine opening off each dormitory. It
would perhaps not be feasible to provide a similar convenience in a cell, but if only one man is to occupy
each cell there should not be undue discomfort if the present arrangement for cells is continued.
451. The Board’s views will be clear from what they have said. They recommend that effect should
be given to them. If the orders relating to the construction and maintenance of other parts of a barrack
such as kitchens and latrines are followed, those places should be satisfactory. ’
HEALTH OF S.U.S.
452. Speaking generally, the evidence establishes that the health of S.U.S. in detention has not been
worse than that of other soldiers. Indeed in many cases the health and physical condition of a SU S has
improved after a period of detention. * ' ’


453. Although a man is awarded a sentence of detention he is not called upon to perform it unless he
is certified fit to undergo detention. If a medical officer refuses to certify him fit for detention he will not
serve any portion of his sentence, or will be released. This is not the practice under civil law.
454. Some D class men are at times certified fit for detention. During their inspection of the detention
barracks the Board discovered some D class men who had been certified fit for detention, but who complained
that they were no longer fit to serve their sentence, and that no further examination of them had been made.
The matter was taken up with the Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks and the Board were
informed that steps would be promptly taken to ensure periodical examination of D class men in detention to
ascertain whether or not they are fit to serve their sentences.
455. Complaints were made by a few S.U.S. that they had not received the medical attention to which
they considered they were entitled. In most of these cases a S.U.S. —usually an ex-member—desired to have
dental or surgical treatment, but had to wait for what was considered to be a convenient opportunity. The
Board have found no evidence to show that medical or dental attention has been improperly refused to any
man In detention. Any difficulties that have arisen In obtaining treatment have been due to reasons similar
to those which at times obtain in serving units. There is in the Board’s opinion no reason to suggest that the
medical attention afforded S.U.S. generally has been in any way inadequate, having regard to the circum-
stances under which detention is to be served, and Army organization generally.
TRAINING IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
456. Serving soldiers who are sent to detention must carry out military training. That of course is
highly desirable as part of the programme to improve the discipline and education of such men by all avail-
able methods. The Board have been handed a copy of the Syllabus of Training for use in Military Prisons
and Detention Barracks: (Exhibit 15). This covers a period of 28 days. The object of the training is to bring
the soldier to the standard known as “Draft Priority 1” so that when he is released he can be posted direct to
an operational unit.
457. Paragraph 150 of the Detention Barracks Regulations provides that:—
“Suitable educational training will be carried out to the fullest possible extent in detention barracks
and military prisons.”
458. After the Army Education Service was established the facilities provided by that Service were
available to serving soldiers in detention. The Board consider that the provision of means by which the educa-
tional standards of soldiers in detention may be improved is one of the best methods for promoting their re-
habilitation. In the Board’s opinion however something more could quite easily have been done to afford
educational facilities beyond those that were provided. What was done no doubt was useful, but greater atten-
tion to this aspect of training would have contributed to the reformation of the soldiers, and the achievement
of a higher standard of discipline among them.
459. That more could be done can be clearly seen from the following extract from paragraph 33 of the
report of the “Second Oliver” Committee:—
“In all the Army establishments without exception there is an Education Room, sometimes more than
one, and frequently an Information Room as well, excellently arranged with cuttings from the illus-
trated papers, war maps and so forth. Use is made of the cinema and of wireless for educational
purposes, and in many places there are regular courses of lectures on current topics, the “Brains’
Trust” method of imparting information is employed (at one Detention Barracks the Committee
observed a “Brains’ Trust” in operation with three officers and three soldiers under sentence con-
ducting the questions), and the “Padre’s Hour” has its place in the educational scheme.”
460. The Board saw nothing comparable with these facilities in the detention barracks in Australia.
Moreover, it is to be observed that the Committee, in the immediately preceding paragraph of their report,
expressed the opinion that much more effort could be made to occupy men’s minds and improve their characters
while they are undergoing detention, by an extension of facilities for general education as well as for training
in technical military subjects.
461. Paragraphs 144 to 153 of the Detention Barracks Regulations relate to the employment and training
of S.U.S. and time tables for weekdays and Sundays are set out in para. 156. As far as possible a uniform
policy should be applied throughout detention barracks in respect of the employment and training of serving
soldiers, and the necessary technical instructions should be issued to bring about this result.
462. Since the institution of the general policy of discharging certain men sentenced to detention, but
retaining them to serve their sentences, the question of the employment of such men has assumed considerable
importance. For the reasons stated in paras. 552-565 the Board are entirely opposed to the policy of discharging
men from the Army and keeping them in detention. If that policy had not been adopted, many of the diffi-
culties that have arisen in the way of getting discharged personnel to work and enforcing discipline amongst
them would have been avoided. According to the evidence the work that such men carried out comprised
salvage operations, for example, on boots and clothing, reconditioning equipment, timber felling, vegetable
growing, and road making. Details are given at pages V.39-V.42 of the transcript, and, in some instances,
the value of the w r ork done has been calculated.
463. The provision of work for discharged personnel in accordance with any settled policy is attended
with many difficulties. Men are not usually in detention for periods long enough to train them adequately in
a trade. They are at times moved from one barrack to another. Furthermore, instructors are necessary and
must be found if any serious efforts are to be made to give men constant work. The improvement of camp
areas, the construction and maintenance of buildings, and particularly vegetable growing seem likely to afford
the best means of providing regular work. What was done in at least two barracks in the production of vege-
tables shows very clearly the advantage of adopting some such form of work. In some barracks however
the Board found that very little attempt had been made to get discharged personnel to carry out a compre-
hensive programme of work. Most of the difficulties would be avoided if men were not discharged until the
completion of their sentences.


CATERING FOR S.U.S.
464. The scale of diet for soldiers under sentence is reproduced in para. 155 of the Detention barracks
Regulations. The Board understand that it was approved by experts m these matters, and was fixed on t
basis that the men receiving it would do only light work. It is claimed to be sufficient for that purpose.
465. The Board have not been able to obtain a really satisfactory definition of the term “light w ° rk -
It was said that a man who is standing at a bench repairing shoes for 8 hours a day is performing only light
work, and that soldiers who are called upon to carry out the syllabus of training already mentioned are
probably only doing the equivalent of light work, because while lectures are being given and so tort t ey
will be grouped around the instructor. It seems to be clear however that some of the tasks which b.U.h.
may be called upon to perform, and which in fact they have performed, are of a heavier nature than could
be included under the term “light work.”
466. Paragraph 147 of the Detention Barracks Regulations states that, except as otherwise provided in
the regulations, every S.U.S. shall during the period of his sentence be employed for not less than six but not
more than nine hours a day, exclusive of the time allotted for meals. The Syllabus of Training laid own
is to be carried out on six days of every week.
467. From the Board’s observations they are of the opinion that a good deal of the work that S.U.S.
are called upon to do may well be outside the category of “light work.” Discharged personnel have not per-
haps been given enough work to do. This however has been due to difficulties of administration, and if steps
had been taken to employ such men fully they would in all probability have needed a higher scale of diet
than is at present provided. The necessity of providing a higher scale of diet when men are called upon to
perform certain tasks has been recognised on occasions when parties have been allotted work, such, for example,
as loading bombs in the morning and getting instruction in the afternoon.
468. A comparison has been prepared between the dietary scales which are in use in the prisons of the
various States, those laid down for military prisons or detention barracks, and the Army scale for male per
sons for use in certain parts of Australia (which cover much the same area as that in which detention barracks
are situated). This comparison will be found in Appendix J. It is not suggested that a detailed examina-
tion of each commodity is of much assistance. But on a comparison of the prison diets generally with those
included in the Army ration scale and the detention barrack scale there is in the Board’s opinion substantial
ground for the conclusion that the scale in detention barracks is too low.
469. Having regard to that comparison and what has been said earlier, the Board accordingly recom-
mend that men in detention should receive the normal Army dietary scale appropriate for the area in which they
are serving their sentences. In making this recommendation the Board do not consider that they are showing
any undue favour to men in detention as compared with serving soldiers,
470. There appears to be no good reason why as a general rule men ordered to serve sentences of
imprisonment or detention should be punished by an insufficient diet. The necessity for supplying adequate
and satisfactory food for men in detention has been recognised by the steps that were taken to improve the
diet, particularly by the appointment of trained cooks from the Catering Service to the various detention
barracks, as well as in other ways. The Board’s recommendation is based on the view that the policy with
regard to the scale of diet for men in detention has not been carried far enough,
AMENITIES LETTER WRITING, VISITS, ETC.
471. The principal amenities and privileges permitted to S.U.S. are the writing and receipt of letters
and visits, which will be discussed in later paragraphs. In the absence of a special order no S.U.S. is entitled
to receive any parcel while he is in detention. Libraries are usually provided for use of S.U.S. They are
not under the present regulations allowed the use or possession of tobacco in any form or of any intoxicating
liquor.
472. The commandant of each barrack is under a duty to do his utmost to provide for the training
and education of the men under his charge. From the inception of the Detention Barracks Service the per-
formance of this duty was imposed upon the various commandants by the Director of Military Prisons and
Detention Barracks and his deputies. It has already been pointed out that the facilities provided by the Army
Education Service are not available for discharged personnel. Some use was made of the Service by serving
soldiers undergoing detention, but no doubt only in the way of correspondence courses. In some detention
barracks lectures have been arranged which were given by visitors, who in many cases were residents of the
town or district in which the barrack was situated, and at times films were screened. In some cases the
assistance of Chaplains was enlisted.
473. Some very good work was done at times in the provision of educational facilities. But as in other
matters the provision of adequate staff is essential. Educational training must largely be arranged so as not
to interfere with the other training in a barrack, and consequently if the staff is insufficient there may be
difficulties in the way of security while it is being conducted. It is not always easy to obtain the services
of outsiders to give lectures and otherwise assist in training, particularly if a detention barrack is situated
some distance from a large town. The Board however strongly urge that every possible step should be
taken to provide as much educational training in detention barracks as is possible.
PROVISION OF TOBACCO AND CIGARETTES.
474. In an interim report dated 11th March, 1946, the Board dealt with the subject of the provision
and use of tobacco and cigarettes, and recommended that smoking should be permitted in detention barracks
subject to certain conditions.
CHAPLAINS.
475. Paragraphs 73 to 77 of the Detention Barracks Regulations relate to Chaplains who visit soldiers
under sentence or temporarily committed for safe keeping. Paragraph 45 provides for the issue to each SITS
of a Bible and Prayer Book of the kind approved by the denomination to which he belongs and fo^the dis'
tnbution of other books deemed proper for religious instruction. There has been no evidence and no s„T
gestion, that any Chaplain carrying out his duties in a detention barrack has been in any way hindered bv the
» t^ a flct„, B ° ard h>Ve reaS °" dMbt ,hat ■”* -PP—'it/ha, been afforded


476. Some complaints however were made by a few Chaplains that the rooms or places provided for
the holding of divine service were somewhat inadequate, or inappropriate, or that the circumstances under
which they had to conduct divine service prevented that solemnity being achieved which should prevail on
such an occasion. The Board consider that better facilities might have been afforded to Chaplains in some
cases without unduly risking the security of the barrack.
477. While expressing admiration for the excellent work done by the Chaplains who have undertaken
the important and difficult work in the detention barracks, the Board consider that greater use might have
been made of them in some places, and recommend that arrangements should be made so that the services of
Chaplains specially set aside for this work will be available in all barracks.
LETTERS.
478. The writing and receipt of letters by S.U.S. is regulated by certain paragraphs of the Detention
Barracks Regulations (131-133, 134, 135 and 143). Onreception into a military prison or detention barrack a
S.U.S. is to be permitted to communicate by letter, postcard, telegram or other writing, with his relations and
friends, and thereafter to write one letter in each 14 days during his sentence. Letters and other written
communications addressed to or written by S.U.S. are subject to censorship as laid down in para. 143. Any
S.U.S. may apply to the commandant for permission to write a special letter. Many applications of this nature
have been made, and apparently most of them have been granted.
479. Some complaints were received from S.U.S that they were restricted in writing a letter to what
could be written on one sheet of paper, and, in one barrack, on one side of the sheet only. The Board found
that there was a general tendency among the staff of the barracks to place limitations on the length of letters
in some such way. Where it was found that such limitations were being imposed, the matter was adjusted on
the spot after consultation by the Board with the commandant.
480. As every letter has to be censored and therefore read by some member of the staff—and thousands
of letters have been written —the work entailed in doing so is very considerable. On a comparison with the
work which has to be done by officers in serving units in censoring the letters of the members of that unit,
there seems to be no justification for any restriction being placed on the length of a letter which an S.U.S. may
write once every fortnight.
481. The Board however do not recommend any alteration in the present restriction on the number of
letters which may be written. Cases of hardship can quite easily be met by granting permission to write a
special letter.
VISITS.
482. A S.U.S. on reception into a military prison or detention barrack may be visited by his relations
and friends immediately after reception, and thereafter, subject to his good conduct and industry, and at the
discretion of the commandant, at intervals of not less than 28 days: (para. 135 of the Detention Barracks Regu-
lations). A visit must take place in the presence of a member of the staff; (para. 137). The period of
any one visit is not to exceed 20 minutes, except in special cases: (para. 139). Other provisions in the regu-
lations are directed to safeguarding the security of the barrack, and preventing unauthorized communications
or the furthering of attempts at escape.
483. There appears to be no uniform practice with regard to the intervals at which visits are per-
mitted. It would appear that 28 days is fairly common, but that in some barracks visits have been per-
mitted at intervals of 14 days. Very few complaints were received from S.U.S. with regard to the intervals
at which visits are permitted. Most of the complaints were as to the short space of time allowed for a visit,
particularly where visitors have to travel long distances for the purpose.
484. Many S.U.S. serve their sentences in barracks in States other than those in which they reside.
Such men are most unlikely to receive any visits at all. Some barracks are situated in or near country towns,
and even the S.U.S. serving sentences therein may not be visited very frequently because their friends and
relations may live at considerable distances. Difficulties of this nature must arise, as it would be impractic-
able to distribute all S.U.S. to barracks nearest to their places of residence.
485. The Board see no reason to recommend any alteration in the present provisions. Any case of
real hardship can be dealt with by the commandant permitting a special visit.
BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS.
486. Paragraph 46 of the Detention Barracks Regulations provides that; —
“No newspapers or books, other than those supplied to the detention barrack military prison
library, will be permitted for the use of the soldiers under sentence or temporarily committed for
safe keeping, and then only in accordance with these Regulations and Orders.”
487. The Board have inspected the libraries provided in the various detention barracks. Some were
meagre while others, although more extensive, contained some reading matter which would not appear to have
very much value in such institutions. Apparently books for libraries are not supplied at the expense of the
Army, but are collected by gifts from such bodies as the Australian Comforts Fund, and through the efforts o
chaplains and commandants and so on. Deprivations of library books is one of the punishments which a com-
mandant may inflict for a breach of the Detention Barracks Regulations. If the punishment is to have any
value, the privilege which is thereby forfeited should be of some worth. Furthermore the education of SALS,
should be promoted by making suitable books available to those who are prepared to make good use of them.
The Board do not overlook the fact that some S.U.S. destroy books which are given them to read. Such men
however are probably more effectively punished if by the deprivation of books they lose a valuable privilege.
488. The Board accordingly recommend that steps be taken to have a uniform policy laid down which
is calculated to achieve these objects and to make the implementation of such policy the specific responsibility
of some appropriate officer, body or organization within the Army.


OTHER AMENITIES.
489. The news of the day, or portion of it, is communicated to S.U.S. in some barracks by means of a
copy of a daily paper being pasted on a board so that the S.U.S. can read it. In some cases portions of a
newspaper are read out to the S.U.S on parade. The Board found in one or two barracks that no news at
all was given to the S.U.S. but some arrangement for the communication of news was promised as a result of
discussion with the commandant.
490. In many barracks wireless sets have been installed and selected programmes are broadcast at
various times.
POWER TO WITHDRAW AMENITIES.
491. Beyond the deprivation of library books and mattress, a commandant has no power to punish a
S.U.S. by the withdrawal or alteration of any amenities or privileges at present permitted by regulations. He
may of course refuse to grant additional privileges which are within his discretion, and if discipline is bad he
may decide to take no steps to provide further amenities. Under present conditions such action, broadly
speaking, cannot be directed against an individual S.U.S. but can be directed only against the general body of
S.U.S.
492. The Board consider that if a commandant had the power to grant additional privileges to individual
S.U.S., and the right to withdraw them for misbehaviour, a valuable means of enforcing discipline would be
added. If the Board’s earlier recommendation that a marks system be introduced is adopted, it might be
possible to introduce in conjunction with it a system of progressive stages with specific privileges attaching to
each. The commandant could then be empowered to withdraw such privileges for misbehaviour.
493. If the recommendation made by the Board in the interim report referred to in paragraph 474 that
smoking in detention barracks be permitted subject to certain conditions is adopted, the commandant might well
be empowered to withdraw for limited periods (which should be prescribed by regulation) the permission to
smoke for a breach of certain specific regulations.
ILL-TREATMENT IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
494. A number of witnesses who gave evidence at the public sittings deposed that they had never seen
nor heard of any case of ill-treatment in a detention barrack. One of these had been the commandant of
various detention barracks, and of the others some had been visiting officers, and two were chaplains. These
witnesses therefore had had some opportunities for observation on which to base their evidence.
495. The Board do not doubt the honesty or sincerity of the witnesses who made these statements but
they are satisfied from other evidence, from statements made to them, and from their own investigations’ that
at times there have been instances of the ill-treatment of S.U.S. in detention barracks.
c * I 9 B ° ard interviewed Practically all the S.U.S. who were in detention during the period from
September, 1945 to
cannot speak with much certainty regarding that year, but it appears probable that there were more cases of ill-
treatment sLe mT" occurred. The Board have heard very few allegations of ill-
t. 497 ‘ Alle « at ‘ o « s , of excessive doubling were made by some of the S.U.S. who were interviewed, and
there is evidence that in some barracks excessive doubling at times took place.
. ,. 498 ’ kl rt j 8 beyond question and was admitted, that in some barracks the rule was enforced that men
should double during the whole of the time they were in line waiting for a meal to be served The Bo”rd
are satisfied however that this practice was discontinued some time ago.
499. Doubling under some circumstances is quite legitimate, for example, during drill or when men are
ordered to move from one spot to another. Nevertheless, when directed under some circurnTtances it is
doubling'’ha*T^at 1 ° f P “”“ *>■"* « -*** ““jhcled
-d
regarding allegations of ill-treatment at the Warwick Detention Barrack in 194 t T inq P, iry was b f. ld
treatment was given against certain members of the staff Of those reDorted blch evidence of ill-
martialled, two of them were found not guilty on all charges hut tl rted as gullt y four were court-
member of the staff who had been found by tLTnvestigadng officer to have h. guilty ' ° ne
brought to trial because he went A.W.L. and ‘° b "" gUi " y ° f i "' treatment "«
in the d«e„.f.fr."“ack h ”, AiC gS mi The BoSlTdid’? ° f °" e wh ° " as
heard the allegations made by Saunders and other SU S who mad P . ‘ investigate this case, but they have
seen the record of the proceeding, bcfor” V„ LvLdgating officefwho ’ behalf -. They have also
of ill-treatment that Saunders made V/ain* re: Stl is:mb!rfo C f er th: h s o tar S aPPOinted t 0 inquire into the Char^es
502. The Board have come to the conclusion that it is highly orobahU c, j . . .
ill-treatment as alleged by him, and that the probability arises fven L that Sunders was the victim of
the investigating officer. The Board do not in any way approve 1 S record of the proceedings before
conduct e have°been Ut C “"°' 8 " “ y ™ ha "-
ill-treatment. They °the h^ff^^ h ° f h detenti ° n bar . racks were guilty of
would not under any circumstances resort to the ill-treatment of SU S f Crved in detentl °n barracks
the allegations of ill-treatment were made against a few nerermc v, * IS . b °wever a fact that most of
of the Jerusalem detention barrack. No suggestion however was fi! ° ne ,. tlme were members of the staff
of that barrack have been guilty of ill-treatment, or are of such a nature as to ° n the Staff
rr,4 Aij. De 11Ke *y to indulge in it.
ill-treatment, as it would n T eStigatlon Into a ”y charge of
complaints made to the Board. However, it may well be thS ZTS *• SmaH P ro P orti °n of the
unfounded, and that in some cases what was only the enforcement of strin h -6 * , egatlons tbat were made were
to be ill-treatment. y enforcement of strict discipline was considered by S.U.S.


ESCAPES.
505. It is at times extremely difficult to detect plans to effect escapes, and attempts to escape are usually
not easy to prevent, and are often fraught with danger to the staff. Where a civil gaol has been used as
a detention barrack the high stone perimeter wall offers much greater protection against escapes than is the
case where the barrack consists of huts or tents, and is surrounded only with some form of barbed wire fence.
Owing to their military training S.U.S. can get over or through barbed wire much more easily than they can
surmount a high stone wall.
506. Quite a lot of S.U.S. no doubt devote a great deal of time to considering ways and means of
regaining their freedom, and many escapes and attempts to escape have taken place. Any occasion that
seems to present the opportunity to escape is likely to be seized on by most S.U.S. even though it arises un-
expectedly.
507. The duty of the staff of a detention barrack to prevent escapes is one that entails constant
vigilance and imposes a serious responsibility. It is all the more onerous when the staff is Inadequate, or is
composed largely of men who are not physically fitted to act in this capacity. Carelessness in carrying out
routine duties in a barrack may afford an opportunity for S.U.S. to escape, or facilitate their getting possession
of some article or weapon that may enable them to effect an escape, or attempt to break out of the barrack.
508. Staff whose duty takes them amongst the S.U.S. have not been authorized to carry any weapons
or batons. The Board found in one barrack that the staff doing duty in the compounds were armed with
revolvers. The Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks, who was present with the members
of the Board, expressed his very strong disapproval of this practice. Otherwise the Board have found no
evidence of any such staff carrying weapons. In the main therefore staff coming into contact with S.U.S. have
carried out their duties entirely without protection against violence, except such as they can secure by the use
of their own hands.
509. Sentries and guards posted in towers or patrolling outside fences carry rifles to which, in some
instances, bayonets are fixed. The Board have found that there is no uniform practice as regards the carrying
of ammunition or loaded rifles. In some instances sentries have had loaded rifles.
510. Where guards and sentries are armed considerable confusion may arise as to what rights they
possess to fire on S.U.S. G.R.O. 648/1943, relating to the powers of sentries and guards, lays down in paras.
2 and 3 certain principles to be followed by all sentries and guards in the execution of their duty as such, and
in the exercise of the right to resort to arms. Sub-para, (f) of para. 3is as follows;
(f) Guards of members of the forces in custody:—
(i) An escort or guard is not justified in using his weapons merely for the purpose of pre-
venting another member from escaping from custody and if he so u?es his weapons he may
render himself, as well as any officer or N.C.O. under whose orders he acted, liable to be
charged with murder, manslaughter or incitement to murder.
(ii) If a member in custody attempts to escape, the escort or sentry will immediately raise the
alarm and give chase. He may call upon any passer-by to assist him in apprehending the
escapee.
(iii) An escort or guard may be justified in using his weapons when a member in custody resorts
to violence. In such circumstances an escort or guard may meet force with force, but care
must be taken to use no more force than is necessary to overcome the violence offered.
Hence, even when violence is offered to an escort or guard, it will only be as a last resort
that the use of weapons will be justified.
511. It will be seen that under the present orders no guard or sentry may use a weapon merely for
the purpose of preventing an S.U.S. from escaping from custody. Under the regulations applying in practically
all civil gaols in Australia the warders, or officers entrusted with the safe custody of prisoners, are empowered
to fire on any prisoner who attempts to escape if no other means are available for stopping him.
512. Attacks have at times been made on guards of detention barracks by S.U.S. attempting to escape,
and in some cases with very serious consequences to a man who has been attacked. It is reasonable that
a guard should have power to shoot to defend himself or prevent some apprehended violence, if no other
course is fairly open. In the same way a guard should be entitled to protect the life of any other guard, or
prevent apprehended violence to him by shooting. Accordingly, all guards on posts, as distinct from men
actually on duty in the compounds, should be armed with firearms and live ammunition.
513. It may be assumed that the power possessed by civil guards and warders to resort to shooting to
prevent a prisoner escaping is considered to be necessary for the protection of the community against the
possibility that crimes of violence may be committed if prisoners who are prepared to make an attempt to
break out of a civil gaol do in fact escape.
514. If the Board’s recommendation that military prisons should be established is given effect to,
members of the Forces sentenced to terms of imprisonment would be confined in such institutions, and the
probability would be that the majority of them would be men with serious military and/or civil records. Those
sent to detention would be men who it might be expected would be returned to their units on their release,
or who, although to be discharged from the Army on the completion of their sentences, would be unlikely to
resort to violence.
515. On that basis, and particularly because the men confined in military prisons would be likely to be
comparable to the inmates of a civil prison, the Board recommend that guards and sentries at military prisons
should be given the power to use weapons by firing on inmates attempting to escape if no other means of
stopping them is available.
516. The Board however do not recommend any alteration to the present orders in respect of guards
and sentries at detention barracks set up to receive members sentenced to detention, or at detention barracks
established as part of a system under which military prisons would be used as already recommended.


PUNISHMENT FOR ESCAPES.
517. During their inspections of the detention barracks it came to the notice of the Board that on more
than one occasion, where escapes had been effected by numbers of S.U.S. who were apprehended,
one of them was singled out for trial by court-martial and received a substantial sentence, while the others
were dealt with by a Board of Visitors whose maximum power of punishment is to award P.D.I for a period
not exceeding 15 days, and close confinement for a period not exceeding 14 days.
518. It would appear that, apart from the policy of punishing a ring-leader more severely than others
concerned in such an affair, the reason for the disparity in sentences has been the opinion that no more than
a total of two years detention can be awarded to a man in respect of both the original offence and an escape.
519. Proviso IB to Sec. 44 of the Army Act is to the effect that an offender under that Act shall not be
subject to imprisonment or detention for more than two consecutive years, whether under one or more sen-
tences, except under Sec. 106 of the Defence Act. That section permits a sentence of imprisonment in lieu of
a sentence of penal servitude.
520. . Note 19 to Sec. 44 of the Army Act (at page 435 of M.M.L.) indicates that by virtue of the proviso
a man cannot be subjected to imprisonment or detention, whether under one or more sentences, for more than
two consecutive years. It is pointed out however, that escape from prison or detention for even a single day
breaks the continuity of the confinement, so that time must be calculated afresh from the date on which the
man is returned to prison, detention barrack or military custody. If he is re-captured and kept in military
custody to be tried for some fresh offence (e.g., his escape from imprisonment or detention) his original sen-
tence is then still current. He is not merely “under arrest pending trial,” but is actually serving the original
term. Consequently at his trial a court-martial cannot award two full years imprisonment or detention but is
obliged to deduct therefrom the period spent in custody since his arrest.
521. The statement just quoted appears to imply that a further sentence of up to two years detention
or imprisonment, less any time he has been in custody after re-arrest, may lawfully be awarded to an escapee.
The opinion apparently has been held that no more than a total of two years in all in respect of the original
sentence and the sentence for the escape may be awarded. Consequently it has been thought that when a
prisoner escapes, whose original sentence is of or close to a term of two years, it is not worthwhile putting him
up for court-martial as there is no power to award him any really substantial additional sentence.
522. Complaints have been received from S.U.S regarding the different treatment meted out to men who
have taken part in the same escape. Feeljngs of injustice have arisen as a result of one man receiving a
substantial sentence of detention or imprisonment, while others equally guilty have been dealt with by an
award of 15 days P.D.I. The Board recommend that provision be made to deal with situations of that nature,
so that it may be possible to impose an adequate sentence in any case where a man has escaped from custody.
VISITING OFFICERS.
523. Paragraph 122 of Detention Barracks Regulations directs that in respect of each detention barrack
and military prison the proper authority shall detail an officer to be the visiting officer. Amongst his other
duties, a visiting officer must, at such times or regular intervals as are directed by the proper authority visit
the barrack or prison and see all men under sentence, or temporarily committed for safe keeping. Any man
is entitled to make complaints to the visiting officer regarding his welfare or treatment. The visiting officer
is obliged to inquire into any complaint which he considers reasonable, and in his report as to each visit he
must include a report upon any complaints into which he has inquired, together with any remarks or recom-
mendation thereon which he deems fit to make.
524. Appointments of visiting officers are obviously provided for to ensure that each SU S shall have
the opportunity, and the nghlj to complain to an outside authority regarding the administration of the barrack
by the commandant and staff, and the way in which he has been treated. To be effective such a system must
place no obstacle in the way of the S.U.S. in his approach to the visiting officer, and that officer must faith-
fully carry out the duties imposed on him.
525. In some barracks which the Board have visited the S.U.S. were told that they could not approach
the visiting officer without first stating their complaint or request to the commandant, or a member of the staff
and any S.U.S. who did so was informed that he had offended against the regulations. Whenever the Board
found that this procedure had been followed the attention of the commandant was drawn to it as being in
correct, and so far as the Board can discover the matter was put right.
526. Some of the witnesses have criticized the work of visiting officers trenerallv and , • .
that S.U.S. can be adequately safeguarded only by the appointment of civilian inspector’s in no way Zea
to Army command or discipline. The suggestion however was presented without much attention w the wav
The'r'e ““it “
rit" orgl's"i y o„ pri!ons and deKn,ion barracks - <° •£.
527. There appears to have been no uniform practice in the selection of office- . u .
visiting officers, or as to the intervals at which they should visit the barracks Nor h/ t£° appomted as
practice in the carrying out of their duties by visiting officers The matn ? T been 3 uniform
indicated by para. 122 of the Detention Barracks Regulations already menf d ° f 3 . VlSltmg officer - as
of S.U.S. regarding their welfare or treatment, into those tTaf V° Comp!aints
to furnish reports in respect of visits and complaints inquired into together with t° be , reasonable and
tions. Accordingly the inspection of a barrack itself is actually required onlv so 3nd fecommenda-
for the purpose of inquiring into a complaint. 7 required onl y 80 fa * a * it may be necessary
528. The general practice appears to have been for visiting officers to t• i ,
tion of the barracks visited from time to time. Only one report of a visitimr offlcJ fair y , thorou g h mspec-
(Exhibit 13) bu, the Board have seen copies of /umbers of repo,,, iT Ze th/^a^acE.


529. In at least two L. of C. Areas the practice was adopted for a time of appointing a number of
visiting officers, representatives of various Branches and Services at the headquarters of the L. of C. Area
and for the barracks in the area to be inspected by them in turn —for example, weekly. The object of this
procedure, the Board were informed, was to give the various Services, for example Medical and Legal, and
(he “A” and “Q” Branches, an opportunity of seeing the detention barracks and of becoming acquainted with
conditions in them. These officers, in addition to making inspections, no doubt took any complaints that S.U.S.
desired to make.
530. It is clear on the evidence that the intervals at which the various barracks have been visited vary
considerably, and that on occasions these intervals are fairly lengthy. The Board are strongly of the opinion
that the intervals at which detention barracks should be visited in this way should be prescribed by regulation,
and should not be left to the decision of individual authorities. The visits should be made weekly.
531. It appears to be a fair conclusion that the main purpose for which visiting officers are appointed
has been somewhat submerged by the practice of getting visiting officers to conduct inspections of the barracks.
It is one of the duties of the Detention Barrack Service to inspect the barracks, and this should be discharged
by an Inspector, or by the Deputy Directors in the various areas. The Service is responsible for giving
technical advice to the Adjutant-General’s Branch. Representatives of it should frequently inspect the barracks
to see how they are being administered, to ensure that the policy laid down is being carried out, and to obtain
information upon which to advise the Adjutant-General’s Branch from time to time of any alterations or additions
that may be required in the barracks, and to make recommendations as to policy generally. Those are not
matters within the general scope of the functions of a visiting officer. If it is necessary for any other Service
or Branch to have information about detention barracks it can be obtained quite easily.
532. The Board strongly recommend that visiting officers should be appointed only by the Adjutant-
General and should report direct to him, and that a visiting officer should be superior in rank to the com-
mandant of the barrack which he is driected to visit. In view of the earlier recommendation of the Board,
that means that a visiting officer should not be below the rank of Lieut-Colonel. The Board also recommend
that the officers appointed should be selected with particular attention to their suitability for this type of duty.
533. Paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Detention Barracks Regulations provide that opportunities shall be
given to S.U.S. to make complaints or requests to the commandant, and impose a duty on members of the staff
to inform the commandant if any S.U.S. desires to see him, or to make any complaint or prefer any request.
The Board found in each barrack that they visited that the commandant had given ample opportunity to S.U.S.
to make complaints and prefer requests. The records show that this right was freely used.
534. The obvious intention of paragraphs 22 and 23 is that any S.U.S. shall have the right to go direct
to the commandant with complaints and requests. It is desirable that this right should be recognised by regu-
lation and that it should be made clear that no member of the staff has any authority to interfere with the
exercise of it.
THE SEGREGATION OF PERSONS SERVING SENTENCES.
535. A soldier sentenced to imprisonment or detention is in military custody and in due course he is
committed either to a prison or to a detention barrack. A.M.R. & O. 597 (6) and 599 (6) provide for the issue
of a warrant of commitment by a competent military authority, as defined in A.M.R. & O. 602.
536. It is provided by A.M.R. & O. 610 that a committing authority, before committing a soldier under
sentence, should ascertain that there is accommodation available in the place to which commitment is contem-
plated.
537. A soldier committed to a civil gaol passes out of the hands of the Army for practical purposes,
and any segregation in the gaol will be determined by the provisions of the law of the State in which the gaol
is situated. Every State has adopted rules for classifying prisoners under which where possible segregation
is carried out.
538. Soldiers sentenced in a particular area are usually committed to a detention barrack in that area.
No barrack has been set apart to be used exclusively for the confinement of soldiers of any particular class
or classes. However, in practice, certain barracks have been used almost exclusively for the confinement of
serving soldiers, and discharged personnel have been sent to other barracks. It has not always been possible
to avoid some intermixture of the two classes, but speaking generally they have been kept separate.
539. In the barracks used for the confinement of serving soldiers there appears to have been no segrega-
tion either according to age, nature of offence or length of sentence. It is perhaps to be expected that no
attempt at segregation should be made in respect of serving soldiers, as the conditions of service in a deten-
tion barrack probably call for it no more than do the circumstances under which soldiers serve in units.
540. Discharged personnel who are committed to detention barracks, either from guard compounds, or by
transfer from a barrack in which serving soldiers are undergoing detention, are disposed of largely according to
the accommodation that is available. The very great increase in the numbers of men sentenced to detention
which followed the return of the troops from the Middle East, and the introduction of compulsory service,
imposed a tremendous strain on the accommodation in detention barracks generally.
541. The importance of attempting to segregate the various types of offenders in detention barracks is
beyond question, and has been recognised by the Detention Barrack Service and those responsible for adminis-
tration and discipline in the Army. For example. Technical Instruction No. 7 (appearing in Exhibit 1) deals
with segregation, and sets out certain principles which should be applied.
542. Some attempts have been made to effect segregation in the detention barracks where discharged
personnel have been confined. In these barracks where compounds have been constructed segregation is some-
what easier to effect than in other barracks not so divided. But even where men have been placed in different
compounds the occupants of the various compounds have not been kept entirely separate. Some degree of
mingling cannot be prevented unless there are separate messing arrangements for each compound, and the men
work in their own compounds, or elsewhere quite apart from others, and there are separate sick and dental
parades. Such parades, as well as the mess parade, furnish many opportunities for conversation, and many
of the evils which segregation is designed to prevent are brought about as a result of men meeting on those
occasions.


543 The attempts that were made at segregation were seriously hampered by the limited accommoda-
-343. Ine attempts mat w c & .• f cpcrreeation is to be even reasonably effective,
tion that was available in the detention barracks. If a pol cy - g 8 which it is decided that
SSS .0 cope ;ith .he
ortenaers snail oe uiviucu. tn he sent there The accommodation provided may
number of offenders that may reasonably be expected to be sent t
not always be fully occupied because the size of each class will inevitably vary from time to time. y policy
of is bound to break down to some extent if practical difficulties of this nature cannot be avoided.
544 The Board strongly recommend that the best available policy of segregation should be adopted in
respect of soldiers under sentence, and that as far as possible the necessary accommodation should be provided
to give effect to it. The expenditure of the money necessary to make such a policy as effective as possible
would be entirely justified, and would be amply repaid by the results obtained The Board venture to express
the opinion that it should have been possible to provide better facilities in the way of buildings to carry out
the policy of segregation in a more satisfactory way.
545. Paragraph 2 (i) of the Terms of Reference relates to “the segregation of persons serving sentences
in institutions for different offences against military law.” In view of the experience gained during the war
perhaps the most obvious classification of offences against military law for this purpose would be.
(i) absence without leave and desertion, and
(ii) all other offences.
546. On the evidence before the Board such a classification would not be entirely satisfactory. Segre-
gation according to the nature of offences is not often adopted by those who are experts. Furthermore, the
men who have committed offences of A.W.L. and desertion cannot be regarded as being in one class for this
purpose. The evidence establishes clearly that some of them have long civil records of a serious kind, and
are hardened criminals, while the civil convictions of others are for minor offences, and in some cases men have
none at all.
547. In the Board’s opinion some classification other than the nature of offences should be adopted as
the basis of a policy of segregation. Possibly a division of offenders in accordance with the system described
by Mr.. J. Akeroyd, Inspector-General of Penal Establishments and Gaols for the State of Victoria, (page V.
193-194 of the evidence), and by Col. Murphy, would be the most satisfactory. The system is based on
separating those who have not acquired serious criminal habits from those whose “pattern of life” is criminal,
and doing so in respect of both youthful and older offenders.
548. The Board later recommend that a S.U.S should not be discharged from the Army until at or
about the time when his sentence will expire. If that recommendation is adopted it will no doubt at times be
decided that a soldier serving a sentence shall be discharged at the expiration of it. Although he will
remain a member of the Forces until that time arrives, it would certainly be wise to remove him from the
barrack in which there are soldiers who will not be discharged, and send him to another barrack where he can
be employed in some kind of work instead of doing military training. In the Board’s opinion it would be
desirable to have two or more types of institutions to which such a man could be sent according to his classi-
fication, and it would be preferable to do so rather than to attempt segregation in one institution. In some
cases the nature of the institution to which a man is committed may influence his conduct, and possibly pre-
vent his rehabilitation, which might be effected if he were confined in a different type of institution.
TREATMENT OF YOUTHFUL AND FIRST OFFENDERS.
549. In some cases youthful and first offenders deserve special consideration. Nevertheless it would not
in the Board’s opinion be desirable to introduce any provision which would have the effect of preventing a
court-martial from passing what it considers to be the appropriate sentence for a youthful or first offender.
550. G.R.O. 23/1946 contains provisions for regulating the exercise of the power to review and suspend
sentences. Many cases of youthful and first offenders which may be deserving of special consideration can be
dealt with under those or similar provisions. It would appear, however, that, if the confirming or reviewing
authority considers it desirable, a sentence can be suspended at once so as to enable the soldier to return to
his unit. That method of dealing with a youthful or first offender, as to whom there seems to be a reason-
able prospect of reformation, is in the Board’s view preferable to posting him for duty with any unit in the
nature of a penal battalion. If the case is one in which there is no such prospect, the offender should be
directed to some other form of national service.
STOPPAGES OF PAY AND ALLOWANCES.
551. In their interim report dated 4th September, 1945, the Board dealt with the stoppages of allowances
to persons guilty of offences against military law, and of the financial assistance provided for the dependants
of persons committed to institutions for such offences. The Board have already in this report dealt with stop-
P ?’ “J VC reCOr " men , ded ‘ hat th u e . P° wer » award forfeiture of pay as a punishment should be
abolished but that the present rule under which pay is forfeited for any day when duty is not being per-
foimed should continue: (see paras. 132-143 . The Board consider that the system of niacin- a soldier on
a restricted drawing rate (usually 1/- per day) to which he is limited until h s pa" has maTe up any debits
d ab °u Sh / d „ Ma "* a " d Particularly married mL who
s tahrr„Me r wives a very subs,an,iai por,i °- ° f
THE DISCHARGE FROM THE A.M.F. OF PERSONS CONVICTED BY COURTS-
MARTIAL.
552. In paragraphs 272-276 of this report the Board discussed the discharge from the AM F of ner
sons convicted by courts-martial, and there referred to the power which aG O T nLJ * * P
for certain reasons; (see G.R.O. 23/1946, para. 12; A.M.R. &O. 253 A) '°' C ‘ P e ses to d,schar 8 e a man


553. About June, 1943, a policy was adopted and put into effect under which numbers of men sentenced
by courts-martial were discharged by administrative action shortly after admission to detention, but were never-
theless compelled to serve their sentences. The authority for continuing their confinement under such circum-
stances is Sec. 158 (2) of the Army Act, and such a course can be taken only in respect of a soldier who is
on war service at the time of his conviction.
554 The policy remained in force, and as a result the proportion of men in detention who had been
discharged became increasingly larger. The graph Exhibit 11A shows the progressive percentage of ex-members
in detention to the total S.U.S. from June, 1943, to June, 1945. The proportion rises fairly steadily from zero
in June, 1943, to 54.2 per cent, in June, 1945, when out of a total of 2756 S.U.S., 1398 were discharged per-
sonnel. ’ The Board understand that after June, 1945, the percentage rose even higher.
555. Decisions to discharge members were made largely on advice and material tendered or prepared
by the Army Psychology Service, which conducted numerous investigations regarding soldiers, and made many
technical reports.
556. The object of the policy was explained by Brigadier Urquhart, Deputy Adjutant-General (Per-
sonal Services), in evidence as follows: —
“They are incorrigible or no good. There are many reasons we think why persons who are in-
corrigible and of no use whatever to the Army, and have been proved such by constant convictions
and by their records, should be immediately discharged because there is no reason for them being
kept on. If they are not discharged they remain on the Army strength and they are counted as
Army strength and cannot be replaced, and the effect of that would be one fighting man less. We
can only get men on as others go out and we do not want a couple of thousand useless men being
counted on the Army Strength and thus preventing us from getting fighting soldiers. They are
completely useless. Such men have been worse than ten members of the enemy. Some 60 per cent
or 70 per cent have records in civil life and to us they are nothing less than a burden, and we
consider the proper course is to discharge them at the earliest possible moment consistent of course
with the absolute necessity of not putting a premium on misconduct, and to prevent them from
saving the easiest way of getting out of the Army would be to misconduct themselves. In t ose
cases it is thought necessary that they should serve penalties imposed upon them before they go.
(p. V. 240).
557. The Board entirely agree that soldiers who are incorrigible are only a burden to the Army and a
useless expense to the State, and that their discharge from the Army is undoubtedly desirable. However e
policy of discharging a man almost at the commencement of his sentence, instead of at the end ot it, has ha
most unfortunate consequences.
558. In answer to a question from the Board, Col. Murphy stated that the policy of discharging men
and keeping them in detention has created immense difficulties in administration and has created situations in
large camps which have been extremely difficult to handle. There is no doubt about the accuracy of that
statement.
559. Although a man undergoing detention but who has been discharged, is subject to the application of
the Army Act, and may be kept, removed, imprisoned, made to undergo detention and punished accordingly as
if he continued to be subject to military law: (A.A. 158 (2)) the extent to which he is subject is by no
means clear. In the case of The King * Cox (1945 Argus Law Reports 330) a of the Hgh Court
decided that a general court-martial has no jurisdiction to try a former private undergoing detention after
his discharge from the forces, on a charge of joining in a mutiny in His Majesty s Forces, where* was alleged
that he combined with other ex-members serving similar sentences in an attempt to break out of barracks.
Other questions regarding ex-members may also arise.
560 The Board have found that discharged personnel in detention barracks very frequently made the
claim that they were civilians and therefore were not bound to obey any order given by the commandant or
a member of the staff, and at times men refused to obey orders on that ground. They al , S ° C S f, " es d
they were being forced to do work without being paid for it. As a result very considerable difficulties have
been caused both by refusals to work, and also failures to carry out tasks properly.
561. In the interim report of 4th September, 1945, already mentioned the Board drew attention to the
unrest and dissatisfaction that had been caused amongst discharged personnel as a result of dependants allow-
ances ceasing on discharge. It is abundantly clear that a good deal of the trouble that has
barracks amongst discharged personnel has been due entirely, or to a large extent to the minds of the S.U.S.
becoming unsettled as a result of their dependants losing the allowances that had previously been paid.
562. During their inspection of detention barracks the Board visited 14 A.D.B at Tamworth, and found
that certain discharged personnel were working in camps some 35 miles from the barrack. The men were
IployeTlelUngd/ad tiler, and cutting up felled and fallen timber for use as firewood m m.h.ary msmuttons.
563 This arrangement provided useful employment and the men preferred working in the open country
563. in!s arrangemciu p f h o Wever illustrate the difficulties that have arisen from the
policT oT'dfscharging men before completion of sentence. The Board were informed that the official view was
that men wefe not legally entitled to medical treatment or compensation in the event of injury and that ey
woild Keenly what the Army saw fit to provide for them. Two men, who were injured in connection with
the work when a truck overturned, received medical attention in a military hospital.
564 The Board reiterate their previous statement that they are entirely opposed to a policy of dis-
charging members of the Forces and compelling them to serve their sentences after discharge. Their recom-
mendation is that no man should be discharged until, or shortly before the termination of his sentence, and
that if a decision is reached before that time that a man should be discharged at the termination of his sen-
tence, he should then be transferred to another detention barrack, and dealt with as the Board have alrea y
recommended in paragraph 548.


565. The official reason advanced for the adoption of the policy was in under
replace the men sentenced to imprisonment or detention by enlisting ot ers, an •. tb t a done he
manpower arrangements to do so in any case until the man was discharged, because until ™ "
remained on the Army strength. After investigating the matter to some extent, and inquiries tro t
Manpower authorities, the Board are left in some doubt whether additional men could ”°* h ™_ b ® sentenced
to replace men sentenced to imprisonment or detention, and whether for manpower P ur P ’ forward as
could not have been calculated as part of normal Army wastage. Althoug it ias f 0 was t o eet
a reason for introducing the policy, the Board are inclined to the opinion that the principal ° bj .* C ' V J? B l ° d g b *
rid of the liability for allowances to the dependants of soldiers sentenced. That this was so is_»ndic V
the explanatory statement which accompanied the Adjutant-Generals request to t. e ieu e
charge-of-Administration for the promulgation of G.R.O. 228/1943: (Army File 8 / / )•
LIST OF PRINCIPAL RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS IN PART 111 OF
THE REPORT.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
1. Rigorous discipline is an essential ingredient of any system of punishment. Conditions in a detention
barrack or any other institution in which offenders against military law are required to serve their sen-
tences should not be better than those under which the Army generally lives: (para. 332).
2. A policy of review and suspension of sentence is calculated to promote reformation: (para. 334).
3. In some cases, the sentences of courts-martial, particularly for the offence of A.W.L. have been somewhat
excessive: (para. 335).
4. The failure to punish and excessive punishment alike react to the detriment of military discipline: (para. 336).
5. In many cases sentences of men to be discharged were determined or confirmed at a fairly lengthy term
which would have been more reasonable if suspension of it had been possible : (para. 338).
6. The principle that “the proper amount of punishment to be inflicted is the least amount by which dis-
cipline can be efficiently maintained” is sound: (para 340).
DELINQUENCY IN THE ARMY.
7. One contributing factor to the large number of A.W.L. cases was the presence in Australia for lengthy periods
of thousands of soldiers under conditions somewhat different from those of normal active service: (para. 344).
8. Domestic troubles and business anxieties led many soldiers to go A.W.L.: (para. 344).
9. A somewhat more liberal outlook in the granting of compassionate occupational and seasonal leave and the
like leave in some cases, and of the reasons for men going A.W.L. might have considerably reduced the
number of such offences: (para. 345).
10. A greater use of the services of Chaplains and trained social workers would probably have prevented
many cases of absence without leave: (para. 345).
11. Many serious problems would not have arisen or would have been less difficult to deal with if criminal types
had been excluded from the Military Forces: (para. 347).
12. The Board are strongly in favour of any practical course being taken that would ensure as far as possible
that undesirable persons are excluded from the Military Forces: (para. 350).
PLACES IN WHICH SENTENCES ARE TO BE SERVED.
13. A military prison for the reception of men with civil convictions of the more serious nature should have
been established: (para. 375).
14. The institutions and conditions therein under which men in detention are to serve their sentences should as
far as practicable be uniform. For this reason the Board are strongly opposed to the policy of taking over
civil gaols as detention barracks: (para. 382).
15. Adequate representation of the Detention Barrack Service In each area is essential if the necessary advice
and representations with regard to the requirements and proper functioning of the Service are to be made
to the formation commander. In the opinion of the Board there has not been in every case adequate
representation of the Service in the various areas: (para. 384).
16. Provision should be made to prevent the possibility of a person’s being transferred from one form of
sentence either to a higher or lower grade during the term of service of his sentence: (para. 389).
17. Regulations should be made to ensure that men sentenced to imprisonment who cannot be committed to a
prison immediately and must be temporarily held in a detention barrack are kept separate from others who
are serving sentences of detention; (para. 389).
18. There is no objection to the serving of a sentence of detention in a field punishment centre so long as care
is taken in the selection of any men to serve detention in that way: (para. 390).
19. As far as possible the present provisions of G.R.O. 141/1945 whereby a member sentenced to detention for
14 days or less is not normally committed to a detention barrack should be continued: (para. 391).


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE DETENTION SYSTEM.
20. Of the barracks in which serving soldiers were confined, only one appeared to the Board to be satisfactory
from the aspects of administration, discipline and training: (para. 397).
21. The Board were not favourably impressed by the barracks in which mostly ex-members were serving sen-
tences. Staff problems were acute in most of them, sometimes arising from inadequacy of staff, but mostly
arising from unsuitability of staff: (para. 398).
22. If more accommodation and better conditions had been provided the deleterious effects of the system might
have been largely avoided. More segregation and better facilities for training and work, particularly for
ex-members, would have been possible, and better discipline would have resulted: (para. 400).
23. 111-founded allegations of ill-treatment and bad conditions in detention barracks have been made and other
matters have been exaggerated. The public has not appreciated the difficult task of the Detention Barrack
Service. Unjustified prejudice and hatred in the minds of many members of the public have had most un-
fortunate results with regard to staff: (para. 402).
ADMINISTRATION OF DETENTION BARRACKS.
24. The commandant of a detention barrack should hold a rank not lower than major: (para. 414).
25. Some of the commandants of detention barracks did not possess the special qualities necessary for detention
barrack work: (para. 414).
26. The power to award close confinement and P.D.I should be exercised only so far as discipline cannot be
maintained without it: (para. 422).
27. There is reason to believe that at times too great a use has been made of close confinement and P.D.I as
a punishment in detention barracks: (para. 422).
28. If at any time it is found that too much use is being made of the power to inflict close confinement and
P.D.I, steps should be taken either to remove the commandant or to limit his powers so that he can award
not less than half rations, and entrust some higher authority with the power to inflict P.D.I: (para. 423).
REMISSIONS OF SENTENCES.
29. There has not been entire uniformity in the administration of the system for the remission of sentences in
the various barracks: (para. 425).
30. Commandant’s remission should be authorized in respect of sentences of 14 days and upwards (para. 426).
31. A marks system should be introduced into Australian detention barracks: (para. 429).
32. Suspensions and remissions should be governed by a policy uniform throughout the Commonwealth: (para.
435).
33. S.U.S. should be fully informed of what is involved in such phrases as “exceptionally good conduct,” “special
industry and good conduct” or “proficiency in and attention to drill and military training”: (para. 435).
STAFF OF DETENTION BARRACKS.
34. Attention is invited to the Board’s interim report of 18th December, 1945, and representations on two
previous occasions to the Minister regarding the necessity for ample staffs of adequately trained men for
detention barracks: (para. 437).
35. From the time when the Detention Barracks Service was established, sufficient A class personnel were
never posted to the Service; (para. 438).
36. It is desired to emphasize as strongly as possible the necessity of providing for detention barracks a staff
that is adequate, fit and properly trained. Any tendency to detail men haphazard to detention barracks
should be strongly resisted: (para. 441).
ACCOMMODATION IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
37. Barracks, huts or tents in which S.U.S. live under conditions approximating to those of ordinary Army life
provide the best accommodation; (para. 442).
38. The provision of more accommodation as detention barracks would facilitate segregation, improve discipline
and make available more space for each man. A separate water closet or latrine should be built opening
of each dormitory: (para. 450).
HEALTH OF SOLDIERS UNDER SENTENCE.
39. The health of S.U.S. in detention has not been worse than that of other soldiers and in many instances,
health and physical condition have improved after a period of detention: (para. 452).
40. The medical attention afforded to S.U.S. has been adequate having regard to the circumstances under
which detention is to be served and Army organization generally; (para. 455).
TRAINING IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
41. Greater educational facilities could have been provided for S.U.S.: (para. 458).
42. The work provided for discharged personnel was sufficient in some barracks, but not in others. Difficulties
in this regard were greatly Increased because of policy of discharging S.U.S. at commencement of sentence
instead of at conclusion: (paras. 462-3).


CATERING FOR SOLDIERS UNDER SENTENCE.
43. Soldiers in detention should receive the normal Army dietary scale appropriate for the area y
are serving their sentences: (para. 469).
AMENITIES FOR SOLDIERS UNDER SENTENCE.
44. Every possible step should be taken to provide as much educational training in detention barracks as can
be supplied: (para. 473).
45. Attention is invited to an interim report of 11th March, 1946, recommending that smoking should be per-
mitted in detention barracks subject to certain conditions: (para. 474).
46. The Board have no reason to doubt that every opportunity has been a^ord , ed , . tO / hapla^ S , A° dlscharge
their functions, though in some cases, better facilities might have been afforded, (paras. )•
47. Arrangements should be made to make available In all barracks the services of chaplains specially set
aside for this work; (para. 477).
48. No alteration is recommended in the number of letters a S.U.S. may write: (para. 481).
49. No alteration is recommended in the present provisions regulating visits to S.U.S.. (para. 495).
50. It is recommended that a uniform policy be laid down with regard to the provision of library facilities in
detention barracks and that the implementation of that policy be made the specific responsibility of some
appropriate officer, body or organization within the Army: (para. 488).
POWER TO WITHDRAW AMENITIES.
51. If commandants of detention barracks were given power to grant additional privileges to individual S.U.S
and to withdraw them for misbehaviour a valuable means of enforcing discipline would be added. If a
marks system were introduced it might be possible to introduce in conjunction with it a system of pro-
gressive stages with specific privileges attaching to each. The commandant might then be empowered to
withdraw such privileges for misbehaviour: (para. 492).
52. If the Board’s recommendation that smoking in detention barracks be permitted subject to certain condi-
tions is adopted, the commandant might well be empowered to withdraw for limited periods (which should
be prescribed by regulation) the permission to smoke for a breach of certain specific regulations: (para.
493).
ILL-TREATMENT IN DETENTION BARRACKS.
53. There have been instances of ill-treatment and excessive doubling in detention barracks: (paras. 495-99).
54. It is highly probable that a S.U.S. named Saunders was the victim of ill-treatment: (para. 502).
55. The great majority of the staff who have served in detention barracks would not under any circumstances
resort to ill-treatment of S.U.S.: (para. 503).
56. The Board have not conducted a complete investigation into any allegation of ill-treatment, as it would
not have been practicable to investigate fully more than a small proportion of the complaints made to the
Board: (para. 504).
ESCAPES.
57. All guards on posts in detention barracks (as distinct from men actually on duty in the compounds) should
be armed with firearms and live ammunition and should be entitled to shoot in self defence or to prevent
some apprehended violence to another member of the staff: (para. 512).
58. Guards and sentries at military prisons (if established) should be given power to fire on inmates attempt-
ing to escape if no other means of stopping them is available: (para. 515).
59. Provision should be made to enable the imposition of an adequate sentence in any case where a man has
escaped from custody: (para. 522).
VISITING OFFICERS.
60. The appointment of civilian inspectors to visit detention barracks in place of the present system of visiting
officers is not recommended; (para. 526).
61. The intervals at which visiting officers visit detention barracks should be prescribed by regulation. Such
visits should be made weekly: (para. 530).
62. Visiting officers should be appointed by and report directly to the Adjutant-General. Each visiting officer
should be senior in rank to the commandant of the barrack visited: (para. 532).
63. The right of any S.U.S. to go direct to the commandant with complaints or requests should be recognissd
by regulation (as distinct from order) : (para. 534). B
SEGREGATION OF PERSONS SERVING SENTENCES.
64. In barracks used for the confinement of serving soldiers there appears to have been no segregations either
according to age, nature of offence or length of sentence: (para. 539). S g
65. Some attempts have been made to effect segregation in the detention barracks where discharged personnel
have been confined which however were hampered by limited accommodation available: (pafas. 542-3)


66. The best available policy of segregation should be adopted, and, as far as possible the necessary accom-
modation should be provided to give effect to it: {para. 544).
67. Some classification other than the nature of offences should be adopted as the basis of a policy of segrega-
tion: (para. 547).
68. Segregation of offenders into those with serious criminal habits and those without and doing so in respect
of both youthful and older offenders would possibly be the most satisfactory system of classification:
(para. 547).
69. Soldiers whom it is intended to discharge on completion of their sentences should be segregated from
others: (para. 548).
TREATMENT OF YOUTHFUL AND FIRST OFFENDERS.
70. It would not be desirable to introduce any provision which would have the effect of preventing a court-
martial from passing what it considers to be the appropriate sentence for a youthful or first offender:
(para. 549).
71. Prompt suspension of sentences would be preferable to the posting of youthful offenders to any unit in the
nature of a penal battalion: (para. 550).
STOPPAGES OF PAY AND ALLOWANCES.
72. Attention is invited to the Board’s interim report of 4th September, 1945, regarding the stoppages of allow-
ances to persons guilty of offences against military law and of the financial assistance provided for the
dependants of persons committed to institutions for such offences: (para. 551).
73. The system of placing a soldier on a restricted drawing rate (usually 1/- a day) to which he is limited
until his pay has made up any debits arising from payment of an allotment should be abolished: (para.
551).
DISCHARGE OF PERSONS CONVICTED BY COURTS-MARTIAL.
74. The Board are entirely opposed to a policy of discharging members of the Forces and compelling them to
serve their sentences after discharge: (para. 564).


CONCLUSION.
In conclusion, the Board desire to express their appreciation of the assistance tne^Army
Department throughout the course of the Inquiry. In particular, it is e J^ ( T KC MBE yD the former
assistance rendered by the former Judge-Advocate-General Mr. J. Bowie Wilson,
Director of Legal Services, Mr. Alan S. Lloyd, K.C., and his successor, Col. AG. Al ?^ a^ i 7 h ho . h V ! er
most ready to give the Board the benefit of their wide experience, and whose discussions with the Board
various times were of the greatest help.
His Honour Mr. Justice Simpson, of the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, who has now
succeeded Mr. Bowie Wilson as Judge-Advocate-General put himself to considerable inconvenience on two
occasions to discuss several matters with the Board, and his assistance also was of the greatest value.
Colonel G. F. Murphy, C.M.G., D. 5.0., the Director of Military Prisons and Detention Barracks, was
untiring in his efforts to assist the Board. Throughout the Board’s visits to the various Detention Barracks there
were many occasions when an immediate adjustment of minor defects in the administration of particular Deten-
tion Barracks was effected through his asssistance.
The Board desire also to mention the orderly behaviour of the S.U.S. who were interviewed in the
various Detention Barracks. In the course of interviewing about 1850 soldiers under sentence, not a single
untoward incident occurred.
An acknowledgment is also due to the very valuable assistance of Mr. J. E. H. Pilcher of the New South
Wales Bar, counsel assisting the Board, whose untiring researches and extensive military experience were ot
great benefit in his submissions to the Board.
The Board also desire to place on record their appreciation of the valuable help they have received from
Mr. Keith G. Brennan, LL.B., of the Secretariat, Department of the Army, who has acted in the capacity ot
Secretary to the Inquiry.
G. S. REED (Chairman).
R. A. BIDSTRUP (Member).
29th August, 1946.


CONTENTS OF THE REPORT.
Subject Matter.
Paragraphs.
PART I—INTRODUCTORY
Prefatory Remarks 9-16
Provisions Applicable in Peace Time 17-22
PART lI—TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF
OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW.
Prefatory Remarks 23-27
Military Law and Persons subject thereto 28-39
Offences against Military Law 40-42
Procedure for Investigation and Trial
of Charges 43-59
Jurisdiction to try Charges 60-69
Military and Civil Tribunals 70-76
Form of Military Law 77-79
“War Service” and “Active Service” 79-81
Training in Military Law 82-93
Laying of Charges 94-100
Charges of Conduct to the prejudice of
good order and military discipline 101
Powers of Punishment of Company, etc.,
Commanders 102-110
Summary Powers of Commanding Officers
and others 111-31
Forfeiture of Pay as a Punishment 132-43
Summary of Evidence 144-56
Convening and Composition of Courts-
Martial 157-62
Field General Courts-Martial 163-70
Delays in Trials 171-73
Judge-Advocates 174-180
Procedure and Evidence of Courts-Martial 181-94
Review of Findings and Sentences 195-204
Petitions against Findings and Sentences 205-31
Appeals against Cancellations of Commis-
sions or discharges by administrative act 232
Advice and assistance to convicted persons
in connection with petitions 233-35
Punishments for offences against Military
Law:—
(a) Penal Servitude 236-42
(b) Effect of sentence of cashiering 243
(c) Forfeiture of Pay 244
(d) Severe Reprimand, Reprimand
and Admonition 245-47
(e) Field Punishment 248-55
Review and Suspension of Sentences 256-71
Discharge from the Forces 272-76
Offences against Military Law and Civil
Law 277-90
Alteration of Regulations by G.R.O. 291-94
Rulings and Opinions of the Judge-
Advocate-General 295-300
Trials of Members away from Units 301-302
Offences by Members of Women’s Services 303-12
Subject Matter.
Paragraphs.
Appearance of Legally Qualified Other
Ranks as Counsel before Courts-
Martial 313-17
Trial of Charges of Treason by Court-
Martial 318-19
Summary of Principal Conclusions and
Recommendations in Parts I and II of
the Report pp. 86-94
PART lII—THE CONFINEMENT
OF OFFENDERS AGAINST MILITARY LAW.
Prefatory Remarks 320-25
Punishment Generally 326-40
Delinquency in the Army:—
Extent of 341-43
Causes of 344-45
Soldiers with civil Convictions 346-51
Places in which sentences are to be served
(generally) 352-62
Civil Gaols 363
Military Prisons 364-75
Detention Barracks 376-84
Field Punishment Centres 385-87
Alternative Methods of Punishment 388-92
Detention and Detention Barracks 393-403
Administration of Detention Barracks 404-13
Punishments in Detention Barracks 414-23
Remissions of Sentences 424-36
Staff of Detention Barracks 437-41
Accommodation in Detention Barracks 442-51
Health of Soldiers under Sentence 452-55
Training in Detention Barracks 456-63
Catering for Soldiers under Sentence 464-70
Amenities for Soldiers under Sentence:—
Educational Work 471-73
Tobacco and Cigarettes 474
Chaplains 475-77
Letters 478-81
Visits 482-85
Books and Newspapers 486-88
Other Amenities 489-90
Power to withdraw Amenities 491-93
111-treatment in Detention Barracks 494-504
Escapes 505-16
Punishment for Escapes 517-22
Visiting Officers 523-34
Segregation of Persons Serving Sentences 535-48
Treatment of Youthful and First Offenders 549-50
Stoppages of Pay and Allowances 551
Discharge of Persons convicted by
Courts-Martial 552-65
Summary of Principal Conclusions and
Recommendation in Part 111 of the
Report pp. 164-72
Conclusion pp. 173-74


APPENDIX A
NATIONAL SECURITY (INQUIRIES) REGULATIONS
NATIONAL SECURITY (GENERAL) REGULATIONS
APPOINTMENT OF BOARD OF INQUIRY
In pursuance of the power, conferred by the National Security (Inquirie,) A R B e S Ia^’ FF | E f R SAND S
MICHAEL FORDE, Minister of State for the Army, hereby appoint REN .
FORD REED a Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia, the REVEREND THOMAS CRAIKE REN-
TOUL and ROBERT AUSTIN BIDSTRUP, Esquire, to be a Board of Inquiry to inquire into and report u P on
the following matters, being matters in relation to the public safety and the defence of the Commonwealth .
1. The trial and punishment (including summary punishment) of offences against military law and the
administration of institutions to which persons convicted of offences against military law may be
committed.
2. Without restricting the generality of the foregoing, the following matters in particular .
(a) The summary punishment of offences against military law.
(b) The constitution and procedure of courts-martial, including .
(i) the laying of charges;
(ii) the taking of a summary of evidence; .. ,
(iii) the facilities afforded an accused person for the preparation and conduct of his defence;
(iv) the rules of procedure and evidence of courts-martial;
(v) the powers of the Judge-Advocate;
(vi) the findings and sentences of courts-martial;
(vii) the notification to the accused person of the finding and sentence of the court-martial;
(viii) the review of the findings and sentences of courts-martial;
(ix) the rights of convicted persons to petition against the findings and sentences of courts-
martial and the powers of persons to whom petitions may be made;
(x) the advice given to convicted persons of their rights of petition;
(xi) the assistance given to convicted persons to prepare and lodge petitions.
(c) The discharge from the Australian Military Forces of persons convicted by courts-martial.
(d) The punishment of (i) offences which are offences against both the civil law and military law;
and (ii) offences which are offences only against military law.
(e) The circumstances under which sentences should be served in :
(i) Field Punishment Centres.
(ii) Detention Barracks.
(iii) Military Prisons.
(iv) Civil Gaols.
and the circumstances (if any) under which alternative measures of discipline under sentence
should be adopted.
(f) Stoppages of pay and allowances of persons guilty of offences against military law and the
financial assistance provided to the dependants of persons committed to institutions for such
offences.
(g) The treatment of youthful and first offenders against military law.
(h) The administration of institutions to which persons guilty of offences against military law may
be committed, including :
(i) the supervision and administration of discipline of persons committed to institutions for
offences against military law, including the recruitment and training of staff;
(ii) the accommodation, medical attention, training and catering provided for persons commit-
ted to institutions for offences against military law;
(iii) the amenities and privileges (including such matters as the provision of tobacco and
cigarettes and the receipt or writing of letters) allowed to persons committed to institutions
for military offences and the powers of the persons charged with the administration of
such institutions to withdraw, or alter such amenities and privileges;
(iv) the safe custody of persons under sentences of field punishment, detention, or imprisonment
for offences against military law, including the use of firearms or weapons of any kind to
ensure the safe custody of such persons and for the protection of the staffs of institutions
against violence.
(i) The segregation of persons serving sentences in institutions for different offences against
military law.
(j) The segregation in civil gaols of offenders against military law from persons guilty of of-
fences against the civil law.
3. Any other matters arising out of or Incidental to the above matters on which the Board sees fit to
report.
AND I HEREBY APPOINT the said GEOFFREY SANDFORD REED to be Chairman of the said
Board.
And in pursuance of Regulation 71 of the National Security (General) Regulations I HFRFBY
AUTHORIZE the said Board and each and every member of the said Board to iequir! any person to furnish
or produce to a person specified in any such requirement any information or article in his possession which is
so specified, being information or an article which the Board or the member of the Board making the re-
quirement considers it necessary or expedient in the interests of the public safety, the defence of the Common-
wealth, or the efficient prosecution of the war to obtain or examine.
DATED this third DAY of August 1945.
F. M. FORDE,
MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ARMY.


APPENDIX B
NATIONAL SECURITY (INQUIRIES) REGULATIONS
NATIONAL SECURITY (GENERAL) REGULATIONS
APPOINTMENT OF BOARD OF INQUIRY
In pursuance of the powers conferred by the National Security (Inquiries) Regulations, I, FRANCIS
MICHAEL FORDE, Minister of State for the Army, hereby appoint the HONOURABLE GEOFFREY SAND-
FORD REED, a Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia, and ROBERT AUSTIN BIDSTRUP, Esquire,
to be a Board of Inquiry to inquire into and report upon the following matters, being matters in relation to the
public safety and the defence of the Commonwealth :
1. The trial and punishment (including summary punishment) of offences against military law and the
administration of institutions to which persons convicted of offences against military law may be
committed.
2. Without restricting the generality of the foregoing, the following matters in particular :
(a) The summary punishment of offences against military law.
(b) The constitution and procedure of courts-martial, including :
(i) the laying of charges;
(ii) the taking of a summary of evidence;
(iii) the facilities afforded an accused person for the preparation and conduct of his defence;
(iv) the rules of procedure and evidence of courts-martial;
(v) the powers of the Judge-Advocate;
(vi) the findings and sentences of courts-martial;
(vii) the notification to the accused person of the finding and sentence of the court-martial;
(viii) the review of the findings and sentences of courts-martial;
(ix) the rights of convicted persons to petition against the findings and sentences of courts-
martial and the powers of persons to whom petitions may be made;
(x) the advice given to convicted persons to prepare and lodge petitions.
(c) The discharge from the Australian Military Forces of persons convicted by courts-martial.
(d) The punishment of (i) offences which are offences against both the civil law and military law;
and (ii) offences which are offences only against military law.
(e) The circumstances under which sentences should be served in :
(i) Field Punishment Centres.
(ii) Detention Barracks.
(iii) Military Prisons.
(iv) Civil Gaols.
and the circumstances (if any) under which alternative measures of discipline under sentence
should be adopted.
(f) Stoppages of pay and allowances of persons guilty of offences against military law and the
financial assistance provided to the dependants of persons committed to institutions for such
offences.
(g) The treatment of youthful and first offenders against military law.
(h) The administration of institutions to which persons guilty of offences against military law may
be committed, including :
(i) the supervision and administration of discipline of persons committed to institutions for
offences against military law, including the recruitment and training of staff;
(ii) the accommodation, medical attention, training and catering provided for persons commit-
ted to institutions for offences against military law;
(iii) the amenities and privileges (including such matters as the provision of tobacco and
cigarettes and the receipt or writing of letters) allowed to persons committed to institutions
for military offences and the powers of the persons charged with the administration of
such institutions to withdraw, or alter such amenities and privileges;
(iv) the safe custody of persons under sentence of field punishment, detention, or imprisonment
for offences against military law, including the use of firearms or weapons of any kind to
ensure the safe custody of such persons and for the protection of the staffs of institutions
against violence.
(i) The segregation of persons serving sentences in institutions for different offences against
military law.
3. Any other matters arising out of or incidental to the above matters on which the Board sees fit to
report.
AND I HEREBY APPOINT the said GEOFFREY SANDFORD REED to be Chairman of the said
Board.
And in pursuance of Regulation 71 of the National Security (General) Regulations, I HEREBY
AUTHORIZE the said Board and each and every member of the said Board to require any person to furnish
or produce to a person specified in any such requirement any information or article which the Board or the
member of the Board making the requirement considers it necessary or expedient in the interests of the public
safety, the defence of the Commonwealth, or the efficient prosecution of the war to obtain or examine.
DATED this 9th DAY of January 1946.
F. M. FORDE,
MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ARMY.


Terms of Reference
Statutory Provisions
and Orders.
Relevant Paragraphs
in Report.
1.
The trial and punishment (in-
cluding summary punishment)
of offences against military law
and the administration of in-
stitutions to which persons con-
victed of offences against mili-
tary law may be committed.
17-22, 28-39, 70-76, 326-40.
2.
(a) The summary punishment
of offences against military
law.
(b) The constitution and pro-
cedure of courts-martial.
D.A. 55 108 ; A.M.R. & 0. Pt
IV Divs. 7-10; (A.M.R. & O.
389-444) and Div. 12;
(A.M.R. & O. 483-495); A.
A. 46, 47 R.P. 2-10; National
Security (Women’s Services)
Regulations; Military Forces
(Women’s Services) Regula-
tions Regs. 25-28
24, 40-54, 67-9, 99-100, 102-110,
111-131.
59, 63-66, 67-8, 157-170.
(i) The laying of charges
A.M.R. & 0. 357, 385, 532-550;
A.A. 45 (4); R.P. 11-13, 16
and First Appendix (M.M.L.
(Aust Ed.) p. 626) ; Crimes
Act (Commonwealth) Sec. 13,
55, 94-98.
(ii) The taking of a sum-
mary of evidence.
D.A. 108 (3); A.M.R. & O.
391-393; A.M.R. & O. Appx
VI; R.P. 4, 8.
S3, 144-56.
(iii) The facilities af-
forded an accused
person for the con-
duct of his defence.
D.A. 96; A.M.R. & O. 530, 531,
5S1-553A; A.A. 51; R.P. 14-
16, 25, 32, 34-41, 46, 59, 60,
62 (E), 70, 72, 75, 76-80, 84-
87, 89, 91-93, 103, 108, 110,
112-115.
193, 313-7.
(iv) The rules of pro-
cedure and evidence
of courts-martial.
D.A. 88, 102-106, 110A, 111,
121; A.M.R. & O. 21, 22, 38,
328A (2), 702-712; A.A. 127,
128, 163; Rules of Procedure
(generally).
181-88.
(v) The powers of the
Judge-Advocate
A.M.R. & O. 513; R.P. 101-103.
56, 174-180.
(vi) The findings and
sentences of courts-
martial
D.A. 97, 98, 106; A.M.R. & O.
554-584, 595; A.A. 44, 48 (8),
+9 (1) (d), 49 (2), 54, 56
R.P. 43-57, 117-120.
57, 243.
(vii) The notification to
the accused person
of finding and sen-
tence of the court-
martial
A.M.R. & O. 566, 580, 580A;
R.P. 53 — and see form of
oath for President and mem-
bers prescribed by Appendix
II to the R.P. (M.M.L. (Aust
Ed.) p. 694).
189-94.
APPENDIX C
TERMS OF REFERENCE WITH NOTES OF THE RELEVANT STATUTORY
PROVISIONS AND ORDERS AND TO THE PARAGRAPHS OF THE REPORT
IN WHICH THEY ARE DISCUSSED.
The Terms of Reference are divided into three paragraphs. The first paragraph indicates in broad out-
line the scope of the inquiry. The second paragraph enumerates certain specific matters on which a report is
desired. The third paragraph requires the Board to report on “any other matters arising out of or incidental
to the preceding paragraphs on which the Board sees fit to report.”
In the compilation of the present appendix, references have, wherever possible, been related to the sub-
ject matters appearing in paragraph 2of the Terms of Reference. Only observations of the most general
character have been related to paragraph 1; and no reference has been made in the case of that paragraph to
the relevant statutory provisions and orders, because any such reference would necessarily be so wide as to
be of little practical value.
The references to paragraph 3 of the Terms of Reference are self-explanatory.


Terras of Reference
Statutory Provisions
and Orders.
Relevant Paragraphs
in Report.
(viii) The review of the
findings and sentence
of courts-raartial
A.M.R. & 0. 576, 584, 1016 (4)
(b), 1016 (5) (b).
58, 195-204, 212-220.
(ix) The rights of con-
victed persons to
petition against the
findings and sen-
tences of courts-
martial and the
powers of persons to
whom petitions may
be made
A.M.R. & 0. 574, 584, 589;
R.P. 51, 55, 56.
205-32.
(x) The advice given to
convicted persons of
their rights of peti-
tion
225, 233-5.
(xi) The assistance given
to convicted persons
to prepare and lodge
petitions
233-5.
(c) The discharge from the
A.M.F. of persons convicted
by courts-martial
D.A. 97 (a); A.M.R. & 0.
253A (i) (k) (m) and (mm)
588; A.A. 44, 158 (2).
272-6, 462-3, 552-65.
(d) The punishment of :—
(5) Offences which are
offences against both
the civil law and
military law
D.A. 102; A.A. 41, 162 (i);
A.M.R. & O. 558
277-90.
(ii) Offences which are
only offences against
military law
D.A. 102; A.A. 4-40, 44;
A.M.R. & O. 345, 558.
.
(e) The circumstances under
which sentences should be
served in :—
(i) Field Punishment
centres
A.A. Sec. 44 provisoes 5, 6, 9,
10; A.A. 183 (4); Rules for
Field Punishment M.M.L.
(Aust. Ed.) p. 705.
248-55.
(ii) Detention Barracks
A.A. Secs. 63, 132-3, 183 (4);
D.A. 116; A.M.R. & O. 558,
597-606, 630-1 ; D.B. Regs.
11.
376-84, 391.
(iii) Military Prisons
A.A. 58-68A; A.M.R. & O. 558,
630-1; D.A. 116.
364-74.
(iv) Civil Gaols
A.A. 58-68A Constitution Sec-
tion 120.
363, 369.
The circumstances (if any)
under which alternative
measures of discipline un-
der sentence should be
adopted
388-92.
(f) Stoppages of pay and al-
lowances of persons guilty
of offences against military
law, etc.
D.A. 119; A.M.R. & O. 485-
491; A.A. 136-140; War
Financial (Military Forces)
Regulations 7c, 23, 27, 47, 48,
49, 50 (2), 54.
551.
(g) The treatment of youthful
and first offenders against
military law
A.M.R. & O. 558
549-50.


Terms of Reference
Statutory Provisions
and Orders.
Relevant Paragraphs
in Report.
(h) The administration of in-
stitutions to which persons
guilty of offences against
military law may be com-
mitted :—
Australian Military (Places of
Detention) Regulations and
Orders 8A, 15, 16, 20, 21, 28,
112, 125, 161-175, 184.
393-403, 404-413, 523-34.
(i) the supervision and
administration of dis-
cipline of persons
committed to institu-
tions for offences
against military law,
including the recruit-
ment and training of
staff
D.B. Regs. 9, 11; Technical In-
struction 22.
414-23, 437-41.
(ii) the accommodation,
medical attention,
training, and cater-
ing provided for per-
sons committed to in-
stitutions for offences
against military law
D.B. Regs. 21, 36, 39, 48, 50-72,
128, 144-9, 154-5.
Technical Instruction 5, 16, 30.
442-51, 452-55, 456-63, 464-70.
(iii) the amenities and
privileges (including
such matters as the
provision of tobacco
and cigarettes and
the receipt or writing
of letters) allowed
to persons committed
to institutions for
military offences and
the powers of per-
sons charged with
the administration
of such institutions
to withdraw, or alter
such amenities and
privileges;
D.B. Regs. 32, 45-7, 73-7, 87,
131-41, 143, 150.
Technical Instruction 1, 3, 4,
10, 27.
•
471-93.
(iv) the safe custody of
persons under sen-
tence of field punish-
ment, detention, or
imprisonment for of-
fences against mili-
tary law, including
the use of firearms
or weapons of any
kind to ensure the
safe custody of such
persons and for the
protection of the
staffs of institutions
against violence.
G.R.O. 648/1943; Technical In-
struction 9, 11, 13, 18, 24.
505-22.
(i) The segregation of persons
serving sentences in institu-
tions for different offences
against military law.
Technical Instruction 7.
538-548.
(j) The segregation in civil
gaols of offenders against
military law from persons
guilty of offences against
the civil law.
A.A. 67.
331, 535-7.
3.
Other matters arising out of or
incidental to the above matters
on which the Board sees fit to
report :—
(i) Form of Military
Law
77-79.


Terms of Reference
Statutory Provision
and Orders
Relevant Paragraph
in Report
(ii) Distinction between
“war service” and
“active service”
D.A, Sec. 4; A.A. Sec. 189 (1).
33-4, 80-81.
'
(iii) Training in military
law
82-93.
(iv) Charges of Conduct
to prejudice of good
order and military
discipline
(v) Delays in trials
A.A. Sec. 40.
101.
171-73.
(vi) Forfeiture of pay as
a punishment
A.M.R. & 0. 418 (2) (b) (ii);
A.A. Sec. 44 proviso (6) .
132-43, 244.
(vii) Penal servitude as a
punishment
A.A. Sec. 44.
236-242.
(viii) Severe reprimand,
reprimand and ad-
monition
A.A. Secs. 44, 47; A.M.R. & 0.
345, 418, 423 and 436.
245-7.
(ix) Review and suspen-
sion of sentences
A.A. 57, 57A.
256-71.
(x) Alteration of regula-
tions by G.R.O.
291-4.
(xi) Rulings and Opinions
of the J.A.G.
A.M.R. & 0. 1016 (10).
295-300.
(xii) Trial of Members
away from units
301-2.
(xiii) Offences by Mem-
bers of Women’s
Services
National Security (Women’s
Services) Regulations; Mili-
tary Forces (Women’s Ser-
vices) Regulations — Part VI
303-312.
(xiv) Trial of Charges of
Treason by Courts-
Martial
A.A. Sec. 41.
318-9.
(xv) Delinquency in the
Army
341-51.
(xvi) Public Opinion and
Detention Barracks
402-3.
(xvii) Remission of Sen-
tences
424-36.
(xviii) Ill-treatment in De-
tention Barracks.
96, 324, 494.


Exhibit
No.
Description.
Page in
Transcript.
Manner of
Disposal.
1.
Copies of all Technical Instructions issued by
D.M.P. & D.B.
V.2
Accompanies
Report
2.
List of all Detention Barracks and Guard Compounds
with locations in Australia.
V.2
Appendix H
3.
Copy of Australian Military (Places of Detention)
Regulations and Standing Orders and Guard
Compound Standing Orders.
V.2
Omitted
4.
Abstract of Regulations and Orders issued January
1945 for the guidance of men in detention.
V.2
Accompanies
Report
S.
Minimum Rules for the guidance of penal establish-
ments issued by the League of Nations.
V.3
Omitted
6.
Set of Army Education Course No. 22 entitled “Un-
derstanding Human Nature.”
V.3
yy yy
7.
Extracts from Field Service Regulations Vol. 1
V.7
yy yy
8.
Graph showing intake of Armoured Division person-
nel showing numbers of A.W.L. in Armoured
Division from June 1941 to June 1945.
V.19
Accompanies
Report
9.
Graph showing ratio of soldiers under arrest finger-
printed in New South Wales (June 1945)
V.21
yy yy
10A.
Graph showing ratio of civil convictions of ex-
members serving sentences in Detention Barracks
on 30th May, 1945.
V.22
yy yy
10B.
Graph showing civil conviction of ex-members (977
cases investigated).
V.22
yy yy
IOC.
Graph showing number of convictions (civil) ac-
cording to age groups.
V.22
yy yy
11.
Graph showing comparative holdings July 1943 to
June 1945.
V.28
yy yy
11A.
Graph showing percentage of discharged personnel
in total S.U.S.
V.29
yy yy
12.
Graph showing comparative length of sentences.
V.28
13.
Visiting Officers Report of Visit of 14th March, 1945,
to 7 Aust Detention Barracks.
V.77
yy yy
14.
Sample menus for S.U.S. at No. 8 Detention Barracks,
Geelong.
V.79
yy yy
15.
Syllabus of Training for use in Military Prisons
and Detention Barracks.
V.163
yy yy
16 A.
Return for each month, January 1944 to September
1945, showing S.U.S. admitted and discharged,
S.U.A. admitted, sick parades, hospitalizations’
requests and Church Parades at 9 A.D.B.
and charges at Courts-Martial.
S.200-201
yy yy
16B.
Return for each month January 1944 to September
1945, showing offences charged and punish-
ments awarded at 9 A.D.B., Adelaide.
S.200-201
yy yy
APPENDIX D
LIST OF EXHIBITS.
In this appendix are listed the exhibits tendered in evidence before the Board together with an indication
of the manner of their disposal.
The bulk of the exhibits accompany the signed copy of the report handed to the Minister. All such exhibits
are marked in the list below “Accompanies Report.
Some have been included as appendices to the report. These will be marked in the list below with the
word “Appendix” and the number of the relevant appendix.
Other exhibits for a variety of reasons which need not be enumerated have been omitted. The manner of
their disposal is indicated in the list below :


Exhibit
No.
Description.
Page in
Transcript.
Manner of
Disposal.
16C.
Return showing lectures given and films displayed
at 9 A.D.B. Adelaide, for each month January,
1944, to September, 1945.
S.200-201
Accompanies
Report
16D.
Return showing estimated cost of articles recon-
ditioned at 9 A.D.B. for R.S.D. for each month
March 1944 to September 1945.
S.200-201
ff ff
16E.
Typical week’s menu at 9 A.D.B. Adelaide.
S.200-201
ff if
16F.
Document showing weights of S.U.S. on admission
to, and release from, 9 A.D.B. Adelaide.
S.200-201
ff ff
16G.
Syllabi of training 9 A.D.B. Adelaide for weeks
ending 1st July, 1945, and 19th August, 1945.
S.200-201
)f )f
17.
Routine Order No. 122 dated 25th May, 1942, con-
taining promulgation of sentences imposed by
D.C.M. following on Nuseirat mutiny.
P.27
ff ff
18.
Summons addressed to Cpl. E. E. Roberts to appear
at Police Court, Midland Junction, to answer
charge against Section 28 of Traffic Act 1919-35
(W.A.).
P.74
ff ff
19.
Extract from Annual Report 3 Aust. Guard Com-
pound.
Q.52
ff ff
20.
Report by Lt-Col. Gray on delays in bringing sol-
diers to trial N.S.W. L. of C. Area.
N.39
ff ff
21.
Memorandum dated 9th April, 1943, from L.H.Q.
to H.Q., N.S.W. L. of C. Area regarding duties
of Col. L. E. Vail.
N.S6
Omitted
22.
Sample forms used by Col. Vail in directing re-
vocation of a suspended sentence.
N.66/7
Omitted
23.
Details of oversea service of 92 soldiers recom-
mended for discharge by Col. Vail in July, 1945.
N.74
Accompanies
Report
24.
Text of Secs. 57 and 57A of Army Act as modified
by latest amendments to A.M.R. & 0.
N.78
Omitted
25.
Tabular statement giving particulars of results by
months of Courts-Martial held in Sydney in 1945.
N.203
Accompanies
Report
26.
Chart giving details of absentees without leave
reported and arrested.
N.203
ff ff
27.
List of duties of members of staff of D.A.D.M.P.
& D.B., N.S.W. L. of C. Area.
N.203
ff ff
28.
Form used for reporting on prisoners in N.S.W.
gaols with a view to their transfer to a prison
camp or farm.
N.244
ff ff
29.
Tasmanian Prison Regulations 1937.
T.17
Forwarded to
Director of
Military Prisons
& Det. Barracks
30.
Australian Army Form A.ll used in exercise of
powers under Army Act Sec. S7A for review and
suspension of sentences.
T.21
Omitted
f
i
31.
Victorian Gaols Regulations, 1931.
V.202
Forwarded to
Director of
Military Prisons
& Det. Barracks
32A.
Australian Army Form A.9. Form of Proceedings
for General and District Courts-Martial (Revised
Nov. 1939). . .A :
V.221
Accompanies
Report


Exhibit
No.
Description.
Page in
Transcript.
Manner of
Disposal.
32B.
Australian Army Form A.9. Form of Proceedings
for General and District Courts-Martial (Revised
July, 1942).
V.221
Accompanies
Report
32C.
Australian Army Form A.9. Form of Proceedings
for General and District Courts-Martial (Revised
March, 1944).
V.221
yy yy
33.
Engineer-in-Chief’s Technical Instructions No. 47
(Revised).
V.2S9
yy yy
34.
New Guinea Force Administrative Standing Orders
1st July, 1944.
V.256
Returned to
Mr M. Ashkanasy,
KC.
35.
Tabular statement showing details of detention
barracks and guard compounds as at 31st Janu-
ary 1946.
V.276
Appendix I
36.
Certified copy of letter dated 23rd March, 1943,
from L.H.Q. to all L. of C. Areas, Tas. Force,
N.T. Force, and N.G. Force, authorizing applica-
tion of State prison remissions to Military
prisoners in State prisons.
V.276
Accompanies
Report
37.
Comparative weekly statement of S.U.D. held and
duration of sentences 6th Nov. 1943 to 2nd Feb-
ruary, 1946.
V.278
>> yy
38.
Letter dated 14th February, 1946, from Lt-Col. A.
M. Cohen to the Chairman of the Board.
V.491
yy yy
39.
Forms of Proceedings for Field General, General
and District Courts-Martial (British Army).
V.548
yy yy
40.
Regulations for the Auxiliary Territorial Ser-
vice, 1945.
V.S95
Returned to
A.A.G.
(Women’s Ser-
vices)
41.
Copy of advising by Director of Legal Services re
liability to discharged personnel in case of acci-
dent.
V.608
Accompanies
Report
42.
43.
44.
relating to wood cutting parties 14
A.D.B. Tamworth.
Minute dated 22nd March, 1946, from D.M.P. &
D.B. to Secretary of the Board.
Statement showing firewood taken on charge each
to°Sept 3 1943 SSUCd by A - A - s - c - ~ from Oct. 1942
V.616
V.621
V.627
Returned to
Central Registry,
Department of
the Army
Accompanies
Report
yy yy
45.
S ~B.^t r b *m 6 . Wa "'" -
V.629
yy yy
46.
’’SSrm, °, n ' unda, ' d and dated
i—s c& Raffa "’ Ad -
V.629
yy Jy
47.
M Sary Pri.™ .pd sTra^T/ard-
ing working psrties 14- a n R j
thereto. ADB ‘ and annexure
V.629
yy yy
48.
49.
Statement by Lt-Col. W. D. Houston, D.S.O.
Notes by Brig. F. O. Chilton, D.S 0 on the
ministration of Military Law. ’ h d '
V.629
V.629
yy yy
yy yy
50.
Statement by Lt-Col, P. E . R hoden 0 B R
V.629
yy yy


Exhibit
No.
Description.
Page in
Transcript.
Manner of
Disposal.
51.
Statement by Lt-Col. N. T. Jelbart.
V.629
Accompanies
Report
52.
S — y by Brig. W. J. V. Windeyer, C.B.E.,
V.629
ft tt
53.
Statement by Brig. W. E. Cremor.
V.629
54.
Notes of interview with Lt-Col. T. B. Stephen*
15th October, 1945. ’
V.629
Omitted
55.
Letter dated 8th November, 1945, from Mr. McLach-
lan of the Demobolized Sailors’, Soldiers’ and
Airmen’s Association and reply.
V.629
Accompanies
Report
56.
Letter dated 3rd October, 1945, from General Sec-
retary R.S.S. & A.I.L.A. to the Secretary of the
Board with annexure.
V.632
ft tt
57.
File of papers dealing with comments of Mr. Syd
Black on report of Mr. Justice Reed on Wilson
case and letter dated 24th January, 1946, from
Secretary of the Board to Mr. Black.
V.632
ff tt
58.
Graph showing percentage total of male strength
and the personnel A.W.L. from January, 1942 to
August, 1945.
V.632
ff tt
59.
Letter dated 15th March, 1946, from the Director
of Legal Services on the subject of taking a sum-
mary of evidence in trials of officers.
V.632
>f ft
60.
Letter dated 15th March, 1946, relating to the use
of abstract of evidence on the trial of an officer
from the Judge-Advocate-General.
V.633
ff tt
61.
Tabular statement of details of penalties imposed
on S.U.S. for escapes from Detention Barracks
from January 1943 to 6th May, 1945.
V.634
ft tt
62.
Tabular statement showing remissions granted by
Commandants of Detention Barracks to soldiers
under sentence between 1st January, 1945 and
30th September, 1945.
V.634
tt tt
63.
Statement by Major G. S. Vanstan dated 25th
January, 1945, dealing with powers of sentries
and guards to use firearms.
V.634
ft tt
64.
Report on 3 Aust. Corps School of military ad-
ministration and discipline with syllabus.
—
tt ft
65.
Statement by Lieut-Col. J. P. Rhoden dated 2nd
April, 1946, on trial and punishment of offences
against military law.
—
tt tt


Tribunal
Basis of
Jurisdiction
Composition
Persons subject
to jurisdiction
Offences dealt with
Powers of punishment
Check on finding
or award
Remarks
Coy.
Commander
A.M.R. & O. 423 —
subject to power
of C.O. to limit
(A.M.R. & O.
394 (4) ).
Coy. etc. com-
mander (For de-
finition of “Coy.
etc.” see A.M.R.
& 0. 4).
N.C.Os. below rank
of sergeant or ap-
pointment of L/
Sergeant and pri-
vates.
Same as C.O. un-
less limited fur-
ther by C.O. un-
der A.M.R. & 0.
394 (4).
(A.M.R. & 0. 423)
Reviewed by C.O.
(A.M.R. & O.
413) “Superior
Officer” etc. may
cancel, remit or
commute (A.M.R.
& 0. 431).
If a soldier entitled to do so
elects trial by court-martial,
case shall be referred to C.O.
for re-hearing (A.M.R. & O.
423 (4) ).
C.O.
A.M.R. & O. 389 —
417; A.A. 45 (5),
46.
Commanding officer
as defined in
A.M.R. & O. 389
and 389A.
W.O. of C.M.F. (in
peacetime only)
N.C.Os., privates.
All offences (A.M.
R. & O. 408) but
only after refer-
ence to higher
authority where
offences other
than those listed
in A.M.R. & 0.
409 are involved.
(A.M.R. & O. 418).
“Superior Officer”
etc. may cancel,
remit or commute
A.M.R. & O. 431.
If C.O. intends to inflict other
than a “minor punishment,”
he must give soldier right to
elect trial by court-martial.
A.M.R. & 0. 418 (2) and (5).
G.O.C.
etc.
A.A. 47 and A.M.
R. & 0. 433 on
war service;
A.M.R. & 0. 435-
440 (peace).
One of the authori-
ties mentioned in
A.A. 47 (war) or
in A.M.R. & 0.
436 (peace).
Officers below rank
of lieutenant-col-
onel (war) or
major (peace)
and warrant of-
ficers (war) or
warrant officers
and N.C.Os (per-
manent) (peace).
All offences — but
only after refer-
ence to superior
authority where
offences other
than those listed
in A.M.R. & 0.
437 are involved.
A.A. 47 (2) (war) ;
A.M.R. & 0. 436
(4) and (6)
(peace).
“Superior Officer”
etc. may cancel,
mitigate, remit or
commute R.P. 10
(war service) ;
A.M.R. & 0. 440
(peace).
If more than severe reprimand
or deduction not exceeding £5
is to be inflicted, accused can
elect trial by Court-Martial
(A.A. 47 (2) (war service)
and A.M.R. & 0. 436 (6)
(peace) ).
G.C.M.
D.A. 86, 88, 102,
124 (g); A.A. 48.
5 qualified and eli-
gible officers A.A.
48 (3); R.P. 19;
R.P. 101.
Any person subject
to military law.
Any offence triable
by court-martial
A.A. 48 (6).
(a) May impose any
sentence which
court-martial is
empowered to
impose under
D.A., A.A. or
A.M.R. See par-
ticularly A.A.
44 (war service)
and D.A. 124
(1) (S) and
A.M.R. & O. 345
(peace).
Confirmation Re-
view Petition.
APPENDIX E
EXISTING TRIBUNALS.


D.C.M.
D.A. 86, 88, 102,
124 (g); A.A. 48.
3 qualified and eli-
gible officers A.A.
48 (4); R.P. 19;
R.P. 101.
Any person subject
to military law
other than an of-
ficer or person
subject to mili-
tary law as an
officer A.A. 48
(6).
Any offence triable
by court-martial
committed by a
person subject to
jurisdiction other
than one for
which sentence of
death or penal
servitude or im-
prisonment for a
term exceeding
two years is pro-
vided.
May not impose sen-
tence of death or
penal servitude or
imprisonment with
or without hard
labour for more
than two years.
Otherwise, may im-
pose any sentence
on a person subject
to jurisdiction which
a court-martial may
impose for the of-
fence (see particu-
larly A. A.44), (war
service) &D.A. 124
(1) (a) andA.M.R.
& O. 345 (peace).
Confirmation Re-
view Petition.
Restricted power of punishment
of W.Os.: A.A. 182 (war
service) ; A.M.R. & O. 345
(2) (peace).
One-man
D.C.M.
D.A. 86, 88, 102,
124 (g);
A.A. 48; A.M.R.
& 0. 497 (1) (a)
(iiia) and 497
(1) (a), (iv) (ca)
One qualified and
eligible officer.
Same as for D.C.M
Offences against
Secs. 12 and 15 of
A.A. of desertion
attempted deser-
tion or A.W.L.
Not more than 12
months detention.
Cannot sentence
to imprisonment.
Confirmation Re-
view Petition.
Applicable on wax service only
(can only try offences against
A.A.).
F.G.C.M.
A.A. 49; R.P. 105-
123
3 officers or in
special circum-
stances, 2 officers.
Any person subject
to military law.
Any offence triable
by court-martial.
(a) 3 officers —same
as G.C.M.
(b) 2 officers — sen-
tence not to ex-
ceed F.P. or im-
prisonment (A.
A. 49).
Confirmation Re-
view Petition:
A.A. 54 (1) (d);
R.P. 120; D.A.
98.
F.G.C.M. may be convened only
by a person holding a delega-
tion from Governor-General
under D.A. 86. Delegations
made are limited to troops on
war service and to occasions
when convening officer is
satisfied it is not practicable
that offence be tried by an or-
dinary court-martial.
See Appendix IV to Orders
of the Military Board (Table
D).
Civil
Court
D.A. 102 and note
on p. 47 of A.M.
R. & 0.
Offences against
D.A. and A.M.R
Offences against A.A. (other
than civil offences) triable
only by C.M. Civil offences
—civil power is supreme. In
practice, military officer de-
cides whether a civil offence
is tried by civil courts or
court-martial.


ON WAR
SERVICE
NOT ON WAR SERVICE
(Powers exercisable over
officers below rank of
(Powers exercisable over officers below rank of
Lieut.-Colonel and Soldiers)
Major and
Soldiers)
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation.
1.
Detention not exceeding
28 days (privates only
—exercisable by C.O.
only)—(A.M.R. & 0.
418 (2) (a) (i)).
Detention not exceeding
7 days (privates only
—exercisable by C.O.
only)—A.M.R. & 0.
418 (2) (a) (ii).
2.
Field Punishment (Pri-
vates on active ser-
vice only—exercisable
by C.O. only) —
(A.M.R. & O. 418 (2)
(b) (i)).
To be extended so as
to apply on war
service.
3.
Discharge (privates
and N.C.Os only—
exercisable by C.O.)
(A.M.R. & O. 418
(2) (c)).
4.
Reduction to the ranks
(corporals and bom-
bardiers only—exer-
cisable by C.O. only)
— (A.M.R. & 0. 418
(2) (da)).
Reduction in permanent
rank or to the ranks
(W.Os and N.C.Os
only—exercisable by
Formation etc. Com-
mander etc. and
C.O.)—(A.M.R. & 0.
418 (2) (d) and
(da); 436 (4) (iii)).
5.
Forfeiture of seniority
of rank (officers and
W.O’s only) or classi-
fication (officers only)
or forfeiture of ser-
vice (officers only) —
exercisable by G.O.C.
etc. (A.A. 47 (2)).
Forfeiture of seniority
of rank (officers,
W.Os and N.C.Os
(permanent) only)
or classification (of-
ficers only) or for-
feiture of service
(officers only) —
exercisable by For-
mation etc. Com-
mander etc. (A.M.R.
& O. 436 (4) (i) and
6.
Forfeiture of pay (pri-
vates on active service
only exercisable by
C.O. only) —(A.M.R.
& 0. 418 (2) (b)
(”))•
To be abolished.
(Hi)).
7.
Fines (officers, W.Os
and privates only) —
To be extended also
Fines (officers, W Os
to N. C. Os. and
(A. A. 4'/ (2) and
(3); A.M.R. & 0.
418 (2) (g) 418 (S)
(da) and 423 (1) (b)
(i).
exercisable by C.O.
in case of corporals
or bombardiers and
brigadier or equi-
valent officer in
case of sergeants
and staff sergeants.
vates) — exercisable
by coy. etc. com-
mander (drunkenness
only) C.O. and for-
mation etc. Com-
mander etc. —
A.M.R. & 0. 418
(2) (e) and (5) (b);
423 (1) (b) and (d)
and 436 (4) (v)).
8.
Penal deductions from
pay (officers, W.Os,
N.C.Os and soldiers)
(A.A. 47 (2) and
(3)i 137; 138;
A.M.R. & 0. 418 (2)
(g): 418 (5) (da)
and 423 (1) (ba)).
Brigadier or equiva-
lent officer to be
given power to
award this punish-
ment in case of ser-
geants and staff
sergeants.
Fines for loss of equip-
ment etc. (N.C.Os.
and privates only—
exercisable by C.O.)
A.M.R. & 0. 418
(2) (f).
APPENDIX F
TABULAR STATEMENT OF POWERS OF SUMMARY PUNISHMENT IN PEACE AND
ON WAR SERVICE AND EFFECT OF BOARD’S RECOMMENDATIONS.


ON WAR SERVICE
(Powers exercisable over officers below rank of
Lieut.-Colonel and Soldiers)
NOT ON WAR SERVICE
(Powers exercisable over officers below rank of
Major and Soldiers)
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
9.
Confinements to bar-
racks (privates only
exercisable by coy.
etc. commander and
C.O.)— A.M.R. & 0.
4-18 (5) (a) and 423
(1) (b) (ii).
Confinement to bar-
racks (privates only
—exercisable by coy.
etc. commander and
C.O.)—(A.M.R. & 0.
418 (5) (a) and 423
(1) (b) (ii)).
16.
Severe Reprimand (offi-
cers, W.Os, and
N.C.Os only—exer-
able by C.O. (in case
of N.C.Os) and
G.O.C. etc. A.A. 47
(2) and (3); A.M.R.
& 0. 418 (5) (d)).
(a) Brigadier or
equivalent officer
to be given power
to award this
punishment i n
case of sergeants
and staff ser-
geants.
(b) Punishment to be
extended to pri-
vate soldiers and
exercisable b y
C.O. and coy. etc.
commander.
I Severe Reprimand (of-
ficers, W.Os and
N.C.Os only — exer-
cisable by C.O.
(N.C.Os only) and
formation etc. comd.
etc.). (A.M.R. & 0.
418 (5) (d) ; 436 (4)
and 436 (6)),
Punishment to be ex-
tended to private
soldiers and exer-
cisable by C.O. and
coy. etc. commander.
11.
Reprimand (officers,
W.Os and N.C.Os
only—exercisable by
coy. etc. commander
(N.C.Os below ser-
geant) C.O. (N.C.Os
only) and G.O.C.
etc.)—(A.A. 47 (2)
and (3)); A.M.R. &
0. 418 (5) (d) and
«3 (1) (a) (i).
(a) Brigadier or
equivalent officer
to be given power
to award this
punishment in
case of sergeants
and staff ser-
geants.
(b) Punishment to be
extended to pri-l
vate soldiers and 1
exercisable by
C.O. and coy. etc.
commander.
Reprimand (officers
W.Os and N.C.Os
only—exercisable by
coy. etc. commander
(N.C.Os below ser-
geant) C.O. (N.C.Os
only) and G.O.C.etc.).
(A.M.R. & 0. 418 (5)
id); 423 (1) (a) (I);
436 (4) and 436 (6)),
Punishment to be ex-
tended to private
soldiers and exer-
cisable by C.O. and
coy. etc. commander.
12.
Extra guards and pic-
quets (privates only
exercisable by coy.
etc. commander and
C.O.)—(A.M.R. & 0.
418 (5) (c) and 423
(1) (c)).
Extra guards and pic-
quets (privates only
—exercisable by coy.
etc. commanders and
C.O.). (A.M.R. & 0.
418 (5) (c) and 423
(1) (cc) ),
13.
Admonition (N.C.Os
and privates only —
exercisable by coy. etc.
commander (N.C.Os
below sergeant and
privates) and C.O.)
— (A.M.R. & 0. 418
(5) (e) and 423 (1)
(a) (ii) and (iii)).
To be abolished.
Admonition N.C.Os and
privates only—exer-
cisable by coy. etc.
commander. (N.C.Os
below sergeant (and
privates) and C.O.).
A.M.R. & 0. 418 (5)
(e); 423 (1) (a)
(ii) 423 (1) (b)
(iii) and 423 (1) (d)
(ii).
To be abolished.
The expression “G.O.C. etc.” means one of the authorities mentioned in A.A. 47.
«porn UiVal ' m ° ffiCer '’ has ,he meaning “ < h ' "G.O.C. etc.” in
The expression “Formation etc. Commander etc.” means one of the authorities mentioned in A.M.R. & O. 436 (1).


WAR SERVICE
NOT ON WAR SERVICE
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
*
1. Death (for mutiny
or traitorous conduct
only). (A.A. 44 proviso
14).
*yz
2. Penal servitude
for not less than three
years. (A.A. 44 (b)
and (j)).
To be abolished
-
yz
3. Imprisonment for
not more than two
years. (DA Sec. 106,
A.A. 44 (c) and (k)).
Limitation to two
years to be re
moved.
yz
Imprisonment not ex-
ceeding three months
(D.A. 124 (1) (s);
A.M.R. & 0. 345
(D).
y
4. Detention (soldiers
only) not exceeding
two years. (A.A. 44
(kk)).
y
Detention (soldiers
only) not exceeding
three months (A.M.R.
& 0. 345 (1) (b)
(H) )•
y
5. Field punishment
(soldiers on active ser-
vice only) not exceed-
ing three months. (A.A.
44, proviso 5).
To be extended so
as to apply on
war service.
X
6. Cashiering (offi-
cers only) (A.A. 44
(d) )•
7. Discharge with
ignominy (soldiers
only) (A.A. 44 (b)).
8. Dismissal from His
Majesty’s service (offi-
cers and W.Os only)
(A.A. 44 (e) and 182
(2)).
9. Discharge from the
Defence Force (sol-
diers only) (A.A. 44
(ID).
Dismissal from the De-
fence Force (officers
and W.Os only)
(D.A. 97; A.M.R. &
0. 345 (1) (a) (ii);
345 (2) (a) (i)).
Discharge from the
Defence Force (sol-
diers only) (D.A.
97; A.M.R. & O. 345
(1) (b) (in)).
X
10. Reduction of rank
or classification (offi-
cers only) (D.A. 97
and A.A. 44 (ee)).
X
Reduction of rank or
classification (officers
only) (D.A. 97;
A.M.R. & 0. 345 (1)
(a) (iii)).
11. Reduction to the
ranks or to a lower
grade or reversion to
permanent rank or both
(W.Os and N.C.Os
only) or to an inferior
class of W.O. or re-
duction in seniority
(W.Os only (A.A. 44
(m) and 182 (2)).
Reduction to the ranks
or to a lower grade
(W.Os and N.C.Os
only) or to an in-
ferior class of W.O.
(W.Os only) (D.A.
97; A.M.R. & O. 345
(1) (b) (iv)).
....
APPENDIX G
TABULAR STATEMENT OF POWERS OF PUNISHMENT OF COURTS-MARTIAL IN
PEACE AND ON WAR SERVICE AND EFFECT OF BOARD’S RECOMMENDATIONS.


WAR SERVICE
NOT ON WAR SERVICE
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
X
12. Forfeiture of seni-
ority of rank (officers,
W.Os and N.C.Os
only) or forfeiture of
service (officers only).
(D.A. 97 (b) and A.A.
44 (f) and (m)).
13. Fine not exceeding
£20 (A.A. 44 (ff) and
(mm) ).
14. Forfeiture of pay
for a period not ex-
ceeding three months
(soldiers on active ser-
vice only) (A.A. 44
proviso (6)).
15. Penal deductions
from ordinary pay
(A.A. 44 proviso (12) ;
137 and 138).
To be abolished.
X
Forfeiture of seniority
of rank (officers,
W.Os and N.C.Os
only) or classification
(officers only) or for-
feiture of service
(officers only) (D.A.
97; A.M.R. & 0. (1)
(a) (iv) and 345 (1)
(b) (v)).
Fine not exceeding £20
(D.A. 124 (1) ( s );
A.M.R. & O. 345 (1)
(a) (v) and 345 (1)
(b) (vi)).
a.
16. Forfeiture of de-
ferred pay as may be
provided by the Regs.
(A.A. 44 proviso (11)).
a.
17. Forfeiture of ser-
vice towards pension
as may be provided by
the Regs. (A.A. 44
proviso (11)).
a.
18. Forfeiture of naval,
military, or air force
decoration as may be
provided by the Regs,
-or by Royal Warrant
(A.A. 44 proviso (11)).
a.
19. Forfeiture of naval,
military, or air force
reward as may be pro-
vided by the Regs, or
Royal Warrant (A.A.
44 proviso (11) ).
a.
b.
20. Order for pay-
ments to make good
loss or damage occa-
sioned by Wilful de-
fault or neglect and
expenses occasioned by
the offence. (D.A. 97).
21. Forfeitures pre-
scribed by the Army
Act (soldiers only)
(A.A. 44 (n)).
Order for payments to
make good loss or
damage occasioned
by wilful default or
neglect and expenses
occasioned by the
offence. (D.A. 97;
A.M.R. & 0. 345 (1)
(a) (vii) and 345 (1)
(b) (viii)).


WAR SERVICE
NOT ON WAR SERVICE
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
Notes
Present Powers
Board’s
Recommendation
22. Severe reprimand
(officers, W.Os and
N.C.Os only) (A.A. 44
(g) and (mm)).
To be applicable
also to private
soldiers.
Severe reprimand (offi-
cers, W.Os and
N.C.Os only) : (A.M.R.
& O. 345 (1) (a)
(vi) and (1) (b)
(vii)
To be applicable
to private sol-
diers also.
23. Reprimand (offi-
cers, W.O.s and N.C.Os
only) (A.A. 44 (g) and
(mm)).
To be applicable
also to private
soldiers.
Reprimand (officers,
W.Os and N.C.Os
only) ; (A.M.R. & 0.
345 (1) (a) (vi) and
(1) (b) (vii) ).
To be applicable
to private sol-
diers also.
NOTES.
* Punishments so marked may not be imposed by D.C.M.
x D.C.M. cannot try an officer. Consequently punishments applicable to officers only cannot be imposed
by D.C.M.
a No such forfeitures have been prescribed by the Regulations or by Royal Warrant.
b No forfeitures have been prescribed or authorized by the A.A.
y As to effect of sentences of penal servitude, field punishment, imprisonment or detention and, in peace
time only, a fine exceeding £5, on W.Os and N.C.Os, see A.A. 183 (4) (War) and A.M.R. &O. 345 (3)
(Peace).
z As to effect of sentences of penal servitude or imprisonment on officers see A.A. 44 proviso 2 and
A.M.R. & O. 345 (1) provisos (viii) and (ix).
For powers of punishment of D.C.M. over W.Os, see A.A. 182 (War Service) and A.M.R. & O. 345 (2)
(Peace).


L of C
Area
Location
Official
Designation
Type
Authorized
By W.E. to
Hold Up To
Holding
Capacity
W.E.
Serial
No.
Date of
Raising
Authority
Date
Order in Council
Remarks
Q’LD
Grovely
2/1 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
225
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Expanded
1/5/43
SM10418
Original 25/9/40
Expanded 25/11/42
File 85/1/132
’>
Warwick
3 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
200
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
11/9/42
Expanded
9/10/43
SM17217
SM23928
13/11/42
File 85/702/72
259/2/393
>>
Charters
Towers
4 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
220
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
11/9/42
Expanded
27/8/43
SM17217
No. 786
App. DSD
1/9/43
25/11/42
File 259/702/602
Round
Mountain
Det. Bks.
B
300
200
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
AG Signal
63020
Aug. 45
»
Grovely
3 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
150
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
30/1/43
SM2211
File 240/1/141
”
Townsville
5 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
100
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
31/7/43
SM19309
File 240/1/585
N.S.W.
Holsworthy
5 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Raised
20/5/42
SM8887
27/3/40
File 85/752/3
”
Orange
6 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Raised
20/5/42
SM8887
13/5/42
File 85/702/46
”
West
Tamworth
14 Aust
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Raised
13/2/43
SM3246
14/1/43
File 85/701/264
APPENDIX H
DETAILS OF DETENTION BARRACKS AND GUARD COMPOUNDS AS AT 21st AUGUST, 1945.


L of C
Area
Location
Official
Designation
Type
Authorized
By W.E. to
Hold Up To
Holding
Capacity
W.E.
Serial
No.
Date of
Raising
Authority
Date
Order in Council
Remarks
N.S.W.
Tamworth
IS Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
120
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 28 30
Raised
16/3/43
SM5413
6/5/43
File 85/1/64
’
Malabar
18 Aust.
Det. Bks.
C
100
100
IV/119C/1
O ORs T
2 46 48
Raised
27/8/43
SM21230
29/9/43
259/38/961
’
Miranda
19 Aust.
Det. Bks.
c
100
100
IV/119C/1
O ORs T
2 46 48
Raised
27/8/43
SM21230
29/9/43
259/38/961
>>
St. Aubins
2 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
120
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
30/1/43
SM2211
File 240/1/41
Park Rd
6 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
90
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
21/8/43
SM20743
File 240/1/53
VIC,
Bendigo
7 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
110
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
A.H.Q.
(21/10/39
Instruction for
War)
SM3083
21/10/39
27/3/40
File 0251/724/494
Geelong
8 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
190
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
6/3/42
SM4234
25/2/42
File 85/702/35
}}
Portsea
10 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
250
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
13/6/44
Expanded
23/6/45
SM629S
SD3203
19/7/44
File 240/1/1157
File (pt)
240/1/1635
Albury
17 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
90
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
21/6/43
SM15050
Proclaimed
27/7/43


VIC.
Royal Park
1 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
150
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
13/1/43
SM864
D0184177
22/10/43
File
85/701/250
15/7/44
yy
Melbourne
Gaol
4 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
150
90
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
4/6/43
SM13437
File
240/1/466
Deleted OOB
SM6295, 13/6/44
yy
Puckapunyal
% 2 Aust.
Det. Bks.
C
100
80
IV/119C/1
0 ORs T
1 29 30
Raised
29/11/44
SMI 243 5
File
240/2/546
Declared
Det. Bk. Sect.
116, 14/12/44
S.A.
Adelaide
9 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
25/11/42
SM22946
13/11/42
File
85/702/74
yy
Gladstone
2/2 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
70
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
30/3/42
SM5856
18/3/42
File
85/702/46
Deleted OOB
SM23333,
28/9/43
W.A.
F remantle
11 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Expanded
31/7/43
SM19324
Original Fremantle
1/4/40. Files
85/1/132 259/7/90
TAS.
Conara
°/o 12 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
90
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 22 24
Raised
3/12/42
SM23533
25/11/42
File
259/706/209
N.T.
FORCE
Brock’s Creek
13 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
25/11/42
SM22950
13/11/42
File
85/702/70
FIRST
AUST.
ARMY
Lae
16 Aust.
Det. Bks.
(A.I.F.)
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
9/7/43
Expanded
B type
SM17361
SM2847
3 Apr. 44
Pt. Moresby
14/10/42
File 85/702/64
Lae Order-in-
Council 10/10/44
Revoked 14
Mile Moresby
File 85/1/674
Not to be
Gazetted
1 AUST.
CORPS
Mo rot a i
20 Aust.
Det. Bks.
(A.I.F.)
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
7/5/45
SD2553
1/5/45
SM4079
File
240/1/1541


L of C
Area
Location
Official
Designation
Type
Authorized
By W.E. to
Hold Up To
Holding
Capacity
W.E.
Serial
No.
Date of
Raising
Authority
Date.
Order in Council.
Remarks
Q’LD
Grovely
(transferred to
Round Mountaii
18 Aug. 45)
2/1 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
225
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Expanded
1/5/43
SM10418
Original 25/9/40
Expanded 25/11/42
File 85/1/132
Grovely
Detention
Barracks
closed
”
Warwick
3 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
200
1V/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
11/9/42
Expanded
9/10/43
SM17217
SM23928
13/11/42
File 85/702/72
259/2/393
Charters
Towers
(transferred to
Grovely
15 Sep 45)
4 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
220
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
11/9/42
Expanded
27/8/43
SM17217
No. 786
App. DSD
1/9/43
25/11/42
File
259/702/602
Redundant Unit
9 Jan. 46. In
process of closing
Grovely
3 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
150
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
30/1/43
SM2211
File
240/1/141
yy
Townsville
5 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
100
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
31/7/43
SM19309
File
240/1/585
Redundant Unit
14 Jan. 46
N.S.W.
Holsworthy
5 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Opened
17/2/40
Expanded
20/5/42
File
85/702/3
SM8887
27/3/40
File
85/752/3
”
Orange
6 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Raised
20/5/42
SM8887
13/5/42
File
85/702/46
Closed
5 Jan. 46
”
West
Tamworth
14 Aust
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 64 67
Raised
13/2/43
SM3246
14/1/43
File
85/701/264
APPENDIX I
DETAILS OF DETENTION BARRACKS AND GUARD COMPOUNDS AS AT 31 JAN. 46.


Tamworth
15 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
ISO
120
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 28 30
Raised
16/3/43
SM5413
6/5/43
File
85/1/64
yy
Malabar
18 Aust.
Det. Bks.
C
100
100
IV/119C/1
O ORs T
2 46 48
Raised
27/8/43
SM21230
29/9/43
259/38/961
yy
Miranda
19 Aust.
Det. Bks.
C
100
100
IV/119C/1
O ORs T
2 46 48
Raised
27/8/43
SM21230
29/9/43
259/38/961
yy
St. Aubins
2 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
120
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
30/1/43
SM2211
File
240/1/41
Closing
8/3/46
yy
Park Rd
6 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
90
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 50 52
Raised
21/8/43
SM20743
File
240/1/53
VIC.
Bendigo
7 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
ISO
110
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
A.H.Q.
(21/10/39)
Instruction for
War.
SM3083
21/10/39
27/3/40
File
0251/724/494
Closed
24 Jan. 46
Geelong
8 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
190
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
6/3/42
SM4234
25/2/42
File
85/702/35
yy
Portsea
Albury
10 Aust.
Det. Bks.
17 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
Reduced
to
“C” Tvpe
22/1/46
SM127
A
300
150
250
90
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
13/6/44
Expanded
23/6/45
Raised
21/6/43
SM6295
SD3203
SM150S0
19/7/44
File
240/1/1157
240/1/1635
Proclaimed
27/7/43
yy
Royal Park
(transferred to
Attwoods
1+ Jan. 46)
1 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
LE
150
150
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
13/1/43
SM864
D0184177
22/10/43
File
85/701/250


L of C
Area
Location
Official
Designation
Type
Authorized
By W.E. to
Hold Up To
Holding
Capacity
W.E.
Serial
No.
Date of
Raising
Authority
Date.
Order in Council.
Remarks
VIC.
Melbourne
Gaol
4 Aust.
Gd. Compd.
150
90
IV/119D/1
O ORs T
2 49 51
Raised
4/6/43
SM13437
File
240/1/466
15/7/44
Deleted OOB
SM6295, 13/6/44
>•
Puckapunyal
% 2 Aust.
Det. Bks.
C
100
80
IV/119C/1
0 ORs T
1 29 30
Raised
29/11/44
SM12435
File
240/2/546
Declared D.B.
25/10/45
Declared Det. Bk.
Sect. 116, 14/12/44.
Revoked
S.A.
Adelaide
9 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
25/11/42
SM22946
13/11/42
File
85/702/74
”
Gladstone
2/2 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
70
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
30/3/42
SM5856
18/3/42
File
85/702/46
Deleted OOB
SM23333,
• 28/9/43
W.A.
Fremantle
11 Aust.
Det. Bks.
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Expanded
31/7/43
SM19324
Original Fremantle
1/4/40. Files
85/1/132 259/7/90
TAS.
Conara
% 12 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
90
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 22 24
Raised
3/12/42
SM23533
25/11/42
File
259/706/209
Now being
closed
N.T.
FORCE
Brock’s Greek
13 Aust.
Det. Bks.
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
25/11/42
SM22950
13/11/42
SD4153 (85/1/724)
14/9/45 auth.
disbanding
FIRST
AUST.
ARMY
Lae
16 Aust.
Det. Bks.
(A.I.F.)
B
300
300
IV/119B/1
O ORs T
3 63 66
Raised
9/7/43
Expanded
B type
SM17361
SM2847
3 Apr. 45
Pt. Moresby 14/10/42
File 85/702/64
Lae Order-in-
Council 10/10/44
Revoked 14 Mile
Moresby File
85/1/574 Not to be
gazetted. Redundant
Unit 2 Jan. 46
1 AUST.
CORPS
Morotai
20 Aust.
Det. Bk.
(A.I.F.)
A
150
100
IV/119A/1
O ORs T
2 27 29
Raised
7/5/45
SD2553
1/5/45
SM4079
File 240/1/1541
240/1/1732
O-in-C No. 51
dated 22 Aug. 45
Closed


COMMODITY.
RATION PER DAY
IN OUNCES.
Military
Prisons
Det.
Bks.
Qld.
Vic.
S.A.
W.A.
Tas.
N.S.W.
Temperate
Army Scale
Bread
24
14
20
24
24
24
18
24
12 ozs.
Bread in lieu of
—
—
—
—
6
vegetables
Meat (with bone)
9-1/7
12
16
16
16
16
12
16
16
Oatmeal or maize meal
2
2
6
8
3
3
3
6
x 2 ozs. — alternative to
or wheatmeal
Mixed vegetables
12-5/14
22
12
16
24
16
20
16
flour
24
Sugar
1
H
1
2
3
H
2
1
3
Tea
1/4
1/4
—
1/4
1/4
1/3
3/16
—
1/4 oz.
Coffee
2/7
—
—
—
1/2
1/5 oz.
Cocoa
1/2
—
—
Salt
1/2
1/2
1/2
1/2
3/4
1/2
3/4
1/2 oz.
1/2 oz.
Barley, rice, peas, beans
5-1/7
2
—
—
2
1/4
2/5
1/4 oz.
1-1/2 ozs.
Pepper
3 days a week
—
—
—
as req. for
1/20
—
1/100 oz.
Flour
in soup
5/7
—
—
—
cooking
1/2
x 2 ozs. — alternative to
Soap
—
—
1/2
1/2
1
1/2
oatmeal
Curry Powder
—
—
—
—
1/4
—
1/56 oz.
Milk
2
2
—
—
1
—
—
—
(cond.)
Cheese
6/7
2
—
—
—
6/7
Mustard
—
—
—
—
—
—
_
1/100 oz.
Fruit (dried)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1 oz.
Bacon
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
ozs.
Baking Powder
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1/28 oz.
Jam, Golden Syrup
—
1/4
—
—
—
2 ozs.
Suet
3/28
—
—
Vinegar
1/28
—
—
—
—
Butter
2/7
2
—
—
—
—
1-3/4 ozs.
Tobacco
—
1/4
—
—
—
—
Diet for
prisoners
doing 12
months hard
labour
Diet for
prisoner
at hard
labour
Diet for
Y atala
Labour
Prison.
Highest
diet
scale.
Diet for
prisoner
at hard
labour.
Diet for
prisoner
at hard
labour.
x alternatives.
APPENDIX J
RATION SCALES IN MILITARY PRISONS, DETENTION BARRACKS AND CIVIL PRISONS AND A.M.F. IN TEMPERATE REGIONS.


APPENDIX K
BOARD’S VISITS TO BARRACKS.
The Detention Barracks inspected by the Board, and the dates of each visit are as follows
Geelong 7th September, 1945
Bendigo 10th September, 1945
Geelong 11th September, 1945
Portsea 12th September, 1945
Adelaide 2nd October, 1945
Fremantle sth October, 1945
Albury 18th October, 1945
Albury 19th October, 1945
Grovely 27th October, 1945
Grovely 28th October, 1945
Warwick 29th October, 1945
Round Mountain Ist November, 1945
West Tamworth 3rd November, 1945
Bush Camps, Tamworth 4th November, 1945
Tamworth sth November, 1945
Orange 7th November, 1945
Malabar 9th November, 1945
Miranda 9th November, 1945
Holdsworthy 10th November, 1945
Conara sth February, 1946








