





REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS
AT THE
NATIONAL BANQUET,
HELD AT THE
PRINCE OF WALES THEATRE, SYDNEY,
ON THE 17th OF JULY, 1856,
TO CELEBRATE THE ESTABLISHMENT AND INAUGURATION OF
RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT
IN THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
EDITED BY
RICHARD THOMPSON.
SYDNEY:
THOMAS DANIEL, MARKET STREET.
3856.




PRELIMINARY NOTE.
In a brochure which was published in Sydney seventeen years ago,
the authorship of which, we believe, is to be ascribed to Dr. Bland, the
following passages appear in defence of the great principle of
“ Responsible Government” :
The greatest improvement in political constitutions that has occurred, has been
that of introducing into them the principle of responsibility to the people, and the
beautiful machinery by which this indispensable object is effected. It had not escaped
the attention of those interested in the moral and intellectual advancement of the
human race, that political freedom was invariably found to be the basis, as well as
principal actuating power, of all such improvement. With this principle in operation,
the smallest communities had often outstripped the wealthiest, and most extensive
empires in every attribute of human excellence. But the ancient forms of govern- .
ment of this description, however excellent in their effects, were yet deficient in some
principle essential to their preservation ; and, until this principle was discovered, it
was in vain to hope for permanent success from any of the free forms of government
that had been devised. The lapse of eighteen centuries has at length given to poli-
tical science, in this department, a degree of perfection which, as in some of our most
splendid discoveries in mechanical science, has rendered it practically applicable, and
that with a facility and effect which, but a few years since, would have been consi-
dered hopeless. The vital element to which we allude, and which it has required so
many years to reduce to practical perfection, is that of the responsibility of the
governing to the governed. This one principle, in respect to constitutional forms of
government, in its operation may not unaptly be compared to what steam is discovered
to be in mechanical science ; though, great as are the effects of the latter, it would
indeed be an injustice to the former to compare their respective results. That this
political principle is indispensable to the religious, moral, and intellectual advance-
ment of the human specif s, we have too many existing proofs to doubt: for which, we


have to look only at those countries in which this principle is in greater or less opera-
tion, and contrast the state of those countries with that of those other countries in
which it may be said not to exist.
This was the first public and bold expression of the opinion that the
people of New South Wales had a right to govern themselves.
The principle then asserted here, but contemptuously denied by the
Imperial Government, has, at length, been conceded; and to consider
the best means of celebrating the Establishment and Inauguration of
Responsible Government in the Colony of New South Wales, a Public
Meeting was convened, at which Mr. John Fairfax presided.
It was agreed that a National Banquet should be given, to which
His Excellency the Governor-General; their Honors the Judges; the
Members of the present, and the late, Ministry ; the Foreign Consuls;
and Mr. James Macartlaur; should be invited to attend. And it was
also resolved, unanimously, that a Deputation wait upon Dr. Bland,
the earliest Champion in the cause of “ Responsible Government,”
and request him to preside upon the occasion.
And thus was initiated, in the most appropriate and satisfactory
manner, the means of celebrating the concession of a boon for which
the colonists had, for so many years, struggled to obtain. And now
the Legislature of New South Wales will occupy a place in its Con-
stitution and in Public Confidence different from what it has yet
occupied; and which must point to a far different balance of the
counteracting powers from any which has hitherto existed here.
There are abundant materials in this colony for Independent Legisla-
tion. That a very considerable proportion of our large settlers, our
professional men, our merchants, are the equals in education, and.
general intellectual habits, of those who ordinarily find their way into
the British House of Commons, no one acquainted with the tone of our
society will deny. Having the strongest interests, as capitalists, in
searching deep into the foundations of economical science, they have
also the best kind of school which can afford for such inquiries :
namely, a young community, attaining, by degrees, to a more perfect
civilization as its different interests grow up, and become blended with
each other. With us it is as if Political Economy were being acted on


a stage; for we here witness the growth of human society as plainly as
we can observe the operation of bees through a glass hive
But, although we had the materials for independent legislation, that
great constitutional boon was long withheld from us. We were
governed by officers selected by the Parent State who were exempted
from all Responsibility to the Local Legislature 5 and thus, although
we had a Representative Assembly given to us, possessing the usual
powers of such a body, domestic institutions to which we were not
attached were established amongst us ; and the Representatives of Pro-
perty, having no inducement to enter so anomalous an arena, did not
seek to become the “ Representatives of the People.”
“It seems plain to me/’ said Sir Henry Vane, “ that all offices had
their rise from the people; and that all should be accountable to them ;
and if this be monstrous, then it is monstrous to be safe and rational,
and to bear your own good." This is a maxim which we ardently hope
will be in full force for all posterity ; for, if Government is to be for the
good of the public—an axiom which even the advocates of Prerogative
will not deny, when put to them in what Burke calls the nakedness of
metaphysical abstraction, however unwilling they may be to apply it to
themselves— Government must be responsible to somebody —either to the
people themselves, or to some one who knows their interest and has it
at heart. If Irresponsible Government does not act for the good of the
people, this is not the result of its constitution but of a lucky accident.
The worst Responsible Government, therefore, is better than the best
Irresponsible. The question of Irresponsible Government is decided by
this consideration. The proposition is not to transfer the power of hold-
ing the Colonial Government responsible from the House of Commons
to the Legislative Council, but to free the people from a practically
Irresponsible Government.
The total absence of all 'Responsible Government in this colony was
thus alluded to in the Report of the Select Committee on “ General
Grievances/’ which was laid upon the table of the former Legislative
Council in its session of 1844 :
Nothing can more clearly evince the evil tendencies of that entire separation of
the Legislative and Executive powers which exists here at present, than the perfect


indifference, if not contempt, with which the most important decisions and resolutions
of your Honorable House have been treated by the head of the Government during the
course of this Session. Notwithstanding the insignificant minorities —in which the
confidential servants and advisers (if any such there be) of the Government have been
left on every important subject—which has engaged the attention of the House during
the present Session, the condemned policy and measures of the Executive are still per-
severed in, as if they met the fullest concurrence and support of overwhelming majo-
rities. Night after night the decisions of the representatives of the people —decisions,
in many of the most important of which some of the most experienced and influential
of the unofficial nominees of the Crown have concurred, have been utterly disregarded,
and every possible expedient resorted to—in order to deprive the Council of that con-
trol over the public purse which the Imperial Legislature on the one hand, and
successive Secretaries of State—with the sanction of the Lords of the Treasury—on the
other, have over and over again placed at its disposal.
There is but one remedy for these evils—Responsible Government, in the sense in
which it is understood in England, and an absence of all interference on the part of
the home authorities, except on questions purely Imperial, or on matters referred to
them by way of appeal, where the Executive and Legislative bodies happen to differ.
Happily the application of this remedy, tardy though it was, the
colonists have at length celebrated at the National Banquet, whose
proceedings we are about to report.
In reference to this Eeport, we must observe, that in consequence of
the extremely crowded state of the Prince of Wales Theatre, where the
Banquet was held; and the inconvenient distance at which the Re-
porters of the daily journals were placed from the chief speakers, it was
impossible to do full justice to their speeches. This, together with the
desire, very generally expressed, to have published in a more enduring
form than the columns of a newspaper, the record of a most important
event in the history of New South Wales, has suggested the present
publication.
To the various addresses (which have been revised as well as circum-
stances would allow) it is not necessary to advert in the spirit of strict
criticism. We quite agree with the remarks of the Sydney Morning
Herald, which are subjoined, that “brief and fragmentary as they were,
they form, combined, a fair exhibition of the sentiments of the colony
on the stirring topics suggested by the toasts.” The tributes which


the Governor-General and the chief speakers warmly paid to Dr. Bland
in respect to his untiring and devoted services in the arduous struggle
for the constitutional liberty which this country now enjoys, must have
been most gratifying to one who, foremost in the earliest field, was
called upon to preside at the Ovation which celebrated its crowning vic-
tory. This tribute paid to the patriotic labours of a long, and, in every
respect, a consistent career, proves that the true patriot —the benefactor
of his country and his kind—does not always suffer from the proverbial
inconstancy of the public gall; nor always feel those vicissitudes of pub-
lic opinion to which public life is too generally exposed. The colonists
have not forgotten the emphatic words of Mr. Wentworth on a memo-
rable occasion, when he said —“ I charge you never to forget your tried,
devoted, indefatigable friend, William Bland. No man ever served a
country in a purer spirit of patriotism —no man ever more deeply
deserved the gratitude of a generous people than he has.”
Before we describe the proceedings at the Banquet, it will assist those
in the Parent Country, who take a deep interest in the welfare of the
Australian colonies, if we invite their attention to the opinions ex-
pressed in reference to this great National Celebration, by the leading
journal of New South Wales, the Sydney Morning Herald, ; and that
of Victoria, the Melbourne Herald.
The former journal says :
In another column will be found a full report of the Banquet. The task of the
reporters was not easy, and the gentlemen who spoke were hastened by a feeling of
justice to each other. Still, brief and fragmentary as were the addresses, they form,
combined, a fair exhibition of the sentiments of the colony on the stirring topics sug-
gested by the toasts.
The Chairman of the evening—a veteran in the cause of Constitutional Government
—was once well known in public life. His friends were happy to perceive that, since
his retirement, his affections had not cooled towards the cause of liberty, and that he
had not forgotten how to lead the rejoicings of his fellow-citizens in celebrating an
auspicious change.
Were we to select from the whole of the speeches which appeared most to interest
the company, we should place those of the Consuls high on the list. The cordial,
pungent, and epigrammatic speech of the French Consul was received in the British
style of applause.


A deeper and more serious feeling welcomed the sentiments of Mr. Williams, the
Consul for the United States. There cannot surely exist any permanent causes of
alienation between two nations, one in blood and language, and heirs of one inherit-
ance of glorious traditions. The consular agents of great countries are representa-
tives of those material interests which are the sureties of peace ; and it is their
happiness often by a generous and fraternal word to neutralise prejudices which,
however contemptible, are yet sometimes the remote cause of internecine war.
The political speeches were in perfect correspondence with the object of celebration.
Still it was true that a strong sympathy revealed itself. The cheers were unmistakable
—they were in bold defiance of all prudential reserve. It must have been a one
party cheer. We all know the opponents of the present Ministry too well to suppose
they could for one moment lose sight of party, and receive a rival with magnanimity ;
they never relax. The welfare of civilized nations admits of courtesy even on the
eve of battle. No true soldier imagines that his loyalty to his own flag can be sus-
pected because he embraces a truce, and meantime salutes an opponent. It is the
savage who always looks fierce with ochre, and never meets his antagonist without
threatening gestures and insulting tongue. The cheers so long and loud which
greeted the guests were those of friends, and they may be taken as a pledge of support
should a time ever arrive when the true cause of Responsible Government shall be
carried to its last court of appeal —the prim,ary assemblies of the people.
The compliment paid to the Judges was deserved. Until lately they were liable
to suspension at the pleasure of the Governor, and dismission by the Secretary of
State; yet we believe that during their long tenure of office, they have escaped even
a suspicion of leaning to the Executive. The fact is indisputable, that both in the
general government and in our courts of law, the servants of the State have been in-
fluenced far more by pervading British principles and tastes than by any particular
status of the colony, or its transitory institutions. Thus, Sir Francis Forbes, when
administering the law under conditions scarcely known to Englishmen in other
countries, hastened the establishment of a more desirable system, while he held in
check the tendency of that which existed to despotism and oppression. The name
of that gentleman is unknown to many, but others, like the Chairman, turn to his
memory with reverence.
The tenure of the judicial office now depends on Legislature. A judge may he re-
moved by an address from both houses—a formidable responsibility. Should the
division of the Legislature into separate chambers ever become merely nominal, and
should the judges be liable to the sudden attacks of a passionate majority, we believe
they may rely on the press and on the people.
We regretted that the committee had not included in their programme some
reference to the late official corps. We should do so the more, had not that course
been requested by the gentlemen immediately concerned. Mr. Thomson 'will he
appreciated hereafter—at present, he has the warm regard of the colonists who have


known him long. It has suited political warfare to couple his name with every epithet
of depreciation, but, when his general policy shall be traced by an impartial pen, he
will take a high place among the statesmen of the colony, and among the friends of
commercial, civil, and religions freedom. Were we disposed to be captious, we might
bring out two or three serious mistakes during an administration of twenty years, but
what are these compared wdth the enlightened and vigorous career of one of the ablest
functionaries under the British Government.
The last speech of the evening—that of Mr. Justice Dickinson— was distinguished
for its elegance. His allusions to Lady Denison were the more acceptable, because
fully justified by her amiable conduct from the moment she touched the shores of
Australia —(alas, how grey we get!) —nearly ten years ago. Her footsteps are always
to be traced where ignorance is to be instructed, and misery to be succoured.
'The Melbourne Herald says :
Our neighbours at Sydney—who are more sanguine, or at least more
excitable and mercurial politicians than we are—have been glorifying themselves and
the rest of the great and good men, who have fought and won the battle of constitu-
tional reform and progress in this hemisphere. The banquet, which was held on
Triday last in the Prince of Wales Theatre, was intended to celebrate the establish-
ment of Responsible Government, and was conducted on a scale that rivalled the im-
perial magnificence of festivals in the mother country. It was, in truth, a very superb
dramatic entertainment, got up with consummate skill and liberality by experienced
managers; and the result appears to have been so successful that it would be as imper-
tinent as thankless to pry behind the scenes and to explore, too curiously, the
machinery and the organization by which the effects were produced that charmed, so
powerfully and delightfully, the imagination of the public. Who cares about what
squabbles may have disturbed the green-room, or what jealousies or bickerings may
have prevented rival stars from joining in the performance ; when the stage itself did
not conspicuously suffer from these causes,- —when the principal characters were sus-
tained by the most distinguished veterans, —and when the curtain fell amidst the
approbation of the audience and with thunders of applause.
Tlie occasion was one tliat might have been expected to have congregated and con-
ciliated, for the moment, all classes of politicians ; who„ might at least have seen that
here was common ground, and that the bitterest antagonists might unite in celebrating
the advent of that system, and the establishment of that well-fenced and wide
arena, which rendered it possible for them to fight out, so conveniently and so plea-
santly, the factious and fratricidal warfare in which they so much delight. But foi
Constitutional Government —the combativeness of “ our lively neighbours would
never have had such free scope as that in which it now indulges, It must bave con-
tented itself with the rattling of its chains and the hoarse monotonous growl with
which the discontent and impatience of the colonies w r as formerly made known to its


distant rulers. But now—the scene is changed ; and, when the very object of free
institutions—as a means to the great ends of public liberty and order—is to provide the
lists, and to give encouragement, within certain limits, to the jousts and tournaments
of party warfare—it was, we say, to be desired that the founding of such an institution
should have been celebrated by a gathering of all the chivalry on both sides of the
question, and by an interchange of those knightly courtesies which would have done
justice to the occasion aud equal honour to all concerned. We do not inquire too
narrowly into the causes, and we do not seek for an explanation ; but the fact is too
glaring to be overlooked, that, whilst the object of the meeting was truly national, and
appealed to what should have been the common sympathies, the common triumph, and
the common glory of all the various sections of constitutional politicians, the assem-
blage seems to have contained too few of the leading members of the opposition, and
too large a preponderance of the adherents of the Government, to bear that comprehen-
sive character which ought to distinguish such occasions. There ought to have been
no sour and ill-conditioned sect to keep itself away from such a passover, —no insolent
and overbearing hierarchy to repel them from the common celebration. It ought to
have been the jubilee of the colony, and no Samaritan should have stood aloof or been
excluded from the temple. We do not know which party is to blame ; but it was a
bad beginning, and a bad omen for the spirit in which political struggles are to be
carried on hereafter, between men who are already so entirely and so fiercely com-
mitted to hostility, that they cannot meet even at the festive board, and for such
purposes as were contemplated at the banquet. This is not English. This is not
constitutional. This is not the true theory or practice of Responsible Government. It
is throwing away the ad vantages—the immense advantages—of the monarchical element,
which provides for the unity and harmony of the state, as something’ greater and
more comprehensive than any faction ; and it is splitting up society itself into re-
pulsive masses like those in the old Greek democracies, or the Italian republics of the
middle ages. This is the danger of the colonies, that they should fall into that kind
of murderous antagonism which has almost invariably distinguished and disgraced
the little commonwealths and free cities, that have otherwise been the most illus-
trious in the annals of liberty. *
To some, these observations will appear to be overstrained; but, to .those who
dwell incessantly on the aspects and symptoms of our political life, the caution will
not appear unnecessary nor the injunction too earnest and too solemn, if we implore
our fellow-colonists to beware of the demon of discord, and, for God’s sake, not to
allow political animosity to extend one hair’s breadth beyond the line of demarca-
tion, into any other sphere of either public or private life. Within that line we
would fight, intellectually, like Guelphs and Ghibellines ; but let us have no daggers,
no lances, no libels, and—beyond it—all the charities and courtesies of life.
What has this to do, it will he said, with the dinner at the Prince of Wales


Theatre ? Too much, we fear; and time may show the accuracy of our presenti-
ment. The leaders of the opposition kept aloof, and the question is now mooted at
Sydney whether their conduct was justifiable, on the ground of some intrigue, some
artifice, or some studied insult, on the part of the ruling power, or must be ascribed
to some jealousy or misconception —too paltry to be suspected even, in men of such
capacity as those whose absence was remarked. Whoever was absent, however,
there were those present whose very names would be a tower of strength—as they
have been in many a day of trouble—in any cause that should appeal to the higher
and nobler sentiments of the people. It was a magnanimous and a gracious thing—
alike honorable to both parties—when it was determined to celebrate such a
jubilee, as we have termed it, to call out William Bland from his retirement, to
invest him with the sacred stole, and to make him the high priest of so august a
ceremony. Many of our readers do not know him ; and, to some who do, the base-
ness of faction may have interposed a veil, that would conceal talents and virtues
never looked for and seldom found in this hemisphere. But, still there is a class
of men among the old colonists to whom those locks, whiter than the driven snow,
are a crown of glory; and who, when they shall follow him to his grave, will feel
that, whoever may come after him, none can ever assume his place, as one of the
earliest founders and patriarchs of liberty on this continent. For more than forty,
or perhaps fifty years, has this brave, consistent and accomplished man been strug-
gling, sometimes against imperial, and at other times against local tyranny, on
behalf of a people who at one moment appreciated his motives, and at another
joined with their own oppressors in disparaging, if not in vilifying, their greatest
benefactor. An elegant scholar, a man of science, and a gentleman of that antique
school of urbanity aud refinement, which modern barbarism and ruffianism have
almost trampled into oblivion— William Bland, from almost the beginning of this
century, became the firm and incorruptible assertor of the people’s rights—bearding
colonial despotism, when the gallows, the chain-gang, and the horrors of Norfolk
Island—that compendious and concentrated hell, of which governors and secretaries
held the key—were the ready answers to reclamations too loud, or protests too
daring for official ears. It was at that period, when his physiological attainments
and surgical inventions were exciting the admiration of the schools of Europe,
and when fortune seemed at his disposal, that William Bland— choosing that which
he thought better than all “ the riches of Egypt”—cast in his lot with that of a
persecuted people, and became their champion, against an oligarchy more cruel and
more profligate than the wretches that were entrusted to their power. It was a
proud day for such a man to outlive—not merely all the struggles and all the
violence, but all the feebleness of expiring despotism, and to preside on such an
occasion, supported by the Denisons and the Macarthurs, under a new dis-
pensation and system of law and government. It was the crowning glory of such


a life, and a fitting bouquet for the public to lay upon the sepulchre that awaits
him.
Mr. Spain, who acted as croupier, is not an untried man. He also was a labourer
in the cause of reform, in the old country, when reform was a passport to poverty
and ignominy, rather than to wealth or consideration ; and his claims as a colonist
are ratified, by the assignment to him of such a post of honour.
Upon the whole, the festival was most satisfactory in the demeanour and the
speeches of those present; hut most unsatisfactory and incomplete, when we reflect
upon the absence of so many who ought to have been there, —if they were not
absolutely precluded by a sense of honour.


NATIONAL BANaUET.
Now wreaths of PEACE around each column twine,
And FREEDOM cries, the glorious prize is mine !
In accordance with the arrangements made by the Committee ap-
pointed at a Public Meeting, which was convened for the purpose of
considering the fittest and most appropriate means of celebrating the
Establishment and Inauguration of Responsible Government in New
South Wales, a grand National Banquet was held at the Prince of
Wales Theatre, in Sydney, on the 17th July, 1856.
The capacity which the resources of this fine establishment afford for
an entertainment of the kind, provided ample space for the accommoda-
tion of the large number of guests, nearly six hundred of whom occu-
pied the tables. The pit was covered with a floor even with the stage.
The boxes were reserved for ladies, about 400 of whom graced the two
commodious tiers. The ordinary decorations of the Theatre, of them-
selves, with their superb chandeliers, and richly appointed boxes, upon
whose panels the Feathers of the Prince of Wales appear in boldly
embossed relievo ; and the elaborate ornamentation of the proscenium,
upon which the Royal Arms of England appear in bright emblazonry ;
these decorations, we say, are of themselves sufficient as regards orna-
ture upon ordinary occasions. But upon so important a celebration as
the present, the Committee, to whom was confided the decorative part,
determined that additional and appropriate embellishments should also
he introduced. Accordingly, from the gallery were displayed the flags
of the Allied Powers, and of the other nations of Europe, and America;
“ whose ensigns were hung up, whose peaceful drums were still.”
Above the centre box was hung Mr. 0. R. Campbell's fine portrait of


the late Speaker of the former Legislative Council, Sir Charles Nichol-
son, and which was painted at the desire, and by the public subscrip-
tion, of the colonists, previous to the honorable gentleman’s departure for
Europe, with the view of its being placed in the Hall of the Sydney
Exchange. Above this fine specimen of art floated a banner, designed
by Mr. Torning, jun., displaying on a field argent the Crown of Eng-
land and the Rising Sun; above and below which device were em-
blazed the words —“ Advance Australia,” and “ God Save the Queen.”
The arrangement of the choicest floriferous treasures of “ fair Austra-
lie” was entrusted to Mr. James Kidd, Superintendent of the Sydney
Botanic Gardens, whose appointment to this tasteful work was (we
need scarcely say) fully justified. The floral embellishments of the
various festins which for many years past have been held in Sydney,
have exhibited Mr. Kidd’s artistical skill, and, on this occasion, he
summoned all the resources of his art, and they were obedient. Under
his hand, wreaths and spiral involutions, garlands, and festooned
draperies, entwined round and surmounted each pillar. On the centre
table a beautiful trousseau of flowers, and plants interspersed with
fruit, was surrounded by a rich tortis, upon which the legend, “ Onward
Australia ! thy Star shines brightly!” was gracefully emblazoned,
The musical arrangements were in admirable keeping with the rest
of the appointments. The band of Her Majesty’s Eleventh Regiment
was stationed in the upper circle; whilst on the stage, opposite the
chair, a party of professional and amateur vocalists was grouped, led
by Mr. John Howson —Mr. Packer presiding at the pianoforte.
Shortly after eight o'clock, the bugles of the guard of honor stationed
outside the theatre announced the arrival of the Governor-General, and
as the whole house rose to receive him, at the first notes of the National
Anthem, the mise en scene was brilliant in the extreme. In the centre box
sat Lady Denison and her family, and surrounded as her Ladyship was by
nearly 400 ladies and their families, the fairest of Australia’s daughters,
the effect was electric. His Excellency was accompanied by the in-
vited guests. Their Honors, the four Judges; the Members of the
present and past Ministry; the Speaker of the Legislative Council;
Dr. Bland ; Mr. James Macarthur, M. P.; Colonel Bloomfield ; the
Brigade Major; and the whole of the Foreign Consuls. The visitors
included Members of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly;
Clergymen of the various denominations; Members of the Bar; and of


the other learned professions; Representatives of the Banking, Mer-
cantile, and Maritime interests, —in a word, men of all classes, creeds,
and parties, were assembled at what, in the Roman sense of the word,
was in reality an Ovation, —for the victory had been won without blood-
shed. The sumptuous entertainment provided under the direction of
the Committee, was in every respect worthy of the occasion.
Upon Dr. Bland advancing to occupy the President’s Chair, one
loud and long continued burst of applause, together with the waving of
handkerchiefs by the hundreds of fair hands in the beauty-adorned
boxes, welcomed Australia’s venerable Patriot the Philanthropist;
the Founder of the earliest Educational and Charitable Institutions of
New South Wales. To quote the language of the Sydney Morning
Herald —“ the applause was that of G-ratitude, Respect, and Love.”
The President was supported on his right by His Excellency, the
Governor-General; the Premier, Mr. Stuart A. Donaldson; and Mr.
Justice Dickinson. On his left by Sir Alfred Stephen, C.J.; and the
Colonial Treasurer, Mr. Holt. Mr. Spain occupied the Vice-President’s
chair, supported on his right by Mr. Justice Therry; on his left by the
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. D. Cooper.
Dinner being ended, and Non nobis Domine having been chanted by
the musical party,
The President rose to propose the first toast of the evening, “ The
Queen.” He said :
“ This, gentlemen, is a toast which needs no comment in such an
assembly as the present. It is one that speaks for itself, and will be
drunk by all of us with devoted affection and loyalty.”
The toast was drunk with all the honors, the National Anthem
being sung in excellent style, accompanied by the Military Band.
The President then proposed the second toast of the evening
“Prince Albert, the Prince of Wales, and the Royal Family.” He
said :
“ That in proposing a toast which included Prince Albert, he must
take occasion to call attention to the fact, that his Royal Highness had,
ever since the commencement of his connection with England, evinced the
warmest attachment to the country which was the native land of many of
those present. (Cheers.) This remark led him to a particular instance


which it was impossible he could pass over —he meant the part which
Prince Albert had taken in connection with the industrial Exhibition of
1851. (Renewed cheers.) It would be inpossible, in point of fact,
to record the many instances which were to be found of the deep
interest which his Royal Highness had ever shown in the welfare of our
fatherland. He (the President) would pass over other circumstances
which might be mentioned, because important as those others were, the
one instance which he had adduced was in itself amply sufficient to
establish the claims of the Royal Personage in question to their highest
consideration. (Cheers.) As to his Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales, and the other juvenile members of the Royal Family, he must
admit that as yet he could not speak as to their meritorious deeds,
because at so early a period of their lives no opportunity could have
been afforded them for distinguishing themselves ; but he felt assured
all present would agree with him in thinking that they could not but
expect the best fruits from such a source as that from which the royal
children derived their origin. (Cheers.)
The toast was drunk with all the honors.
Band —“ Prince Albert’s March.”
Vocalists—“To the Green Woods Inviting.”
The President next proposed the third toast of the evening, “ The
Governor-General,” which was received with three times three. He
said:—
“ His Excellency had been only a short time, comparatively speak-
ing, among them ; hut he had been sufficiently long to convince them
that the ability, as well as the zeal and industry with which he was
gifted, were ever at the service of the colonists for the advancement
of their interests. At the present period that talent and industry
were peculiarly adapted to advance the general happiness and welfare
of the colony. (Cheers.) Not only indeed were his Excellency’s
talents valuable at this juncture in the history of the colony, but his
practical acquirements were such as would with the greatest ad-
vantage to the colony be called into requisition at the present junc-
ture. (Renewed cheers.) Short as was the period during which his
Excellency had been among them, it had been sufficiently long to
make his services extensively felt; but one of the most effective marks
of the value of his Excellency’s service had been the admirable


manner in which he had assisted in the establishing among the
colonists of the great boon of Responsible Government. (Cheers.) He
(the President) felt assured that few men would have performed
the critical duties which devolved upon the Governor of the colony,
in this matter, in a manner at once so useful to the country, and so
satisfactory to the colonists as his Excellency had done. He would
not trespass further on their time, but would give the ‘ Governor
General.’ ”
The toast was drunk with all the honors.
Band—“ Fine Old English Gentleman.”
The Governor-General rose to respond. After the cheering with
which his Excellency was greeted had subsided, he said :
“I cannot deny, Mr. President and gentlemen, that I feel really grati-
fied with the very kind manner in which you have drunk my health. I
feel I have done my best to fulfil those duties, for the performance of
which I have been sent to the colony. (Cheers.) The people of the
colony have always done me justice by giving me credit for my good inten-
tions. Now, however, they have given me credit for the performance of
good and useful acts. I certainly am rejoiced for the part which it had
been my good fortune to play in a performance which can only happen once
in a man’s life ) namely, the inauguration of Responsible Government.
(Cheers.) If I may be permitted to draw an anology between a country
and an individual, you will find a colony in its youth, like an inidvidual
before he has attained his majority, is subject to control and direction j
but you will also find that the period of the matured growth of a colony,
as in the case of an individual, is a period of rejoicement (loud ap-
plause) j and, as in the case of the individual, none rejoices more than
the parent who has watched over its youth. (Renewed applause.)
Now I, as the representative of the Queen, can say that.her Majesty is
rejoicing at the advent of Responsible Government to this magnificent
colony—rejoicing to think that you, as a colony, have passed your period
of childhood and youth, and are now in the enjoyment of those advantages
and privileges which belong to the period of majority. (Cheers.)
It does not follow, from your rejoicing in the privileges which you
have received, that you are aspiring to what is elsewhere called ‘ inde-
pendence.’ The child who, having passed the period of his minority,
is relieved from the direct control of his parent, does not seek to cast


off all the ties of filial affection; and so it is with a colony. (Cheers.)
When the proper period arrives, the parent gives the child the freedom
of action and the independent use of all those faculties with which he
is endowed. Carrying out the comparison, this it is which the mother
country had done in the case of the colony ) and I feel assured you will
find that, so far from the ties which bind you to Great Britain being
weakened by the concession of Responsible Government, they will be
strengthened. (Cheers.) Heretofore you may have had reason to com-
plain—hereafter you will have none. (Renewed cheers.) In conclu-
sion, I can assure you that you may depend upon my ever being ready
to give you the best assistance which lies in my power in carrying into
full effect the great boon which has been conferred upon you. I again
thank you for the kind and hearty manner in which you have drunk
my health. (Applause.)
The Governor-General again rose, and said: —
“It fell to his lot to propose the next toast of the evening, and he
felt assured it was one which would he drunk with all the honours.
The toast was—‘The powers allied with Great Britain in the recent War/
(Cheers.) The duty of proposing it had taken him somewhat by sur-
prise, for it was only since he entered the room that he was requested
to undertake the task. Such a toast on the present occasion, just after
the colonists had celebrated the advent of peace, must be received
with peculiar satisfaction. (Cheers.) Those who had aided England
in carrying her through all the phases of a war unparalleled in intensity
for the period during which it lasted—a war which had brought for-
ward a development of might almost unparalleled in the annals of war
on the part of all concerned, but on the part of none more than their
glorious Allies the French—those Allies who, throughout the entire
contest, had acted in the most perfect harmony with the armies of
England. In this war there had been, in fact, a development of union
which must be most satisfactory to all concerned. (Cheers.) They at
this part of the empire had not suffered much by the war; but to those
who had endured with their countrymen the dangers, toils, and
difficulties of all phases of the contest, they would be generous; and to
those who had suffered so much in their service, they would give all
honor. They had borne the brunt of the struggle, and it was not for
those who had benefitted by their gallantry and devotion to forget


their services. (Cheers.) Without further preface he would give—
‘The Powers Allied with Great Britain in the recent War.’”
The toast was drunk with all the honors.
Chorus —“ Bright Sword of Liberty.”
Monsieur Sentis (the French Consul) responded. He said :
* “ He had the honor to thank them on behalf of the Allied Powers,
and more especially on behalf of France. The warm manner with
which the toast had been received was a mark that all of them believed,
like Lord Palmerston, that the alliance between England and France
was but beginning; and that those two great nations would every day
be more and more firmly cemented together. If the union of the two
nations had been so successful in war, what greater good might it not
effect in peace ? The world was informed henceforth that justice and
morality were the international laws, and that England and France
would oppose, in future, all encroachments upon the freedom of Europe.
It was the immortal glory of England and France that the principles
put forward at the beginning of the war were sanctioned by the peace of
which the terms were all that was necessary to stop the power of Russia,
and no more. Let them not say that Russia was going out of the
struggle without being enfeebled. Was it the Allied Powers or Russia
who were compelled to do away with any military arsenal or any fleet
in the Black Sea ? (Cheers) Was it the Allies or Russia who were
prevented to build again the fortresses pulled down by our cannon in
the Crimea and in the Baltic ? (Cheers.) Was it the Allies or Russia
who had consented to yield a part of their territory, and thus to lose
the mouth of one of the most important rivers of the globe the
Danube ? (Continued applause.) It was said, by the continuation of
war, they could have got more, perhaps; but at the same time
they could lose their advantages. It was not enough in war to be
brave and skilful ; it was also necessary to be lucky. (Cheers and
Was it possible to be more brave than the English troops
have been in tlie attack of the Redan, or the French in the first attack
of the Malakoff? but still they did not succeed. To neglect the good
in order to get the better was a great mischief in every thing ; but, in
this matter, no one must forget that war was carried on with the blood
of the people, and that it was the duty of any honest government to


be sparing of it. (Loud cheerg.) He had the honor to thank them
again for the Allied Pow®rs. (Applause.)”
The Vice-President, in rising to propose the next toast of the
evening, “ The Army and Navy,” said:—
“ It was one which appealed to the ladies, and he felt assured that
the sympathies of the brilliant assemblage he saw occupying the boxes
would not be withheld. (Cheers.) The Committee, he must say, had
been very kind in allotting this toast to him. He was relieved from
expressing the usual wish that the toast had fallen into better hands,
because it was one which so far commended itself to every Englishman,
and to every Englishwoman too, that he felt confident, however he
introduced it, every heart would respond to the appeal which it con-
tained. (Cheers.) The only difficulty he experienced arose from the
fact that in putting the toast he was compelled to place one service
before the other —not because they valued one more than the other,
because both were equally deserving their confidence and thanks —but
because it was impossible that it could be otherwise. He would, how-
ever, compound the matter by giving the toast as the two services.
(Cheers.) If they went back to English history, he felt assured there
was not a heart that would not leap with pride in contemplating the
deeds which the army and navy of England had accomplished. Begin-
ning with Marlborough, and coming down to the great Iron Duke, and
descending from Exmouth to Codrington, history was full of the great
achievements of the army and navy in guarding the liberties of Eng-
land, and in promoting the freedom of the world. (Renewed cheers.)
The army of England, instead of being the dread of the people, had
ever done the best service in the cause of the people and of the Consti-
tution. If, he repeated, they went back to history, they would find
that their achievements were such as would never be forgotten j but
he felt bound to refer to what the army and navy had done on late
occasions, and he would first allude to some instances in order to show
the feeling which existed between the sovereign and her forces. At
the commencement of the war, when the Guards perhaps the finest
in existence —repaired to her Majesty’s palace to take leave, they found
her, on a cold winter’s morning, accompanied by her royal consort, and
by the royal children too, ready to take leave. (Cheers.) . They re-
ceived the farewell of the sovereign, and certain he was that in the day


of battle not a man forgot the waive of his sovereign’s hand which
greeted him as he left his (Renewed applause.) He would
advert to another occasion in which the sympathy between the sovereign
and the defenders of the nation was manifested. When the fleet
went forth to do battle in the cause of England in the recent war, where
did they find her Majesty ? Why, they found her in her yacht, leading
forth the ships on their way. (Cheers.) Had it been the fate of that
fleet to be engaged in active service, not a sailor on board, he felt as-
sured, would have forgotten that he had been led forth to the contest
by bis sovereign. Whether they looked to the achievements in the
Baltic—in the Mediterranean—to Balaklava or Inkerman—it was im-
possible to say which deserved best at the hands of their country in the
recent war the army or the navy. (Cheers.) He could not conclude
without remarking that those troops stationed in this colony, and their
gallant commander, although they were not afforded an opportunity for
distinguishing themselves in the field of battle, should not be foi gotten
on an occasion like the present. (Cheers.) Nor could he sit down
without adverting to that excellent lady, Florence Nightingale (loud
applause), who, actuated by the most humane and patriotic feelings,
led forth a staff of ladies to succour and attend those soldiers and
sailors, who, in the midst of the contest, were visited by wounds, sick-
ness, and unhappiness. (Loud cheers.)”
The toast was. drunk with all the honors.
Band—“ British Grenadiers and Hearts of Oak.”
Colonel Bloomfield, who was received with general applause, pro-
ceeded to respond on behalf of the army. He said .
“ It was a proud thing to consider that the army of England should
in the recent war have fought side by side with the troops of one of the
greatest military powers in the world joined in fellowship too with
those against whom they had often fought in deadly hut fair fight.
(Cheers.) This was a proud consideration, and it was a pleasing con-
sideration ; the pleasure was heightened too by the reflection that those
brave fellows, the soldiers of England and of France, not only fought
side by side against a common enemy, but throughout the entire cam-
paign vied as to who should be most civil, one to the other. (Cheers.)
Every soldier must know, indeed all must be aware ox the fact, that an
attack on a fortress was the most difficult of all warlike operations, and


having this fact in view, he thought it must be admitted that the army
had done its duty in the war which was just terminated. (Cheers.)
Por himself and the regiment which he had the honor to command,
he would express his regret that he had not enjoyed the privilege of
taking a part in the war. (Cheers.) He would assure them, in con-
clusion, that in whatever part of the world it might be his lot to live
hereafter, he would always remember with pleasure and with gratitude
to his friends the many happy days he had spent in the colony.
(Cheers.) He begged to thank them in behalf of the army.”
Captain Moriarty, R.N., who was warmly received, responded on
behalf of the navy. He said: —
“He would not deny he felt happy that it had fallen to his lot to
respond on behalf of a branch of the service with which he had been asso-
ciated from his earliest infancy. (Cheers.) Not only, indeed, had he him-
self been always associated with the navy, but members of his family for
many generations had belonged both to the army and navy; among
others he might mention that he had a brother-in-law who held the
post of admiral. He could not add much to what had been said by a
previous speaker who had alluded to the services rendered both by the
army and navy, but this he would say, that wherever the naval force
were engaged they had always endeavoured to do their duty, and in
doing so, were influenced only by a sense of their responsibility to their
sovereign and their country. (Cheers.) In the reeent war they were
not found wanting, and the fact that some of his own family were en-
gaged in the war just terminated, added to the pleasure he felt in bear-
ing testimony to the good service which the fleets and armies had
rendered their country. (Cheers.)
Vocalists —“ This night we’ll merry be.”
The President then rose to propose the toast of the evening, —“ The
Prosperity of New South Wales under Responsible Government, and
spoke as follows :
“ln this toast we indirectly express what we all feel—what the
entire colony feels—onr deep sense of the wisdom and justice of the
Home Authorities in granting to us f Responsible Government/ —the
second great political concession which the fatherland has been pleased
to confer on this noble colony. The first was in the year 1843, that of


onr late Constitution ; —a Constitution devised by ourselves, and which
had the full sanction and approval of one of our most esteemed and
distinguished Governors, the late Sir Richard Bourke; as well as
of the Chief Justice of that time, the eminently talented Sir
Francis Forbes; a Constitution deemed well fitted to meet all the
political wants of this colony for many years to come in fact, until
our population should have considerably exceeded a million; and such,
doubtless, with slight modification, it would have proved but for one
unfortunate well-known flaw in its construction. I advert to this cir-
cumstance solely as to an important suggestive fact,—and no more.
The present great concession of Responsible Government is not only
that of an inestimable boon, but of a boon immeasurably enhanced m
value by the considerate spirit in which it has been made : the boon
itself, solicited as it was by ourselves, having been actually referred to
ourselves for reconsideration, and, if necessary, for amendment. A
generous permission on the part of the Home Government, which we are
aware will be responded to by our own legislative authorities with a
care and circumspection worthy of so important a privilege. But to
come more immediately to the Subject of the toast which I shall have
the honor to propose. Free institutions are a part of every one of us,
or we are a part of them. They are interwoven, and have been from
time immemorial, in the very hearts of our countrymen. An English-
man is born a Constitutional Politician. We begin, intuitively, with
the Romance of Freedom in our boyhood and our youth; and this, at
first little more than an affair of the imagination, becomes realized as
we advance by actual observation and long-tried experience; until, if
anything could add to our convictions, its truthfulness is finally demon-
strated by science. Ample proof of the inestimable value of those free
institutions which our fatherland has now so nobly conferred on us,—
Institutions, the plasticity and elasticity of which is such that, by the
most obvious modifications-so that the great principles on which they
are based be not infringed,-they can be adapted with immense advan-
tage even to the smallest of our colonies. If further recommendations
be required to show the full value of the vast boon, the establishment
of which in this colony we are now met warmly to acknowledge and
to celebrate, we may finally have recourse to contrast,-aid compare
the state of those countries which are without such institutions with
that of our parent country; the prosperity, the happiness, thecontent-


ment, the internal peace, and the perpetual progress of the latter with
the grievances of the former—grievances attested by the numerous
noble, sanguinary, but hitherto ineffectual struggles to obtain redress )
together with the stationary—or rather, —in some respects —retro-
gressive state of man in those countries, —which, but for the stimula-
tion of the free nations of the earth, would most probably ere this have
been reduced to the barbarous condition of our neighbours of the Celestial
Empire. Who, while fighting under what they may be pleased to desig-
nate fixed principles, are unmindful of the fact that man cannot con-
tinue in one and the same stay, —but that he must be perpetually mak-
ing progress —aye, and in the present state of the world, rapid progress
—or be receding, in effect, quite as rapidly. But, gentlemen, the
indirect benefits derived from free institutions are scarcely, if at all,
inferior to those which I have enumerated. Gentlemen, if we wish to
extinguish war we can do it only by the full spread of free institutions,
including, as they do and always will and must, the unlimited spiead
of Education, —the unlimited spread of every species of Knowledge with-
out exception. If we wish to strengthen and render perpetual the tie
between our parent country and her colonies, it can be done only by
the same means. If we wish to improve to the utmost the whole
human race, to raise the entire human family infinitely above their
present level—whatever the additional means required —the world-wide
spread of institutions, similar to those the establishment of which
we are now met to celebrate, will ever be an- indispensable element, —
and that in their most perfect form, —such as that which the
paternal Home Government has so nobly shown itself desirous
that we should at once enjoy. Gentlemen, I know not in
what terms to express the feelings which this wise and just act of the
Imperial Government excites. To those little versed in British
motives and reasonings it may appear more like Romance than Reality.
We, on the contrary, better acquainted with the doings of the British
Government, particularly of late years, should simply class this great
Act (extended as it is to all our colonies) with those noble, those
splendid, those wise Measures —the Reform Bill, the Emancipation Bill,
the Abolition of Slavery, and the Repeal of the Corn Laws, with the in-
auguration of Free Trade, acts the brightest of Britain’s bright trophies;
Victories gained by herself over herself, for her own honor and benefit;
—the epic poetry of history; true with the utmost exactitude, both to


sentiment and to reason; deeds of chivalrous generosity,—based as firmly
on highly cultivated and enlightened intellect as on the highest refine-
ment of sentiment. I will now beg to conclude; but not without express-
ing my regret, Gentlemen, that you should have been detained so long by
so indifferent an orator, —by merely reiterating the toast, to which I feel
assured you will be disposed to do every honor. Gentlemen, ' The
Prosperity of New South Wales under Responsible Government.’ ”
The toast was received with the utmost enthusiasm, the President,
during his speech, being frequently interrupted by bursts of the
warmest applause.
The band having played the Australian Anthem,
The Premier (Mr. Stuart A. Donaldson), who was received with
great applause, rose to respond. When the cheering, which lasted
for some time, had subsided, he said :
“ The life of man is three score years and ten, —an age of which the
colony cannot yet boast; but who, among the crowds of friends and
fellow citizens who hear me, remembering its early days, could have be-
lieved that Australia, inhabited as it was seventy years ago almost ex-
clusively by the ' blackfellow,’ and by the indigenous creatures of the
country, could, within so short a period of time, have been the theatre
of a scene such as this—(cheers) —surrounded as we are by all the
attributes of wealth, happiness, and prosperity, accompanied by all the
accessories of a highly advanced state of civilisation ? (Applause.) If
we look below us, on this brilliant entertainment, what could the world
produce more elegant than the banquet which we have enjoyed ?
( Cheers.) If we look above at that galaxy of beauty—( cheers ) —at
that halo of light which, like the double ring around the planet Saturn,
beams upon us two stories high —(cheers) —who could have dreamed,
sixty-nine years ago, of such an assemblage as this ? ( Continued ap-
plause. ) "We are now met at the festive board to celebrate the intro-
duction of Responsible Government—of that form of Government
which has been the aim and object of every man of intelligence and
weight in the colony for the last thirty years. (Cheers.) And
if the contrasts just drawn between the physical condition of
Australia then and now, are striking and curious, not less interest-
ing is the comparison between the venerable antiquity of the
institution of self-government, and the youth and ardent spirits of this


youthful and noble country, who are met here to-nigbt to celebrate its
inauguration. (Cheers.) And when I speak of prosperity to New
South Wales under responsible government, having been the aim and
object of every leading man in New South Wales, I do not allude only
to that body of gentlemen in whose hands the popular voice has for the
present placed the reins of power; but I say that it has been
the guiding star of all men of intelligence, of all parties, and of all
opinions. (Cheers.) The time, too, is so recent, that many will
remember the commencement of the movement which has proved so
felicitous, who now share in the triumph of its completion. (Applause.)
Well, if we allow imagination to have its sway- —when we consider these
things, and look backward to the nonage of this now almost mature
manhood, and forward to the stupendous changes now advancing and
improving which wait upon our future, over what a country does
the mind wander-—into what a prospect does the spirit of young hope
and prophesy delight to stray ! (Cheers.) For my part I trust that
this commemorating may be repeated, in order that we may from time
to time review the annals of the country, and retrace the stages of its
growth from infancy to maturity, and strive to find in the experience
of generations passed away lessons which may be useful to generations
yet unborn. (Cheers.) If we have at this moment no Herodotus to
immortalize our history, time will produce him ; and if we ever suffer
a Pelopennesian war between the Sparta of that Victoria and the Athens
of this Sydney—(which, God forbid ! for I hope that our intercolonial
interests will be identified by our roads of iron, and our links and chains
of gold, that no difference can possibly arise between us); —but I say,
if ever we suffer a Pelopennesian war we shall not want a Thucidides
to chronicle it. (Cheers ) I have said there are statesmen—natives
of the soil —patriots of the country, who have looked upon the
prosperity of New South Wales under Responsible Government as the
object of their lives (Hear, hear, and cheers.) May I here mention
one name ? If Idoso I only anticipate what history must do, in spite
of us all. (Cheers.) I will only mention the name of one gentleman,
for I do not desire to trespass upon the province of those who may suc-
ceed me, and who may delight to dwell upon individual titles to dis-
tinction among our Australian patriots. Moreover, I might infringe
upon the delicacy of feeling of some now present. (Cheers.) But
shall I name one, the very corner-stone of the building whose apex,


almost, stands visibly before us—who laboured strenuously for the con-
cessions which we now enjoy. That person is William Charles Went-
worth. (Continued applause.) No doubt, many of us have done our
‘ little possible,’ and thus humbly assisted in the bringing about of a more
popular system of government ; but we must not be forgetful of others.
(Cheers.) And, in thus referring to them, I know full well that Aus-
tralia —rich, prosperous, and happy —is, nevertheless, grateful ) and
the time will come when, for her patriots and statesmen, we may use
the words of the Royal Harry, before the battle of Agincourt
Then shall our names
Familiar in their mouths as household words—
Harry the King, Bedford, and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Glo’ster,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered:
This story shall the old man teach his son.
(Loud applause.) No doubt iu times to come these events nay, this day
and its jubilee—will be freshly remembered (cheers), and in the future,
so great as it must be, due recognition will be thus afforded to the
aristocracy of talent —(cheers) —that aristocracy the guerdon of whose
reward is the very privilege of a new country —for it wears its laurels in
its own day, but writes its 'blazon in posterity.’ (Loud and continued
cheers.) Truly this is a bright and golden day in the country s annals.
(Applause.) But, while we say this, let us not forget how much we
owe to a higher power. ‘Non nobis, truly we may exclaim, non nobis,
Domine, sed tibi detur Gloriam .’ (Cheers.) Surely no country has
ever been more blessed than this. (Applause.) The ink of the despatch
which conveyed to us the vast amount of liberty we now possess was
hardly dry when Providence showered down upon us fresh advantages
and blessings in the conclusion of peace —(applause) of peace the very
safety and sure prosperity of a new and rising country which lives by
the arts of peace and dreads the horrors of war. (Cheers.) At the
same time, in addition to peace, our gold fields are developing them-
selves, and I hope good policy will develope them more fully still.
(Applause.) This recognition of the goodness of Providence makes good
politicians, good subjects, and good men. (Applause.) I hope this
country will ever continue to bear a chaiacter not only of virtue as a
country, and advancement in a political point of view, but acknowledge
religion as its guiding principle, and goodwill towards all men as its


leading characteristic. (Applause.) And no goodwill will ever 1)0
more cordial in the hearts of Australians than good will towards the dear
old mother country. (Loud applause.) I will now conclude. It is
unnecessary for me to descant further on the merits of the toast, and I
am anxious to avoid being led by my own feelings into a single political
allusion. (Cheers.) We have prosperity, and as far as human vaticina-
tion can go we have reason to expect its continuance. Then, while we
are thankful let us he careful; and rejoicing in ‘Prosperity under
Besponsible Government,’ let us by the blessing of Providence guide
it wisely, and use it well. (Loud and long'continued applause,,)
Chorus—Spring is forth returning.”
The President then rose to propose the next toast, “ The Judges.’*
He said
u I rise utterly unprepared to do justice to this toast—which, for
the first time, has only this moment been put into my hands The
Bench, as now Constructed, had its origin some ten or eleven years
after my arrival in the colony, and it may well be proud of its origin, as
Well as, in great measure, of its originator, our first Chief Justice, Sir
Francis Forbes ;—who had been not only consulted, hut who no doubt
had a large share in its construction, —and then came to these shores to
establish it amongst us; a Judge who, whether viewed as a Judge or
as a Member of our Government, evinced, as far as it was possible in this
then narrow field, talents and acquirements as well as moral qualities,
which by any community in any part of the world would have been
pronounced of the highest order, and which obtained for him here, not
only the admiration of the Bar and of all who had the happi-
ness to know him, but the respect and confidence of the
entire colony. Sir Francis Forbes, it is my gratifying duty to add,
was ably and nobly supported by his two brother judges, Mr. Justice
Stephen, the father of our present Chief Justice, and Sir James
Bowling, who subsequently became Chief Justice, —and continued to
adorn the Bench many years; and it is no small satisfaction to have
to add that the present incumbents of the Judgment-seat have shewn
themselves in every way worthy of their honorable predecessors. Per-
haps it would be improper for me to say more on the present occasion;
—most happy as I am to see that the whole of those high functionaries


are now present, —a circumstance of itself which •will no doubt be
universally and duly appreciated by the public. Gentlemen, * The
Judges,’ with all the honors.”
Air —“ Balance a straw.”
Sir Alfred Stephen, C.J., rose to respond, and was received with
enthusiastic cheering. His Honor said: —
I return you very sincerely my own thanks, and those of my friends
and colleagues, for the honor you have done us. (Cheers ) It cannot
he a matter of indifference to us, and it ought not to he, with what
feelings we are regarded by those among whom we live; and I conceive
it to he not wholly unimportant to the public, that the judges should
possess the good opinion and good will of the community. I may
frankly say, speaking here not for myself merely, hut for others, that I
do not disclaim all title to the good opinion which the toast, and the
cordiality with which you received it, may he presumed to imply ; hut
that affords no reason why, when expressions of esteem and regard are
tendered to us, we should not feel deeply gratified by them. (Applause.)
There is, however, on occasions of this kind, it has always occurred to
me, too little account taken of those who are associated with us in our
duties. (Cheers.) It should not be forgotten that the judges are but
part of a system, the perfection of which depends much on others.
(Applause.) It is that system and the success which attends it, and
not alone the character of those who preside in our tribunals, which
have rendered them the boast and honor of our country. (Hear, hear.)
And, when I remember the high judicial qualities of those with whom
I have been associated on the bench, the ability, industry, zeal, and
integrity, of the solicitors of our court, the great talent and learning
of the Australian bar, and the intelligence and rightmindedness of
juries, I mean not to arrogate to myself, and I attribute no more than
what is just to others, in avowing my belief —and why should I be
ashamed to express it ? —that in no part of the Queen’s dominions is
justice more faithfully administered than in New South Wales.
(Applause.) Sir, it is a great pleasure to me to be present here this
evening with my brethren. I reject and repudiate the idea, by whom-
soever it may be entertained, that a judge ought to be isolated from his
fellow citizens. (Cheers.) To me it appears, on the contrary, that he


may desirably mingle with them, and as one of them—becoming ac-
quainted with their wants, their feelings, their opinions, their habits,
and that he is not likely to be the worse, but that he will probably be a
better judge for the knowledge —that he ought to taxe an interest in
all that effects their interests; and that, participating as he must do in
any general distress, he may reasonably on such an occasion share with
them in the general joy. (Applause.) It is this that brings us here,
as your guests to-night. I know no reason why we should not, as
Britons, render publicly our homage to a great principle, for which our
ancestors have contended in all ages, and which is dear to our fellow
subjects in every part of the world. Why we should not, as members
of the community, rejoice in your having at length obtained the privi-
lege and the right of self-government; that your judges are now by
law rendered absolutely independent of the Crown, and yet are
removable at the pleasure of the Legislature; that you have Ministers
who cannot retain office for an hour without your consent; that you
may now raise and expend your revenue in your own way, and in all
other respects manage your own affairs for yourselves. (Applause.)
I believe that there is no class of men among you, however enthusiastic
in the cause, by whom these auspicious events are more heartily
welcomed than by myself and my learned colleagues. (Cheers.) And
we earnestly trust that they will largely tend, nor do we see any reason
to doubt that they will tend, to advance the best and highest interests
of the colony. (Applause.)”
The Vice-President proposed —
“‘The President and Members of the Legislative Council : the
Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly.’ He preferred
giving the toast, however, as ‘The New Parliament of New South
Wales.’ (Cheers.) He observed: The Constitution of this colony is
as nearly assimilated to that of England as circumstances will admit of,
and I think that is a matter of great congratulation to us all. (Applause.)
The electors having done their duty, not the least satisfactory feature
of the present assembly is, that men of all political opinions have
cordially met together, setting aside party feeling, in order to celebrate
the advent of Responsible Government. (Continued cheering.) W hen
I look to the blood and treasure one ‘new Constitution ’ cost not very


many years ago, it is a matter of still greater congratulation that
we have so pacifically been blessed by the Constitution we now possess.
(Applause.) ”
Catch —“ Mr. Speaker, though, ’tis late.”
The President oe the Legislative Council (Sir Alfred Stephen,
C.J ) rosi amid loud cheers to respond to the toast. lie said:
“I am ashamed so soon again to present myself to you ‘ } but, on
behalf of the Legislative Council, the privilege and the duty devolve on
me, of acknowledging our share in the toast to which you have just done
honor. (Cheers.) The toast, as I apprehend, gentlemen, apart from
the compliment to ourselves which the courtesies of the evening would
naturally claim, implies the opinion that, as a principle and apart from
other questions which admit of a controversy, two seperate Houses
are desirable for legislative purposes; since this is a portion of the Con-
stitution which we all meet to celebrate. (Applause.) This is a
principle, gentlemen, which, so far as my own reading has extended,
has in all countries where freedom in any degree exists, and by politi-
cians of every grade, been considered an axiom in political science.
There is, therefore, I believe, no member of the House over which I
have the honor to preside, who, in thanking you for the honor done him
by the toast, will hesitate to express his concurrence in the opinion
conveyed by it. (Cheers.) With the particular constitution of the
Council as one of those two Houses, we have I am happy to think,
nothing to do this evening. We gladly accept the constitution as we
find it; but we offer no pledge, that, as there is the power to amend it,
we may not think it susceptible of improvement. (Cheers.) One
pledge, however, we will give; one assurance we venture to hold out to
you. It is this : that we shall devote ourselves to the important and
sacred duty which we have undertaken, of assisting in the task
of legislating for this great colony, with one single object—that of pro-
moting the general welfare of all classes, without preference or distinc-
tion of rank, or social position, or employment, or creed, or country, or
party. It is my own most fervent aspiration —it is on the part of each
of us our most earnest desire, as it will ever be our aim, in the perform-
ance of that duty, that the Council and its members may at all times
and under all circumstances be found in harmony with the Assembly,
collectively and as individuals. That the two Houses will occasionally


and, on important subjects, widely differ in opinion, is to be expected ;
for where is the example of a people who all think alike on any
subject ? (Hear, hear.) But, if we are mutually true to ourselves and
to our country, we shall never permit these differences to extend
beyond. Remembering that whether members of the one House or the
other, we are all members of one commonwealth, we shall never sacrifice
her interest to unnecessary misunderstandings, or to petty rivalry.
(Applause.) I hope, that we may all of us—the members of both
Houses —live to see many more such gatherings as the present; and
that at each we may entertain the same friendly feelings towards each
other that we reciprocate now. (Continued cheering.)”
The Speaker (Mr. D. Cooper) returned thanks on behalf of the
Legislative Assembly. When the cheering had subsided, he said: —
“ Many momentons questions require the attention of the Parliament
from time to time. (Hear, hear.) Its members, therefore, require all
the support their fellow-colonists can give them to discharge their duties
effectively, for they can do but little unless the public opinion is in
their favour. (Cheers.) Much might be done in carrying out the
details of Responsible Government by non-members of the Legislature,
in the promotion of works of public utility, and in the organization of
municipal institutions, as members of which many might prepare them-
selves for the more important duties of Parliament. (Cheers.) Lut more
than this, every one can assist the Legislature in its exertions to advance
the interests of the colony, by the weight of his moral example, and
his temperate and religious habits. (Applause.) The hon. gentleman
concluded his address by returning thanks on his own behalf, and on
behalf of the members of the Legislative Assembly, for the kind
manner in which their healths had been drunk.
The Colonial Treasurer (Mr. Holt) proposed, “ The Foreign
Consuls.”
Band—National Airs.
The American Consul (Mr. J. H. Williams) responded. The
cheering having subsided, he said :
“On behalf of the Foreign Consuls in this city and myself, I return
thanks for the honor done us in the proposing the toast, also for the


very hearty manner in which it has been received. (Cheers.) In this
colony English hospitality has been very largely extended to the Foreign
Consuls, and I may say, that in no part of the world are there fewer
obstacles in the way of the performance of consular duties than in
Sydney. (Applause.) After thanking the head of the late Government
(alluding to Mr. E. Peas Thompson) on his own behalf, and on the
behalf of the other consuls in this colony, for the facilities afforded them
by him in the discharge of their official duties, Mr. Williams continued :
In the name, and on behalf of the countries we severally represent, but
more especially in the name and on behalf of the United States
Government, I most heartily extend the hand of fellowship to the colony
of New South Wales this day. (Applause.) After eulogising the
country from which he came, and congratulating the colony on the pos-
session of its New Constitution, without a seven year’s war; and ex-
pressing his gratification that the Celebration of its Inauguration was
presided over by one of the earliest Champions of Constitutional Freedom
in New South Wales, Mr. Williams resumed his seat amidst loud
applause.
Mr. Justice TheRRY, on being called upon by the President, was
warmly cheered at rising, and said :
“ I rise to propose a toast wliicli lias been intrusted to me for no reason
that I can imagine, except that it is one so simple, so coming home to
the bosoms of all here to-day, that it requires no enforcement of elo-
quence to recommend it to a favourable reception. The sacred and
venerated word of ‘ Fatherland’ (cheers) speaks trumpet-tongued
to the hearts of all men; for there ( breathes no man with soul so dead’
in whom this word does not awaken feelings of endearment and of love for
his native land. (Cheers.) It revives sentiments and associations of the
liveliest sympathy—the land in which, at the dawning of reason, we
first looked out upon the world, with an eye of simplicity, sincerity and
truth—the land in which our earliest friendships, and our tenderest
affections were formed, —the land where we lisped in infancy,—where in
boyhoood our hopes and fears were freely told; —and where, in riper
years, our manhood joined our hearts in one with those whom, from
childhood until then, we had known and loved. (Loud cheers.)
’Tis true we are now far from that land, but { distance only lends enchant-
ment to the view,’ and the language of poetry never more truly spoke


and interpreted the language of the heart, than in the expression oi the
sentiment —
Where’er we roam—whatever realms to see,
Our hearts untravelled fondly turn to thee.
Still to our country turn with ceaseless pain,
And drag at each remove a lengthening chain.
It may be the lot of some amongst us to revisit that country ; it may
be the hope and wish of a portion of us that where ‘ trod our first footsteps
may totter our last.’ (Hear, hear.) Or it may be that others, delighted
with our golden clime, and enriched with our golden fleece and our
golden ore, may take root in the land in which they have prospered, and
transmit the rewards of their toil as an inheritance to their children
here. (Cheers.) Rs this as it may—present or absent —whether tread-
ing .the land that bore us, or that of our adoption, we will, each and all,
recognise and feel towards the respective countries of our birth the sen-
timents beautifully expressed by a favourite bard towards ’his native
Caledonia —
Land of my sires ! what mortal hand
Shall e’er untie the filial band
That binds me to thy rugged strand?
(Loud cheers.) Proud as we may well he of our country on all
occasions, her recent conduct has established a new claim to our pride
and admiration. England has of late not only fully equalled the most
boasted instances of Grecian or Roman heroism, but also rivalled them
in other respects, in which Rollin, in his Ancient History, holds up
the conduct of ancient Athens to peculiar commendation. After
having introduced the notice of Pericles’ oration, in which, in a solemn
manner, a tribute of applause was paid to the memory of the brave men
who had sacrificed their lives for the liberties of their country, the his-
torian adds, that the ‘ public did not confine their gratitude to empty
ceremonies and tears, but maintained the widows and orphans of the
slain.’ (Loud cheers.) This noble example has been nobly imitated
by England, and in swelling the tribute of this magnificent benevolence,
it may be truly said that Australia (and no part of Australia more than
New South Wales) has acted well her part; and in the merit of assuaging
the widows’ woes and orphans’ wants, become a large and generous
partaker. (Cheers.) And, whilst we are proud of our native land,


it may be permitted us to say that our Fatherland has some reason to
be proud of us —(cheers) —the noblest scion that ever formed an off-
shoot from the parent oak of England. We illustrate the truth of a
great political doctrine, that it is the genius of a country that emigrates.
The shepherd-kings and merchant-princes whom we have sent home,
and the many more of the same class who remain amongst us, attest that
they who have come hither do not belong to the idle or indulgent classes
of society at home. (Applause.) They transplanted here the best
abilities and energies—toil and perseverance, prudence and frugality,—
which distinguish the most eminent and successful men at home. It is,
therefore, that the character of our fellow-countryman at home, in its
most admirable features, is nowhere more faithfully represented than in
the success which has crowned the enterprise of those who have settled on
the shores and sought the pastoral plains of Australia. (Cheers.) The
growth of this country is truly the most wonderful event in the history
of the nations of the world. (Hear, hear.) It was an unknown land
when America was rising into notice and achieving her independence.
In one of the eloquent outbursts of the immortal Edmund Burke, he
figures the genuis of England, pointing out to a young nobleman —(I
think Lord Bathurst) —a little speck then scarce visible in the mass of
national interests, and telling him, ‘Young man! there is America—
which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with the
stories of savage men and uncouth manners, yet shall, before you taste
of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now
attracts the envy of the world. Whatever England has been growing
to by a progressive increase of improvement, by a succession of civilising
conquests and civilising settlements in a series of 1700 years, you will
see as much added to her by America in the course of a single life.’
(Cheers.) A single life! why, in less than half the period of an ordi-
nary single life, have we not seen Australia advance and grow to an equal
height in political attitude and commercial greatness ? (Loud cheers.)
If, as Mr. Burke says, America in his day ‘only served for little
more than to amuse us with stories of savage men and uncouth man-
ners/ did not Australia in the early days of most of us, serve to alarm
us with tales of terror of a similar sort ? But all this apprehension of
alarm is now dissipated, as though it were more than a hundred years
ago since such a state of things existed; and at this national banquet—
inaugurating our free institutions——we meet as free, prosperous,


and united fellow-citizens as could be gathered together any where
throughout the whole range of the British dominions. (Cheers ) In
proposing then the toast of Fatherland, I repeat, long may we be proud
of England, and England reciprocate a feeling of pride in us—and long
may our destinies be united, prosperous, and happy. (Loud cheers.)”
Chorus—“ Should auld acquaintance be forgot.”
The Governor-General responded :
“ The toast embraced the United Kingdoms of Great Britain and
Ireland. (Applause.) He was sure the toast had been drunk with one
heart. (Cheers.) His Excellency concluded by expressing his wish
that three cheers should be given for the fatherland.” Three cheers and
one cheer more, were enthusiastically given.
The Attorney-General (Mr. Manning) was received with much
cheering. He said :
ci i feel proud in haying been selected to propose the toast—' The
land we live in.” (Cheers.) I cannot hut think that such a toast at
a national banquet should be one of the principal toasts of the evening.
(Cheers.) I feel much embarrassed, however, by the task imposed upon
me, for I cannot do justice to the toast without being long, and I can-
not be long without being tedious. (Cries of ( No, no,V and applause.)
I know not what it may be that induced gentlemen to select me to dis-
charge this particular duty, but I have a vague suspicion it was because
on a late occasion I stated that although not a native of this country
I stood in the relation of father or uncle to no less than 23 young
Australians. (Laughter and cheers.) The time was when the colony
was looked upon merely as a place to procure riches, but now it was appre-
ciated in other respects. (Cheers.) I believe, although it may be my
privilege once more to revisit my native land—see old familiar faces,
and learn from monuments of antiquity lessons of wisdom—that this,
‘ the land we live in,’ will be my final home and resting place. (Ap-
plause.) I believe this is not the land for the rich and selfish; but for
those who are contented with the substantial blessings of life—those
who sympathise with their kind—those who desire to take a part in
promoting the well-being of their fellow men, (Cheers.) Men in my


own position, if they went home, could hardly aspire to anything beyond
the high honor of a parish vestryman (Cries of 1 no, no’) ; but here I
have the opportunity of playing my part, be it small or great, in pro-
moting the honour and welfare of a country destined to be great—
‘ The land we live in.’ (Applause.) I feel that among the great ad-
vantages of the land in which we live is that of membership with the
great family of Britain. (Cheers.) The Consul for the American
States has alluded to the imperishable monument of England’s glory,
yet what a speck does Britain appear on the map. (Applause.) In
course of time, as nations change in greatness, she may sink, though
God defend her from it. (Cheers.) But her people have been so estab-
lished that ‘ England’ must live for ever, for the world could hardly
outlive her fame and glory. (Applause.) I feel this colony, being a
younger brother to our American States, brother to so many other
States scattered about the world, and twin brother to the other Australa-
sian colonies, that we ought to glory in the circumstance as one of the
advantages of the land we live in. (Applause) I feel also that to
inherit her memories, to be the child of a parent so mighty in war —so
great in peace—so great in intelligence —so great, above all, in freedom
—to have the protection of Great Britain (we perhaps but little appre-
ciate it sometimes, but let us reflect what we should be, had we not
England for our friend and protector) (cheers) —when we think of
these this is another great advantage of the land we live in. (Ap-
plause.) Here we have so much of plenty and happiness as to. con-
trast with many other and much older countries. (Hear, hear.) This
is another advantage of the land we live in. (Cheers.) Thousands
who would perish in other countries may find plenty here. (Applause.)
I will not enlarge upon those more common topics —our wealth, or our
mineral resources, not even upon our coal, our copper, or our iron; per-
haps a more lasting source of wealth than our gold. (Cheers.) I will
not dwell on our commercial advantages, the impartial administration
of justice, our means of education, or facilities for the administration of
the ordinances of religion: with good laws, or the means of making
them ; with a constitution nearly assimilated to that of England (if it
has all her faults it has also the elements of improvement) ; with mem-
bership to the great family in the fatherland —with all the elements of
material wealth and all the principles of intellectual advancement —
this country must be a prosperous and a happy one. (Applause.) If


true to ourselves, we must stand pre-eminent among the nations.”
(Cheers.) The hon. gentleman then concluded by requesting that the
toast be drunk with all the honors.
Glee —“ Home, sweet home.”
The Third Minister of the Crown (Mr. Nichols) was enthusiasti-
cally received. After remarking that he felt much pleased we were
called upon to show our approval of the Government of the fatherland,
Mr. Nichols continued :
“ Although an Australian by birth, I claim to be an Englishman,
and I claim for the Englishman, the Scotchman, and the Irishman
the rights I claim for the Australian. (Continued applause.) We all
belong to one nation, and long may we continue united. (Cheers.)
Previous speakers have uttered all I intended to say, and theiefoie I
shall be very brief. (Cheers.) None in this assemblage feel the
presence of our honored guests, including the Foreign Consuls, more
than Australians. We feel it is the duty of every man in the com-
munity, whatever may be his political creed, to come among us on an
occasion so national. (Cheers.) I hope the powers conceded by the
New Constitution may be so exercised as to render this country the
happy home of millions.” (Applause.) The hon. gentleman concluded
by expressing his sincere gratification at the Banquet being presided
over by so old and esteemed a laborer in the vineyard as Hr. Bland.
(Cheers.)
Mr. Mac Arthur, M.L.A., rose amid loud applause. He said :
“ Mr. President, ladies, and gentlemen —the occasion, as has been
already observed, is a most memorable one. (Cheers.) It is indeed
the most so of any which has yet graced the historical annals of
Australia. (Applause.) I cannot therefore but prize the more highly the
distinction which has been conferred upon me of proposing the toast of
‘ Our sister colonies.’ (Continued cheering.) I feel that I can the
more appropriately address myself to the ladies on this occasion from
the very terms of the toast itself, the ‘ sister colonies (cheers), and I
am happy to see this assemblage graced by the fair presence of the
matrons and daughters of Australia, who have deigned on this occa-


sion to extend over us their chastening and benign influence. (Con-
tinued applause.) The preceding speakers have so fully exhausted the
subjects of civil and religious liberty, and the due exercise of political
institutions, that upon those topics nothing remains for me to say. I
congratulate the meeting, however, upon the generous spirit which has
characterised the remarks of all who have spoken on these subjects, and
the freedom from every thing in the shape of party feeling and political
partizanship. (Continued applause.) Like my friend Mr. Nichols, I
may perhaps owe somewhat of the distinction now conferred upon me
to the circumstance of my being a native of Australia. (Cheers.) Like
him also, if I pride myself on being an Australian, I pride myself still
more on being a Briton. (Continued applause.) lam happy also to take
this opportunity of expressing my entire concurrence in the meed of
applause and approbation which he has expressed, and which is so emi-
nently due to our worthy President, and his tried associate —William
Charles Wentworth. (Cheers.) But there is one theme to which I
desire to address myself, if I may so far trespass upon the patience of
the meeting at this late hour. (Cheers.) I allude to that of maritime
and commercial enterprise. (Applause.) And lam the more anxious
to enter upon this topic (as briefly as possible) because it seems the one
most appropriate to the toast lam now to recommend to you. The sis-
ter colonies of Australia are generally known throughout Europe, and
throughout the civilised world, by the name of the Australian gioup.
They may all, in fact, be blended under the name of Australia, a name
which we derive from the happy genius of the French language. Aus-
tralie is the original word from which we derive our Australia. (Cheers.)
The resources of this quarter of the globe are so rich and so diversified
that it would be impossible on an occasion like the present to enumerate
them. (Cheers.) I feel confident, however, that the practical good
sense and Anglo-Saxon character of the inhabitants of this great group
will turn these resources to the utmost advantage. (Applause.) I
would ask you to bear with me in diverting your attention somewhat
from the present scene and turning your recollections upon the past. I
would invite your attention to what I may term the great historic
names which are so familiar to us that we are scarcely sensible of their
import. I allude, in the first place, to the great Butch navigators—
Tasman and Van Biemen. (Cheers.) Among those of France, I
would mention La Perouse and B’Entrecasteaux, with our own Cook,


-A 40
Flinders, and Bapfs. (Applause.) Their achievements upon the peri-
lous field of maritime discovery are too well known to require more
than a passing notice. (Cheers.) At a period more recent, and within
the recollection of the majority of those present, come the names of
Owen Stanley and Phillip Parker King. (Cheers.) All these I may
justly term citizens of the world, benefactors of Australia, and of the
human race. They are names which will go down to the history of all
time —
A tomb is theirs on every page,
An epitaph on every tongue,
(Applause.)
The meanest rill, the mightiest river,
Eoll mingling with our fame for ever.
The woods are peopled with their fame,
The waters murmur of their name.
(Continued cheering.) Yet, if I may be permitted,
One would I select from that proud throng
I am the more anxious to do so from the fact that he was a native of
Australia. (Cheers.) That he was well known to most of us, and
that hut a short time ago we might have hoped for his presence amongst
us on this occasion—l allude to my lamented friend and distinguished
countryman, Admiral King —(applause)—one who rose in his pro-
fession by his services, more especially in the geographical department,
to the high rank he held in the Navy, and whose services as a naval
explorer are acknowledged to be of the greatest practical benefit to the
world at large, but more especia ly to this portion of it. (Applause.)
I am satisfied that there is but one sentiment as regards the character
of my gallant and lamented friend—that in the highest ranks in the
British navy there was no one more eminently deserved the favour of
his sovereign, or the distinction to which he had attained. (Applause.)
To revert to the immediate subject, the resources of the Australian
colonies from which their future commercial and general prosperity is
to be derived, I ask you to join with me in no cramped or isolated
spirit. (Cheers.) I wish to avoid every thing in the shape of com-
parison between the different colonies of the Australian Group—still
less will I say anything in the shape of contrast. (Cheers.) Each
colony is largely endowed with the elements of future greatness and


prosperity. I trust that the commercial policy which distinguished
the career of the late Colonial Secretary, Mr. Deas Thomson, will be
mantained in our intercourse with each other, and with the world at
large, and that no attempt will be made to introduce class legislation,
or restrictive principles. (Continued cheering.) Union amongst
ourselves, and unity of action, is what will best accomplish these great
ends, for which Providence has evidently designed them —that politi-
cally, commercially, and in every other respect they should form one
great brotherhood, —or rather, to follow out the terms of the toast, one
great sisterhood. (Applause.) I prefer the latter term as the most
appropriate on this occasion, and especially looking at the fair assemblage
above me; and while concurring in the just tribute which has been
paid by my honorable and learned friend, Judge Therry, to those who
now represent the men of Australia in our parent land—l might say
in Europe —fully concurring with them that they are well qualified to
be our representatives —(applause) —I am satisfied that he and all
present will give equal praise to the gentler sex, and will at once not
only admit, but strongly urge their claim to take a distinguished
position in any society. Among the gentlemen now present I trust
there are representatives of each of the sister colonies. A worthy
representative of one of them —I mean New Zealand, lam happy to see
in the person of Mr. Ludlam, a member of the Legislature of that
colony. We must bear in mind at this epoch, so interesting to all the
Australian colonies equally with ourselves, that our four sisters are now,
if I may use the expression, ‘ straining in the leash,’ ready to start with
ourselves in the glorious rivalry who shall be foremost in the race of
improvement. (Applause.) To each and all we pledge success and
prosperity in the toast we are about to drink. (Cheers.) And how
can we so well attain the great ends for which we are strivng as under
the protecting Mgis of Britannia ? (Cheers.) Long may we continue
under that time-honored flag, of which it is, perhaps, the highest
attribute that no human being, however abject his condition, however
servile his position, can come under its broad shade without being free.
(Cries of ‘ bravo,’ and loud cheers.) I conclude by proposing the toast,
and by requesting permission to embrace within it our two sisters, if
not so by blood, yet so by alliance —the French colonies of Tahiti and
New Caledonia.”
Chorus —“ Australia, hail !’’


Mr. Ludlam, a member of the Wellington (New Zealand) Legisla-
ture, responded.
The Solicitor-General (Mr. Darvall) then rose. He said:—
“I have been requested by the Committee to propose a toast, —it is
'the Press;’ the Australian Press. (Cheers.) A more agreeable duty
could not have been assigned to me (Cheers.) The occasion is most
appropriate to do honor to the Press, whose exertions have so largely
contributed to the achievement of that political success which this vast
and influential assembly have met together to celebrate; and it is a
happy omen that the first fruits of our political freedom is a cordial and
unanimous expression of thankfulness from men of all classes and
opinions, sanctioned and adorned by the presence of the fair and vir-
tuous matrons and daughters of Australia. (Applause.) Prom the
time when the inhabitants of this colony, led by our President and
other patriotic men, demanded, under an absolute military Government,
the first elements of social liberty, freedom of thought, speech, and
writing, and enforced their just demands ; from that time the Press of
this colony has toiled in the common cause of freedom and social liberty
and improvement, with unwearied diligence and courage, and at last
all powers of self-government have crow'ned one common effort in one
common cause. (Cheers.) During the most bitter party conflicts the
Press of Australia has for the most part preserved a tone of prudence
and moderation ; and if occasionally some private calumniator or disloyal
scribbler, from a desire of notoriety or innate corruption, has been per-
mitted to defile the pages of the Press, it has but served to provoke an
universal feeling of indignation and disgust in the public mind, and to
prove that, as a commercial speculation, the labours of the 1 less aie
only profitable when the Press is what it ought to be the organ of
public opinion. (Hear, hear ) It is by keeping that in view that the
Press is truly useful and powerful. It is by writing in harmony with
the general feelings and opinions of the country, that the Press really
exercises power, and even appears to govern and direct, when in reality
it only follows or keeps pace with the tide ,of public opinion. (Cheers.)
Thus it is that the Press, in a free country, when public opinion is freely
expressed, and when the will of the people is fairly represented, is an
institution conferring great benefits on the community, little liable to
abuse, and dangerous only to bad Government. It the tyiant or


the corrupt statesman to fear the Press, to exaggerate its pernicious
tendencies, to charge it with being subversive of good government and
destructive of social order; —it is for such as these, in countries where
such things are permitted, to impose a censorship on the Press, to bind
men’s thoughts and fetter their tongues; but in australia the only cen-
sorship of the Tress is exercised by the good taste and sound sense of a
free and enlightened people, and long may the Press of Australia
worthily fulfil its high duties; watch with jealous scrutiny all govern-
ments, public men, and public measures; denounce fearlessly all
imbecility, corruption, and bad government, promote reform, protect
the weak, repress the strong, expose unworthy motives, and encourage
truth and virtue; so will the freedom of the Australian Press endure
so long as the name of freedom is cherished in Australia; and this
fourth estate will always be as now, identified with all the great and
growing interests of Australia, and a toast which Australians will
always desire to honor. ‘ The Press, then;’ * the Press of Australia.’
(Continued applause.)
Band—“ Galop.”
The Rev. J. West rose amid loud cheers. He said :
“ X cordially respond to the toast ' The Press/ hut at this late hour
I will not detain you with any lengthy observations; nor is it neces-
sary that I should do so. (Cheers.) The importance of the Press has
long been recognised. (Applause.) Its labours in the cause of Aus-
tralian freedom are well known to all. (Applause.) It has now how-
ever other duties to perform —not only to protect the liberties of the
people, but to explain them; to unite the ideas of order and liberty.
To secure permanently the freedom of any country there must be a cor-
dial submission to the laws. (Cheers.) To prevent the powers of the
State becoming oppressive, their constitutional division must be care-
fully preserved—(cheers)—to prevent as far as possible any one branch
of the State usurping the functions of another. (Continued applause.)
It is from misconception of the importance of this careful division that
danger may be apprehended. (Hear, hear.) Our liberties are sure so
long as they depend upon the so-called sovereign will of the people.
(Cheers.) But it is necessary that the people should carefully exercise
the power vested in them, and that they should confide authoiity to


the hands of men really interested in the prosperity of the country, and
who are capable of managing its affairs. (Cheers.) In a word, it is
the duty of the Press to use its influence on the side of liberty, order,
and law. (Continued applause.)”
Mr. Justice Dickinson was loudly cheered on rising to propose the
next toast. He said :
“ I solicit gentlemen to charge their glasses to the brim, while I have
the honour to propose a toast which will be responded to with the fullest
honors. That toast is, ' Lady Denison and the ladies of the colony.’
(Continued applause.) The time of night compels me to be extremely
brief, although speaking to the most interesting toast of this festivity,
the health of our beloved Queen excepted. (Hear, hear.) The gallantry
of all the gentlemen will doubtless induce them to sympathise, even
should they not agree with me in my feelings that the existence among
us of so refined and so.high-minded a body as the ladies of New South
Wales is of far higher interest and more practical importance than that
of any constitution, however perfect, or of any Government, however
appointed. (Renewed eheering.) Equal laws and liberal institutions
lead to the production of heroes, orators, and philosophers—the society
of refined ladies alone can fashion and perfect gentlemen. (Applause.)
Fortunate, therefore, at this momentous crisis in the history of this
great, loyal, and prosperous colony of New South Wales, to have among
us a body of ladies excelled by those of no other community in grace,
elegance, and refinement. (Cheers.) Thrice fortunate are we that
ladies of such accomplishments are presided over by such a personage
as Lady Denison, a lady whose dignity in her public station is rivalled
only by her benevolence towards her poorer brethren in the exigencies
of their obscure affliction and distress —whose intelligence, zeal in all
good works and unwearied devotion to all and every duty, compel our
respect and admiration ; while her unaffected grace, invariable kind-
ness, and unsurpassed urbanity ensure to her the regard of all admitted
to her society or who are benefitted by her bright example. (Continued
applause.) Gentlemen, I beg you will drink, with all the honors and
with fervid acclamation, ‘ Lady Denison and the ladies of New South
Wales.’ ”
Glee —“ Here’s a Health to all good Lasses.”


The Governor-General was greeted with continued cheering when
he rose to respond to the toast. He facetiously alluded to the advan-
tages he possessed over bachelors in performing this duty, and in the
course of his brief response passed several compliments on the ladies of
the colony. Lady Denison had been “ a blessing to him ” (Applause.)
TTts Excellency, when silence was restored, again rose and said :
“ There is only one toast remaining to be drunk, that is, the health of
the gentleman on my left, who has so well performed the duties that
devolved upon him as President this evening. Having had the pleasure
of the acquaintance of the President but for a short time, I cannot
speak, from my own knowledge, of his past career or the influence of his
example on the destinies of the country j but I must say that he de-
serves the hearty thanks of this meeting for the manner in which he
has performed the duties imposed upon him. I, myself, cannot
speak of the former career of this gentleman, or of his past services in
the struggle for the liberty which the country now enjoys, or of his
efforts for the attainment of that Giovernment which they have now met
to commemorate. (Applause.) lam sure, however, that the toast will
meet with the hearty assent of all who remember those services, and
that they will respond to the toast in favour of one, to whom thanks
are due, not only as President, but as one who has done so much towards
securing the liberties of the colony. I therefore propose the health of
the President, Dr. Bland, with all the honors. ” (Prolonged applause.)
The toast was responded to with great unthusiasm, the band playing
“For he’s a jolly good fellow.”
The President briefly expressed his acknowledgements for the honor
done to him, and for the more than kind manner in which the toast
had been received.
His Excellency retired shortly after Eleven o’clock, the hand
playing the National Anthem. The assembly then dispersed.
Tickle and Ross, Printers, 9, Market-street, Sydney.


J \fp
fhIMJO
' "i




