

REPORT
THE DIRECTORS
OF THE
PENOLES
GOLD MINING ASSOCIATION,
TO BE PRESENTED AT THE
FOURTH HALF-YEARLY GENERAL MEETING
THE PROPRIETORS,
WHICH WILL BE HELD
AT THE OFFICE OF THE ASSOCIATION,
MONDAY, the 6™ of MAY, 1833.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY E., 8., AND G. CLARKE,
SILVER STREET, FALCON SQUARE.


PENOLES GOLD MINING ASSOCIATION,
DIRECTORS,
LI. S. BAXENDALE, Esq., Chairman,
ROBERT HUNT, Esq.
RICHARD SALISBURY, Esq.
JOHN MILROY, Esq.
HENRY ENGLISH, Esq.
JOHN DOVER, Esq. .
JAMES MEREDITH, Esq.
BANKERS,
Sir JOHN WILLIAM LUBBOCK, Bart., & Co.
AGENTS AT VERA CRUZ,
Messrs. MANNING, MARSHALL, & Co.
SECRETARY,
air. GEORGE DYSON.
Office, No. 5, Warnford Court, Throgmorton Street.




JjJcnoksl (SoUr ftlintits ft&toctation*
REPORT.
The period has now arrived when it becomes the duty of the
Directors, in compliance with the terms of the Prospectus under
which the Association was formed, to make to the Shareholders a
Report for the past half year.
Since the Directors were called into office, the affairs of the
Association have required little of their time or attention, their
duties having been limited to the ordering and forwarding to the
Mines of a few stamp-heads and plates, and a very brief correspon-
dence with Messrs. Weichsel and Sadler.
The Directors, by the first packet which sailed after their appoint-
ment, announced to Messrs, Weichsel and Sadler the confidence
you had been pleased to place in them, but it appears from the last
letters received from those gentlemen, that they had not then
received the letter advising of such appointment.
Since the last Report, several letters have been received from
Messrs. Weichsel and Sadler, and from them the Directors take
leave to submit to you the following extracts.


EXTRACTS OF LETTERS
F. A. WEICHSEL, Esq., and JOHN SADLER, Esq.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 14 th September, 1832.
Enclosed are copies of the Journal and Cash Account for the last
month, and the rayas to date, also duplicate of my letter to you of
23rd ult., to which I beg reference. The ores of Santa Barbara are
not yet finished, nor will they be before the 19th or 20th; for nearly
the whole of last week was lost by the spindle of the cog wheel
having broken, which, with other repairs and improvements that
were found necessary, added to the feasts of Pefioles, it may be con-
sidered that nothing was done in the way of making gold. The mill
goes tolerably well, but I do not think it will be found to have ground
over the quantity mentioned in my last; in those metals that are now
going through it, there is a good deal of iron and copper pyrites,
which make the reduction very difficult by this process of amalgama-
tion, and I am afraid will cause a considerable loss in the quicksilver.
'We are very curious to know what sort of a “ descarne” there will
be next week, it strikes me. the loss of gold will not he anything like
so much as on the former occasion, but that is to be seen; and, until
such time arrive, I prefer being silent rather than venture upon sup-
positions. The character of the ores in each mine sometimes varies
very much, and they require a different treatment, which is the most
difficult part to manage; in case of many pyrites presenting them-
selves, in future, Mr. Weichsel intends to roast them, to see what
will be the effect of fire upon them. About a fortnight ago we had
a descame at the Arrastra de la Luz, and only took out about seven or
eight ounces of amalgam. This is slow and poor work; and as the
method is barbarous, and being so very much exposed to plunder.


for we are at too great a distance to be always at it over the people,
its working is suspended for the present: the most it will grind is
about three cargas in the twenty-four hours during the rainy season,
and a little more than half that quantity in the dry; so you can easily
see, under any circumstances, how insignificant it is, and whether it
is hardly worth attending to —if Dolores were not so far off, most
likely it never would have been set a going.
Mr. Weichsel wrote you at the end of last or beginning of this
month, and doubtless informed you of what was going on in the
mines. In Guadalupe and Santa Barbara some ores are being broken
up, but without any new veins being discovered. In part of the
works in San Lnis the water has found its way, and, as the people
are mostly employed in the adit, making a communication to draw
it off, there has not been an opportunity of raising ores there, as
was intended. In Soledad nothing is doing, nor at present does it
seem hardly worth while spending money in it. San Francisco and
San Antonio continue to look well; ore is being taken out of both
of them in small quantities, and it is expected they will increase, and
improve in quality. If we were better supplied with cash, it would
be well to go to the expense of taking legal possession of these mines,
as well as of Dolores, to put them at rest, out of harm’s reach ; but
at the present moment it is not practicable. On the score of finances
I have already told you all that appears necessary, and you will, of
course, act as you may think proper. We are now drawing for the
last £lOO. credit, which, I am sorry is not for five times the
amount.
In politics there is nothing known here. By the entries in the
journal you will see the discount on bills in Vera Cruz, which, added
to the scarcity of money in Oaxaca, is one of the principal inconve-
niences we experience by the disturbance.
In this and last month we ought to have had a good deal of rain,
but it has been unusually dry, and it is possible there may be a
scarcity of water for the mill after the end of the year. The maize
crops are also suffering much by this circumstance.


From Mr. Sadler.
OAXACA, sth October, 1832.
I have delivered to Messrs. Montgomery and Nicod three small
cakes of gold, -neighing together 41hs. 2oz. 12dwts. troy, equal to
55 ounces Mexican weight. This small remittance will be sent on
by an early opportunity to the care of Messrs. Manning, Marshall,
and Co., of Vera Cruz, who have instructions to ship it to your
address, on board the first packet, and to effect the corresponding
insurance.
You will doubtless think this remittance very small, and a long
time coming round, which is the case; we did not have the
“ descame” of the Santa Barbara ores till the 27th ultimo, in conse-
quence of only five of the stamp heads having been able to work
from the 19th ultimo to 2nd instant, for want of a sufficient sup-
ply of water, which decreased greatly on a sudden: after this had
taken place there was found to be much less amalgam than - was
expected; and in extracting the quicksilver from it there only
remained a little more than a fourth of its weight in pure gold, which
was a much greater reduction in proportion than that taken from the
arrastra; and the same happened with the amalgam from the ores
of San Luis, which did not yield more than half what we had calcu-
lated upon. This, so far, is not good, or at all to my satisfaction, but
I hope our future operations will be more successful. The ores
ground till within the last week have evidently been of too low a
standard; but now as our funds are being exhausted, we cannot
afford to continue" on those of such quality, but must go on the
richer ores, which is being done since the 28th, and as the amal-
gamation apparatus now goes well, without apparently losing gold,
we shall see what can be done. The discovery of the unexpected
want of sufficient water for the wheel was very unfortunate, and dis-
concerted me somewhat. August and September are rainy months,
but this year, by some strange phenomena, there has scarcely been a
shower, and people say there is as little water in the ravine as at the
end of the dry season. lam happy to inform you, however, that for


the last three days a change has taken place, which enables the ten
heads to work, and by an occasional shower we shall be able to go
on famously. If only live of the stamp heads could be kept going
(which I am told under any circumstances there will be no difficulty
in), you may easily imagine what difficulties we should have in
producing sufficient gold to meet the expenses; and it was, taking
into consideration these possibilities, and the persuasion that it was
necessary to extend the concern before any very great good could
arise from it, that I recommended the remission or supply of £2,000.
more—if such be on the way here, another stamping mill will be
immediately commenced upon, and a valuable mine in the neigh-
bourhood of Las Peras purchased for a small sum, which Mr.
Weichsel went to see the owner about the day I left Penoles—if this
can be accomplished, it may put matters on a different footing ; we
shall then be able to produce double the quantity we do at present,
whilst the expenses need not be increased beyond a third. If, on
the contrary, nothing he forthcoming, it will be necessary to draw,
perhaps, for the whole amount against our remittances; and if we
have to grind all the good ores to enable us to do that, those on hand
will fall very short in the standard of three adannes to the carga,
which is what they should he—besides the establishment in its
present limited shape, has more expenses upon it in the way of
salaries, &c. than it can bear, and if not augmented, it will be
necessary for some one to retire, which I shall think about, and
write you further on the subject. I hope you will have given this
money matter due consideration, and acted upon it accordingly'.
Since only five heads could work we have been stamping close upon
the iron plates, which makes a difference of Cto 8 cargas a day. As
we were grinding before, no more than 12 to 15 cargas a day could
be got through, whilst now- it is dispatching upwards of twenty with
one set, and of course the same with the other. The only objec-
tion there is to this method, is the great wear and waste of iron—the
heads and plates will soon want to be replaced.


From Mr. Weichscl.
PENOLES, 6th October, 1832.
My last letter to you bore date of 30th August, in which I
promised that the first remittance of gold should be made soon
after, and with respect to this, I am sorry to say that our produce
of gold turned out smaller than I expected, though I knew before-
hand that the standard of the ores at hand would be rather low,
as it was reasonable to begin with the poorest ores, for the purpose
of not losing much by the irregularities, which unavoidably take
place, when applying an altogether new method of reduction. The
Soledad ores which have been ground contained hardly any gold;
I was well aw r are of this, and likewise that most of those from
S. Luis were very poor; but I considered the ores of Santa Barbara
to be somewhat better than they proved to be. This is to be
accounted for through the want of attention, with which those ores
have been collected, I mj'sclf having been so much occupied in
the erection of buildings, &c., as I mentioned to you in some of
my former communications. Now that my presence here in the
Hacienda can better be dispensed with, I am seldom one day at
home, which naturally will prove beneficial to the mines, and
improve the standard of the ores which go to the Hacienda. The
gold which Mr. Sadler took to Oaxaca, weighed only 55 oz. Mex.,
the particulars of which you will see from Mr. Sadler’s last com-
munication. Although the quantity is but trifling, the quality no
doubt will please you, and as I suppose you will get the fineness
of the gold tried, I would thank you to let me know the results
of the respective assays.
The mines are much about the same as when I addressed you
last. In Guadalupe and S. Luis I put some people to work, to
extract ores which will be stamped, mixed with the ores at hand,
to improve the standard of the latter. In S. Luis a level which
I drove towards the old workings, where rich ores were abandoned
on account of the water, got suddenly filled up with water, which
no doubt comes from the before-mentioned old workings, and proves


the porous state of the vein; and this promises good and abundant
ores. lam now making a communication between that level and
the adit, which will soon be accomplished. Santa Barbara does not
look better now than before. Dolores shews good ores in several
parts. S. Antonio vein is very variable; some times good ores ap-
pear, but they soon disappear again. Soledad does not look so
favourable as before, and if it should not improve within a short
time, I am disposed to abandon it, as it is rather distant, and situate
in a quite opposite direction from the other mines.
18 th October.
I was interrupted when I wrote you the above, and afterwards
omitted to continue, because I wished to empty the pans once more,
hoping that I would be enabled thereby to give you the news of
a more favourable produce than the former. In this point, I am
grieved to say, I have been sadly disappointed, as w r e got no more
than 230 z. 12dwt. 12gr. troy, from not less than 400 cargas of
Guadalupe ores, part of which was of so good a quality, as to let
me hope, that our produce would not be less than 60oz. I cannot
account for this disproportion between my expectation and the
produce of the last "Molienda." The ores, no doubt, ought to
have given more, whilst the loss of gold by its extraction from the
ores (if there has been any) has most certainly been very trifling.
There remain only two chances to account for the deficiency;
cither, that it remained behind in the stamping boxes, or that some
person found occasion to steal it. As to the former, it is certain
that the biggest grains, or part of the same, will remain on the
bottom of the stamping boxes, and some ounces may in this manner
have remained behind, but this will not make up the deficiency.
As to the second supposition, no person but the German whom I
have appointed to superintend the stamping mill, could have done
so, and I cannot believe that he should.
I am going to make some alterations in one of the stamping
boxes, which will shew whether a considerable quantity of gold


remained on the bottom. I wish wc may find plenty, but J date
not hope it.
The very trifling quantity of gold which we have produced
hitherto will perhaps cause you to doubt whether the application of
the amalgamation machines be advantageous or practicable at all.
In this respect at least, I feel gratified to assure you, that your fears,
if you should entertain any, are ill-founded. The amalgamation
machines answer here exceedingly well. In what flows out of the
same only an eye used to such kind of examinations will now and
then find some grains, but so small that the loss caused thereby
cannot come into consideration, it being by far less than what the
loss would be by any other method. It is for the advantages which
this kind of amalgamation affords, that after the many difficulties
and disappointments I have met with, I still hope to fulfil my object,
though our very precarious situation here allows us to proceed but
very slowly.
Among the unfortunate circumstances with which I had to con-
tend, I reckon the unheard-of scarcity of rain during the last wet
season, which prevents me from producing more gold, as one half
of the stamping mill will soon be stopped for want of water. Since
the middle of July it has hardly rained at all, until about a fort-
night ago, when it again began to rain a little. I shall perhaps be
obligde to open a new watercourse to lead another river on the wheel,
which may cause an expense of some hundreds of dollars.
The mine of S. Luis assumes again a more pleasant appearance,
and my next letter may likely give you some other good news.
Mr. Sadler, according to the instructions you gave him, will be
very extensive and circumstantial in his communications, and this
may partly account for the shortness of my own, and more so as the
events which were to be reported hitherto were not very flattering.
I hope the same may in future prove more satisfactory to you,
and consequently render my communications to you more grati-
fying to myself.


From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 17lit October, 1832.
Yesterday we made the “ dcscarne” of part of the Guadalupe
ores, and to-morrow I shall take the proceeds and deliver them
to Messrs. Montgomery and Nicod, to be sent on in the best
way that may be. Upon the whole, this operation turned out
very unsatisfactorily, by no means what any of us expected, for
instead of four pounds of gold, which was the minimum I had
calculated upon, after it is melted down, there will scarcely be
two, and there is an enigma in it that is incomprehensible to us all;
the least number of cargas of ore ground cannot be under four
hundred and fifty, and computing moderately their standard of
upwards of two adarmes, the question naturally comes of whence
arises the great deficiency of gold ? All I can say to this is, that
cither the ores must have been inferior to the quality put upon
them, that the pans have allowed it to escape, or else it has been
robbed. The two first suppositions I cannot believe, for most of
the good ores from Guadalupe were mixed up with the others, and
by tentaduras and other proofs, we congratulated ourselves that
the amalgamation apparatus could scarcely go better. For the
latter, there seems to be some grounds of suspicion, but at the same
time difficult to understand; I hope, however, it may be so, for
that will be the most easy to remedy in future. This disappoint-
ment of such a paltry quantity, when something decent was looked
for, and at a time that we are so scarce of money, has disconcerted
me a good deal.
Fortunately we have got a change of weather, and the ten
heads are dispatching, and are likely to get through about forty
cargas daily for some time to come; but what of that if we cannot
have better descarnesP And from what I have seen of the water
required, it will be well always to calculate on no more than five
heads being at work during two or three months in the year. The
loss of quicksilver for several weeks past has been next to nothing.
The person Mr. Weichsel went to see at Las Peras, about the new


mine mentioned in my last, was from home, and nothing has been
done. In the workings and aspect of our mines there is not much
to notice; one or more “ paradas " (one pair of hands) have been
struck off this week in each mine. In Guadalupe the quantity of
good ore has not hitherto proved abundant, and that of a low standard
we have plenty on hand for the present. Rich ores to mix with the
poorer ones is what we want just now, and which, although to be
found, are in much smaller quantities than I supposed. Santa
Barbara will probably never make any body’s fortune; all the ores
that can be extracted will be taken out, and after that she must lie
by for a while to see how matters go with us. This is an interesting
moment with San Luis; some beautiful specimens and good ores
are being broken up, and if present appearances only continue, much
may be looked for from this mine; the drainage has been nearly
effected, and as soon as sufficient ore can be collected we shall begin
to grind it, and leave the large heap of Guadalupe till another
opportunity. San Antonio tells nothing decisive yet; but I am
sorry to say, that for the last fortnight San Francisco has been in
“ Borrasca,” and is become so excessively hard that it would require
a bag of money to work it.
OAXACA, 19 th October.
On my arrival here yesterday, I found that Messrs. Montgomery
and Nicod had not had a good opportunity of sending on the
three cakes of gold mentioned in my last. This one of the Gua-
dalupe ores, weighing 11b. lloz. 12dwts. 12grs. English, equal
to 250 z, 12 adannes Mexican weight, will now accompany them;
but as our funds are finished, and being obliged to draw on
Messrs Manning, Marshall, and Co., of Vera Cruz, on account
of their remittances, I have requested them by this post to ship it
all to the consignment of your bankers. Sir J. W. Lubbock & Co.,
subject to your order and disposal. We intend to value on them
for 1,000 dollars, which they will reimburse themselves for by bills
on London, and you must manage the affair in the best way that
may be.
Peubla is in possession of Santa Ana, who, in all probability, is


in Mexico at this moment; if so, we may soon expect to see an end
to the disturbances which are so annihilating the country, and
causing so many irregularities, particularly in the post communi-
cations.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 31s< October, 1832.
Yesterday we made another descarne of the Guadalupe ores, and
to-morrow I shall take in the gold, deliver it to Messrs, Montgo-
mery and Nicod, and give them the necessary instructions, as well
as to Messrs. Manning, M., and Co., about shipping it on your
account, to the address of your hankers. Sir J. W. Lubbock and Co.,
with whom I expect you will have made some arrangement ere this.
There will be about thirty ounces troy of pure gold, which, upon the
whole, is an improvement on last descarne, for we considered the ores
of somewhat lower standard; not quite so many days have elapsed
between the two, and since the 25th only five of the heads have been
going, from the circumstance of the stamps having worn out—the
carpenter will have others ready to replace them in the course of a
day or two; hut from the appearance of the water in the ravine, I
suspect greatly there will not he sufficient to move the ten; besides,
the other five will also w'ant changing, as soon as those in hand can
be put in order; the cause of the apparent deficiency of gold men-
tioned in my last is in part accounted for by having found deposited
at the bottom of one of the boxes a good deal of the best of it (the
large grains); we extracted, rather hastily, between nine and ten
ounces, and taking more time, when the seat of the other is broken
up, much more may be expected.
With regard to money matters, I hardly know what further to say
than that already stated in my previous correspondence; the want
of proper supplies, perhaps, is proving injurious to the concern at
this moment, many of the labourers having left (turned off), who
might have been usefully employed; and, if cash were to spare, by
expending some two or three hundred dollars, a drain might be made
from a neighbouring brook that would convey more than a suffi-


ciency of water to work the ten heads with every day in the year,
instead of which, only half the number will have to go for some
months, and I leave you to reflect upon this; again, if a valuable
mine were to be offered cheap, or new promising veins discovered by
the natives, which is a thing frequently happening, and by working
which, or giving them a trial, the goodness of all mines has been
ascertained, we have not the needful to carry into effect one or the
other ; and I ask you if the situation is a fitting one to carry on
mining operations ? Our rayas in future will be reduced to about
two hundred dollars per week, that is, until we have it in our power
to extend the workings, and it is only in this way that we are secure;
and if the same be continued, on such a limited scale, there will be
no occasion for an agent, &c.—one person should manage the whole
affair in its present reduced shape, and I repeat, as things go, it is
too much borne upon by salaries. &c. —if, contrary to the expectation
of some, you should have resolved on sending out credits, the aspect
of things is at once altered, and there is a chance of each being
employed usefully, and of the concern turning out to the satisfaction
of all; it is a pity that the capital necessary should have been stated
in the first instance at so low a figure; if it had been made £15,000
instead of £lO,OOO, the disappointment, if any at all, would have
been less.
Mr. Weichsel wrote you a few days ago, and doubtless gave some
account of what is going on in the mines; he probably told you that
that part of the work in San Luis, where the water got in, is become
nearly a ruin, and will require some expense to put it in order again
before the ores can be got at which it obstructs the way to; part of
one of the levels in Guadalupe also fell in the day before yesterday,
but this is not of so much consequence, as there are other entrances
and communications; the principal evil arising from this accident, I
understand, is that it also covers some ores: in the other mines there
is nothing material to notice, and I shall refer you for particulars to
Mr. W’s. statement, which ought to be better than that made by one
who knows little or nothing of mining, and who has to be guided by
what he can hear and learn from others.


OAXACA, 2 nd November,
I came in here yesterday evening, and brought with me 21b. soz.
Bd\vts. of gold, equal to 320 z. Mexican weight, which are deposited
in the hands of Messrs. Montgomery and Nicod, and will be for-
warded to-morrow or next day to Vera Cruz by an arriero of entire
confidence. Messrs. Manning and Co. have instructions to ship the
whole to the address of your bankers. Sir J. W. Lubbock and Co.,
and to reimburse themselves by drawing on them to cover my order
for one thousand dollars, given this day to Messrs. Montgomery and
Co.; of course Messrs. Lubbock and Co. will understand with you
for the sale and proceeds.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 1 2th November, 1832.
lam told the August packet has arrived; but as the correspon-
dence was sent on to Mexico, where, from the unfortunate state of
things, all letters are detained, it is uncertain when ours may come
to hand, in case there be any for me or Mr. Weichsel.
Here we are going on very slowly in the working of the mines, as
you will perceive by the late rayas, and it is a plan that will have to
be adopted until you enable us with funds to extend these opera-
tions ; for it is not likely the produce of the stamping mill will more
than cover, for a time, the present reduced expenses, and not
altogethen-them if you include salaries. It is not yet fixed which
day our next “ descarne ” is to be, it will depend upon how our
funds hold out; it is our present intention to delay it for a week or
two in order to scrape together as much gold as possible, for if the
operation takes place soon, there will be too small a quantity to remit
to Vera Cruz for us to draw against, and in that case we shall have
to make a sale in Oaxaca, which, although at a low price, taking all
things into consideration, perhaps may not be unadvisable to do for
a time.
Since my last only the five stamp-heads are at work; nor is it
likely the others can be moved before the next rainy season, unless


the drain, referred to in my previous correspondence, he made—if
it could be effected it would be a great acquisition, and tbe means of
removing some of the present difficulties. The mill grinds a little
more or less than 20 cargas in the twenty-four hours, and if with
this we can support a limited expense, what should we have it in our
power to do if double the quantity were ground P
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 27//t November, 1832.
My last to you was dated on the 12th inst., as per duplicate here-
with, since which none of your favours have come to hand, nor do I
expect any will before the arrival of the September packet, for the
letters that came by the former one, which were sent through
Mexico, are still detained there, and may be for some time to
come yet.
We had the “ descarne” of more of the Guadalupe ores on the
17th inst.; it has produced, in pure gold, 21b. Ooz. 7dwts. troy, equal
to 260 z. 8 adarmes Mexican weight, the which includes about B|oz.
that was found deposited at the bottom of the box.
The last ten days have been taken up in replacing the stamps and
heads that were worn out, altering water spouts, &c., so that nothing
has been done in the way of grinding ore. Yesterday, in making a
fresh beginning, we had the misfortune to have the spindle of one of
the cog wheels break, the same as once happened before, and it will
require, perhaps, all to-morrow to finish making a new one. The
water in the Canada is decreasing, which has made Mr. Weichsel
resolve on beginning the new drain, it will be made for the present
to answer a temporary purpose, and not cost a great deal of money;
but every dollar is an object in the present emergent state of our
finances, and you will see how ill we can afford to enter on such
undertakings. Annexed you will find two sets of rayas of the
mines, which I wish you to look at, and observe how little is being
done in them; with the exception of San Luis, and some researches


in new veins, to have ready to work upon when you put us in pos-
session of funds, all the rest may he considered as suspended; and
if this plan have to he continued the concern will become extremely
insignificant, to that degree, that it should belong to one or two
individuals instead of to a company. San Luis has not yet declared
its good or bad qualities. We have had a visit from the owner of
the famous “ Angustias” mine, which he is disposed to sell, and
which Mr. Weichsel is so anxious to get hold of. It is the same as
mentioned in one of my former letters, and by all accounts it would
doubtless be a great acquisition. Some of the people who have
worked in it say it would yield sufficient ore of about two adarmes
per carga to keep our stamping mill always going, and that there is
not wanting a good share of those of better standard. lam told the
mine is out of condition, and will cost some money to repair it,
more than Mr. Contreras the owner has to spare, which is the only
cause of his being willing to effect a sale; but, as our finances are
much in the same predicament as his own, we did not feel inclined
to say much to him about it for the moment.
OAXACA, 29 th November, 1832.
On my arrival here, yesterday, I found that your favour of the
IGth August had at length made its appearance; the principal
point in it that requires to be noticed by me, is that on finances;
although my letters to you will have continued to recommend your
making remittances, that we might not be left moneyless, depending
entirely on the resources of the mines and produce of the mill in the
first instance, still, from the unfavourable and (to me) unexpected
results as yet, there is some doubt whether you will determine on
making sendings or not —if the latter be the case, my opinion is,
that your concern will dwindle into insignificance, and from that,
probably, to nought—if the contrary happen, I should say there
was a very tolerable chance, which was well worth the risk of
running, rather than lose all that has been spent; and on that
I, as an individual, would not hesitate in entering upon; but, as
for promising certainties, it is more than I can take upon myself to


do. As tlie mill did not begin to vvovk so soon as was conjectured
by about two months, I conclude it will be necessary to wait still
that, or a longer time, before your resolve can be known.
From Messrs. Manning, Marshall, and Co.
VERA CRUZ, 11//( December, 1832.
Some days since we safely received from your friends at Petioles
six pieces of gold, weighing 112 oz 13ad., which it is our intention
to ship by the packet expected here daily from Tampico, to the con-
signment of Sir W. Lubbock, Part, and Co., which wo beg you will
be pleased to mention to them for their government.
VERA CRUZ, 18/A December.
Since our last respects, the gentlemen at the Petioles mines have
again valued upon us for 500 dollars, (making 1,500) and in con-
formity with their instructions, and your confirmation of the
arrangement, under this date we draw upon Messrs. Lubbock and Co.
for £350., which we doubt not they will duly honour; the amount
we request them to set off against six pieces of gold shipped to
them by this packet, the “ Sheldrake,” and to understand with you
about the whole.
From Mr, Sadler.
PENOLES, 12 th December, 1833.
The foregoing is a duplicate of my last respects to you of 27th
and 29th ult., since which your valued favour of 20th September has
come to hand, bringing the pleasing intelligence of a new credit
from Lubbock and Co. for 500/. sterling, which has come so oppor-
tunely as to relieve me of a thousand annoyances that were about to
take place, and to give this concern a chance of doing well after a
while.
If the additional £2,000 should not, as you say, carry us into pro-
fitable ground, I of course shall be much grieved, but, in the mean-


time, I rejoice greatly to know of their being completed, which I
again repeat is the only means of giving your establishment a fair
trial of success, or even perhaps of saving it from entire ruin. Ac-
cording to my views of the business, this cash, if properly laid out,
and I have no reason to doubt it will be, ought to prove whether the
concern will answer in the end or not —if it should happen that
nothing very good results from it, it will be for you to determine by
the accounts you will from time to time receive, whether to persevere
or give up ; but for the moment, I make no further recommendations.
Mr. Weichsel has written to know the tenns at which the “An-
gustias” mine can be had; two or three days will determine this
matter, and I shall be much pleased if something takes place, for if
the mine be half so good as is represented, we shall do well. It is
true the distance is rather great, but there is nothing nearer at hand
known to be worth much, and the freight, by the mules of the Haci-
enda, will not be higher than from San Luis; for they never make
more than one journey a day there, and they will be able to do the
same to Angustias throughout the week. If Mr. Contreras should
be unreasonable, in his demands, I do not know what steps it will be
advisable for us to take. Mines good and cheap might perhaps be
had in Las Peras, but they are too far off to be made any use of here,
or turned to account with our stamping mill, and as for building
another, if it were practicable, according to my notions, we have no
business to undertake it yet awhile ; let us do all we can with the ore
we have, and see what it results in. With the extra water we shall
have by the new drain, in the course of ten or twelve days it will be
sufficient to dispatch all the ores, or even more than our present
mines are likely to give.
Last week San Luis shewed some bad symptoms, and instead of
some thousand cargas of good ore, perhaps we shall only get a few
hundred. Those of a low standard, say from one adarm downwards,
are plentiful, particularly in Guadalupe, and in working amongst
them, it is to be hoped something of a better ley will appear.—lt is
not yet fixed which day our next descarne is to be, it will doubtless
take place during the Christmas holidays.


The mill continues to go well, and, as far as we can find out, the
pans do all that Mr. Weichsel expected them to perform, which must
be in some respects a consolation to you, for I am told they have not
been found to answer in some parts of South America. I notice you
■were about to ship some quicksilver, ironmongery, &c. by a vessel
to sail in October. I hope you will have got Mr. Weichsel’s letter
in time to send by the same opportunity some stamp heads and plates
which he recommended.
Enclosed you will find copy of journal and cash account for last
month, with the rayas to date, which I hope will have the good luck
to find their way to you through the United States. It was from the
irregularity of the post here, and the uncertainty when letters might
reach Vera Cruz, that I could hardly prescribe by what route they
should go; but if Messrs. Manning and Co. have followed my in-
structions, I suspect you will not have much reason to complain, and
besides I never send a duplicate alone without subjoining a few lines
in original.
To avail ourselves of a favourable exchange we have already drawn
the bills on Sir W. Lubbock and Co., for 500/., and remitted them
to our Vera Cruz friends. Such is the difficulty and risk in getting
money from the city of Mexico, where most people send their credits
on, that 16 and 10 per cent, discount are being allowed for drafts at
sight, and they can only get supplied on these terms to a very
limited extent. Oaxaca has not been so completely drained per-
haps for many a day.
From Mr. Weichsel.
HACIENDA DE S ANTONIO,
30t/t December, 1832.
Under date of the 18th October, I informed you that there re-
mained some doubts whether a portion of the gold had not been
stolen from the amalgamation machines, and that, if nothing had
been taken, a good deal of gold must have remained in the stamping
boxes. We have since emptied the pans twice, and at the same


time taken out the stuff from the stamping boxes; we got the first
time 20oz. from the pans, and 9|oz. from one division of the stamp-
box; the second time we got from the pans 16£0z., and from the
other division of the stamping box 9oz. Although we got a good
deal more from the stamping boxes than I expected, still this does
not make up the deficiency referred to in my last- But lam now
of opinion that the fault consists in the poorness of the ores, as those
which were extracted before the completion of the stamping mill are
certainly very poor, and most of them would not have been sent to
the mill if the expenses of reduction were not so very trifling.
The stamping has since been interrupted for more than one week,
the stamps and some other parts having got worn out, so as to render
it necessary to replace them by new ones. When the mill began
again to work, I commenced with San Luiz ores, which to-morrow
will be finished. I shall then empty the pans again, but it may be
too late to tell you the result in the present, as I wish this to reach
Vera Cruz in time for the packet.
Since my letter. No. 33,1 have had the pleasure of receiving two
of your favours, viz.. No. 23, dated 16th August, and No. 24, dated
24th September. lam glad to sec from the former you remained
persuaded that the delay of the completion of the stamping mill is
not to be attributed to my management; and I thank you for the
advice, in case I should build another stamping mill —“ to set as
much as ’possible on piecework." This is certainly a very good
method, which, as you could have seen from the rayas, I applied in
some things; but it can be of little use where people are to make
things which they never saw before, and where they do not under-
stand working after drawings.
The nails, screws, &c. which you referred to in the same letter,
arrived in Oaxaca, and the borax, saltpetre, &c. have likewise made
their appearance in due time.
The notice of the credit which you sent by the September packet,
was certainly the most agreeable news we could get. We had already
been obliged to draw for the amount of the remitted gold, and were
rather in an awkward situation, as the produce of the metal turned


out much shorter than I expected. Besides, the £SOO enabled me
to accpiire another mine, which by every person is considered to
be the best and most regular vein in this neighbourhood. This is
the “ Angustias” mine, about the purchase of which I have been in
communication with the owner for nearly twelve months. He then
asked too much money, and I did not see the necessity of acquiring
it. I give him now 1,000 dollars for the mine, and shall purchase the
ores at hand, 4 to 600 cargas, at a rate which will leave a good profit
to the concern. The said mine wants perhaps a 1,000 or 1,500 dol-
lars to bring it in a good state, but then you will have every motive
to consider it as a very good acquisition. The owner, Don Jose
Pedro Contreras, would not have sold it for the said sum, were he
not in want of money for some workings in other mines which he
has near Las Peras, or had he funds to work the “ Angustias” in a
better style. This mine is situate not quite half, a league to the
south-east of San Luiz, and its distance from this Hacienda will be
nearly two leagues. Next Wednesday Igo to meet Mr. Contreras
at the mine, for the purpose of agreeing with him about the price of
the ores, and the following week I may, perhaps, set some people to
work there.
I hope you will make up your mind to complete the £12,000;
for after so many disappointments I have met with in my operations,
I think we cannot do without it. However promising the commence-
ment of the operations in the mines may have been, the result has
hitherto been very unfortunate. I got tired of driving levels on
examination in Guadalupe, and have there only four people at work to
extract ores. The miner has been despatched, as I don’t want such a
person for so few people. Besides, he was very neglectful, and caused
a considerable loss by his want of attention, as a part of the vein,
where a good deal of ores might have been extracted from, came
down by his fault.
The workings in Santa Barbara have been stopped, as the hardness
of the stone made it too expensive for our present state. In San
Luiz it is the softness of rock and vein which causes immense trouble.
I have not yet been enabled to clear the level, which, as I wrote you,


got suddenly filled with water. Much breaking has been caused by
the water, and, unfortunately, this is the most promising part of the
mine. I intend working Dolores only in “ Amparo,” as the results
show that this mine is too distant to conduct the workings properly,
and also renders it impossible to prevent the people from robbing it
of the best ores. In the Soledad 1 have again put people to work,
and shall continue to do so, till they be more urgently wanted in
other parts. San Francisco turned out a complete failure, which I
regret the more, as there was every hope that this mine would do
well, the great distance notwithstanding. In the direction towards
San Francisco I tried several other veins, but none turned out good.
It will appear that to the west and north-west of Penolcs the veins
do not go into the depth, and I shall not spend a farthing more on
“ Diligencias" in that direction. It is towards las Peras, on the
other side of San Luiz, that the veins are more constant, and in that
direction we are to extend our operations. There also is the
“ Angustias” mine situate.
The new water course is finished—the expenditure caused by it
does not amount to 200 dollars. I wrote some months ago for stamp-
heads, (without holes in the tail,) and hope they will be on the road
to this part of the world—we shall soon be in want of the same.
Our amalgamation machines go in a superior manner, the bad state
of the iron work and the wooden runners notwithstanding.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 31 si December, 1832.
After some correspondence and a good deal of parley, Mr.
Contreras has agreed to give the Angustias mine for the sum of
one thousand dollars, on condition of our taking the ores that are
already broken up at a fair valuation. I understand there are about
three hundred cargas, and the 2nd January is the day appointed
to have them examined and estimated, after which the only thing
necessary is to have the writings made out, to enable us to make


a beginning at the works, but this can be an affair that may Occupy
ten or twelve days, before its final conclusion ; for my part I am
glad that the thing is so far understood, for if we could only spend
the remaining money on Guadalupe and St. Luis, which are the
only mines of any expectation, I should have but poor hopes, and
under any circumstances it seems to me most advisable to give a
thousand dollars, to be put upon a vein which is spoken of in the very
highest tenns, rather than spending small sums in researches here-
abouts, or as has been done since my arrival without any good effect,
and which items when added together will make a considerable
amount, including the money laid out on San Francisco and San
Antonio. If Dolores were nearer the Hacienda, it might be worth
while to continue the works there, and if matters turn out well, after
a while, that mine may be brought into useful requisition. The
mill has been grinding principally the ores of San Luiz for the last
three or four weeks, and as some cargas remained in the galera,
we thought it better to have them finished before making the
descarne, which will take place to-morrow.
The new drain was finished the day before yesterday, and is now
bringing water upon the wheel, as yet a good deal escapes in such a
lengthy course, and there is scarcely a sufficiency to move the ten
heads, it will however be daily getting better, and I should say even
in a very dry year, like the present has been, that the whole of the
stamps can be worked during ten months, and with ordinary rains in
September and October throughout the other two. If it were not
for this drain from what I can see now, we should not be able even
to do any thing with five heads part of next month, and February,
and perhaps March, when occasional showers are expected.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 22 nd January, 1833.
At length we have got peace and quietness established in the
republic again, and the post communications are re-opened, circum-
stances which will be hailed with satisfaction by every one; and let


us now hope, that the present year will be more fruitful of successful
events than the past has been, and that it will be followed by
many others without experiencing such mischievous interruptions
and excesses as those we have had to witness during the last twelve
months.
The affair of the Angustias mine is finally settled with Mr. Con-
treras, and the writings, which are being copied by the notary, now
stand in the name of Mr. Weichsel, who spent most of last week in
Oaxaca on this business. As legal possession has been given of the
mine, it becomes a bona fide property, and will be transferred to you
or the Association after a while, so soon as we know of the Director-
ship having been fonned, which it seems well to wait for in order to
save expense.
I think you may venture to look upon this mine as a great acqui-
sition, and if attended with the least luck it must do well, and be the
principal prop of this concern. Eight parados are at work in it,
some taking out ores, and the others in “ obras utiles.” I have
already told you that the mine is in bad condition from the way in
which it has been neglected, and the quartz in general are exces-
sively hard, so that in the first instance it will cost a good bit of
money, and it is on that account I should have liked very well to
have heard of four credits of £6OO each, instead of three being forth-
coming, so as to have given us a little more amplitude, and less ex-
posure of being cramped, which is bad enough when that happens.
On the Ist inst. we had a “ descame,” much on a par with the
previous ones, and until we get through the ores on hand, which
are much inferior in standard to what they were estimated at, nothing
satisfactory may be expected—it "only produced of pure gold 21oz.
15dwts. troy, or 230 z. 11 adarmes Mexican weight, which were sent
on from Oaxaca about ten or twelve days ago, in company with the
26|oz, previously advised—Messrs. Manning, Marshall, and Co.
have instructions about shipping it per packet or ship of war on your
account, to the address of Sir J. VV. Lubbock and Co., upon whom
they will draw for £l5O sterling.
The stamping mill goes on steadily; we have been working a


little with the ten heads, and afterwards with eight, but as the water
course continues to leak, and finding it advisable to give the Indians
of the village a supply, for the purpose of irrigating their maize
crops, rather than making enemies of them, only five heads are going
just now, and such will be in a great measure the case until we have
a shower or two of rain.
In the mines here we are doing but little; for the past three weeks
there have been from twenty to twenty-five cargos of ore, of two and
three adarmes, taken out of Guadalupe weekly, and as long as any
can be found they will he persevered in; San Luis says nothing
fresh; for the purpose of keeping “ amparadas,” Dolores and La
Soledad, we have had a couple of “ parados” employed in each of
them, and the latter has shown some good symptoms by presenting
ores, which yield from one to four and five adarmes—if this continue
it will be a great and unexpected lift to us, and the advantage is the
greater from the mine being so near the Hacienda. I have, how-,
ever, seen so much inconstancy in the behaviour of all of them, that
I will not be very sanguine as to what may take place.
Many people say these mines only require patience, perseverance,
and, consequently, cash, to make them profitable, which, probably,
may be the case, notwithstanding how differently they have hitherto
turned out with what we have been able to do, but as we have no
money to spare, merely to spend on hopes and expectations, they
must remain in a dormant state at least for a while; if one or two
thousand dollars were not such an object, Mr. Weichsel would carry
them on as usual, all which I mention to you for your consideration.
The opening of the post communications threw into my hands a
whole batch of letters, and amongst them the duplicates of yours up
to the 20th September; in future, you need not be afraid of their
being miscarried, as the post is under good management.
The goods, per Mutine packet, have been safely received, and those
by the Trident are on their way to Oaxaca. I have credited you
with the amount of their respective invoices in the accounts of last
year, which shall be all made up now without delay, as well as the
rayas, and forwarded via the United Stales; the reason the accounts


are yet unclosed is from not having received some memorandums, &c.
that were wanting, till the day before yesterday, and as for the rayas,
in the first place I was unwell, and afterwards, during Mr. Weichsel’s
absence, too busy to attend to them.
I shall give you a list of our stock of stores, &c. with other par-
ticulars that may be perhaps interesting.
From Mr. Weichsel.
ANGUSTIAS MINE, sth February, 1833.
I addressed you last officially the 30th December, and have since
concluded my transactions with Don Jose Contreras, about the pur-
chase of this mine (the Angustias) the contract of which will be
remitted to you in due time, together with my conveyance of the
same to the Penoles concern.
You will, of course, be anxious to know something more about
this new acquisition, and I am happy to say that this vein is, by
myself and others, considered to be the very best and most abundant
in ores in all the district, and will, no doubt, influence the establish-
ment very favourably. If, you naturally will ask, the mine is of such
an importance, why then did the former owner sell the same for 1,000
dollars ? He did so because some other mines which he possesses
furnish as much ore as his Arrastras —he has four—will grind, and the
1,000 dollars which he has got, serve him to do some necessary works
in the same. Besides this mine is in some parts extremely hard,
and causes thereby a heavy expenditure in powder and tools. For
the very same reason he never worked it in a regular way, but went
upon ores, without ever driving a level of discovery. Thus he left
the mine in a ruinous state, but notwithstanding this, after a month’s
working, I am almost enabled to raise as much ore from it as to keep
our stamping mill going, and after six months, 1 dare state with
some certainty, our mill would not be able to grind what the mine
could yield. In some parts, the vein is more than three yards wide,
as the old workings show, and there you see excavations that a house
could be built in, and from the whole good ores have been extracted.


To prevent robbery, which has here been effected to a considerable
extent, I remain here day and night, except Sundays and Feast-
days, though the residence in a miserable straw hut, open on all
sides, and without the least comfort, connot be pleasant to me ; but I
shall continue so until the thing be in a better state. lam about to
survey the mine, and to make a map of it, a copy of which shall be
forwarded to you in the course of this month or at the beginning of
the next.
I can say but little about our other mines. From Guadalupe we
are extracting some tolerable ores, but, as I have said already, in
some of my former communications, this mine gives little hope for
the future, the ends of the levels having so bad an appearance, that I
am inclined to give them up. Of Santa Barbara I have a better
opinion, but our present situation is not such as to carry on workings
on discovery there, the vein having got very hard, and the alloy of
gold is too little to pay the expenses. San Luis is only worked by
two paradas, (two miners each). I meet there from time to time
with decent ores, and shall continue to examine the vein in two
directions; but it is so extremely soft sometimes, that it breaks
whilst the people are securing the end of the level, and several work-
ings I have been obliged to give up for that reason, as here is no
person experienced and handy enough for putting timber in those
places. The Soledad is now yielding some good ores, but I am
afraid they will never prove abundant; which, however, I cannot
decide upon. Dolores is kept in “ Amparo.”
As to our produce of gold, I feel embarrassed in stating that it has
been very trifling. I requested Mr. Sadler to keep the accounts
which come under that head, he therefore will give you the necessary
information on the subject.
From Messrs. Manning, Marshall, and Co.
VERA CRUZ, 20/A February, 1833.
By orders of Messrs F. A. Weichsel and John Sadler, we remit
by this packet, the « Thais,” two pieces of virgin gold, weighing 50oz.
4ad., against which we value on SirW. Lubbock, Bart, and Co. for
150/. sterling.


The gold referred to in the foregoing correspondence has been
received, the first consignment has been sold, and the proceeds of
such sale have satisfied the bill drawn against it, the insurance
commissions and charges, and left a small balance in favour of the
Association.
The Directors do not presume to offer any opinion upon the
prospects of the Association, leaving it to the Shareholders indivi-
dually, who are in possession of every fact in common with the
Directors, to draw their own conclusions from them.
Judging from the nature of the communications made by Messrs.
Weichsel and Sadler, in relation to the mine last acquired on behalf
of the Association, it appears to your Directors that a fair trial
should be given it; but to enable Mr. Weichsel to make such trial
your Directors cannot conceal from you their conviction that it
will be absolutely necessary at an early day to raise amongst the
Shareholders a further sum of money, and to make remittances as
exigencies may require; and probably also to send out improved
machinery to the mines.
order of the Board of Directors,
GEORGE DYSON,
SECRETARY.


Since the foregoing rvns sent to press, letters have been
received from Messrs. Weichsel and Sadler, from
which the following extracts are taken:
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, sth February, 1833.
The November packet had not arrived in Vera Cruz on the 26th
ult., and I am without any of your favours since I had last the
pleasure of addressing you on the 22nd ult., copy of which goes
enclosed in company with the accounts up to the 31st December,
as well as the rayas for the past month, all which I trust will, on
examination, be found correct.
On reference to the balance sheet you will at once see how
matters stand; and if I were to be called upon by the different
claimants for a settlement of their accounts, it would be necessary
to get from somewhere or other nearly 1,200 dollars to enable
me to do so; which I mention here in order that you may see,
that after paying the cost of the " Angustias ” mine, and the amount
of charges on the goods per “ Trident,” &c., there would only
remain about 2,500 dollars to begin the new year, and prosecute
the works of the establishment with, out of the two credits of £ 500
each which you promise to send forward in November and De-
cember.
On the 2nd inst. we had a “descarne,” which will turn out
about the same as the last and previous ones, but I do not know the
exact quantity of gold, for as yet there has not been an opportunity
of melting it down. It is tiresome to see the stamping mill and
amalgamation apparatus go so well and produce scarcely nothing;
on this account I shall be heartilv "lad when the old stock of ores


can be finished; this ought to he in the course of a month, or per-
haps sooner, for yesterday and to-day we have had some rain, which
causes the ten heads to move, and it is not unlikely they will be
able to continue in future without much interruption. After this
rubbish is got through, we shall have to depend upon what the mines
give us; if they do not supply 180 or 200 cargas per week I shall
not be satisfied, and that they yield equal to two adarmes for each
load of 3001bs. It is not thus requiring too much for the mill to do,
with the water we shall have, nor, by all appearances, will there be
much difficulty in getting the quantity from the “ Angustias” alone,
without bringing into the question any of the others, part of which
are contributing their mite. From “ Guadalupe” we continue to get
from 20 to 25 cargas weekly, to average at least two adarmes. La
Soledad, although inconstant, is also yielding a little of decent
standard, and “ San Luis” is again doing the same, with appear-
ances that cannot be desired better—may they only remain perma-
nently so.
As for the “ Angustias,” much might be said of this mine; the
more I see of it, the more persuaded I am that its good qualities
have not been misrepresented to us; it is frequently presenting
ojos (bunches) of rich ore, and from the little that has been done in
it by us, there is every reason to be satisfied.
I, of course, am here alone, and find plenty to do during the
day, either in the Galera, or at Guadalupe and Soledad, where, now
that they are working amongst ores, one need have a hundred eyes,
and be frequently amongst them ; for both these mines do not fail to
give ojitos (little bunches) of rich ore, which is wanted to mix with,
and make a better average of, those of less ley. I ought to have
gone to Oaxaca this week, to take in the gold, get some money, and
receive the writings of the " Angustias,”&c,, but circumstances have
not permitted it; the next cannot pass over, and Mr. Weichsel will
have to remain mostly at the Hacienda whilst I am away.
According to an account that has been kept of the ores that were
brought to the Hacienda last year there were 3,127 J cargas, out of
which, on 31st December, remained on hand about 810 cargas.


making to have passed through the mill during the twenty-three weeks
it was more or less at work, 2,317| cargas, which produced 1620 z.
15ad. of gold, and makes an average of If- adanne per carga, and
of ores ground 100 loads per week. This statement is too dishearten-
ing to dwell much upon ; and you will perhaps now ask me if the
mill only ground at the rate of 100 cargas weekly last year, why I
expect it to do double this P But so it is, for at the outset our
grinding amounted to next to nothing, and we have now learnt some-
thing by the experience we have had.
For your inspection and government I subjoin a list of the prin-
cipal stock of stores, &c. on hand on 31st December last.
The following extracts are from letters addressed to the
“ Chairman of the Directors of the Denotes Gold Mining
Associationin answer to the first communication of the
Board to Messrs. Weichsel and Sadler.
From Mr. Sadler.
PENOLES, 20 th February, 1833.
The foregoing is copy of my last respects of sth inst. to Messrs.
Druke and Swinburne, since which I have had the pleasure to re-
ceive your valued favour of 22nd November, and have taken due note
of its contents. As usual, I send on the copy of the Journal for
January with two sets of rayas; by the former you will observe that
I have opened some new accounts, which may, perhaps, render the
whole more simple than in the form they were kept last year; and
further alterations may be still necessary yet. The object of keeping
an account of the “ Mortero” is to ascertain exactly the expenses of


grinding the ores, which it appears to me desirable to know, so as to
be able to make a calculation of what that operation stands in per
carga; the “ Angustias” is of course kept quite distinct from the
other mines for various reasons. The writings are now in my pos-
session properly made out, and it only remains for the conveyance
to be made in favour of the Association to enable me to send them
on, which will be in the course of a few weeks, as Mr. Weichsel has
been to Oaxaca, and taken some steps in the business.
In less than a week our old stock of ores will be finished, although
we are again reduced to five stamp-heads; the little gold that may
he in the pans will be then taken out, and sent to Oaxaca in com-
pany with that from last “ descame,” which still remains here without
being melted down. The next ores to follow will be from the
“ Angustias” mine, and it will be then that 1 shall consider a fair
trial to have commenced, to see if we can produce sufficient gold to
meet all the expenses of the establishment, after the rains have fairly
set in : the generality of these ores is not rich, but they are such as
ought to yield two adarmes per carga at least, and if they do that
I shall be satisfied for the moment, although we shall be only able
to grind about one hundred loads per week, whilst but half the
stamp-heads are at work: my main object, at present, is to see the
concern pay its own expenses in its now limited shape; it is then
we shall be better able to judge of the extension it may be deserving
of, and whether we shall be able to effect the same by means of our
own resources. lam in good hopes we shall; for although I men-
tion but the low standard of two adarmes per carga, it does not follow
but they may prove much richer : notwithstanding which, I should
be better satisfied in my mind if we could have a few thousand
dollars in reserve at command, so as to meet any unforeseen
emergency that might present itself—such as breakage of the axle,
unusual drought to prevent the mill from working, or the impossi-
bility of bringing down sufficient ores for it during part of the rainy
season, &c.
Mr. Weichsel is at the “ Angustias.” Upon the whole, the mines
are behaving tolerably well, and although some new features have


presented themselves, the same account as given in my last will bear
to be repeated.
From Mr. Weichsel.
PENOLES, 24 th February, 1833.
I received the first letter of the Directors on the 16th in-
stant.
Allow me to express my most sincere thanks for the honor the
Shareholders did me at the meeting, at which the Directors were
elected, and for the confidence which the Directors express in
their esteemed communication. But if I return my thanks on
that account I cannot omit to add, that I feel the deepest regret at
the disappointment which you will have experienced, when learning
from Mr. Sadler’s and my own communications since August last,
that the concern was not in such a state of forwardness as you
expected, when the mentioned meeting was held. You will however
not blame me for this event, it having arisen from circumstances
over which I had no control. The sudden falling off of the mines,
and the great scarcity of water, were the reasons of the short
produce of gold, which did not by far cover our rayas, much less
all the expenditure of the concern. For the same reason I could
not think yet of building another stamping mill, and the money you
have since remitted was wanted for our immediate expenses, which
Mr, Sadler will have better explained in his communications. At
present however our troubles seem to be over; two months since
the whole has taken a different appearance. The acquisition of the
“ Angustias” mine—a mine which, as I already expressed in my last
official communication to the Contractors, proves to be very abun-
dant in ores, a good part of which may be called rich, and will after
some time not only yield ores sufficient to feed our stamping mill
now erected, but require an additional one—almost secures a good
result of our undertaking. Besides this, “ San Luis” is behaving
exceedingly well, the ores which they extract from it at present


being of a superior quality, and there is every appearance of their
being more constant than they formerly proved to be. In short, I
look with a good deal of ease and calmness into the future, and
feel great satisfaction in announcing this to you.
Since my last official letter to the Contractors, we have not
emptied the pans again, which will be done one of these days, when
the poor Guadalupe ores will be finished. The produce of gold will
again be short, but thenceforward our remittances will suit you
better than it can have been the case hitherto.


PENOLES GOLD MINING ASSOCIATION.
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements from the Commencement to 30 th April, 1833.
£. s . d.
£.
*.
d ■
To Cash received in Instalments, being £12 per
By Cash remitted to Penoles for Administration,
Share on 1020 Shares 12,240 0 0
including purchase of the Mines, and
„ Ditto, Net Proceeds of First Remittance
contingent Expenses
10,315
0
9
of Gold £372 16 7
H
Ditto, Travelling Expenses
195
8
0
Less amount of Bill drawn from
it
Ditto, Mr. Sadler, on Account ••••••••••••
148
4
1
Mexico against the same. 350 0 0
22 16 7
125
8
1
Ditto, Office Expenses in London, includ-
„ Balance of Interest and Premiums received
99
and paid on Exchequer Bills 42 16 11
ing Salaries, Rent, Stationery, Law
Charges, Postage, Furniture, Commis-
y
sion and Incidental Expenses «...
567
8
4
it
Ditto, Quicksilver
115
14
7
/
it
Ditto, Machinery, Stamp-heads, Tools, Iron,
/
Copper, 8cc
424
9
1
/
a
Ditto, Freight and Insurance
131
9
3
/
a
Ditto, Balance at the Bankers ..£138 19 9
/
Ditto, in hand 31 12 7
12
/
Balance due by Messrs. Druke and Swin-
/
bume £ 11 19 0
/
Exchequer Bill in hands of ditto 100 0 0
19
0
/
X £12,305 13 6
£12,305 13
6
No. 5, Warnford Court ,
GEORGE DYSON, Secretary.
London , 30t& AprV ', 1833.
