

Providing for
Disabled Soldiers
What FRANCE has done
TO BE SOLD IN AID OF
THE FRENCH RED CROSS
6d.
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, Sydney.




FOREWORD.
This Report has been re-printed as a
tribute to France for the wonderful work
she has undertaken in re-educating her sick
and wounded heroes.
May Australians who read it be aroused
to a sense of what we owe to our gallant
men who have fought for us, and may we
realize how we must be ready to help with
our money, with personal service, and in
unison in the great work of Repatriation
which lies before Australia.




REPORT upon the Treatment and Training
OF
Disabled and Discharged Soldiers in France
By Captain Sir HENRY NORMAN, Bt., M.P.,
Liason Officer of the Ministry of Munitions to the French Ministry of Inventions.
The Right Hon. D. Lloyd George, M.P.
(Secretary of State for War).
Sir, —On September 21st I received
your letter asking me to furnish you
with a report upon the French system
and method of dealing with the problem
of the medical treatment of disabled
and discharged soldiers in France, in
all its aspects, both from the medical
and administrative standpoints.
Your letter proceeds :
“I should also like to know how
far you consider the French organi-
sation can be adapted to our re-
quirements here, having regard to
the differences which exist in the
military arrangements in both coun-
tries.
“There appears to be some dif-
ference of opinion here as to the
results already achieved in France.
I should, therefore, be glad to know
what you consider to be the weak
as well as the strong points in the
French system, and any proposals
you may have to suggest for its
improvement.”
You further desired me, in view of
(he urgency of the problem in England,
to send my reports as soon as possible.
The re-education of disabled and
mutilated soldiers has evoked profound
interest in France, funds have been gen-
erously voted for it. and both officially
and privately the most earnest thought
and the most strenuous personal efforts
have been devoted to it. But owing to
the great pressure of the demand for
help, and doubtless also to the success
of individual activities, it has not yet
been found possible to give the subject
definite official centralised form; it is
still under the control of several Min-
istries, until important impending
changes receive the sanction of Parlia-
ment ; the training centres are situated
in a number of cities widely apart;
and conflicting opinions on many points
are held by the highest authorities.
For these reasons, together with the
natural breadth and complexity of the
subject, much time would be required
for a comprehensive survey. In view,
however, of the urgency you Impress
upon me, I beg to forward the following
provisional Report, asking only that
you will be good enough to regard it as
necessarily imperfect, and subject both
to correction and amplification.
HISTORY AND DEVERLOPMENT OF FRENCH
ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL.
During the first anxious and pre-
occupied period of the war, all disabled
French soldiers were regarded as des-
tined to come under the care of the
“Assistance Publique,” corresponding
generally to our Poor Law, which is
administered by the Ministry of the
Interior.
After a time, however, this elemen-
tary point of view was modified, as


everybody came to realise that the dis-
abled soldier was in no respect in the
same category as the aged or invalid
pauper, the abandoned child, and the
mother without means of support, lie
was not necessarily lost to society, but
was to be restored to independent in-
dustrial life in a greater or less degree
of efficiency.
Accordingly, in April, 1015, an “Intei’-
ministerial Commission” was formed,
under the chairmanship of Monsieur
Brisac, Directeur de I’Assistance Pub-
lique, consisting of representatives of
the Ministries of War, Marine, Public
Instruction, Commerce and Agriculture.
The duty of this Commission was to
study the question in all its aspects, to
settle the principles upon which it
should be treated, and to assign Par-
liamentary funds.
The State then proceeded, about a
year ago. to found two schools for the
re-education of disabled soldiers. These,
however, were placed under the Minis-
try of the Interior, which supports
them, and at the same time gives sub-
ventions to private institutions from a
credit of 2.000,000 francs (£80,000)
voted by Parliament. Larger sums for
the general purpose have since been
voted.
The first of these schools was the
Institut de St. Maurice, near Paris,
formerly a convalescent and permanent
home for civil accidents from (lie Paris
hospitals. The second was the Ecole
Normale at Bordeaux. This, founded
later and therefore benefiting from
newer developments, was the more
scientific, and was intended to be a
model school of re-education. It is
under the direction of a distinguished
physician. Dr, Gonrdon. At this par-
ticular school attention is given to those
who have lost an arm, and they are
provided with artificial arms on the
system of Professor A mar, described
hereafter.
It became evident, however, to the
Chamber and the Government that the
re-education of the disabled soldier
would become far too great a task to
be undertaken by any one Ministry
with heavy existing duties, and that in
any case the Ministry of the Interior
was hardly the right department to
be responsible for it, as it had passed
entirely out of the scope of Poor Law
administration, and much confusion was
arising from the simultaneous activity
of many separate and sometimes con-
flicting authorities,
The situation at this time was that
no fewer than four Ministries were
actively engaged in dealing with the
question. These were —
1. The Ministry of the Interior, as
already explained;
2. The Ministry of War. through the
Under-Secretary of State for the
Service of Health (corresponding
in its administrative functions to
our Royal Army Medical Corps),
because the question concerned
the health of soldiers in military
hospitals;
3. The Ministry of Commerce, because
technical instruction, which is
one of the functions of this Min-
istry, for disabled soldiers would
become necessary;
4. The Ministry of Labour, because
the replacing of disabled and
crippled men in trades, and the
arrangement of special conditions
of employers’ insurance for them,
was obviously a labour question.
CREATION OF A CENTRAL AUTHORITY.
The result of these independent and
often conflicting activities was inevit-
ably confusion, overlapping and waste.
Therefore, on the initiative of the Min-
ister of Labour, a co-ordinating scheme
was created by interministerial decrees
of March 2nd and 10th, and May 11th,
1010, known as the “National Office for
Mutilated and Discharged Soldiers.”
The Presidents are Monsieur Albert
Mftin. Minister of Labour, and Mon-
sieur Justin Godart. Under-Secretary
of State for War for the Service of
Health, with Monsieur Brisac. Director
of Public Assistance and Hygiene, as
President of the Commission of Re-edu-
cation.
The creation of this National Office,
and the provision of funds for its sup-
port were voted unanimously by the
Chamber of Deputies, and it is now in
operation at 05, Quai d’Orsay, although
the Senate has as yet taken no action in
the matter.
The object of the National Office is
to co-ordinate the work of public de-
partments and institutions dealing with
discharged and mutilated soldiers, and
to centralise all useful information on
the subject.
It is composed of an Administrative
Committee, a Commission of Re-educa-
tion, and a Council for the Study of


Improvements (“Consell de perfection-
nement”).
The National Office will —
1. Keep a register of every soldier
who by reason of wounds or ill-
ness resulting from the war has
thereby suffered an important
and permanent diminution of pro-
fessional capacity, his civil
status, his military situation;
the nature of his invalidity, his
previous occupation, and the new
occupation he may have adopted
because of his invalidity;
2. Maintain a list of work and em-
ployment available to disabled
soldiers, distinguishing the kinds
of employment suitable for each
type of invalidity;
3. Co-ordinate all information re-
ceived from institutions dealing
with disabled soldiers, and keep
a statistical record of situations
filled by them;
4. Collect all legislative and other
documents relative to the treat-
ment of disabled soldiers, in
France and abroad;
3. Unite in a common effort all de-
partmental and local organisa-
tions for the welfare of disabled
soldiers.
Such is the admirable programme laid
down for the National Office. It has
not yet, however, been realised, because
the different Ministries concerned still
continue their distinct activities, and
because parts of the funds voted are
still at their separate disposal. There
is thus a dispersion of effort, both
official and private, and two more stages
of development are necessary before
co-ordination is secured: the transfer-
ence to the National Office of the
authority and work of each Ministry
so far as this question is concerned;
and the bringing of the many separate
private institutions and organisations
under the control of the National Office.
The Chamber of Deputies is understood
to desire these two steps to be taken
immediately, though the difficulties in
the way of the first are regarded as
very great; the views of the Senate on
the subject are unknown.
GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF FRENCH
RE-EDUCATION.
Disabled soldiers fall obviously into
two classes: (1) those who are wholly
permanently disabled for any kind of
work, and (2) those who may by re-
education be restored to social and pro-
fessional efficiency in varying degrees.
With the first of these classes the
National Office is not concerned. They
have become the helpless dependents of
the State and their support and care
present obviously a wholly distinct
problem. They can earn nothing, they
should receive financial support if they
can live with 'friends, or if not, they
must be provided for in State-supported
institutions. Each country must pro-
vide for these according to its own view
of its obligations to those who have
given all but life in its service, and
comparisons of national methods would
be neither useful nor desirable.
With regard to the second class—
those capable of re-education —the task
of dealing with them falls naturally
into two branches: (1) the re-educa-
tion of men for industrial employment;
and (2) finding work for them when
they have become capable of undertak-
ing it.
Here clearly two alternative courses-
present themselves: (a) to endeavour
to replace the re-educated man in his
former employment, for which he would
have the great advantage of knowing
all the technical details of the work; in
which he would have the sympathy of
his fellow-workers and the support of
his trade-union; and in which he would
be able to earn a greater or smaller pro-
portion of his former wages, the State
giving him a pension more or less the
equivalent of that proportion he cannot
earn; and (h) to re-educate the man
for tlie kind of work he would be best
qualified to perform, in view of the
nature and extent of his disablement,
without regard to his previous employ-
ment.
The French Government has adopted
the first of these courses.
Therefore, the principle upon which
the National Office, and. indeed, all
French institutions, are acting is. so far
as possible,” not to uproot the disabled
man either from his previous locality
or his previous employment. Indus-
tries in France, as elsewhere, are
largely local, and it has been thought
eminently desirable to keep the man
industrially localised. That is, to take
an English comparison, a re-educated
knitter would be sent back to his home
in Leicester, a bootmaker to Northamp-
ton, a cotton-weaver or spinner to
Blackburn, a potter to Staffordshire.


&c. It is considered that previous know-
ledge of a trade, and the possession of a
home or friends in the locality, are of
such importance as to outweigh all
other considerations. And, of course,
the artificial limb supplied to the man
should be such as to enable him to per-
form some job, or run some machine,
of his trade.
This being the accepted French view,
the National Office proposes that an
organisation shall exist in every indus-
trial district of France for the muti-
lated and disabled of that district,
where both technical re-education and
subsequent finding of employment will
be provided for the men who joined the
army from there.
EXISTING AND PROPOSED INSTITUTIONS
OF RE-EDUCATION.
According to a list issued by the
National Office the following re-educa-
tion centres (I adopt this French term
in general use; it means schools where
trade-training is given) exist at this
moment (there are S 9 departments in
France, including Algeria), under the
authorities specified:—
Ministry of the Interior. —35 centres
in 110 departments.
Ministry of Commerce. —13 schools in
11 departments.
Miniatri/ of Agriculture. —2(s schools
in 22 departments.
Other Institutions reported to the
Motional Office. —27 schools in 10
departments.
Of course, the same departments
figure in different lists. No fewer than
45 departments do not appear at all.
To the above lists should he added
four schools of re-education (one agri-
cultural) founded and supported by the
Union of Foreign Colonies in France,
to whose admirable work reference is
made hereafter.
But, further, the Ministry of War, by
a circular dated June 2nd. 1910, an-
nounces that the existing “Centres of
Orthopaedic Surgery,” created by its
circular of December 31st. 1914, are
thereby suppressed, and that a large
number of “Centres d’Appareillage et
de Rd-tducation” (Centres of Surgical
Equipment and Re-education) are to be
established with the least possible de-
lay, in different Military “Regions”
covering the whole of France. The
object is that a disabled man shall be
sent to a Centre of Surgical Equipment
in the Military Region to which he be-
longs as a soldier, and to this Centre
shall be added, first, a “normal school
of re-education,” depending upon the
Ministry of War. or at least remaining
in close relation with it; and second, a
State Workshop of Prothesis, where
artificial limbs are studied, made, and
repaired.
Therefore 10 centres, organised as
described above, are being indepen-
dently organised by the Ministry of
War for disabled soldiers, that is—the
importance of this qualification will be
seen later — before their discharge from
the Army.
It is unnecessary to point out the
overlapping that may thus arise. 1 hough
this is not so great as might appear
from the list of the National Office
alone, since many of the schools figur-
ing in that list are previously existing
schools for trade-training which will
henceforth receive disabled soldiers
also.
It may be pointed out that the Insti-
tute of Saint-Maurice (see hereafter),
which is described in the Circular of
the Ministry of War as the model to
be followed, is under the Ministry of
the Interior.
PENSIONS FOR DISABLED SOLDIERS IN
FRANCE.
Men discharged from the army in
France as unfit for further service are
divided into two classes: “R£form£s No.
1” and “RfTormfs No. 2”—that is, Dis-
charged No.l and Discharged No. 2.
The Discharge No. 1 is accorded to
men with severe and incurable wounds,
suffered In action or in any commanded
service, and to men suffering from
grave and incurable Infirmity arising
from the danger and fatigue of military
service. This discharge confers the
right to an annual pension.
The Discharge No. 2 applies to men
suffering from infirmity not recognised
as due to their military service. This
discharge gives no right to a pension,
although a provisional grant may be
made.
In France, ns in England, feeling
runs very high upon this last point, as
the view is held that once a man has
been passed as medically fit for mili-
tary service, any subsequent Infirmity
should be recognised as due to that
service. Great hardship has been ex


Class.
Sergeant.
Corporal.
Private.
I. ...
1,430
1,100
1,170
975
II. ...
900
750
Ill ...
800—1,100
700-900
600-750
IV. ...
800—1,100
700—900
600—750
V. ...
550—825
4-50—675
375—563
Class.
Sergeant.
Corporal.
Private.
£
£
£
I. ...
57
47
39
II. ...
44
36
30
III. ...
32—44
28—36
24—30
IV. ...
32—44 ‘
28—36
24—30
V. ...
22- 33
18—27
15—23
perienced, mitigated to a small extent
by private benevolence, but the Cham-
ber of Deputies passed without debate,
a few days ago, a measure by which a
monthly sum of 30-50 francs is allotted
to certain of these men, temporarily,
and until a new Pension Law is passed.
The disabled soldier “Bn instance de
It£forme,” that is, while awaiting his
final discharge in the No. 1 Class, re-
ceives a provisional pension called
“gratification.” He comes up for per-
iodical medical examination, and his
“gratification” may increase or diminish
according as his physical infirmity be-
comes more or less serious.
The final pension of the man Dis-
charged No. 1 depends upon two fac-
tors: («) the nature of Ids infirmity,
and (5) his rank.
[I pass over the pensions of dis-
charged officers, since most of these for
the present continue to wear their uni-
form and receive their pay. Therefore
the question of their final treatment
has not yet generally arisen, although
their pensions are duly fixed on an
official scale.]
The different classes of pensions are
five, as follows :
Class I. —Amputation of two limbs,
or total loss of sight.
Class ll.—Amputation of one limb,
or total loss of use of two
limbs.
Class 111. —Severe wounds, the pen-
sion depending upon number
of years of service, unless re-
ceived in action.
Class IV. —Slighter wounds, the
pension depending upon num-
ber of years of service, unless
the wound was received in
action against the enemy.
Ciass A". —In case of death, pen-
sion for widows, or orphans,
if no wife living.
The actual annual pensions payable
in three typical cases under commis-
sioned rank are shown in the following
table (figures in fi’aucs) :
Approximate corresponding figures in
English money at £1 equals 25 francs.
The scale of these pensions is that
of 1870-71. It is now generally regarded
as inadequate, and Parliament will
probably increase each pension by an
additional sum for each child of a dis-
abled soldier.
Further, in fact, though not by right,
almost every soldier who lias lost a limb
has received the Military Medal, which
carries an annual grant of 100 francs.
The Legion of Honour, which many
have also received for acts of excep-
tional courage, carries an annual grant
of 250 francs.
The sum payable to a disabled man
while awaiting Ids Discharge No. 1 is
225 francs a day for a sergeant, 2
francs for a corporal, and 1-70 for a
private, say respectively, Is. 10d., Is.
Bd., and Is. sd.
I would ask your special attention,
in this connection, to the fact that in
France the pension of the man Dis-
charged No. 1, once given , is given for
hi* lifetime, and is not subject to with-
drawal or modification for any reason
whatever.
A DIFFICULTY OF VOLUNTARY
RE-EDUCATION.
At tliis point I must digress for a
moment to speak of a great difficulty
in the way of re-education, which is
causing much anxiety in France, as it
will probably do in England.
The difficulty is this: The Service of
Health, which is part of the Ministry of
War, deals of course only with soldiers.
A man needing an artificial limb is sent
to a Centre of Surgical Equipment,
which is always attached to a military
hospital, and while receiving hospital
treatment he may follow a course of re-
education to fit him to return to his old
trade, or to take up a new one. This,
however, is entirely voluntary ; the best
men gladly avail themselves of the op-
portunlty. but a large number do not.
These men, who often spend months in
hospital, have the greater part of their
day free; they are given leave, and


spend their time sitting about the
grounds, or walking the streets, with
results frequently disastrous to them-
selves.
Even the men who elect to receive
training while undergoing hospital
treatment, mostly leave the school when
they are discharged from the hospital.
Two other reasons tend to lead dis-
charged men from seeking trade-train-
ing. One is that of the man who says,
“The State has crippled me; now let it
keep me.” The other is the belief that
if a man is seen to be earning a good
living his pension will be reduced or
withdrawn. As I have said, this is
absolutely untrue, but many still be-
lieve it.
The inability of the State to control
a man after he is discharged from the
army constitutes a very difficult pro-
blem, which will have to be faced in
both countries. After a long period of
the hardships of war, with his grievous
disablement at the end, a man not
unnaturally desires above all to get
back to his freedom and his friends.
At first, the object of great sympathy,
he receives well-meant but often unwise
kindness and charity, but he is clearly
in danger of acquiring habits of idle-
ness and intemperance which can never
afterwards be extirpated.
The result will thus be that after the
war France, as doubtless other belliger-
ent countries also, will have among her
population a large number of partially
disabled men without any industrial
training whatever to tit them to earn a
living.
To avoid as far as possible this moral
and economic misfortune, every effort
is being made. Each man. on his dis-
charge is presented with a booklet in-
forming him of the schools in every
part of France to which he can go for
training, urging him to take advantage
of one of these, and showing him photo-
graphs of mutilated men at work in
different trades. The Ministry of War
issues one booklet, the Ministry of the
Interior another. Roth are attached to
this Report, (See Appendices I and
II.)
Illustrated lectures to the same effect
are delivered, posters are exhibited,
other kinds of propaganda work are
undertaken, and Prefects and Mayors
are instructed to do all in their power
to induce men to return for re-educa-
tion.
All the authorities I have consulted
earnestly wish that professional re-cdu-
cation could be made obligatory, but
almost all are agreed that this is very
difficult, if not impossible, in France.
THE SUCCESSIVE STAGES OF THE FRENCH
SYSTEM.
It may now be convenient to sum-
marise the French method of treating
sick and wounded soldiers in its succes-
sive stages, forming, at least in its
conception, a complete administrative
system.
The worker in civil life passes, on
mobilisation, into the army, and those
with whom this Report deals become
casualties.
Casualties may be divided into six
classes, as follows, dealt with as here
specified:—
1. Dead. —A pension is granted to the
widow dr, if no wife, to the
children.
2. Totally Disabled. —A pension is
granted, if they can live with
friends. Otherwise they are sup-
ported in State institutions, and
it is suggested for this purpose
to restore the great Hotel des
Invalides, in Paris, to its original
object.
3. Blind. —These are trained in sepa-
rate institutions.
4. Sick. —These, if they recover, re-
turn to the army, or, if unfit for
service, receive, if the unfitness
is recognised as arising from
their service, Discharge No. 1,
with permanent pension, or other-
wise, Discharge No. 2 with pro-
visional allowance.
o. Functionally Injured. These
are treated in a Centre of Phy-
siotherapy, whence in due course
they (a) return to the army for
active or base duties, ( b) pass
into Class 2, or (c) receive Dis-
charge No. 1 from the army with
fixed permanent pension, and
enter, at their own wish, a school
of re-education.
0. Amputated. — These enter a Centre
of Surgical Equipment, where
they are fitted with an artificial
limb, receive Discharge No. 1
with permanent pension, and
enter, at their own wish, a school
of re-education.
The men in Classes 5 and (> who have
passed through a School of Re-educa-
tion are provided with work by an
Employment Bureau, and thus return
to the civil industrial life they quitted
on mobilisation.


I have endeavoured to exhibit this
system in diagrammatic form in the fol-
lowing sketch :
plaster oast made of it. In the rase of
a man not amputated but requiring an
appliance, and electro-diagnosis is also
CENTRES OF SURGICAL EQUIPMENT.
I pass now to a brief account of the
work done at each stage of the French
treatment, and In the first place to the
work of surgical equipment of men who
have lost a limb.
The official statement is as follows; —
“ The State has imposed upon itself the
task of providing mutilated soldiers
with strong and elegant appliances,
most appropriate to their mutilation
and to their future life.”
There is. in principle, a Centre of
Surgical Equipment (“Centre d'Ap-
pareillage”) for each important part
of France, to which the soldier belong-
ing to that part of France should go.
This is not yet realised in fact. The
most careful and detailed procedure
has been laid down, into which I need
not enter. In general, after a clinical
examination of the man, his stump is
to be photograhed, radiographed, and a
made to establish the functional valid-
ity of the injured limb.
For leg amputations a man receives
as a temporary appliance either a peg-
leg or an orthopaedic boot, and ulti-
mately a complete artificial limb. On
discharge he keeps both these. The
latter may be either an artificial leg
or an articulated peg-leg with spare
leather calf and foot. Double amputa-
tions of the thigh receive two peg-legs,
as they cannot make use of any other
type.
For arm-amputations the appliance
supplied depends upon the length of the
stump. In general, a “working arm,”
with ring, hook or “universal pincers,”
is given, and a “dress arm” or “dress
hand” added.
The State procures these appliances
either by direct manufacture, or more
largely from manufacturing firms. An
extremely elaborate “ Cahier des
Charges,” that is. a specification, with


prices attached, has been drawn up,
prescribing in minute detail the con-
struction of every type of appliance,
and accompanied by a large number of
working drawings. These specifications
were drawn up by the Orthopaedic Com-
mission (of the Ministry of War), and
this Commission meets regularly to re-
ceive the appliances and to put on each
part of them an official stamp of accept-
ance or rejection.
I append specimen blue-prints (Ap-
pendix 111. —not printed) and photo-
graphs, and I can forward the complete
“Cahier des Charges” if desired.
Manufacturers are requisitioned to
furnish a certain number of appliances,
and after this number has been supplied
they may execute private orders. Every
manufacturer must be a Frenchman
and established in France.
The State assumes permanent respon-
sibility for the upkeep, repair, or re-
placement of all appliances it has fur-
nished. For appliances furnished by
private organisations or procured by
the amputated themselves, the State
takes no responsibility. But a man
may be reimbursed the cost of an ap-
pliance he himself purchased before
October Ist, 1910.
No amputated man can receive his
discharge from the Army until he has
been treated and definitely equipped
with a suitable appliance.
CONFLICTING FRENCH OPINIONS UPON
ARTIFICIAL LIMBS.
At this point I would invite your
attention to the conflicts of opinion
among the many eminent or experi-
enced French authorities, and disabled
men themselves, whom I had occasion
to consult, upon the value of artificial
appliances in general.
In the first place, it has become clear
to me —though this opinion receives no
official statement—that a sharp line of
distinction must be drawn between
arm-amputations and leg-amputations.
The difference is vast and vital. A
man who has lost a leg is just as able
to perform any work he can do seated,
and can be taught any such trade just
as easily, as before he was injured. His
Invalidity is personal. It is a grave
and deplorable handicap in his private
life, but It leaves him. for all seated jobs,
practically as efficient industrially as
before.
On the other hand, a man who has
lost an arm has lost much, probably
as much as four-fifths in many cases.
of his industrial efficiency. The num-
ber of jobs he can do is strictly limited,
and in most of these he can only be
partially efficient as compared with a
sound man.
For these reasons, which I regard as
indisputable, it does not appear reason-
able or just that the State should grant
similar pensions in the two cases.
Upon the general question of the
utility of artificial appliances, I have
been greatly surprised to find how much
scepticism, and indeed hostile opinion,
prevails.
Directors of institutions, almost with-
out exception, but differing in positive-
ness of assurance, told me that many
men will not use elaborate appliances.
In leg-amputations, ‘‘the first time a
man puts on his artificial leg is a great
disillusionment for him.” “The leg is
hot. heavy, awkward, fatiguing.” “Men
will use a peg-leg. but nothing else.”
“My own difficulty Is to get men even
to use a peg-leg, since they get about so
fast on their crutches, though I warn
them that the prolonged use of these
will inevitably result in nervous dis-
orders or even in paralysis.’ I may
mention that I know of a lady in Paris
able to purchase any type of artificial
leg. but who uses only a peg-leg and
walks with it a dozen miles dally for
exercise. “Any leg that flexes at the
knee will, notwithstanding all that the
makers say, sooner or later give the
man a bad fall.” “Then why give the
men these useless limbs? ’ I asked.
“The law says every man is to have
them.” was the reply.
On the subject of artificial arms, the
opinions expressed to me were even
stronger. “No complicated arm, how-
ever ingenious, is of any good at all.
An artificial arm that will enable a man
just to hold something down on a table
is all right. Beyond that, a man will
be interested in it for a short time,
then he will throw it aside for good.
As for the ‘dress arm,’ not more than
one man in a hundred will put it on
to go out with.”
One medical officer, with both tech-
nical knowledge and much experience.
sjx>ke to me frankly on the subject, but
confidentially, as he naturally did not
wish to criticise the views of many of
his medical colleagues. “It is.” he de-
clared, “wrong to place confidence in
delicate, complicated, costly apparatus,
difficult to repair. A man’s physical
aptitude is the only sure basis of his
future work. If a man has a job which


depends upon a complicated apparatus,
once the apparatus is broken or out of
order the job vanishes. Such things
may be repairable in Paris, but how
can a man working in a small provin-
cial town get a complicated arm re-
paired? For the first year or two these
tilings might serve, but after that,
what? Choose artificial limbs simple,
cheap, easy to repair—all others are a
waste of effort and money.”
On the other hand, there is the
official view of the highly-competent
Orthopedic Commission, with its elab-
orately-studied specifications.
Between these conflicting authorities
l am not competent to express an opin-
ion. though I may say that in the many
training schools I have visited only a
small proportion of the men under
training had lost an arm. I content
myself with placing this situation be-
fore you, and asking you to consider,
in this connection, the other side of the
argument as presented in my account
of the work of Professor Amar, later in
this Report.
CENTRES OF PHYSIOTHERAPY.
The French, as already said, include
among the “mutilated” men suffering
from impaired muscular or articular
functions. Such injuries they call
“functional wounds,” as distinct from
amputations.
Men thus disabled are sent to a
Centre of Physiotherapy, where all the
different curative methods included
under that general title are practised.
These may be shown as follows: —
Physiotherapy.
The chief Centre of Physiotherapy
In France is situated at the Grand
Palais, Paris, of which Dr. Jean Camus,
an eminent physician and specialist, is
Chief Medical Officer.
/ Mechanotherapy,
Treatment by mechanical appli-
ances. Largely Zander System.
Thermnlh-rapy.
Treatment b\ heat, electric light
baths, blue light baths.
Hydrotherapy,
Treatment by water, whirlpool
baths, Ac.
Einesitherapy,
Treatment by movement, re-edu-
cation in walking, gymnastics,
massage.
Electroleraphy,
Treatment by electricity. Fara-
dic, galvanic and high fre-
quency currents, and ionio
medication.
Radiumtherapy.
, Treatment by radium emanations.
There is here an extensive and elabor-
ate equipment of apparatus required
for all the above forms of treatment.
I need not describe it, as the mechanical
part consists with few exceptions of
Zander appliances. The apparatus for
other methods of treatment is also well
known, except perhaps the so-called
“whirlpool bath.” which is circulating
warm water, giving a superficial mas-
sage, of use in preparing a sensitive
limb for manual massage.
The fine equipment of this Centre
derives its chief value from the skill
and experience of the expert physicians
who direct it. The system of electro-
diagnosis enables a peculiarly accurate
record to be made of each man’s mus-
cular and nervous condition. In
mechanotherapy experience has shown
that the so-called “active” treatment
in which the movements are given to a
patient by motor machinery, is rarely
of use, and sometimes dangerous, and
that the best results are secured from
the “passive” treatment, in which the
patient himself moves the mechanism.
No one method of physiotherapy is re-
lied upon; it is the combination of
several, based upon prolonged and
specialist experience, that produces
good results. Dr. Camus made the in-
teresting remark to me, when this sub-
ject was being discussed, "If I were
obliged to suppress all these methods of
treatment except one, I should retain
massage.”
One other part of the installation at
the Grand Palais I may mention,
namely, the apparatus for determining
by the graphic and other methods the
degree of a man's physical efficiency.
This is a field of scientific and social
research, the development of which
should render important services after
the war.
A fully-equipped Zander Institute,
situated in the Rue d’Artois and under
the charge of Dr. Quiserne, which has
been taken over for the war by the
Society of Insurers and placed at the
disposal of the Government, is used
for the treatment of officers. There are
also smaller but fully-equipped Centres
of Physiotherapy in the Rue Paul Louis
Courier in Paris, at Enghien, and at
Juvisy, near Paris, the latter in connec-
tion with the Agricultural School of
Re-education there. A complete outfit
for physiotherapy, for the treatment of
about 500 men per day, costs £5OO when
supplied by the firm of Bordered in


Paris. In London higher prices appear
to be asked for identical apparatus.
Dr. li. Fortescue Fox, of London, re-
cently studied the equipment of the
Grand Palais and the Zander Institute,
and placed an order for an equipment
for the lied Cross Physical Clinic estab-
lished by a committee of physicians in
Great Portland Street, London.
When I visited the Grand Palais last
January there were 3,000 patients under
treatment. To-day there are about)
1,200. This diminution is due to* the
fact that it has been found undesirable
to concentrate so many of these patients
in Paris.
It should be clearly realised that the
main object of this institution is to re-
store functionally disabled men to the
fighting ranks. When this is impossible,
the object is so to improve their condi-
tion as to reduce the amount of pension
that will be payable to 1110111 by the
State on account of their incapacity
for work. That is, the objects are first
military, and second economic.
Striking figures have been furnished
me showing these results accomplished.
During the month of December, 1915,
411 patients were cured and restored to
the ranks, their average incapacity on
entering liaviug been 2811 per cent.,
and on leaving 096 per cent. To base
and auxiliary duties 56 were sent, and
22 were recommended for discharge.
The capital sum represented by the dif-
ference between the pensions which
would have been payable by the State
to these men if they had not been
treated, and the pensions payable to
them after treatment —that is, the
financial gain to the State, is stated at
2.898,080 francs, say £116,000 from one
mouth's work.
During the four months ending
December 31st, 1915, 1,780 “functionally
wounded” men, whose morbid condi-
tion had existed for an average period
of six months before their treatment,
were returned to the military depots,
200 to base duties, and 92 recommended
for discharge, at a gain to the State
on their pensions and allowances repre-
sented by a capital sum of 10,000,000
francs, say £400,000.
It may be added that the time taken
for a man's cure must depend very
largely upon his own desire to get
well.
SCHOOLS OF RE-EDUCATION.
From the Centres of Sui’gical Equip-
ment and the Centres of Physiotherapy,
men discharged from the army, or to be
discharged, converge, as has been indi-
cated, upon Schools of lie-education. I
proceed to give a brief account of the
constitution and work of some typical
schools.
The Institute of Saint Maurice.
The “Institut Natiomil Professional
lies liivalides de la Guerre,” at Saint
Maurice (Seine), on the outskirts of
Paris, was before the war, under the
Ministry of the Interior, divided into
parts: (1) a convalescent home for
those discharged from the Paris hos-
pitals; and (11) a home for those per-
manently disabled by accidents in Paris.
The former has become a military hos-
pital, with a Centre of Surgical Equip-
ment, and the latter, since May Ist,
1915, a School of Ke-education for the
disabled of the war.
The school, which remains for the
present under the Ministry of the In-
terior, and is under the directorship of
Dr.Bourrillon, is housed in a large build-
ing situated pleasantly among trees
which must originally have formed part
of the Bois de Vincennes. This con-
tains only the various workshops and
class-rooms, the messroom and dor-
mitories being in separate buildings.
This school is attended by the men
who are undergoing treatment in the
adjoining hospital, but it is also freely
open, so far as its accommodation per-
mits, to all discharged soldiers and
sailors recognised as incapable of re-
turning directly to their previous em-
ployment. They may come as boarders
or as day-scholars, the latter being
those whose families live in the neigh-
bourhood.
During this time, those who are in
receipt of a provisional pension of 1 TO
francs per day pay 1-20 francs of this to
the school, keeping the remaining sd. as
pocket-money. When they receive their
final military discharge and pension,
they are admitted gratuitously. Board-
ers are provided with board, lodging,
washing, lighting, and heating. Day-
scholars receive sd. a day, and keep
their pension as well. Half of all pen-
sions is retained, to be given in a single
sum when the student leaves. The
hours of work are eight per day. When
men produce goods which are sold, thej
receive the balance, less 10 per cent.,
left after deducting the cost of raw
materials. Prizes are given for special
diligence, and these often take the form
of an outfit of tools for the trade which
has been learned.


The disabled man chooses what trade
he will be taught, and may change to
another if he thinks he could do better
at it. Any man is free to leave at any
moment, only moral pressure being ap-
plied to induce him to stay until he is
really equipped to earn a living.
The punishments for idleness or in-
temperance are deprivation of leave, of
pocket-money, and —what is especially
felt —of wine at meals. Incorrigible lazi-
ness or intemperance is punished by
expulsion. Diligent work is required;
“the Institute is a place of instruction,
and not a refuge for the idle.”
The occupations taught are those of
commercial clerk, tailor, bootmaker,
leather-worker, tinsmith, architectural
and mechancial draughtsman, land sur-
veyor, and mechanic to drive or repair
agricultural motor-tractors, &c.
Every effort is made to persuade a
man to be trained to resume his former
trade, or one resembling it, where his
special knowledge would be of value,
but the Director will not have men
trained as chauffeurs, lie holds that
far too many men are seeking this em-
ployment, and that the employment of
men with disabled limbs for this job will
inevitably result in serious accidents
“A chauffeur,” he said to me, “cannot
be ready at any moment to meet a
sudden difficulty or danger, unless he is
physically a sound man,” But to drive
an agricultural tractor round a field is
obviously a very different job from
driving a fast and powerful vehicle in
town traffic, and special efforts are
made to induce men to learn agricul-
tural motor mechanics.
The average times taken to train men
to earn their living at different trades
are stated by the Director of this school
to bo as follows, based upon sixteen
months’ experience with about 700
men:—
Clerk —3 months.
Draughtsman—10-12 mouths.
Leather-worker —S mouths.
Shoemaker —0 months for repair
work.
Shoemaker —S months for repair
work and new work.
Mechanic —0 months.
Tailor —8 months.
Tinsmith —4 months for a town work-
shop.
Tinsmith —8 months to work on his
own account in the country.
In separate temporary buildings in
the grounds a number of expert
mechanics, released from the army for
the purpose, Were making artificial
limbs and other surgical appliances.
Plaster of Paris casts were made of the
stumps of limbs, or other injured parts
of the body to be fitted, and of one
whole leg when another leg was to be
made to match it. This was admirably
done, and of course obviated the neces-
sity of repeated and tiresome fitting and
trying on. The artificial limbs made
here were of steel, leather, and felt, of
beautiful workmanship, but they ap-
peared to me rather elaborate, expen-
sive, and heavy.
The men in the workshops were cer-
tainly doing excellent work. Large
quantities of army saddlery were being
made, and excellent “Sam Browne”
belts —all of a good army type. The
pig-skin and morocco leather work was
more than good—it was up to Bond-
street standard. The draughtsmanship
and mechanical drawing was in many
cases first-rate. And 1 may say here
that an appliance familiar in many
drawing offices, the “Unico,” made by
the Universal Drafting Machine Co..* of
Cleveland, U.S.A., has been found a
valuable help to a one-armed draughts-
man.
The tinsmith's work was not to be
distinguished from that ordinarily sold.
An order for a thousand small tin
bottles for sewing-machine oil had just
come in.
But one could not fail to be struck
by the fact that most of the men had
two serviceable arms'. Only in the
drawing office did 1 see a one-armed
man. A few had arms crippled more
or less severely, but hardly any so that
they had not serviceable hands. A
very large proportion of men, on the
other hand, had lost a leg. But as a
man with but one leg is incomparably
easier to re-educate physically than
a man with one arm, this visit to Saint
Maurice, though interesting in many
respects, did not throw much light upon
the most difficult side of the problem
of re-education of the soldier.
At this Institution, as everywhere,
the difficulty of the man who does not
wish to be trained, came up for discus-
sion. I asked the Director if many
men chose to go home, untrained, to
live largely on charity. “Many,” was
all his answer. “But,” he added, “it
is a good sign that we receive here
regularly men who were discharged a
long time ago, and who now reaiise the
need of training.” One provincial mayor
had sent twelve men to Saint Maurice


on the day of my visit. On the previous
day a man discharged from the army
nearly two years ago had presented
himself. All such comers are warmly
welcomed and serve as warnings and
examples to the men in residence.
Attached to this Institution is a
“Hotel-Annexe.” situated at 4, Rue
Rondelet, Paris, where the men in
training in Paris are boarded and
lodged. Some of these, as has been
said above, are mechanics undergoing
a final stage of practical training, and
100 men being trained in cabinet-mak-
ing. book-binding, furriery, photographic
work. &c. This has been made possible
by the munificence of a well-known
lady.
The average number of men under
training at one time, both at Saint
Maurice and in Paris, is between 250
and 300. The State gives a subsidy
of 5 francs per man per day. That is,
the total cost to the State for the
Institution and the Hotel-Annexe is
from 1,250 to 1,500 francs per day, say
£IB,OOO a year; to which must be added
the private subsidy above-mentioned.
This includes all expenses of whatever
nature.
The Re-education School at the Grand
Palais.
One of the most interesting, because
most scientifically directed, re-educa-
tion schools in France is that estab-
lished in a part of the Grand Palais,
in the Champs-Elys6es, in Paris. It
is supported by the “Union des Colonies
Etrangeres en France en faveur des
Victimes de la Guerre,” a benevolent
society composed of the leading mem-
bers of the foreign neutral communities
in France, which collects its funds by
means of committees in all the principal
neutral cities of Europe and America.
The president is Mr. J. B. Shouiger,
president of the American Chamber of
Commerce in Paris. Mr. E. Stotesbury,
of Philadelphia, is making by instal-
ments the munificent donation of
80,000 dollars. The total income of the
Union to date has been 716,013 francs,
mf which it has expended 193,317 francs.
The Union is under the patronage of
the President of the French Republic.
The head of this school is Dr. Charles
Vallce. an army doctor and eminent
specialist, who was himself wounded at
the front. He is the author of an in-
structive work upon “The Measurement
of Physical Inelticiency by the Ergo-
graphic Method.”
The men in training in the school are,
with feAv exceptions, those undergoing
treatment in the Centre of Physio-
therapy in the other part of the Grand
Palais." They are not discharged men,
but are still in the army, and therefore
subject to discipline. Some of them
are taken back for the auxiliary army
services, but most are finally discharged
when their medical treatment and
school training are completed.
Almost all trades and employments
are taught: book-keeping, draughts-
manship. type-writing, shorthand, Eng-
lish, harness-making, shoemaking, hair-
dressing. carpentry, cabinetmaking, tin-
smiths ’work, mechanics, tailoring, soap-
making, &c. Each workshop is under
the charge of a “foreman” or “pro-
fessor,” who was at first himself a
maimed man, but now, since the mili-
tary authorities took too many of these
best men back into the auxiliary ser-
vices. is a civilian expert paid a regular
salary. The men work (including their
medical treatment) seven hours a day,
and they are paid a penny an hour,
rising to 2d. as they advance in skill.
They do work foi the army or public,
or the product of their labour is sold
commercially.
The soap-making was novel and in-
teresting The raw material, coconut
oil, salicylate of soda, &c., is received
in tubs, Is mixed, boiled, moulded, and
stamped into cakes. During one month
over £6O worth of cakes of soap was
sold, and the demand is greater than
the supply. (This is doubtless due
partly to the excellent quality, but per-
haps chiefly to the war shortage of com-
mercial supplies.)
An obvious question was whether this
would afford a living for the men after
the war—whether they would not be
crushed out by competition of the great
soap-making firms. Dr. Vall6e declared
that it would be a valuable and re-
munerative local industry, which could
be carried on by one or two shops in
provincial towns, who would secure
regular local custom because of the
knowledge that the soap produced was
of absolutely honest quality. Very little
capital is required for it. and small
profits would be sufficient to make it
well worth while as a subsidiary family
industry. The men engaged in it were
crippled in arms or legs. Three or four
months’ training is sufficient.
The hairdressing shop was a great
success. Men who have been discharged
from the army, after two months’ train


ing, were earning as much as 15 francs
in a day at the week-end. One man’s
father said his son had learned the job
better here in two months that he him-
self in two years’ apprenticeship. A
young soldier was shaving expertly
after a fortnight’s training. Wig-mak-
ing is a part of the instruction. This
shop is very popular, and a number of
the men had expressed their intention
of settling in England after the war.
A few of them had partially disabled
hands, but most had stiff legs, or were
wearing peg-legs.
Of the harness-makers, several had
been agriculturists, one a hospital at-
tendant, and one a miller before the
war.
Photographic retouching had a num-
ber of students, the most successful
having been a butcher. A man who had
been through the tailoring shop was
also taking this course, which includes
instruction in drawing, in order that he
might be able to draw designs for
ladies’ dresses.
The book-keeping and clerking waj
most carefully and technically taught,
and here many of the men were one-
armed, or had lost the use of one hand.
The progress made was remarkable, and
among those I saw were men whose
job had previously been locksmith, car-
penter, plumber, horticulturist, and
waiter.
The shops are large, airy, and well
lighted, and the whole atmosphere is
that of keen work and cheerfulness, due
alike to the care with which each case
has been studied and the interest taken
by the instructors in their pupils’ work.
Dr. Vallee states his fundamental aim
to be to give the maimed man a
genuine professional value, enabling
him to resume his place in social life
and to gain honourably his livelihood.
To this end, the first question he puts
to himself with regard to each man is,
can he be fitted to return to his previous
employment? If so, every effort Is
made to enable him to do so, and he
Is re-educated in the appropriate work-
shop. If this is impossible—as when,
for instance, a man who has been a
carpenter can no longer climb a ladder,
then he is trained in the job most nearly
resembling his old one, to make use of
as much as possible of his previous
professional knowledge. Thus a dis-
abled ear pen ter should become some
kind of a wood-worker, or a disabled
plumber a tinsmith. The choice of a
trade should depend upon a man’s pre-
vious knowledge, combined with his
actual physical aptitude.
In reply to the question whether it
was really the case that men did not
use the “dress arm” or “dress leg” pro-
vided for them, Dr. Valine said this was
undoubtedly often the case. There are
several reasons for this. First, the
elaborate artificial limb is heavy and
tiring. Second, a man does not actually
need the arm, a-nd he walks much better
with a peg-leg. Third, the reason illus-
trated in the following story:—A young
man who had been a commercial travel-
ler in wine had lost an entire arm and
been fitted with a fine artificial “dress
arm.” He-called at the school recently.
“Where is your arm?” asked Dr. Vall&e.
“Oh, I don't often wear it.” “But if
you don’t everybody sees at once that
you are a mutilated man.” “It is all
the better for me that they should see
I have been mutilated in the war.” Not
only is this advantage often present in
the man’s business, but in the streets,
tramcars, or trains, a man receives
greater consideration when it is evi-
dent that he has suffered the loss of a
limb in his country’s service.
The Re-education School at the
“Maison Blanche.”
A second school established and sup-
ported by the admirable efforts of the
“Union ties Colonies Etrang£res” is at-
tached to the great military hospital,
formerly a large civil convalescent home
and hospital, known as the “Maison
Blanche,” at Neuilly-sur-Marne, about
eight miles from Paris. This was taken
over on July 15th, 191 G, and opened on
July 24th, and is under the charge of
Dr. Kresser, an army surgeon who has
seen much active service and been
wounded.
At this hospital only men who have
suffered amputation are received. While
undergoing treatment and, therefore,
not yet discharged from the army, they
may, if they choose, receive instruction
in the re-education school. The average
number in the hospital is about 700,
and of these about 270 avail themselves
of the privilege. The others—two-
thirds of (he whole number —lead a life
of idleness or worse, being allowed out
of hospital every day after 11 a.m. to
do as they like. “You cannot,” it is
said, “compel a man against his will to
learn a trade.” And those in the school
can. of course, leave it at any moment,
although the obvious seriousness and
keenness of the men there did not sug


gest that many who had been wise
enough to enter would he so foolish
as to leave. But, unlike the Institute
of Saint Maurice, their training comes
necessarily to an end when their hos-
pital treatment is finished. The average
length of stay is from two to three
mouths.
The hours of work are six and a half
per day. Each soldier receives his army
pay of 24d. a day, and the school adds
one franc a day. Any man who allows
the whole or part of lids daily franc to
remain on deposit till lie leaves receives
in addition a present of 25 per cent, of
the sum deposited. As soon as this sum
amounts to 19 francs, it is, at the man’s
request, invested in a 20-franc bond of
the French loan, bearing interest of
one franc a year. A man with a de-
pendent family is helped financially by
tlie Union, so that he may not be worse
off at the end of his term than ids com-
rades who had nobody dependent upon
them. About half the students thus
leave their earnings on deposit.
The installation of the school cost
39.000 francs, and the equipment 15,000
francs. This year's budget, for an
average of 300 students, and including
the cost of an agricultural annex, under
construction, and 50 acres of land,
allows for a' total expenditure of
300.000 francs, say £12,000.
A fortnight ago an Employment Bur-
eau was established, under two
wounded officers, winch corresponds
with employers of labour in the districts
to which the men belong. Already
places have been found for twenty men,
for one of them, with an amputated
arm, as night-watchman at a factory at
wages of 225 francs a month.
During the three months not one man
has been guilty of intemperance or given
trouble in any way whatever.
Men were receiving elementary in-
struction (it has been a surprise to me
to learn how many illiterates there are
in France) and learning all the usual
trades. Several officers with crippled
or amputated arms were in the book-
keeping class. The basket-workers, all
with one or two amputated legs, were
doing specially good work, and this, it
was said, would enable them to earn a
good living in fruit-gi‘owing or wine-
producing districts. The leather-
workers, as they cannot hold the usual
wooden vyce tight between their knees,
were provided with a prolonged vyce,
on one side of which was a support in
which the stump lies. The shoemakers
had a sort of right-angled wooden leg-
rest, one end of which rested on the
floor while they sat upon the other end.
Thus the stump-leg was comfortably
supported horizontally in the usual
shoemaker’s position. Men with only
one hand, and this often not a good
one, were learning french polishing, and
turning out quite good commercial
work. This I saw nowhere else. Some
who had been thus trained had secured
jobs paying them 8 to 10 francs a day.
Excellent decorative wood-carving was
being done by men with amputated legs,
one of them having been a vineyard lab-
ourer, another a stonemason. There
is also a class for wood-turning, the
best workman being a man whose arm
was amputated below the elbow, but
who finds no difficulty in holding down
(he chisel with ids stump. Fitters’
work, of really high class, was being
done, the best by a man who had been
an agricultural labourer.
Dr. Kresser, as has been said, has
purchased 50 acres of land, and within
a couple of months hopes to have an
agricultural school, where he will have
sheep and sheep dogs to train shepherds,
and will teach all farmyard work, bee-
keeping, the use of motor tractors, &c.
Ilfs view is that it is necessary to
have many different occupations to at-
tract men of all tastes. Thus, besides
french polishing, wood-turning, shep-
herds’ work, all of which are original
to him, he proposes to teach autogenous
oxy-acetylene welding, as soon as he
can convince the military authorities
that there is no danger in it.
But he is strongly of opinion that
professional re-education should be
made obligatory. In support, he points
to the two men out of three in the
hospital who do not come to his school,
in spite of all that is done to make It
attractive, and to the inevitable effect
of the months of aimless, unoccupied
hospital life, during which the men
smoke and drink and do little else. He
hopes that this war experience will
result in the establishment of what
France needs, and does not possess—a
sufficient number of permanent tech-
nical training schools.
The “Ecole Joffre" and the “Ecole de
Tourvielle ” at Lyons.
The first School of lie-education in
France was the “Ecole Joffre,” opened
in Lyons, under the authority of the
Municipal Council, on December 16th,
1914, and this is to-day in many respects


the most interesting and important.
The creation of this pioneer school, its
methods, and its continued and in-
creasing success, have been due to the
foresight and the great energy and
organising ability of M. Edouard Her-
riot, Senateur du Rhone and Mayor of
Lyons, to whom the many other war
institutions which have given Lyons
the place of honour among French cities
are also chiefly due.
M. Herrlot approached the subject
upon original lines. He swept aside,
with much frankness of speech and
independence of action, the elaboration
and prolonged preliminary considera-
tion of French traditional official pro-
cedure and the red tape common to the
bureaucracies of all nations. He formed
a small Committee, with whom he
studied the whole question of the future
of the disabled soldier, reached de-
cisions upon the many problems this
presented, and carried these out prac-
tically with the greatest promptitude
and energy. The result is that the re-
education schools of Lyons have been a
striking success, and that they differ
in important respects from the others
which have subsequently been founded
in many parts of France,
The city of Lyons provided the first
building, an historic house formerly the
seat of a religious order, at 41, Rue
Rachais, and the General Council of the
Department of the Rhone voted a sum
of £1,200, on condition that special
facilities were provided for the disabled
of the Department. Large sums have
been received from fetes, concerts, and
theatrical performances, and from pri-
vate gifts. M. Justin Godart, Under-
secretary of State for War for the Ser-
vice of Health, has from the beginning
given the utmost official support to the
schools, which are under the Ministry
of War. Indeed, the official title of the
Lyons Schools is “Auxiliary Hospital
No. 202 bis,” and it receives the highest
State subsidy of any such institution,
namely, 3f»o francs per man per day,
the actual cost being 5 francs. Thus,
upon one of the most difficult questions
connected with the re-education of the
disabled, M. Herriot and his colleagues
came to the conclusion that it is essen-
tial to successful training that disabled
men should be under strict military
discipline during the whole of their
training. The military rules applicable
to army hospitals have been modified
in a few respects to meet the special
conditions of these schools, but other-
wise the inmates are under ordinary
army discipline, and all action in re-
gard to them is taken in the name and
by the authority of the military officer
commanding the Lyons district.
This is undoubtedly one of the two
chief reasons of the success of these
schools. The other is the strictness
with which admission to the schools is
granted. The first condition of admis-
sion is that those only are admitted
who are completely and definitely cured
—that is, who are proposed for Dis-
charge No. 1, and are, in French mili-
tary language, granted unlimited leave
while awaiting their final pension. In
the case of the amputated, a most care-
ful surgical examination is made, to
make sure that the wound is perfectly
healed and that the stump will require
no further treatment; in a word, that
there is no risk of the pupil having to
leave the school even temporarily for
any medical or surgical cause. Inten-
tionally, a large proportion of the dis-
abled in these schools have been selec-
ted from among the amputated. Those
disabled, not amputated, are examined
by two medical Boards, to assure the
certainty (o) that the disabled man
cannot by treatment be restored to the
army, and ( h ) that he is otherwise in
a fit state of health to bear the strain
and do the work of the school. After
this, the Medical Officer of the school
closely questions the applicant, to make
sure that he does not come within one
of the three strictly excluded categories ;
syphilis, alcoholism, turberculosis.
Heart, kidneys, lungs, nervous system,
urine (albuminuria is a ground of ex-
clusion) are carefully tested. And the
physical examination is followed by an
equally strict moral examination.
Some applicants are found to be look-
ing only for a comfortable place, with
good food and frequent leave; others
simply want a State tobacco shop or
any job as “functionary”; some apply
because they have lost two fingers or
have a shortened femur; some are
merely feckless and would never repay,
so to speak, careful professional train-
ing. All these are rejected. This moral
examination has for its object the dis-
covery of disabled men really anxious
to learn and to work, keen to become
good workmen and self-supporting citi-
zens. Too much time and trouble, says
Dr. Carle, the first Medical Officer of
the school, cannot he given to this task,
for upon it depends the future success
of the training.


The Lyons re-education schools thus
begin their work with a conspicuous
initial advantage, namely, that their
inmates have been selected with the
utmost cax - e, indeed with severity, as
most likely to profit from the training
provided. To this must be added a
highly competent staff of “professors.”
chosen with equal solicitude for their
technical knowledge and for their qual-
ities of tact and sympathy, a very strict
but kindly discipline, and a long period
of training, in some classes for as much
as fifteen months. The result is that
the schools turn out men genuinely
educated for the work they are to do,
and finding immediately in most cases
well-paid jobs. “I have seen,” says Dr.
Carle, “real resurrections, transforma-
tions justifying belief in brilliant and
unhoped-for futures.”
It might be thought that the severity
of the conditions of admission, the
strictness of the discipline, and the long
duration of the training would turn dis-
abled men away from Lyons and cause
them to seek easier surroundings else-
where. This may be so. but it is a
striking testimony to the wisdom of
M. Herriot that the applicants far out-
number the places available. Book-
keeping, for example, is taught with
extreme thoroughness, and no more
students can be admitted till September.
1917. The “Ecole Joffre” trains a
hundred men in all, and in a few
months this was over-full, and a second
school was opened at Tourvielle, on the
outskirts of Lyons. Here a pleasant
rural estate of about 17 acres enables
horticulture to be efficiently taught, and
the workshops are in separate huts,
with admirable conditions of space,
light, &e. As this school profited by
the experience gained in the Hue
Rachais, and was built for its purpose,
it represents a later and more scientific
development than the original school.
A few statistics of this Tourvielle
school may be instructive. In all 310
men have passed through or are still
there; of these, 28 men abandoned their
training for various reasons, such as
return to their old occupations, failure
of health, family reasons, employment
in munition works, &c., and notwith-
standing the care taken in selecting
applicants, no fewer than 22 have been
expelled for intemperance or bad con-
duct; 75 have been placed in employ-
ment, of whom 35 were shoemakers, 20
wireless telegraphists (all of whom se-
cured Stale positions) and electricians,
10 horticulturists, and 0 cabinetmakers;
of 185 undergoing training on Decem-
ber Ist, 191 G, 4G are shoemakers, 13
“galochiers” (makers of leather shoes
with wooden soles, the equivalent of
our Lancashire clogs), 27 tailors, 17
horticulturists, 12 cabinetmakers, 32
wireless telegraphists. 2G makers of
artificial limbs, and 12 furriers.
After what has been said it is un-
necessary to describe the workshops in
detail. Basket-making, clock-making,
photography, harness-making, and pol-
ishing precious stones are not taught.
Book-keeping is the speciality of the
schools, and the making of artificial
limbs, furriery, and wireless telegraphy
are peculiar to them.
One other occupation has been spec-
ially developed. In 1012 the German
toy makers sent into France goods
upon which they paid import duty of
no less than 13,500,000 francs. From
the beginning it was M. Herrlot’s am-
bition to wrest this trade from Ger-
many, and to make Lyons the seat of
the toy-making industry of France.
Therefore a complete series of work-
shops have been arranged and a large
number of men have been trained for
this work, and have been retained In
it as paid workmen after training. It
will be of the greatest interest to ob-
serve hereafter whether this patriotic
technical development results in a per-
manently established commercial suc-
cess. At present cheap and compara-
tively simple wooden toys are produced
in large quantities and appear to find
a ready sale. A more expensive and
elaborate class of toys would be re-
quired for our own market.
A few other points may be noted
about these schools. All the men under
training live in. This was regarded
from the beginning as a necessary con-
dition of discipline and therefore of
success. As the men are still in a mili-
tary hospital, they do not receive the
1-70 francs which they would otherwise
receive from the State before the alloca-
tion of their permanent pension, but in
its place the school authorities give
them 1 25 francs a day as an act of
grace, so long as the finances of the
institution allow it. It has been found,
as elsewhere, necessary to keep always
before the men the ofiMal statement
of the Ministry of War that “the learn-
ing of a trade cannot affect in any way
whatever the prerogatives and advan-
tages of the pension to which they are
entitled.” Any money earned by work


is divided among all the men of a trade
section as soon as they have reached the
stage of production, each section having
its separate cash account. Those who
have been longest in the school, and are
therefore most efficient, take two-thirds,
and the others the remaining third.
The desire of the latter class to secure
admission to the former class provides
a useful stimulus. Further, as the
largest possible output is thus to the
advantage of all, every man is naturally
a supervisor of the industry of the rest,
which relieves the authorities of much
supervision. A plain brown school uni-
form of tunic and trousers is worn by
all the inmates. On completion of any
course a man receives a diploma,
issued under authority of the city of
Lyons, signed by his “professor,” the
Director of the school, and by M. Har-
riot as Mayor. It is intended that this
diploma shall always be a guarantee
of genuine professional ability in the
work specified on it.
Upon the question of the employment
of trained men, Dr. Carle has written
as follows :—“Our disabled men will not
lack employment —that is certain. It is
only necessary to avoid for them alike
excessive wages, which are disguised
almsgiving, and too poor a remunera-
tion. The former is never permanent,
and the latter is exploitation. Those
who direct the movement should be
alive to this double danger.”
With regard to the vexed question of
the value of artificial limbs, the Lyons
schools are fortunate in having an ex-
pert orthopaedist, Dr. Nove-Jusserand,
upon their staff, and many of the im-
provements in prothesis adopted by the
Orthopaedic Commission of the Ministry
of War agp said to be due to him.
Among the men themselves, in both the
Lyons schools, we found the same
diversity of view as elsewhere. Some
men used their elaborate artificial arms
and legs all the time, and were per-
fectly satisfied with them. Others re-
garded the arms as useless and pre-
ferred the old-fashioned i>eg-leg. All
they desired was that this latter should
be articulated, so that when they sit
down it is out of the way of other
people. I’ossihly the personal factor
will always he decisive in this matter.
Dr. Carle himself has written as fol-
lows: —“When I make an unexpected
visit to the workshop of the bookbinders
or the cardboard-box makers I am much
annoyed to find that they have deli-
cately placed their artificial arms upon
the table, and are working busily with
their sound arm and their stump or
elbow.”
The Director of the “Ecole Joffre”
is M. Baseque, and of the school at
Tourvielle M. Hirschfeld. The latter
school owes much to the devoted work
and influence of a woman, Madame
Madeleine Monod. To all three I have
to express my thanks for a most kind
reception.
AGRICULTURAL TRAINING IN FRANCE.
Disabled Men and Agriculture.
The problem of the maimed agricul-
turist is a peculiarly difficult one In
France. The great numbers employed
in munition works are all town-dwellers.
The result is that of every 100 maimed
soldiers, 00 are agriculturists. (Of 30
men in one shoemaking shop, 15 were
agriculturists; of 5 maimed arriving
on the day of my visit, 3 were from
the land.) And a large proportion of
these GO desire to secure urban jobs.
The grounds of their wish are chiefly
two. First, without a hand or without
a leg, they think they cannot dig, and
they have not imagined work on the
land which does not involve digging.
Second, the city attracts them by its
opportunities of all kinds, good and bad,
its companionship, and its cinemas.
(These last are often given as a rea-
son.)
It is of the utmost importance that
as many as possible of these men should
be induced to return to the land. The
reason of this urgency springs from the
cautious, even suspicious, foresight
characteristic of the French peasant,
lie has clearly perceived that the
trenches have been chiefly manned by
agriculturists —that it is chiefly they
who have suffered hardship, exile from
home, wounds, mutilation, and death,
while the townsman has largely worked
in safety at munition making, receiving
the while high wages. If there is an-
other war in his lifetime, he wishes to
be one of the latter. If not, he wishes
his son to have this better part. As a
result, there is likely to be a great and
dangerous shortage of labour on the
land in France after the war.
Some re-education schools follow the
line of least resistance, and train their
men for urban jobs whenever they ex-
press the wish. Others will not do so
if they can possibly avoid it. When
a man says to the Director, “I cannot
go hack to the land because I cannot
dig”; he replies, “It is true you cannot


dig, hut that is no reason why you
should not go back to the land. You can
learn other agricultural operations—
poultry-keeping, bee-keeping, horticul-
ture, cheese-making, butter-making,
shepherding, market-gardening. There
is a good living for you in these things.”
And in many cases he saves the man
for the land.
Special and most valuable efforts are
being made to induce men to become
proficient motor mechanics for agricul-
tural tractors and motor implements, as
these are expected to be largely and
often co-operatively employed. The
sale of American “ Emerson ” and
"Mogul” agricultural motors is being
energetically pushed in France, and the
agents of these in Paris receive men
from the schools for a period of addi-
tional training. They are glad, in the
first place, to have the men’s work, as
the men have been carefully trained in
motor repairs, and to pay well for it
(often from S to 12 francs a day at pre-
sent) ; and in the second place, they
wisely realise that this knowledge of
their own machines will be of commer-
cial value to them as dealers, when the
men return to country districts.
The State School at Ondes.
As a typical State school I may take
that at Glides (Haute-Garonne); This
has 90 beds, the course of instruction
lasts three months, and 300 men per
year receive an agricultural training.
A hospital and small equipment of phy-
siotherapy are attached. The agricul-
tural and allied subjects taught are
farmwork, vineyard and nursery gar-
dening, horticulture, blacksmithing, car-
pentry, and basket-work. Both written
and oral examinations are held and a
diploma is given. Of 0G disabled men,
39 presented themselves for examina-
tion, and 37 obtained the diploma. The
examiners expressed their satisfaction,
indeed their astonishment, at the scope
and accuracy of the knowledge acquired.
An Employment Bureau has been estab-
lished, and not only have all the re-
educated men who desired it been
placed in situations, but there are many
more places offered than men to fill
them. But the Director’s report to the
Ministry of War contains the following
strong passage to the same effect as
opinions I have already quoted from
other schools; —“It appears to us in-
dispensable that the disabled man
should be re-educated while he is still a
soldier —that is, while still subject to
military discipline. Once become a
civilian, the disabled man, almost in
spite of himself, has but one wish: to
return home, even if he vegetates
there.”
The Treatment and Training at
Jurisy.
At Juvisy, a small town on the Seine,
about 20 miles from Paris, a military
hospital was established under one of
the societies belonging to the French
Bed Cross, in the building of the “Ecole
Secondaire Saint Charles,” and when
it was found undesirable for obvious
reasons to have a large aggregation of
disabled men in Paris, at-the Grand
Palais, this locality was chosen, in June,
1016, for (he combined treatment and
training of men for agricultural life.
At the time of our visit 520 men were
on the books, of whom 100 were away
on leave, but in a short time GOO will
be there, and for their accommodation
a number of brick huts, costing £5BO
apiece, have been built on land adjoin-
ing the hospital, each sleeping hut hold-
ing about 50 beds, and one being the
messroom. They will be under the com-
mand of four officers. The whole
organisation is under the Ministry of
War.
The object is to train men for agricul-
tural life at the same time that they
are being medically treated for their
disablement, the latter occupying at most
one hour a day of each man’s time.
The organisation therefore comprises
two distinct parts—the Centre of Phy-
siotherapy and the Agricultural Train-
ing School. .
1. The Centre of Physiotherapy. —The
whole of this is contained in a double
row of cubicles placed down the middle
of the central hall of the hospital, with
one room in the basement for medical
baths. The apparatus is of an admir-
ably simple and inexpensive character,
and consists entity of machines,
twelve in number, with pendulum move-
ments, on the Begonin system, manu-
factured by the firm of Borderel, of
Paris. The complete outfit only costs
£l4O, yet Dr. Camus, the medical head
of the great Centre of Physiotherapy at
the Grand Palais, who was good enough
to accompany us to Juvisy, said that it
comprised everything really necessary
for mechanotherapy. An economy was
effected by connecting the “whirlpool
baths” in the basement with the exist-
ing ] dumbing arrangements for the
school baths, but the actual sum spent


fot the complete equipment of the
Centre, including several whirlpool
baths, several heat-baths for arms and
legs, couches for massage, and an appar-
atus for electro-diagnosis, Avas- only
£4BO.
As thus showing lioav simple and
cheap a complete installation for physio-
therapy may be, based on French ex-
perience, a visit to this Centre at Juvisy
is highly instructive.
2. The Agricultural Training School.
■ —Much of the agricultural land near
Paris on the south and east is in the
hands of large OAvners, in contrast Avith
the proprietorship of small holdings
generally characteristic of France. It
is also very productive laud. Near
Juvisy is a farm of over 1.000 acres,
of Avhich the family of M. Petit have
been tenants for seven generations. Of
these, the Union of Foreign Colonies in
France, which 1 have previously de-
scribed, has taken 112 acres, Avith a
portion of the large but old-fashioned
farm buildings, on a three-years’ lease,
paying about £BOO a year rent (land
hereabout sells for about £9O an acre).
The leased buildings are to be divided
off from the main block, separate en-
trances constructed, some of the old
barns fronted to make coAv-houses,
stables, dairies, classrooms (including
an educationdl cinema), &c., piggeries,
foAvi houses and runs, and kennels con-
structed, a large garage and motor-shop
erected for the study of agricultural
tractors, fruit trees planted, and bee-
hives installed. In a Avord, everything
is to be provided for agricultural and
rural industries, even to the training of
keepers in the land and game laws, the
rearing of game, dog-breaking, &c.
The funds for this. Avhich must be
considerable, Avill be Avholly provided by
the Union of Foreign Colonies, which
will, moreover, pay the men in training.
The establishment is to be under the
direction of Professor Boittel, head of
the Institut Agrouome, and M. Jacquet,
“Chef de Culture” of the Avell-knoAvn
horticultural firm of Vilmorln, Avill be
manager.
Though this school is primarily de-
signed for men with all their limbs —of
course in a more or less disabled con-
dition — it is intended to add to these
a certain trial number of men Avith arti-
ficial limbs.
The tAvo outstanding facts about the
agricultural school of Juvisy are thus —
first, that it is as yet only an ambitious
scheme, and hoAv ambitious may be
judged from the hope exptessed that i(s ?
success may possibly justify the taking
over later of the Avhole of M. Petit's
thousand acres ; and, second, that it will
be a free gift to France from foreign
sympathisers.
It presents, therefore, at the present
time, little scope for comment. One
aspect of the plan, hoAvever, calls for
remark. The land acquired is about a
mile and a half from the Centre of
Physiotherapy and the barracks and
messrooms. Disabled men cannot Avell
be expected to Avalk six miles a day in
all Avcathers. in addition to a long day's
Avork on the land. Yet the transport of
some <iOU men backAvards and fonvards
tAvice a day Avill be a serious and costly
operation, to say nothing of the separate
transport of men at irregular hours for
their medical treatment. Moreover, the
care of farm stock requires the pre-
sence of some men at hours of the early
morning and evening incompatible Avith
regular meal-times at a distance. A
primary essential for an agricultural
training school for disabled men in our
oavii country Avould appear to be that the
men should be housed in the middle of
their work and treatment, but this has
evidently not been considered essential
at Juvisy. Further, since one of the
results aimed at, in England, at any
rate, should be the co-operative manage-
ment of small holdings, it would seem
desirable for the school to be established
in a district of small holdings, Avhere the
co-operative use of expensive motor cul-
tivating and harvesting implements
could be taught and exhibited in actual
practice.
To appreciate the results attained at
Juvisy, to which such generous funds
and so much expert thought are being
devoted, it A\ill be necessary to visit it
again in a feAV months’ time.
It should be borne in mind, hoAvever.
that the task envisaged at Juvisy is not
so much to train previous urban
dAvellers for the land, as to prevent pre-
vious agriculturists from adopting
urban life. Most of the men Avill be
peasant proprietors or the sons of pea-
sant proprietors. Such a man is apt to
say, “Look at my leg or my arm. lloav
can I possibly go back to Avork on the
land?” And he usually proposes to sell
his holding and establish himself in a
toAvn Avith his little capital, Avhich Avould
probably soon be exhausted. This
school is an effort to save such men for
country life; first, by restoring to them
as far as possible the use of their dis


abled limbs, and second, by teaching
them the modern principles and practice
of subsidiary rural industries by which
they can earn a good livelihood on the
land they already possess.
More developed experiments on these
lines are, as I have said, in existence,
under State control, in other parts of
rural France.
THE TRAINING OF FRENCH BLIND
SOLDIERS.
I. The “Maison de Convalescence" at
Reuilly.
The chief ophthalmic hospital of
France is the ancient foundation, estab-
lished in 12<30 by St. Louis, known as
the “Hospice National des Quinze-
Vingts’’ (the words meaning “fifteen
times twenty”) to house 300 blind poor.
The training school for the blind of
the war is an annexe of this, known
as the “Maisou de Convalescence” (to
avoid the painful associations of the
word "blind”), in the Hue de Keuilly,
opened on March 20th, 1015. It was
created by the Ministry of the Interior,
but is also partly dependent upon the
Ministry of War, since it receives un-
discharged soldiers. It receives from
the State 2-50 francs per man per day.
This, however,, is inadequate, and the
difference is made up by an allowance
from the budget of the hospital.
A further important contribution,
without which the benevolent activity
of the school would be greatly dimin-
ished, is made by a charitable society
known as “L’Oeuvre Les Amis des Sol-
dats Aveugles,” supported by contribu-
tions from French sympathisers in many
parts of the world. A gift of 100,0(H)
francs, for instance, has been received
from South America. This society pre-
sents an outfit of tools for his trade
to every man leaving, and gives him a
supply of raw material to start with,
until his handicraft begins to bring in
money, it also gives the man an outfit
of clothing, called his “trousseau.” It
presents liim with 500 francs on his
marriage—thirty men have married
from the school —and treats all his com-
rades to coffee and a cigar on his wed-
ding day. It also buys raw materials
in commercial quantities, and re-sells it
at cost price to (he men after they have
set up business for themselves. It has,
for example, just bought £12,000 worth
of fibre for household brushes. In a
word, the society adds a humanising
factor to the bare essentials provided
by the State. Doubtless the cheerful-
ness and briskness of the blind men
throughout the school was a reflection
of this wise and intelligent sympathy.
The school has 233 beds, and also re-
ceives a number of men who live in the
neighbourhood. Altogether it has had
about 500 men in training, and about
300 have left it with a handicraft by
which they can make a living. The
Director is Monsieur Emard.
The buildings are old, and some of the
workrooms dark and dingy, but no place
we have visited in the course of this
inquiry left a pleasanter impression of
serious, intelligent training, or happier
informal relationships.
The training seems long, but the ob-
ject is to turn out a man with a real
working capacity. The basket-makers
take a year. Ke-seatiug rush-bottomed
(hairs takes two or three months to
learn; re-seating cane-bottomed chairs
a year. It is not regarded as enough
that men should be able to do this
work; to earn a living at it they must
be able to do it quickly. Shoemakers
are trained for repair work, as making
now boots is considered more suitable
for men with sight. I saw rows of
boots which had been repaired, or soled
or heeled, for the outside public. The
fine fitting work in the mechanics' shop
was astonishing. This is a job with
which 1 am personally familiar, and I
can fully confirm the statement made to
me by the “professor,” who had been a
fitter all his life and blinded in the war,
that not 50 per cent, of men with sight
working as fitters could do some of the
precision jobs his scholars had done.
The brush-making workshop was turn-
ing out much work. Six to eight
months’ training is needed to make
rough household and stable brushes, but
one to two years to make fine brushes.
Tipis latter is not encouraged, though
one man was doing it skilfully, the
view being that a man will make a liv-
ing better by producing quickly the
kind of brush that wears out quickly.
There are also classes for typewriting,
piano-tuning, making upholstery fringes,
and net-making, though the two last-
named were regarded more as an occu-
pation than a handicraft. A class of
men was learning the harmonium, and
another receiving instruction in plain-
song —these two not having any con-
nection with the earning of a living,
but to give the men an agreeable and
cultivated interest in life.
Two classes specially interested me.
First, the cooperage, which I had heard


unfavourably criticised. We found it,
on the other hand, particularly good.
This training takes on an average about
ten months, although the best workman
of all, a Russian, a mason before the
war, had made his first cask in two
weeks. Over IGO large casks have been
sold to wine merchants from this work-
shop in less than a year, and certainly
at every stage the work seemed first-
rate. This workshop doubtless owes
much of its success to the fact that the
“professor” has been s blind cooper for
many years.
The other specially interesting class
was that of massage. Here men are
given daily instruction in anatomy, &c.,
and then very careful training and
supervision by an expert masseur. The
men take it in turn to massage and to
be massaged, and about 30 were hard
at work, and their massage was delicate
and scientific, equal to that for which
Swedish masseurs receive high fees in
London. In sixteen months thirty-two
trained masseurs have been turned out,
three having gone to Vichy, two to
Evian, and others to hospitals. A good
man is easily able to earn 10 francs a
day. Pupils are taken on probation
for a short time, and if they are found
not to possess the requisite manual deli-
cacy, are taught some other job.
An attractive part of the establish-
ment was the fencing-school, for which
a famous maitre d'anncs, Monsieur
Georges Dubois, gives his services. A
blind man can find great pleasure in
fencing, and in exceptional cases he is
able to meet the fencer with sight on
equal terms. This again is, of course,
only to give an interest in life to the
men who have been deprived of so
many.
The Director is planning a number
of new activities. He proposes to set
up, at a cost of £2OO, a workshop to
teach men to grind and polish cast glass
bottle-stoppers. The Glass-workers'
Trade Union has promised to supply
stoppers to be ground, in cases of 10.0(X).
to men when trained, and the society
above-mentioned will equip each man
with a wheel and a j-h.p. motor. A
man will thus he able to earn 7 to 8
francs a day. The polishing of litho-
graphic stones is also in view. Further,
it is proposed to teach elementary wire-
less telegraphy, not for ordinary com-
mercial work, since for this a man must
be able to read written messages, but to
enable men to go as wireless operators
on steam fishing vessels. It was found
that the German vessels of this kind
made much better catches than the
French, as when one boat found the
school of fish it called the others by
wireless telegraphy. A man could —
and I myself suggested this a year ago
—easily manage the very simple appar-
atus necessary. He would have to be
told what messages to send, but he could
write down the messages received.
In this connection, it may be added
that the officials of this School have
invented the best and simplest appliance
I have yet seen for enabling a blind man
to write. It is a board with shallow
grooves where the lines of writing go,
and with projecting brass points on the
left of each line to enable a man to
start the line correctly. As soon as this
had been explained, it was easy to turn
one’s head away and write legibly at
almost ordinary speed.
A printing office for books in Braille
is under the charge of Corporal Guy
Robert dn Costal, after a period of ser-
vice at the front. I do not know
whether the system in use here, in-
vented by M. Ernest Vaughan, is gen-
erally known. If not, it deserves the
careful attention of all who care for the
blind. To set type for Braille printing
requires, as it is usually done, a know-
ledge of the Braille alphabet. Here
several lady volunteers who did not
know one Braille letter from another
were busily setting type. The Ingenious
hut very simple device is, that each
type letter has Braille at one end and
the ordinary letter at the other. So the
setter has only to place the letters in
the box constituting the “forme,” ordi-
nary type upwards, but spelling the
words backwards and beginning from
the right. Then when the box is full,
a lid is put over this side, the box
turned upside down and a lid taken off
the other side, when the page is in
Braille, in proper sequence. Four pages
are printed at once under a rubber
cylinder on a hand-press. A smaller
press, called the “drawing-room press,”
can be bought for £4O, and with this and
a fount of double-ended type, anybody
can set up and print perfect Braillie
books at home. As an example of the
thoughtfulness pervading this school, I
may mention that the official com-
umniqud is struck off in Braille twice a
day, and circulated among the men.
I asked one of the officials if the
blind could really be expected to do
good work—that is, good enough to be
sold without the suggestion of a eharit


able appeal to the purchaser. “Too
good,” he replied; “their tendency is
to make their work too punctiliously
good.” But obviously they must neces-
sarily be at a great disadvantage, in
comparison with the man who can see.
This means merely that they cannot
earn so much money. That is why the
State gives them a pension. The pen-
sion is tlie fulfilment of the duty of the
State to put the men who have been
blinded in its service on an equality, so
far ns possible, with men who have not
made this sacrifice.
II. The “Phare de France.”
French blind officers and men are also
treated by an American benevolent in-
stitution known as “Le Phare (Light-
house) de France,” in the Rue Daru,
Paris. This was founded and is directed
by Miss Winifred Holt, an Aiherican
lady who has devoted herself for many
years to the care of the blind in the
United States, where similar “light-
houses” have trained 8,000 cases. The
funds are raised by an Influential com-
mittee in America, and this Paris “light-
house” was established in a large and
pleasant house in the fashionablequarter
of Paris. The esteem in which Miss Holt
and her work are held is shown by a
recent official visit of the President of
the Republic, and the fact that she is
allowed to take for training any blind
soldier she may find in a hospital. The
“Phare de France” was opened on
August 18th, 1010, so that there has not
yet been time for complete training.
Officers and men are alike admitted,
forty-three in residenceand about twenty
living outside. Intelligence and indus-
try, beside total blindness, are the only
qualifications for admission.
The subjects taught range over a wide
field, and include more of what may be
called the humanities than is usually
found in such Institutions —artistic pot-
tery-work, for example, which is sten-
cilled by the blind, mathematics, music,
foreign languages, weaving on elaborate
looms, &e.
The “Phare” leaves the impression of
a happy house-party or a social centre
rather than of an institution. The
pupils clearly regard the place as a
home, and blind officers and their
friends came into tea almost as in a
club, sure of a hearty welcome and a
pleasant hour of conversation and music
and laughter. This atmosphere is due.
first, (o Miss Holt’s long experience
with the blind, and, second, to her own
sunny and energetic temperament, which
diffuses cheerfulness and vivacity wher-
ever she passes.
This home for the blind has the ad-
vantage of long experience in America
behind it, and therefore possesses a
number of machines and appliances
which have been developed there. For
instance, a knitting machine, upon
which a man can make a full-sized and
perfect sweater in an hour (a knitting
machine procured from England had
been scrapped as useless for the blind) ;
ingenious games of draughts and a new
admirable kind of dominoes for the
blind; Braille printing typewriters; and
weaving looms, on which excellent car-
pets and rugs are being made. But
these last appeared to me rather too
complicated and elaborate to be really
practical, though possibly an exceptional
man, with occasional assistance from a
seeing j>erson. might make a living from
one if the original cost of the loom were
defrayed.
One custom in vogue here which ap-
peared excellent we had not seen else-
where. namely, that every man, when
moving about, carried a very light
supple cane, which he continuously
waved before him. and thus felt his
way about as an insect with its
“feelers.” The canes are so light that
they cannot injure any object or any
other person, and men with them moved
about the house, and up and down the
stairs, almost as quickly as seeing
people. By their use, too, men went at
good speed round the roller-skating rink,
avoiding with ease ail obstacles.
Usually, in walking about an institution
for the blind, one has to keep carefully
out of the way of more slowly moving
blind persons. Here the blind soldier,
touching you with his cane at arm's
length, keeps out of your way almost as
readily as you would keep out of his
way.
A Braille printing office and editorial
room were in course of formation, where
books for the blind, of which the de-
mand still greatly exceeds the supply,
will be produced on a considerable scale.
It is hoped to establish similar “light-
houses” in other parts of France.
Miss Holt's admirable and devoted
work seems to supply a need, hitherto
unmet in France, whereby officers and
those blind who require it. may adapt
themselves to an occupied but more or
less leisured life, rather than to the
training of those who’will have to re


turn to a working-man’s environment
and earn their livelihood at a trade.
Conclusions hearing upon the Problem
of the Blind Soldier in England.
The training of the blind French sol-
dier at the “Maisou de Convalescence”
suggests several considerations bearing
upon our own treatment of this pro-
blem.
First, the industrial training of the
blind should be genuine professional
training, not the well-meant efforts of
untrained persons. A man should be
taught by a professional, the work he
does should be work having a definite
industrial and commercial value, and
his training should not be regarded as
complete until it has been a thorough
apprenticeship, rendering him capable
of doing industrial work with accuracy
and at fair speed.
In this connection it may be said that
the best teacher will probably be found
to be a man who was an expert at
job. and has himself become blind.
It is admitted, of course, that a blind
man must have distractions, but it
should be kept in view that such occu-
pations as the making of trifling play-
things, string-bags, mats, little baskets,
ajid such like, are but distractions, or
temporary means of training the mind
and the fingers, and implanting the
seeds of hope and courage. Indeed, as
distractions, the playing of draughts or
dominoes, or the use of a musical in-
strument, are probably better. No
handicraft should be permanently
taught, the product of which requires
an appeal to charitable sentiment for its
disposal.
' Second, besides the teaching of what
may be called the coarser kinds of work,
advantage should be taken, in case of
suitable men, of the qualities.in which
the blind man excels the seeing man, to
train the former to do work on a higher
intellectual level. The blind man’s
superiorities lie (1) in the exquisite
development of the sense of touch; (2)
his infinite patience; and (3) the pride
he takes in the excellence of his work-
manship. Clearly, therefore, precision
work involving repetition is peculiarly
suitable to the blind. In the fitters’
shop at the “Maison de Convalescence”
a man was at work fitting together the
flanges of the hemispherical halves of
steam valves, having fifty or more of
these to do. Not only was he doing it
well —he was doing it perfectly. This
was an ordinary commercial job sent in
from outside, and the firm that sent it
could not possibly have accepted the
work unless it were done at least as
well as a titter with sight would do it.
Seeing a blind workman sharpening a
tool suggested to me that knife-grind-
ing. tool sharpening and setting, and
many kinds of polishing, would be ideal
jobs for a blind man. Indeed, ‘“repeti-
tion,” in the workshop sense of the
word, will be found to lie at the basis
of a blind man’s success. lie is unduly
handicapped in making a number of
different parts and assembling them,
whereas he is specially capable of deal-
ing with a large number of identical
parts requiring careful finishing.
Home work, in the sense of making
little complete articles for sale, unless
they require very few separate processes,
like brush-making, or unless the work
deals with objects brought in, like re-
pairing shoes, will not afford a blind
man the best outlet for his activity, but
there is a kind of home-work for which
he is peculiarly adapted, namely, the
receiving from firms large quantities of
objects which require finishing by
hand. No benevolence could be more
useful than that which would pro-
vide an efficient blind man with
the equipment required to do this
at home, often including a small
electric or gas motor to drive a polish-
ing or grinding wheel. He would thus
be able to live outside a town, and be
saved the difficulty and loss of time in-
volved in going to and from a work-
shop. Manufacturers in country dis-
tricts should be approached to discover
what work of this kind they could give
out, but always on the basis of a fair
commercial proposition, and not as an
act of semi-charity.
The teaching of scientific and skilful
massage should receive special attention
as a very useful and remunerative occu-
pation for the blind who have the re-
quisite personal qualities, and an Asso-
ciation of Blind Masseurs, with the ap-
proval and support of the medical pro-
fession, should be formed.
In conclusion, this French experience
shows that many a blind soldier, if
wisely and efficiently trained, may be
restored to a higher degree of industrial
efficiency, bringing with it greater earn-
ing power, than he possessed before his
loss of sight.
THE WORK IN PROTHESIS OF PROFESSOR
AMAR.
No account of the treatment of dis-
abled soldiers in France would be com


plete without a description of the
methods of scientific prothesis practised,
in Paris, by Professor Jules Amar,
I).Sc., author of “Le Moteur Humain,”
&c„ in his laboratory at the Conser-
vatoire National des Arts et Metiers.
(I do not know whether the word
“prothesis” is adopted in English. If
not, there would be advantage in adopt-
ing it. The word “prothese,” used in
France, is taken directly from the Greek
np6o«rn, meaning “an addition.” It
signifies the provision of an artificial
apparatus to perform, so far as possible,
the work of an amputated limb, or to
replace a lost function.)
Professor Amar had for years studied,
apart from his other professional duties,
the problems of the physiology of the
workman performing the work of his
trade. In 11)12 Mr. Taylor, the American,
whose investigations and experiments
in increasing scientifically the work-
man’s output are now well known, came
to France. It was then realised that
Professor Amar had been working on
the same lines for years, and therefore
the Minister of Labour immediately
gave him official recognition by creating
at the Conservatory of Arts and Trades
a Chair of the Physiology of Work, and
appointing him to till it. For two years
he taught the principles and applica-
tions of this to both students and em-
ployers of labour, and when the war
broke out he adapted his methods and
employed his laboratory in the service
of the disabled and mutilated. Up to
the present lie Informs me that he has
restored to work about 1,300 men, I pre-
sume in connection with the military
hospital at the Conservatory.
Professor Amar, with whom was his
Assistant Director, Dr. Bouras, was
good enough to explain his methods and
demonstrate his apparatus to me at
great length, and while I cannot at-
tempt here to present a complete ac-
count of these, which demand surgical
knowledge of a high order for their
full appreciation, or, indeeed, to state
which of them are new and original to
himself, enough may perhaps be said
to show the great importance of the
subject, and the necessity for the adop-
tion of a similar system in England.
The Amar system of prothesis com-
prises in every case three stages :
1. The investigation of physical
fatigue and mental aptitude—
that is, a scientific determination
of exactly what is physically left
to the man as the result of his
wound and amputation, and what
his uxmtal coefficient is.
2. Education of the amputated man’s
etump in sensitiveness.
3, Education of the complete limb,
consisting now of both stump and
artificial limb.
It is only when the man has passed
through these three stages that his
“‘professional re-education” —that is. his
training to perform his actual industrial
job—takes place.
For these three stages Professor
Amar lias designed or adapted a large
number of appliances of the greatest
ingenuity and accuracy. In almost all
of them a permanent record is made
by a point, actuated by pneumatic con-
nection with the limb or function
(heart, breathing, physical response to
mental stimulus, &c.) of the man under
investigation. This is accomplished by
causing a small air-piston to actuate a
light finger under which a lamp-blacked
cylinder revolves, while another finger
moved by clockwork marks a parallel
line at an exact speed, marking, for
Instance, fifths or hundredths of a
second. This mechanical graphic
method is, of course, well known, but
Professor Amar has invented a number
of new appliances in which it is used.
Without going into too great detail, I
may mention a few of these.
A fixed bicycle, called an “ergometric
(force-measuring) bicycle,” allows the
most precise determination, with a re-
cord of the change from day to day, of
(a) the man’s strength; (h) the fatigue
produced by a given amount of work;
(c) by measuring the time taken by a
man to secure coincidence between a
tick produced at each revolution of the
wheel and the heat of a metronome, a
man’s mental coefficient. So accurate
are these determinations that the line
showing “fatigue” responds almost
instantly to the stimulus of a drop of
coffee, and enables a man on the
bicycle, of whom nothing was pre-
viously known, to be told, “You are a
fitter or a mechanic,” or “ You are an
agricultural labourer.” The man him-
self, on being shown his record day by
day, appreciates his own improvement,
and becomes keenly interested in his
progress.
Another machine consists of a
warmed metal plate, through which a
small ivory point projects a fixed dis-
tance. At first a man passing his
stump over this plate cannot detect the
point projecting a centimetre; at last


he can feel the point projecting only
half a millimetre.
The man’s stump is further educated
by being strapped in a support and
caused to move backwards and for-
wards, registering the amount of the
movement each day. Again, weights in
a small scale-pan are attached to the
stump. At first a man cannot feel
when a weight of several hundred
grammes is placed in or taken from
the pan; at last he can detect the ad-
dition or subtraction of a few grammes
—a blind man grows so sensitive in his
stump that he can tell a weight lighter
or heavier by only a gramme. One
machine trains disabled fingers, which
begin by moving a weight of one
gramme and end by moving 1,500
grammes. Another, a “dynamographic”
rubber bulb, educates the hand in
grasping power. Another, the “dyna-
mographic platform,” reveals in parallel
lines on the cylinder six movements of
a man walking 3 metres; that is, back
thrust and right or left diversion of
each leg. This enables an Immediate
and unquestionable test to he made of
an artificial leg.
Another machine trains a man to use
a plane (without cutting-iron) with his
left hand. At first his pressure with
this varies every few inches —a bell
rings if this exceeds 10 kilogrammes,
and if he gets off the straight line by
several centimetres at each side —at
each of which mistakes a warning bell
rings. At last he can make 00 consecu-
tive strokes at normal speed with con-
stant proper pressure at both ends of
the plane, without touching the tell-tale
bars at a distance of 2 millimetres on
each side.
So with filing. On parallel lines on
the cylinder are recorded the pressure
on the work, the thrust and pressure of
the right hand and the thrust and
pressure of the left hand, one of the
arms being again, of course, an arti-
ficial one. Thus a man is trained in
accurate filing—always one of the most
difficult operations in a workshop, and
perhaps the best test of an accom-
plished fitter. Similarly, tests are
made with a hammer, to determine the
correct proportions of an artificial hand
or arm for efficient hammering without
jar. Incidentally, I may add, these
cylinder records infallibly betray ma-
lingering.
Thus an amputated man, or one with
a member functionally disabled, passes
through these three stages, until at the
end he is a totally different person as
regards his physical efficiency. First
comes the sensitiveness of the stump.
Originally >so insensitive that a man
cannot tell within several inches where
it is being touched, and, indeed, often
cannot feel a touch at all, the stump is
at last so sensitive that in one case a
man actually does basket work with
his two arm stumps. This, of course,
is but a curiosity; hut it is absolutely
necessary, for a man to use an artificial
arm efficiently, that he should be able
to exert varying pressure almost as
well as a sound man.
Then, after this training, and this
exact knowledge of what physical and
mental efficiency a man has, an appro-
priate artificial arm is supplied. And
even at the risk of writing at too great
length I feel compelled to describe the
results achieved.
I was shown a photograph of three
men. with six of Professor Amur’s arti-
ficial arms, dining at an open-air res-
taurant. surrounded by an astonished
crowd of spectators. There is a crowd
all day long at a butcher’s shop in
Paris watching a one-armed man cut-
ting up and serving meat. Women. I
am assured, smile at Professor Amar
as he goes down the streets near the
Conservatory, and say, “That’s the
man that gave my husband his arm
hack.’’ Now for what we saw.
Three one-armed men, two amputated
high above the elbow, who are earning
8 francs a day as fitters, had come
to the laboratory for our visit. While
waiting, one of them had amused him-
self by turning on a lathe little brass
shells as souvenirs, as well as any tur-
ner could have done. They were fully
dressed; two had their steel hands
showing, and one wore a glove. Pro-
fessor Amar offered one of them, am-
putated just below the shoulder, a
cigarette, when I opened my cigarette
case and was about to take out a cigar-
ette to give the man. “Pardon me,” he
said, “I can .help myself,” and his steel
hand took a cigarette from my case
with ease. Then he placed the cigarette
in his month, picked a match from a
box. struck it on the box in his sound
hand, and lighted the cigarette, holding
the lighted match in his steel hand.
A second man, amputated Below the
elbow, put out his gloved hand and
grasped mine and shook hands. The
third, amputated above the elbow, took
a small pair of dissecting forceps and
picked up a needle from the table with


them. Then I saw; them turning and
filing metal, drilling wood with a sen-
sitive drill, &c. The motions of these
limbs are controlled, through straps
and cords, by movements of the muscles
of the chest and back. This method of
control of articulated limbs is, of
course, not peculiar to Professor Amar,
and I am unable to say how his arms
compare in efficiency with others con-
trol led on the same principle.
Professor Amar adduces these re-
sults achieved as his answer to the
criticisms I have previously mentioned,
namely, that men soon discard their
expensive and complicated artificial
limbs; that even directors of re-educa-
tion schools tell you that such limbs
are not of the practical value that, was
anticipated, and, indeed, that to expect
men to use elaborate appliances is often
to ask them to become “acrobats.”
Professor Amar declares it to be a
sheer waste of effort and money to
provide amputated men with artificial
limbs, without previously investigating
scientifically their efficiency, and then
educating, first the mutilated limb it-
self, and second, the man himself in
the use of his appliance. “You must
train a muscle, he says, “gradually in
effort and speed.” Given tills re-educa-
tion. he claims that a man with the
smallest stump of an arm. and. indeed,
to some extent with no stump at all. as
in disarticulation of the shoulder, can
be restored to considerable mechanical
efficiency and the earning of an honor-
able livelihood. Of the men trained on
his method, Professor Amar says that
4.10 have gone back to work on the land,
being able to dig, using an artificial
arm.
The average time stated to be neces-
sary for complete re-education here is
six months, which is no longer than is
taken by re-education schools working
on ordinary lines. Moreover, whereas
in the other schools I have described, a
very large proportion of men under
training had lost legs and not arms,
and their professional re-education
was, therefore, comparatively easy,
Professor Amar told me that the men
whom he has re-educated were largely
men who had lost an arm or hand, and
whose re-education therefore presented
the most difficult problem.
Upon the grave issue thus in dispute,
I am not competent to decide. Whether
the ordinary provision of artificial
limbs is wrong, and Professor Amar
alone is right; whether the men whose
astonishing performances we saw are
really typical specimens of re-educa-
tion; whether, therefore, a vastly in-
creased efficiency may be conferred up-
on an amputated man. 1 must leave to
experts to determine. But of the great
scientific interest and importance of
Professor Amur’s work, and that of
Dr. Camus and others in the same
direction, there can he no doubt what-
ever. and this is freely admitted even
by those who do not accept all his
conclusions.
Professor Amar gave me the follow-
ing information, as proof that his
method has received the approval of
foreign authorities.
An Italian military medical commis-
sion, headed by Dr. Gualdl, came to
Paris three weeks after Italy declared
war to study the whole question of re-
education of the disabled and muti-
lated. After examination of the
methods of physicotherapy and mec-
hanotherapy—that is. in general, the
Zander method (of which Professor
Amar is a hostile critic), I am told
they adopted the Amar system. The
Queen is at the head of this movement
in Italy, which has, in consequence,
widespread support and ample funds.
Therefore Italy will shortly he dealing
with her disabled and mutilated sol-
diers on a thoroughly co-ordinated
scientific system. Two schools are es-
tablished at Rome, under Dr. Gualdi
and Professor Delaverona; one at
Milan (for which the Baroness Otto-
leughl has given a million lire and a
house) under Professor Galliazi; one
at Bologna under Professor Putti; one
at Naples under Professor Ferramini;
one at Lucca under Professor Lucchese:
and one is forming at Palermo. Seve-
ral of these doctors have spent some
time studying at Professor Amur's
laboratory.
From Russia. M. Petovski. Minister
of Finance, and M. Barck have come to
Paris, and I am informed that orders
have been placed for the equipment of
20 Russian centres of re-education on
the Amar system. Further, delegates
from Roumania will shortly proceed
to study this system as established in
Petrograd.
In Austria, Professor Dr. Hans
Spitzy, as his book “Uusere Kriegsin-
validen” shows, has largely borrowed
Professor Amur’s method, which he
calls “Arbeit-therapie,” and Germany
has actually tried to get information
and apparatus for it during the war.


Professor Amar showed me a letter
from Dr. Zunz of Berlin, sent to him
in the envelope of a French prisoner of
war, asking that Germany should be
enabled to procure the appliances in
order that they might be used for muti-
lated French prisoners. Naturally,
Professor Amar contented himself with
communicating the contents of the
letter to the French Military Intelli-
gence.
In France this system has been par-
tially adopted at the Belgian re-educa-
tion school at Vernon, and a school was
established on January Ist, 1910, at
Bordeaux, and is now moving into
larger quarters, for men with ampu-
tated arms, under Dr. Gourdon, where
about 75 are always under treatment.
England, up to a short time ago,
appeared to he ignorant of Professor
Amar’s work. But recently the officer
commanding the Granville Hospital of
the Canadian contingent at Ramsgate
has been to Paris, and has ordered an
equipment, and Dr. R. Fortescu Fox
is endeavouring to procure apparatus
for the Bed Cross Physical Clinic in
London. That is all. Not even an
inquiry had been made, Professor Amar
told me, until my visit, on behalf of
the British Government. Thus the
situation, ns I am informed, is that,
whatever our enemies may be doing,
our allies will soon be dealing with
tins grave problem on definite scientific
principles.
I should add that the firm of Pirard
and Coeurdevache, of Paris, who manu-
facture the various appliances, are
quite unable, on account of so many of
their men being in the army, to fill
large orders without much delay. If
an order were given from England it
would be necessary to send to Paris
several instrument-makers, accustomed
to precision work, whom the firm would
pay at the rate at present in force here
of Is. Sd. an hour, or more if necessary.
The cost of a complete single equip-
ment of apparatus is under £4OO, and
Professor Amar estimates that the
total cost of a centre of re-education,
to treat 3,000 amputated as hoarders
and 10,000 wounded living outside,
would be about £lB,OOO for the first
year, and £B,OOO for the second year.
The cost of establishing the Italian
centres has been less than this.
After two years from the conclusion
of the war the centres would no longer
be needed for the re-education of dis-
abled soldiers, but they would remain
of permanent value as schools of scien-
tific “professional”—that is, industrial
—apprenticeship. “The war,” he says,
“will be over, but industrial work, and
the necessity for the scientific study
and physical organisation of it, will be
with us for ever.”
EMPLOYMENT BUREAUS.
The official Employment Bureau,
which is under the Ministry of War, is
situated at 95, Quai d’Orsay, Paris. It
was opened in February, 1010, and the
officer in charge is Captain Paul Bil-
lault, who has seen military service in
matiy parts of the world, and was in-
capacitated for further active service
by a leg wound in the present war.
Circulars were sent to all depots of
men about to be discharged, and to all
centres of re-education, and posters
were displayed in suitable places, in-
viting men to make use of the bureau,
and to keep in touch with it even after
they had secured civil employment.
Its functions are being extended at
the present moment by the establish-
ment of a branch bureau in each of the
twenty-one military “regions” into
which France is divided —a “region”
being the locality of an Army Corps.
Each branch bureau will be in charge
of a wounded officer, and, on the occa-
sion of my visit, a number of these
were in conference with Captain Bil-
lault, learning his methods and profit-
ing by his experience, in order that
there may be one standard procedure
throughout France.
This extension had become necessary
because Paris, from the point of view
of finding employment, is “full,” though,
of course, many employers are keeping
open the places of men who left them
on mobilisation. And it was soon found
impossible to place men all over France
by correspondence. In future, a man
seeking employment will be passed on
to the branch bureau in his own part
of the country, and. when he is without
means, free railway transport will be
given him.
When an applicant, having his army
discharge, arrives, he fills up a form
giving all necessary information about
himself. This he takes to the medical
officer in attendance, who examines the
man and fills up on the hack of the
form a complete statement of his
physical condition. The man is physic-
ally graded on a scale of 0-20, the zero
meaning that he is useless for any
work and the 20 that he is fit for any


thing. (In practice, neither of these
extreme figures occurs, since if the man
were wholly unfit he would not apply,
and if he were fit for anything he
would not have been discharged.) ihe
form is then passed on to the officer in
charge, who interviews the man person-
ally, and advises him —he can only ad-
vise and try to persuade—regarding his
future, and if the man is capable of
doing a job. puts him in communication
with vacancies in Paris or sends him
to the O.C. Branch Bureau in the dis-
trict where he belongs. A good many
applicants, however, are useless for
work without professional re-education,
and these are strongly urged to enter
one of the schools.
The Bureau has received in seven
months (to Ist October, 1916) 0,368
offers of vacant situations. The appli-
cants have numbered 2,776, and of these
2,126 have been placed. This is an
excellent record, but since Paris, as I
have said, is now “full,” placing appli-
cants will be more difficult in the
future. This Bureau, it should be said,
has the most difficult cases to deal with,
namely, those who have neither friends
to go to, nor previous jobs to return to.
Oaptain Billault told me he had ad-
vised 241 applicants to enter a school
of re-education, as he could do nothing
for them in their present condition.
Of these, 183 acted upon his advice.
What has become of the remaining 58V
Nothing is known, hut they must be
living on their friends, on charity, or
by picking up odd jobs. The same is
true here as everywhere—it is com-
paratively easy to find a job for a man
who has lost a leg, but difficult to place
one who has lost an arm.
A large proportion of all applicants
desire to become “fonctionnaires,'
that is, to enter some branch of the
Civil Service, in which a certain num-
ber of posts are reserved for disabled
men. They consider that they have a
special right to this. But I am informed
that the conditions imposed by the
State are more stringent in some re-
spect than those of private employers,
and that many applicants are unable to
fulfil them.
The Union of Foreign Colonies in
France has also recently established an
Employment Bureau iit its head office,
11 bis, rue Scribe, Paris. This is
managed by M. Murat, a Quartermaster
in the French Navy, who lost his left leg
at Dixmude, and has had in a short time
425 applicants on its list, of whom
about 110 have been provided with situ-
ations. Almost all these, however,
were discharged men whose injuries
did not prevent them from returning
straight to their previous occupations,
without the need of a course of pro-
fessional re-education.
M. Murat is himself an example of
the non-use of an artificial limb. He
has had more than one supplied to him,
but has discarded them after trial, and
he continues to use crutches. The sur-
geon had advised him not to use a peg-
leg, on the ground that this would re-
sult in the habit of moving his stump
in a way to prevent him ultimately
making proper use of an artificial leg.
STRONG AND WEAK POINTS OF THE
FRENCH SYSTEM.
You asked me to state what I con-
sider to he “the weak as well as the
strong points in the French system.”
I can summarise my answer, after what
I have already written, in a few words.
The strong points of the French sys-
tem are the deep and universal sym-
pathy felt for the disabled soldier; the
national determination to do every-
thing possible for him who has done so
much for France; the keenness of all
Ministers and officials to spare no effort
and overlook no channel of usefulness;
the readiness of Parliament to provide
ample funds; the high scientific and
specialist knowledge that is being de-
voted to the subject; and the desire
that every part of France shall be pre-
pared to offer to the disabled man the
opportunity to return physically and
intellectually re-equipped to civil life.
All these things evoke one’s profound
admiration.
The weak points appear to he the
absence of effective and authoritative
co-ordination; the dispersion of pre-
cious effort along parallel and even
conflicting lines; the rivalry of dlffen-
ent Ministries, none of which is willing
to be dispossessed of functions It has
exercised for a long time and which it
regards as of paramount national im-
portance; the retention by the military
authorities of some activities which
appear essentially those of civil ad-
ministration; the undecided conflicts
of technical opinion; and the increased
expenditure resulting from the forego-
ing situation.
The lessons to be learned from it hy
ourselves are sufficiently obvious.


SUGGESTIONS REGARDING THE TREATMENT
OF DISABLED SOLDIERS IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM.
You request me, in conclusion, to
furnish any suggestions that occur to
me during my inquiry in France, bear-
ing upon the treatment of disabled sol-
diers in Great Britain.
I therefore beg to submit for your
consideration the following recommen-
dations, premising only that as 1 have
been in France most of the time since
the beginning of the war, I am but im-
perfectly acquainted with what has
already been done in England, and that
therefore these recommendations may
be in some cases superfluous and in
other cases no longer possible of adop-
tion.
In the first place, I would most
strongly emphasise the necessity of ab-
solute co-ordination of authority.
This great task should not be divided
among a number of already over-bur-
dened Departments, with a multitude
of uncontrolled private institutions
working independently, along different
lines, and often without specialist
guidance. If such a system be allowed
to grow up, then confusion, waste, and
inefficiency will inevitably result.
The proper course would appear to
be the creation of a Central Committee
under the authority of a Minister with
varied departmental experience, who
would preside over Its sittings when
necessary, and would represent it in
the House of Commons. But such a
Committee should not be part of, or in
any respect dependent upon, a par-
ticular Department of State.
The membership of this Committee
should include representatives of the
War Office (preferably young officers
with modern views, and readiness to
assimilate new ideas) ; civilians- with
special knowledge of social reform
work; one or more Labour and Trade
Union representatives; an educationist
with special knowledge of technical
training; an employer of manual
labour; two women with special ex-
perience of the care of soldiers, and
knowledge of this particular subject;
representatives of the benevolent so-
cieties dealing with disabled men (such
as the Soldiers and Sailors’ Help So-
ciety) ; and at least two scientific
medical men who have made a special
study of the problems of prothesis.
All centres of surgical equipment and
schools of re-education, whether official
or private, should be subject to the
authority of this Committee, and to se-
cure authorisation every institution
should be required to follow the
methods of treatment and training laid
down by the Committee.
The Committee should alone have the
disposal of the funds supplied by the
Treasury, and would make grants to
private and philanthropic organisations
and to existing institutions, such as
polytechnic and trade 'schools, which
would receive disabled men for tech-
nical training.
These schools should be, so far as
possible, employed in this movement.
But the time to begin a man's re-educa-
tion, it must always be remembered, is
while he is still receiving hospital
treatment. Training at polytechnic and
similar institutions comes, of course,
later.
A limited number of Centres of Re-
education. few and good, rather than
many and less well-equipped, should be
established in suitable places to cover
the whole of the United Kingdom.
New training schools should not be
allowed to be started haphazard over
the country on private initiative. It is
most important, as has been said, that
in the official Centres medical treat-
ment and industrial re-education should
proceed side by side.
These Centres would, of course,
cease to exist more or less soon after
the war, but at least two of them
should be established in such a manner
and in such places that they could re-
main permanently as centres of physio-
logical research into industrial pro-
blems and scientific industrial training.
It will be for the Government to de-
cide whether in any acceptable manner,
by military authority, by conditions at-
tached to the grant of pensions, by con-
ditions attached to health or unemploy-
ment insurance, or in any other way,
it can be secured that men receive in-
dustrial re-education before they return
to civil life.
Failing this, every possible per-
suasive effort should be made to this
end, and to lead men to return to the
trades and localities in which they
were engaged before the war.
As many men as possible should be
retained in scientific agriculture and
technical allied rural occupations. Men
in hospitals for a long time near large
towns naturally acquire a taste for ur-
ban life. Therefore it is of great im-
portance that those who have come
from the land should be transferred as


soon as possible for training to country
districts, where everything should be
done to render agricultural life attrac-
tive.
Disabled men should be discouraged
from seeking in large numbers merely
clerical posts.
In general, the aim should be to re-
educate men for their previous or a
kindred employment, and especially to
train those possessing the requisite
natural aptitude to a higher degree of
intellectuality than they had before
their injury—that is, to become fore-
men, overseers, instructors, &c. Their
previous ehiployers should be consulted
regarding such available posts, and the
special qualifications required to fill
them; Many a man may become better
off, as regards wages, for his disable-
ment —a result to be warmly welcomed.
All employment should be through
the Employment Exchanges.
Special conditions of health, unem-
ployment and accident insurance should
be created for disabled men returning
to industrial life. .
The State should assume responsi-
bility during a man's lifetime for the
provision, repair, and replacement of
artificial limbs and surgical appliances.
One centre of manufacture and repair
should be established, preferably in
London, with a research laboratory
attached, to which all limbs and ap-
pliances would be sent for repair, and
in every industrial centre there should
be an advising and forwarding agency
to which the would apply when
their appliances needed attention.
Every man should be given, and re-
quired to retain, a book in which would
be entered all particulars regarding his
qualifications, disablement, appliances,
employment, the training-schools in his
locality, the appliance agency to which
he should apply, &c.
Pensions should be of two kinds, as
in France. First, those of amputated
men, and men with permanent func-
tional disablement. These pensions
should be divided into classes, accord-
ing only to the nature of the inva-
lidity. Once granted, these pensions
should not be subject to withdrawal or
modification for any reason whatever,
and should have no relation whatever
to a man’s present or future industrial
efficiency, A higher pension should be
given for an arm-amputation than for
a leg-amputation. Second, those of
“functionally-injured” men. These men
, should be subject to periodical medical
examination, and their allowances,
divided into several classes, should in-
crease or diminish as their invalidity
becomes greater or less.
In all that is done for the re-educa-
tion of the disabled soldier, it should,
to avoid extravagant expenditure, be
borne in mind that, with the exceptions
before mentioned, the need for this
will cease in a year or two after the
conclusion of peace.
PERSONAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
1 have to express my special obliga-
tion to Monsieur Justin Godart, Under-
secretary of State for the Service of
Health in the Ministry of War, to
whose great organising ability and de-
votion so much of the French success is
due, and who most kindly provided me
with all necessary official authorisa-
tions, and to Monsieur Albert M£tin,
Minister of Labour; and my warm
thanks to Monsieur AndrC Idoux, Chef-
Adjoint of the Cabinet of the Minister
of Public Instruction; Monsieur Pic-
quenard, Chief of the Cabinet of the
Minister of Labour; to Professor Dr.
Jean Camus, Chief Medical Officer of
the Centre of Physiotherapy of the
Grand Palais, and to Dr. Fffiix Allard,
of the same service; to Professor Jules
Amar and Dr. Bouras; to Dr. Charles
Valine, head of the School of Ke-educa-
tion of the Grand Palais; to Dr. Bour-
riilon, Director of the Institute of
Saint-Maurice; to Dr. Kresser, Direc-
tor of the School of Re-education at
the “Maisou Blanche”; to Dr. Quiserne,
Director of the Zander Institute; to
Captain Billault, Director of the Mili-
tary Employment Bureau; to Miss
Winifred Holt, of the “Phare de
France”; and to many other persons
for the courtesy with which they ex-
plained the details of their work.
It was sufficient for me to state at
any time or place that you had charged
me with this mission, to receive all
possible help and information.
I may perhaps bo permitted to add
that Lady Norman, who was in daily
touch with British wounded men for
fourteen months while Lady Superin-
tendent of her hospital in France, and
who has since given special attention to
the training of the disabled, accom-
panied me in all these investigations,
and has afforded me invaluable assist-
ance.
I aui, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
HENRY NORMAN,
Captain.
Paris, October, 1916.
