

REPORT
OF THE
CITIZENS’ COMMITTEE,
OFFERING SOME
Suggestions for Improved Methods of
Dealing with the
UNEMPLOYED
PROBLEM.
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS,
f 5 2.73
227 Castlbeeaqh Steeet.


hist of (D embeds
OF THE
Citizens’ Unemployed
Committee.
Rev. G. D. BUCHANAN, B.A.
£lice - :
W. F. SCHEY, Ex-M.L.A.
S. T. WHIDDON, M.L.A.
Hon. BENJ. BACKHOUSE, M.L.C.
son* &s>cveiavtj:
Rev. J. H. L. ZILLMANN, Ph. D.
Rev. THOS. ROSEBY, L.L.D.
Yen. Archdeacon J. D. LANGLEY
GEORGE ANDERSON, M.L.A.
MARK HAMMOND, Ex-M.L.A.
ANDREW THOMPSON.
D. E. BLACK 'j Delegates
T. ALLEN I of the
D. A. S. WATSON] Unemployed.


EEPOET
THE CITIZEN’S COMMITTEE,
OFFERING SOME SUGGESTIONS
For Improved Methods of Dealing
with the
PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED.
The Citizen’s Committee, appointed at a public
meeting held in the Temperance Hall, Sydney,
on November 28, 1898, have been brought face to
face with a condition of things which is indeed
deplorable. The acute distress of hundreds of
unemployed men, with hundreds of others de-
pending on them, demanded first and immediate
attention. And our efforts to find employment
for these have been continuously carried on
from the beginning. A sub-committee of our
number has been specially charged with this
task—a task as painful and difficult as it is
urgent.
But we felt that this mere temporary relief
was after all quite unsatisfactory. If a few
weeks’ work were found for the men, the situa-
tion remained at the expiration of that time just
where it was. There was no progress. We
therefore devoted attention to the question,
which if it seemed less urgent, was really more
important, of finding a more permanent remedy
for what is a perpetually recurring source of
anxiety and trouble. Our suggestions towards
this end may be thus stated :
There is a distinct and recognized relation
already existing between the State and the
Unemployed. Though the Unemployed are
prevented from rendering any equivalent for their
maintenance, they have to be fed ; they have, if
only in the slums, to be housed; they have to be
cared for, in our hospitals, when sick; and for
those of them who sink into a condition of
chronic helplessness accommodation lias to be
found in our asylums,


All this costs money. Nor is it simply the
unemployed man that has thus to be provided
for, but his family. And children brought up
under such conditions often become a burden to
the State in a costlier way than by simply re-
quiring maintenance. Vice, criminality, law-
lessness are often hatched in the nest of idleness.
The question then arises: Can the State
improve its present relations to the unemployed ?
It is not a question of whether the State shall
expend money on them. That it already does :
and more money, perhaps, than if it hired them,
and paid them regular wages. The only
question is: Having already to give them bread,
should it not give them the opportunity of earning
it?
The State is a large landowner; it is a large
mineowner; it is a large employer.
The State is the only landowner which feeds its
workmen, while not insisting that they shall
cultivate its land. It is the only mineowner
which keeps its mines closed while feeding the
men who might work them. It is the only
capitalist which pays non-workers for doing
nothing.
One solution of the present difficulty—a
solution appealing directly to our common-
sense —would appear to be for the State to do
what other landowners and capitalists do. Let
it make its land and resources available to enable
its unemployed citizens to earn the bread which
in any case it has to give them to eat.
Arrangements might be made for settling
families in groups —as Crown tenants —on
good land, supplying them with the means
of cultivating it, and maintaining them till
their work became remunerative. Thousands
of tenants have been able to make a living under
a metayer system in this colony, by leasing land
from a private owner and giving him “half”
the proceeds. Why should not the State make a
similar use—but, of course, on such terms as
would make it possible for the Unemployed to
accept them —of its vast estate ? Such State
farms should be, as far as possible, self-contained
and self-supporting. What is here contem-
plated will be found set forth in considerable
detail in Appendix A to this report.
In the same way the State might actively
exercise its (at present dormant) functions as
mineowner. A resolution has already been
passed by the Legislative Assembly of our
colony approving of the Government taking
this course. What reason is there why the


State should not retain and work for itself, for
the employment (and sometimes for the profit) of
its own citizens, some portion of its Coal cliffs,
its Broken Hills, its Hill-ends ?
We may point out that the State as landowner
and capitalist is in a particularly favored
position, as compared with others, for accepting
such a role.
Its railways furnish it with the • means of
transit. And it has at its disposal a skilled staff
of servants, surveyors, inspectors, engineers, and
the rest, whose aid would greatly facilitate the
doing of its work.
The fundamental assumption, however, is to be
made that the State, in accepting this role of
active landowner and employer, shall do as
private employers do : use not only its land, but
all its resources, to make its enterprise a success.
It must not wreck its enterprise by doing what
no other employer ever does—treating its work-
men as if they were working for somebody else.
No solution of the Unemployed Problem is
possible without frankly recognizing that a large
number of those for whom it is necessary to pro-
vide are men unable to do “ a good day’s work,”
and unable, therefore, to compete with those
who, under the contract system, alone stand any
chance of obtaining employment.
In the appended classification (see Appendix
B) of those who might be employed on public
works—a classification for which we are in the
main indebted to the actual experience of the
“unemployed” members of the Citizens’ Com-
mittee, men of whose intelligence and self-
restraint we feel bound to speak in the highest
terms—an attempt is made to meet this difficulty.
In regard to this “weaker element” in the
ranks of the Unemployed it would be a manifest
cruelty to expect these men to mingle in the
general competitive scramble. The State must
stand to these in loco parentis. Yet the last
thing the State should do for any man is to
pauperize him. The physically weak and infirm
should still have the opportunity of earning
what bread they can. And a full and courageous
acceptance by the State of its functions as a
landowner and capitalist might easily find em-
ployment even for these.
The social chaos and widespread suffering
resulting from the industrial conflicts which from
time to time occur amongst us are a serious


factor in the problem of the unemployed. These
industrial conflicts not only throw hundreds of
people out of employment, but in many cases
become a serious menace to the peace and good
order of society. The suggestion has often
occurred to us—Why should not the Government
be empowered by Statute, when, in their opinion,
the exigencies of the community seem imperatively
to demand such active intervention, to step in,
and itself carry on the industry which has come
to a deadlock. If this were only partially done,
on however small a scale, the State or the
Municipality might not only avert a grave social
danger, but furnish an object lesson of how such
industries may be carried on with justice to all
concerned.
The preceding considerations all emphasize the
necessity of substituting, in all public works,
wherever possible, the system of Day Labor for
the contract system.
The foregoing paragraphs indicate that our
Committee looks with no favour on any scheme
which seeks to find work for the unemployed by
displacing other workmen. There is no point
on which we would lay more stress than that
indicated in the foregoing sections, and in
Appendix A to this Report, that this surplus
labor should occupy itself with something that
will constitute a substantial addition to the pro-
ductive industry of the colony. Our proposals
contemplate the settlement of the unemployed
upon the land, to produce and make for them-
selves, and thus not to disturb those already
employed, nor to compete with other producers.
VIII.
No consideration of the Unemployed Problem
would be complete without taking account of an
element, which the genuine and honest worker
disclaims and detests —an element which seldom
fails to associate itself with meetings of the
Unemployed, but always discredits it. This is
the loafing element. There are no members of
our Committee who feel so strongly on this sub-
ject as the representatives on our Committee of
the unemployed themselves.
Now, in respect to this element—to men who
are able to work, but will not—men who have
drifted into a condition of chronic indolence—our
recommendation is that they be dealt with on
the apostolic principle : “ If any will not work,
neither shall he eat.” That is to say, we re-
commend the committal of such persons to a
labor settlement or workshop wherein labor shall


be compulsory. We must recognize the fact that
there are those in our community, although their
percentage is small, who can only be described as
incorrigible loafers. They mingle with the
unemployed, but the honest worker justly
disclaims them. They can work, but they
will not work, and they often live upon the labor,
sometimes on the vice and crime, of wife and
children. Such persons should be taken in hand
and put under strict discipline with a view to
their reformation. We can see no man starve,
but we can insist that the man who can work
and will not should be made to earn the bread
he eats.
Labor Legislation.
1. A common objection to legislation limit-
ing the hours of labor rests on the ground that
the cheapened production arising from the use
of machinery, and from the competition of
labor in countries where longer hours and lower
wages prevail, has made it impossible for the hours
of labor to be shortened without surrendering our
place in the markets of the world to other
nations. If this be true, and cannot be counter-
acted by other means, it would lead not only to
a lengthening of the hours of labor, but to the
necessity of the workman adding, as in the
countries referred to, the work of wife and
children to his own, and the work of Sunday to
that of the rest of the week. To state this inference
is surely to show that the principle involved is
unjust and inhumane. The Divine gift of
machinery was meant to make the lot of mankind
not harder but easier. And we must hold firmly
to the principle, and get it effectively embodied
in legislation, that of the expanded production
resulting from the labor-saving inventions of the
age, the actual worker must be allowed to get
the benefit in shortened hours and improved
social conditions.
2. The congested condition of the labor
market resulting from the agonizing competition
of men with one another is still further aggra-
vated by what seems to us the cruel and un-
natural competition between men and women
Such competition is equally to be deprecated on
economic and on moral grounds. It tends still
further to degrade the standard of living for the
man, and to lead (as the whole history of factory
legislation shows) to the deterioration of the
woman.
3. The Act regulating child labor needs to be
made much more stringent.
4, And we strongly affirm the principle of
Compulsory Arbitration in industrial conflict.


It is evident, in dealing with so large and
difficult a subject, the utmost that could be ex-
pected of a Citizens’ Committee such as ours
would be to carefully consider the situation,
and make such recommendations, for improved
methods of dealing with the Unemployed
Problem, as seemed wise, just, humane, and
practicable. We make no pretence of course of
covering the whole ground, or making an
exhaustive series of recommendations.
The suggestions we have ventured to make
have all of them the recommendation that they
proceed on lines of State and municipal action
already laid down, and already in large measure
accepted. We have made no suggestions for
which precedents could not be found in the great
cities of the Empire, in the London County
Council, in our own Australasian colonies, as
well as in several European countries, and in the
United States of America. Our suggestions
follow what is already, as a matter of principle,
established, and they cannot therefore be set
aside either as new or as impracticable.
Their wisdom is we think established by the
fact that the progress of the world is evidently
moving in the direction they indicate.
The progress of the world is moving in the
direction indicated by these suggestions because
they are an attempt to realize social conditions
which are more humane and just.
APPENDIX A.
We are of opinion that a much-improved
method of dealing with the unemployed problem
is to be found in the working of establishments
conducted on the lines of the scheme hereunto
appended. And we strongly recommend that one
such establishment be at once founded as an ex-
periment. We very respectfully urge that if
such is undertaken, some gentleman be placed in
charge who is strongly imbued with the ideas
herein expressed, and who is enthusiastic about
their success. Also that at least five years’ trial
should be given ; as enormous difficulties, social
and otherwise, must be encountered and over-
come before the numerous and interesting
problems involved can be adequately dealt with,
or any well-grounded opinion as to the success or
otherwise of the methods adopted can be definitely
pronounced. Also, in view of the inferiority of
much of the labor which must be dealt with, the
land for the settlement, and for the blocks pro-
posed herein, must be of first-rate quality. Only
with every material advantage and patient per-
sistence can any measure of success be expected
in such an undertaking, wherein most of the
other elements tend to failure and to disappoint-
ment :


DRAFT SCHEME FOR A LABOR
SETTLEMENT.
Principles to be agreed upon prior to founda-
tion :
1. That the usual methods of indiscriminate
and intermittent charity only offer a degrading
kind of relief to the poor who suffer from enforced
idleness. They give the necessaries of life
instead of the means of earning them, and take
away the self-reliance of those whom they try to
help.
2. That it is desirable that such methods of
relief be amended, so that work shall be offered
—agricultural and manufacturing—to all who
are in need and are able to work, that they may
provide themselves with the necessaries of life.
8. That certain conditions must be observed
in providing this work. It must be done, as far
as possible, for the use of the workers, their
foremen, and director, instead of for sale.
Where sales are necessary, the articles to be sold
shall be surplus products, or, preferably, special
products raised for the purpose, and, if possible,
such as are imported at present from outside the
colony.
4. That this attempt to carry out this reform
shall be made as follows:
(a) By endeavoring in every lawful way to
call the attention of the Government and
the public at large to the importance and
practicability of the foregoing propositions.
(5) By raising a fund, comprising money, and
every species of goods, tools, and material,
to be spent in the erection of buildings,
purchase of cattle, tools, and machinery,
and the organization therewith of a Labor
Settlement for the employment of men and
women out of work.
(c) By procuring suitable lands from the
Government to be vested in a body of
Trustees for the purposes herein specified,
and obtaining such sums of public money as
may be necessary to carry out the purposes
of the Trust.
For the effectual carrying out of the foregoing
Principles, the following Suggestions are
drafted as indicating what, in our opinion,
are the most suitable lines on which to
proceed;—
1. That a Trust be formed by the Government;
and that the Government vest in such Trust lands
suitable for the purposes named herein, and such
moneys as may be required therefor from time to
time.
2. That for a receiving depot, which must be
immediately contiguous to Sydney, a portion of
the old Sydney Water Reserve, or the Church
and School Lands, abutting on the Botany or
Bunnerong Roads, and comprising (say) 200
acres, should be set apart. For the Farm Settle-
ment, not less than 2,000 acres must be vested in
the Trust. For this we suggest the Warragamba


Valley, near Penrith, with a frontage to Cox’s
Creek. Further, some large area in a good
agricultural district should be set apart for
cutting up into various-sized blocks whereon to
settle those who desire to become farmers.
3. That tools, &c., should be purchased, and a
number of the unemployed poor should be
selected and sent in detachments on to the
depot and settlement as work can be given them,
such work to be done under skilled direction
appointed by the Trust. The work at the outset
should consist of the erection of dormitories,
separating each family to itself, a central cooking
kitchen, dining-room, &c. The Settlement
should be stocked as early as possible with cattle
and other animals, both for food and other pur-
poses. The land should be brought as early as
possible under cultivation, and be used for such
other purposes as the Trust may deem suitable
and advisable.
4. That the first company of workers should
consist of builders, carpenters, agricultura
laborers, gardeners, bakers, cooks, laundresses,
and so on ; and, as various trades can be brought
into operation, of shoemakers, tailors, &c. As
far as possible everything used on the Settlement
should be produced and made there.
5. That every effort should be made to pro-
duce for consumption only on the place, with
the exception of such produce as is needed to
pay the cost of organization and supervision, and
to sell for the purpose of buying those things
which it is there and then impossible to produce.
6. That no person should be taken on the
Settlement who cannot work, except a proportion
of children, which, however, at the start should
be kept as low as possible. Ultimately, however,
the whole resources of the establishment should
be available to every applicant who is able and
willing to work.
7. That the wages of the ordinary workers
should not consist of a money payment, but of a
rent-free lodging, three good meals a day in the
general dining-room, and such clothing and
extras as may be at any time available, at the
discretion of the Trust. The Government also
should be asked to utilise their own scientific
staff for the purpose of giving instruction in
agriculture, irrigation, bee-farming, poultry-
raising, dairying, &c., &c.
8. That each adult should be required to do
not exceeding eight hours’ work per day at
whatever task may be assigned by the director
and foreman.
9. That every person should be at liberty to
leave at any time, but should be required to
notify the director of such intended departure.
10. That every endeavor should be made to
find employment in the ordinary channels of
industry, for which purpose all employment
advertised at the Government Labor Bureau
should be simultaneously advertised at the depot


of the Settlement, and every person wishful of
taking up such employment should be afforded
every assistance in reaching and obtaining the
same.
11. That any resident who so desires, when
considered suitable and competent by the Trust,
should be assisted to take up land, and become a
farmer, under such conditions as may be fixed by
the Trust.
12. That the rules should not be unduly op-
pressive or inquisitorial, but should include
prompt dismissal for disobedience, idleness,
drunkenness and immorality.
APPENDIX B.
Proposed Improved System of Grading the
Unemployed on Public Works ; taking
into consideration their various physical
inequalities.
1. We suggest that all the best men receive
not less than the Government standard rate of
six shillings per day. This will meet the objec-
tions of the Labor bodies outside of the unem-
ployed, as they claim to be all average men.
This standard rate to be paid to all those who for
the past two years have stood the really severe
test of the sewer farm, railway deviations, &c.
2. We now come to a body of men who really
form the main portion of the unemployed. It is
composed of various tradesmen who, through
misfortune and other causes, have lost their tools
of trade ; and of others of almost every occu-
pation ; all of whom are physically inferior to
the best men, and we suggest that they
should be employed at five shillings per day,
their physical incapacity being recognized by
the Government through their Superintending
Engineer. These men will be expected to do
a fair day’s work for their money, and no loafing
will be allowed. The Superintendent must speak
straight to the men on this matter.
8. If the Butty-gang system is to be used, we
suggest that gangs be reduced from ten men to
six. Erom tbe experience of the Unemployed
Delegates on this Committee, six men will
answer better than ten, as the division of wages
will be less, and it is easier to pick six good
mates than ten. The question of a cook may
well be left to the men themselves, as, if they
earn more money, they will be better able to pay
a cook.
4. We suggest that no man be allowed to leave
the six-shilling gang for the five-shilling gang,
as we know this would cause an immense amount
of trouble. We suggest that the remedy should
be for men who are discharged, as they will he ,
for various reasons, to take their chance of form-
ing new butty-gangs on the works on the plan
suggested, or to leave altogether. Under this
system we believe all the men will be given a
chance to better their position. The Government
will suffer no loss, as the same superintendence will
dofor the five-shilling and the six-shilling gangs;
and one good overseer can, without difficulty,
look after ten butty-gangs of six men each.


To equalize the gangs, we suggest that they
should he picked gang and gang from the six-
shilling and five-shilling gangs alternately.
Under this system the Government may proceed
with the works already authorized by Parlia-
ment. No relief works need be resorted to, as
they are always a source of trouble to the
Government, and are not satisfactory to the men
themselves.
APPENDIX C.
We believe that many of our alluvial gold-
fields, even some of the deserted ones, might
furnish at least subsistence to a large number of
men by intelligent fossicking.
We suggest that the Government offer a
premium for the best and least expensive gold-
saving machine of a portable character, and
suitable for sluicing and washing. One such
machine might be loaned to a party of
ten men (or even less), desirous of trying such
employment. In such case, the Government
should guarantee rations for a period not exceed-
ing eight weeks. These gangs should, of
course, be under Government control. Interest
on the cost of each machine, and a refund of the
cost of rations supplied should be exacted when-
ever the gang was able to pay the same ; and
machines might be sold outright to gangs able
to purchase them on time-payment or otherwise.
Commending these thoughts and suggestions
to the earnest consideration of all our fellow
citizens,
We are,
Yours for Humanity,
G. D. BUCHANAN, President.
W. F. SCHEY, i Vice-Presidents
S. T. WHIDDON, 1 ICE S
BENJ. BACKHOUSE, Hon. Treasurer.
J. H. L. ZILLMANN, Hon. Secretary.
THOS. ROSEBY.
J. D. LANGLEY.
G. ANDERSON.
ANDREW THOMPSON.
D. E. BLACK.
T. ALLEN.
D. A. S. WATSON.
13 & 14 Tattersall’s Chambers,
Hunter & Castlereagh Streets,
25th February, 1899.
Co-operative Print, 227 Oastlereagh-st., Sydney,
