

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
TO THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL
ON
APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES FOR
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS
IN THE
BEGA-COOMA AREA, THE MURRAY
VALLEY AREA AND THE SPENCER
GULF NORTH AREA
1965
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
By Authority:
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia)
12062/65.


REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
TO THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL
ON
APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES FOR
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS
IN THE
BEGA-COOMA AREA, THE MURRAY
VALLEY AREA AND THE SPENCER
GULF NORTH AREA
1965
COMMONWEALTH OF
AUSTRALIAN /BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
By Authority:
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia)
12062/65.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page.
Part I.—lntroductory . . .. .. .. .. .. 3
Part ll.—Preliminary Observations .. .. 7
Part lll.—Particulars of Applications for each Area and the Board’s conclusions
thereon .. .. .. .. 9
Part IV.—Recommendations .. . . .. .. .. 21
Appendices—
A—Notice by the Postmaster-General . . .. . . .. 22
B—Form of Application .. 22
C —Reference by the Postmaster-General . . 26
D—Counsel representing Applicants . ■ 27


AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
Report and Recommendations to the Postmaster-General on
Applications for Licences for Commercial Television Stations
in the Bega-Cooma Area, the Murray Valley Area and the
Spencer Gulf North Area.
PART I.—INTRODUCTORY
1. The Australian Broadcasting Control Board now submits
its report and recommendations on applications received by the
Postmaster-General for the grant of a licence for a commercial
television station in each of the undermentioned areas:—
New South Wales
Bega-Cooma.
Victoria
Murray Valley.
South Australia
Spencer Gulf North.
2. The Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1965 provides
as follows:
“Section 81.—(1.) The Minister may, subject to this Act, grant to a
person a licence for a commercial broadcasting station or for a commercial
television station upon such conditions, and in accordance with such form,
as the Minister determines.
(la.) A licence for a commercial television station shall not be granted
except to a company formed within the limits of the Commonwealth or a
Territory of the Commonwealth and having a share capital.
Section 82.—(1.) Before granting a licence under the last preceding
section, the Minister shall, by notice published in the Gazette, invite
applications for the grant of the licence.
(2.) An application for the grant of a licence shall be in accordance
with a form supplied by the Minister and shall be made in such manner,
and within such time, as the Minister specifies in the notice.
Section 83. —(1.) The Minister shall refer applications made in pur-
suance of the last preceding section to the Board for its recommendation
as to the grant of the licence.
(2.) Before making a recommendation, the Board shall hold an inquiry
in accordance with this Act into the applications.”
The provisions relating to inquiries by the Board are contained in
Division 3 of Part 11. of the Act.
12062/65.—2


3. Pursuant to section 82 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by
notice published in the Gazette dated 26th November, 1964,
invited applications for the grant of a licence for a commercial
television station in each of the three areas specified in para-
graph 1, and in the Southern and Central Agricultural Areas
of Western Australia and directed that the applications should be
lodged with the Secretary of the Board not later than Ist March,
1965. A copy of the notice of the Minister is set out in Appendix
A. A copy of the form of application supplied to applicants, in
accordance with section 82 (2.) of the Act, is contained in
Appendix B. (The applications for the licences for the Southern
and Central Agricultural Areas of Western Australia will be the
subject of later inquiries and report and recommendations by the
Board.)
4. Seven applications were received in response to the Minis-
ter’s invitation in respect of the Bega-Cooma, Murray Valley and
Spencer Gulf North Areas. The applications were as follows: —
Bega-Cooma
Canberra Television Ltd.
Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd.
Southern United Telecasters.
Murray Valley
Sunraysia Television Ltd.
Bendigo & Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.
B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran, on behalf of a company to
be formed.
Spencer Gulf North
H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith, on behalf of Spencer Gulf
Telecasters Ltd. (a company to be formed).
The applications of Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd.,
in respect of the Bega-Cooma Area, and Sunraysia Television Ltd.,
in respect of the Murray Valley Area, were withdrawn prior to
the commencement of the Board’s inquiries. Television Wollongong
Transmissions Ltd. subsequently informed the Board that it would
make application to be represented at the Bega-Cooma inquiry
as a person having an interest in the proceedings within the mean-
ing of section 22 of the Act. This matter is referred to in paragraph
15 below.
5. Pursuant to section 83 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by
instrument in writing dated 22nd April, 1965, a copy of which is
contained in Appendix C, referred the above applications
to the Board for its recommendation as to the exercise by
him of the powers conferred by sub-section (1.) of section 81
of the Act. The Board, in accordance with the requirements of


section 20 of the Act gave notice of the time and place for the
commencement of the inquiries into the applications by letter to
each of the applicants, and also by public notice published in
newspapers circulating in the areas concerned. The Board com-
menced the inquiries on 31st August, 1965, at the Board’s offices
at 373 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, and completed the inquiries on
2nd September, 1965. Mr. Richard Searby appeared to assist the
Board at each of the inquiries; the names of counsel representing
the various applicants are set out in Appendix D. An official
transcript of the proceedings was made by the Commonwealth
Reporting Branch.
Provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act Relating to the
Ownership and Control of Commercial Television Stations —
Effect on Applications.
6. After the invitation of applications for licences for the areas
to which this report relates, the Broadcasting and Television Act
1965 was passed, which amended the Broadcasting and Tele-
vision Act 1942-1964 by substituting a new Division 3 of Part
TV. of the Act, relating to the limitation of ownership
and control of commercial television stations. The new
provisions, which were assented to on 2nd June, 1965,
had the effect that no person could have a “ pre-
scribed interest” within the meaning of section 91 of the
Act in more than two television station licences. Section 92,
however, provided that interests in commercial television station
licences held as at 17th December, 1964, would not be affected,
but that persons having such interests amounting to “prescribed
interests ” in more than two licences, would not be able to increase
such interests, nor would they be able to acquire “prescribed
interests ” in any further licences.
7. On 7th June, 1965, after the new legislation had been
assented to, the Board considered that it was necessary to invite
the attention of Canberra Television Ltd., licensee of commercial
television station CTC Canberra, an applicant for a licence in
the Bega-Cooma Area, to the new provisions of the Act because
the interests of John Fairfax Ltd. and associated companies
in station CTC appeared to make Canberra Television Ltd. ineli-
gible for the grant of a licence for an additional station. The
Board had in mind, in particular, the provisions of section 92e
of the Act which prohibits the grant of a licence to a company
where the circumstances are such that, upon the grant of the
licence, a person would be contravening (inter alia) section 92.
It appeared to the Board from the information available to it
that the grant of a licence for the Bega-Cooma Area to Canberra
Television Ltd. would result in a contravention of section 92 of
the Act by a number of persons who already held “ prescribed
interests ” in more than two commercial television station licences.


8. At the inquiry into applications for the Bega-Cooma Area,
counsel for Canberra Television Ltd. conceded that, as at that
stage constituted, the company would not be eligible for the
grant of a licence for the area. In these circumstances, the Board
was obliged to consider to what extent an applicant such as Can-
berra Television Ltd. should be permitted to appear in the
proceedings, especially as Canberra Television Ltd. did not give
any indication that any steps were being taken to remedy the
situation. The Board decided that the appearance of Canberra
Television Ltd. should be limited to the presentation of its appli-
cation and the submission of statements of evidence by witnesses.
Accordingly, therefore, the Board directed, in accordance with
sections 22 and 25 of the Act, that counsel for Canberra Tele-
vision Ltd. should not be permitted to cross-examine witnesses
of the other applicant, namely Southern United Telecasters, and
that representatives of Southern United Telecasters should not
cross-examine witnesses of Canberra Television Ltd.
9. The new legislation also affected the application for the
Murray Valley Area by Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters
Ltd., licensee of commercial television station BCV Bendigo,
because of the interests of Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd.
and Victorian Broadcasting Network Ltd. in the licence for BCV
Bendigo; each of these companies already hold “ prescribed
interests ” in more than two commercial television station licences,
with the result that the grant of an additional licence to Bendigo
and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd. would result in a contra-
vention of section 92 of the Act. The Board therefore wrote on
7th June, 1965, to Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.,
inviting the company’s attention to the new provisions of the
Act. At the Murray Valley inquiry, counsel for this applicant
also conceded that it would be ineligible for the grant of a
licence. The company presented its application but took no further
part in the inquiry.
10. The Board considered the applications and other docu-
ments and evidence presented by Canberra Television Ltd. and
Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd. as indicating the
views of these companies on the manner in which they considered
that television services should be provided in these areas.


PART II.—PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
11. The Bega-Cooma and Murray Valley Areas are both
areas of relatively small population in which a commercial tele-
vision service, if authorized, could only be a “ minimum-type ”
operation, involving mainly the provision of programmes on
film, supplemented by simple live programmes, unless, of course,
it was possible to obtain programmes on relay from another
station. In each of these areas, a station would, on the basis of the
Board’s estimates, provide a service to only about 40,000 people.
The position is further aggravated by the fact that both areas are
subject to the penetration of signals from adjoining commercial
stations, namely CTC Canberra and WIN Wollongong in the
case of the Bega-Cooma Area, and BTV Ballarat and BCV
Bendigo (and shortly STV Mildura) in the case of the Murray
Valley Area. The Spencer Gulf North Area, though it is subject
to some overlapping from the Adelaide stations, is a significantly
larger area than the other two areas.
12. Applications had previously been invited foj licences for
each of these three areas in November, 1961, but because of
doubts regarding the economic prospects of the operation of
stations in these areas, no applications were proceeded with in
the Bega-Cooma and Spencer Gulf North Areas. In the case
of the Spencer Gulf North area the then applicant indicated that
the position could well be reviewed by, say, 1965. The application
of B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran for the Murray Valley Area was
made on the basis that they would only accept a licence for that
area if they were also granted a licence for the Mildura Area: the
Board recommended that the licence for the Mildura Area should
be granted to another applicant.
13. The Board, in considering the provision of television in
any particular area, is obliged to explore fully the possibility of
providing service by means which will cover the widest possible
audience; normally, this is achieved only by the establishment of
high-powered stations. Every endeavour must, therefore, be made
to ascertain whether this course is practicable in respect of any area.
It was for this reason that applications were re-invited for the grant
of licences in the areas under consideration. Other means of pro-
viding a service can be considered only when the Board is satisfied
that service in the normal way by high-powered stations is imprac-
ticable on economic or other grounds.
14. The considerations applying to the three areas in question
and particularly to the Bega-Cooma and Murray Valley Areas, are
similar to those which the Board referred to in its report of
August, 1963, paragraphs 6-14 inclusive, on the applications for


licences for the smaller of the fourth stage areas, namely the
Manning River Area and a number of other areas. It was pointed
out in that report that the principal question which arises in
connection with the establishment of commercial television stations
in areas of lower population density is the likelihood of the finan-
cial success of such stations. In considering the likelihood of
success of such stations, in respect of which the margin between
success and failure must necessarily be small, the Board must
have, in particular, careful regard to the capacity of the appli-
cant, as demonstrated by his application and the evidence in
support thereof, and to such factors as his ability to attract capital
for the venture and his identity with the area. Because of the
small margin between success and failure, the Board would
expect that applicants would approach the compilation of their
applications with a considerable degree of precision and that, in the
estimation of revenue and costs, a thorough investigation of all
relevant matters would be undertaken. It must be said that the
effective applications for both the Bega-Cooma Area and the
Murray Valley Area were deficient in this respect.


PART III.—PARTICULARS OF APPLICATIONS FOR EACH
AREA AND THE BOARD'S CONCLUSIONS THEREON
BEGA-COOMA AREA
15. Canberra Television Ltd.
Canberra Television Ltd., licensee of commercial television
station CTC Canberra, proposed that a service should be pro-
vided to the Bega-Cooma Area by means of the relay of pro-
grammes from CTC. However, as indicated in paragraph 7
above, under section 92 of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1965, Canberra Television Ltd. is ineligible for the grant
of an additional licence, since contraventions of the Act would
result if a further licence were granted to that company. The
Board, as explained in paragraph 8, directed that Canberra
Television Ltd. should, in the presentation of its application, be
limited to the submission of its application and statements of
evidence by witnesses. The evidence submitted by Canberra Tele-
vision Ltd. was directed mainly towards demonstrating that an
independent station could not operate economically in the area.
It claimed that the relay of programmes from an existing station,
as proposed in its application, was the only way of providing a
proper service to the Bega-Cooma Area. Canberra Television Ltd.
submitted to the Board and the Government that “ ways and
means might be found whereby Canberra Television Ltd. could
be permitted to provide a service to the area”. The applicant
offered to enter into discussions with the Board and/or the
Government on the basis that —
“ (1) The Bega-Cooma Area be withdrawn as an area for
separate licence and be added to the Canberra
Area.
(2) Because of its exceptional nature the Bega-
Cooma Area as a whole is not capable of being
serviced by translators as defined by the Post-
master-General in his speech to Parliament on
24th October, 1963.
(3) Canberra Television Ltd., being the most appro-
priate source of a commercial television service
for the area, be permitted to operate two trans-
mitters of 100 kW. e.r.p., one on Black Mountain
as at present and the second by relay on Brown
Mountain where arrangements can be made for
siting and servicing conjointly with the Postmaster-
General’s Department so that residents of the sub-
ject area would receive a service equal in quality
and interest to that enjoyed in Canberra.”


Although it is technically practicable to provide a service to
the Bega-Cooma Area by the relaying of programmes from CTC
Canberra, the establishment of a high-powered station in the area,
as proposed by Canberra Television Ltd., would require the grant
of an additional licence, which would be subject, inter alia, to
the ownership and control provisions of Division 3 of Part IV.
of the Act. As indicated earlier, however, the grant of an addi-
tional licence to Canberra Television Ltd. would result in a con-
travention of the provisions of section 92 of the Act, unless the
constitution of the company were changed. No proposals for
changes in shareholding were made by the company and the grant
of a further licence is therefore expressly precluded by section
92e of the Act. It is to be pointed out in this connection that
licences do not attach to areas, as seems to be suggested by Can-
berra Television Ltd., but to stations. In the circumstances, the
proposals put forward by Canberra Television Ltd. could not be
adopted, as a contravention of the Act would result.
16. Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd.
Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd. is the licensee of
commercial television station WIN Wollongong. This application
was withdrawn by the company prior to the commencement of the
Board’s inquiries. However, the company subsequently made
application to the Board for leave to be represented at the Bega-
Cooma inquiry as a person having an interest in proceedings
within the meaning of section 22 of the Act. The Board heard sub-
missions of the company’s counsel, based largely on the grounds
that the company had an interest in the proceedings by reason of
the fact that station WIN already provided a service to portion
of the Bega-Cooma Area and that the only way of providing a
service to that area was by means of television translator stations.
The Board decided that the company had not demonstrated that
it had a sufficient interest in the proceedings; it was not sufficient
for the company to claim that it was an adjoining station.
17. Southern United Telecasters
Constitution
The application was made under the name of Southern United
Telecasters by Stewart J. Craig, William A. Dargie and Herbert
S. Lilburn, on behalf of a company to be formed. If granted the
licence it was proposed to incorporate the company with an
authorized capital of £125,000 comprising 500,000 shares of ss.
each. All of the 500,000 shares would be issued and called to
3s. 9d., providing a paid-up capital of £93,750. It was proposed
that no individual shareholding would exceed 5 per cent, of the
paid-up capital and that at least 70 per cent, of the issue would
be reserved for public subscription, with priority being given to
residents within the viewing area. The three proposed directors
named below intended to take up 2,000 shares each.


—
First Year.
Second Year.
Third Year.
£
£
£
Income
64,324
71,110
73,779
Costs
63,000
63,800
62,500
Profit
1,324
7,310
11,279
It was proposed that there would be seven directors, includ-
ing the three sponsors of the application and four residents of the
viewing area. The four local directors had not been determined.
Details of the three proposed directors are as follows: —
S. J. Craig . . Company Manager and Director.
Director of Wilson & Craig
Pty. Ltd. (builders) and asso-
ciated companies, Castle-
reagh Holdings Pty. Ltd. and
Delta Enterprises Pty. Ltd.
W. A. Dargie . . Artist. Chairman of Directors
of D.Y.T. Services Pty. Ltd.
H. S. Lilburn . . Television Engineer. Chief Engi-
neer and Assistant General
Manager of Wide Bay-Burnett
Television Ltd., licensee of
commercial television station
WBQ Wide Bay (Mary-
borough). Director of Delta
Enterprises Pty. Ltd.
Financial Proposals
The estimated cost of establishment of the station was
£121,500 including £13,700 pre-operational expenses. The esti-
mated income and costs of operation for each of the first three
years were —
Funds would be provided from paid-up capital of £93,750.
It was proposed that equipment would be purchased on terms and
that a bank overdraft would also be obtained.
Programme Proposals
It was proposed that the weekly hours of transmission for
each of the first three years would be 32 hours. All programmes
would be on film except the A.B.C. network news, a portion of the
children’s session from Monday to Friday and a twice weekly
12062/65.—3


half-hour panel show. It was anticipated that approximately 30
per cent, of programmes for the first year would be of Australian
origin and that this content would be increased in later years.
Technical Proposals
The applicant’s estimates were made on the basis that the
studios and a transmitter of 50 kW. e.r.p. would be located on
Brown Mountain. The applicant estimated that the station would
serve a population of some 40,000.
CONCLUSIONS
18. Because of the withdrawal of the application by Tele-
vision Wollongong Transmissions Ltd., and the questions which
arose as to the eligibility of Canberra Television Ltd. for the
grant of the licence, the only effective application for this area
was that of Southern United Telecasters. The Board has given
careful consideration to this application. It was impressed by the
sincerity of the only witness, Mr. H. S. Lilburn, but it was clear,
as he admitted in evidence, that he had limited experience in
accounting and business matters, and this was reflected in the
application which was largely compiled by him. The basis
of the revenue estimates and cost figures did not seem, on the
evidence adduced, to be sound and the Board was left in a state of
uncertainty in this respect. A feature of this application was that
despite the fact that the estimates presented to the Board showed
a profit in each of the first three years of operation, the applicant
desired the Board to explore the possibility of Government assist-
ance for the establishment of the station. It was not clear what
form of assistance was envisaged but it appeared that the appli-
cant intended that the assistance should be of a continuing nature.
The applicant had made some attempt to enlist local support for
the application but, in fact, no promises of local capital sub-
scriptions had been forthcoming, nor had any local businessmen
indicated their willingness to act as directors of the company.
Although it is not an indispensable requirement for a successful
application, the Board has always emphasized the desirability
of local shareholding in a country station and undoubtedly the
goodwill and support of the local community are required in the
establishment of such a station. The Board has serious doubts
whether capital would be forthcoming for the establishment of
a station. The only capital subscriptions which had been promised
at the time of the inquiry were £375 by each of the three pro-
posed directors. The Board has come to the conclusion that it is
unable to recommend the grant of a licence to this applicant for
a commercial television station for this area. The result is that
the Board does not recommend the grant of any licence in this
area. In these circumstances, the Board will now consider the
possibilities of providing a service to the area by means of tele-
vision translator stations.


MURRAY VALLEY AREA
19. Sunraysia Television Ltd.
Sunraysia Television Ltd. is the licensee of commercial tele-
vision station STV Mildura, which is expected to commence
operations later this year. This application was withdrawn prior
to the commencement of the Board’s inquiries.
20. Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.
Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd., licensee of
commercial television station BCV Bendigo, proposed in its appli-
cation that a service should be provided to the Murray Valley
Area by means of the relay of programmes from station BCV.
Counsel for Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd. con-
ceded that the company is ineligible for the grant of an additional
licence under the provisions of the Broadcasting and Television
Act 1942-1965 because of the interests of Amalgamated Wireless
(A/asia) Ltd. and Victorian Broadcasting Network Ltd. in
station BCV; both these companies have “ prescribed interests ” in
more than two commercial television station licences. Beyond the
presentation of its application, this company took no further part
in the proceedings, but also submitted that the provision of a
service to the Murray Valley Area would not be an economic
proposition for an independent station and that, in these circum-
stances, the area should be served by a television translator station.
21. B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran, on behalf of a
Company to be Formed
Constitution
The application was made by Brian F. O’Halloran and
Patrick F. O’Halloran on behalf of a company to be formed. It
was proposed that the company would have a nominal capital of
£200,000 comprising 800,000 shares of ss. each. If the applica-
tion were successful, it was intended to issue 400,000 shares, pro-
viding a paid-up capital of £lOO,OOO. It was proposed to raise
the capital by private subscription, with priority being given to
local residents.
The six proposed directors would take up not less than 1,000
shares each. It was stated in the application that no person would
hold more than 5 per cent, of the total issued shares, but in
evidence it was indicated that, if necessary, Messrs. B. F. and P. F.
O’Halloran would subscribe for 25 per cent, of the capital between
them.


—
First Year.
Second Year.
Third Year.
£
£
£
Income
37,100
51,500
70,900
Costs
62,800
65,600
69,600
Profit
Loss .
25,700
14,100
1,300
The proposed directors were as follows:
G. K. Harrison . . Oil Company Agent, Swan Hill;
Director of Barwicks Hotel
Pty. Ltd., Swan Hill, and a
number of Co-operative Hous-
ing Societies.
B. Kennon . . Grazier, Mellool, via Swan
Hill. Director of Moulamein
Pastures Protection Board.
B. F. O’Halloran . . Picture Theatre and Sporting
Centre Proprietor. Director of
Argus Holdings Pty. Ltd.,
Golden Bowl Pty. Ltd. and
theatre companies in Swan
Hill and Kerang.
P. F. O’Halloran . . Picture Theatre Proprietor.
Chairman of Directors of
Argus Holdings Pty. Ltd.,
Golden Bowl Pty. Ltd. and
theatre companies in Swan
Hill and Kerang.
B. Delany . . Barrister and Solicitor, Swan
Hill.
P. W. Landy . . Manager and Co-Proprietor of
White Swan Hotel, Swan Hill.
Financial Proposals
It was estimated that the cost of establishment of the station
would be £124,040 including pre-operational expenses of
£5,500. The estimated income and costs of operation for each of
the first three years were —
It was stated in evidence that these results would be improved
a little because of the fact that interest payments relating to tech-
nical equipment would be lower than estimated.
Funds would be available from the issued capital of £lOO,OOO
and a bank overdraft would be arranged. Equipment would be
purchased on terms.


Programme Proposals
It was proposed that the weekly hours of transmission in the
first year would be 25i hours, rising to 3(H hours in the second
year and 35 hours in the third year. The majority of programmes
would be on film, but the studio equipment proposed would per-
mit modest live presentations in the case of news and children’s
programmes.
Technical Proposals
It was proposed that the transmitter of 75 kW. e.r.p. would
be co-masted with the national station transmitter at Goschen, some
13 miles south-west of Swan Hill. The studio would be located
in Swan Hill. The applicant estimated that the station would serve
a population of over 50,000.
CONCLUSIONS
22. The application of Sunraysia Television Ltd. having been
withdrawn, and Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.
being ineligible for the grant of the licence, the application of
B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran was the only application which could
be considered for the grant of a licence. The supporting informa-
tion for this application was supplied at a very late stage with
the assistance of Electronic Industries Ltd. Although local busi-
nessmen were named in the application as being willing to act
as directors, they appear to have taken no part in the pre-
paration of the application. A feature of this application was the
small amount of profit which was predicted in the third year of
operation, namely £1,300. The position at the end of the third
year was that accumulated losses would amount to £38,500. On
the basis that the profit result in the third year, by which time
receiver saturation would have reached a substantial level, could
not be expected to be improved on to any substantial extent, the
financial prospects of the company and its ability to pay dividends
within a reasonable time could not be said to be favorable.
As indicated earlier, the Murray Valley Area is already
subject to penetration by commercial stations BCV Bendigo and
BTV Ballarat and will shortly also be subject to competition
from STV Mildura. Competition from these stations must have
a significant effect on the audience attracted by a station estab-
lished in the Murray Valley Area and must detract seriously
from the revenue prospects of the station, particularly in the
early years of operation. There was no evidence to suggest that
any substantial financial support would be forthcoming from
the area and the Board has doubts regarding the prospects of
the applicant raising the necessary capital.


An important technical matter arises in connection with this
application. In the interests of economy, the applicant proposed
to share the mast used for the national station transmitter but,
although the applicant proposes a transmitter with an effective
radiated power of 75 kW. requiring an aerial gain of 15 with the
5 kW. transmitter proposed, the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment has indicated that the national mast is only suitable for an
aerial having a gain of 4, thus providing an e.r.p. of only 20 kW.
from the 5 kW. transmitter. A reduction of power of this order
would, of course, have the effect of reducing the coverage of the
station and its revenue potential.
After giving careful consideration to all the circumstances of
this area the Board has come to the conclusion that it should not
recommend the grant of a licence for a commercial television
station. The Board has serious doubts regarding the prospects
of this company of raising the necessary funds for the establish-
ment of the station. The Board will explore the possibility of pro-
viding a service to the area by means of television translator
stations.
SPENCER GULF NORTH AREA
23. H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith, on behalf of
Spencer Gulf Telecasters Limited (a com-
pany to be Formed)
The application was made by Henry B. Welch and Frederick
R. Smith, both of Port Pirie, on behalf of Spencer Gulf Tele-
casters Limited, a company to be formed with a nominal capital
of £250,000. It was proposed that issued capital would be
£lBO,OOO, comprised of 720,000 shares of ss. each. The follow-
ing have expressed their intention of taking up shares in the
company if a licence is granted:—
Name No. of ss. Shares
Electronic Industries Ltd. . . . . 105,000
The Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. . . 20,000
Recorder Newspaper (Port Pirie) . . 12,000
.1. H. Gray . . . . . . 8,000
F. M. Streicher . . . . . . 8,000
Transcontinental Newspaper (Port
Augusta) . . . . . . 8,000
H. B. Welch . . 5,000
W. J. C. Willson . . . . . . 4,000
Union Motors . . . . . . 4,000
Others (21 with proposed holdings
between 100 and 2,000 shares) . . 19,100


It was proposed that the first directors of the company would
be —
H. B. Welch (Chair- Farmer and Grazier, Port Pirie.
man)
W. J. C. Willson . . Proprietor and Managing Direc-
tor of the Whyalla News,
Why alia.
R. M. Edwards . . Managing Editor of Transcon-
tinental Newspaper. Director
of Recorder Newspaper Pty.
Ltd., Gulf Hotels Pty. Ltd.
and Gulf Investments Pty.
Ltd.
L. G. Riches . . Speaker of the House of
Assembly of South Australia
and Co-Proprietor of Trans-
continental Newspaper.
D. G. Edwards . . Chairman of Directors and
Editor of the Recorder News-
paper Pty. Ltd., Co-Proprietor
of Transcontinental News-
paper, Director of Gulf
Hotels Pty. Ltd. and Gulf
Investments Pty. Ltd.
C. L. Ryan . . Chairman and Principal Execu-
tive Officer, City of Whyalla
Commission.
F. R. Smith . . Land Agent and Accountant,
Port Pirie.
C. C. Zahara . . Executive, Electronic Industries
Ltd. Alternate Director of
Broken Hill Television Ltd.
(the company to which the
licence for commercial tele-
vision station BKN Broken
Hill is to be granted).
Details of Principal Shareholder
Electronic Industries Ltd. is primarily a manufacturer and
distributor of electrical appliances and communications equip-
ment carrying on business principally in Melbourne, but also


—
“ A ” Ord.
(10s.)
No. Held.
“ B ” Ord.
(10s.)
No. Held.
6i% Pref.
(£1)
No. Held.
6% Pref.
(£1)
No. Held.
Total
Value
(in £s.)
Pye Ltd., England
Australian Mutual
869,788
20,500
445,144
Provident Society
Mutual Life and
Citizens Assur-
28,943
322,205
14,606
351,283
ance Co. Ltd. ..
National Mutual
Life Association
15,388
213,384
14,250
235,328
of Australia Ltd.
990
106,724
123,218
26,166
203,241
Warner Family ..
ANZ Nominees
330,484
10,400
170,442
Ltd.
A. & I. Insurances
695
285,682
143,188
Ltd.
277
41,151
61,378
82,092
throughout Australia, either in its own name or through sub-
sidiary companies. It has an issued capital of £6,518,705 com-
prised of 1,905,399 “A” ordinary shares of 10s. each, 7,843,577
“B” ordinary shares of 10s. each, 1,423,962 6jt per
cent, cumulative preference shares of £1 each and
220,255 6 per cent, cumulative preference shares of
£1 each, held by some 14,000 shareholders. Only the
“A ” ordinary shares have full voting rights. Holders
of “ B ” ordinary shares may vote only on reduction of capital,
winding up or sale, or on questions affecting their rights, or when
their annual rate of dividend falls below 5 per cent.
The principal shareholders of Electronic Industries Ltd. are
as follows:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 92d of the Broadcasting
and Television Act 1942-1965, Electronic Industries Ltd. is
restricted to a shareholding of 15 per cent, or less in the appli-
cant company as, under the Act, Electronic Industries Ltd. is
deemed to be under the control of Pye Ltd. of England, a non-
resident company which is in a position to exercise 45 per cent,
of the voting rights.
In addition to its proposed holding of 14.6 per cent, in the
applicant company, Electronic Industries Ltd. has the following
interests in commercial television stations:—l4.9 per cent, in
SES South East (South Australia); 5 per cent, in BTW Bunbury
(through its wholly-owned subsidiary—Harris, Scarfe and
handovers Ltd.); 1 per cent, in WBQ Wide Bay (Queensland)
and a proposed 5 per cent, interest in BKN Broken Hill.


—
First Year.
Second Year.
Third Year.
£
£
£
Income
86,000
131,000
185,000
Costs
120,300
129,300
142,300
Profit
1,700
42,700
Loss ..
34,300
Financial Proposals
The estimated cost of establishment of the station is £271,550
including £12,750 pre-operational expenses. The estimated income
and costs of operation for each of the first three years were—
Funds would be provided from the proposed issued capital of
£IBO,OOO. Technical equipment will be purchased on terms. In
addition, overdraft accommodation of £25,000 is being arranged.
Programme Proposals
The applicant proposed that the average weekly hours of
transmission would be 25i hours in the first year, rising to 30
hours in the second year and to a minimum of 35 hours in the
third year. Programmes would consist mainly of film and kine-
scope recordings; in the first year, programmes would include
3i hours of local live presentations.
Technical Proposals
It was proposed that a transmitter of 60 kW. e.r.p. would be
co-sited with the national television transmitter at The Bluff, some
8 miles from Port Pirie. The studio is to be located in Port Pirie,
at a site to be selected. The applicant estimated that the station
would provide a service to a population of some 74,000.
CONCLUSIONS
24. The Spencer Gulf North Area, with an expected station
coverage in the vicinity of 70,000 people, is a substantially
larger than either the Bega-Cooma or Murray Valley Areas and
there seem reasonable prospects that a station in this area should
be a financial success, although the station would, in its early
stages, be of the “ minimum-type ” operation.
The local interests in this application are substantially the same
as those who' originally applied for a licence in this area pursuant
to the Minister’s invitation of 30th November, 1961, and appeared
before the Board at its inquiries in 1963. However, at that stage,
the applicant considered that the time was premature for the


establishment of a commercial station in the area and sub-
mitted that any action regarding the grant of a licence should be
deferred until say, 1965, when the position would be clearer. The
applicant now considers that conditions are favorable for the
establishment of a local station and the Board on the evidence
presented to it agrees with this view. The application now has
relatively substantial financial backing, with Electronic Industries
proposing a 14 per cent, shareholding and Broken Hill Pty.
Co. Ltd. proposing a 3 per cent, shareholding. A total of 27 per
cent, of the proposed issued capital has already been promised.
The applicants have also enlisted substantial local support and
seven of the eight proposed directors will be local residents. Two
of these local directors gave evidence before the Board. The appli-
cation was competently prepared and presented, and the Board
considers that the proposed station should have reasonable pros-
pects of success. The Board accordingly reached the conclusion
that a licence should be granted to H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith,
on behalf of Spencer Gulf Telecasters Ltd. (a company to be
formed).


PART IV.—RECOMMENDATIONS
25. The Board recommends—
(a) that no licence for a commercial television station be
granted in respect of the Bega-Cooma Area;
( b ) that no licence for a commercial television station
be granted in respect of the Murray Valley Area;
(c) that a licence for a commercial television station in
the Spencer Gulf North Area be granted to H. B.
Welch and F. R. Smith, on behalf of Spencer Gulf
Telecasters Ltd. (a company to be formed).
The Board further recommends that the licence for the Spencer
Gulf North Area should not be granted until the proposed com-
pany is formed and until the Minister is satisfied as to the
memorandum and articles of association and the directors and
shareholding of the company, and as to compliance with Division
3 of Part IV. of the Act. It also recommends that it be a condition
of the grant of the licence that the licensee shall not enter into
any exclusive arrangement with any metropolitan station for the
provision of programmes or the sale of station time or advertising.
The Board was constituted for the holding of the inquiry in
respect of the Bega-Cooma Area by the Chairman, Messrs.
Donovan and McDonald, and Sir Tasman Heyes. During other
inquiries Sir Tasman Heyes was not present.
Dated this 21st day of September, 1965.
R. G. OSBORNE, Chairman.
J. M. DONOVAN]
D. MCDONALD r Members.
T. H. E. HEYES J
J. A. McNAMARA, Secretary.


APPENDIX A
Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
NOTICE BY THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL
In pursuance of Section 82 of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, I, Alan Shallcross Hulme, the Postmaster-General of the
Commonwealth of Australia, hereby invite applications for the grant of
a licence for a commercial television station in each of the areas specified
below:—
Bega-Cooma Area—New South Wales.
Murray Valley Area—Victoria.
Spencer Gulf North Area—South Australia.
Southern Agricultural Area—Western Australia.
Central Agricultural Area—Western Australia.
Applications for the licences shall be made in accordance with the
form supplied by me and obtainable from the Secretary, Australian Broad-
casting Control Board, 373 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, C.l.
Applications shall be lodged with the Secretary of the Board not
later than the first day of March, 1965.
Dated this sixteenth day of November, 1964.
ALAN S. HULME,
Postmaster-General.
APPENDIX B
Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF A LICENCE FOR A
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION
The Secretary,
Australian Broadcasting Control Board,
373 Elizabeth Street,
Melbourne.
In pursuance of the provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, application is hereby made for the grant of a licence for a
commercial television station for the
area.
The particulars and information required by the form of application
supplied by the Minister are attached.
Name of Applicant
Address
Signature
Dated this day of 19. . . .


Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
Application for the Grant of a Licence for a Commercial Television Station.
Particulars to be supplied by Applicant
An applicant for a licence shall supply the particulars or information
required by the following paragraphs. Such particulars and information
should be set out in separate numbered schedules of which eight copies
should be supplied—
1. State whether the application is made by a company or on behalf of
a company to be formed.
2. If the application is made by a company, state the name of the
company, the date and place of incorporation, and the address of the
registered office, and furnish—
(a) a copy of the memorandum and articles of association;
(b) if applicable, a copy of the prospectus or statement in lieu of
prospectus;
(c) details of the financial position of the company, including a
copy of the last balance sheet and a copy of the profit and
loss account and of the profit and loss appropriation
account for each of the last five years;
(d) a list of shareholders including the address and occupation
of each, the number and class of shares held, and the
amount paid up on each share. In any case where shares
are held on behalf of some other person, similar details
with respect to that person are also to be furnished;
(e) the names, places of residence and occupations of the directors
and principal officers of the company:
(f) details of the association of any director or principal officer
of the company with —
(i) any commercial television station;
(ii) any person, firm or company carrying on any
business;
(g) details similar to those required by the preceding sub-
paragraph (d) in respect of any company which is—
(i) the beneficial owner of five per cent, or more of the
shares in the applicant company; or
(ii) in a position to exercise control of five per cent.
or more of the voting rights in that company;
(h) a list of the directors of any company referred to in the pre-
ceding subparagraph (g);
(i) details of the association (either directly or indirectly through
other companies) of the applicant company or any share-
holder holding more than five per cent, of the shares in the
applicant company with —
(i) any commercial television station;
(ii) any person, firm or company carrying on any
business;


(iii) any other company, or company to be formed,
which is, or proposes to be, an applicant for a
licence for a commercial television station;
(j) the name (and details where not elsewhere supplied in the
application) of any person or company who, either alone
or by virtue of any association or arrangement would be
deemed to exercise control of the licence within the
meaning of Section 92a. and Section 92b. of the Act, if
the licence were granted to the applicant company;
(k) details of any shares in the applicant company which are
beneficially owned by persons who are not residents of
Australia or by companies controlled within the meaning
of Section 92b. of the Act by persons who are not residents
of Australia; and
(l) details of any proposed increase of the issued capital beyond
that issued at the date of the application, including details
of the proposed additional capital and shareholding together
with details of any changes which may result in relation
to the information provided under the preceding sub-
paragraphs.
3. If the application is made on behalf of a company to be formed, state
the proposed name of the company, and where it is to be incor-
porated, and furnish—
(a) a copy of the proposed memorandum and articles of
association;
(b) a copy of the proposed prospectus or statement in lieu of
prospectus;
(c) details of the proposed issued capital;
(d) a list of the proposed shareholders and other details similar
to those required under sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph
2; and
(e) all information relevant to the company proposed to be
formed, including details similar to those required under
sub-paragraphs (e), (f). (g), (h), (i), (j) and (k) of
paragraph 2.
4. Furnish details of —
(a) any documents, instruments, contracts, trusts, arrangements
or understandings relating to the ownership, operation or
control of the station or its facilities or any right or interest
therein; and
(b) any network arrangement entered into or proposed to be
entered into.
5. Furnish estimated costs, and the basis on which the costs are com-
puted, of the establishment of the station under the headings of—
(a) technical equipment;
(b) radiating structure;


(c) land and ancillary facilities;
(d) buildings;
(e) pre-operational expenses.
6. Furnish estimates and details of the basis on which the estimates are
made, of the income and cost of operation of the station for each
of the first three years.
7. Furnish details, supported by documentary evidence, of the capital
or funds available to meet the cost of —
(a) the establishment of the station; and
(b) the operation of the station for the first three years.
8. Furnish details of any proposals for recruiting and training staff,
together with particulars of the estimated staff required.
9. Furnish details of the proposed hours of service in the first three years
after the commencement of operations.
10. Furnish details of the proposed composition of programmes for the
first three years after the commencement of operations. (As far as
practicable, information under this heading should be supplied with
respect to such matters as —
(a) likely programme schedules;
(b) the manner in which programmes will be provided by the
station, i.e., whether by means of films, telerecordings,
video tape recordings, live programmes, programmes
received by the station on relay, or otherwise.)
Details should also be supplied as to the extent to which it is likely
that programmes produced in Australia will be used. In addition,
full information should be given as to the sources from which the
above-mentioned programmes will be obtained.
11. Furnish particulars of the technical facilities to be provided, covering—
(a) type and power of transmitter;
(b) height and gain of aerial system;
(c) studios;
(d) type and number of cameras; and
(e) telecine and/or video tape equipment.
12. Specify the proposed location of the transmitter and studios and the
estimated coverage of the station on the basis of the technical
equipment proposed.


APPENDIX C
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT 1942-1964
Reference by the Postmaster-General
In pursuance of the above Act, I, Alan Shallcross Hulme, Postmaster-
General, hereby refer to the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, for its
recommendation as to the exercise by me of the powers conferred by
sub-section (1.) of section 81 of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, the following applications made in pursuance of the Notice
published by me in the Gazette dated 26th November, 1964, for licences
for commercial television stations in the undermentioned areas:—
Bega-Cooma Area —New South Wales
Canberra Television Ltd.
Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd.
Southern United Telecasters.
Murray Valley Area —Victoria
Sunraysia Television Ltd.
Bendigo & Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.
B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran, on behalf of a company to be formed.
Spencer Gulf North Area —South Australia
H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith, on behalf of Spencer Gulf Tele-
casters Ltd. (a company to be formed).
Southern Agricultural Area —-Western Australia
South Western Telecasters Ltd.
TVW Ltd.
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly.
Central Agricultural Area —Western Australia
TVW Ltd.
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly.
Dated this 22nd day of April, 1965.
ALAN S. HULME,
Postmaster-General.


APPENDIX D
COUNSEL REPRESENTING APPLICANTS
Applicant Counsel or Agent
Bega-Cooma Area
Canberra Television Ltd. . . . . . . C. L. D. Meares, Q.C.,
J. Melville
Southern United Telecasters . . H. S. Lilburn
Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd. I. F. Sheppard
Murray Valley Area
Bendigo and Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd. . . D. W. Rogers
B. F. &P. F. O’Halloran on behalf of a company J. Melville
to be formed
Spencer Gulf North Area
H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith on behalf of H. N. Wardle
Spencer Gulf Telecasters Ltd. (a company to
be formed)
By Authority: A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.


