

SANDS A McDOUGALL LIMITED, LITHOGRAPHERS, MELBOURNE.


EXE(
Appointed at
Town HaL
The Mayo
Carter, Esq., Chairman.
The Right Rev. Dr. Moorhouse, Bishop of
Melbourne,
His Honor Mr. Justice Holroyd.
The Hon. E. Langton.
G. H. F. Webb, Esq., Q.C.
J. L. Purves, Esq.
Professor Elkington.
P. Moloney, Esq., M.D.
John Blyth, Esq.
Mr. Councillor Wilks
R. G. Benson, Esq., Hon. Treasurer,
32 Collins Street East.
M. Lang, Esq
R. Balderson, Esq
Jas. Macdougall, Esq.
Andrew Rowan, Esq.
David Bennett, Esq.
W. E. Murphy, Esq.
A. G. Mclntyre, Esq.
J. E. Phillips, Esq.
C. J. Fairfield, Esq.
T. L. Parker, Esq.
H. U. Alcock, Esq,
Benjamin Douglas, Esq.
E. G. Fitz Gibbon, Esq., Hon. Secre-
tary, Town Hall, Melbourne.


IMPERIiiSgr
FEDERATION LEAGUE
VICTORIAN BRANCH.
REPORT OF PUBLIC MEETING
HEI.D IN THE
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
On FRIDAY EVENING, sth JUNE, 1885,
Godfrey Downes Carter, Esq., the Right Worshipful the Mayor
of Melbourne , in the Chair.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
TOGETHER WltH
\ of % mi of %
Suggestions for the Formation and Organisation of Local Sections
of the Victorian Branch League.
Temporary Office of the Branch;
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE.
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
GREAT MEETING IN THE TOWN HALL.
A public meeting of “citizensof Melbourne
who desire to maintain the integrity of the
British Empire and to bring its parts into
closer union,” convened by Mr. Godfrey
Downes Carter (the mayor), was held in the
Town-hall, on Friday evening, June 5. The
doors were besieged for some time before the
hour fixed for their opening, and when the
meeting commenced the hall was well filled,
the balconies and south gallery being chiefly
occupied by ladies, for whom and their
escorts these had been considerately reserved.
The period of waiting was pleasantly wiled
away in listening to national and patriotic
airs played on the great organ by Mr. David
Lee, whose performances were acknow-
ledged by the most cordial applause. As
the speakers filed on to the platform the
organist played the National Anthem, and
the audience rose en masse.
The Mayor presided, and amongst the
gentlemen on the platform were the Bishop
of Melbourne, Mr. Justice Holroyd, Pro-
fessor Elkington, Professor Morris, Messrs.
Ham, M.L.C., E. Langton, G. H. F. Webb,
J. Blyth, R. G. Benson. H. J. Langdon, J.
M'Dougall, D. Bennett, W. E. Murphy, A. G.
MTntyre, T. L. Parker, E. G. Fitz Gibbon,
Councillors Terry. Wilks, and Peirce, Dr.
Moloney, Dr. Blair, Dr. Robertson, Messrs.
W. G. Lempriere, J. Smith, C. R. Blackett,
S. Leon, J. D. Emerson, G. W. Taylor, and a
large number of other gentlemen.
The Mayor, who upon taking the chair was
greeted with loud applause, said :—Ladies
and gentlemen,—Before introducing to you
His Honour Mr. Justice Holroyd, who will
move the first resolution, I desire to say a few
words as to how and why this meeting has
been convened, as I see that doubts have
been circulated in the press as to who might
be its promoters. (Hear, hear.) The answer
is very simple ; like, I presume, the greater
number of those I see confronting me this
evening, I have, to use the words of the
late Duke of Wellington, been “trying
to guess what was on the other side
of the hill,” with regard to the future
destiny of the British Empire ; and
noticing the great interest that this ques-
tion—this greatest of great questions—has
excited in the old country, and that an
Imperial Federation League has been formed
there, numbering amongst its members some
of the brightest and ablest of England’s sons,
I have many times wondered why the re-
quest of that League that the colonies should
inaugurate branches of the parent associa-
tion, had not been complied with. I waited
for a long time hoping that some one or other
would take the necessary steps to form a
branch in Australia. Finding, however, that
no one did so, some months ago I determined,
rightly or wrongly, to take the initiative my-
self. (Cheers.) And invited a number of
gentlemen to meet me, whose names are on
the programme which has been circulated
amongst you, and I found that with scarcely
one exception they coincided with my
opinions and considered that this was an
opportune time to start such a branch, it
being a period of political peace, and when
public enthusiasm had been aroused by recent
events—(cheers) —when I may say there has
been such a shaking of the dry bones among
the people of our race as has not occurred
previously during our life-times. (Loud
Applause.) They further agreed with me
that this should be a non-political movement
as far as local party politics are concerned,
and we therfore decided that until after this
meeting had been held, and until we had
placed the case fairly end squarely before the
people of Victoria, we would not invite the
co-operation of politicians, because we felt
that if we did so it would be very difficult to


keep quite clear of the suspicion of being
influenced by party motives—(hear, hear), —
and at this moment we require the assistance
of men of all shades of politics. We want
all to be for the state, and none for them-
selves. (Cheers.) We next decided unani-
mously that we should not pretend to place
any scheme of Federation before you. What
we wish to do is simply to endeavour to rouse
the people to a sense of the necessity of
Federation, if we are to remain a part of the
great British Empire. (Loud cheers.) I have
been told, ladies and gentlemen, that there is
a section of the people country who
do not believe in Imperial Federation—
(Applause and “No.”) —and I have also been
told that those unbelievers are young people.
(Applause.) Well, I desire here, on behalf of
my sons, and of the young of this colony
generally, to give that statement the most em-
phatic denial. (Loud cheers.) li(say that of
these young people we are very’proud. We
are proud of their successes at the Universities,
not only here, but in the old land, and
of their triumphs in all manly sports, on the
river, in the cricket field and elsewhere ; but
we, their fathers, know perfectly well that
they owe us everything they possess, even
their existence, and that in a few short years
we shall leave them what little we have not
already given them, and amongst that little
we shall leave them as a sacred trust the
traditions of our race, and we feel quite satis-
fied that they will be true to them. (Loud
cheers.) Mr. Froude told me, when he was
here recently, that the thinking men of
America were beginning to see that thegpro-
bable outcome of the Federation movements
going on throughout the world would be the
union of all English speaking peoples,—loud
cheers—and I say that he who tells me that
our worthy sons are so small in their ideas
that they cannot look to such a future with
hope and with anxiety, grossly slanders our
young people. (Cheers. ) I say that that is the
future that we and they do look for, and why?
Not merely for our own personal advantage—
which will be considerable—but because we
know perfectly well that the manifest destiny
of the Anglo-Saxon race is to carry civilisation
and liberty wherever they go, and once united
as one people they will carry them to the
greater part of this habitable world. (Cheers.)
I will not trespass upon you further, but will
ask Mr. Justice Holroyd to move the first
resolution. (Cheers.)
Mr. Justice Holkoyd, who was received
with loud and prolonged cheers, said, —Mr.
Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, and my
Fellow-citizensof Victoria—(loud applause),—
I have been requested to move the first reso-
lution this evening, and that is this :
“ That, in order to maintain the integrity of the
British Empire, and to bring its parts into closer
union and co-operation, some form of federation is
essential.”
What does that resolution assume ? You all
know that the British Empire is composed of
many widely-dispersed communities, some of
them already great nations, and others
growing rapidly to become great. Who-
ever votes for this resolution will sig-
nify his belief that these communities, as
they increase in population and expand in
power, should not fall away from each other,
should not pursue each an isolated career un-
mindful of kindred ties and oi the influence
for good which union produces, but should
combine for common interests and common
objects, and for those interests which
combination makes common. (Loud cheers.)
For I tell you that combination
creates unity of purpose as well as it
effectuates concerted designs. (Applause.)
Nations are like politicians ; as soon as they
coalesce they begin to assimilate. (Applause
and laughter.) That is what the resolution
assumes. What does it affirm? That, to
effect the purpose of combination amongst
all parts of the British Empire which
shall some day lead to a combination of
all English-speaking peoples, a league is
necessary. What does a league mean?
Two things there are two principles—
one clearly admitted already by the Imperial
Federation League, and another which, to my
mind, is the corollary upon it. The first is
a comprehensive scheme of international
defence —(cheers) —in which every member of
the British Empire shall bear a proportionate
part; andpthe second is a voice for each
member in controlling the external policy of
the Empire.& (Cheers.) We are not now, at
our first meeting, to consider means; we
are here to consider principles, and I am
trying tolpoint out to you the meaning of this
first resolution, more particularly because I
wish every man and woman and child that I
can influence to adopt it with their eyesopen.
(Hear, hear.) Now, I know well enough that
there are many men whom I am very far
from despising, whose opinions are worth


hearing, weighing, and deeply considering
—(cheers) —and those men think that in
the event of war between Great Britain and
another foreign power, the colonies of Great
Britain are placed in an unfair position of
great peril. (Cheers.) Ido not deny that,
and I know to what it has led in many
thoughtful minds, whose opinions, I beg you
to mark, I most sincerely respect, though I
differ from them. (Cheers.) Many men think
that that leads necessarily to separation.
Why ? Because they say if a war ensues
between Great Britain and a foreign power
we colonists would be exposed to the risk of
invasion in a cause for which we care not a
jot, and which may be in our opinion an un-
just one. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, I know that
opinion as well as possible, and I know the
conclusion to which it leads. But apart from
all question of sentiment, I venture to think
the conclusion is wrong. (Cheers.) And I
will tell you why. Do you think that if any
strong nation wants a pretext to invade a
weak one it cannot find it ? (Laughter and
cheers.) And, suppose we colonists were
separated from Great Britain—or I would
rather say from the United Kingdom of Eng-
land and Ireland —(cheers) —to-morrow, and
some foreign power, shall we say Russia,
wished to invade us; and, if Russia had
that desire, what would she say? That our
ocean fleet of steamers, laden with wool and
grain and gold, had troubled her cruisers
in the southern seas. (Laughter.) And, if
she should afterwards sack Melbourne, what
would she call the act? She would call it
“ an incident ” —(laughter)—and “ trust that
it would not embarrass our future amic-
able relations.” (Laughter and cheers.)
Well, gentlemen, and if we were separated,
and if that great misfortune, which God for-
fend should happen, did happen, and this
Australia of ours was invaded by any great
power like Russia, or even France—for noble
as the French people are, we can never de-
pend upon a French Government—(“Hear,
hear,” and cheers) —I say if that great mis-
fortune should happen, what would be our
best chance of safety, supposing us to have
“ cut the painter ?” Bravely as our handful
of men would fight to prevent this country
falling into the hands of the enemy, and I
know they would do that —they come of Eng-
lish, Scotch, and Irish blood, and, of course,
they would fight—(cheers)—they inherit that
spirit from those from whom they got every
good thing that they have in this world—from
their ancestors—(cheers) —but bravely as
they would fight, the chances are they would
be beaten. And if we were beaten down,
where would be our best chance of safety?
In this, that the grand old mother country,
although discarded and cut off, would say
—“We will never let our children perish.”
(Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, that is senti-
ment. (Hear, hear.) But I tell you this
that sentiment is a living force in this
world (cheers) —which every statesman
and every [man of action has to take into
account, and if that day, which I pray to
God may never come, should come, then
there will live in the minds and hearts of
all Englishmen the memory of the New
South Wales contingent and Mr. Dailey !
(Cheers.) That is the meaning of senti-
ment, and it is by sentiment alone that
we can awaken enthusiasm and kindle
a great idea. (Cheers.) When we come
to details, we talk business. (Laughter.)
We look at them in a hard, practical
way; and that is what, if you become
members of this society, you will have
to do. (Laughter.) You are asked to help
us. We have difficulties enough before us.
But what should we do ? Because of the very
number and magnitude of these difficulties,
why, we[should tackle them at once. (“ Hear,
hear,” and cheers.) And recollect that we
shall be only a small part of a vast society, a
contributing member of an enormous cir-
culating library. (Cheers.) I trust, there-
fore, no man will think that because he
cannot see the way to the solution of these
difficult problems at the outset, a multitude
of men may not find the way in the future.
(Cheers.) I have only one more word to
add, and that is, beware of false friends.
(Cheers.) There are men in this community,
who are opponents of this movement, but
dare not avow it. (Hear, hear.) All
those who are really sincere in their
desire for the closer union of the vast circle
of British communities, wish to be honestly
and adversely criticised, for the simple
reason that the more and the more
truly they are criticised, the more able they
will be to understand the difficulties
which beset them, and to find means to over-
come those difficulties. (Hear, hear.) But
there is one thing which I hate, and against
which I will fight with all my might, and I
hope you will too, and that is the man who,


while pretending goodwill towards this
movement, tries to daunt us at the outset of
our career by predicting inevitable failure.
(Cheers.) I now ask you, with all your heart
and soul, to carry this motion with acclama-
tion. (Loud and continued applause.)
The Chairman called upon the Hon.
Edward Langton to second the resolution.
Mr. Langton said :—Mr. Mayor, ladies and
gentlemen,—The discussion which has been
going on for many months past in the old
country has familiarised the minds of most of
us with the leading features of the proposi-
tion which has been so eloquently put before
you by Mr. Justice Holroyd. Wise and
thoughtful men in the old country have
come to the conclusion, having experience
of the peculiar needs of colonists, that the
permanent relations of the several parts of
this the proudest empire the world has ever
seen, ought not to be left to be determined
either by the exigencies of party,or by the
chapter of accidents. (Cheers.) Gentlemen,
party, no doubt, is an almost indispensable
feature of representative Government; but
there has been a tendency, and very many
men have recognised and deplored it—there
has been a tendency manifested in high
quarters, and especially during the last
quarter of a century, to prefer the interests
of party to the interests of the people, and
to put the immediate interests of the Govern-
ment of the day before the permanent welfare
of the people at large. (Cheers.) I am not
alone in expressing that opinion, and I might
refer to two authorities with which I do not
always agree. But a few days since there
appeared a leading article in 'The Argus upon
this very subject, and speaking with approval
of the sentiment I have expressed, the writer
said, referring to public feeling and sentiment
in England:—“lt is deplored that a fatal
change is passing over public men, that they
have ceased to lead, and have come to con-
sider only the public opinion of the hour.”
In the other leading journal, The Age, a
writer, dilating upon the same topic went
further still, and uttered the sentiment which
possibly needs some qualification, that
“nearly all modern wars spring from the
party necessities of politicians in office.”
Now, I ask, has not profound wisdom been
displayed by the friends of the colonists in
England in declaring that our ultimate des-
tinies shall not be determined by influences
like these? (Cheers.) How disastrous those
influences under some circumstances may
prove, history furnishes at least one striking
illustration. We have but to cast our minds
back a little more than a century, to the time
when Lord North’s Government was in office,
when the principles that The Argue and Age
denounce in the paragraphs I have read were
in full force; when what Professor Seeley
called the “newspaper view ” of the question
prevailed, and when the interests of the party
in power were preferred to the interests of
the people at large. At that time, you will
recollect, a disastrous severance took place,
once and for ever, between two large sections
of the British race. By a majority of 270 to
78, the House of Commons preferred the re-
tention of Lord North’s Government in power
to the preservation of the Empire ; and by
doing that, what did they do ? They sacrificed
to the British people one half of a great con-
tinent, and sent adrift to shift for themselves
millions of the very pick of our own kith and
kin. That was the price paid on that occasion
for the triumph of a Government. The full and
most disastrous results of that act have pos-
sibly not yet been seen. The unity of a State,
the aspect which it presents to the world,
possess an influence far beyond the precise
material influence which its armies and
navies can produce. Do you recollect when
the late Lord Beaconsfield was in power—
(cheers) —the profound astonishment that
was created throughout Europe by the appear-
ance at Malta of 7,000 of Her Majesty’s dark
soldiers from India? Every statesman in
Europe at once asked himself the question:
If it is possible for this little island in the
North Sea to bring 7,000 of these people here,
why not 70,000 ? I think you will agree
with me that in actions such as this lay the
genius of the departed Statesman. (Cheers.)
But a more recent case has occurred. I heard
a letter read the other day which had been
received from a Victorian now in London,
and who is in a position which affords him
peculiar facilities for ascertaining the feelings
of the people in England and throughout the
Continent on questions affecting the relations
of the Empire and the colonies, and in that
he said :—“ No words I can employ would
convey to you an adequate idea of the pro-
found impression that has been created
in every court in Europe by the appear-
ance of the New South Wales contingent
in the Soudan.” (Cheers.) Coming as it


did a few years after Lord Beaconsfield’s
masterly stroke in the Mediterranean, it
forced European statesmen to the conclusion
that though the bond which has hitherto
existed between the different parts of the
Empire, has seemed a light one, it is no sham
—(hear, hear)—but the people whom they
never reckoned upon would make their ap-
pearance from all parts of the globe—(cheers)
—to defend that grand home of freedom from
which we came. (Loud applause.) And
now, gentlemen, to come back to the illustra-
tion I was just employing. What would
have been the impression throughout Europe
on that occasion if from another greater
Britain on the other side of the Atlantic,
still under British rule, there had come a
message that 50,000, or 100,000 men if need
be, were ready to cross the Atlantic to defend
the home of their fathers ? (Cheers.) I say
that we can only estimate the results of a
rash dismemberment of the Empire by view-
ing it in such a light. If some such combina-
tion were possible, if all Saxons were united
when the home of Saxondom was threatened,
I say that we could have no better security
for peace than that union would afford.
(Loud cheers.) But, gentlemen, if we ought
not to allow our destinies to be controlled by
the influences of party, ought we to leave
them to be decided by the chapter of acci-
dent ? I will dispose of that in one sentence
of a writer in The Times some years ago, who
summed up the whole question in the
words—“ The chapter of accidents is the
bible of the fool.” But I may be asked,
what have we to complain of in our present
relations? Why should we seek to draw
closer the bonds that bind us to the mother
country ? I answer that if you look into the
matter you will find that those relations are
not entirely satisfactory. It is not long ago
since a meeting was held in this hall at
which no complimentary opinions were ex-
pressed at the conduct of the Colonial authori-
ties, and the Colonial Office in that business
of New Guinea. (Cheers.) It will not be the
part of statesmanship to repeat that conduct,
for it would perhaps put too severe a strain
on the loyalty of the people of these colonies.
(Loud applause.) And that is not the only
case I can produce. When these discussions
were going on here, the Colonial Office re-
ferred the entire question of the relations of
England and Germany in the Pacific to two
officials, one from Downing-street, who has
since been appointed to a position in'Fiji,
and the other the German Consul at Sydney.
Strange to say, so far as I can discover, that
Commission was allowed to sit and make its
report without one word of authoritative
protest on the part of these colonies. And
still more recently we have had another illus-
tration. We desire not only Federation forthe
whole Empire, but special Federation amongst
ourselves. (“Hear, hear,” and cheers.)
To promote this, a conference, as you know,
was held not long ago in a neighbouring
colony. Conclusions were arrived at, and a
bill drafted and adopted by at least four of
the colonies concerned ; but without any con-
sultation with the authorities of these colonies,
the minister in charge of the bill in the House
of Lords has introduced a clause which, I
do not hesitate to say, will make the bill more
a measure to bring about the permanent dis-
memberment of Australia than to secure its
permanent unity. (Hear, hear.) Now I
think, when you reflect upon these several
points to which I have referred, that you will
arrive at the conclusion that it would be no
mark of wisdom or of statesmanship to allow
matters to remain in the present position. It
is better to anticipate the ill consequences
of a mistake than to make that mistake.
You may be led by circumstances to do some-
thing that you would regret in your calmer
moments. I hope nothing of the kind will
happen, but we have to deal with men, and
men are human, and we must consider their
sentiments and feelings in determining their
permanent retations. Therefore I say, on
account of the unsatisfactory condition of our
relations at the present time, we ought to look
with kindly and appreciative feelings to the
men in the old country who, casting aside all
party aims, have banded together in an
Imperial League to promote the settlement
of this very question, and to relieve us of the
danger that lurks in the future. (Cheers.)
Just a word now as to what is to be gained by
Federation. Mr. Justice Holroyd has told
you the importance of one combined system
of defence. Igo further. I think one great
consequence of Federation would be that
an anomaly in our system would] be
removed, and that throughout the British
Dominions there would be one navy and
one army, in which the status and dis-
cipline of all branches would be similar. If
that would not produce superior efficiency,
then I have altogether mistaken the possible


consequences of the present system. I have
heard, and I believe it is correct, that
amongst those who are responsible at the
present time for the defence of this colony
there is no difference of opinion at all on the
point Indeed, the suggestion was made by
Admiral Tryon that if actual war occurred it
would secure the efficiency of our means of
defence if all the naval forces of Australia
were put under his control. It has been my
fate, or fortune, to administer the Defence
Department more than once; and with special
means of discovering the defects of that
defence system I came to the same conclusion
years ago, and nothing has occurred since
to alter my opinion in the least degree.
Besides, if that change is made, as I believe it
will be made, I do not think the Colonial
Government would be called upon to pay
nearly so much as at the present time, for they
would only be required to bear a fair and equit-
able share of the cost of defending the Empire,
(Cheers.) Well then, gentlemen, look at the
altered conditions under which warfare is
carried on in modern times. When Nelson
won Trafalgar—(loud cheers) —we did not
want coal for our ships, but under the highly
complicated system of modern naval warfare,
coal, to propel the ship, is of as much conse-
quence as either men to work the guns or
ammunition to fill them with. We have in
these colonies an important coaling station,
and the defence of Newcastle is as much a
matter of Imperial as it is of colonial concern.
(Loud cheers.) And this furnishes us with
an additional reason why we should promote
a Federation which would bring about that
result. But, gentlemen, we are told that no
scheme at the present time is possible. I do
not think for my part that it is at all neces-
sary to go into that matter at present. I do
not wish to shirk that part of the question,
but it is not a new objection. It was antici-
pated so long ago as a century and a quarter,
and you will find in the speeches of Edmund
Burke an effective answer to it. When it was
said that the parts of the Empire were too
far apart to exist under one Government,
what did he say? “I cannot remove the
eternal barriers of the creation, but what
nature has disjoined in one way, wisdom may
unite in another.” (Cheers.) And recently
Mr. Forster, to whom every colonist is under
a debt of obligation, said “No scheme which
can now be devised, and no system which
can now be defined, would adequately express
the feelings in men’s minds.” (Cheers.) The
real question which we have to determine to-
night, is whether we prize and mean to pre-
serve our British birth-right. For my part,
I regard that as the most precious of my pos-
sessions, and I would not sacrifice it for any
party or any Government, or for any con-
sideration whatever. (Cheers.) I have such
faith in what Tennyson called
“ Our crowned republics’ crowning common sense
That saved her many times.”
that I believe the best thing that can happen
for the world, is for the United Kingdom to
be the paramount authority in it. And I will
tell you why. Because the British people—
whatever individual Governments may do,
and though we may find men who lend them-
selves purely to party ends—the British
people at heart are sound. They do not care
for glory; they do not go to war for glory;
they do not go to war for aggrandisement;
they recognise the mission which Providence
appears to have cast upon them, and they are
prepared to fulfil it—the mission of promoting
freedom, of securing justice, and preserving
peace throughout the world. (Loud and pro-
longed cheers.)
Mr. D. Bennett, who was called on to
support the resolution, said: —Mr. Mayor,
Ladies, and Gentlemen, —The readers of a
good old book will remember the passage
which says that the people were all with one
accord in Solomon’s temple. (Laughter.)
Now, sir, I am not going to compare the Town
Hall, Melbourne, with Solomon’s temple, ex-
cept in the one particular, that all the people
here seem to be of one accord. (Cheers, and
“No.”) Australians —to quote the words of
Puff in the play of “The Critic”—“when
they are of one mind, their unanimity is
wonderful.” (Hear, hear, and laughter.)
Seeing that so much unanimity prevails in
the meeting—(Cries of “ No”) —it would
surely be unnecessary for me to delay you by
any lengthened remarks in support of the
resolution so ably proposed and seconded by
the two gentlemen who have preceded me.
There is an opinion prevalent in some quarters
that separation from the mother country is
desirable. (Hear, hear, and “No.”) Now,
sir, while I claim as a settler in Australia the
fullest right for myself and my fellow colonists
to manage our own affairs—(Cheers) —in our
own way—(Cheers)—l cannot see that
there is anything to be gained by actual
separation from the mother country.


(Cheers.) Federation, sir, is a word that has
become rather popular of late, but Federation
to my mind does not imply that we are to
give up the right to govern ourselves in the
way that suits us best, but simply that upon
some general questions, such as national
defence and other kindred subjects, we should
have federal action, and we can well federate
with the other parts of the British Empire
without giving up our own liberty of action
in matters affecting only ourselves. (Loud
cheers.) I feel quite certain that although
there are indications in some quarters that
Federation is not thought to be desirable—
(A Voice: “ Intercolonial Federation”) —I
am quite sure that the great bulk of the
people are quite satisfied that Federation is
not only desirable, but absolutely necessary.
(Cheers.) Surely it would be unneces-
sary for me to recall the remembrance of our
native land, which we love so well, and of
whose history we feel so proud. Who is
there among us who does not feel a burst of
enthusiasm going through his mind when he
recalls the memory of the noble deeds done
by the old country, and who amongst us
would refuse to participate in such deeds if
the necessity arose for them to be performed
again? (Cheers.) Assuming for one minute,
sir, that the Australian colonies did separate
from the mother country, let but a
foreign power cry “Havoc,” and let slip the
dogs of war, the Australians with one voice
would cry out, “We will support the mother
country against foreign aggression.” (Loud
and prolonged cheering.) Sir, that is the sort
of Federation we require ; we do not want to
be bound to the mother country in any other
way than as a means of defence against
foreign aggression- Surely, sir, patriotism,
if nothing else, would induce us to support
the mother country, and look for her support
in return if any difficulty arose. What better
illustration of patriotism could there be than
in those spirit-stirring words of Sir Walter
Scott—
“ Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native land.”
(Cheers.) I think it is unnecessary for me to
take up your time further, and I will simply
call upon you to vote in favor of the resolu-
tion which has been already proposed and
seconded by His Honor Mr. Justice Holroyd
and the Honorable Edward Langton. (Loud
cheers.)
Mr. Whitelaw (speaking from the body of
the hall) said —Mr. Mayor, before you put the
resolution, I ask permission to say a word.
(Cries of “Platform.”)
Mr. Whitelaw ascended the platform, and
having obtained permission to speak, said: —
Mr. Mayor, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —You will
probably think I am playing a bold part here
to-night when I tell you I have risen to move
an amendment. (“Hear, hear,” and “No,
no.”) To put myself right with the meeting
I will first read the amendment, and after-
wards make a few remarks. The amendment
I propose is as follows :
“ That, in order to unite and strengthen this por-
tion of Her Majesty’s dominions, a society be formed
of men of all parties to advocate and support the
federal union of the Australian colonies. (Hear,
hear.) That this meeting is further of opinion that
the time has not yet arrived for an Imperial federa-
tion such as that proposed by Mr. Justice Holroyd.”
(Cheers, and dissent.) I have been some
48 years in this and the adjoining colony
of New South Wales. I have six Austra-
lians, the youngest of whom is 28. (“ Hear,
hear,” and laughter.) I have 21 young Victo-
rians—gumsuckers—(Cheers and laughter)—
and I expect very shortly to be a great grand-
father, (Laughter.) For these reasons, ladies
and gentlemen, I think I have a right to speak.
“Hear, hear.” I speak on their behalf—
(“ hear, hear”) —and it strikes me very forcibly
that this resolution which is now before the
meeting endangers their political and social
rights. (Cries of “No, no,” and “Yes, yes.”)
The resolution itself is unmeaning, and I
am very much surprised that such a resolution
should be submitted to such an intelligent
meeting as this. (Cries of “Oh !” and confu-
sion. ) I will read it, gentlemen, and then let
us judge for ourselves. “That in order to
maintain the integrity of the British Empire,
and to bring its parts into closer union and co-
operation, some form of federation is essen-
tial.” What meaning the words “ Some form
of federation” conveys to you I really cannot
understand. To me it is quite incomprehen-
sible. It means nothing. (Cries of “Time,”
and confusion,)
His Worship said: —l will ask you to give
Mr. Whitelaw a quiet hearing. It must be a
very poor cause indeed which cannot boar the
criticism of all that can be said against it.
Mr. Whitelaw has assured me that he will
only occupy a few minutes, and I will ask
you patiently to grant him a reasonable time.


Mr. Whitelaw resuming, said :—I have no
fear of the meeting before me, but it is the
gentlemen on the platform behind me that I
am afraid of. (Laughter.) I say “ Some form
of federation” means nothing. We have a
right to know what we are committing
ourselves to if we vote for this resolution,
but there has been no explanation given by
any of the speakers who have addressed you
to-night as to what form of federation they
propose. I hope this large and influential
meeting will not entertain the idea of voting
for the motion. When I was a boy at school,
and wanted to refer to something of which I
did not know the meaning I called it a
“Thingamy-bob.” (Laughter.) Now this
“Some form of federation” is simply a
“thingamy-bob,” and I am sure no one
understands it.’ (Laughter.) I may take
this opportunity of mentioning that the
Australian natives have an association here,
which numbers more members than there are
persons in this room, and they have passed
a resolution unanimously condemning this
proposal. (Cheers.) I noticed by the news-
papers to-day that the chairman was furnished
with a copy of this resolution, which might
be read to the meeting. I will conclude by
moving the amendment which I have read,
and I do not wish to occupy your time any
longer.
His Worship read the amendment, and
asked if anyone would second it.
Mr. H. Leonard who ascended the plat-
form, said ; —Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and
Gentlemen, —I should think myself wanting
in moral courage if I did not come forward as
an Australian and enter my protest against the
resolution. (Hear, hear.) Some years ago, when
in conversation with the late Sir John
O’Shanassy in the hall of the Assembly, some
mention was made of Imperial federation.
Sir John said ; “ As soon as Australian federa-
tion comes on the board, Imperial federation
will be drawn across it as a red herring.”
(Hear, hear, and laughter.) English states-
men can see that there is a glorious nation
rising in the south with many grand institu-
tions, many of which they have not had the
pleasure of enjoying yet. (Hear, hear, ironical
cheers, and laughter.) We have many liberties
which the men of the old country still have
to enjoy. (Hear, hear, confusion, and a
Voice : “ What are they?”) Anyone who says
that we have any desire to separate from the
mother country utters a slander upon us.
(Cheers.) I think the manner that the New
South Wales men responded to the call is a
denial of that statement. I, therefore, have
much pleasure in seconding the amendment.
(“Hear, hear,” and dissent.)
His Worship the Mayor said: — I desire
to say that only the last part of this docu-
ment which I have read is in the form of an
amendment. The rest is surplusage. I will
now call on the Right Rev. Dr. Moorhouse.
Dr. Moorhouse (Bishop of Melbourne), who
was received with prolonged and enthusiastic
cheers, said :—Mr. Mayor, Ladies, and Gen-
tlemen, —I was to have proposed another reso-
lution, but as an amendment has been moved
upon the first motion I have asked leave of
the mayor, and I ask the leave of this meeting,
to speak to that amendment. (Cheers.) With
the first portion of what is called
the amendment I heartily agree. lam in
favour of colonial federation. (Cheers.) With
the second part of it I cannot agree. (Cheers,
and “ Why ?”) Because it says the time has
not arrived. It does not contradict, you see,
either the desirability or necessity of ulti-
mate federation, but it affirms that the time
has not yet arrived for it. (Hear, hear.) To
that question I will now, if you please, ad-
dress myself—(cheers)—because I believe the
time is fully ripe. (Cheers.) I saw it stated
in one of the newspapers that a
great authority at the Colonial Office
had expressed some doubt whether there
was any great sentiment of attachment to the
Empire in the colonies. Well, of course, if
there were room for that doubt, federation
could only be a futility. (A Voice.—“ Senti-
ment.”) It could be nothing but a futility,
for you cannot bind together by an outward
bond those who have not a sentiment of
mutual attachment to one another. (Cheers.)
But now, is the allegation true that there is
no such sentiment of attachment here to the
mother country? (Cries of “No, no,” and
“Yes.”) I am in a position, ladies and
gentlemen, to affirm on this platform that it
is not, and, what is more, to advance the
proofs of it. (Cheers.) You remember when
the Russians attacked the Afghans, and
when even Mr. Gladstone was constrained to
use decisive language—(cheers and hisses)
—we all thought war was imminent.
Well, I chanced to be in the country at
that time, so I laid what I thought to be the


existing situation before a considerable
number of meetings in townships which, for
their character and their population, were ad-
mirably representative of Australian opinion,
at least of Victorian opinion. (Cheers.)
I laid it before them thus :—“ Gentlemen, a
deceitful, tyrannical, and aggressive power
having overrun Central Asia, has made an
unprovoked aggression upon the British em-
pire. We have done nothing to invite attack ;
it was prompted simply by a savage lust of
war. Will you let your dear mother land be
smitten by the sword of the despot and never
lift a hand to help her ? ” What was the
answer ? The men jumped to their feet,
waved their hats wildly in the air, vociferat-
ing cheers which were astonishing even for
Australians, and saying they would live
and die for the old land. (Enthusiastic
and prolonged cheers, a large section of
the audience rising and waving their
hats and handkerchiefs). That is the
feeling in Australia, let who will say to the
contrary, for I have witnessed it. (Cheers.)
Now, on the other hand I ask you is there any
such feeling at home towards this colony
and these colonies ? I have heard men say
“ no,” but I hold in my hand a proof that it
is a slander. (Loud cheers.) When two ladies
I am acquainted with at home read that the
colonies had rushed, sword in hand, to the
side of the Imperial mother country, they
were so penetrated with gratitude that they
determined to get their neighbours to sign a
memorial conveying the feelings of the
mother country. (A Voice.—“ Name.”) What
could the name signify to any man ? One of
the ladies was a Mrs. Burrows, wife of a
barrister, and the other was a particular friend
of hers. Now I do not suppose the gentleman
is much wiser. These are foolish questions.
Well, gentlemen, these two ladies went and
got their neighbours to sign this memorial.
The persons whose signatures are attached
to the memorial are men who live in different
parts of the land, but the majority of them
are my old friends and former parishioners in
the great parish of Paddington, and the
neighbouring parish of Kensington. (Cheers.)
Now, it is a very short memorial, and therefore
I will venture to read it to you. It is this;—
The People’s Memorial: A tribute of respect and
affection to Australia from English hearts and homes.
To the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
We, whose names are written on the following pages,
arc anxious to express the delight and gratitude
with which we have hoard how deeply our
brothers and sisters in Australia and elsewhere
sympathise with the mother country in this her
hour of peril and perplexity. We warmly thank
those who have come forward to fight for us in
our battles, and we assure those who remain at
home that England will never feel that she stands
alone, when she can thus count upon the love
and service of her children in the colonies.
Now, gentlemen, 4,000 names are appended
to that memorial —(Cheers)—and the ladies
tell me they only stopped getting signatures
because they were tired out. (Hear, hear.)
They likewise tell me that the signa-
tures were given with an enthusiasm
that would have cheered us and warmed
our hearts; that men who were asked
to sign replied, “ Sign, aye, with both
hands;” and others, again, said, “Sign,
I should think we will; this is no red
tape, the bishop will tell it to the
people.” (Loud cheers.) A number of
dock labourers in Paddington asked to be
allowed to sign, because, said they, “We have
brothers and sisters in Melbourne, and we
want them to know what the folks at home
feel.” (Cheers.) And others again said,
“ Will the bishop write to us? Tell him the
memorial comes from the people’s hearts.”
(Cheers,) Now, ladies and genclemen, I dare
say there mgy be little enough of love, amity,
and unity in the regions of red tape, but
these feelings glow in the hearts of living
people, and I say that there is a bond of union
and affection between England and her
colonies which no brute force can break, and
which I think not even domestic jealousies
can dissolve. (Cheers.) I say the time is ripe,
for here are the proofs of it—(Cheers) —and
the question only remains for us—ls it worth
our while to endeavour to make this affec-
tion, which is proved to exist, an abiding
feeling ? (Cheers.) I think it is, and again,
in opposition to the mover of the amend-
ment, I must say that the time is ripe
to make the attempt. (Hear, hear.) We
are passing into an era of world empires.
Ever since the great Roman Empire was
broken to fragments no successful attempt
has been made to reconstitute a world
empire. Charlemagne tried it in the
ninth century; Napoleon tried it in our
fathers’ days; but both failed. Charle-
magne’s empire broke to pieces after his
death, that of Napoleon during his life.
(Hear, hear.) But Professor Seeley has
warned us that there are at least two states


—one in the east and one in the west—
Russia and the United States—that have in
them all the conditions of world dominion.
Their territories are vast, their populations
are numerous and rapidly increasing. They
are bound together by unity of race, by
language and by institutions ; they have the
instinct and the lust of empire. (Hear, hear.)
That being the case, we have to face this pro-
blem:—The United States in 50 years will
have a population of at least 100 millions, and
the population of the Russian Empire, now 80
millions, will, if it increases at the same rate,
reach the portentous total of 160 millions —I
believe the one would prove our friend, the
other our foe. (Hear, hear.) We see clearly
that the next lead of Russia is upon India.
(Hear, hear.) What are we going to do to
keep pace with the advance of our enemy so
as to have a hope of making a successful
resistance to any attack ? (Hear, hear.) Now
then, let me speak to young Australia. (Hear,
hear.) Do try to get above the horizon of
parochial politics. (Hear, hear.) I would
repeat my warning, because in the time that
is coming none but great states will be able
to live. (Cheers.) The European Governments
see that, and with quick instinct are pre-
paring for the future. (Hear, hear.) What is
the movement which has had the most in-
fluence in the last quarter of a century in
Europe? what has caused its wars? what
has excited its deepest impulses? Why, the
desire for unity, begun in Italy, and com-
pleted in Germany. (Cheers.) These states
feel, and know, that they cannot live
in the future, unless they are large
enough, for it is an age of the re-
newal of universal empires; and so Ger-
many, finding that she has done all
the unification she can upon the home
ground, is going forth into the world to
enlarge the area of her dominions and in-
crease the numbers of her children as
colonists. (Hear, hear.) Bismarck knows
what he is doing; he came to New Guinea,
and has gone to Africa, with a pur-
pose, and that purpose is to absorb,
if he can, those territories, and to
increase upon them, if he may, those
that belong to the German people. (Hear,
hear.) In times past European nations were
like pipkins—all floating along a tributary
stream—and when thrown together by the
current and eddies, they were not much
worse for the collision, but they and
the tributary stream of human life that
carries them are going to be thrown into the
great ocean rivers—the Amazons of cosmic
life—and there they will have to be knocked
against the great iron pots of the United
States and Russia, and it wants no
prophet to tell what then will be
the fate of the poor pipkins. (Laughter.)
Now, those who are writing to our papers and
telling us that Australia will be all the better
for separation from England—(“ Hear, hear,”
and “ No, no ”) —for then she could live, a
kind of undisturbed Arcadia in the loneliness
of the Southern Seas—those persons can never
have thought of such conditions as were laid
| before you by Judge Holroyd. (Hear, hear.)
How could the gentleman who moved the
amendment say that the judge did not refer
to the substance of his resolution. (Cheers.)
He brought it out admirably, and showed
you clearly that if a great power wants to
gobble up a little one, it will very soon find
cause for it. (Hear, hear.) It is only the old
proverb of the lamb and the wolf. (Hear,
hear.) If the lamb cannot be devoured
for muddying the water above, it can be
devoured for not doing it. (Hear, hear.)
Depend upon this, if Germany—l say
Germany because I don’t want to be harping
always upon our known enemies—(Hear,hear)
—if Germany wanted Australia for the pur-
pose of increasing her area and increasing
the number of her forces for the awful
world battle that she sees is coming,
do you think she would stop because
Australians are not Germans? (Laughter.)
What were the Canadians?—Frenchmen. Did
England stop because the Canadians were
Frenchmen when she wanted to swallow up
Canada? (Laughter.) Not she; she swal-
lowed up Canada, and then she swamped
the first colonists by alien colonists, and
Germany would find no place on this
globe so admirable a country to re-
ceive the overflow of her swarming hives
as this great Australia of ours. (Cheers.)
For, see what she would do. She would
have here a strong German community,
not enlisted under a foreign banner like
the United States, but she would have
them under her own flag, a splendid contin-
gent of powerful men lying upon the flank of
her great Eastern foe. (Hear, hear.) And,
therefore, if we federate with the home
Government we do this —we take security that
we do not lie at the mercy of any power,


whatever it be, that has the ambition, and
thinks it feels the necessity, of enlarging its
area and multiplying its people. (Cheers.)
Another question I would like you to con-
sider is this. Is it better for the world in
general that England or that Germany should
lead the future, should be the Venice of the
future, with the sea for her streets ? Well, I
say in a moment, from obvious considerations,
England—l mean, of course, as Mr. Justice
Holroyd explained, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland. (Loud cheers.)
And why ? Because of her insular position,
because of her colonies girdling the world,
because of the nautical genius of her people,
because of her enormous commerce. (Cheers.)
But let us try this conclusion by applying it
to two practical questions now being solved.
Which is the race fittest to occupy the vacant
spaces of the world and fittest to protect and to
lead the back ward races of the world? (AVoice :
“The Anglo-Saxon,” and cheers.) Let us
take the first. Which is the fittest race to
occupy the vacant spaces of the world ? Are
we to say, whatever race it is, it is not the
British : that it is best for us that we fall out
of the rank of the leading and ruling people ;
that we suppress our instinct of empire, and
make ourselves as comfortable as we can, each
in his little corner, until we are swallowed up
by the deluge of the great coming fight?
Are we to say that we feel our strength wan-
ing with every year, or are we to say that we
look upon the history of the mother of
human freedom as the discipline of the
British races for high service to mankind !
Do you British men feel yourselves worn out
and your work done ?—(“ No, no! ”) —that you
are members of an effeminate and emascu-
lated race, that cannot lead the great files of
humanity as they are marching on to
freedom and happiness ? No! Do you
feel that ? The man that says that
knows nothing of the British people, and he
is no true British man himself. (Cheers.)
My friends, we are a great people, born to
lead, born to teach, and to guide, and to
bless, and therefore, because when we go
into a country we try to establish insti-
tutions that are encouraging and conserva-
tive of freedom and civilisation, we are the
fittest race to fill the vacant spaces of
the world, and consequently are the
fittest to help, to protect, and
to guide the backward races of
mankind. (Cheers.) Why do we cling to
VICTORIAN BRANCH.
India? I daresay partly because we
have it, and partly because we have the
strong man’s determination not to be driven
out by insolent force—(cheers) —and also, and
mainly I think and earnestly believe, because
we feel that the British race has a beneficent
mission in India, (Cheers.) We are keep-
ing the crowded millions in that continent
from failing into hopeless and destructive
strife, and by wise legislation and just
administration no truthful man can deny
that we are largely contributing both to the
moral and material development of the Indian
people. (Cheers.) And shall we give up all
that at the insolent demand of the Musco-
vite? (“No.”) Shall we turn all those gentle
Aryan brothers of ours over to the tender
mercies of the Northern Bear, that with
his iron claws he may tear to pieces
at his leisure that fair fabric of
civilisation which it has taken us a
century to erect? No. If the Russian
hordes come over the northern passes
of India, we will hurl them back
into their deserts. (Loud applause.)
If we are the race that is fittest to fill up the
vacant spaces of the world, and help the
backward races, and if we desire the
solidarity of British interests and British pri-
vileges all over the world, then I say we
ought to have a voice in determining
how those material interests shall be
managed. (Cheers.) For, look, what is the
alternative ? We must either separate from
England in order to escape Imperial dangers,
or federate with England to gain Im-
perial privileges. (Cheers.) And can we
separate in this era of world kingdoms ?
(“No.”) No, a thousand times no ; because
of the sentiment of patriotism, because of our
enlightened self-interest, we cannot, we dare
not separate. (Loud cheers.) What follows,
logically? We make the union a more
real union, and give more power of control
and a better representation to those who are
willing to spend their blood and their
treasure in the defence of the whole.
(Hear, hear.) One word more, and I
have done. I have heard it said to-
night, as I have heard it said before,
that there are great difficulties connected
with the subject. Of course there are. But
how do we answer that? By doing as the
mover of the amendment besought us? By
throwing crude schemes before you ? No;
that is not the way to proceed. We


should ask,—ls the end we seek a great believed the idea to be a true and right one,
one, is it a necessary one, is the Bri-
tish race wherever it lives persuaded of
that fact ? Then, if it is so, difficulties are
nothing but things to be overcome. (Cheers.)
Look at what Bismarck did. He had to
federate Germany. And what was Germany?
A set of hostile kingdoms and principalities,
which stood opposed to one another in arms,
and had therefore inherited jealousies, sus-
picions, and hatreds, which are always be-
gotten of such collisions. It was one of the
hardest problems ever set to the human mind ;
but Bismarck said that Germany must and
shall be one, and therefore found the
means. Do you mean to tell me
that we have no Bismarcks in the
British race—that our statesmen are so de-
generated that, given an end of supreme
national importance, they cannot find away
to it ? Well, then, I say we shall have to
make new leaders, or import them. (Cheers.)
We are a great race, with a great past, with
great faculties, and a great future, and we
will have no leaders who show themselves
unmindful of these facts. Therefore, I say,
let England frankly recognise our power to
legislate for our local affairs. And on the
other hand, let it give to us, who are proved
to be ready to make sacrifice in the common
cause, an effective voice in the decision of
such questions as what shall be the amount
of our war contingent, and of our war contri-
bution. Let it adopt some such Federal con-
stitution as that suggested by the Govern-
ment of the United States. By so doing, I
believe that it might put an end to its Irish
difficulties, and make the future of our race
more glorious and more fruitful to the world
of the blessings of peace and freedom, tha n
ever its past has been.
The bishop resumed hi seat amid loud and
prolonged applause.
Mr. Justice Holroyd briefly replied. He
said: —Ladies and Gentlemen, —I don’t wish
to occupy more than two or three minutes of
your time, but an amendment has been pro-
posed which shows me that the character of
this resolution has been by some profoundly
misunderstood. (Hear, hear.) First of all,
I ask nobody to concur in the resolution who
is not convinced of its necessity. (Cheers.)
And I endeavoured distinctly to intimate, in
face of the difficulties that were before us,
that if we adopted the resolution, if we
we nevertheless invited criticism and sugges-
tions of all kinds, and did not attempt to
impose upon anybody at this moment any
particular scheme whatever. (Cheers.) We
have got to seek for everything. We only
say, that if we can federate, we want to find
out how. (Cheers.) His Honor concluded
by an earnest appeal to young Australians to
honour the parents to whom they owed their
birthplace, and the country from which those
parents sprang.
The Chairman. — The mover of the amend-
ment has complained that I did not read a
letter conveying a resolution of the Aus-
tralian Natives’ Association, and which I was
requested to communicate to the meeting.
It was from the Melbourne Branch No. I. of
the Australian Natives’ Association, and the
reason why I did not read it was because, as
I came on to the platform, I received a
telegram from the Chairman of Directors of
the whole Association, to a contrary effect,
and as I had no desire to sow discord
amongst that body, I decided to say nothing
about either resolution or telegram; however,
as the complaint has been made that it
was unfair of me not to read the resolution,
I will now place both before the meeting.
The resolution is as follows “That, in the
opinion of this branch, Imperial federation
is inadvisable, and would entail a serious
burden on, and curtail the privileges and
independence at present enjoyed by the
colonies.” The telegram, which is signed by
“ Alexander J. Peacock, chairman, board of
directors, Australian Natives’ Association,”
runs thus:—“Should Melbourne branch
resolution, re Imperial federation, be read,
kindly explain that such a course is against
rules last adopted, which provide that all
branches’ decisions on public topics be for-
warded through board of directors, the
Association having been committed through
branches’ actions, which sometimes may be
decided upon at a small meeting, without
previous notice,” (Cheers.) I hope the mover
of the amendment will now be satisfied.
The amendment was then put, when about
a dozen hands were held up in its favour;
and when the question to the contrary was
put, two-thirds of the meeting rose spon-
taneously to their feet. The motion was
then put, and amid enthusiastic applause
the Chairman declared it carried almost
unanimously.


The Chairman called upon Mr. G. H. F.
Webb, Q.C., to move the next resolution.
Mr. Webb said: —Mr. Mayor, Ladies and
Gentlemen, —At this late hour of the evening
I do not propose to address you at any
length. If I had a little more time I should
endeavour to put the subject more fully
before you, but still there are one or two
prominent points which I think it is
desirable should be fully understood in
connection with the very important question
we have met here this evening to discuss.
We are met here to-night for the purpose of
considering the question of Imperial Federa-
tion ; and it seems to me that at the outset
the first question we should thoroughly
understand is, what do we mean by federa-
tion ? What is federation ? Perhaps the best
definition of the term is that given by
Professor Freeman, when he says:—“A federal
commonwealth in its perfect form is one
which forms a single state in its relations to
other nations, but which consists of many
states in relation to its internal government,”
and I apprehend that this is the sole end and
aim which we now have at heart—that the
British Empire as a whole, including its
colonies, should present one front as a single
state when dealing with the outside world
and foreign nations, and at the same time
that every member of that Empire should be
essentially an individual and separate state
when dealing with its own internal manage-
ment and affairs. I think we are all agreed
that whilst we should federate for the
purpose of defence and for various other
purposes of Imperial concern, we should ever
retain the right of self-government so
far as all internal matters are concerned.
(Hear, hear.) In dealing with this subject it
seems to me that we must approach the con-
sideration of the question with a firm
conviction that in the perhaps not far future
we must either have voluntarily a more
complete federation of the Empire, or
we shall inevitably have involuntarily
forced upon us the ultimate disintegration of
the Empire. The question is are we going
to stand by and allow the Empire to be dis-
banded by a centrifugal force, or are we going
to do our best by all means in our power to
draw closer together by a centripetal force
the various members of which this grand
Empire consists? We know that in every-
thing in this world, whether political, moral,
or physical, if we do not grow we must
decay—if we do not go forward we must go
back ; and the question is —Is the British
Empire to go on with a more substantial
unity to increased strength, notwithstanding
the difficulties which we may see ahead, or is
it to be allowed to decay and fall to pieces ?
If we do not coalesce for the purpose of
keeping the Empire intact, it will become a
question whether the Empire as a first-class
power will continue to exist at all. Looking
at the population and area of the British Isles
alone, now that empires of large areas and
immense populations are springing up, what
chance would our dear old country have if its
whole Empire were confined within the area
of the four great seas ? It then behoves us,
if we reverence and respect our fatherland, to
take every step in our power to maintain it
as an empire in its proper place amongst
the nations of the earth, and with some
degree of the power and influence upon the
world which it has exercised in times past.
(Cheers.) A hundred years ago the British
Empire consisted of the British Isles and
very little else, and comprising as
it did then a comparatively limited area and
small population, the constitution then in
existence was sufficient, and answered all
purposes, both for internal management and
external diplomacy. All related to the same
one country, and was managed by the same
one parliament. But now that the Empire
within it comprises dependencies or colonies
encircling the whole globe, we find that the
same constitution and the same mode of
government which was adopted, and rightly
adopted, for the government of the country,
so long as the British Isles and the
Empire were co-terminous, is not adapted
to the government of that Empire when it
consists of many different communities scat-
tered all over the world. Then what are we
to do ? Are we to say we will adopt the same
form of government for all offshoots, and
every offshoot shall manage its own internal
matters, and its own external relations —that
is to say, that every offshoot shall form a
weak and puny state of itself, at the mercy
of any one of the great powers of Europe ; or
shall we say that all the colonies shall have
independent self-government internally, but
shall at the same time have a voice and take
a part in the outward relations-of the Empire,
and, together with the mother country, form
that ideal federal community which shall
present itself as one vast united whole in


all its dealings with the other nations of the
world. The position of these colonies at
the present day is, that whilst they each
have internal self-government they have
nothing to do with the external relations
of the Empire, and what is the result?
That it has given rise to discontent both
at home and in the colonies. At home we
are told by a certain school of politicians
that the colonies are very expensive ; that
they are a mere incubus, and that the
mother country had better get rid of them.
They say —“Why should we, the Home
Government, and the home taxpayers, be
asked to support a large army and navy
for the purpose of protecting territory which
does not contribute to the cost of such
protection ?” And a very sensible obser-
vation too, allow me to say. On the
other hand the colonies have said over
and over again, “Why are we to be
placed in the position of being open to the
attack of any nation with which England
may happen to be at war, when we have
nothing to do with the inception, the manage-
ment or the termination of that war ?” Again,
as it seems to me, a very sensible and reason-
able observation. Therefore let us come to
the practical question—What do we mean
by Federation ? And what do we desire to
secure by the movement in this colony,
which you are this evening invited to inaugu-
rate ? We mean that we should federate
first for the purpose of mutual defence and
protection, in order that we may feel that
every colony is not only in name and
sentiment, but in fact a part of the British
Empire, and that each may have a voice in
the management of the external affairs of
that Empire in the same way as the British
people living within England, Scotland, and
Ireland have. As I have already said, one
thing or the other must come. Either we
must separate ourselves, or be separated into
different small communities, cast adrift from
the mother country and each other, and Eng-
land must revert simply to the old Great
Britain of the past, or we must draw more
closely together, and form a greater Britain
of the future which shall constitute one vast,
entire, homogenous, and united Empire.
(Cheers.) The question is, which is it to be?
Our present position really appears to me to be
this. We have unity in a Crown and nothing
else. We have the same Sovereign we serve the
same Queen, as they in Great Britain. So did
the Hanoverians in the time of the Georges,
and to the death of William IV., when the
salic law prevented the succession of our
present Queen to the throne of Hanover.
But we have no more voice in anything relative
to the general government of the nation,
than the Hanoverians had in the affairs
of Great Britain in the time of William IV.
We have the same Queen, but beyond that
what have we ? We all reverence our Queen.
(Cheers.) We all delight to think that we in
the colonies have the same Queen over us as
they who live in England, and we are proud
of Her, and we wish ever to continue loyal
subjects of the Crown of Great Britain.
(Cheers.) But at the same time we wish to
draw closer the bond which unites us to the
Crown. We desire that whilst there shall be
as heretofore one Crown, there shall also be
one Sovereign power—not using the word
“sovereign” in the sense of the crown—
which shall have supreme control of the
Empire as a whole, and which shall have the
determination of peace or war. Of course, it
is a fiction to say that the Crown now has
this power. We lawyers say that the right to
proclaim war rests in the Crown, but this, as
you all know, is a fiction, and the real power
rests with the responsible Ministers of the
Crown at Westminster. We desire that if
the colonies are to suffer all the inconveni-
ences and risks and possible losses which
may result from war, the colonies should
have their share in the Councils of the
Empire which are to determine whether that
war is to be entered upon or not, and should
have some voice in the management of that
war when proclaimed ; and at the same time
we say that when the colonies are admitted
to that position, then as a necessary corollary
they should contribute their fair proportion
of the expenses of that war. (Cheers.) It
remains yet to work out the details of the
scheme by which this end is to be accom-
plished. It is only principles that we are
now dealing with, and the details will work
out aright after the principles are once
settled. The principle then you are asked to
support is that we shall have one Sovereign
power for Imperial subjects, leaving every
integral part of the Empire to manage itself,
so far as local and internal matters are con-
cerned. (Cheers.) We cannot now. at this
our first meeting, go into the details of how
the Imperial governing body is to be consti-
tuted. But I will venture to make this one


observation, that if by having a Federal
Council—if you please to call it so—and send-
ing to it representatives from the colonies,
men who have come here prepared to fight
their way in the face of all difficulties, and
have fought with success the battle of life in
a new world, we can only infuse into the
supreme governing power ot the Empire a
little more backbone than has recently been
exhibited in the Government of the mother
country, it seems to me that we shall have
made one step, and not an inconsiderable
one, towards replacing our dear old country
in that position in the eyes of Europe and the
world which she once proudly occupied, but
which I fear she can hardly truly be said to
occupy now. The question then remains,
how is the object we have in view, the prac-
tically bringing about of Imperial Federation,
to be accomplished ? Simply, as it seems to
me, by bringing before the people both at
home and in the colonies, the desirability of
effecting such a Federation, and by furnish-
ing them with every information we can upon
the question, so as to educate the public
mind upon the matter. To this end, as ycu
have been already informed, an Imperial
Federation League has been formed in
London. But to strengthen their hands, and
to give vital force to the movement, it is
essential that the wish for Federation should
emanate from the colonies ; and this brings
me to the immediate subject of the resolution
which I have been asked to propose, which
is—
“ That for the purpose of influencing public opinion
by showing the advantages which will accrue to the
whole Empire from the adoption of such a system of
organisation, a society be formed of men of all parties
to advocate and support the principle of Federation.”
This resolution I have much pleasure in pro-
posing, and I commend it to the hearty
acceptance of this meeting. (Cheers.)
Mr. E. G. Fitz Gibbon, who was called on to
second the resolution, and was well received,
said Mr. Mayor, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —
On few occasions in my life have I felt
greater pleasure than (remembering the in-
clemency of the weather)to see this grand
hall crowded as it is to-night. I congra-
tulate his Worship the Mayor upon the
wisdom of the course he has adopted, for
he has done a much bolder thing than
the promoters of the Imperial federation
movement in England ventured upon.
What they did was to call meetings of
gentlemen specially invited to consider how
best the subject might be incepted, how
best information with regard to it might
be disseminated throughout the British
Isles, and how best the various parts of
the Empire might be taught to estimate
its importance, but here his Worship the
Mayor, well assured of the loyalty and
affection of the inhabitants of this colony
towards the mother country, and knowing
the readiness and capacity of the citizens
of Melbourne to judge of public ques-
tions for themselves, has not hesitated
to call the citizens together in the
first instance, and give the matter into
their hands, confident of their will and
ability to join in and aid the counsels
of those who have at heart the promotion
of this mighty movement. (Cheers.) That
the compliment was rightly paid is proved
by this great meeting, which in undiminished
numbers, has listened to so many speeches
with keen attention, interest, and enthu-
siasm. Doubtless as to the great majority
here present, that may be attributed to old
associations and loving memory of the land
of our birth—(cheers)—and as to the few
dissentients, it is not less natural nor other
than creditable to their discretion and inde-
pendence, that those who are natives of
Australia, and have no such memories or
associations, should pause, question, and re-
quire further information before committing
themselves to so momentous a proposal. To
solve such doubt and furnish such infor-
mation is one important purpose of this
meeting. And I, who, like Mr. Justice
Holroyd, am a father of Young Australians,
would speak as a father to his children, and
ask of Young Australians—Who will guard you
against yourselves and the mischief that will
surely come to you if ever you are mad
enough to break from the British Empire ?
(Cheers.) Humtm nature is, as human
nature was. Man has not changed one
particle in his nature or disposition as long
as he has lived upon this earth, and what
has happened in bygone years will happen
again. Who then talks about the federation
of the colonies as the grandest notion that
can be entertained by native-born Australians,
or of Australia in the possession of native
Australians to hold it against the world ?
Suppose that were so, what progress has yet
been made towards this Australian federation,!?
Nothing is further from my disposition and


purpose than to utter a word that could
sow disunion or give offence, but who does
not know that in New South Wales, from
the time of the separation of this colony
from that, there has been a spirit of envy
of the progress of Victoria. Which of you
has been in Sydney for four and twenty
hours without being told that Mel-
bourne is jealous and envious of Sydney,
—that, in fact, there is a burning
jealousy in Victoria against Sydney? You
know that that is an utter mistake on
their part, but the committing of the mistake
proves that the reverse is the case, and that
there is that envy of Victoria existing in
New South Wales. (Cheers.) In what I
am saying I wish carefully to guard against
the supposition that I am in any way opposed
to the federation of the colonies. The worthy
youth—(laughter)—who stood here just now,
boasted of his acquaintance with that grand
old colonist, the late Sir John O’Shannassy,
who once took him into confidence, and told
him that if ever the question of Australian
federation was brought forward, then Imperial
federation would be drawn like a red herring
across the trail. (Laughter.) Well, I tell that
worthy boy—(much laughter)—that if he
supposed that I am here to draw a red
herring across the trail of Australian federa-
tion. he never made a greater mistake.
(Loud cheers.) I go heart and soul for
Australian federation, because it will
facilitate the inclusion of Australia in the
federation of the Empire. (Cheers.) But
what success has colonial federation had up
to the present time ? What has the colony of
New South Wales said in effect ? “ We don’t
care to act with Victoria, we distrust and
don’t much believe in her. We would have
as little as possible to do with her action
regarding New Guinea, and will have nothing
to do with her federation movement, because
it might bring New South Wales under her
thumb, and we will not be so brought,”
(Hear, hear.) I mention these differences,
not to foment them, but because I never
spoke on any subject on which I felt more
impressed with the obligation to tell out
what I feel to be the truth than on this
solemn subject of federation. (Hear, hear.)
But separated from the United Kingdom,
federated or unfederated, what would pro-
bably happen between any two of these
colonies, say New South Wales and Victoria?
Each of them is armed. You have a power-
ful flotilla in the bay—(hear, hear) —and your
land forces are drilled and trained to arms.
And New South Wales has proved itself a
military nation. (Laughter and cheers.) I
heard somebody call out a little time ago
“sentiment.” Aye, but sentiment produced
500 armed men at half-an-hour’s notice.
(Loud cheers.) Sentiment sent them as the
New South Wales contigent to the Soudan,
and all honour to them for going there.
(Loud cheers.) But with New South Wales
as a military nation, and Victoria a naval
and military power, let the two get by the
ears, and where will then be their sentiment ?
(Hear, hear.) Is this an extraordinary or
altogether unlikely thing ? Why, gentlemen,
I remember the time when Mr. Frank Hare,
our superintendent of police, was sent up to
the Murray with a party of men to resist the
New South Wales officials in their collection
of border duties. (Much laughter.) And I
ask you what may come of future quarrels
upon such or other subjects ? Look amongst
other examples at the Spanish republics of
South America, and remember what took
place there only within this last three or four
years—the deadly and embittered struggle
between the Chilians and Peruvians, men of
the same race, occupying the same continent,
and all native-born South Americans, just
as those born in New South Wales and
Victoria are Australians. (Hear, hear.)
“Aye,” 1 may be answered, “but they are
only half-bred Spaniards, and we can never
sink to their level ! ” Don’t make any such
mistake. Human nature is the same all the
world over. (Hear, hear.) Remember what
took place amongst the purest blooded, most
talented and celebrated people the world
ever saw—the ancient Greeks—at and after
the Peloponnesian war. A people one in
blood, language, religion, games, traditions,
and in common love of freedom, and so
proud of their special inheritance of these
that they called all other inhabitants of the
earth barbarians ; and yet by mere petty
squabbles between one state and another,
between Corinth and Corcyra, Sparta and
Athens, Thebes and others, they broke into
intestine strife, bitter slaughter, and savage
cruelty, and reaped thereout the ultimate
ruin and degradation of them all. (Loud
cheers.) Well, suppose that this federation
of the Australian colonies takes place, and
we “ cut the painter,” who is to keep peace
between us? (Hear, hear.) Where is to be


that great central authority, which, when
we quarrel about tariffs and the like,
would have power to step in and say as old
England might—“ You are all my boys, don’t
quarrel; above all you shan’t fight—(laughter)
—the whole Empire is stronger than you two ;
you shall keep the peace, and we will be the
policemen to see that you do so.” (Laughter
and cheers.) But suppose that these
colonies federated in one dominion, is there
a man among us who would desire to break
from England through a craven and cowardly
fear of standing by the old country in the
hour of her peril? (Loud cries of “No.”)
I have spoken of internal discord, but
where would be external safety if we were
to federate these colonies and then separate
from England ? What would prevent Germany,
who is looking for a field of emigration, from
taking possession of northern, western, or
some other part of Australia ? Where is the
power to protect the extensive coast line of
Australia from the invasion of a foreign foe ?
And remember what Prince Bismarck is
reported in a recent Blue book to have said
to the English diplomatic agent, who was
deputed to see him in regard to New Guinea :
“That Australia is an enormous continent
with only a handful of people in it.”
(Laughter.) If these colonies were separated
from England, why might he not go on to
say “ I want a new and suitable country for
my troublesome Socialists—(Laughter),—
away with them to Australia, and if Victoria,
New South Wales, or federated Australia
offer any opposition we may easily teach
them how such a handful as they aie can be
dealt with.” (Hear, hear.) Australia could
not then look for help to the mother country,
whom for cowardly self-interest she had cast
aside—nor for sympathy if the convicts of all
Europe were turned loose at her doors.
(Hear, hear.) But no, we will have none
of this base, selfish and craven-hearted
cowardice; we are all men, with manly hearts
and noble purposes, and we can read the
lesson of the world’s history too well to
commit the crime of national suicide.
(Cheers) I am sure that what I have said
commends itself to your common sense as
practical facts, though my argument has
been of a negative character—would that I
possessed the ability to describe the
illimitable prospect of positive advantages to
flow from the banding together, the whole
world over, of the great, powerful, Christian,
civilising, free-hearted British people, pro-
claiming to mankind the proud utterance
which accompanied their expenditure of
£20,000,000 to free the West Indian slaves—
that where their Hag floats freedom lives and
slavery cannot exist. (Cheers.) For freedom
and free institutions are natural to and go
with them. Witness these colonies, whose
local Parliaments and municipal institutions
give perfect self-government, and every man
has free and fair opportunity to think and
speak and live and thrive. Britain taught
this to the states of America before she
madly alienated them, and has taught it to
Australia, happily leaving us still part of the
British dominion, and determined to main-
tain the national integrity and honour by
doing all that in us lies to help on the
welding together of that great and mighty
Empire, whose equal the world has not yet
seen—(Cheers) —peaceful, powerful, and just,
increasing not by filching scraps of territory
from civilised states, but by reclaiming the
waste places of the earth, and making the
desert to blossom like the rose. Speech worthy
the theme of her future glory would rise
above platform oratory to the rhythmic
melody of grandest verse, such as that the
laureate dreamed of when he wrote—
“The nightingalS thought ‘ I have sung many songs,
But never a one so gay,
For he sings of what the world will be,
When the years have died away.’ ”
(Loud and prolonged cheering.)
The Mayor then put the resolution to the
meeting, and declared that it was carried
almost unanimously.
Professor Elkington was next called upon
to address the meeting. He said Ladies
and Gentlemen,—The resolution I have to
move is in these terms :
“That such a society be now formed under the
rules of the Imperial Federation Leaarue, to be called
the ‘Victorian Branch of the Imperial Federation
League.’ ”
It would be needless to say one word in
addition to what has been so well said
to-night to show the urgent necessity for
the formation of our League to impose a
peremptory check upon the tendency to
separation from the mother country, if ever
that tendency should unhappily be made
mani fest. (‘ ‘ Hear, hear. ”) The necessity for
our league has also been demonstrated by
the fact that the English race has ever


been the great civilising, the great educating
race of the world, and that we have now
a vast and growing empire, over which, as
a mere matter of duty to its millions of
inhabitants, that civilising and educating
influence must be extended and intensified.
(Cheers.) But this federation of Great
Britain and her colonies, which by God’s
help, we intend to accomplish, will be unique,
in one respect, in the world’s history; for
whereas all federations of which hitherto this
world has held record —from the federation
of the Heptarchy to the federation of the
United States of America—have been brought
to pass by pressure from without, with them
the union has been in each case compelled
by fear of a foreign foe, or by some external
political influence; with them whatever
organisation they have accomplished has been
due to motives of necessity or of common
safety; but in our case the difference is
marked, as the call has not been from
without but from within, (Loud cheers.)
The federation that is asked for now is not
generated of any fear of the great world-
empire of the East, or of the great world-
empire of the West—the one doubtless the
foe, and the other the friend of our own
dear country. No ; the federation that we
are, to-night, engaged in commencing, is a
movement that represents an attempt on
the part of the more thinking portion of
the statesmen of the mother country and
of the Australian colonies, to take one step
higher in the great path of social develop-
ment, to achieve a great measure of inter-
national reform by welding more closely
the internal parts of the Empire, and so
creating a great peace-compelling force re-
spected by all nations of the earth. We
may thus accomplish yet another phase in
that truly imperial destiny which the British
Empire has, it is to be hoped, only as yet
entered upon, and make another advance
in that great movement of Saxon energy
which has gone on since the fourth or
fifth century of our era, and, I trust, will go
on for centuries to come. (Loud and pro-
longed cheering.)
The Chairman called upon Dr. P. Moloney
to second the resolution.
Dr. Moloney said :—Mr. Mayor, Ladies
and Gentlemen,—At this late hour of the
evening I will not attempt to inflict a speech
upon you, but I will ask you, as I appear this
evening, not officially—l may say accidentally
—as a representative of the Australian
Natives’ Association —(cheers) —that you will
allow me a few words of explanation, as
I believe an explanation is necessary, be-
cause this is the first occasion upon which
I have seen the people of that body appa-
rently separating themselves into anything
like parties. That this separation is not
a real one I feel sure, and I feel certain,
from some conversation with Australians
after this meeting was advertised, that a
section, and a very important section, of the
Victorian community have come here this
evening under not so much a misunderstand-
ing, as a' misinterpretation, of the whole
situation. When I was asked a few days
ago to come here and join a meeting for the
furtherance of Imperial federation, I gladly
consented. (Cheers.) I have been, I think,
almost from the very beginning one of the
members of the Australian Natives’ Associa-
tion. That association has been now some
14 years in existence. It is a non-political,
non-religious body, and among its various
excellent objects, such as charity, intellec-
tual converse and amusement, it has at heart
the brotherhood and federation of Australia.
(Cheers.) Now, there is nothing, I think,
more necessary for the defence and progress
and future commercial success of Australia
than this very federation. I have always
thought so. Some years ago I appeared on a
public platform, and with, I think, proper
courage, expressed the same sentiments,
which then exposed me to some obloquy.
I am not here to take part in Imperial as
against Colonial federation, and I ask those
members of the Australian Natives’ Associa-
lion who are present to bear with me for just
a few moments more. It is undeniable,
and the latest school of historians have
come to the conclusion which they have
made axiomatic, that of all things deter-
mining the future of any race, climate,
soil, and geographical position are the true
factors. We live not only under a different
sky, but in a different hemisphere from
our ancestors, and Australia is large
enough to contain several distinct nationa-
lities. I believe that before many years
have passed away we shall see the
impress on each of the Australian
colonies of a distinctive colonial nationality.
Mr. Fitz Gibbon has spoken truly of the
jealousy between the different colonies, espe-


dally between New South Wales and our-
selves ; but the very existence of that jealousy
is a proof that if Imperial Federation is
necessary, so also is Australian Federation.
(Cheers.) Another reason for our coming here
this evening, is that, except for a political
attempt which was certainly not a great suc-
cess, the people here have never made an
attempt at any form of Federation ; and I
conclude, and I think rightly, though I am
prepared to be corrected, that Federation is
necessary, and that it may be found easier to
secure the larger Federation of the empire at
first than the smaller one of a single con-
tinent. If the Australian natives do not be-
lieve in Imperial Federation, I am prepared
to throw in my lot with them. But I cannot
think that our worthy Mayor and those who
have come here to speak to this representa-
tive meeting of colonists, would ask us to
take a leap in the dark. (Hear, hear, and
cheers.) I am quite content, for my own
part, to leave the future of Australia with
those gentlemen whom I see on the platform.
(Cheers.) And further, I am sure that the
natives of Australia are prepared to do so as
well. A little explanation only is required.
We are now—and I am speaking to the
students of history—in almost the same rela-
tion to England that the American colonies
were a little more than a century ago, and of
all the statesmen who have adorned the Eng-
lish House of Commons, the greatest,
Edmund Burke, was wont to preach what we
try to practice. (Cheers.) He held that the
American colonies should be regarded as
friends —that they should have their own
State Legislature, and the right of taxation
conferred upon themselves. In other words,
Burke preached a behaviour of the Imperial
Government towards the English colonies at
that time which, if carried out, would have
left them in the same, or closer, that is
Federated relationship to the mother country
than we are now. (Cheers.) It is difficult to
know what to say upon the question at the
present time. We are met rather to give ex-
pression to a sentimental emotion, and the
British are not a very sentimental people, but
when they do give way to sentiment, it means
a great deal. I would like to say this. lam
sure everybody must see that we Australians
have passed through the stage of patronage,
and would gladly see changed that attitude of
—what shall I call it?—not of hostility, it is
not that, but of contemptuous indifference
displayed towards us by the Home Govern-
ment, and the very latest statement on this
subject, which I read only to-day, is confirma-
tory of our complaint. It will be found in
the last number of the Quarterly Review, and
that Review goes line for line, and step by
step with the views of Edmund Burke. I say
to those gentlemen, I myself have lived here,
and have felt hurt when visitors from the old
country have shown an inclination to treat
Australians with what the showman might
call “ contemporaneous disgust.” But that
attitude is passing or has passed away;
Great Britain and Ireland are beginning to
understand us. We always understood them,
and believed in them. So much has this
understanding increased that, to give a
common instance, no sooner does a marriage-
able Australian girl appear than the horizon
is immediately clouded with young English-
men. (Cheers, and laughter.) I believe in
reciprocity, and I hope that young Victorians
will imitate this at ,the Antipodes, and that
our Antipodean sons and daughters will, at
at any rate, continue their marriage federa-
tion. I am sure the feeling expressed by
some in this hall to-night is not so much a
feeling of hostility, as what, by altering an
expression, I might confidently call the
“dissidence of assent.” Australians think
that strangers are too ready to preach to
them. Young men are bumptious, and if
they are not bumptious they will not turn
out to be much. Irritability is a sign of
growth. America had its irritabilities, and
so have we, and we will till we have become
a real nation. However, I think there is not
the slightest doubt that from this movement
the bond between Australia and the mother
country will be closer and closer —(Cheers) —
and if those gentlemen who came out from
the old land are proud of being the fathers of
Australians, the sons and daughters of Aus-
tralia are no less proud of them. (Loud
cheers.) But Australia would ask those
gentlemen who read us our lessons, if, while
there is a commandment “ Honour thy father
and thy mother,” there is not also one of
which we here wish to appreciate, the ob-
servance, viz,, “Honour thy son and thy
daughter. (Cheers and laughter.) Gentle-
men, I have much pleasure in seconding this
resolution. I do it in the thorough hopt
that it will be the means of cementing more
closely Australia and the mother country, as
well as of cementing more closely the Aus


tralian colonies one to the other. (Loud
cheers.)
The motion was carried unanimously,
amidst loud cheers.
Mr. W. E. Murphy, who was called on to
move the next resolution, said :—Mr. Mayor,
Ladies, and Gentlemen, —I appear here to-
night with great pleasure, and with much
satisfaction. I appear with pleasure, be-
cause I feel that I have a right to be here as
a Federationist, as I am a Unionist by con-
viction. I have done something for the
Federation of the working classes of this
colony, and for that reason I may fairly have
my claim to be upon this platform, because
the Federation of labour organisations is
only the stepping stone to that greater
Imperial Federation which I trust every lady
and gentleman present wishes to see accom-
plished. (Cheers.) I was somewhat sur-
prised when I saw, in the papers yesterday
morning, the hostile advertisement which
undoubtedly drew together the little knot of
oppositionists who appear here this evening. I
was more than surprised to find that they
had the hardihood to come upon this plat-
form, represented by the antiquated gen-
tleman, Mr. Whitelaw, who is, by the
way, an old friend of my own, and with
whom I have fought many a political battle,
side by side, in days gone by. Mr, Whitelaw
represented the views of those Australian
natives who think ihat Imperial Federation
is not desirable at the present time, and that
the colonies must first Federate themselves.
Now, I take quite the reverse of this view,
and agree with Mr. Justice Holroyd that
Imperial Federation is first to be effected,
and local Federation brought about after-
wards. (Cheers.) I have no doubt, sir, that
when Mr. Whitelaw had the hardihood to
step on to this platform and propose the
amendment, he was under the impression
that he knew something of the Anglo-Saxon
difficulty when dealing with big questions.
We have often been told by statesmen at
public meetings in the old country that
Englishmen, of all others in the world, are
the most difficult to induce to change fixed
opinions. A great orator at one time asked,
“ Why do you object to innovation gentlemen,
is it because innovation is improvement?
Gentlemen,” he continued, “be careful,
the English-speaking race have carried that
principle too far. Do not reject innovation
because it is improvement, for you may have
to regret it some day when you will be]obliged
to accept the innovation, when it has ceased
to be improvement.” (Cheers.) time
like this, when all the great powers of the
earth are directing their attention to these
southern lands, we cannot pause in the con-
sideration of this subject simply because it is
conceived by a few members of the Austra-
lian Natives’ Association that this is an inno-
vation. (Cheers.) No, sir, the connection
with the mother country and the strengthen-
ing of her arms at the present time, when
it is almost a crisis in European history, is
what every Australian here to-night should
desire, and I trust it will be the desire of all
gentlemen at this meeting. I have much
pleasure in proposing the resolution entrusted
to me, which is consequent upon that which
has just been passed. I desire that the
meeting will associate with the resolution a
hearty vote of thanks to the Mayor, who un-
doubtedly was actuated by the most patriotic
sentiments when he called the meeting.
(Cheers.) The resolution I have to propose
is as follows :
“ That, to give effect to the foregoing resolutions,
a provisional committee shall be appointed, to con-
sist of the following gentlemen, with power to add to
their number, viz.:—The Mayor of Melbourne, the
Bishop of Melbourne, Mr. Justice Holroyd, Mr. E.
Langton, Mr. G. H. F. Webb, Mr. J. L. Purves, Dr.
Moloney, Professor Elkington, Mr. John Blyth,
Councillor J. Wilks, Mr. R. G. Benson, Mr. M. Lang,
Mr. R. Balderson, Mr. J. M‘Dougall, Mr. Andrew
Rowan, Mr. D. Bennett, Mr. A. G. M'lntyre, Mr. J.
E. Phillips, Mr. C. J. Fairfield, Mr. T. L. Parker,
Mr. H. U. Alcook, Mr. E. G. Fitz Gibbon and the
mover.”
I have great satisfaction in committing this
resolution to the meeting, and I feel sure
that in the hands of a representative com-
mittee such as is contemplated by the reso-
lution, the Imperial federation question will
be well launched upon the Victorian public.
I am pleased (if, as we suppose, the time has
arrived for initiating a scheme of Imperial
federation) —that New South Wales has not
cut the ground from under our feet in this
act of patriotism. I feel that the Australian
natives who objected to the proposal in
the early part of the meeting ought to have
acted more consistently, and have hesitated
before they appeared in the way they did
before such a large and representative meet-
ing as this. A few weeks ago these very
Australians lauded to the skies the action


of the sister colony in sending away a
battalion of men to cut the throats of the
Soudanese who were fighting for their liberty,
and here where they are called upon to
adopt a resolution for Imperial federation,
a measure intended for their own protec-
tion. they object to the principle. I feel
convinced that federation will soon be
brought about. Speaking as an Irishman
by birth, but as an Australian by adoption,
I would draw the sword to-morrow, and
there are thousands of the brawny sons
of toil of this colony who would follow me—
(cheers) —to maintain that Imperial connexion
which I trust will not be interfered with.
We have nothing to fear for the scheme
propounded, either in England or the colo-
nies. If any attempt were made to inter-
fere with the privileges and the growing
prosperity of these colonies there is not a
man who would not stand up against even
the mother country itself. They would
follow the sentiments of that great states-
man Edmund Burke, who told the Imperial
Parliament that if they did anything to
jeopardise the growing power of their
splendid young colonies they would be
shedding their own life blood. “Do jus-
tice,” said on his death-bed that great
and brilliant statesman the night before
he passed away for ever, “Do justice to
America; do it to-night; do it before you
sleep, or have a care that the brightest
page of your history may not be written in
your heart’s blood.” (Cheers.) There is not
one who would subscribe his name to that
but would give the same advice to the
Imperial authorities to-morrow, and there-
fore it is that I ask every true British
man in this grand Assembly, whether he
hails from Scotland, England, or the Emerald
Isle, from which I come, and whose every
blade of grass that grows on her green
hills is dear to me, to be true to the
resolutions passed here to-night for upholding
the glory of the British Empire.
Councillor Wilks was called upon to
second the resolution. He said :—Ladies and
Gentlemen,—At this late hour I shall not
attempt to say all that I wished to say on
this subject, for it is one to which I have
given considerable attention, and so long ago
as last January, I wrote a letter to The
Argus, urging the formation of a branch of
the Imperial Federation League ; therefore,
I feel I can justly claim that my hearty
sympathy is with this movement. (Hear,
hear.) But at this late hour, and after the
eloquent speeches to which we have listened
with pleasure and with profit, it would be
almost impertinent for me to trespass on
your forbearance. As there appears to be
some small show of opposition to the
resolutions, however, I cannot refrain from
expressing my conviction that the few young
Australians who have here expressed their dis-
approbation of the movement have done so
under a misapprehension as to the facts, and
I am sure after this meeting they will hold
with us that Imperial federation is a necessity
for the Empire, as well for us Australians
as for our fathers and brothers at home.
(Cheers.) There are two important facts
which I would invite the opponents of
Imperial federation to consider in their
bearing upon this great question. At the
present time there are about 10 millions of
the English-speaking race in the colonies of
Great Britain, and yet they have no voice
in the Imperial Council; and I would like
to say in opposition to the gentleman who
moved the amendment to the first resolu-
tion, that in my opinion it is high time
those 10 millions of British subjects had
some voice in the great questions of war and
peace, if in no other. (Loud cheers.) I say
further it is'high time that we did what
I am perfectly sure every young Australian
will be ready to admit we ought to do, when
he comes to consider it, viz., that we should
be prepared, not only to stand shoulder
to shoulder with our fellow-Britons, at
home, but also to put our hands into our
pockets and pay our share of the cost of
maintaining the integrity of the Empire, and
protecting our Australian shores and
commerce. (Hear and cheers.) To whom
do we look to maintain the commerce of
these colonies in case of aggression from
foreign nations—a commerce which repre-
sents one-eighth of the entire commerce of
Great Britain ? To whom did we look for
protection of our commerce when war
appeared to be imminent between England
and Russia a few weeks ago? What was
our first thought? “Where is the British
fleet?” (Hear, hear, and cheers.) “What
is the strength of the Australian squadron ?”
(Hear, hear.) But what right have we to
look for these fleets outside the Heads, what
right have we to ask them to protect us,
unless we are prepared to pay a portion of


the expenditure ? (Hear, hear.) What right
have we to ask the mother country, already
overburdened with taxation and an enormous
national debt, to undertake the whole cost
of the defence of the Empire and its
commerce ? It is a mistake to call these
colonies “dependencies” of the Empire.
(Hear, hear.) They are not “dependencies,”
but integral parts of that Empire in
common with the mother country, and
the 10 millions of British-speaking people
in the colonies ought to be prepared,
and, I believe, are prepared to share
with the 35 millions in the British islands
the cost of maintaining the British navy,
which is for the defence, not only of
Great Britain and Ireland, but of the
Empire at large. (Cheers.) I believe
that the gentlemen who have been
nominated to the Committee, to carry out
the resolutions already passed by this
meeting, are the right men in the right place.
(Hear, hear.) But you will notice the
resolution states that the Committee will
have power to add to their number ; and I
am sure I can call to mind many men, both
Australian natives and colonists who come
from the old land, who would also be glad
to join the Committee ; and if they are too
modest to come forward themselves, as
probably they will be, I hope their friends
will nominate them, in order that
this may be a large and representative
working committee, to bring forth the full
fruit of this great meeting. (Cheers.) I also
heartily second the portion of this resolution
which tenders the thanks of the meeting to
the Mayor of Melbourne for bringing this
question of Imperial Federation before the
citizens of the metropolis, enabling Victoria in
this instance at least to take the foremost place
among the Australian colonies as being pre-
pared to stretch out the hand to old England
and say, “ We are ready to Federate.”
(Loud cheers.) In all the discussions in
England on this question of Imperial Federa-
tion, and there have been a great many of late,
some of the foremost men have said—“ It is
not well for us to press Federation upon the
colonies; let the proposal come from them
first.” (Hear, hear.) And now that we have
met together and made known our views and
opinions, I would make this suggestion to
our worthy Mayor, viz., that the result of this
great and magnificent meeting be telegraphed
home, that they may know there are
thousands of hearts beating in unison and
sympathy with theirs, and ready to stand
with them whatever may come, determined
that whether it be war or peace, our Empire
shall stand, and never be beaten down by any
foe. (Loud and prolonged cheering.)
The Mayor said:—Ladies and Gentlemen,
—Before I put the resolution, allow me to
thank the mover and seconder very much for
their kind allusions to me, and also to thank
you, ladies and gentlemen, for the hearty
manner in which you were good enough to
manifest your approval of the sentiments
they expressed. I felt I was taking a very
great responsibility in convening this meet-
ing, but I think I may fairly claim that the
result is a sufficient justification of my con-
duct, and I can certainly assure you it is a
more than ample reward. (Cheers.) One
word more before I put the resolution—and
it is this—pending the society, which you
have now formed, obtaining offices of its own,
any persons desiring to join the Association,
can do so in the Town Hall Offices. (Hear,
hear.) It will be manifest to you that we
must not let this work stop here. (Hear,
hear.) We want thousands of members
throughout the whole colony, and we want to
spread the gospel of Federation throughout
the whole of Australia. (Cheers.)
The resolution, on being put to the meet-
ing, was carried unanimously.
This concluded the business of the meeting,
and as the audience departed, Mr. David Lee
played the National Anthem on the great
organ.


OBJECTS
OF THE
% Ktttjwfial JjWqatwt
1. To secure the permanent unity of the Empire, by Federation.
2. To influence public opinion by showing the advantages
which will accrue to the whole Empire by Federation, and to
form a Society of men of all parties for that purpose.
3. In giving effect to these objects the following principles
will be observed :
(a) No scheme of Federation shall interfere with the existing
rights of local Parliaments as regards local affairs.
(b) Any scheme of Imperial Federation should combine on
an equitable basis the resources of the Empire for
the maintenance of common interests, and adequately
provide for an organised defence of common rights.
RULES.
1. The Membership of the Victorian Branch of the Imperial
Federation League is open to any British subject who accepts its
principles and pays a yearly registration fee of one shilling ; but
donations and subscriptions are invited for the transaction of
local business in printing, advertising, holding meetings, delivery of
lectures, and otherwise in propagating the principles of the League.
2. The affairs of the Branch League shall be conducted by a
General Council to be elected by the Members at the first Annual
Meeting, and who shall act through an Executive Committee
to be appointed by such General Council. Local Sections will be
empowered to appoint representatives to act upon the General
Council, one for every twenty members enrolled.
3. Until such appointment shall have been made the gentle-
men named as the Provisional Committee at the meeting of
sth June, 1885, shall act as and be the Executive Committee
of the Branch League.
4. The General Council shall likewise have power to appoint
President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, and such other officers
as it may deem necessary.


DIRECTIONS FOR FORMATION OF LOCAL SECTIONS
ENROLMENT OF MEMBERS.
British subjects in Victoria desiring to form any Local Section
to promote the objects of the Imperial Federation League, and
to have such Section affiliated with the Victorian Branch of the
League, are requested to be good enough to communicate, through
their Chairman, or other duly appointed officer, with
The Honorary Secretary
of the Victorian Branch of the
Imperial Federation League,
Town Hall,
Melbourne.
For the information and assistance of Local Sections so formed,
and desirous of being affiliated and enrolled as constituent parts
of the Victorian Branch of the League, the following provisional
arrangements have been made :
1. Local Sections shall consist of not less than twenty enrolled
members.
2. Applications from any Local Section wishing to be affiliated
and enrolled with the Victorian Branch of the League, must be
accompanied by :
(a) A copy of the resolution of the Section expressing a
desire to that effect, and specifying the name by which
it wishes to be designated as a distinctive Local
Section of the Victorian Branch League.
(6) A copy of the rules, if any, by which the Section is
governed.
N.B.—Time and correspondence will be saved if it
appears clearly by the rules, or by the terms of the
application for affiliation, that the Section invites the
support of men of all political parties in the locality in
which the Section is formed.
(c) The names and addresses of the members of the Section.


3. On receipt of this necessary information, a notice of the
enrolment as a Local Section of the Victorian Branch of the
Imperial Federation League will be forwarded, provided it
appears that the Section is in harmony with the objects and
general constitution of the League.
4. Counterfoil books containing certificates of individual
membership have been provided, in order to facilitate the entry
of the names of all members upon the central register. Such
books or sample sheets can be had on application. Their use will
be found convenient to Sections, and the general adoption of a
uniform system would greatly assist the conduct of the business of
the League.
5. Sections will be entitled to receive copies of all ordinary
publications of the League.
6. Individual members may be supplied with all publications of
the Branch League on special terms, on application to the
Secretary.
7. The Executive Committee hopes to be furnished with all
published reports of meetings and other proceedings of Sections;
or any publications issued by Sections, or contributed by
individual members, with a view to giving them as wide a
circulation as possible throughout the Empire.
8. It is extremely important that Sections should furnish the
Executive Committee with all facts and information of such a
nature as may tend to enlighten public opinion here and in the
mother country, on all matters of Imperial importance.
9. By the aid of the organisation of the League information
can thus be readily obtained and diffused throughout the Empire,
and by such means the precise nature of the “common interests”
it is necessary to maintain, and the “ common rights ” it is
essential to defend, by the united action of all parts of the
Empire, will be better understood, while the necessity for some
form of Imperial Federation will become more generally
appreciated.
10. It is most desirable by all and every means to encourage
the formation of sound public opinion on so important a question.
This may be done, for example, by organising public meetings, by
lectures and by discussions in parliament and in the press, &c. &c.
The Executive Committee will, on application, be happy to assist


as far as possible any efforts in these directions made by Sections,
When the League is fully organised, and sufficient funds, properly
available for the purpose, are at the disposal of the Executive
Committee, arrangements will be made for public meetings when
and where desirable, and for securing the services of properly
qualified persons to deliver lectures when required.
11. The annual registration fees of members will be payable on
the Ist of January in each year.
Annual registration fees paid before the Ist of January, 1886 ?
will be considered as paid for the whole year 1886,
N.B.—lt is to be observed by all members of the
League, and by all sympathisers with the movement,
that the “ annual registration fee ” has been fixed at
the small sum of one shilling, so as to admit of all
classes of the community joining the League. The
Victorian Branch of the Imperial Federation League,
therefore, relies on voluntary aid, and considering
the heavy expenditure which will have to be incurred
in carrying out the objects of the League, the Executive
Committee will thankfully receive contributions from the
Sections as well as from private individuals.
STILLWELL AND CO. PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET BAST, MELBOURNE.


OBJECTS
OF THE VICTORIAN BRANCH
OF THE
IMPERIAL FEDERATION LEAGUE.
i. To secure the permanent unity of the
Empire by Federation.
2. To influence public opinion by showing
the advantages which will accrue to the whole
Empire by Federation, and to form a Society
of men of all parties for that purpose.
3 In giving effect to these objects the fol-
lowing principles will be observed
a. No scheme of Federation shall interfere
with the existing rights of Local
Parliaments as regards local affairs.
b. Any scheme of Imperial Federation
should combine on an equitable
basis the resources of the Empire
for the maintenance of common
interests, and adequately provide
for an organised defence of common
rights.
R; TJ lEj IB S .
i. The membership of the Victorian Branch
of the Imperial Federation League is open to
any British subject who accepts its principles
and pays a yearly registration fee of one shilling;
but donations and subscriptions are invited for
the transaction of local business in printing, ad-
vertising, holding meetings, delivery of lectures,
and otherwise in propagating the principles of
the League.


Bt&llto
f r io~74-3
M 2 *' The a ff a ’ rs °f the Branch League shall be
I conducted by a General Council, to be elected
by the members at the first Annual Meeting,
md who shall act through an Executive Com-
mittee, to be appointed by such General Council
Local, sections will be empowered to appoint
representatives to act upon the General Council
—one for every twenty members enrolled.
3. Until such appointment shall have been
made, the gentlemen named as the Provisional
Committee at the meeting of sth June, 1885,
shall act as and be the Executive Committee of
the Branch League.
4, The General Council shall likewise have
power to appoint a President, Vice-Presidents,
Treasurer, and such other officers as it may
deem necessary.
BRITISH subjects throughout the colonies,
who sympathise with the cause of Imperial
P'ederation, are invited to enrol themselves as
members of the League, and to give all the
assistance in their power towards ensuring its
success.
All communications should be made to the Honorary
Secretary of the
Victorian Branch of the
IMPERIAL FEDERATION LEAGUE,
Town Hall, Melbourne.
It is to be observed that the Annual Registra-
tion Fee has been fixed at the small sum of One
Shilling, to admit of all classes of the community
entering the League. The Victorian Branch
of the Imperial Federation League therefore
relies on voluntary aid, and it will thankfully
receive special Donations and Annual Sub-
scriptions from its supporters.
