

So y H
REPORT
OP THE
FIFTH ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE
Congregational (Union anb fission of Victoria
THIRD ANNUAL MEETING
OP THE
Congregational College of Pretoria,
AND THE
FIRST ANNUAL MEETING
OP THE
Congregational Ministers’ |robibent Jfnnb
FOR THE COLONY OF VICTORIA,
HELD IN MELBOURNE,
On Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, May B th, Oth, and 10 th, 1865.




CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA.
Chairman:
EEY. W. R. LEWIS.
Secretaries:
EEY. T. H. JACKSON & EEY. W. MOSS.
Treasurer
HENRY
BROOKS,
Committee
EEY. W. S. H. FIELDEN. I ME. W. BATES.
„ J. C. M'MICHAEL. I S. HAIGH.
„ J. MIRAMS. j „ G. EOLPE.
„ J. D. DAYIES. 1 ~ J. WISEWOULD.
„ T. ODELL. I " J, BROWNING.
„ J. P. SUNDERLAND. | „ R. SMITH.
* r/ ,
;ommunications to be addressed to Rev. W. Moss, Prahran.
All communications to be addressed to Rev.
Remittances to be forwarded to H. Brooks, Esq., Elizabeth Street, Melbourne ; or
to the Rev. T. H. Jackson, Williamstown.
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
Chairman.—REV. W. E. LEWIS, Brighton.
Secretary.—REV. W. S. H. FIELDEN, 67 Victoria Parade, Fitzroy.
Treasurer. —WILLIAM BATES, Esq., Uxbridge House, Nicholson Street, Fitzroy.
Medical Referee. —DR. THOS. EMBLING, Gore Street, Fitzroy.
College Council:
REV. E. DAY. . MR. H. BROOKS..
„ W. R. FLETCHER, M.A.
„ ALEX. FRASER.
„ J. BROWNING.
„ S. HAIGH.
„ ALEX. GOSMAN.
„ T. H. JACKSON.
„ W. E. LEWIS.
„ W. MOSS.
„ J. G. JENNINGS,
„ O. KEMP.
„ J. POET.
„ W. PETERSON.
„ GEO. ROLFE.
„ J. MIRAMS.
.. J. C. M‘MICHAEL.
„ J. P. SUNDERLAND.
„ W. K. M. VALE, M.L.A.
„ J. WISEWOULD.


#
V
A
0 «
' .
- ; ,
• .


CONSTITUTION
OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA,
I. The Society shall be called The Congreqa
txonal Union and Mission of Yictokia.
11. It shall consist of Evangelical Churches of
the Congregational Order situated within the
colony of Victoria.
111. This Union fully recognises the right of
every separate Church to maintain perfect Inde-
pendence in the Government and Administration
of its own affairs, and therefore it shall not in
any case assume Legislative authority or right
of interference.
IV. The following objects shall be contem
plated by the Union.
I. The promotion of Evangelical Religion
in connection with Congregational principles of
Church Government by Missionary and other
operations.
2. The formation of Congregational Churches
—and aiding them when necessary by pecuniary
assistance for a time.
3. The introduction into the colony of
accredited Congregational Ministers, and the
promotion of measures for educating young men
suitable for the work of the Ministry.
4. The cultivation of brotherly affection and
cordial co-operation among the associated
Churches and Ministers.
5. The maintenance of fraternal intercourse
and occasional correspondence with Congrega-
tional Christians in other parts.
6. The procuring of statistical information
respecting the state of the Denomination and of
Religion generally, in the various districts of the
colony.
7. The maintenance and enlargement of
Religious Liberty, Rights and Privileges.
V. The Funds of the Associations shall be
provided by contributions from the Churches,
and by individual subscriptions, donations and
bequests. Every Church shall be required, as a
condition of membership, to make at least one
contribution in the course of each year.
VI. To make the Union more effective the
country shall, from time to time, as population
increases and Churches multiply, be divided into
districts of convenient size. Eor the present
there shall be
The Melbourne district,
The Geelong district.
The Mount Alexander district.
The Ballaarat district.
The Beechworth district.
The Portland district.
VII. The supreme control of the affairs of the
Society shall be vested in a body to be called
the General Council, which shall consist of re-
presentative and special members.
1. The Representative Members shall con-
sist of the Pastors and Delegates of the Associated
Churches, each Church consisting of not more
than thirty members being entitled to send two
delegates, with an additional delegate for every
twenty members above the first thirty.


2. The Special members shall be :
1, The Professors of any Collegiate Insti-
tution within the colony for train-
ing Ministers for the Denomination,
being members of Congregational
Churches.
2. All Ministers and Evangelists, wholly
or partially supported by the Mission,
not being Pastors.
3. All Ministers of the Gospel of the Con-
gregational order, not having pastoral
charges, and resident within the colony,
who shall have been admitted to mem-
bership by a vote of the General
Council.
4, All special members shall be annual
subscribers.
VIII. The General Council shall annually elect
a Chairman, a Treasurer, one or more Secretaries,
and an Executive Committee.
IX. The Treasurer shall receive all contribu-
tions, and discharge all the Society’s obligations,
under the direction of the Executive Committee,
and shall present to the Annual Meeting a state-
ment of the accounts duly audited. He shall also
furnish at the same time, a list of such Churches
as may not have made any payment to the funds
during the year.
X. It shall be the duty of the Secretaries to
summon all meetings of the Executive Committee
and General Council. The General Council shall
be convened by a letter addressed to each special
Member, to the Pastor of every Church in the
Union, and to one of the Deacons or Delegates
of such Churches as may be at the time without
a pastor. The notices shall be sent at least a
month before the time of meeting. The Secre-
taries shall take account of all the members
present at the meetings of the General Council
and Executive Committee, make a record of all
the transactions, and present to the Annual
Meeting, the Executive Committee’s report of
the proceedings of the year.
XI. The Executive Committee shall consist of
the Chairman, Treasurer, General Secretaries,
the Secretaries of the several districts, and twelve
members of the General Council, who shall be
elected at each Annual Meeting. The duties of
the Executive Committee shall be to take
measures from time to time to obtain the funds
of the Society, and to apply the Society’s money
to the following purposes :
1. To defraying the charges, in whole, or in
part, of bringing ministers out from Britain or
elsewhere.
2. In engaging ministers or evangelists to
labour in suitable spheres.
3. To assist weak churches by grants in aid,
according to their necessities and the state of
the funds.
4. To purchase, in special cases, as in new
townships or other eligible localities, land suit-
able for places of worship.
5, To defray travelling and other expenses
incurred in carrying on the business of the
Mission.
The Executive Committee shall meet once a
month, or oftener, if necessary.
XII. The members of the General Council
resident in each district shall constitute a Dis-
trict Committee within their own bounds. They
shall meet once a year, or oftener, in such parts
of the district as may seem to them suitable.
Their duties shall be :
1. To promote union and intercourse among
the Churches.
2. To ascertain the state and progress of the
several stations and Churches within their dis-
trict. receiving pecuniary aid from the Mission,
and to report on the same to the Executive
Committee.
3. To look out new spheres of Evangelistic
labour in their district.
To adopt such local measures as may be
practicable to provide these spheres with religious
ordinances.
5. To correspond with the Executive Com-
mittee with a view to further the work, and
obtain their co-operation and assistance where
needed.
6. To appoint a Secretary for its own use,
who shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and
shall transmit to the Executive Committee an
annual report of the district one month before
the Annual Meeting of the Union.
XIII. Every Church or Congregation receiving
pecuniary assistance from the Union, when about
to choose a Minister, shall be expected to give
information of its proceedings to the Executive
Committee in order to have its concurrence in
the measure, and to the maintenance of a cordial
understanding between such Church or Congre-
gation and the responsible conductors of the
Association. The neglect or refusal so to do
shall be regarded as an intimation that further
aid from the Mission funds is declined.
XIV. Admission of Churches or special mem-
bers to the Union shall take place only at meet-
ings of the General Council. Each Church or
qualified individual shall be proposed by two


members of the General Council, and the question
of admission shall be decided by the vote of the
meeting.
XV. Any Church in membership with the
Union neglecting for one year to send a contri-
bution to the funds, after having been reminded
by the Treasurer of the omission, shall lose its
membership. But if a contribution for the past
year, and also for the current year, shall be
transmitted within twelve months alter the
omission has been notified to the General
Council, upon a statement to that effect being
made by the Treasurer, the Church shall again
be received into the Union.
XVI. Any two or more members of the
General Council may give notice in writing
addressed to the Secretaries that they object to
any particular Church continuing in connection
with the Union. The Secretaries shall without
delay send a copy of such notice, with the names
of the objectors, to the Pastor and one or more
of the Deacons of the Church to which objection
is taken And if, at the meeting of the General
Council, the accused defend their right of mem-
bership, a Committee shall be appointed to inves-
tigate the case, and report thereon for the guid-
ance of the Council, A similar course shall be
pursued in reference to special members.
XVII. As the meetings of the representatives
of the Churches of the denomination will afford
suitable opportunities for asserting and giving
public expression to the general opinion of the
body on subjects connected with morals, educa-
tion, liberty of conscience, and legislation bear-
ing more or Jess on the interests of religion, it
shall be competent for any member to bring
matters of this kind before the General Council,
but not until the regular business of the Union
shall have been disposed of. But it shall be at
the option of the Council whether any matter of
this kind proposed for discussion shall be enter-
tained or not.
XVIII. The General Council shall meet for
the despatch of business once at least in every
year, and, if practicable, twice. All arrange-
ments as to time, place, and the number and
order of public services shall be made by the
Executive Committee, subject to any instruc-
tions given by the General Council, Special
meetings of the General Council may be con-
vened by the Secretaries on their receiving a
written requisition to that eifect signed by
twelve members.
XIX. The order of proceeding at each Annual
Meeting of the General Council shall be as
follows :
I. Devotional Exercises.
2. Chairman’s Introductory Remarks.
3. Minutes of previous Meeting read.
4. Report of the Executive Committee
presented.
5. Treasurer’s Statment of Finances.
6. Business arising out of Report to be
transacted.
7. Officers for the next year to be appointed
Chairman.
Treasurer.
Secretaries.
Executive Committee.
Auditors.
8. New Churches and Special Members re-
ceived.
9, Any General Motions considered, those
of which previous notice had been given to take
precedence.
10. Any Supplementary Business transacted.
11. Concluding Devotional Exercises.
XX. If any member or members desire to pro-
pose any alteration in the Constitution of the
Union, notice shall be given to the Secretaries of
such intention full two months before a General
Meeting of the Council, and the Secretaries
shall insert the same in the circular calling such
meeting.




REPORT
OF THE
FIFTH ANNUAL MEETING
OP THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA.
MINISTERS AND DELEGATES.
Ballaarat:—
Dawson-street—Rev. J. J. Halley; Messrs.
Holmes, Birtchnell,Yale, Smith and Donnell.
East—Rev. S. B, Holt.
Welsh Church—Rev. J. Farr.
Sturt-street—Rev. J. M. Strongman; Messrs.
Tarrant and Ewart.
Brighton —Rev. W. R. Lewis ; Messrs. Dod-
shun, Stamp and Hunt.
Castlemaine —Rev.E. Day; Mr. T. Blackwell.
Chewton —Rev. J. Pitman.
Geelong, McKillop-street—Rev. W. Cuttle ;
Messrs. Clarke, Adcock, Wright and Port.
Janefield —Mr. G. Bell; Messrs. Shillinglaw
and Law.
Kew —Rev. J, D. Davies ; Messrs. Marshall,
French and Payne.
Little River —Mr. T. Fullager.
Melbourne; —
Carlton —Rev. J. Mirams ; Messrs. Colthard,
Simmonds and Page.
East Melbourne —Rev. J. Beer; Messrs.
Hayes and Bangs.
Emerald Hill—Rev. C. S. Y. Price; Messrs,
Scott and Wood.
Lonsdale-street Rev. T. Odell ; Messrs.
Stephens, Flood, M'Pherson, Dunn and
Harker.
Oxford-street —Rev. J. C. M'Michael ; Dr.
Embling, Messrs. Wilkinson, Walker, Bates,
Stickland, and Devenish.
Prahran Rev. W. Moss ; Messrs. Wise-
would, Haigh, Jennings, Hicks, Roberts and
Taylor.
Richmond—Rev. J. P. Sunderland ; Messrs.
Bachelor, Britten, Freeman, Sharpe. Russell,
Din woo die and T. Luke.
Melbourne —( Continued ): —
St. Kilda—Rev. A. Gosman; Messrs. Eolfe,
Smith, Hearne, Dobson and Allan.
Victoria Parade—Rev. W. S. H. Fielden ;
Messrs. Kemp, Masters, Stillwell, Langton,
Wellsteed, Bruce and Taylor.
Sandhurst —Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., and
Mr. Woods.
Sebastopol and Napoleon’s Rev. J. G.
Wilson.
Snapper Point —Rev. H. Groube.
Warrnambool —Rev. W. W. Pentland.
Williamstown —Rev. T. H. Jackson, Messrs.
W. White, and Suffren.
VISITOR,
Rev. R. Connebee, Dunedin, New Zealand.
STUDENTS.
Messrs. U. Coombs, J. G. Richmond, E.
Griffiths, J. Manby, E. Miles, W. H. West,
CHURCHES NOT REPRESENTED AND SPECIAL
MEMBERS NOT PRESENT.
Beechworth—Rev. M. W. Bradney.
Brunswick—
Dunolly—Rev. J. Sayer.
Inglewood—Rev. A. Brunton.
Kyneton—Mr, J. Hutcheson,
Wesley Hill—Castlemaine—Rev. D. Jones.
Rev. B. Cuzens —Geelong.
Rev. W. Higgins—Geelong.
Rev. J. Apperly—Jan Jac.
Rev. W. Butler, Sandhurst.
Rev. H. Kidgell, Melbourne.


Monday Evening, May 8.
The devotional service, by which the meetings
of the Union commenced, was held in the Oxford-
street Congregational Church. The Rev. J. C.
M'Michael presided. The Rev. C. S. Y. Price
having read the Scriptures, and the Rev. J. D.
Davies offered prayer, an excellent sermon was
delivered by the Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M. A., of
Sandhurst, on 1 John v. 20. There was a marked
increase in the attendance, and it was evident
that a deep interest was felt in the service.
Tuesday, May 9,
The Ministers and Delegates constituting the
General Council of the Union, met for business
in the Victoria Parade Church, at ten o’clock.
The Rev. E. Day, of Castlemaine, having
conducted devotional exercises, introduced the
Rev. W. R. Lewis, the Chairman for the year.
Moved by the Rev. J. P. Sunderland;
seconded by Mr. J. Wisewould—
“ That this Council gives its hearty thanks to
the Rev. E. Day, of Castlemaine, for the efficient
manner in which he has discharged his duties as
Chairman of the Union during the past year, and
would especially record his self-denial and perse-
verance in so regularly attending the Monthly
Meetings of Committee, although residing so far
from Melbourne.” Carried enthusiastically.
The Rev. W. R. Lewis then read a very able
and interesting inaugural address, which was
received with marked approval. It was then—
Moved by the Rev. W. S. H. Fielden ; seconded
by Mr. G. Rolfe—
“ That the thanks of this Council be given to
the Rev, W. R. Lewis for his very appropriate
and admirable address, and that he be requested
to place it in the hands of the committee for
publication.” Carried unanimously.
Moved by Rev. J. P. Sunderland ; seconded
by Rev. J. J. Halley—
“ That the Rev. E. Day be requested to allow
his address, delivered at the half-yearly meeting
at Ballaarat, to be printed in the annual report.’’
Carried.
Moved bv the Rev. J. Beer ; seconded by Rev.
J. C. M‘Michael—
“ That the best thanks of this Council be give ll
the Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A., of Sandhurst,
for the excellent sermon delivered by him, at the
request of the Union, on the preceding evening ;
and that he allow it to be printed in the report.”
Carried unanimously.
Standing Orders having been suspended on
he motion of the Rev, W. S. H. Fielden,the fol-
lowing Churches were received into the Union :
ISebastopol and Napolean’s, Rev. J. G. Wilson,
Pastor, and the Welsh Church, Ballaarat,
Rev, J. Farr, Pastor,
Special members—H. Brooks, Esq., and J.
Browning, Esq.
Notice having been given that objection
would be made to the Sturt-street Church. Bal-
laarat, continuing in Union, and that Church
claiming to be heard in defence, it was moved by
Rev. T. H. Jackson ; seconded by Rev. A.
Gosman —
“ That a Committee of six be chosen to deal
with this case according to Rule 16, and that
three be nominated by the Council and three by
the Delegates of the Sturt-street Church.”
Carried.
On the part of the Council, Messrs. Bates,
Rolfe, and Haigh were nominated; and on the
part of the Church, Revs. Messrs. M'Michael,
Day, and Gosman.
Subsequently Mr. J. G. Jennings was elected
Chairman of the Committee.
The minutes of the Half-yearly Meeting having
been confirmed, the Rev. T. H. Jackson, Secre-
tary, and H. Brooks, Esq., Treasurer, read the
following reports :
Dear Brethren, —In presenting the fifth
annual report of the Congregational Union and
Misson, your Committee render an account of
their stewardship with but little exultation, and
yet with little to regret.
The past year, though marked by no very
exciting circumstances, has been, nevertheless,
a busy and anxious one. There has been little
outward demonstration in our proceedings, still
your Committee believe that steady and effectual
progress has been made, and they trust that the
labours of the year, under the Divine blessing,
will be fruitful in good.
A large number of claims have been made on
the funds of the Union during the year, and
many openings for usefulness have presented
themselves, and it has been with no little regret
that your Committee have been obliged to pass
by many of these, and could afford but an
inefficient amount of help to others, through
lack of means.
The income of the Union is very inadequate
to the work it is called to do, and the Churches
will again have to be urged to greater liberality,
or the interests not only of the denomination, but
of the kingdom of Christ, will suffer at our hands.
But for the liberality of our Treasurer, who has
freely advanced of his private means to meet
the more pressing emergencies, the work would
have been seriously impeded. Your Committee
would take this opportunity of acknowledging
their obligation to Henry Brooks, Esq., for the
generous help thus rendered by him in their
time of need.
At the half-yearly meeting at Ballaarat, the
office of “Financial Agent” was created, the
object of which was to obtain a personal visita-
tion of the Churches with a view to increasing
the funds. It has already borne fruit, and it is
hoped that, during the next year, it will tend to


remedy the evil complained of from year to year.
Your Committee would earnestly commend the
consideration of this subject to the Churches as
most vitally affecting the usefulness of the Union
and Mission.
The following are the places with which your
Committee have had communication during the
year, and to some of which they have afforded
help:—
Beechworth.— The pulpit of Beechworth
was vacated in September last. Your Com
mittee requested the Rev. T. H. Jackson to visit
Beechworth, who, through his former acquaint-
ance with the people, was enabled to rally and
encourage them. Subsequently the services of
the Rev. W. M. Bradney were secured, and
your Committee learn, with great satisfaction,
that their highest hopes are likely to be realised
in this settlement.
This Church needed a little help to meet the
additional expenses attending their settlement,
but it is believed it will be now self-sustaining.
Ballaarat East.— Your Committee, believing
that a good opening presented itself for the
establishment of a strong Church in Ballaarat
East, felt it good to encourage the faith and
enterprise of the Rev. S. B. Holt and those
associated with him, by an unusually large
grant, in the hope that effectual assistance at
the beginning would be the most economical in
the end.
Brunswick.— This station has been constantly
supplied by the students, to whom your Commit-
tee feel deeply indebted. We trust the cause
here will develope into a strong church.
Carlton. —The Church at Carlton, though
not needing aid from the Union for sustenance,
has been aided by the payment of a sum due for
interest, which accrued while the Church was
without a Pastor. The Church and Congre-
gation are becoming consolidated under the
ministry of the Rev. J. Mirams, whose work,
however, has been hindered by a severe affliction,
—an affliction which has proved to him the
esteem of his people, and which, we trust, will
be blessed both to him and his Church,
Datlesford. —The Church at Daylesford is
still without a Minister, and a few faithful men
there are still crying “ come over and help us.”
The population of the neighbourhood is increas-
ing, and everything betokens a growing pros-
perity. Your Committee have been anxiously
endeavouring to provide the means of grace to
Daylesford, in the hope that the Lord would soon
direct to them a Minister suited to this impor-
tant sphere, Daylesford has been visited by the
Rev. W. Moss, the Rev. W. R. Lewis, and the
Rev. J. Pitman, and supplied by students, and
by the Rev. A. Scales of Geelong. These are
unanimously of opinion that a suitable settled
minister would be well sustained.
Dunolly. —The Rev. J. Sayer is still labour-
ing faithfully and patiently at Dunolly. The
establishment of several other denominations
there has had a weakening effect on his congre-
gation. Your Committee regret that their limited
means prevented their assisting Dunolly as far
as, in their judgment, the merits of the case de-
served.
Emerald Hill. —The Church at Emerald Hill
is progressing favourably under the pastorate
of the Rev. C. S. Y. Price, and is likely to attain a
strength and permanency it has never had before.
Service is conducted in a hired building, and
your Committee assisted the Church in jts pre-
liminary difficulties by paying the rent for a time.
Most praiseworthy efforts are being made to
secure a permanent building.
Hawthorn. —Services have been regularly
maintained at Hawthorn, partly by the ministers
in and around Melbourne, and partly by students.
Good congregations are obtained, and the people
are looking forward to the speedy settlement
of a Minister among them. Your Committee
feel great credit is due to the promoters of this
cause, for the vigour with which they administer
their affairs.
Jan-Jac. —This station is supplied by the Rev.
J. Apperly, late of Geelong, who is labouring
acceptably, and doing good in a remote and
thinly populated district. Your Committee
thought it good to assist Mr. Apperly with a
small grant to aid in establishing this cause.
Maryborough and Norwood. —These stations,
vacant at the last annual meeting, called the
Rev, W. Hopkins to preside over them, who
accepted the invitation in July last, and is
working happily and successfully there.
Portland. —The Church at this place is still
without a Pastor. An attempt was made in
June last to supply the pulpit at Portland, but
the smallness of the population did not warrant
your Committee in incurring expense, and by
the request of the people themselves operations
were suspended.
Rutherglen. —The Rev. A. Stoker is still
labouring at Rutherglen. Recent communica-
tions state that the congregations are good and
the Pastor highly esteemed, but that the town is
unusually depressed for want of water to work
the mines, so that the finances of the Church are
seriously affected. Hopes are, however, enter-
tained for the future. Mr. Stoker is the only
Minister in this place. Your Committee granted
help to this cause, and still feel that our brother
there is deserving our sympathy and aid.
Sebastopol and Napoleon’s.- —The Rev. J.
G. Wilson was called to labour in these localities
in June last. Your Committee felt it right to
encourage this effort by substantial help, and
have reason to believe the help was worthily
bestowed.


Warrxambool. —Your Committee have learned
•with regret that the Rev. W. W. Pehtland has
been necessitated to resign his promising sphere
at Warrnambool, owing to the strong sea air
injuring his health. It is hoped, however, that
a Minister will soon he found for this rising dis-
trict.
Negotiations were entered into with the sister
society of New South Wales with a view to the
settlement of a Minister at Echuca and Moama,
but both societies found they had prior claims in
the places opened, and nothing was done.
The following Churches have been received
into the Union :—Ballaarat East, Emerald Hill,
Brunswick and Napoleon’s ; and the following
as special members : Bev. J. G. Wilson, and
Eev. W. Higgins, of Geelong.
Our ministerial staff has not this year been
increased from England. This would have con-
siderably embarrassed us but for the efficient
help we have been able to derive from the college.
But while we have not added to our staff, your
Committee cannot but regret—even while their
judgment admits that their loss is the gain of the
Church in general—that the Rev. J. P. Sunder-
land, who has so long and so ably borne office
in the Union, is about to leave us for other, yet
kindred work. Our regret is somewhat modi-
fied, however, by the hope that his place will be
filled by a worthy successor. Your Committee
would take this opportunity of expressing their
high estimation of Mr. Sunderland as a fellow-
worker, to whose untiring zeal and judicious
counsels the success attending their labours is so
much due.
The political action of your Committee has
been limited this year to presenting an address
to Her Majesty on the subject of Transportation.
But they have waited for opportunities to ex-
press the decision of this Council on the question
of State Aid to Religion, and would bequeath to
the successors as a charge, a vigilant watch
over the movements of the State Aid Advocates.
In resigning their trust, your Committee,
while conscious of having made their best
endeavours to forward the object of the Union
and Mission, cannot but deplore that much has
been left undone for want of means, and would
pray the Great Head of the Church to inspire
his people with his own self-denying spirit, that
the prayers of the Churches for the spread of the
gospel may be “without ceasing,” and that the
treasury of the sanctuary may overflow with
their liberality, so that the pleasure of the Lord
may prosper in our hands.
TREASURER’S BALANCE SHEET,
Mat 1864 to Mat 1865.
Dr.
By Balance brought forward ... £5O 15 1
By Loan for Daylesford Church ... 40 0 0
By Pamphlets sold 0 3 6
£9O 18 7
Collections
Public Meeting, Oxford-street ... £lll5 4
United Communion, Richmond ... 7 5 4
Maryborough ... ... ••• 318 4
Dawson-street, Ballaarat ... ... 8 0 0
Sebastopol Welsh and English
Churches ... ••• 2 12 9
Napoleon’s ... ... ... ••• 3 16 6
United Communion, Ballaarat .. 4 2 2
Prahran ... 11 15 3
Emerald Hill ... ••• ••• 2 0 0
McKillop-street, Geelong 6 0 0
Brunswick ... ••• ... .«• I 12 0
Janefield 1 13 6
Castlemaine Church and Sunday-
school ... 11 0 0
Dunolly 116
East Melbourne 5 0 0
Do. Sunday-school... ... ... 10 0
Victoria Parade ... ... ••• 711 0
Beech worth 13 3 0
Do. Sunday-school 1 13 8
Warm am bool 2 95
William stown 6 00
St. Kilda 418 4
Sandhurst ... 8 0 0
Brighton ... ... ... ... 410 0
East St, Kilda Working Meeting 3 11
St. Kilda Auxiliary 14 0 0
Victoria Parade do 11 1 0
£159 0 2
Subscriptions :
Mr. F. J. Sargood 10 0 0
Mr. H. Brooks 10 0 0
Mr. Wm. Peterson 5 5 0
Mr. B. Haigh 5 0 0
Mr. S. Haigh 5 0 0
Mr. J. Browning 3 0 0
Mr. W. Bates 5 0 0
Mr. G. Rolfe 5 0 0
Mr. G. Johnson ••• 110
Rev. B. Cozens 010 0
Mr. H. Kidgell 0 10 0
Mr.W. Higgins 0 5 0
Mr. H. Groube 0 5 0
Mrs. Miller, Richmond ... ... 110
Per Rev. T. H. Jackson.
Mr. J. Port, Geelong 2 0 0
A Friend ... ... ... ... 010 0
“ First Fruits,” by Mr. Jennings 15 0
Sandhurst—
Mr. Britten £llO
Mr. Casey 10 0
Mr. Young ... ... 0 10 0
Mr. Commanders ... 0 10 0
Miss E. Commanders... 0 10 0
Mrs. Broadfoot (quarter) 0 5 0
Mrs. Armitage do 0 5 0
Mrs. Abbot do 0 5 0
Mr. Davies do 0 5 0
Mr. Seward do 0 5 0
. Mr. J. Haynes do 0 2 6
Mr. Derham ... ... 0 2 6
Mr. Williams ... 0 2 6 5 3 6


Kyneton— Moved by Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M. A.; seconded
Mr. Yule (quarter),.. £0 7 6 by Rev. J. Mirams—
Mr. Cook do 0 5 0 “That the reports now read be adopted and
Mr. Atwood do ... 0 5 0 printed.” Carried.
Mr. Hutcheson do ... 0 5 0
Mr. Hart do ... 0 5 0 Moved by the Rev. J. Mirams ; seconded by
Mr. Walker do ... 0 5 0 Rev. T. Odell—
Mr. Eromby do ... 0 5 0 “ That the Rev, W. R. Fletcher, M.A., of
Mr. Miles do ... 0 5 0 Sandhurst, be Chairman for the year commenc-
Mr. G.Milledgedo ... 0 5 0 ing May, 1866,” Carried unanimously.
On ’ 0 5 0 Moved by Mr. J. Wisewould, seconded by Mr.
Dr. SsSf do 2 I 2 s-u**, ******-
Mr. Jarman do ... 0 3 0 “ That H. Brooks, Esq., be Treasurer for the
Mr. Wells do ... 0 2 6 ensuing year.”
Mr. Baldwin do ... 0 2 6 At this stage of the proceedings the Rev. R.
p . 3 6 Connebee, who had just arrived from New Zea-
Prahran— land, was introduced to the Council.
Mr. Roberts 10 0
Mr J. Roberts ... 10 0 Moved by the Rev. J. C. M'Michael, seconded
Mrs. Billyeld 0 10 0 by Mr. W, Bates—
Mrs. Craven... .. 0 10 0 “That this Council welcomes the Rev. R.
\l tC IGr (9 uarter ) 05 0 Connebee, of Dunedin, as a visitor, and assures
Mr. Dxxon do 0 4 0 him ot its interest in the great work in which he
3 9 0 is engaged, and desires for him long continued
“ “ “ success in his important sphere.” Carried
_ , , 67 15 0 acc iamation.
Balance due Treasurer 66 9 1
y jMr Connebee then gave a brief statement of
Summary. the progress of the Congregational Church under
_ _ . , , , , his care, from which it appeared that abundant
By Balance brought forward ... £5O 15 1 SUC cess had attended his labours, and that the
~ Loan for Daylesford Church .. 40 0 0 biessing of the Lord was with him.
„ Pamphlets sold 0 3 6 &
Collections ... 159 0 2 It was then moved by the Rev. J. P. Sunder-
” Subscriptions "! 67 15 0 land, seconded by the Rev. A. Gosman—
„ Balance due Treasurer 66 9 1 “ That the Rev. T. H. Jackson and the Rev.
VV. Moss be Secretaries for the year.” Carried.
£384 210 Moved by Rev. J. C. M‘Michael, seconded by
Cr. Mr. H. Brooks, and carried—
By cash paid to Churches “ That a resoiutiou be drawn up expressive of
Ballaarat East £75 0 0 the thanks of the Union to the Rev. J. P Sunder-
Dunoliy 25 0 0 laud for his long-continued and efficient services
Rutherglen ... ... ... ... 20 0 0 as Secretary, and its best wishes for his success
Waimer and Mucklelord ... ... 30 0 0 iu his new sphere ot labour, as agent lor the
Sebastopol and Napoleon’s 37 10 0 Loudon Missionary Society in these colonies and
Emerald ilili ... ... ... 20 0 0 New Zealand.”
S°»onh.:; ;;; “ 2 2 tu? M».in resolution w* s .aiwuwot^
Jan Jac 10 0 0 submltted
Rev. d. G. Wilson’s expenses in Moved by Rev. W. R. Fletcher; seconded by
Melbourne 17 5 0 Rev. W. S. H. Fieldea ; supported by G.
Lay Agency Committee ... ... 10 0 0 Rolfe, Esq.—
Ministerial supply and travelling “That this meeting, representing as it does
expenses ... 19 9 6 t j ie Congregational Churches of Victoria,
Daylesford Church, repairs ... 42 15 0 expresses its cordial sympathy with the Rev.
Interest on loan for Daylesford James Povey Sunderland in his acceptance of
Church 16 12 6 t j,e work and responsibility of agent for the
Printing ... ... ... ... 21 11 6 London Missionary Society in the colonies of
Incidental expenses 8 19 4 Australasia. It recalls with gratitude his many
services cordially and cheerfully rendered during
£384 210 t be four years that he has held the office of
Examined and found correct, Secretary to the Congregational Union and
Taos. Wilkinson. Mission, and rejoices in remembering his name
Gwen Kemp. among its Chairmen, to which honourable post


he was elected by the Churches in the year
1863. Knowing fully the immense importance
of the Missionary Work of the southern hemi-
sphere, and the eminent fitness of Mr. Sunder-
land for the agency of the South Sea Island
Missions, it cheerfully acquiesces in the choice of
the directors—assures him of hearty co-opera-
tion prays that the blessing of God may
attend him, and that while his labours increase
his power to labour may increase in like measure.”
Carried.
The Rev. J. P. Sunderland replied in feeling
and suitable terms.
The following gentlemen were then elected by
ballot to be the Committee for the year Revs.
J. D. Davies, W. S. H. Eielden, J, C. M‘Michael,
J. Mirams, T. Odell, J. P. Sunderland, Messrs.
W. Bates, J. Browning, S. Haigh, G. Rolfe, R.
Smith, and J. Wisewould, Auditors—Messrs.
T. Wilkinson and 0. Kemp.
The Rev. W. R, Fletcher then drew attention
to the “ Cemetery Act,” and after describing
several cases of unseemly opposition in the
burial of the dead, owing to the officiating
Ministers not being of the denomination to which
the ground was allotted, in which the interment
took place; pointed out that the act left the
right an open question and explained that a
slight alteration would make the matter definite,
and obstruction would become illegal. Mr. J.
Wisewould confirmed the views of Mr. Fletcher.
The farther consideration of the subject was
remitted to the Parliamentary Vigilance Com-
mittee.
Mr. T. Wilkinson brought up a report from
the Lay Agency Committee, which was adopted.
Moved by Rev. A. Gosman; seconded by
Rev. J. Hailey; and carried —■
“That Messrs. Wilkinson, Walker, and the
mover be a sub-committee to collect information
on the subject of Lay Agency, and report at the
next meeting,”
Mr. Rolfe introduced the subject of Finance,
and recommended the plan that had been partially
adopted: namely, the formation of Auxiliary
Committees to collect money for the Union and
Mission Fund in every Church.
The Rev. T. H. Jackson, (as Financial Agent,)
explained that he had commenced collecting and
had met with considerable success. The plan
adopted was to obtain annual subscriptions, and
get some one to collect these by quarterly instal-
ments. He had just received quarterly pay-
ments from Kyneton and Sandhurst.
Moved by Rev. J. C. M‘Michael; seconded by
Rev. W. Cuttle—
“ That the subject be referred to the Finance
Committee.” Carried.
The Rev. W. Cuttle (as requested at the Half-
yearly Meeting,) brought forward the subject of
Sunday-schools. As the returns from the schools
were incomplete, the Rev. A. Gosman moved,
Rev. J, J. Halley seconded, —“ That the Sunday-
school Committee be re-appointed,and requested
to bring up a report at the Half-yearly Meeting.”
Carried.
The Rev. E. Day read a paper on the desira-
bility and practicability of establishing a “ Chapel
Building Society.” The subject was considered
with great interest, and the plan proposed was
regarded very favourably; but in order to
mature the plan and ascertain what would result
from a proposition of the Rev. J. L. Poore, to
obtain money on loan without interest, it was
moved by Rev. W. Cuttle, seconded by Rev. C.
Price,—-“ That Messrs. Rolfe, Smith, Brooks,
Bates, and the Rev. E. Day, be a Committee to
consider the scheme proposed by Mr. Day, and
report at the Half-yearly Meeting. ” Carried.
The Council then adjourned till nine o’clock
the following day for prayer, and till ten o'clock
for business.
Wednesday.
After an hour spent in devotion, the business
was resumed by submitting the resolution
respecting the Rev. J. P, Sunderland before
recorded.
The Rev. A. Gosman stated that he had pre-
pared a paper on “ The State of Religion in our
Churches,” but as the subject had been suffi-
ciently treated in the course of the proceedings,
he begged the Council to consider the paper as
read, which was agreed to.
The Rev. A. Gosman then brought forward a
series of questions.
Moved by Mr. Rolfe, seconded by Rev. W.
Cuttle—
“ That the said questions, and any matters
arising out of them, be referred to the Com-
mittee appointed to consider the case of Sturt-
street Church.” Carried.
The Rev. E. Day next read the following
paper on—
“ THE INCORPORATION OF TRUSTS.”
The subject of this paper is, from its practical
nature—the trouble it occasions very often—and
the unsatisfactory mode at present in existence
for transferring Congregational property to suc-
ceeding trustees, a subject of unceasing interest
and frequent discussion. An excellent paper on
it was read by Samuel Morley, Esq., at the
Autumnal Meeting of the Congregational Union
held in Liverpool, October, 15, 1863. It may
be found in the Congregational Year Book for
1864. “At the close of it Mr. Morley stated
that he had received several letters on the sub-
ject since he had arrived in Liverpool. One was
from Mr. Hadfield, M. P. (an eminent solicitor in
Manchester,) who expressed his opinion that the
subject was one which had not yet received all
the consideration it deserved, and that it was


desirable that a plan should be suggested by
which, while affording all needful security for
the maintenance of denominational interests,
facility should be given for union among
Christians on a catholic basis. Another corre-
spondent suggested that there should be greater
facility than at present for selling chapels ; and
a third expressed a wish that there might be
devised a cheap mode of getting rid of absent
trustees.”
The views entertained by these correspondents
are such as I have long held. Nearly twelve
months ago I submitted to the Executive Com
mittee of our Union and Mission a scheme for
carrying them out, by whom it was referred to
the Parliamentary Vigilance Committee, ap-
pointed by this Council, consisting of Messrs.
E. Langton and J. Wisewould, Dr. Enabling and
the Eev. J. Mirams. These gentlemen met and
considered the scheme and approved of it in all its
main parts, and sent it back to the Executive
Committee, recommending the adoption of it.
Nothing further was, however, done until the
meeting of the Council at Ballaarat, when a
vote was passed requesting me to read a paper
on the subject at the then coming and now pre-
sent May meetings.
In taking it up, there is, I think, no necessity
of entering at length upon the question lately
discussed in England, whether Church property
should be placed at the absolute disposal of the
majority of the members of the respective
Churches, notwithstanding any change of senti-
ment on what are now regarded as vital doctrines,
and the true Scriptural order and discipline.
The question may be better understood by ask-
ing, if any Church, at present sound in all Con-
gregational principles, should, at a future day,
through a complete or even partial succession of
members become Unitarian, Baptist, Presby-
terian or Episcopalian, shall it, with this change
in sentiment and practice, take with it property
purchased by Congregationalists for Congrega-
tional uses? My reply is—No. And again
seeing that every one has a right to direct the
purpose to which his money shall he applied,
ought we to form building associations and
encourage Congregationalists to give their money
for the purchase of property upon the under-
standing that it may through a change of senti-
ment in the future members of the respective
Churches now Congregational, be applied to
Unitarian, Baptist, Presbyterian, Episcopalian,
or any other religious or non-religious purpose?
Again, I say, no. Ido not wish to fetter future
members so as to prevent them from doing what
they wish with their own. My only desire is to
prevent them from perverting the use to which
our money is applied. And my desire is, as a
steward of God, to apply my money to uses
which, in accordance with the light I possess, (
appear to be Scriptural. Those who advocate
the abolition of trusts and uses should, I think, j
also advocate the building of Churches, Colleges,
and other denominational erections by means of (
shares, and pay an annual rent for them, making I
the property private, and leaving the Congrega-
tions or constituents for the time being to pay
their own expenses. In this case, there would
be no need of perpetual uses and trusts, and the
Churches of the future would have all the free-
dom which can reasonably be desired by any
persons.
Presuming, then, that it is proper for us to
insist on our Church property being vested in
Trustees for Congregational uses, the question is,
What is the best mode of effecting this purpose?
Let me briefly point out what it appears to me
to be.
1. The safe custody of the Title Deeds. —A
perusal of the paper read by Mr. Morley will
show that under the present course of procedure
the title deeds are frequently lost, defaced, or
destroyed. He recommends that all trustees
should deposit them in a muniment room for the
purpose, but then he cannot insure the carrying
out of his recommendation. The same evils may,
and they probably will, though to a less extent,
still prevail. Something more than a recom-
mendation is required. A certainty must be
insured.
2. The faithful execution of the Trusts. —Many
Church properties in England belonging right-
fully to the Independents have passed into the
hands of Unitarians, and been confirmed to the
latter by a special Act of Parliament, after long
and undisturbed occupation. Through the con-
nivance or carelessness of Trustees, property may
easily be diverted from use by our denomination
to use by some other even in this colony. We
may have all the trouble and expense of raising
new interests, and providing and maintaining
Ministers for them, and then just as they become
self-sustaining, find the people and property pass
over to other denominations. We cannot, and
we do not wish to prevent the people, contrary
to their inclination or will, from passing over,
but we have a right to the property for our deno-
mination, and should therefore adopt measures
to secure it.
3. The removal of absent, unsuitable, and dis-
qualified persons from the Trusteeship. —Under the
present system in this colony there may be clauses
in the trust deed declaring that certain persons
shall cease to be Trustees, but there may be a diffi-
culty in getting a transfer of their interest in
the trust property. And it may so happen that
persons may become exceedingly disagreeable
and troublesome as Trustees, and yet not come
under the disqualifying clauses so as to be
removable. A remedy for these evils is required.
4. A simple and inexpensive form of vesting the
property in successors. —Our brethren in England
have obtained an Act of Parliament called
Peto’s Act. under which new Trustees can be
appointed and the trust property vested in them
by a short memorandum under the hand and
seal of the Chairman at a Church meeting; but as
the Act does not extend to this colony, we are
compelled on every appointment of new Trus


tees to proceed under the old system and make
a new deed and enrol it. Peto’s Act is a very
useful one, but it does not meet all the eases
before noticed. We want, then, something
better than it.
5. The effecting of greater union amongst
our Churches without sacrificing denominational
interests. —We are oftentimes afraid to do what
is right, lest it should by any possibility lead to
what is wrong. We prefer being weak as a
denomination, through fear of wrong, to being
strong as such through doing what is proper.
We have risen to some extent above this
feeling in the formation of our Union and
Mission, the founding of our College, and the
establishment of a Ministerial Provident Fund.
We have done well so far, but we must not
stop there. We must still advance in voluntary
associations, so as to keep pace with compulsory
associations, and show that the force of the
former is greater than that of the latter. We
must have a Building Association, and, as an
accompaniment to it, an incorporation of
Churches in relation to Church property, but
to this alone. Congregational Churches in
America are distinct corporate bodies —but this
is scarcely desirable in this colony. Mr. Morley
complains in his paper that the Congregationalists
in England are placed at great disadvantage in
comparison with the members of the national
establishment, on whose behalf there are many
corporate bodies who can retain property in
perpetual succession. And he thinks that Inde-
pendent principles necessitates a multitude of
separate holdings, and the multiplication of
great trouble and expense. But I think that he
is in error. Every Church may be made a body
corporate. All the Churches in a district may
form one corporation without any sacrifice of
principle, or all the Churches in the colony may
constitute one without it. An Act ot the Legis-
lature would be required for the purpose. To
obtain it would be expensive; but the first
expense would be nearly the whole expense,
and would not be much felt when distributed
amongst all the Churches. Every corporation
would hold the property conveyed to it for the
benefit of any Church upon the trusts set forth
in the trust deed just as the present Trustees
hold it. The members of the corporation,
numbering seven or any other number, might
be appointed by the communicants of every
Church becoming alone a corporate body, or by
delegates from several Churches where they
unue to form a corporation. A certain portion
of the persons appointed would go out of office
every year, and their place be filled up as under
the original appointment. In the union of all
the Churches, the corporation would take pos-
session of all title deeds; execute faithfully in
ail probability the trusts, seeing that they would
give a report every year of their proceedings; be
freed very easily of absent, unsuitable, and
disqualified persons; pass the trust property
without any new deed, or any expense or trouble
from the out-going to the incoming members,
and produce a healthy union amongst our
Churches. The draft of an Act has been pre-
pared and submitted to the Parliamentary
Vigilance Committee, and recommended by
them in its main parts for adoption. It con-
tains, of course, details which would be out of
place in this paper; but it can, if you desire to
hear them, be read to you. My hope is that
you will not consent to the shelving of it, and
to a (piiet relapse i-nto the antiquated system,
involving endless trouble and endless expense.
Moved by the Rev. W. Cuttle, seconded by the
Rev. J. Farr—
“ That the best thanks of this Council be given
to Mr. Day for the valuable paper now read, and
that he be requested to place it at the disposal of
the Executive Committee, in order that they may
consider the whole scheme in detail, and bring up
a report at the Half-yearly Meeting.” Carried.
The Rev. E. Day drew attention to the fact
that some of our Church property was very
imperfectly secured for the use of the denomina-
tion, and urge the necessity of putting it in trust.
He moved, the Rev. W. Moss seconded —
“ That the friends of our denomination be
recommended not to subscribe towards the pur-
chase of land, or the erection ot buildings, until
satisfactory evidence be given that the property is
or will be secured to the denomination.’’ Carried.
The question of State Aid to Religion having
been considered ; it was moved by Mr. Rolfe,
seconded by the Rev. T. Odell —
“ That a petition be presented to both Houses
of Legislature, requesting their favourable con-
sideration of the motion made by Hon. O. Marker
for the gradual abolition of State Aid to religion,
and that every congregation be requested to send
a similar petition forthwith.” Carried.
Moved by Rev. W. S. H. Fieldeu, seconded
by Rev. VV. Cuttle —
“That the Executive Committee be requested
to prepare a form of petition tor signature.”
Carried.
Moved by Rev. W. S. 11, Fieldeu, seconded by
Rev, W. R. Fletcher —
“ That the Secretaries be requested to forward
to George Marker, Esq., M.L.A., the expression
of our cordial sympathy and gratitude for his
able and earnest efforts in reference to the State
Aid question.” Carried.
Moved by Mr. G. Rolfe ; seconded by Rev.
W. S. H. Fielden —
“ 'That, in the opinion of this Council, it is
desirable to disseminate more extensively among
our congregations our distinctive congregational
principles, and for the more effectually doing so
the Committee be instructed to prepare, and iiave
printed, a small book setting forth the same in a
simple and concise form ; or if such book be
already in existence, it be obtained and the


several Churches connected with the Union
pledge themselves to take as many copies at cost
price as they can judiciously distribute from
time to time.” Carried.
Mr. Pielden announced that the Rev. J. L.
Poore had forwarded to him a large number of
English Congregational tracts, which he should
he happy to give to the several pastors for
gratuitous distribution in their Congregations.
Moved hv Rev. W. Moss; seconded by Rev.
W. S. H. Fielden -
“ That inasmuch as the subject of systematic
beneficence is in itself of great importance and is
now occupying a large share of public attention,
and seeing that the temporal prosperity of
the Churches and of all Benevolent Societies is
in a great measure dependent upon its proper
understanding and practical working, this Coun-
cil desires earnestly to recommend the system—
as Scriptural in its character and efficient in its
results —to the thoughtful consideration of the
members of the associated Churches ; and fur-
ther, this Council hereby empowers the Secre-
taries to obtain an adequate supply of the vari-
ous addresses and tracts published by the Sys-
tematic Beneficence Society of Great Britain, for
general distribution.” Carried.
Moved by the Rev. W, Moss : seconde dby
Rev. J. J. Halley—
“ That the Half-yearly Meeting be held at
Geelong, and the Rev. W. S. H. Fielden be
requested to preach on the occasion.” Carried.
Moved by the Rev. W. R. Fletcher ; seconded
by Rev. C. S. Y. Price —
“That the Parliamentary Vigilance Committee
("consisting of Messrs. E. Langton, J. Wisewould,
Dr. Embling, and Rev. J. Mirams,) be reappointed,
and that Messrs. Rolfe and Vale be added to
their number. Mr. Rolfe to be convener.’
Carried. <
-Moved by Mr. J. Port ; seconded by Rev. W.
R. Fletcher—
“That the best thanks ofthis Council be given
to the Rev. T. H. Jackson, for the efforts made
by him to increase the funds of the Union, and
this Council urges him to continue the work he
has so well begun.” Carried.
Mr. Jackson said he willingly accepted the
work, and trusted to be able to visit every easily
accessible Church during the year.
Moved by Rev. T. H. Jackson, seconded by
the Rev. J. Farr —
“ That this Council desires thankfully to
acknowledge the good services already rendered
to the Union by the Rev. J. L. Poore, and would
especially record its appreciation of the Loan
Fund he is attempting to raise in England, for
the use of the Churches of this colony ; and that
the Secretaries be instructed to convey the same
to him by letter, assuring him of our unabated
regard.” Carried unanimously.
Moved by Rev. T. H. Jackson, seconded by
the Rev. J. P. Sunderland—
“That the best thanks of the Council he given
to the Collins-street Congregational Church for
the use of their building for the meetings of
Committee ; and that the use thereof he requested
for the coming year.” Carried.
Moved by Mr. G. Rolfe, seconded by Rev. C*
S. Y. Price-
“That, if necessary, the future meetings of
the General Council shall extend over four days.”
Carried.
Refreshment having been provided in the
School-room for the Ministers and Delegates
on Tuesday and Wednesday, at the cost of the
Churches of Brighton, Ivew, and Williamstown,
a cordial vote of thanks was passed to those
Churches.
The Council then adjourned till the Half-
yearly Meeting.
Tuesday Evening, May 9.
The Annual Public Meeting was held in St.
George’s Hall, Bourke-street. The Rev. W. R.
Lewis presided. Prayer was offered by the Rev.
J. J. Halley. After the Chairman’s remarks, the
Rev. T. H. Jackson gave an abstract of the Re-
port ; and excellent addresses were delivered on
the following subjects -
Rev. E. Day: “The Moral and Spiritual
Wants of our Population, and howto meet them.’
Rev. W. R. Fletcher, MA. : “The necessity
of the hearty co-operation of the People with the
Minister in the work of the Churches,”
Rev. W. Cuttle: “ The need of the Holy Spirit’s
influence to render effectual all the instrumentali-
ties empowered for the spiritual welfare of the
colony.”
Rev. W. S. H. Fielden: “The Mission of
Congregationalism.”
The proceedings of the evening were enlivened
by an excellent choir, under the direction of Mr.
C. Blanchard, conductor; and Mr. G. Bell,
organist. Several pieces of music were admir-
ably performed, to which the audience testified
by an enthusiastic vote of thanks.
The attendance was larger than usual, not-
withstanding that the evening was wet, and the
wisdom of adopting this new course was placed
beyond question.
Wednesday Evening, May 10.
The United Communion Service was held in
the Prahran Congregational Church. The Rev.
W. Moss presided. Prayer was offered by the
President, the Revs. H. Groube and W. R.
Lewis. Impressive and appropriate addresses
were delivered by Rev. J. Beer and Rev. J. P.
Sunderland. The attendance was very large
and an earnest devotional tone pervaded the
meeting.


To Collections and Subscriptions re-
ported £601
4
3
Interest from Smith, lloche & Co. 2
18
4
Snapper Point Church 7
14
6
Carried forward £611
17
1
Brousht forward ...•£611
17
1
Rev. H. Groube, personal sub-
scription
Victoria Parade Church
1
2
0
11
0
4
Castlemaine do .
4
5
0
Rev. E. Day, personal subscription
1
0
0
Sandhurst Church
2
0
0
Oxford-street do.
2
i
10
0
Dunolly do, ... •••
0
0
Rev. James Sayer, personal sub-
scription
St. Kilda Church
i
5
0
18
0
6
Rev. Alex. Gosrnan, personal
subscription
1
0
0
Carlton Church •••
2
0
0
Rev. Jas. Mirams, personal sub-
scription
1
0
0
Emerald Hill Church ...
1
0
0
Kyneton do.
3
0
0
Warrnambool do.
2
12
6
Rev. W. W. Pentland, personal
subscription
1
0
0
Chewton Church
1
0
0
Rev. F. J. Pitman, personal sub-
scription
1
0
0
Interest paid by Buchan
12
0
0
Brighton Church
1
1
"0
Rev. W. R. Lewis, personal sub-
scription
1
0
0
Interest paid by Buchan
12
0
0
McKillop-street Church, Geelong
3
0
0
Janefield Church
1
0
0
Dawson-street Church, Ballaarat
2
3
4
Rev. J. J. Halley, personal sub-
scription
I
0
0
Interest allowed by Treasurer ...
2
6
1
Richmond Church
1
2
0
Rev. J. P. Sunderland, personal
subscription
1
0
0
Rev. J. C. M‘Michael
1
0
0
Rev. W. S. H. Fielden
1
0
0
Prahran Church
3
3
0
FIRST ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS’ PROVIDENT FUND,
f ob THE COLONY OF VICTORIA.
ESTABLISHED 1864.
The first Annual Meeting of the members of
the Ministers’ Provident Fund was held in Vic-
toria Parade Congregational Church, May 9th,
1865. The chairman, the Rev. W. R. Lewis,
called upon the Secretary to read the following
REPORT.
There is but little to report in relation to this
fund during the past year.
Six hundred pounds, which formed nearly
the whole of the capital, have been securely
invested in the names of the Trustees, bearing
interest at eight per cent, per annum. The year’s
income has been but small, as will be seen by
the Treasurer’s report, as all the Churches have
not contributed, and those that have contributed
have sent very small sums, probably in conse-
quence of the pressure of other important claims.
Already this fund has commenced its bene-
ficent career, by rendering timely aid to an
esteemed brother, who, by a painful accident,
was laid aside from his labours.
No layman has yet availed himself of the
privilege offered in Rule VIII., which states,
“ That any person may become an honorary
member of this fund, by an annual payment of
£2, or a lile subscription of £10.” It is hoped
that some will at once aspire to this honour, and
thereby render important aid to the fund.
The usefulness of this fund being already
established, the Committee express the hope that
the Churches will, during the ensuing year,
liberally respond to its claims.
The Treasurer of the Congregational
Ministers’ Provident Fund for the
Colony of Victoria in account current
with the . Fund.
Dr.
Rev. W. Moss, personal sub-
scription 10 0
Rev. T. H. Jackson, personal
subscription 10 0
£69129 10


To Balance brought down £6O 16 6
By Advertising sermons in St. Kilda
Church OH 0
Printing Circulars 1 10 0
Postages per Rev. J. Beer ... 018 0
Stationery 12 6
Cash lent Buchan at 8 per cent,
secured on property in Collins
street ... ... ... ••• 600 0 0
Exchange on Sandhurst cheque o 1 0
Printing Report 100
Postages per Rev. J. Beer ... 0 910
Exchange on Halley’s cheque ... 0 1 0
Rev. J. Mirams 25 0 0
Balance 60 16 6
£691 9 10
It was then moved by Rev. J. C. M‘Michael,
and seconded by the Rev. T. Odell, and carried
“ That the reports now read by the Secretary
and Treasurer be adopted, and printed with the
proceedings of the Union and Mission.”
Moved by the Eev. J. C. M‘Michael, and
seconded by the Rev. J. P. Sunderland—
“ That the following gentlemen be the com-
mittee for the ensuing year:—
Rev. W. R. Lewis, H. Brooks, Esq.,
Rev. W. Moss, W. Bates, Esq.,
Rev. T. H. Jackson, J. Browning, Esq.,
Rec. J. C. M'Michael, O. Kemp, Esq.
Rev. W. S. H. Eielden, J. Jennings, Esq.,
Robert Smith, Esq., Treasurer.
Rev. J. Beer, Secretary.”
Moved by Rev. J. Beer, and seconded by Rev.
T. H. Jackson, and carried—
“That Messrs. S. Haigh and W. Bates be
requested to audit the Treasurer’s account.”
Ministers and Churches are hereby reminded
that, according to Rule VI., both personal sub-
scriptions and collections should be paid in
October next.
It is requested that all moneys be sent to the
Treasurer, Robert Smith, Esq., 23, Eiinders-
lane west, Melbourne.


REPORT OF THE THIRD ANNUAL 1 MEETING
OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE OF VICTORIA.
The third Annual Meeting of the College Con-
stituency was held in the Victoria Parade Con-
gregational Church, on Wednesday, the 10th of
May, 1865, at three o’clock in the afternoon.
The Secretary (Rev. W. S. IT. Fielden) gave out
the 891st Hymn, and the Rev. 0. S. Y. Price, of
Emerald Hiil, offered prayer. The Rev, W. R.
Lewis was voted to the chair, and after intro-
ductory remarks called upon the Secretary to
read the
ANNUAL REPORT.
The College Council have much satisfaction
in thus meeting the Constituency of the Institu-
tion to give account of their stewardship and
to resign the responsibilities laid upon them last
year. Fifteen meetings of the General Council
have been held, and the House and Finance
Sub-Committees have also discharged their duties
with commendable promptness and regularity.
Many questions of vital importance have been
discussed, and, while no very brilliant results
have crowned our endeavours, we rejoice to
believe that some progress has been made, and
that we close this year with a firmer policy and
a clearer out-look towards future success, than
existed when the Constituency last assembled.
Several changes have occurred during the
year. Shortly before the end of last session the
tutors signified their intention to resign, and in
December last, after mature consideration, it
was determined to elect four ministers to dis-
tinct chairs, and make them severally responsible,
by formal appointment, for a department of
college study, so that the then existing tem-
porary and uncertain tenure of office should
cease. It was believed that there was no pros-
pect of the arrival of a President from England,
and that the new arrangement might last for
three or four years, and cut off the excuse for
repeated discussions of policy and methods
which could only be prejudicial to our interests,
by exciting criticism and division. The Council
accepted the resignations unwillingly, and
expresesd gratitude for the good service which
the retiring tutors had freely rendered up to
that time. The new scheme proved easy of
adjustment, and was accepted unanimously.
The Revs. Alexander Frazer, W. S. H. Fielden,
A. Gosman, and J, C. M‘Michael were elected
and appointed: they have laboured together
since this session opened, in February last. John
Carmichael, Esq., M.A., has continued his duties
as classical and mathematical tutor to the satis-
faction of the Council.
During the year the usual prizes have been
awarded. Mr. Man by obtained the Fletcher
prize of £5 for an essay on “ Miracles,” and as
the second student in seniority, the Hopkins
Prize of £2O was voted to him by the tutors,
according to the precedent established last year.
Mr. Manby has also been awarded the Rolfe
prize of £lO for the best competition sermon on
(1 Kings xviii. 21.) “How long halt ye between
two opinions ?” The Council gladly availed
themselves of the presence in Melbourne
of the Rev. John Graham, of Pitt-street, Sydney,
to secure his services at the College Opening on
30th January. He preached, at their request, to
a crowded congregation at Oxford-street Church,
an eloquent and impressive sermon from 2 Cor.
iv. 7. His readiness to meet our wishes and
the earnest appeal which he made on behalf of
the College demand the expression of our
gratitude. Upon himself, and the sister College
at Sydney, we pray that God’s blessing may ever
rest.
In previous reports reference has been made
to our desire that the Melbourne University
should supply the arts course for some, at least,
of our students. We are gratified to announce
that this wish is already accomplished. Last
February, Mr. West passed the matriculation
examination —was at once entered as an under-
graduate, and has since attended the University
Lectures. Mr. West has, therefore, become
entitled to the Fletcher University Prize of £5
worth of books. We repeat the hope that the
time will come when the University will do most
of the secular instruction and the College be
thereby the better fitted to accomplish its work
as a Divinity Hall. In order to this, however,
we must have a higher standard of previous
education than is secured under the existing
terms of admission to the College.
We regret that as yet the Institution has
failed to secure the hearty and liberal support


which it demands from our denomination. It
was felt necessary to issue a special appeal to
the Pastors and Churches in reference to the
annual collection in August. Surely we have a
right to expect that every Congregational
Church in the colony will show this amount of
practical sympathy and willinghood. There are
still, however, many exceptions to this rule of
very “ reasonable service,” and our subscription
list by no means represents the total ability of
those who are pledged to our support. By very
rigid economy we have avoided any pressure of
actual debt, but the Treasurer has often been in
advance through tardy payments, which have
involved a large expenditure of time in very
repeated applications to some of our subscribers
before the promised sums could be obtained.
Thanks are due especially to Owen Kemp, Esq.,
and the Treasurer, for the zeal they have shown
in this trying and wearisome department. The
Council would appeal to the common sense
and fairness of the constituency against the
threatened necessity for a paid collector. “Every
man, according as he purposeth in his heart, so
let him give; not grudgingly or of necessity, for
God loveth a cheerful giver.”
During the year our students have satisfac-
torily accomplished their allotted tasks, and
have merited the continued confidence and
affection of all who are interested in the Insti-
tution. They have also fulfilled a large number
of preaching engagements, and were never in
greater demand than at the present time. We
trust and believe that their labours are not in
vain in the Lord. Mr. Kennedy’s year with us
expired in November last, and he returned to
labour in Tasmania. Mr. Coombs will shortly
leave us, with every prospect of usefulness
before him. We pray that these brethren may
be guided and blessed in their great work, and
prove “ workmen who need not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth,”
We now turn with peculiar pleasure to the
subject which has affected all our plans and
brightened all our hopes for the future. The
scheme already described, adopted last December
for the conduct of the College, was not destined
to be more final than the existing temporary
arrangements which it has superseded. The
acceptance by the Bev. J. P. Sunderland of the
colonial agency of the London Missionary Society,
which was one cause of the change, was also, in
the providence of God, fatal to its continuance.
In conjunction with a Pastor to the Church at
Richmond we look for the President of the
College in the Rev. A. M. Henderson, of Clare-
mont chapel, London, who has accepted the call
of the Colonial Missionary Society to fill both
these offices. The letter of the Bev, J. L. Poore
to the Council announcing this most auspicious
and hopeful conclusion excited great satisfaction
in our minds. It bears ample testimony to the
ability and fitness, the scholarship, literary power,
and experience of the President elect, whose con-
sent to the offer has diffused general pleasure and
anticipation among the friends of the College and
the colonies in England. The following extracts
from Mr. Poore’s letter will best express the
terms of Mr. Henderson’s engagement:—“He
is engaged as President of the College, and
tutor in theology, philosophy, and the criti-
cism of the Greek Testament. He will be
in attendance at the College three times a week,
and we have promised him £2OO per annum in
quarterly payments.” Towards the close of the
letter he says, —“ Fill the house with students,
(there will be need for them all, and if godly,
earnest, and self-denying men, they will have
plenty of work) and retain the services of Messrs.
Fielden and M'Michael for one day each per
week, and give them £5O per annum.”
The last mail brought a letter of kind and
earnest congratulations on this appointment from
the Bev. Thomas Binney. He says that Mr.
Henderson’s arrival will “repay us all for the
past delay, and make up for that ‘ hope long
deferred’ which ‘ maketh the heart sick.’ . .
You will find Mr. H. a kind, unassuming, loving
man, with whom you will be able to work con-
fidently and fraternally : and Tam sure be will
find his * entrance in among you’ to be so hearty
and generous on yonr part, that his spirit wdll he
cheered, and the pressure of his official duties
lightened.”
By the same mail we received a copy of Mr.
Henderson’s address to his congregation an-
nouncing his speedy departure;—among the
reasons for accepting the call to Melbourne he
says:—
“ In the third place, it offers me an additional
work, which is also of the highest character—
the training of the future ministry of what is
destined to grow into a great empire, to be the
England of the Southern World. The studies of
my whole life have been always beyond the re-
quirements of my public ministrations ; and
until lately, the instruction of young men in
theology and philosophy, thereby fitting them
for the ministry, has been a delightful portion of
my work. Not less than one hundred are
preaching the Gospel with acceptance in various
denominations and in different portions of the
earth, whose whole training for that work has
been under my care. Such work has been a
passion with me when opportunity and time have
permitted, and I have longed for it when they
have not. I believe God now opens it to me,
and I dare not say nay when He invites.”
The following resolutions were carried unani-
mously at a special Council meeting, held in
April, and forwarded with an official letter to the
Bev. J. L. Poore, as the Secretary of the
Colonial Missionary Society :
Resolved, —“ That this Council has heard, with
great satisfaction and gratitude, the details given
in the Rev. J. L, Poore’s letter, concerning the
appointment of the Rev. A, M. Henderson, of
London, to the Presidency of the Congregational
College of Victoria. The Council hereby accepts


and ratifies that appointment, pledges itself to
pay him the sum of £2OO per annum in quarterly
payments, to give him a cordial welcome, and in
concurrence with him to make such other sub-
ordinate arrangements as may be hereafter felt
necessary for the welfare and prosperity of the
institution.”
Resolved, —“That the best thanks of the
Council are hereby given to the Rev. J. L.
Poore, and the gentlemen associated with him in
the negotiations which have resulted in the
appointment of the Rev. A, M. Henderson,
above described.”
We hope that the changes announced in this
report will secure the approbation and excite
the support and liberality of an increased con-
stituency. It is obvious that our income must
be augmented, and that there is now an opening
for the “liberal things,” which, on fitting occa-
sion , you have the reputation of being prompt to
devise and execute. We are “ surrounded by a
great cloud of witnesses,” and a “ great occasion”
Win. Bates, Treasurer, in Account with
BUILDING AND
has come at last! Our friends in England have
set us a noble example ; the Rev. J. L. Poore has
fulfilled the pledge referred to in the last report;
hehas obtained £lOOO towards Endowment, and
also the Special Funds needed to send out our
new President and his family without cost to the
College! We trust that his zeal and success,
together with our brighter hopes and prospects,
will provoke the proportionate liberality needed
to meet our increased expenditure. If every
Church will give us a collection and appoint a
collector for the district ; if every subscriber
will assess himself in the court of conscience and
try to interest others in the Institution, then,
may be easily accepted Mr. Binney’s augury for
“the entering in amongst us” of the new Presi-
dent, whose advent will, we trust and believe,
open a new era for the Congregational College of
Victoria. May God give to us abundantly the
spirit of wisdom and true consecration that we
may see his pleasure prospering in our hands.
Wm. Bates, Esq.,the treasurer, then submitted
the Financial Statement,
the Congregational College of Victoria.
FUND.
ENDOWMENT
Cash in hand £267 9 0
Received from Mr. Robert Smith 30 0 0
„ ~ Mr. John Browning 30 0 0
„ „ Mr. Dagger ... 14 0 0
„ „ Rev. E. Day ... 5 0 0
„ „ Rev. Wm. Moss ... 2 10 0
„ „ Rev. J. Mirams ... 2 0 0
Cash received from Rev. J. L.
Poore of England 400 0 0
£750 19 0
I
By Money invested in Mortgages £650 0 0
„ Erection of Bath 22 1 2
„ Cash in hand 78 17 10
£750 19 0
ANNUAL
FUND.
From Annual Subscription List £369 15 11
On Interest Account 80 10 0
Henry Hopkins, Esq., for Mr.
Kennedy—half year 35 0 0
£485 5 11
Deficiency due 1864 £37 2 11
John Carmichael, Esq. ... ... 100 0 0
House Expenses for the year,
up to May Ist 304 14 7
Fees for Matriculation of Two
at University, and do. Fees... 8 0 0
For purchase of Books ... ... 3 0 0
Printing, Postage, Stationery &c.,
for the year ... 16 5 0
By Cash in hand 16 3 5
£485 5 11
} A ™ TOM -
William Bates, Treasurer.


Mr. Boreham, Canipbellfield
.. £110
S. Ramsden, Esq
.. 5 0 0
COLLINS-STREET CHURCH: —
H, Brooks, Esq. ... £25
0
0
John Browning, Esq. 10
0
0
Do. do. for grandson 2
0
0
Mr. Kennison 5
0
0
Mr. Ross 1
1
0
Mr. Cannot 1
1
0
Collection at Sandhurst Church ... £8
10
0
Castlemaine Church. .. ... ...
4
5
6
Proceeds ofLecture delivered at Janeneld
by Hon. J. P. Fawkner
1
16
0
Rev. M. W. Bradney, Beechworth
1
0
0
Rev. W. W. Pentland
1
0
0
Rev. F. Pitman
0
10
0
Sundries
4
15
0
Norwood Church (near Maryborough)
2
10
0
Mr. Joyce, Norwood
o
10
0
It was then moved by Rev. J. C. M'Michael,
seconded by Kev. J. Mirams, and carried —
“ That the report now read be adopted, and
printed for circulation under the direction of the
College Council.”
It was moved by Mr. George Rolfe, seconded
by Rev. J. J. Halley, and carried—
“That the Treasurer’s statement now read
(when audited) be adopted, and printed with the
report and the minutes of this meeting.”
Moved by Rev. Edwin Day, seconded by Rev.
J. Farr, and carried—
“That the best thanks of the meeting are
hereby presented to William Bates, Esq., the
Treasurer; the Rev. W. S. 11. Fielden, the
Secretary ; and to the members of the retiring
Council ’ for the valuable services they have
rendered during the past year.”
Moved by Rev. W. R. Fletcher, M.A.,
seconded by Rev. T. H. Jackson, and carried—
“ That this meeting desires to express its
gratitude to the Revs. J. P. Sunderland,Thomas
Odell, Alexander Eraser, W. S. H. Fielden,
Alexander Gosman, and J. C. M‘Michael for
the service they have rendered in conducting
the college classes during the past year.”
The Rev. Alexander Fraser returned thanks
on behalf of the Professorial Board.
The next resolution was moved by the Rev.
J. P. Sunderland, seconded by the Secretary,
supported by the Rev. Richard Connebee (of
Dunedin, New Zealand,) and carried with great
enthusiasm:—
“ That this meeting rejoices in the appoint-
ment of the Rev, A. M. Henderson as President
of the College, and willingly endorses the agree-
ment accepted by the Council in April last in
reference to his duties, position, and salary ;
prays that God’s providence may shield him
and his family from the perils of the voyage,
and that his entering in and labours amongst us
may be abundantly blessed to our mutual ad-
vancement in all spiritual good.”
Moved by Wm. Bates, Esq., seconded by Rev.
Alex. Gosman, and unanimously adopted—
“ That the Secretary be instructed to convey
to the Rev. J. L. Poore our deep sense of obli-
gation for his untiring zeal and energy on behalf
of the Congregational College; and that he be
also requested to urge our need of the grant of
£lOO per annum from the Colonial Missionary
Society in aid of the farther increase of our
expenditure, which the prospective arrangements
as to the tutorship may involve.”
Moved by Henry Brooks, Esq., seconded by
S. Haigh, Esq., and carried—
“That William Bates, Esq., be earnestly
requested to retain the office of College Trea-
surer.”
Moved by W. K. M. Yale, Esq., M.L.A.,
seconded by Rev. T. H. Jackson, and carried—
“ That the Rev. W. S. H. Fielden be reap-
pointed to the office of Secretary.”
Moved by Rev. T. H. Jackson, seconded by
Rev. J. J. Halley, and carried—
“ That Dr. Embling be requested to continue in
the post of Medical Referee.”
Moved by Rev. J. C. M'Michael, seconded by
S. Haigh, Esq., and carried —
“That Messrs. Port and T. Luke, jun., be
appointed Auditors for the year.”
The meeting then elected the College Council.
After appointing the tutors, Revs. Alex.
Fraser, Alex. Gosman, and J. C. M‘Michael to
be members, and Rev. C. S. Y. Price and Mr
White to be scrutineers, they proceeded by
nomination and ballot to complete the executive.
The following ministers and gentlemen were
declared to be elected, viz., Revs. E. Day, T. H.
Jackson, W. Moss, J. P. Sunderland, J, Mirams,
W. R. Fletcher and W. R.'Lewis; and Messrs.
H. Brooks, J. Browning, S. Haigh, O. Kemp, J.
G. Jennings, J. Port, W. Peterson, Geo. Rolfe,
W. K. M. Vale, M.L.A., and J. Wisewould.
The meeting, which was largely attended, and
characterised by great earnestness and hopeful-
ness, was then closed by the reverend Chairman
with the benediction.
SUBSCRIBERS.
LIST OF
COLLEGE
44 2 0


Collection at Ballaarat
Church (West) ... £7 3 5
Rev. J. Halley 110
Richmond Church;—
Collection £7 0 0
Ballaarat Church East... 2 0 0
Rev. J. Strongman ... 2 2 0
Ballaarat Welsh Church
Rev. J. P. Sunderland 1 1 0
Mr. John Russell
1 1 0
Mr. Britten 2 2 0
Sebastopol ... 2 14 6
Ballaarat Welsh Church,
Maldon 2 0 0
Prahran Church:—
Ballaarat Welsh Church.
Wesley Hill ... 2 0 0
By Lecture delivered by Rev.
J. Farr. Welsh Church
Collection £lO 0 0
Rev. W. Moss ... 10 0
Mr. B. Hick 3 3 0
Mr. S. Haigh 5 5 0
Happy Valley ... 1110
Mr. J. Mellor, England 3 3 0
£2o
Mr. William Mills
5 0 0
Victoria Parade:—
Mr. James Wisewould
10 0 0
Collection £7 o 10
Mr, Anketell 10 0
Rev. W. S. H. Fielden 5 0 0
Mr. Owen Kemp ... 4 0 0
Mr. F. Richardson ... 2 2 0
Mr. Wellsteed ... 5 0 0
Mr. E. Taylor ... 2 2 0
Mr. Masters ... ... 2 2 0
11 0
Kew Church:—
Mr. Taylor £2 0 0
Collection 12 0 0
Mr. T. Luke, junior ... 2 2 0
Mr. Broadbent ... 2 0 0
Mr. E. Langton ... 110
Mr. Stillwell 110
Geelong Church:—
Collection £5 10 10
Collection at Oxford Street at the
opening of College Session, by
the Rev. J. Graham of Sydney 22
Mr. W. M. Hitchcock 10 0 0
Mr. James Port
5 0 0
Mr. R. Clarke
5 0 0
Oxford-street Church:—
10 10
Collection ... ... £9 17
St. Kilda Church:—
Rev. J. C. M‘Michael 3 3 0
Miss Richardson ... 5 0 0
Mr. J Richardson .. 5 0 0
Mr. William Bates ... 10 0 0
Hr. Emhling 2 2 0
Collection £3 16 0
George Rolfe, Esq. ... 25 0 0
F. Sargood, Esq.
5 5 0
Wm. Peterson, Esq....
5 5 0
Mr. Johnston... ... 2 2 0
Mr. Snow ... ... 5 0 0
Mr. Burns 2 2 0
Mr. Kelson 1 i o
Williamstown Church:—
Mr. Fowler 10 0
Mr. Hackett 10 0
Mr. Wood 110
Mr, T. Walker ... 10 0
Mr. M. Hevenish ... 110
Captain Browne ... 110
Mr. Stickland ... 10 0
Collection £l3 6 6
Rev. T, H. Jackson ... 10 0 0
Mr. H. White ... 110
Carlton Church:—
46 14
Collection £2 0 0
Lonsdale-street Church:—
Collection ... ... £4 0 0
Rev. J. Mirams ... 10 0
Mr. R. C. Dunn
5 0 0
369 15 11


SEEMON
DELIVERED BY THE REV. W. R. FLETCHER, M.A., OF SANDHURST,
AT THE BEQUEST OF THE UNION,
ON MONDAY EVENING, Bth MAY, 1865.
And we know that the Son of God is come and hath given us an understanding that
we may know him that is true.
), and we are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life.” —1 John v. 20.
No one of the characters who appear in the
New Testament clustered around the great
central personage —the Saviour, so interests us
—as John, the bon of Zebedee. As the subject of
biography we are struck with his singularly long
life, protracted far beyond the ordinary term, and
still more with a most remarkable personal
change wrought not by external circumstances
but by a new spiritual life-power which possessed
him when he came in contact with and
never left him. We first meet with him in the
full vigour of early youth, with a character which
obtained for him the surname of Boanerges.
Tradition gives us a last glimpse of him as a
venerable, kind, old man of nearly live score, so
enfeebled as to be borne on a litter into the midst
of his flock at Ephesus, and summing up his
advice and his doctrine in his favourite words—
“ Little children, love one another.” Erom the
position of an honest, humble, intelligent fisher-
man at Bethsaida, he advances to be the writer
of the life of the baviour and of the boldest pro-
phecies of the Bible; employing as the vehicle of
his thoughts in his life of Jesus, a diction sin-
gularly pure and beautiful. He is employed by
God to complete and close the Canon of Inspira-
tion, and in doing so to shed such a light upon
the previous bcnptures that they all assume new
meanings and splendours. He gathers up in his
wonderful books all the offices of God’s Ecclesi-
astical government of the world, —law r -giver,
prophet, priest, Evangelist, and Apostie; all
the types, figures, and predictions of the Old and
New Testaments; all the doctrines as well of
ethics and philosophy as of theology, and all the
lines of history, both sacred and profane, and
shows how all centre in him who, while he sits
on the throne of the universe, yet bears the name
and character of Jesus of Nazareth, “the Lamb
as it had been slain.” “This is the true God
and eternal life, ”
To understand the books of Jolm, it is neces-
sary to remember that he wrote as a disputant
in an age of controversy. His works have more
reference to the conflicting opinions of doubters,
sceptics, and cavillers, than any other scriptures.
He was appointed to defend tne (Jhurcn in its
first serious doctrinal difficulties, and lor this
end his life was preserved by Hod long beyond
the days of Apostolic activity. As the oelievers
grew in numbers and intelligence, it was inevi-
table that the doctrine they fieiu should come
into contract with Grecian and Oriental philo-
sophy. It was impossible that the doctrine of
the Cross, so subversive of all proud human
speculations, could enter peaceably among men's
opinions. Great mental tumult arose, and
heresies began to abound in proportion to the
success of the new creed. During the days of
the other Apostles, the disputes were mostly
within the Church, on questions affecting Chris-
tian casuistry and the Jewish law ; but with the
progress of events the field of inquiry and warfare
was extended. The Church had to awake to
defend her bulwarks against a new species of
enemy. VVhile the great political power of the
Roman Empire endeavoured to crush the rising
Church by " bonds and imprisonments,” firesanu
crosses, the wisdom of the Hast and the learning
of Greece did their best to corrupt and disprove
its glorious and peculiar doctrines, spoiling them
“ through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, —after the rudiments of the
world and not after Christ.” Well might John
say, “ Beloved, believe not every spun, hut try
the spirits, lor many false prophets are gone
out into the worid. ”
It is the natural feeling of every age to aiiect
a curious contempt lor tue controversies oi uiose
times winch are gone ny. The lapse of time
uncloaks the absurd side ana conceals tne
plausible side of a heresy. Truly we are amazon


and scandalised as we study with our present
light the odd and wild dreams of the first oppo-
nents of Christianity. We read the fantastic
conceptions of the early Gnostics, the doctrine
of Cerinthus, the immoralities of the Kicolai-
tains, and various sorts of “ worshippers of
angels, intruders into things which they had not
seen, vainly pulled up in their fleshly mind,” and
we wonder at their power. Their very absurdity
seems to condemn them. But while we affect to
treat these things with pity, we should be wary
of being too conceited in our knowledge. Time
wears out heresies, and in their wrinkles and old-
fashioned rags they look absurd, and time may
wear out the heresies of our day. Doubtless, these
Gnostics of John’s days looked back with similar
pity upon the colder and less imaginative opi-
nions of earlier thinkers, comforting themselves
that they were far in advance of their learned
predecessors, and hardly deigned to take notice
of the popular idolatries of the age. So, in like
manner, the controversies of our age may to the
twentieth century stem quite as insignificant.
Strauss and Kenan may rank with Celsus and
Porphyry—the dreams of spiritualism and the
positivism of Comte, with the towering fantasies
of Gnosticism, and the icy reasonings of the Epi-
cureans. The history of religious controversy
among its many lessons should teach us that the
Evangelical Church has no need to fear, for its
doctrines have already survived every species of
attack;—that truth cannot die, for it is passed on
from mind to mind, imparting light in its pro-
gress, and constantly renewing itself; but that
though truth be eternal, old heresies will certainly
arise in new forms, and the best way to meet
them is to fall back on the grand central doctrine
of our text, —“ We know that the Son of God is
come, and he hath given us an understanding
that we may know him that is true,”
in the days of the Apostle John, the attacks
made upon the Church were of a kind strikingly
similar to those which are disturbing modern
times (if only we except ecclesiastical ques-
tions.) There were (1) some who assaulted
the person of Christ by ill-timed and fictitious
reverence; they elevated him so far above
humanity, that he ceased to be the tender-hearted
brother man, and all links of fraternal sympathy
between a sorrowful world and its so-called
Saviour were broken. There were (2) others
who, in an affected reverence for the Supreme
Deity, could not conceive how a human life,
so humble, so simple, and so sad could
express the mind of the absolute God. Both
these objectors alike stumbled at the doc-
trine of the person of Christ, and both
forms of error were fatal to evangelical peace.
It mattered little whether the Church saw its
Christ brought down to the level of a mere
man, or elevated to the curious rank of an
aivn or an angel, moving about among men in
phantasy, for in either case it could recognise its
Mediator no more, his person and his office were
lost, his power to give comfort and peace was
gone. This was not apostolic doctrine. What
Paul and Peter had taught was that “ God was
manifest in the flesh,” that the life of Jesus was
a divine-human life, that the “ Son of Man had
power upon earth to forgive sins,” that “He
died the just for the unjust to bring us to
God,” that “ God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself.” John saw, with much sad-
ness, this precious gospel vanishing away in the
mystic dreams of the speculative theologians of
his day, and. in his old age, as the last of the
apostolic band, as the one “ who had seen and
handled the word of life,” who had leaned on the
breast of Jesus, and been his friend, who had
seen him alive after his resurrection, he felt the
call of God, duty, and conscience, to undertake
the defence of his Master against the heresies of
his own time, and the similar heresies of all
coming time.
It is my intention in this sermon to call your
attention to the mode of John's inspired defence of
the gospel of Jesus. A careful scrutiny of John’s
tactics as a polemic may help us in our diffi-
culties, both by assuring our hearts of their com-
fort and hope in that faith which we repose in
the kinsman-redeemer, and by making us con-
fident and wise in modern discussions.
John’s contributions to the controversy of his
age are contained in the two larger books which
bear his name, the Revelation with which the
Bible closes, and the fourth Gospel. These books
are very different, yet in many points are very
similar. They are mutually explanatory, and
exhibit two sides of one and the same truth.
Let me invite you to contemplate John—
I. As the prophet of the Apocalypse.
11, As the historian of Jesus.
First, let us contemplate John as the writer
of “ the Kevelation.”
It was, as far as we can learn, about thirty
years after Paul had written his last epistles
that John was banished to the island of Patinos.
The shortsighted foes of the gospel evidently
thought that if lie was out of the way the
Church would crumble to pieces and be destroyed
by the power of internal discord. At first sight
this seemed a very likely event, for who could
have thought how it could be otherwise ? They
who banished the apostle did not think how God
could overrule that imprisonment for the lasting
glory of his name, and make it the means of
establishing once and for ever the hated doctrine
of the person of Christ. But so it was. Arisen
Christ is independent of the patronage or disdain
of emperors, or the reasonings of philosophers.
“He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh,”
predicted the psalmist; “ the Lord shall have
them in derision, saying, Yet have I set my King
upon my holy Hill of bion.” The risen Christ,
and none other, in his own person appeared to
the apostle! A vision of glory amazed and sur-
prised the lonely prophet, and out of that vision
emerged a well-known though wondrous form,
and a voice was heard—a celestial echo of the
familiar tones of the preacher of Galilee, “ I am


he that liveth and was dead; and behold I am
alive for evermore.” These were to John no
mere words of celestial rhetoric, but must have
sounded as an argumentative declaration against
the heresies of the time. “ Jesus was a mere
man,” said the false teachers of Ephesus; “I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last,” said
the voice. “ Jesus was no true man, only a
phantom man,” said others of these teachers. “I
am he that was dead,” said the voice. Whether
they denied his divinity or denied his humanity,
the mysterious vision pronounced them in error.
This is the key-note of the whole of the scenes
that follow. They all bear out the character of
that first heavenly surprise in being a succession
of unexpected disclosures. In no book of the
Bible is the personal character of the writer so
completely lost as in this. The author is more
a mere penman and less a writer than in any
other Scripture. So much do we feel this to be
the case that we are warranted in saying that
this book is a direct answer from heaven itself
to the heresies of that day. It is the self-
vindication of the mighty God-man against
those who would traduce his doctrine by deny-
ing his divinity. In this book, as in the
conclusion of the book of Job, the Omnipotent
himself enters the lists of controversy, and gives
his great and final answer to the speculative
doubters and upstart sceptics upon earth.
“ My glory I will not give to another,” says the
Christ of the New Testament as emphatically as
the Jehovah of the Old.
The book which comes to us thus is not an
argument but an assertion. God does not run
his revelations into the moulds of human logic,
simply because they transcend our feeble grasp.
It is his province to state truth, and the duty ot
men is to believe. Much that is found in this
book is very difficult to understand, but its main
lessons, its grand theology, its declarations of
evangelical truth are very plain. It is God’s
wish to show us, and to make us have a firm confi-
dence therein, that there is a sympathy between
heaven and earth, between himself and his flock.
The Divine head of the Church tells how he
knows each Church and each member of each
Church; how he observes the morality, notes
the doctriues, and watches the public and private
life of every member. Christian dogma is seen
to be, not a mere phenomenon in the history of
human opinion—religious heresies are of more
moment than scientific or political mistakes—
there is one above who “ walks amid the seven
golden candlesticks,” and who knows how
brightly or how dimly they are burning—one
who “ holds the stars in his right hand,” and
knows the measure of their illumination!
“ There is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over even one sinner that repenteth.” Still
more plainly is this mutual sympathy between
heaven and earth shown in the unfolding of the
great drama of the Church universal which
follows upon the seven epistles to the seven
particular Churches of Asia. The Church is
seen to be militant on earth, but its King is
above watching, directing, inspiring, and
rewarding. The Church is militant in doc-
trine, but they who have gone to their
reward are at peace, for they know that
they “ have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb.” The Church
is militant against force—suffering from the
tyranny of heathen and ecclesiastical poten-
tates ; but they who are above celebrate the
power of the despised Jesus, and his victories as
“King of kings and Lord of lords,” —“the
Lord God omnipotent.” The Church is militant
against corruption and fraud. It is seen as
polluted by false doctrine, selfishness, and intel-
lectual pride; but above in the New Jerusalem,
it needs “no candle, neither light of the sun, ”
for “ the Lamb is the light thereof.” The Church
is militant now, but as we read on, we are called
to behold a vision which tells of a day when the
wearied Church shall rest! The New Jerusalem
will, in some far distant day, descend from heaven
to earth. There shall be a new earth as well as
a perfect heaven, wherein shall dwell righteous-
ness. The golden city on high shall come down.
Beautiful indeed is this picture thus drawn for
us by the Sacred Spirit, but its beauty and
attractiveness to us, are, that its permanency—its
character —its doctrine—its worship—and its joy
—are all shown to rest on the same foundation of
evangelical truth. It is the Church of the Lamb.
Its radiance is the radiance of that human sym-
pathy which illuminated Nazareth and Bethany.
Its Governmental Head is not alone the omni-
potent Deity, but the Deity as displayed in the
tender Shepherd and Friend of the persecuted
earthly flock—the divine God-man—the “Lamb
upon his throne!”
As the recipient of such a revelation of truth from
Jesus, do we not feel inclined to envy the favoured
evangelist his island prison ? The faithful
pastor sundered from his people, he was thinking
of how “grievous wolves” of heresy had come
in among his flock, had devoured many, and
disturbed the peace of all: he trembled lor that
pure truth of the gospel of Jesus which he had
preached for sixty years, but he is now told and
shown how the same truth will be everlastingly
potent against all such intruders and sceptics.
As the last of the apostles, he doubtless thinks
that he has the care of all the Churches upon
him, and that that care is too heavy a burden for
his venerable age, but God shows him that the
Master is with his people “ alway, even unto the
eud of the world.” As the social thinker, perplexed
by the enigmas of an age of tyranny and blood, he
told how alb things will, by the doctrine of Jesus,
be transmuted into peace, and “ the creation
itself be delivered from the bondage of corrup-
tion.” And as the persecuted Christian man,
holding himself ready, faithful unto death, he is
cheered by seeing in the city of the Lamb how
personal honour and reward are awaiting him.
He beholds on the foundation stones of the new
city the names of his friends, the eleven apostles
of the Lamb already gone to their rest, and as the
twelfth his own name.


Do we not envy St. John his magnificent
privileges ? Yet, lellovv Christians, may we not
take the same truths and the same lads that he
saw depicted, home to our hearts and con-
sciences ? May not we listen to the same voice of
revelation, and charmed with its power to
soothe and bless, be comtorted as he was ? May
not we, through Jesus, read our title as clear to
mansions in the skies as he did, and borne aloft
on the same strong wings of faith in our Saviour,
see, as he saw, the same far-off divine event to
which the whole creation moves ? Is it not in
our power, as it was in his, to escape from the
prison-house of earth in holy exercises ? Truly,
yes ; lor is not the same divine voice which
authenticated for J ohn and his times, the divinity
of Jesus of .Nazareth, still sounding? It is
impossible that such a declaration once true
should not be always true. Is, then, the Church
now in danger ? Is heresy now creeping in
unawares, or undermining our glorious battle-
ments ? Is laith waxing cold and piety
becoming weak ? Is it true that the power of
the pulpit is anywhere lessening ? Is the carnal
spirit oi gold touching with a polluting touch the
sacred ark of God ? Then let us listen to the
heavenly message which gives us the remedy for
all evils, as the stimulus to holiest effort, as the
perpetual inspiration of the churches’ faith, a
reverence ior and firm belief in the divine
character, name ana doctrine of the historic
Jesus of .Nazareth. ‘‘ln him we know the bon
of God is come and hath given us an under-
standing that we may know him that is true.”
Thus John saw the old Divine form walking
on tne troubled waters of speculation and
history, and heard the old voice say again, “It is
I, be not afraid;” and like Teter, his former
companion, he replied, “ Lord, bid me come to
thee.” His Lord bade him, and he came.
“Write,” said Jesus, “the things which thou
hast seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter.” John heard
and oneyed, and indited for us the great historic
drama of the world as he had seen it acted on
the heavenly stage. He wrote with authority;
and so it has come to pass that amid the wildest
commotions of controversy his book is ever
whispering of peace. He wrote as he was told,
but he did far more. “lam he that was dead ,”
said the voice, “ the Lamb that was slain; ’ and
this declaration set him thinking over that
gentle and mighty lile which in earlier days he
nad witnessed. He thought of long-forgotten
words, now, in the light ot a new revelation, full
of deeper meaning. He thought of the miracles,
parables and suheriugs of Jesus as he had never
tliouglit of them beiore. The Holy Ghost, as
Jesus had promised, brought to his recollection
many Hungs relating to that life hitherto lying
dormant m his mind, in Ins loneliness he lived
over again in memory those years of the holy
incarnation.
This leads us, 11., to some considerations
connected with John us the historian of the lile
of Jesus.
1. It was the common tradition of the early
Church that the gospel of John was published
at Ephesus after the writer’s return from Pat-
mos, and that the lievelation was given to the
Churches about the same time. Testimony is
very conflicting about the order of the events
of J ohn’s later years, but after carefully collating
the evidences, I do not see any reason why we
should throw overboard the current opinion that
the Gospel was composed subsequent to the
Apocalypse. I assume for distinctness’ sake the
correctness of the common tradition, though
the mere question of priority, whichever way
scholars may argue it or decide it for us, does not
affect the argument of this discourse, which is
based on the fact that these two great books are
mutually illustrative, and should be contem-
plated in each other’s light.
Assuming this to have been the case, we see
how, after God had revealed himself in the glory
of the celestial Lamb, and had shown how all
heaven was occupied with the worship of the
omnipotent Jesus, that John thought he could
best manifest his love and homage by giving to
the world as faithful, as affectionate, and as
simple a picture of the human life of his Divine
Eriend as was possible. Hence the fourth Gospel
is very different from those which preceded it.
We can trace the peculiar beauty of John’s
Gospel, viewed in tnis light (1) partly in the
general distinctive leatures in the portrait of
Jesus which he draws; and (2) partly in his
especial care to exhibit the career of Jesus as a
teacher of Evangelical doctrine. Let us dwell
for a moment on both these points.
He who had seen the Lamb upon his throne
is the one who has told us how John the Baptist
first gave him that holy name when he saw him
walking by the banks of the stream at Beth-
abara. He who had heard the heavenly choirs
chanting the praises of Messiah has told us how
aforetime he permitted Mary to ‘ ‘ anoint his
feet with spikenard, and wipe them with the
hairs of her head.” He who had beheld the
Sou of Man sitting on the white cloud in the
awful pomp of j udgment, commanding that the
sickle of the great harvest should be thrust in,
and the winepress of the wrath of God tilled,
has told us how he wept by. the grave of his
friend Lazarus, washed his disciples’ feet —not
excepting even the traitor : —on the cross of
atonement, expressed his humanity in the
fevered cry, so common to ail sufferers, “ I
thirst”—and ere he died made provision for his
virgin mother’s comfort. It is to John we owe
the vision of Ghrist among his saved ones, and
to the same writer the story of Jesus talking
with the woman of Samaria, and his giving sight
to the man born blind. He sees nothing incon-
gruous in uniting the dignity of the great white
throne, and the humility of the passover supper—
the greatness of the king, with the tenderness of
the Irieud, and the highest attributes of Deity
with the lowliest attributes of man. There may
be mystery, but, to the mind of John, nothing
impossible in this sublime marriage of heaven and


earth in the life of Jesus Christ! Such teaching
may transcend the utmost powers of human
reason, but the heart can grasp it with the full-
est confidence. Philosophy may fall back
amazed and confounded, but the loving heart
seeking for its resting-place in God may keep
company with the wearied, saddened Man in his
midnight prayers on the mountains of Galilee,
and with those who adore him as the Omnipo-
tent Lord of all. John is a disputant, but he
does not attempt to deal with reason. He was
contending against conceited and frivolous
dogmas of reason, and the weapon he uses, is
such a display of the life and character of the
divine Christ, that reason is shut out of view and
the heart is alone invited to respond. Mightier
in heaven and mightier on earth is emotion than
logic. Eeligion transcends dogma as far as the
living soul transcends the body it inhabits.
Man’s perfect redemption from corruption may
be wrought by the out-going of the heart
towards a God all love and power, but can never
be effected by intellectual processes. God in
his wisdom has made foolish the wisdom of this
world by the gift of the gospel, wherein,
through his human life, he is “made unto us,
wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and
redemption.”
2. 1 will yet further illustrate the power of
John’s second defence against the anti-evangelic
heresies of his day, by reminding you of his pecu-
liar picture of the Saviour as a Teacher. Not
alone did this Evangelist give the world an
original view of the person, but also of the teach-
ing of Jesus. John had lived into the time when
the gospel of the atonement had rightly become
the prominent characteristic of the Church, The
purpose of Messiah’s advent had become fully
known, and his life had become the Church’s
creed. This is borne out by the vision of Jesus
in heaven, wh'ch represents him as the victorious
sacrificial Lamb ; but John has it in his mind to
unveil the earthly career of Christ under the
same idea. He would show the world that the
life of Jesus when on earth was the same in
name, purpose, character and achievement, with
the life of Christ in heaven. Matthew, Mark and
Luke had long before given the world their
graphic sketches of the years of the Saviour’s
ministry, John would add such a picture that the
opponents of the doctrine of the gospel might
see how the whole public life of Jesus was but a
“ leading of that Lamb to the slaughter.” In Mat-
thew’s gospel, Jesus opens his public ministry by
delivering his sermon on the mount. The very
beauty and perfection of that discourse has been a
cause of error. Cavillers often object now, as they
didin John’s day, that religion is but morality, and
that as the climax of all moral teaching is that
sermon—it is sufficient for salvation, to follow its
precepts. True, but if it were hard for weak
men to keep the law of Moses, it were harder
still, nay impossible, to keep the deeper law of
the new Lawgiver, who demanded the allegiance
of the heart as well as the decent ordering of
outward life. “Be ye therefore perfect, as your I
Father in heaven is perfect.” In John’s Gospel,
on the other hand, we find that Jesus, before he
gave the world his sermon on the mount did, in
private, to Nicodemus, sketch out the whole
scheme of his doctrine, and indicate how the law
was to be kept under a new economy of grace.
It was manifestly impossible that the atonement
should be fully proclaimed by the living Lamb,
not yet brought to the altar. The atonement
could not be preached openly as a doctrine before
it was a fact. What Jesus generally did, as we
find in Matthew and Luke, was to sow seeds of
truth, which afterwards his cross would cause to
germinate. This gave occasion to objectors to
say that Jesus was. in fact, a wise teacher of
mere morality, and that the “gospel of his
cross” was the invention or the delusion of the
Apostles. So said Cerinthus of old, and so has
said Eenan of late. John wishes to controvert
the statement, and he tells us how Jesus was
first saluted by the Baptist as the Lamb of God,
and how in his first visit to Jerusalem as a
‘ * teacher come from God.” he gave to Nicodemus
the main doctrines of his mission. Something
more than mere morality fills the third chapter of
John. Few men could equal the consistent
Nicodemus in morality, yet Jesus said to him,
“Ye must be born again,” and thus gave us the
doctrine of human depravity and the need of
conversion ; and further on, by his reference to
Moses uplifting the brazen serpent among the
dying Israelites, he foretold the true atonement.
Jesus came into the world not to condemn the
world, as he seems to do in announcing the all
perfect law of the sermon on the mount, but to
save the world by dying for it as the slain Lamb.
We learn from John’s Gospel that from the
beginning he had before him the Christlike doom
and the Christlike glory. The purpose of his
advent, the life of suffering before him, and the
gospel doctrines thus early indicated in his public
ministry, John shows us never to have forsaken
him, but to have grown plainer and plainer until
he unfolded them fully to his disciples in the
broken bread and the wine cup of the farewell
supper, and proved to the world in his “ resur-
rection from the dead to be a Prince aud a
Saviour.”
It has been my endeavour, my honoured bre-
thren, to exhibit to you the Church of Christ in
its first terrible doctrinal struggles, and the mode
in which the last of the apostles, under the
supreme direction of the Holy Spirit, became its
defender. I have reminded you of the peculiar
position in Church history of those two cherished
works, written by this loving polemic, and
throughout I have endeavoured to show you how
their power as a defence of our gospel arises
from their unflinching advocacy of the divine-
human Christ in his relation to the plan of sal-
vation and the government of the world. In
both these works the author answers every
objector, not by argument, but by pointing to
the historic Man of Nazareth, who is declared to
be “the only begotten Son of God;” in whose
deeds and character we have the “express image ”


of the “person” of the invisible God; and in
whose life, as an accredited fact in the world’s
records, we have “the Word made flesh, dwelling
among us.” and exhibiting to us the “grace and
truth ” of heaven.
Shall this sublime theme teach us no practical
lessons at this time ? Has our vision of the
Saviour this evening not a message to all Chris-
tians and Christian churches, but especially to
those whom, as his ministers. God has appointed
as the intellectual and spiritual leaders of the
Church ?
No man can say of our age that it is marked
by intellectual dulness. Within and without
the church there is a perfect tumult of life. In
every branch of human learning and inquiry—in
philosophy, in ethics, in criticism, in social and
economic Questions, there is no sparing of mental
power. The church and its various theologies
have been cast into the crucible, to be purified
and strengthened. The living energy of the
Church has found its expression in a more fully
developed practical expansion than has been
seen since the days of Constantine. Societies
have covered the world with the gospel army of
missionaries. Organisations in Britain and
America have flooded all classes of the com-
munity with religious publications. Without
any unnecessary forsaking of old dogmas, the
divine life within the Churches has exhibited
these dogmas in newer and more kindly light.
Meanwhile, the enemies of the Church, seeing
that that strength which animates all sections of
Christians is something nobler than the dogmatic
expressions of their creeds, have sought out our
stronghold. Biblical Unitarianism has had its
day, but we are threatened in its stead with
furious onslaughts upon the name, character, and
person of our Saviour. Under the patronage of
learning, Jesus is to be degraded from his high
position, and to be content with a place among
the world’s questionable heroes and “noble
initiators.” How shall we meet these attacks ?
How shall we demean ourselves? Shall we
tremble because the Old Testament is thrown
into the crucible of Christian criticism ? Shall
we be afraid if those who have no sympathy
with us deal rudely with our cherished theology?
It is surely unmanly to quake when in God’s
service. If the world can destroy the truth, it
ceases to be the truth. We may really be ashamed
of the wail of timidity which has disgraced the
army of Christ’s soldiers in the present crisis.
Does the army not know its Captain ? Have his
followers not learned to pray to him ? If a little
outwork falls the shameful cry is heard that the
citadel is in danger. If a verse or a chapter is
proved to be an interpolation, the fear is that the
whole Bible, and with it Christ, are going away.
If a hurricane blows off a mistletoe parasite from
an oak, is the tree going to fall ? Let us fall
back in our perplexities on the historic Christ,
and we are safe. It is a fact that eighteen
centuries ago there did live a man named Jesus,
whose life demands more than a passing notice.
That life, as a fact, cannot be obliterated. It is
preserved for us in biographies, letters, sermons,
traditions, and historical annals, which are partly
the productions of the Church, and partly of the
Church’s enemies. Examine that life. Test it
with critical acumen and unbiassed emotions. It
challenges attention as an astounding miracle.
It shines with wonderous brilliancy. It is gentle,
pure, and gigantic. It is simple, yet vast. It
ever has been, and now is the source of
holiest feeling and most kindly impulses. It
defies criticism by its artless power, while it
invites it by its assumptions. Take it as we
will, this life is a historic fact.
We examine that life and but two conclusions
are open to consistent human inquiry. Either
that life is what John says it was, and its mean-
ing that which he declares, or it is a miracle of
deceit and imposture. The constructive figment
of Renan, a character for which he challenges
our reverence as a curious mixture of tw*o im-
possible extremes, has already fallen to the
ground. It was too untrue to history to stand.
But its very publication has shown how impos-
sible it is to withhold some mead of reverence
from the wonderful Jewish prophet. If, however,
we give him any reverence we must believe what
he says;—if we believe him, we must worship him
—and if we worship him, we have our hearts’
utmost wishes realised, we have found “ the true
God and eternal life.”
How then can we who are God’s servants in
the minstry make our preaching a power, and
conduct ourselves bravely amid the controversies
without and within the Church ? I reply, by
falling back on the life of Jesus Christ. There
we are on firm historic ground, and there we
cannot be wrong if our religion be true at all.
No firmer foundation can be laid for theology
and faith than the historic Jesus. Let us believe
in Christ, love Christ, and preach Christ. If we
do so we cannot be afraid, and can afford to be
large-hearted and liberal-minded amid the con-
flict of opinions. Let us preach Christ. I mean
not as a mere dogmatic element in a creed, how-
ever evangelical; but as a living, loving, brother
Man, whose life and whose love and whose
brotherhood, once exhibited on earth, are not
passed away but are still the world’s regenerative
power. Let us never divorce the atonement from
him who made the atonement, nor the hearer of
prayer from him who taught us to pray, nor the
written word from him who said, “ Search the
scriptures for they are they which testify of
me.” Let us preach Christ, and use as our aids
at once philosophy, history, and learning, faith,
gentleness, and sympathy, that we may defend
his life from fantastic assaults and commend his
person in all its loveliness. Let us preach Christ,
and doubts will vanish as the stars in the morn-
ing dawn, and the truth of the divine nature, the
sacred Trinity, and the doctrines of salvation
will crystallise naturally around our central
figure. Let us preach Christ, and the weakest
of us may feel strong ; and be we strong or weak
we know that he whom we preach is our living
Master, who leaves us not alone in the battle,


who will keep us to do his will and receive us
at last to his mansions of purity and honour.
Finally, my fellow Christians, let ns never,
through cowardice, consider it an evil that
controversies should arise. It was a good
day for the Church when Cerinthus and the
Gnostics advanced their daring heresies—
advocated corrupt morals, and attacked the
person of Jesus—for it called forth such
an exposition of the Deity of the Saviour
and such a display of the Divine Trinity as the
Church could ill have spared. What would our
Bible be without the writings of John? And
it was likewise, I take it, a good day for the
Church when Strauss led the van against the
same Divine doctrine, and beginning with his
denial of the Son, ended by denying the
Father also, and “so rolled out of the chaos
of Pantheism into the blank abyss of Atheism,”
—for the movement awoke the Church. It
roused it from its slumbers. It summoned it
to earnest inquiry, and produced a healthy
activity. And the result is, that it has made
the Church gather closer around its Lord, the
“ Captain of Salvation,” and has provoked such a
noble defence of the doctrine, person, work and
reign of “ the Christ of history, ” that the Church
may take up a song of joy. The struggle has
not ended yet, but in proportion as there
emerges from the tumult of opinion the great
historic personage, Jesus of Nazareth, will the
world receive and love his doctrine, and by
faith in him work out its regeneration. Theories
of that life are not exhausted yet, but in propor-
tion as we are able to recognise in the tenderness
of the man Christ Jesus, the love of the eternal
Son of God; and in the power of Almighty God
the same might which was displayed in the life
of the Jewish worker of miracles; —so shall the
Church be able to join with heart and meaning
in that grand chorus with which the Apocalypse
opens, and which ’ expresses at once the Chris-
tian’s loyalty, devotion, doctrine and privilege.
“ Unto him that hath loved us and washed us
from our sins in his own blood, and hath made
us kings and priests, unto God and his Father,
to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever.”


ADDEESS
DELIVERED BY THE REV. E. DAY, OF CASTLEMAXNE,
AT THE
HALF-YEARLY MEETING HELD AT BALLAARAT.
Honoured and Beloved Brethren, —In
the good providence of God, we meet to-day as
a Union and Mission, for the first time in this
large town, the capital of the gold-fields.
In coming to it, we do, I am sure, unite
in the apostolic salutation to the congregational
churches in and around Ballaarat, with their
Bishops and Deacons, “Grace be unto you and
peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.”
During our short stay in it we desire that
our devotional exercises may be marked by
fervour, humility, and faith, our communion
be heavenly and refreshing, our addresses
pointed and quickening, our debates free and
vigorous, our whole proceedings, in short, charac-
terised by wisdom, love, unanimity, godliness.
And in going from it we all hope that there
will be abundant evidence that both the visitors
and the visited have been greatly benefited
by united supplicatons at the Throne of Grace
and the interchange of thought and feeling, and
that both will look forward with no little delight
to the time when a similar gathering will take
place in Ballaarat.
It has been usual for my honoured predeces-
sors in the chair to deliver, when practicable, two
addresses to you—the first at the November
meeting, and the second at the May meeting;
but as you determined very wisely at the last
Assembly of the General Council that the first
address should, after my term of office had
expired, be delivered at the May meeting; and,
for the purpose of insuring it, elected twelve
months earlier than usual a Chairman to succeed
me, it follows as a matter of course, that my
first and last address is to be given at this
assembly.
In selecting a subject for this occasion, I have
been guided by a desire to uphold the principles
professed by us in their integrity—point out
instances in which advocates of them are apt
to run into extremes —show their relevancy or
otherwise to cases demanding our attention—and
urge the adoption of such measures as may be
necessary to insure consistency, stability, pro-
gress. *
The subject selected is —The Church, the
Union, and the State.
The Church to which allusion will be made
is not the Church universal, but that which
consists of believers meeting voluntarily and
statedly in one place for the worship of God,
the observance of ordinances, mutual edifi-
cation, and the extension of the Redeemer’s
kingdom, and which, in its government, is
subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, but inde-
pendent of all external control, competent
to manage its own affairs, and voluntary in the
pecuniary support of all the institutions con-
nected with it, and all the means used by it in the
promotion of the Christian religion. Every Church
founded by the apostles was of this kind. All
the Churches contemplated in the formation of
the Congregational Unions both in our native
and adopted countries w'ere of this sort. Both
the spirit and the form of it were, however, lost
in the general corruption of Christianity during
the dark ages. But both were regained in the
progress of the Reformation commenced by
Wycliffe. The principles lost were only gradu-
ally recovered. In their completeness, they
received the first embodiment, during the pro-
gress of the Reformation, in the Church formed
by John Robinson, who has hence been called
“ The Father of Modern Independency.” Much
has been said in praise of the principles laid
down by apostles and adopted by Independents.
The renowned Thomas Jefferson, whose epitaph
describes him to be “ the author of the Declar-
ation of American Independence— of the statute
of Virginia for Religious Freedom—and Father of
the University of Virginia,” said, many years
before the American Revolution respecting the


Government of an Independent Church, that “ he
considered it the only form of pure democracy
that then existed in the world, and had concluded
that it would be the best plan of government lor
the American colonies.” Lord Brougham once
said in Parliament of those who held our prin-
ciples in England, “ That body is much to be
respected indeed for their numbers; but far more
to be held in lasting veneration for the unshaken
fortitude in which, at all times, they have main-
tained their attachment to civil and religious
liberty; and holding fast by their principles,
have carried to its utmost pitch the great doctrine
of absolute toleration; men, to whose ancestors
this country will ever acknowledge a boundless
debt of gratitude, as long as freedom is prized
amongst us; for they, I fearlessly confess it, they,
with whatever ridicule some may visit their
excesses, or with whatever blame others; they,
with the zeal of martyrs, the purity of early
Christians, the skill and courage of the most
renowned warriors, obtained for England the
free constitution which she now enjoys.” The
advocates of the principles acknowledge, with
gratitude to the Great Head of the Church, that
they have derived them from him through his
inspired apostles and that these derivatives have
made those adopting them, if they deserve the
high character at all, what Lord Brougham
regarded them to be —and have led in their
legitimate operation to the promotion of civil and
religious liberty, and the zeal, purity, skill, and
courage which that eminent statesmen ascribed
to the advocates of them. They can, therefore,
without being justly chargeable with egotism,
speak in praise of the principles, their operation
and results, rejoice in the liberty, fraternity,
and equality which this church system gives
to them, and glory in the advantages it
affords to them over those afforded by any other
system to other denominations. And they do thus
speak, and rejoice and glory. Ear be it from
me to say anything likely to check their spirit.
It is natural lor persons to think that the system
of religion they have adopted is the best, and to
feel a stronger attachment to it than to any
other; it is proper for them to do so to justify
the continuance of their connection with that
system; it is necessary for them to do it to
induce earnestness and success on their part in
the promotion of Christ’s kingdom. Let that
spirit continue and increase so long as it does
not exclude any further light which reason,
Providence or revelation may afford—so long,
too, as it is kept free from bigotry, the blight of
Christian love, which is far more censurable in
such as profess liberal principles than in others;
and so long also as it does not by straining them
attempt to carry them beyond their legitimate
province.
But let me ask whether the designations
“Independent,” “Congregational,” “Voluntary,”
which distinguish our denomination from every
other, and which do not in themselves give a
full and accurate idea of our system, are not
likely to produce a wrong impression on the
minds of persons unconnected with it, and even
lead astray many of those adopting it ? Are
not both in danger of inquiring what these
designations these words mean, without
stopping to ascertain precisely the occasion of
their original application, and of expecting that
our proceedings will come fully up to what these
designations—these words—can in themselves
be shown to express or imply? Are they not
apt to make this inquiry and expect this result
without considering the limit which the word of
God and the relations of society set to the
meaning of these designations? Eor instance,
the title Voluntary was given to our system to
distinguish it from that under which persons
were compelled by Act of Parliament to go to
the State Church and to support tnat Church.
They were not left to their own option whether
to go or not, to give or not give. The law
decided for them, and punished mem for refusal
or neglect. Under our system there is no com-
pulsion—the option is given; the law does not
interfere. But you will, 1 think, agree with me
in saying, that our voluntaryism would be
carried to excess if we were to say that persons
must not be invited, entreated, urged to attend
the house of God or give towards the mainte-
nance of religious ordinances, but that they must,
to carry out the voluntary principle, be left to
their own free will, suggestions and accord. It
is not often that objections are made against the
using of persuasive means to insure an attend-
ance, but they are frequently made against the
using of the same means to induce pecuniary
contributions. It has been said that tne taking
of pew rents, the collecting of donations irom
seat to seat, the pressing oi persons to give to
any particular or general object, are violations
of the voluntary principle. But they are not.
Persons are not compelled to take seats; they
take them voluntarily. They agree voluntarily
to pay the rents, ami they are nound in j ustice
to render them. When collections are made
they may give or withhold. The law does not
interfere to compel them to subscribe.
I do not intend to enter on the inquiry, which
is the best mode of raising (Jhurch funds; but 1
wish to point out that it is as much a uuty to
urge persons to give to the cause of Christ as it
is to urge them to obey any of his other precepts.
1 fear that the objection against the periormance
of this duty springs in many cases from that love
of money which is the root of ail evil; an unwill-
ingness to part with a small portion of the sub-
stance which God has given; and a consequent
indisposition, yea, a great dislike to hear any-
thing respecting it. 'The duty must not be
neglected. The sin must not be tolerated. VV e
shall, 1 trust, all prove faithful m this respect.
Eurther, the title of *‘ Congregational,” is given
to our system, to distinguish it from that under
which separate Congregations are not permitted
to manage their own allairs ; to denote that every
Congregation of believers, meeting statehly in
one place, is competent to manage mem. But it
so happens that the persons who gather together


in the house of God in any particular place on
the .Lord’s day, are commonly divided into the
Church and tlie Congregation—the Churcli, com-
prising such as have made a profession of faith,
and tlie Congregation, such as have not made
tiiat profession. Sometimes both the professing
and tlie non-professiug are regarded as a whole,
and called the Congregation. .Now, it is rather
unfortunate that one of our designations should
have been derived from a description identical
with that of non-prolessors, or of professors and
non-professors combined. These do not consti-
tute what is understood to be a Congregational
Church. This consists of professors only—a
Congregation of believers, it is easy to show
what is meant, but it is easy also for persons to
make a mistake. Taking up this designation in
its simple meaning, ana thinking it proper to
give it mil scope, how easily would they oe led
to think with rdr, Borter, the author ot Lectures
on Independency, that the distinction of Church
and Congregation is improper and ought to cease;
and that the chief desiderata of a Church system
should be 11 Comprehensiveness correspondent to
ail the distinctions in the social and civil life;
Catholicity exclusive of no variety of Christian
faith ; the power of self-perpetuation ; and such
respect for other institutions and agencies as
shall refrain from all intrusion into their depart-
ments.” iiut the purity of our Churches—the
maintenance of the true doctrines of the Cross—
the conversion of sinners, and the edification of
saints, will not permit us to abandon the existing
distinction, and make the Church and Congrega-
tion identical, and form, in the fullest sense ot
the phrase, a Congregational Church.
W e must keep to a more limited sense of the
phrase and require that every one entering into
Christian fellowship shall give evidence ot a real
spiritual change of heart and life.
hunker, the title, "independent,” is given to
our system to denote that each Church is inde-
peuaeiit of the authority of pope, prelate,
presoytery, prince, or parliament; and to
uistiuguisn it from every Church under any of
tlie powers just mentioned. The authority
widen the latter acknowledges, in its ordinary
government, the former repudiates. The line of
uemarcatiou between them is broadly drawn,
'ihe title independent, says Mr. Urme, in his
Lije pf Owen, is supposed to have been derived
from a description of a Christian Church given
by John do unison, in his "just and necessary
apology.” it was not assumed, he says, but
given, as appears from the titles of many of the
early defences of the body, and from their
repeated protests against the misconstruction
which the term occasioned. It misled many in
former days, and it is apt to mislead many in
modern times, is it not thought by some that
no civil tribunal has a right to interfere with any
action or decision of a Church, when confined to
ns own members ? Hut the famous Cardross
case has shown us that the civil tribunal claims
and enforces this right, A Church may agree
to observe certain laws laid down in the Scrip-
tures, or make rules not inconsistent with the
general interests of society, and may carry both
out, but the civil tribunal will not suffer the
Church to act contrarily to the compact it makes
to the civil injury of any of the members. It
would be monstrous for a Church to commit
injustice and be beyond the reach of civil
power. Is it not also thought, sometimes,
that the action of a Church, although extending
beyond itself and regarded as injurious to
general interests, must not be opposed by any
individuals or societies external to itself ? But
is not such a thought tantamount to a supposi-
tion that a Church has a license to do evil ?
Take a case in point. If a Church should ask
for State aid either in money or land, the Church
is asking for that which belongs to the general
public, and which, it is thought by some persons,
would be prejudicial to the general interests of
Christianity ; and every member of the general
public, either alone or in association, civil or
religious, has a consequent right to oppose the
grant, and use all legitimate means for preventing
it. The Church has a right to apply, so far as
other persons are concerned, and all other
persons being members of the general public,
have a right to oppose the application. The
Church under the title of Independency can no
more deprive the general public ol their right,
than the general public can deprive the Church
of its right. Is it not also thought at times that
a Church appealing to those without it for help
to purchase land, erect buildings, support the
Ministry or otherwise, ought, by virtue of the
principle of Independency, to be left to its own
free action, j ust as much as though no help had
been given or sought ? But, surely, those who
give help have a right to inquire to what object
it is to be applied, the way in which it is to be
appropriated, and the faithfulness with which
the alleged purpose has been carried out. Ihe
help may be given without the right being
insisted on, or any conditions laid down,
or any inquiry made, but unquestionably the
right, legal or moral, exists. The Church in
tins case is oniy independent by the concession
of right on the part of those without.
And generally, is it not assumed that a Church
is not amenable to any without for its action,
whatever that action may be ? If the action be
in strict accordance with the principles of the
New Testament, exemption may be claimed; but
if, in the exercise of common sense, it be seen to
be opposed to them so as to be injurious to the
morals or the civil interests of society, the civil
tribunal has a right to interfere; if it be opposed
to them so as to bring a contempt on religion
and become offensive to society, the press has a
right to interfere ; and if it be opposed to them
so as to defeat the end for which the Church was
formed, members of other churches, of the same
and other orders have a right to interfere by ex-
postulation, moral suasion, and withdrawing
from all association.
There is sufficient for us to admire in the
principles of Independency when rightly under-


stood without straining it and attempting to
carry it beyond its legitimate province. Let us
avoid extremes, which are always hurtful; and
let our profession and practice accord together,
and commend our glorious and sacred system to
all around.
The Union calling for attention is the associa-
tion of “ Evangelical Churches of the Congrega-
tional Order situated within the colony of
Victoria,” The design of the Union is stated
negatively and positively in the Constitution.
It is negatively declared in the third rule in
these words: —“This Union fully recognises the
right of every separate Church to maintain per-
fect Independence in the Government and Ad-
ministration of its own affairs, and, therefore, it
shall not in any case assume legislative authority
or right of interference,” And it is positively
set forth in the fourth rule, where the objects
contemplated are declared to be the promotion
of Evangelical Religion, the formation and as-
sistance of Congregational Churches, the increase
of Ministers, the cultivation of brotherly affection
and co-operation amongst the members of the
Union, the maintenance of fraternal intercourse
with Congregational Churches beyond this co-
lony, the procuring of religious statistics, and
finally “the maintenance and enlargement of
religious liberty, rights, and privileges.”
The last clause shows that one object of the
Union is, in case of necessity, to enter on the
arena of politics in defence of the associated
Churches, even if it does not by the term “ en-
largement” indicate that an aggressive move-
ment may be made to produce perfect equality
amongst all denominations of Christians.
But the seventeenth rule declares that subjects
of morals, education, liberty of conscience, and
legislation bearing more or less on the interests
of religion may, unless forbidden by the General
Council, be brought before it. From this it appears
that aggressive movements in all these matters
are amongst the objects of the Union ; but, that
the Union may not be committed to everything
pertaining to them, the General Council is at
liberty to decide from time to time what is
and what is not a proper subject for considera-
tion. It is of course in the power of the
Union, on due notice being given in accord-
ance with the twentieth rule, to expunge
the seventh clause of the fourth rule, and alter
the seventeenth rule, so as to prevent the Union
from taking up any of the subjects just men-
tioned, or acting either aggressively in the
enlargement of religious liberty, rights, and
privileges, or defensively in the maintenance of
what we at present enjoy; and so as to leave
individual Churches, or a distinct and special
society, to act bota defensively and aggressively
as circumstances may require. But I think, my
honoured brethren, that you will see the wisdom
of the provisions—the security which the General
Council has, in its veto, against the abuse of
them—the difficulty of forming distinct and
special societies in this early stage of the colony—
the importance of united effort, and the conse-
quent desirability of continuing the Constitution
as it now stands. At the meeting of the General
Council in May last, a resolution was passed to
the effect that the taking of land or money from
the State by Congregational Churches' was a
violation of the fundamental principles of our
denomination, and that every form of State aid
to religion should be opposed and discountenanced
by this Union. A report was also received,
adopted, and referred to the Executive Com-
mittee, in which measures were suggested lor
obtaining the abolition of all grants ol State aid,
both in money and land; a Eariiamentary
Vigilance Committee to watch all bills aflect-
ing religion, and report to the Executive Com-
mittee, was also appointed; and the honorary
Secretaries of the Union were requested to give
notice of the appointment of your Chairman to
the Governor’s private Secretary and the Regis-
trar-General, that a channel of communication
might be opened between the State and this
Union on matters relative to our denomination.
In consequence of the notification, 1 received,
as your Chairman, certain communications from
the State respecting applications for two grants
of land—one to an unassociated and alleged
Congregational Church at .North Melbourne,
under the pastoral care of the Rev. Thomas
Birkett Vipont; and the other to an associated
Congregational Church at Warrnambool, under
the pastoral care of the Rev. W. VV. Pentlaud.
In both of these cases I gave in reply—and in
my official capacity—the purport of tne resolu-
tions passed by you, and opposed the granting of
the land. And, in the latter case, although not
required to do so by the Constitution, or any
bye-law of the General Council, yet, to get the
benefit of united deliberation, 1 laid the com-
munication before the Executive Committee,
and acted in accordance with a resolution passed
by them. The resolution was as follows: —
“ That the Chairman be requested to reply,
that, in his opinion, as also in the opinion
of this Union, the action taken by the Cliurch
at Warrnambool is in opposition to the principles
professed by the Union, and that he does not
concur in nor support the application so made.”
In doing what I have done in these cases, I have
endeavoured to fulfil the purpose contemplated
by the constitution to carry out the resolutions
passed by you at the last May meeting, and
to act in accordance with the notification of my
name to the Governor’s Secretary and the
Registrar General. And I think you will agree
with me in saying that what I have done is in
no way a violation of the third rule of your Con-
stitution. The Churches exercised an undoubted
right under the principle of Independency in
applying for land; but their action extended
beyond themselves, and encroached on the rights
of the general public, and operated injuriously, as
it is thought, to the general interests of Curis-
tianity—and therefore, this Union, as well as
every member or body of members of the
general public, had, as before shown, a perfect
right to oppose the application so made. It


would be a very strange thing if persons, by
associating themselves together as a religious
body, and calling themselves Independents, could
in any efforts affecting the interests of the general
public say to others, “ You must not oppose us,
because we are Independents. We may do as
we please, and you must not interfere with us. ”
This, as it seems to me, would be Independency
run wild 1 It would also, as it appears to me, be
very inconsistent for this Union to take active
measures for opposing State aid, both in money
and land, to Churches of other denominations,
and withhold that opposition when applications
are made lor it by Churches of our own order.
And it would, I think, be still more inconsistent
to oppose a grant to any unassociated and pro-
fessedly Congregational Church, and abstain from
opposing a grant to any associated Church, or
act in anyway so as to qualify or weaken any
apparent opposition to the latter. Such a pro-
cedure would bring upon us the application of
the proverb, “ Physician, heal thyself!” “ Take
the mote,” &c. We must oppose all or
none! We must maintain the character
won by our forefathers for candour, decision,
consistency, stability! We must not waver like
a wave of the sea, or the State will soon disregard
our appeals, and despise us! We must not be
silent when we are asked by the State to speak.
We must declare our opinion when it is directly
sought, it is not my intention to enter now
upon the question whether or not it is right for
the State to grant and Christian Churches to
receive aid. That question you have already
decided, and all that i have to do is to justify, if
possible, the course of action which 1 have taken.
This I have endeavoured to do, and I now leave
you to say whether that course meets with your
sanction or not. It may be well to mention, in
confirmation of the propriety of what has been
done, the action taken by the Congregational
Union of England and Wales in reference to the
lieyiurn Donum to poor dissenting ministers.
The constitution of that Union did not, like that
of ours, contemplate political action - there were
other associations beyond it for the purpose ; but
still the English Union took active measures
to deprive Congregational ministers of the
liegium Donum, and succeeded in the r endea-
vours. The fact that Congregational Churches
and their ministers were independent of external
control did not deprive the English Union of the
right to take the measures just mentioned.
The State has been referred to several times
in subservience to other topics, but we must now
give it a leading consideration. Here a series of
questions presents itself. Can we as a Union,
or as Churches, or as individual Christians, hold,
consistently with the principles oflndependency,
Congregationalism, or Voluntaryism, any con-
nection with the State ? Can we, as such, derive
any benefit from it either directly or indirectly?
Must all the connection we have with the State,
and all the benefit we receive from it, be not as
religionists but subjects of the civil kingdom, and
not for religious but civil purposes ? You will
perceive that the questions asked are not whether
these things can or cannot take place con-
sistently with the principles of the New Testa-
ment, but with the principles of Independency,
Congregationalism, Voluntaryism. I have put
the questions in this shape because I do not wish
at present to enter on the former topic, but con-
fine my attention to the latter. My only object
just now is to promote consistency with the
principles we profess. If these should, on a
future examination, be found by any of the more
enlightened in the search after pure truth to be
defective, then, like the Father of modern Inde-
pendency, we shall be ready I hope to correct
what is wrong. Truth is our motto! Now I
start with the principles professed ; and as I
have already shown how they may be carried to
excess, so now I wish to show how they may fail
to be carried out to their legitimate extent. The
questions before suggested may, so far as our
present purpose is concerned, and the time
allotted lor this address, be narrowed down to
this—“ Can we consistently connect ourselves with
the State by receiving grants of money or land?”
In replying to this question it may be well to turn
back to history, and ascertain the opinions and
practices of our ancestors in the faith. In 1602
John Robinson, who had withdrawn from the
English State Church, entered into an association
with certain ministers “to walk according to the
primitive pattern, whatever it might cost them.”
In an article on Independents in the “Encylopsedia
of Religious Knowledge ”it is said—“ But Robin-
son and his companions contended that every
single congregation ol Christians was a Church,
and independent of all legislation save that of
Christ—standing in need of no such provision or
establishment as the State can bestow, and
incapable of soliciting or receiving it.” The
separation between them and the State, on Church
matters, was so entire, as to exclude them from
all pecuniary aid from it, even if they had been
disposed to give money. They were necessarily
Voluntaries. They were more, for they chose
their position. During the Protectorate, fifty
years later, Episcopacy was set aside. Presby-
terianism endeavoured to fill the vacancy,
and Independency had an opportunity
of taking some of the Church livings.
What was the result? It must be admitted
that a few Independent Ministers did in
the anomalous condition of ecclesiastical affairs
at that time, accept Church livings. Mr.
Fletcher in his History of Independency makes
the number large and says, “ They saw no
inconsistency in receiving state patronage and
emolument as vicars, rectors, public preachers,
and lecturers so long as they could follow out
the principles and discipline of the Congrega-
tional polity in a private manner.” But Mr,
Hallam, in his Constitutional History, vol. ii. 427,
differs Ifom Mr. Fletcher. He (Mr. H.) says,
“ In the time of Cromwell, who favoured the
Independent sectaries, some of that denomination
obtained livings ; but very few, 1 believe, compa-
ratively, who had not received either episcopal


or presbyterian ordination.” Presuming Mr.
Hallam to be correct, we perceive that after
allowing for the defections to be expected under
the change in civil affairs, there is sufficient
ground for saying that Congregationalists, as a
body, proved faithful to the independent and
voluntary principle. They would not accept
the State emoluments, although they might
otherwise have followed “ out the principles and
discipline of the Congregational polity in a
private manner.” And the few Independents
who did accept livings were not permitted to do
so without protest and rebuke from others.
Milton, in his severe censure, said, “ Indepen-
dency and State-hire in religion can never
consist long or certainly together. For magis-
trates at one time or other will pay none but
such, whom by their committees of examination,
they find conformable to their interests and
opinions. And hirelings will soon frame them-
selves to that interest and those opinions which
they see best pleasing to their paymasters ; and
to seem right themselves, will force others as to
the truth.” But it seems that the acceptance of
livings by the few was. in some of the cases, more
apparent than real. Vacant pulpits in parishes
were filled by Congregational Ministers, who
were maintained by the voluntary contributions
of the people. Such appears to have been the
fact with one of the Goodwins’, as he himself
declared. A violent attack was made on him
for what seemed to be his inconsistency. To
this he replied, saying, “ I am charged with
receiving their tythes.” My answer is that I
demand no “ tythes of any of them, nor ever had
any right to do it. Nor have I ever received
anything from them in the nature of tythes, but
as their voluntary contribution.’’ It seems, then,
that Mr. Fletcher’s statement requires to be
greatly modified, and that the inconsistency he
notices was not the rule but the exception.
When the Protectorate, which lasted only six
years terminated, the livings had to be vacated
by such Congregationalists as might have held
them, who were thenceforth compelled, if I may
be allowed the term, to be voluntaries, as their
brethren were in principle and integrity. In the
declaration issued by the Congregational Union
of England and Wales in 1833, the ninth principle
of Order and Discipline runs thus : —“ They (Con
gregational Churches) believe that the power of
a Christian Church is purely spiritual, and
should in no way be corrupted by union with
temporal or civil power.” In this article it is
implied that union with the State would corrupt
the Church; and it is indicated that a union
should not, therefore, be formed in any way.
Now, a union may be formed so as to give the
Church the supremacy over the State, as under
the Papacy in the dark ages, or so as to give the !
State supremacy over the Church, as under
Episcopacy in England at the present time, or so
as to make the Church an ordinary beneficiary of
the State. The Church may become an ordinary
beneficiary either by receiving a portion of the
annual grant for the erection of places of wor- I
ship, and the support of the Christian Ministry,
or by receiving a grant of land on which the
erections may be made. It has been thought
that the Church may become beneficiary without
a violation of Congregational principles, seeing
that the State does not, in giving money or
land, interfere with the government of the
Church. But surely the State has a right to
interfere : both the money and the land are
given for specific purposes, and the land is to
revert to the State if the object for which it was
granted should fail or be perverted. May not
the State appoint inspectors to see that both
money and land are properly applied, require
returns to be periodically made, and take other
measures for the protection of State interests?
The Trustees of the land may be nominated by
the Church taking it, but does not the Govern-
ment appoint them? May not the State iipon
the representation of an influential minority in
the Church, or an influential non-member in the
Congregation, appoint Trustees in opposition to
the wishes of the majority or even of all the
members ? If this be so, what becomes of the
Church’s independency? The reason assigned
for taking the money or land is the reason
advanced according to Mr. Fletcher by the Inde-
pendents under the Protectorate for receiving
State patronage and emolument, which receipt
brought the body into a disadvantageous position
after the Restoration, and was censured by their
brethren at the time, and has been pronounced
as incompatible with Independency by our
denomination in the present age. It has been
thought also that a distinction in principle may
be drawn between the receiving of an annual
grant of money and the receiving of a single
grant of land so as to justify the latter whilst
the former is regarded as unjustifiable? But
what can that distinction be? Can it be that
the one grant is money and the other land? If
so, then, an annual grant may become justifiable
by the giving of land equal in value to the
money grant? Can it be that the money and
land are derived by the State from different
sources, the former from the duties on imports
and exports or other taxes payable by colonists
and the latter from the invasion of aboriginal
right, or the taking of no man’s land in the
name of the Queen on behalf of the British
people and for their benefit ? Then it is only
necessary to make the annual grant of money out
of the proceeds of land sales to make it as justi-
fiable as the grant of land itself. Can it be that
the grant of money is a frequent—an annual
act—and the grant of land a single act ? Then
it is only necessary for the Government to give
sufficient land to every Church or congregation
to constitute an ample endowment for the main-
tenance of that Church, or the worship of that
congregation throughout all time to get over any
difficulty on this point. Can it be that the
money given is wanted for State purposes—civil
not ecclesiastical, but that the land is not so
wanted at the present? The same" argument
for the larger grant of land for endowment which


was advanced in the last case may be advanced
in this ? Can it be that the land given may be
made the means of rendering the Government
land in the neighbourhood more saleable and
more valuable ? But surely the annual grant of
money for the erection of chapels and schools,
and the maintenance of the Ministry will do the
same, and to a much greater extent.
It appears to me that in the distinction
alleged there is no real difference. The simple
and proper way of looking at the matter is, I
think, this : —The State possesses money and
land. Ought the State to dispose of its posses-
sions for Church purposes? Can any Church
take a portion of those possessions and be an
Independent or Voluntary Church? In my
opinion, the reply must be in the negative.
At the Australian Conference of Congrega-
tional Churches held in Collins-street Chapel,
Melbourne, on 20th February, 1855, at which
delegates from Victoria, New South Wales, South
Australia and Tasmania, were present, the
following resolution was unanimously carried: —
“ That this Conference commenced at a time
when new and permanent constitutions for the
different Australian colonies are about to come
into operation, and when free scope will be
afforded for the action of the public mind upon
the affairs of Government and Legislation, deems
it important to give distinct and emphatic
avowal to its convictions upon the relation of
the State to religion.’ It is the opinion of this
Conference that it is not the province of Govern-
ment to do more for religion than to throw
around its adherents, in common with the whole
community, the protection of law ; and that all
interference in so sacred and so spiritual a depart-
ment in the way of legislation, permanent
endowment, periodical or occasional ’grants of
money, or gifts of land, is contrary to sound
policy, repugnant to the principles of the New
Testament, and injurious to that cause it pro-
fesses to aid. This Conference would further
give prominent expression to the fact that
Voluntaryism in religion, as opposed to State
interference to the full extent expressed in this
resolution, is an essential and fundamental
principle of Congregational Independency, as
understood and practised by the Ccngregational-
ists of the British empire, both in the parent
land and all its colonial dependencies. It is
further the opinion of this Conference that, as the
errors committed by former generations in the
different nations of Europe on the subject of
State support of religion have been the prolific
sources of heartburning and dissensions among
fellow citizens, and of unspeakable injury to
religion itself; and as the progress of enlighten-
ment in Europe is at this moment strong in the
direction of correcting and even eradicating
these fatal errors, it is in the highest degree
inexpedient and impolitic to transplant into new
communities in this hemisphere obsolete and
worn-out principles and usages, whose only
influence can be to prolong unnecessary agita-
tion, and to impede and embarrass sound legis-
lation.” This resolution is so comprehensive
and explicit on the point under consideration as
to require no addition or comment.
And now, my honoured and beloved brethren,
having given you what I conceive to be the
historical, philosophical, and consistent view of
the subject—Church, Union, and State —which
I have taken up, I wish to add that I do not
profess, nor must I be understood to give any
other than my own personal view of it beyond
the quotations I have made. It cannot, there-
fore, be thought that I have compromised this
Union. In taking up the subject, my desire
has been not to provoke discussion, but to lay a
plain statement before you for consideration.
From my intercourse with many in the colony
I have gathered that an exposition of our
principles, in reference to the points now taken
up, was much needed. I have endeavoured to
supply that need. And, in bringing my address
to a close, let me hope that we shall prove our-
selves the worthy successors of those whose
name we bear, and whose memory we cherish,
by preserving the Independent, Congregational,
and Voluntary character of our Churches intact,
maintaining the free and proper action of our
Union, yielding to each other in immaterial
things so as to insure united action in all our
movements, and endeavouring, above all things,
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.
Bind thy people, Lord, in union
With the seven-fold cord oflove;
Breathe a spirit of communion
With the glorious hosts above.
Let thy work be seen progressing.
Bow each heart and bend each knee,
Till the world thy truth possessing
Celebrates its Jubilee.


CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS.
MAY, 18 6 5
My Dear Brethren, —In calling me to this
position you have conferred on me a great dis-
tinction. But in the very act of acknowledging
the honour—and Ido it most gratefully—l be-
come aware of a corresponding responsibility.
The fact, indeed, that the outline of your pro-
cedure, is already prescribed, and the more im-
portant parts generally allotted, greatly reduces
that responsibility. But, considering the char-
acter of this assembly, and the nature of this
occasion, enough is still left to compel me to cast
myself, as I now unfeignedly do, on your kind
consideration and Christian sympathy. This much
1 will venture to affirm, that I will yield to none
of my honoured brethren in sincere and steady
attachment to those principles which distinguish
us as a denomination, and in a warm interest in
the prosperity of this Union.
My remarks this morning will be very few ;
being desirous that we should at once proceed
with the business of the Union and Mission, for
which we have come together. May our meet-
ings be, as they have heretofore been, times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. And
though we meet at this time in a denominational
capacity, we delight to be able to say to all the
Churches of our common Lord, whether in this
colony or in other lands : 4 4 Grace be to you,
brethren, and peace from God our Father and
the Lord Jesus Christ. The blessing of the Lord
be upon you. We bless you in the name of the
Lord.”
Nothing very marked and particular has
occurred during the past year in our father-land
or this colony, bearing upon our denomination.
The spirit of scepticism which awakened so
many anxieties among the fearful, has had its
influence in arousing the educated and pious, to
come forth and boldly meet the assailants of our
holy religion; and the issue has been, to
strengthen the faith of the believer in the found-
ations of Christianity, and to let the world know
that godly men do not believe a cunningly
devised fable.
We remember with pleasure and gratitude the
visit and kind services of the Rev. J. Graham,
of Sydney, for our Union and College, His
labours and influence, I cannot help thinking,
were beneficial to many .individually, and to our
denomination. Our united wishes and prayers
are ottered that he may belong spared and greatly
honoured in the extensive and important sphere
in which our Divine Master has placed him in a
neighbouring colony.
We have mingled feelings of regret and grati-
tude when we remember that we are to lose from
our Council and Committees, the advice,
influence and labours of our beloved Brother
Sunderland. From the formation of this
Union and Mission he has sought its
interest (as well as the denomination gene-
rally,) with a warm heart and willing mind.
Ever ready at the request of his brethren and the
churches to aid them with his sympathy and
influence in seeking the prosperity of Zion and
the > glory of God, we shall greatly miss his
comely presence and genial smile in our meet-
ings; also, his valuable advice in our Committees,
he having so extensive a knowledge of our sta-
tions and Churches m this colony. Although, in
the providence of God, he has been called to till
an important and responsible position in connec-
tion with Mission work, he will be able in jour-
neyings through the colony, indirectly, greatly to
serve our denomination. While we shall regret
his frequent absence from among us, we do feel
grateful that the honour of serving such an insti-
tution as the London Missionary Society has
fallen upon our beloved brother, it must be
very cheering and sustaining to his spirit to know
that the opinions of brethren in England, as well
as of his brethren here, are unanimous that he is
obeying a Divine call to a Divine work. 1 am
sure he will ever be remembered by us with sin-
cere affection, and our prayers will ascend that
our kind and loving Fattier would abundantly
bless him in his well-being and well-doing.
While we sympathise with the deacons and
members of the Congregational Church at
Richmond in their loss ol a beloved pastor, who
has long laboured successfully among them, we
rejoice with them in the efforts that have been
made, and the success which has been achieved
in securing the services of the Rev. A. M, Hen-
derson, of Islington, as their minister, it is
needless to say anything respecting him; he
is a brother greatly beloved, and held m
high esteem by the Churches in our father*


land. We look forward with pleasure to his
arrival, and I am sure he will receive a warm
and generous greeting from the brethren and
Churcfies, believing, if his life is spared, he will
be a blessing to our denomination, and a great
acquisition to our Union and College.
At our half-yearly meeting held at Ballaarat,
several of our brethren were requested to bring up
papers to this Council bearing on important sub-
jects connected with our Church life and Church
work. How many have consented I know not; but
among the subjects which have been suggested to
my mind, I have thought that a few remarks might
be made on the duty and importance of our
feeling more interest in the maintenance of our
distinctive principles as a denomination, and of
our having such an estimation of them as shall
lead to zealous efforts for the promotion of our
internal strength and unity.
Now, if every body of Christians has its
appropriate work to do, we also have ours, and
none can perform it for us. We have a sphere
to fill into which others cannot enter. We have
duties to discharge to our Lord and to his Church
that lie to the hand of none but ourselves. We
have truths to maintain that are our peculiar
heritage, for which we bear a particular responsi-
bility ; truths, which, having imposed on us the
necessity of separate association, require us to
seek for that association advancing growth. A
few of those truths might be mentioned:
The right of separate Churches to govern
themselves without external interference. The
spirituality of the membership of Churches. The
right of God’s people in each Church to share in
the administration of their own affairs. The
duty of Church members mutually to receive and
recognise one another in fellowship.
Here are no one-sided and partial notions, no
petty details of external arrangement; but
principles of a noble breadth and grandeur,
neither narrow nor shifting, fitted for every
nation and every age—they are the elements of
full religious freedom. These are the elements
of religious freedom in its true completeness—of
freedom without and freedom within ; freedom
not only from the impositions of the State, but
from undue restraints of Church authority. We
stand unshackled alike by the bonds of civil
subjection, and the not less grievous yoke of
ecclesiastical power. We are not concerned to
vaunt our liberty, because the taste ol its sweets
is not new to our lips; it has ever been our
noble estate and patrimony, descending to us
from our spiritual sires ; yes, by the grace of
God, we are free born !
The independence of our Churches, as separate
bodies, must be held by us as a sacred principle
—a principle sanctioned by the apostles in the
Churches which they planted, and proved by
experience to be eminently conducive to the
prosperity of the Churches. But the united
action of these independent societies is an object
also deeply important and interesting; and this
problem also we have undertaken to work
out. Holding the same great principles of
religious truth, following the same formula
of ecclesiastical order, and animated by the
same great hopes and desires, there has risen
amongst us, as it were, spontaneously and with-
out our devising anything in the matter, an
irresistible denominational feeling, which of
itself tends most powerfully to secure unity of
action throughout our Churches; and upon this
rather than upon legislative rules and theoretical
constitutions have we been content to rest the
stability of our corporate association. This has
been our aim, and in this we have succeeded.
It may not be very easy to state in strict
terms how our unity is secured; but this we
know, that we are united. We feel we are one,
and we show we are one by our works. Free
from every controlling power from without,
subject to no authority but that of Christ—we
are nevertheless at this moment as united in
doctrine, in practice, and in co-operation, as any
of the ecclesiastical corporations around us.
Our pastors all preach substantially the same
truths; our Churches all observe the same
usages and practise the same discipline; and
when any object of denominational interest is
presented to us, we all move as by one common
impulse.
VVe have given our unity an outward mani-
festation in the organisation of our Union and
Mission, and College. Our aim is to bring
our separate energies into one focus, and, with-
out trenching upon the independency of our
Churches, to confederate them together, so as to
make them work in unison, and for great com-
mon ends connected with our denomination.
To Congregationalism belongs the honour of
combining purity with Catholicity in the fellow-
ship of the Church. We are able to show to the
Church and the world that it is possible, without
damaging or endangering the purity of the
Church, to open the doors of its fellowship to all
“ who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and
truth.”
Let us remember that these and the other
principles mentioned are not the only ones that
invest the name of Congregationalism with
honour. There are others also that have shed
around it an enduring glory: that generous
spirit of universal brotherly love —fit ally of the
spirit of freedom ; and that principle never to
be named without highest reverence—l mean
the great and universal right of liberty of con-
science. Let philosophers boast as they will of
their doctrine of toleration, their rights of man
and freedom of thought, they never knew these
things ; they never dreamt of them till our
honoured sires had learned and taught them from
the word of God. Two centuries since, this
truth, now of world-wide renown, found no other
defenders. They, and they only, dared to stand
forth in the face of embattled bigotry frowning on
every side, and boldly proclaimed the unheard-of
heresy, that every man has an inalienable right
to be free to worship God according to his con-
science, without let or hindrance from earthly
powers. Here was a discovery greater than all


that science has revealed. Compared with this,
what is the disclosure of the material laws of the
universe? for here is the primary law of the
human spirit, without obedience to which there
is neither safety nor honour—neither light for the
intellect nor hope for the heart—neither dignity
for men nor peace for nations—neither self-
approval nor confidence of the approval of God.
To discover, to announce, and to defend this
truth was the work of Congregationalists. Man-
fully they did their work, and not without suc-
cess.
These are some of our distinctive principles as
Congregationalists, and we must not be slack to
our trust. We must hold fast the advantages
our fathers won, and transmit them confirmed to
posterity. God has given us the honour, and
assigned us the duty. If we are few in com-
parison with other denominations around us, we
have no need to be discouraged, if we are true to
ourselves. When had truth themajority? Were the
same process of selection applied to them which
is in use among us, how would their numbers
stand ? But neither truth nor strength go by
numbers. Though comparatively few, we may
still be strong and do mighty things. The very
principle of selection on which we go is favour-
able to our strength. It should purify and
concentrate us; it should make each individual
feel that something is required of him; and did
every one of our members feel the responsibility
thus laid upon him, striving to bring the culture
of their minds, the elevation of their piety, and
the freeness of their gifts, up to the mark which
they might and ought to reach, how powerful
would be our energy and how successful the
aims of our zeal! Did we see our prayer-meet-
ings frequent and fervid—our Churches united in
purpose and sympathy—everything that affects
the welfare of the body, inspiring immediate
interest in each of us—our Union, our College,
and our Missions warmly supported how
honourable were our position, then, and how
rich the fruits of our usefulness ! And
why should it not be thus with us !
What is there to prevent such prosperity ?
There is nothing without and around us—there
is no hindrance above; the hindrances are all
within. Let us then, my brethren, now, in the
strength of the Almighty, away with them, and
away with them for ever. Let us be up and
doing, and let the incense of prayer and the fire
of devotion be our pillar of cloud and flame,
enshrining the presence of Jehovah ; let us look
back to the deathless glories of our forefathers,
and forward to the triumphs they have left us
to achieve.
It has been remarked that our polity shows us
our wants. What we want is not a higher
organisation, but a higher consecration. What
our Churches need is not to be popularised, but
to be spiritualised; not to be made more like the
world, so that they may win its favour and
attract it, but to be made more unlike the world,
so that they may win its respect and save it.
The great thing which we need, then, the one
thing we need, the only thing we need, is, not
new methods, new measures, new themes, new
sources of interest, power, and popularity, but a
new baptism of the Holy Ghost. Let a Church
and Ministry show itself to be a Church and
Ministry of the Holy Ghost, and it will not be
long anywhere without power and attraction.
Men will hear what is there; they will feel
mysteriously and afar what is there; and they
will come to see what these things mean. When
the Spirit was poured out on the day of
Pentecost, we are told significantly that “ the
multitude came together.” It has always been
so. The community cannot be found so sunk in
indifference, in worldliness, or in sin, that the
outpouring of the Spirit of God will not bring
the multitude to the doors. Let the windows of
heaven be opened over any place, and multi-
tudes will begin to swarm in the direction of
that light. The Spirit of God needs no new
methods, measures, or themes. It makes the
old methods, measures, and themes to be new.
It makes everything new where it comes. Its
very office is to renew and regenerate everything
upon which it falls. All our history as Churches
turns us to the Holy Spirit. All our hope is in
Him. All our help must come from Him.
We must awake! We must enter into the
holiest of all, with humble confidence and intense
desire. In the closet, at the family altar, and at
the hour of social prayer, we must wrestle and
agonise for the out-pouring of the Divine Spirit.
We must carry before the Shechinah, the blood
of the Lamb, to plead for our success, and refuse
to depart, urging the Almighty with our intense
cry; “Awake! awake! put on thy strength,
0 arm of the Lord.”
Honoured brethren, our cause is good, if we
will but do it justice ; our weapons are mighty,
if we will but use them; our God is true if we
will but trust Him ; our resources are exhaustless,
if we will but draw from them; our promises
insure us the victory, if we will but believe
them ; and our prospects are glorious, if we will
but be faithful; and, being faithful, will continue
so even unto death.
In closing, my sincere wish and earnest
prayers are, that the Holy Spirit may be abun-
dantly poured out upon us and our deliberations,
that when we retire to our different spheres of
Christian labour, both the pastors and delegates
of the churches may find that we have received a
fresh baptism of life, and love, and energy to dis-
charge the duties of our holy calling. Amen.




CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE.
The College Council earnestly request that all the Churches
will arrange for a collection in aid of the funds on the 20th
August next, and they also urge the appointment by each Church
of a Collector of Subscriptions for their several districts. All
remittances to be sent to Wm. Bates, Esq., Swanston Street, and
Uxbridge House, Nicholson Street, Fitzroy.
N.B. The financial year of the Mission and of the College
closes on 30th April.


V * v
‘ - v
•:* II J
i • ’ ’J
