

REPORT
ON THE
SWISS MILITARY SYSTEM,
COMPILED IN THE DEPARTMENT
OP
THE CHIEF OF INTELLIGENCE.
1907.
By Authority:
J. KEMP, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C. 11226.




REPORT
ON THE
SWISS MILITARY SYSTEM,
COMPILED IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF
THE CHIEF OF INTELLIGENCE.
1907'.
15g :
J. KEMP, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C. 11226.




Commonwealth of Australia.
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 2nd October, 1907.
Minister of Defence.
1. The accompanying Report upon the Swiss Military System has
been compiled mainly from information gained during a visit to
Switzerland in 1906—upon which occasion the manoeuvres were wit-
nessed—from the books and other documents mentioned in Appendix I.
of the Report, and from papers, &c., that have appeared in Service
Journals and other periodicals.
The population statistics have been kindly supplied by the Common-
wealth Statistician.
2. Sums of money have been converted at the rate of 25 francs to
the pound sterling.
3. More pressing, if not more important, matters have prevented
the completion of this Report at an earlier date. The consequent delay
is regretted.
W. T. BRIDGES,
Chief of Intelligence.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PART I.—THE ORGANIZATION OF 1874.
Paragraphs
Introductory Remarks... ... ... ... ... ... 1-3
Administration, Command, and Organization ... ... ... . 4-12
The Arms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13-40
Arms and Equipment ... ... ... ... ... 41-45
Recruiting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46-51
Training ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52-59
Training of Officers ... ... ... ... ... ... 60-62
Instruction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63-64
•Cadets and Preparatory Instruction ... ... ... ... 65-66
Rifle Clubs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67-76
Mobilization ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77-79
Cost of the Army ... ... ... ... ... ... 80-85
Topographical Service... ... ... ... ... ... 86
The Regie ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
Military Manufacturing Establishments ... ... ... ... 88
PART lI.—THE ORGANIZATION OF 1906.
The New Law ... ... ... ... ... ... 89-94
Military Obligations ... ... ... ... ... ... 95-99
Organization ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100-103
Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 104-112
Training ... ... . . ... ... ... ... 113-117
Recapitulation ... ... ... ... ... ... 118
PART lII.—THE AUSTRALIAN AND SWISS SYSTEMS
COMPARED.
Comparison between Australia and Switzerland ... ... ... 119
Organization ... ... ... ... ... ... 120
Ceneral Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Mobilization ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 122
Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 123
Training ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Rifle Clubs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 125
•Cost ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 126
•Concluding Remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... 127-128
APPENDICES.
I. List of Orders, Regulations, &c., attached to Report.
11. Fixed Establishments.
111. Periods of Training.
IV. The Dominion Arsenal, Quebec.
V. Daily Rates of Pay of Members of the Militia Forces in Switzerland
and Australia.


ADDENDUM
TO
REPORT ON SWISS MILITARY SYSTEM.
(To be inserted at page 6.)
1. The New Organization (Part II.) was passed by the Federal
Assembly on the 12th April, 1907, and on the 3rd November was
submitted to a Referendum and ratified.
< ft
2. To bring the Report into agreement with the Act, a copy of
which has been received since the Report was printed, the following
amendments are required :
(a) Page 13, para. 12, add new line as follows :
“ (5) The Complementary Services.”
(b) Page 39, para. 99, line 9, dele “ half” and insert “three-
quarters of”; line 10, after “Confederation insert
“ and ”, dele “ and a quarter by the Communes ”.
(c) Tables p. 58 et seq-, the length of recruits’ courses are as
follows :
Days.
Cavalry ... ... ••• ••• 90
Artillery and Fortress Troops ... ... 75
Infantry and Engineers ... ••• 65
Medical, Veterinary and Army Service Corps 60
C. 14483.


PART I.—THE ORGANIZATION OF 1874.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
1. The Swiss Army affords a proof, if proof is needed, that a
•democratic form of government and an efficient military system
are not incompatible. In most, if not in all, Anglo-Saxon countries,
the army only affects the majority of the people indirectly; but in
Switzerland every man either serves in the army or pays a direct
tax towards its maintenance. To understand the part it plays in
the national life it is necessary to know the outlines of the Con-
stitution and Government of the Confederation.
2. The Confederation is formed of nineteen Cantons and six Half
Cantons —22 Cantons in all. The Cantons, like the States of Aus-
tralia, are sovereign in respect to all matters not allotted to the
Federal Government, which deals mainly with Foreign Affairs, the
Army, Post and Telegraphs, &c. Each Canton is divided into Com-
munes, which settle their own local matters.
The supreme legislative and executive authority is vested in
a Parliament of two Chambers—The National Council (Nationalrat,
Conseil National) corresponding to our House of Representatives,
chosen in direct election at the rate of one Deputy to every 20,000
souls, and the States Council (Standerat, Conseil des Etats), corre-
sponding to our Senate, of 44 members, chosen and paid by the
22 Cantons, two for each Canton. The Chambers united are called
the Federal Assembly (Bundes-versammlung), and as such repre-
sent the supreme Government of the Republic. On the demand of
30,000 citizens or eight Cantons any law passed by the Federal
Assembly must be submitted to the popular vote for ratification or
rejection.
The Executive Power is deputed to the Federal Council (Bun-
desrat, Conseil Federal) —which corresponds to our Cabinet—consisting
of seven members elected for three years by the Federal Assembly.
The Federal Councillors take part in the proceedings of both
Houses, but do not vote, and may not be members of either House.
The President of the Federal Council (who is also President of
the Confederation) and the Vice-President are elected from the
Federal Councillors for one year by the Federal Assembly.
Each Councillor is in charge of one of the seven Departments
of State, viz., Foreign Affairs, Interior, Justice and Police, Military,
Finance and Customs, Agriculture and Industry, Postal Services
and Railways. In 1906 Foreign Affairs was presided over by the
President and the Military Department by the Vice-President.
Constitution
and
Government of
Switzerland.


The Assembly exercises its authority directly over the Army in
the following matters: It alone can declare war or conclude peace;
when war is imminent it elects the Commander-in-Chief of the Army
who would be invested with very wide powers; it fixes the Military
Budget; and lastly, it exercises supreme control over the entire mili-
tary administration and the application of the penal code. In other
matters its executive authority is deputed to the Federal Council
elected by it, which in turn delegates its authority in military
matters to the Military Department (War Office), reserving to itself
only the decision of questions of special importance. The head of
the Military Department, corresponding to the Minister of Defence,
is a member of the Federal Council. He is a military officer, and is
assisted by a Board,* consisting of sixteen permanent officers —the
Chiefs or Heads of Services.
3. A Standing Army, as that term is ordinarily understood, has
never been maintained in Switzerland. The origin of the military
spirit and tradition which form the basis of the present military
system is to be found in the history of the country.
Switzerland secured her independence by fighting; and for more
than 400 years preceding the middle of the last century Swiss
troops had been employed in the service of foreign countries, some-
times for short, sometimes for long periods. Thus the Swiss mili-
tary system has been founded on experience gained in war.
Twice recently the Swiss Army has been mobilized;-in 1857, on
the occasion of a dispute with Prussia, and in 1870, on the outbreak
of the Franco-German war. These mobilizations showed that the
army stood in need of reform in many directions, and in 1874 the
law was passed which, with many amendments, has up to the
present governed the organization and administration of the Swiss.
Army.
THE ARMY OF TO-DAY.
4. Under the law of 1874 and its amendments every man in
Switzerland fit to bear arms is compelled to serve in the army from
the age of twenty until the completion of his 50th year (officers 55).
All other men are obliged to pay a graduated tax ranging from ss.
to £l2O per annum. This tax is divided equally between the Con-
federation and the Cantons.
The number enlisted annually is about 17,000; about 60 per cent,
of the number who become liable for service. The remaining 40 per
cent, are rejected for various reasons.
5. The control and administration of the Army are complicated
by the fact that the troops form two distinct classes, viz., those
belonging to the Confederation and those belonging to the Cantons.
While the supreme control is in the hands of the Federal authori-
ties, yet the Governments of the Cantons have power, in certain
circumstances, e.g., riots, to dispose of tfieir own troops as they
please.
The Cantons being more closely in touch with the population
than the Federal authorities are charged with matters concerning
recruiting and mobilization, they keep the rolls of men liable
* Corresponding to the Military Board in Australia.


for service, call up troops for training and war, furnish clothing
and equipment, supply horses (except for cavalry) and. collect the
military tax.
For carrying out the duties for which it is responsible to
the Central authorities, there is in every Canton a Military
Department which bears the same relation to the Cantonal Govern-
ment that the Central Military Department does to the Federal
Government.
6. A distinction is maintained between the administration
and the command of the Army. Administration is carried out by a
Board of Permanent Officers, while the command is mainly in the
hands of militia officers, though a limited number of permanent
officers may hold commands or staff appointments, in addition to their
administrative and instructional appointments.
The Military Departments of the Cantons deal directly with the
Central Military Department in administrative matters without the
intervention of the Army Corps and Divisional Commanders.
7. The Army is divided into three classes according to age, viz.,
the Elite, Landwehr, and Landsturm. Different duties are assigned i
to each class.
Ist. Elite or Auszug , composed of men from 20 to 32 years
of age. About 80 per cent, of the Field Army or Ist
Line, is composed of the Elite.
2nd. Landwehr , composed of men aged from 33 to 44, who
have served in the Elite. They act as a reserve to the
Elite, and form about two-thirds of the garrisons of
the fortresses. In the Landwehr members of the
field artillery and infantry are formed into two bans;
those aged from 33 to 39 form the first ban; and those
from 40 to 44 form the 2nd ban. Men of other arms
and departments are not so divided.
3rd. Landsturm , which forms the third line of defence. It is
composed of men aged from 17 to 50, viz., those who
have passed through the Landwehr, and men who,
though unfit for the Elite or Landwehr, can yet be
usefully employed in time of war. Men in this class
from 20 to 44 pay the military tax. Youths from 17
to 20 are kept on a list apart. In time of war they
would join the depots and be passed into the Army
to fill the vacancies caused by casualties.
The Landsturm forms a reserve to the Landwehr. It
would be called out only in case of imminent danger,
and usually would not be employed outside Switzerland.
It is divided into the armed and unarmed Landsturm.
The armed portion is organized into units of infantry
and artillery with a low effective. The unarmed por-
tion is divided into a large number of separate detach-
ments, each with its own special duties to perform in
time of war, some military, some civil. Among these
detachments are firemen, butchers, bakers, &c., and
pioneer companies for throwing up earthworks.


Class.
Age.
Stvength.
Distribution by Arms.
Population of Switzerland.
d
c3
in
H
"cS
>*
c3
Q
3
I
1
50
d
1
a
+2
o
3
>>
ft
ft
d
m
o
<v
a
■+3
O
H
Census,
1st December,
1900.
Estimated
on
1st January, 1906.
Males.
Total.
Males.
Total.
Elite .. .. .
Landwehr
„ 1st Ban.
,, 2nd Ban.
Total
Landsturm, armed
„ unarmed
Grand Total
20-32
33-44
33-39
39-44
45-50
17-50
142,999
19,315
45,292
27,202
2,417
30
227
100
5,162
4,169
17,916
7,852
3,260
2,018
5,543
4,419
108,630
41,805
25,084
124
1,399
892
1,932
1,829
142,999
|91,809
356,058
246,859
CO
>d'
T— 1
CO
cd
4
377,350
26J, 625
96,125
O
lO
co
co
t~
CO
. 1
234,808
44,987
258,104
2,774
9,331
31,046
3,025
34,071
9,962
175,519
41,962
124
2,291
3,761
::}
234,808
303,091
90,702
537,899
2,774
9,331
9,962
217,481
124
2,291
3,761
537,899
693,619
735,100
Strength of
the Army.
y • •• ,1 y -
8. The following table shows the distribution of the Army by classes and arms on the Ist January, 1906
TABLE I.
Strength of the Swiss Army on Ist January, 1906.
The strength of the Elite and Landwehr, as shown above, was 234,808. Deducting from this total the 2nd Ban
of the Landwehr, the remainder, 207,606, is the effective strength of the first line of the army, making a further deduc-
tion of 16,616 for troops allotted as fortress garrisons, and 1.7,769 for unallotted troops, brings down the total to
173,221, which is the strength of the mobile army,


9. The Army is organized on a territorial basis. For this pur-
pose the Confederation is divided into eight Divisional Districts
(arrondissements de division) corresponding to the eight divisions
of the Elite. Each district contains all the battalions of one divi-
sion of the Army and as many as possible of the other units belong-
ing to the same division. The Cantons are divided into districts,
under a District Commandant (Commandant d’ Arrondissement),
each containing from one to three battalions of infantry. The latter
districts are subdivided into sections, each under a Chef de Section.
The District Commandants and Chefs de Section are Cantonal
-officers.
10. The organization is as follows:
(a) The Field Army, consisting of four Army Corps each
about 44,000 strong. Roughly, four-fifths belong to
the Elite, and the remainder to the Landwehr.
(b) Garrison of the Fortresses (St. Gotthard and St. Maurice)
—some 21,000, of whom two-thirds belong to the
Landwehr.
(<?) Unattached Troops, 40,538, of whom more than 90 per
cent, belong to the Landwehr.


An Army Corps consists of two divisions and the Corps Troops.
The strength of each division is about 15,500, and of the Corps
Troops about 13,000.
The following diagram shows the organization and composition
of an Army Corps:—


—
Elite.
Landwehr.
—
Dragoons (Squadrons) ..
24
24
Cantonal
Guides (Companies)
12
12
'I
Maxim M.G. (Companies)
4
-Federal
11. The establishment of an Army Corps is 32,026 (Appendix
II.). The difference between the strength and the establishment
is chiefly in the Divisional Infantry, and is accounted for by the
fact that under a system of universal compulsory service the number
of men enlisted in a year bears no fixed relation to the number
required to make good the annual loss in the Army by death and
discharge.
Men in excess of the Fixed Establishments would, on mobiliza-
tion for war, be left at the depots and used to fill vacancies caused
by casualties.
12. The Army is composed of: —
(1) The Staffs—
Staff of the Army, and Staffs for Army Corps, Divisions, Brigades, and
smaller units.
(2) The General Staff.
(3) The Arms.
(4) The Auxiliary Services
THE ARMS.
13. The principal establishments are shown in Appendix 11.
14. Service in the Cavalry is practically limited to ten years. It
is recruited from well-to-do farmers, and is a very popular arm. It
consists of—
15. The Dragoons are organized in regiments and brigades.
Three squadrons form a regiment and two regiments a brigade. One
brigade is allotted to each of the four Army Corps as Corps
Cavalry. They are armed with carbine, revolver, and sword. The
weight carried by the horse is about 17 stone.
16. A Mounted Maxim Machine Gun Company is allotted to each
Cavalry Brigade. It takes the place of the Horse Artillery of other
armies.
17. A Company of Guides (Elite) is allotted to each Division as
Divisional Cavalry. The establishment is the same as that of a
Squadron of Dragoons. The remaining four companies on a lower
establishment (see Appendix II.), are allotted as escorts —two com-
panies to the Army Staff and a half company to each Army Corps
"Staff.
18. Every officer, N.C.0., and man in the Cavalry is bound to
keep a horse fit for service, and before enlistment he has to fur-
nish evidence of his ability to do so.


Artillery consists of —
Field Army.
Fortresses.
Remarks.
Btys.
Guns.
Companies.
Field
72
288
4 guns form 1 Battery,
Mountain ..
6
24:
3 Batteries form 1
Brigade, 2 Brigades
Companies.
form 1 Regiment.
Position ..
18
7
Fortress—
Gunner
8
Observation
3
The estimated expenditure in 1906 for Cavalry horses was
£117,000.* The horses are bought (unbroken) by officers in Ireland
and North Germany; the price paid is about £5O each. Eight hun-
dred and seventy-two horses were bought abroad in 1905. For a
year after their arrival in Switzerland they are kept at different
training grounds, where they are broken to saddle and trained.
They are then divided into three classes— (a) officers’ chargers ;
(b) horses with curable vices (sold to old soldiers whose horses have
died) ; ( c ) recruits’ horses. The last class are sold at cost price to
recruits at the end of their school of recruits. The men pick
their own horses, each man pays down half the price, and
takes the horse home with him, which he is entitled to use as much
as he likes, provided he does not impair its military qualities. Each
year during his service in the Elite the Government refunds him
10 per cent, of what he has paid, and at the end of ten years the
horse becomes his own property. If a man owns a suitable horse
when he is enlisted the Government pays him half the value down
and 10 per cent, of the balance every year for ten years. Cavalry
horses are the property of the State, and cannot be sold or seized.
If a horse becomes seriously ill the soldier has the privilege of
taking him to one of the Remount Hospitals, and if the horse dies
it is replaced by the Remount Department under various arrange-
ments.
If a man does not take sufficient care of his horse it is taken
from him, and he is dismissed or transferred to another branch of
the service, usually the Army Service Corps.
Officers are entitled to get horses from the Government on the
same terms as the men.
19. The units of Artillery and their distribution are shown in the
following table :
* The principal items were— £
880 Remounts at £5O .. .. .. .. .. • • 44,000
Remount Depot—
Pay of Staff .. .. • • • • £15,012
Forage .. .. .. .. .. 15,228
Shoeing, veterinary, &c. .. ... .. 3,736
— 33,976


Artillery consists of—
Field Army.
Fortresses.
Remarks.
Companies.
Companies.
Ammunition Columns.
Corps Ammunition
Columns (4)
24
••
6 Coys. (Compagnies de
'pare di artillerie) form
1 Corps Ammunition
Column (Parc de Corps).
Corps Ammunition
Parks (4)
12
3 Companies form 1 Park
(Parc de Depot).
Mountain Artillery
Ammunition Columns
6
••
Pack Transport.
Position Train
4
1
Train
See paragraph 28.
At present tlie Artillery is partly Federal and partly Cantonal, but
under the new organization all Artillery units are Federal.
20. The re-arming* of the Field Artillery with the new pattern
Q.-F. guns was completed in 1906, and all the batteries had been
instructed in the drill and service of the gun.
21. There are 72 four gun batteries in place of 56 six gun
batteries as heretofore. Each battery consists of eighteen vehicles.
Two brigades each of three batteries are allotted to each Division, i.e.,
one brigade to each Infantry Brigade. The remaining 24 batteries
form part of the Corps Troops—two brigades to each Army Corps.
The gun (14-pr. of 6 cwt.) was made by Krupp, of a special
pattern determined after trials extending over several years. It
has wedge action and open sights. Telescopic sights were still under
trial last year. The carriage is fitted with a shield with hinged
apron and shallow spade. The gun, which recoils on the carriage,
is very steady in action.
Two men, facing the trail, stand on steps on the axle of the gun
carriage and hold on to a bar fixed on the shield, three are carried
on the limber, three on the waggon limber, and three on the waggon
body.
22. The ammunition (fixed) is carried in baskets, four rounds.
in a basket, each in a jute bag.
40 rounds are carried in the gun limber; 48 rounds in the waggon
limber; and 48 rounds in the waggon body. About 800 rounds per
gun are carried in the field.
* Cost—approximately, £1,000,000.


23. Men who at the time of enlistment state they intend to try
to get commissions are made drivers. A class of provisional officers
seen at Thnn had done both their recruits’ and N.C. officers’ courses
as drivers, and were then only learning the service of the gun. It
is said that it is easier to learn the service of the gun than to learn
to ride, and as an officer must know the service of the gun and be
able to ride, candidates for commissions are made drivers first and
gunners afterwards.
24. Horses for the Artillery are hired. The number required
varies little, and the programme of courses being fixed for a year
it is known how many horses will be required, so there is no trouble
experienced in getting suitable horses.
Saddle horses for officers attending courses of instruction at the
Artillery School at Thun, and the horses for the first portion of the
recruits’ course are supplied by the Eegie, a State establishment,
which is maintained for this purpose. See para. 87.
25. The re-arming* of the Mountain Artillery will be completed
this year. The six batteries (four guns) will form two brigades,
composed of men belonging to the Elite. Each brigade will include
three ammunition and two supply columns, formed of men from
Field and Mountain Batteries passing into the Landwehr.
Each battery carries 576 rounds in baskets —twelve rounds
forming one mule load. The number of rounds carried in the field
is 900 per gun.
26. The experiments for determining the best type of field
howitzer and position gun have not yet been finished. Part of the
Position Artillery is allotted to the fortresses, and the remainder
will be at the disposition of the Commander-in-Chief of the Field
Army.
27. There are eight companies of Garrison Artillery, which form
part of the garrisons of the fortresses.
28. The whole of the transport personnel of the Army, called
the Train, forms an integral part of the Artillery, but as a matter
of fact a large part of the train troops (Army Train) receive no
artillery training. The Train may be classified as follows: —
(a) Battery Train, i.e., the drivers for batteries and ammuni-
tion columns.
(b) Army Train forming—
(i) Line Train, which consists of transport personnel
incorporated in Staffs, Cavalry, Infantry and En-
gineer Units (except Bridging Train), and officers’
servants.
(ii) Train Units, consisting of the transport detachments
of Bridging, Supply and Medical Units.
It appears that under the new organization the Battery Train
and Army Train will be separated. The latter will form a
class by itself, and officers’ servants will belong to the Auxiliary
Services.
* Cost—about £lOO,OOO.


, —
Elite.
Landwehr.
Field Army.
Not Allotted.
Fortress.
Not
Allotted.
Fortress.
Pontoon .,
8
Bridging Train (Sec-
tions) ...
4
2
Sapper ..
16*
11
5
Telegraph
4
2
2
Balloon ..
1
Railway (1 Batt.) ..
4
Garrison
2 *
5
Landwehr.
—
Elite.
1st Ban.
2nd Ban.
Landsturm.
Carabineers (Rifles)
8
4
4
23 Companies
Fusiliers ..
98
33
33
96 Companies
—
Elite.
Landwehr.
Divisional
Infantry.
Portress.
1st
Ban.
2nd Ban.
Corps
Troops.
Fort-
ress.
Fort-
ress.
Not
allotted.
Carabineers (Batts.)
8
4
4
Fusiliers „
95*
3
27
6
6
27
Machine Gun Companies
3
29. The following table shows the number and distribution of
Engineer Companies :
Great care is taken in selecting men for the Engineers. Their tech-
nical qualifications are high, and they are noted for their good discipline.
30. The Infantry, which forms the bulk of the Army, is composed
of—
Battalions of Carabineers (Rifles) and Fusiliers;
Sections of Bicyclists;
Machine Gun Companies.
The number of battalions is as follows:
Every battalion in both bans of Landwehr is formed in the case
of Fusiliers from three battalions of the Elite, and in the case of
Carabineers from two battalions of the Elite.
The Elite battalions of Fusiliers and Ist ban Landwehr are
organized in regiments and brigades. The 2nd ban is organized
in regiments only. Four companies form a battalion, three bat-
talions a regiment, and two regiments a brigade. Battalions of the
2nd ban have a lower establishment than battalions in the Elite*
31. The following table shows the distribution of the Infantry :
* 8 half battalions.
* Form sixteen brigades, each of two regiments.


32. The Infantry are armed with rifles* and bayonets. Each
man carries 120 rounds, and the battalion S.A.A. waggons about
50 rounds per rifle. In all there are 500 rounds per rifle available
in the field.
33. Every man carries a short tent pole and a piece of a tent
which can be used as a waterproof cape—two pieces form a shelter
for three men. When a company bivouacks all the pieces carried
by men of the same section are fastened together.
The total weight carried by the soldier on service, including an
entrenching tool, is about 66 lbs.
34. For duty as orderlies small sections of bicyclists are attached
to the Army Staff (one mounted officer and fifteen bicyclists), and
Staffs of Army Corps and Divisions and other Staffs (15 per Divi-
sion) and two to each Battalion Staff. Detachments are also formed
from the Landsturm for service on the lines of communication and
to complete the Elite and Landwehr.
35. There are three Machine Gun Companies, which form part
of the garrisons of the fortresses. On the march the guns and
carriages are carried by men whose kits are distributed among
their comrades.
36. The Supply Service, or Army Service Corps, is organized in
companies {Compagnies d;administration), of which eight belong to-
the Elite and eight to the Landwehr. Each company includes 21
bakers and 11 butchers. The transport is found by the Train. To
each company in the Field Army is allotted one detachment (Elite)..
Each of the four Army Corps has a Supply Detachment included
in the Corps Troops, composed of a staff and two of the companies
of the Elite, to which are attached a staff and two train sections.
Each detachment carries 40 ovens, capable of baking 24,000 rations,
of bread in 24 hours.
37. The officers of the Medical Corps are drawn from medical
men practising in the country, who are liable to serve in the Army
for the same period as other men. Care is taken that only trust-
worthy men are enlisted in the corps, which includes a separate body
of apothecaries, who rank as officers. Officers and men are
instructed in infantry drill, pitching and administration of field
hospitals; lectures are delivered to officers on field routine, surgery,
&c. (For periods of training see Appendix III.)
The medical officers have complete control of their own units
and of the transport -assigned to the corps.
38. The medical units of the Elite consist of twelve field hos-
pitals, each consisting of a staff and three or four ambulances with
Transport detachments, supplied by the Army train.
39. One Field Hospital (Korps Lazaret), consisting of a staff and
four ambulances with transport (Landwehr), forms part of the Corps
Troops of each Army Corps and one Field Hospital (Division
Lazaret), consisting of a staff and three ambulances with transport
(Landwehr), is allotted to each division. Medical officers and
orderlies are also attached to units of Cavalry, Artillery, Engineers,
and Infantry.
* SChmidt-Bubin, calibre -295 inches, sighted to 1,312 yards, charger contains 6 rounds.


For lines of communication and base the following units are
formed by the Landwehr:—
16 Ambulances.
3 Medical Trains, each capable of carrying 200 sick and
wounded by rail.
5 Transport Columns.
8 Hospital Sections, each of which is sufficient for a hospital
of 200 beds.
40. Under the new organization the auxiliary services include
the following:—
(V) Military Justice.
(b) Chaplains—attached to units according to the dominant
sect.
( c ) Field Posts and Telegraphs.
( d ) Lines of Communication and Railways.
(e) Territorial Service, charged with local defensive opera-
tions outside the range of the Field Army.
(/) Staff Secretariat (N.C.O.’s).
(g) Soldier servants —for care of horses, arms, and equip-
ment of mounted officers. Soldier servants are in-
structed with the train.
(h) Motor Service.
(j) Military Police.
The two latter are innovations.
The Unarmed Landsturm will in future be organized to carry out
the duties assigned to it.
ARMS AND EQUIPMENT.
41. Arms, corps equipment, that is, guns, carriages, harness, &c.,
and all other war materiel are supplied by the Confederation. Per-
sonal equipment, as prescribed by the Federal Regulations, is sup-
plied by Cantons. The Cantons receive an indemnity fixed by
Parliament for supplying, replacing, and storing personal equip-
ment. They are bound to keep a year’s supplies on hand, and the
Confederation to maintain sufficient ammunition for a campaign.
42. Arms and personal equipment are issued to soldiers by the
Cantons. Free issues are made at the beginning or during the school
of recruits, i.e., when the man first joins for service. He keeps his
arms and equipment in his own possession throughout his service,
at the end of which time they become his property. They cannot
be seized, and may not be pawned or sold.
Officers provide their own uniform, towards the cost of which
the Confederation gives them an allowance as well as supplying free
arms and saddlery.
43. Corps equipment is stored at the place , of assembly of the
unit. A distinct place is assigned for the storage of the equipment
of each staff and unit.
44. All arms and personal equipment are inspected every year.
The arms and equipment of N.C.O’s. and men called out for training
are inspected by the officers during the School or Course. In the'


case of N.C.O’s. and men who do not attend a training the inspec-
tions are made in the Communes by the District Commandants
('Commandants d’arrondissement) . For attendance at these inspec-
tions, which are obligatory, men receive neither pay nor subsistence.
45. In order to insure that war materiel is properly stored, com-
plete and ready for rapid mobilization, the corps equipment of
squadrons, batteries, and battalions of infantry is inspected every
two years by the Commanding Officers, and the remainder of the
war materiel by the Chiefs of Services or officers appointed by
them.
RECRUITING.
46. About 30,000 men become liable for service every year. All
have to be examined, and each one found fit to serve has to be assigned
to an arm or department, according to his qualifications and the
military needs of the moment. The duty of seeing that no man
evades his military obligations, either to serve or to pay the military
tax, falls upon the Cantons, who keep, under the supervision of the
Federal authorities, the rolls or registers of those who become
liable to serve as well as of those serving. These rolls, which form the
basis of the military control, are in charge of the District* Com-
mandants ( Commandants d’arrondissement).
47. The arrangements for recruiting, which generally begins in
August, and is finished by the end of October, are as follows:
A field officer is appointed by the Military Department to supervise
the recruiting in each of the eight Divisional Districts. He
is assisted by the Principal Medical Officer of the Division, a
schoolmaster, and five clerks (three permanent). The District
Commandants and Chefs de Section in his district and two clerks are
placed at his disposal by the Cantonal authorities.
48. The recruiting officer, after consulting the Cantonal officers,
submits for the approval of the Military Department a list of dates
and places for recruiting. The places (usually school houses, mayor’s
offices, &c.—hotels may only be chosen in exceptional cases), are
fixed so that recruits can leave their homes, be examnied, and return
the same day. Not more than 100 men can be examined in one day
at the same place.
After the scheme has been approved, and shortly before the time
for recruiting arrives, the call to recruits is issued by the Cantonal
authorities by means of posters, notices in the press, &c.
49. There are three examinations—
(l) Literary.
(2) Medical.
(3) Physical capacity.
The literary examination includes reading, writing, a little
arithmetic, and the geography and constitution of the country.
It is largely oral, and uniformity is insured by conferences
of the examiners held every three pears. Men who fail have to
attend night schools in their own time until they report for duty.
This examination serves as a test of the educational system.
* The districts formed for different purposes have been described in paragraph 9.


The gymnastic tests were first instituted in 1904, and are now
compulsory for all recruits. They consist of jumping, weight lifting,
and running 88 yards against time. The published results afford
proof of the physical superiority of the recruits who belong to
gymnastic societies, and are said to have caused increased interest in
gymnastics throughout the country.
The medical examination is carried out by three military doctors,
who divide the examinees into three classes —
(a) Fit for service.
(b) Fit for complementary services (Unarmed Landsturm).
(c) Unfit.
The decision as to fitness may, however, be postponed for two
years. Men placed in classes ( h ) and (c) have to pay the military
tax. Those forming class (a) are posted to an arm of the service
and given their livret de service or soldier’s small book, in which is
recorded the results of their examination. Their first act of mili-
tary service is now completed, and they return home.
50. Somewhat elaborate arrangements have to be made by the
Chiefs of Arms, Cantonal, and other authorities concerned to insure
that the several arms and departments receive their due proportion
of recruits. The occupations and physical capacities of recruits
mainly determine the arm to which they are posted, but to some
extent the preferences of the recruits are consulted. Men who wish
to serve in the Cavalry have to inform the District Commandant
of their desire before August and produce evidence of being able
to keep a horse.
51. The livret de service deserves more than passing mention.
It is the legal evidence that a man has performed his military obliga-
tions either in personal service or by paying the military tax. It
also contains records of promotion, list of equipment, and particulars
of the horses of those serving.
Any man who wishes to go abroad for more than two months
during the years he is liable to serve or to pay the military tax
must obtain leave from the competent military authorities, and have
it recorded in his livret de service. Before a man moves from
one Commune to another he must report his departure to the Chef
de Section , and within four days of his arrival at his new place of
residence, he must get the Chef de Section of that place to record the
fact in his livret de service.
Failure to comply with these Regulations renders him liable to
punishment.
TRAINING.
52. The number of Infantry recruits enlisted in each year from <
1896 to 1905 was on the average nearly 13,000. The arrangements
for training so large a number of men necessarily had to be done
systematically, i.e., the men had to come up for training when called
upon, and not when it suited their personal convenience.
In every Divisional District three schools of recruits, about 500
men each, are held annually between March and July. #


53. Recruits are' quartered in barracks. The barracks at Berne
are of stone, and contain sleeping rooms (24 men to a room), officers’
and N.C.O’s. messes, good bath-rooms, lecture-rooms, and an infirmary
on the top floor. These barracks belong to the Canton, and the
Federal Government pays rent for each man; the stables belong,
however, to the Confederation.
54. A week before recruits arrive the cadre of the school reports
for duty—this numbers from 130 to 150 officers and N.C.O’s. of the
Militia, many of whom have been recently promoted. It practically
forms a battalion without privates. The cadre is put through a
week’s instruction under permanent instructors. When the recruits
arrive they are organized in companies, sections, and squads, the
officers and N.C.O’s. being found by the cadre.
The instruction progresses from recruit drill to company and
battalion exercises, marches increase in length, and towards the end
of the course two nights are spent in bivouac. Particular stress is
laid on absolute steadiness when at “ Attention,” and exactness and
precision in handling arms. Recruits have to work eight hours a
day on an average; only one and a half days’ leave is allowed, and
some lectures are attended on Sundays.
55. The 42 # days are divided into three periods—
-Ist. Recruit and section drill, about .. 4% weeks.
2nd. Company drill „ .. 1 week.
3rd. Battalion drill „ .. 1 week.
The course comprises practical instruction in gymnastics, signal-
ling, guards and outposts, construction of trenches, entraining,
camps and bivouacs, and tactical exercises.
The instruction in musketry includes estimation of distances up
to 600 yards. Each recruit is allowed 90 rounds of blank and 200
rounds of ball cartridge. The latter are divided into 15 for pre-
paratory, 80 for individual, and 105 for collective fire. All practice
except preliminary is carried out in full marching order. Every
man has a small book in which is entered the result of each round
he fires.
Recruits are taught to march at the rate of 2% miles per hour
(including ten minutes halt), and for short distances, from 6 to
9 miles, at three and one-third miles per hour. During the last period
the school is taken into the country for three days, one of which
is occupied in a march of from 20 to 25 miles.
Besides the outdoor work, recruits are taught to keep their kits
and arms clean and in good order, to cook, the duties of a soldier
when not embodied, theory of musketry, the military regulations,
and are given some notion of hygiene.
At the conclusion of the school the men are sent home and later
posted to a battalion. Their military work for the year is finished.
Their pay during the course is a little less than sd. per day.
The schools for cavalry, artillery, and other arms are carried out
on the same principles, but are longer. (See Appendix III.)
* In future 65 days.


56. Men who, during their recruits’ course, have been noted for
promotion have the fact noted in their livrets de service , and
their names are forwarded to Head-quarters. These men subse-
quently have to attend a N.C.O’s. course of four weeks (proposed
to be reduced to three weeks). This course is conducted by per-
manent officers assisted by ten or twelve of last year’s sergeants and
corporals. During this course, which includes field training and
musketry practice, each member commands a squad and section,
drills the other men, and is drilled by them. Those who pass are
made corporals, and will then have to do a recruit course as one of
a cadre or may be sent to the officers’ school.
57. Under the law of 1874 men of the Elite were called out every
second year for annual trainings or repetition courses, which lasted
for sixteen days, and in the Landwehr for five days. Every second
occasion on which the Infantry were called out the time was devoted
principally to the details of company and battalion training, includ-
ing musketry, carried out under the direction of the Officer Com-
manding the Regiment. It concluded with regimental manoeuvres
on a small scale. At the alternate trainings the work took the form
of grand manoeuvres, the time for detailed instruction was reduced,
and musketry was not attempted.
58. Thus every year the annual training of the units composing
one Army Corps consists of Grand Manoeuvres. All carriages and
equipment required for active service are brought out on these
occasions, and the troops are detailed by the military authorities
precisely as they would be in war. This has the advantage of
insuring that the gear is kept constantly in a serviceable condition,
and the employment of full equipment is of the greatest value from
an instructional point of view. The first week of the training
is spent in company and battalion work; the remainder of
the time in manoeuvres of brigade against brigade, succeeded
by division against division, and during the last two or
three days the whole Army Corps manoeuvres against a Manoeuvre
Division formed of troops from another corps. The whole
concludes with a grand review on the last day. In 1906, after the
Grand Manoeuvres had finished, Cavalry manoeuvres took place,
in which the whole of the available cavalry took part. Sixty thou-
sand men took part in the various manoeuvres.
During manoeuvres troops are free to move everywhere except
in vineyards. Free use is made of any materials that come to hand.
The scaffolding of a house in course of construction has been used
to build a bridge. Indeed, one of the most striking features
of the manoeuvres was the way in which troops cut down hedge?
and dug trenches on private property. The review in 1906 on the
last day was held on a cultivated plain.
59. Schools and courses are inspected as follows:
(1) Repetition courses by the immediate superior of the .Com-
mander of the Course.
(2) Exercises directed by Army Corps Commanders or by
Chiefs of Services—by the Head of the Military De-
partment.
(3) Other schools by an Army Corps or Divisional Commander
or Head of Service appointed by the Department.


Proposed Number of Days Training.
Number of
School.
Attended by—
Infantry,
Cavalry,
Portress.
Artillery
and En-
gineers.
Train.
A.S.C.,
Medical,
Veterinary.
Officers
and N.C.O.’s
attending
in 1905.
Officers’
School
All N.C.O.’s qualify-
ing for commissions
80
105
60
45
310
Central
School I.
All Lieutenants and
1st Lieutenants be-
fore promotion and
Adjutants
30
30
202
Central
School II.
All Captains before
promotion
50
50
As others or
in a special
school
61
School.
Attended by—
Length
of
Course.
Remarks.
Number of
Officers
attending
in 1904.
Staff School I. *
Officers qualifying
days.
70
School is divided
21f
Staff School II.
for General Staff
appointments
Captains of General
42
into two parts
21
Staff School III.
Staff
Officers who have
21
15
passed Schools I.
and II.
TRAINING OF OFFICERS.
60. In the Swiss Army all officers pass through the ranks, and the
foundation of their training as officers is given in the Officers’
School.
The following table gives particulars of schools attended by all
officers:—
SCHOOLS FOR TRAINING OFFICERS.
For number of days in each school under existing organization,
see tables in Appendix 111.
Central School 1. —Instruction consists of theoretical instruction
for the command of a unit. The time has been shortened from 42
to 30 days, as it is expected that officers will join better trained
than formerly.
Central School ll.—Affords instruction in the duties of Field
Officers. The time is extended from 42 to 50 days, and after this
school no further theoretical teaching will be given to the higher
leaders. The school may be divided into two parts.
61. The following table gives particulars of schools for training
officers of the General Staff:—
* The cost per officer varies from about 255. to 325. per diem,
t First part—six weeks.


62. It is recognised that manoeuvres alone do not afford suffi-
cient instruction for the higher Commanders and their Staffs. It is
therefore prescribed that tactical and strategical exercises, staff
rides, &c. (lasting for eleven days each) shall take place periodically.
The courses for the Command Staffs take place every two years,
under the direction of the Commander of the Army Corps and Divi-
sional Commander alternately. The strategical exercises, attended
by Army Corps and Divisional Commanders with their Chiefs of
Staff and others, take place every two years under the direction of
an officer appointed by the Military Department.
63. The responsibility for the efficient training of each arm rests
upon the Chief of the Arm. The permanent instructors are respon-
sible for the instruction in the Officers’ and N.C.O’s. Schools and
Schools of Recruits, though the actual drilling in recruit schools is
done by Militia Officers and N.C.O’s., who are called up periodically
for the purpose. The Militia Officers are responsible for the Field
training of their own units.
64. The permanent instructors, who number about 230 officers,
are appointed from the Militia Lieutenants, and generally serve as
officers for a year in some foreign Army. The Cavalry and Artillery
instructors usually serve in the German Army.
Up to the present a certain number, not exceeding one-quarter,
may hold commands in addition to their instructional appointments,
and draw the double pay. Having only to criticise and rarely to
command, they tended to become doctrinaires, consequently the
restriction in the number that can be incorporated in the Army is
to be abolished, and all will be put on the same footing as other
officers.
PREPARATORY INSTRUCTION.
65. From the age of ten until they leave school all boys are com-
pelled to go through a course of gymnastics under their schoolmasters.
There exist some voluntary Cadet Corps composed of boys from
eleven to sixteen, in which setting up and marching drills and some
exercises in the manual of arms are given. Each Corps adopts its
own simple and inexpensive uniform, the State furnishes a rifle and
ammunition for target practice, which generally takes place on
Sunday; one or more Army Officers act as instructors, and the State
gives a grant of 4s. per member when shooting is favorably reported
on. In 1905 there were 53 Corps with 6,838 cadets; the number who
earned the grant (£642) was 3,208.
66. The law of 1874 provided that from the time lads leave
school until they are twenty years old they should go on with
gymnastic instruction and begin musketry; it was found impossible
to enforce this, and it has been given up.
A Swiss officer of experience says:—“ Most of the boys leave
school at about 15 to take up a trade or some sort of occupation.
• If then they are to go on receiving military
instruction, they must be taken for it on Sunday, the only day they
have free. Is it wise, considering their age and need for plenty of
relaxation, to compel them to give up so much? Is it worth while,
for the sake of a few exercises, to run the risk of giving some of
them a regular distaste for the real military service which is to
come? A long experience in these matters has taught us that mili-
tary exercises, unless carried out in barracks or a camp, and in some
properly-organized unit under strict discipline, are generally value-
less, if not positively harmful, and that it is much better to give them


np altogether. In certain districts, it is. true, military societies
have been formed with the object of carrying out voluntarily the
provisions of the law and an official programme has been adopted.
There is nothing in the least unpleasant about this, as no one need
go on with the work when he begins to find it irksome. Such
is the general opinion in Switzerland, though there are some
dissenters from that view. We can at any rate agree that some
obligatory musketry drill before the regular recruit training would
be very useful and would not entail any great inconvenience.”
The official programme (1898) of the voluntary military societies
is as follows:
Hours.
Gymnastics and school of soldier with and without
arms . . .. . . . . 28
Instruction in arms, practice and theory of
musketry .. .. .. 16
Estimation of distances .. .. . . 3
Simple drill .. .. .. .. .. 3
50
The Confederation provides free rifles, belts, pouches, and as far
as possible exercise blouses, for which the societies are responsible.
The number who began the courses in 1905 was 6,800, and who
finished, 6,093. The estimated cost for 1906 was £5,600, and £1,600
for instruction of masters in gymnastics.
Though obligatory preparatory military training has been aban-
doned, yet the Federal Government is prepared to assist all voluntary
effort aiming at physical development and training to arms. It is
particularly desired to improve the physical training and shooting;
and for the former purpose courses of instruction in gymnastics are
provided.
RIFLE CLUBS.
67. Rifle shooting, which has often been described as the national
sport of Switzerland, is encouraged by the Military Department
mainly by small grants to Rifle Clubs. The amount granted is
determined by the number of members, who fire certain series laid
down in an official programme. One of the series is that prescribed
for soldiers who, being unable from any cause to complete their
musketry course with their units, are compelled to carry out their
obligatory practice with a Rifle Club.
68. Rifle Clubs are under military supervision. For this purpose
the military authorities in each Canton appoint a committee of three
to seven members, whose president is always an officer of the Elite
or Landwehr, and the Federal authorities appoint a field officer to
each Divisional District. The functions of the committees are to
examine the by-laws of the clubs before the Cantonal authorities
approve of them, to report on ranges, assist the clubs, check their
returns and reports of practice, and supervise the practices for which
grants are claimed.
69. The cost of targets and butts are borne by the clubs, but the
Communes, under the law of 1874, are bound to provide ranges up
to 320 yards. For ranges from 320 to 540 yards several Communes
may find a common range, provided that it is not more than 4% miles
from the centre of each of the Communes interested.


70. No club with less than ten members can obtain a grant and
shooting has to be done with service arms.
A noticeable feature of the general rules for the regulation of
rifle shooting consists in the various precautions to prevent accidents
and to insure that the firers do not adopt aids that are impossible
in war.
All firing is done under the orders of a fire commander, who is
usually a member of the Rifle Club Committee, but if there are no
trained officers or N.C.O’s. available, a member of the Cantonal
Committee may act. The rifle may not be loaded until the firer is
in position before the target, and magazines may only be charged
when prescribed.
Only the firing sections and officials in charge are allowed at the
firing points, and on completing a practice the rifle of each firer is
examined. Irregularities on the part of scorers and markers, or any
infraction of the regulations render a club liable to lose its subsidy.
Members of rifle clubs are assured against accidents while
parrying out practices, provided the accident is not due to any
infraction of the rules on the part of the person injured.
71. The targets used are shown in the following diagrams:—
A.— Bull’s Eye Target.
Of white paper, with black bull’s eye, having a white inner circle
and two black outer circles.
Scoring'.
Hit on inner bull’s eye .. .. .. .. 4 points.
„ outer „ .. .. .. .. 3 „
~ inner white ring .'. . . .. .. 2 ~
• „ outer „ .. .. .. 1 „
„ remainder of target .. .. .. 0


No.
Position.
Range.
Target.
Points.
Hits.
1
Kneeling
Yards.
328
A
9
4
2
Lying
437
A
7
3
3
Standing
328
A
6
3
4
Lying
328
B
8
4
No.
.
Position.
Range.
Target.
Shots.
1
Single shots
Kneeling
Yards.
328
B
5
•2
Standing
328
B
5
3*
Magazine Fire ..
Kneeling
328
B
10
B.— Head and Shoulder Target.
Of grey paper, with two black circles. A head and shoulders figure
is pasted in the inner circle, touching the upper edge.
Scoring.
Hit on figure .. .. .. .. .. 3 points.
~ inner circle .. .. .. .. 2 „
„ outer „ .. .. .. .. 1 „
72. The conditions in the 1906 programme were that when the
required number of points and hits shown below were obtained in
five consecutive shots, or eight shots had been fired, the man passed
on to the next series. This constituted the obligatory practice, and
every member who completed it earned for his club a grant of
Is. 2fd.
73. The Voluntary Practice consisted of the following three series.
Every member who fired the three series earned for his club the
grant of Is. 2§d.: —
* Time, 1 minute.


Series.
No. of
Members.
Grant.
Amount.
Obligatory
144,344
Is. 2-fd.
£8,661
Voluntary
78,443
Is. 2fd.
4,707
Pistol
805
2s. 44d.
97
Field Firing*
1,863
150
Total Grant
£13,615
74. The grant (2s. 4fd.) for pistol or revolver practice may he
earned by—
(a) All officers.
( b) N.C.O’s. not armed with rifles.
(c) Soldiers armed with revolvers by the Confederation.
The conditions are that 60 rounds must be fired—3o at ranges
from 30 to 60 metres at a target similar to but smaller than the
“A ” target, and the other 30 at any target whatever. The member
must also take part as a member of a Rifle Club in at least two days’
practice.
75. The Field Firing practice is carried out by groups or sections
at unknown ranges against targets representing lines of men kneel-
ing, heads and shoulders, and heads. Special subsidies are granted
for completing this practice, and the committees are enjoined to
assist the clubs in organizing these tactical exercises.
76. The results of practice in 1905 were as follows:
Number of clubs claiming grants .. .. 3,694
Total membership . . .. .. 220,147
Other estimated expenses for 1906 were as follows:
Loss on sale of rifle ammnnitionf .. £27,300
Loss on sale of pistol ammunition .. 640
Commission to vendors .. .. .. 2,500
Carriage .. .. .. .. 600
£31,040
MOBILIZATION.
77. Mobilization, which is a somewhat misundersood term, means
completing a unit to its war establishment in men, horses, vehicles,
and other materiel.
As units of the Swiss Army have only one establishment the
Army is always at war strength. The troops are strictly localized,
and every man keeps his arms and personal equipment in his own
Possession. Mobilization is therefore simple and expeditious. It
takes one day for Infantry and two for Artillery—probably no Army
m the world can mobilize as quickly.
f * 33 clubs.
to m ttplfiiT ted I ? l,mber . of rounds, 19,500,000. Cost price, £i 12s. per 1,000, less 4s. per 1,000 owing
o material becoming- available by packets containing 60 cartridges in place of 10; sale price, £2.


78. The following notes were made when watching the mobiliza-
tion for manoeuvres of part of the IV. Division at Lucerne.
Notices giving the place, date, and hour of assembly of each
unit, with special instructions to meet special cases, were posted up-
in every town and village of the districts concerned. They were also
published in the press. It is the duty of soldiers living abroad or
in other centres to keep themselves informed of any official publica-
tion that concerns them.
The place appointed for one of the battalions was a street oppo :
site a school, in which in the event of war the men would have been
billeted, but on that occasion they were billeted in stables.
At 9 a.m. on the day fixed the men joined in complete service
marching order, ammunition excepted.
Three operations were performed—
(l) All men were medically . examined. Those who were
excused as medically unfit drew their travelling allow-
ances and immediately returned home.
(2) Regimental equipment was drawn. As soon as the
vehicles were loaded with proper equipment and
harness they were removed from stores by hand.
(3) Deficiencies were replaced. -
Kits were laid out on the pavement and inspected. Deficiencies
were made good at the expense of the man if the loss was due to
his fault, otherwise at the expense of the Government.
The tunics in which the men arrived were exchanged for exercise
blouses, the tunics being sent to the place where the review would
take place on the last day of the manoeuvres. Rations were issuedj
the Commandant de place being responsible for three days’ rations
being available.
In response to notices, similar to those issued in the case of the
men, draught horses for hire were brought by their owners to the
places appointed for examination by Veterinary Boards, who esti-
mated the value of the horses. The horses were again valued at the
conclusion of the manoeuvres. It was stated there was no difficulty in
getting horses which were of good stamp and well groomed. The
cost of hiring is about 4s. per day.
In the afternoon the colours were issued from the arsenal with
full honours, and by 4 p.m. the battalions were ready to march out
completely organized and equipped for war.
79. Another illustration of the rapidity and efficiency of the
system of mobilization was afforded when troops were called out
during some anarchist riots in 1906. The Cantonal authorities,
without reference to the Federal Government or Military Depart-
ment, called out a squadron and an infantry regiment. The order,
which was a complete surprise to the troops, was issued in the morn-
ing, and by 4 p.m. the entire cavalry squadron, and over 70 per cent,
of the infantry stood on the barrack square. On the following
morning over 87 per cent, were present.


COST OF THE ARMY.
80. The military expenditure of the Cantons is not known; but
in 1901 it was estimated to be from £120,000 to £200,000. The Federal
Military Estimates of Expenditure for 1906 amounted to £1,306,620,
so that the total expenditure for 1906 may be roughly put at
£1,500,000.
The military revenue derived from profits of manufacturing
establishments, sale of horses, old arms, and other sources amounted
to £60,066, and the military tax brought. £82,000 to the Federal
Government, and a like amount to the Cantons.
81. The following table shows the Federal Military Estimates of
Expenditure for the year 1906:
FEDERAL MILITARY ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURE, 1906.
Administration (a) —
Pay and allowances and office ex-
penses, Head-quarters and Secre-
tariat .. .. .. .. .. £49,871
Recruiting .. .. .. .. .. 5,200
Instruction—
(i.) Army—
Instructors (pay and allowances
and office expenses) .. .. £57,414
Recruit courses (pay,* allowances,
and subsistence) .. .. 200,554
Repetition courses (pay, allowances,
and subsistence)'!' .. .. 262,550
Officers’ and N.C.O.’s courses (pay,
allowances, and subsistence) .. 93,526
Manoeuvres, expenses in con-
nexion therewith .. .. 8,000
Total Instruction of army .. .. £622,044
(ii.) Non-army— .
Preparatory .. .. .. £5,600
Gymnastics .. .. .. 1,600
Cadets ( b) .. .. .. 720
Total Preparatory .. .. .. 7,920
Total Expenditure in Instruction .. .. £629,964
Carried forward .. .. .. £685,035
(a) Includes inspection of troops and materiel (£1,120) and office expenses for Com-
manders of Army Corps, Divisions, and Fortresses.
(b) Grant of 4s. per head.
* For rates of pay, see Appendix V.
t Annual trainings.


Brought forward .. .. . • £685,035
Rifle Clubs (c) .. .. .. £44,652
Other Clubs ( d ) .. .. .. 4,520
.. 49,172
Maintenance —
Clothing (e) .. .. •• £177,366
Arms and equipment (/) . • 60,085
War materiel (g) .. .. 95,404
Administration of forage stores .. 1,400
Cavalry remounts (h) .. .. 117.183
Horse depot (Regie) (j) .. .. 3,968
.. £455,406
Fortresses (&) .. .. .. • • • • 60,066
Contingencies—
Topographical Department (l .. £18,209
Committees and experts .. 600
Administration of Landsturm .. 1,280
Printing .. . • • • 4,400
Compassionate allowances .. 1,600
Pensions (m) .. • • 30,752
Unforeseen .. .. • • 100
.. 56,941
Total £1,306,620
(c) For details see para. 76.
(d) Pontoon, Medical (Red Cross, Samaritan Association, &c.), Cavalry, Pigeon and
Aero Clubs.
(e) £101,321 for equipment of recruits ; outfit varies according to arm—from £6 to
£B. Uniform allowance and articles issued to officers, £19,690.
(/) Small arms, £45,816.
(g) Maintenance and Assurance, £31,520 ; New Material, £28,158 ; Material for
Instruction, £4,420.
( h ) See para. 18.
(j) Amount by which expenditure mentioned in para. 87 exceeds receipts—the
principal items being horse hire, £18,240 ; sales to officers, £3,200.
(k) Includes administration (pay and allowances) and construction.
(l) See para. 88.
(m) Temporary injury, £16,600; permanent injury, £10,072; pensions, £4,080.


Arm.
Number
Estimated
Tq.tal
Cost.
Horses.
of Men.
Man per
Diem.
of Days.
Total Cost
per Man.
Number.
Number
of
Days.
Cost per
Horse per
Diem.
Total Cost.
s. d.
£ s. d.
£
s. d.
£
Infantry
Field Artillery
11,000
1,720
3 4J
7 5i
47i
58
Recruits.
7 19 7
21 11 6i
87,780
37,111
( 1,109
1 1,037
55
28
2 111
2 in
1
/
13,325
Infantry
Field Artillery
36,500
1,200
2 10|
5 4i
18i
13
Annual T't
2 13 3i
3 9 8
raining.
97,236
4,181
1,000
13
4 0
2,600
82. The following table shows further details of the cost of training
ESTIMATED COST OF TRAINING in 1906.
C 0.,., Med . ca Cost gaming recruits of other arms is as follows :-Cavalry, 7s. OJd.; Engineers, 3s. 10*4;
Engineers, 3s'. 8R ; Medital ss. 1R! Suppty, * W- 1
£l*sB6 MO ‘rtf' e *P. enditure for this 7 ear amounts to £1,640,000, and the net Federal
the MaTcosMo bestated. 18 ‘° f 86 ’ 000 ' abo ™
C. 1]226.
B


84. It is estimated that under the new law the annual expenditure
will be increased by the following amounts
Administration . . . • • • .. ,£1,200
Officers’ horse allowance and forage .. , 6,800
Instruction^ —
Recruit schools . . . • £48,000
Repetition courses . . . . 40,000
Officers’and N.C.O’s. courses .. 12,000
Preparatory • .. • .. 4,000 !
£104,000
War material (due to increased wear and :
tear) . . • • • • • - 4,000
Assistance to men called out for training (see'i
para. 99) .. •• •• • • f 12,000
Loss of revenue due to military tax ceasing at 40;
Total .. • • • • • • £128,000
85. It may be pointed out that although the military: expenditure
in countries with voluntary military systems affords a measure of the
military burden, in countries where compulsory universal service
obtains it is misleading, for the soldier’s pay does not recompense
him for his loss of time, and employers and those depending on his
labour receive no recompense whatever.
MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS.
86. The Topographical Service is in charge of the trigonometrical
survey of the country, and produces excellent maps for both military
and civil purposes, which are on sale to the public.
The cost of the Department is £lB,OOO per annum, oi which nearly
£ll,OOO goes in salaries for the staff, which numbers 66. In 1905
nearly 400,000 maps were sold, and 29,000 issued free.
87. The R6gie des chevaux, or Horse Depot at Thun provides in
peace horses for manoeuvres, for officers attending schools of equita-
tion, and other instructional courses, and, in case of war, horses for
General and Staff Officers and Infantry Field Officers who do not
happen to have their own. The horses in the Regie are not used for
Cavalry, who have their own remount depot. (See para,. J b.)
The Staff numbers ten, and consists of a director, assistant
director, veterinary officer, and two assistants, two ri( i m J? masters, an
accountant, and two clerks. There is an auxiliary sta o trainers,
saddlers, &c., which numbers 34, and grooms" at the rate of one to
every six or eight horses. . . , , „ AA .
The cost of the Establishment, which maintains about 700 horses,
is £31.000 per annum. The receipts from sale and hire of horses
and other sources amount to £27,000, leaving net cost about £4,000.
The principal items of estimated expenditure for 1906 were,
roughly— £lO 000
Salaries and wages . • • * Q ’ QAA
Forage ... ••• ••• B,bOU
90 remounts at £6B .. • •
30 remounts at £52 .. • * ,0
* A groom costs about 3s. sd. a daj ■


The horses (unbroken) are usually bought abroad; generally
3 years old; but 4 years old are preferred.
For the first three months, while being acclimatised, they usually
run on grass during the day and are stabled at night; they are
groomed and fed on corn.
They are first broken to harness alongside an old horse, and
three months later to saddle. After eighteen months’ work they are
considered fit for service, and sent to schools or manoeuvres as
required. The training is done by civilians, of whom there are
eighteen. There are three large riding schools in the Rdgie, and
three more in the Artillery barracks.
Eight hundred and seventy-three officers hired horses in 1905,
and equitation courses were held in 26 places.
! ' ‘ • ■ \ [ .
MILITARY MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS.
88. The following table gives the main particulars of the dif-
ferent manufacturing establishments.
In. addition to the establishments shown in the table, there is an
establishment for carrying out the proof of ammunition and tests of
material, both physical and chemical, and measurement of velocities
and pressures.
B 2


rnniivjuu
Cost.
Nature.
Place.
O a
+»
0
<D
a
-w s'
s” .2
° *
S
bG
o ~o
1
«+H Q
o M
f. b0
>»
cS
Q
Output —Principal Items.
s a
■g.*
ag
be
c8
9
c5
a
Wages.
Interes
Capital
per cen
Depre c
&c.
Materia
Power,
■s'g
o
li
£
£
£
£
£
5. d.
Powder
Worblaufen
75
654
6,000
3,520
20,800
30,974
Tor Artillery, 206,321 lbs. ; for
Infantry, 114,081 lbs. ; for
*
pistol, 465 lbs. ; for machine
guns, 13,429 lbs. ; various, 2,539
lbs.
Ammunition
Thuri
920
777
56,800
5,540
244,883
308,000
303
4 1
34,000,000 rounds S.A.A. ; 118,512
shrapnel for Pie id Artillery;
1,000 rounds for Mountain Ar-
tillery; 8,500 projectiles (4* 7"
and 5’9*)
Ammunition
Altdorf
241
676
12,000
2,428
68,215
83,319
293
3 5
108,000 brass cartridge cases for
Field Artillery; 23,000 Field
Artillery projectiles ; 14,000,000
rounds S.A.A. re-capped
Small Arms
Berne
696
14,560
700
38,944
54,900
7,800 small arms, pistols and revolvers,
sights, and other small parts
Workshops
Thun
431
765
14,766
2,435
46,675
64,641
307}
2 3
331 Artillery waggons, 120 limbers,
87 other vehicles, also wheels and
fittings, &c., for vehicles
Particulars of the Dominion Arsenal at Quebec, which may be of interest for comparison, are given in Appendix IV.
PARTICULARS OF SOME MILITARY MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS.
* Salary of Director, Assistant Director, and Accountant; Office and Travelling Expenses. + Calculated from columns 3,5, and 9.
J j Hours from 6.30 a.m. to 11.45 a.m., and from 1 p.m. to 6.15 p.m.


PART II.-ORGANIZATION OF 1906.
89. The mobilization of 1870—71 clearly showed the defects of
the Swiss military system, and led to the passing of the law of 1874,
which formed the independent and unequal Cantonal contingents,
into a single National Army. With the development of the
Army and improvements in military science, new wants made
themselves felt, and attempts were made to revise the law as
■a whole and bring it into harmony with modern requirements. In
1895 a Bill was passed by both Houses of Parliament, but was
rejected by the people when submitted to a referendum. In conse-
quence, recourse was had to an increasing number of Special Acts,
which made the organization of 1874 so extremely difficult to
interpret that two years later the Federal Council was requested by
Parliament to prepare a revision of the law of 1874, which, besides
codifying the existing laws and regulations, should embody the
changes introduced through the Budget with any other additions
that were necessary. This task, which involved a period of careful
study, was sufficiently advanced by 1903 to permit of a Conference
of the Senior Commanders and Headquarters Staff to discuss the
■details. The proposals adopted, accompanied by explanations, were
published in 1904, and further discussion and information invited.
A second Conference was held in May, 1905, when complete agree-
ment was attained. The proposals were then submitted to the
Committee of National Defence and adopted unanimously in
November, 1905.
90. The debates on the Bill began in the States Council on the
19th, and finished on the 27th June, 1906, when with a few amend-
ments the Bill was passed unanimously. The National Council passed
it with some further amendments in December last, and it was then
referred back to the States Council. The two Chambers have since
reached an agreement, and the Bill will shortly become law, or be
submitted to a referendum.
91. Hitherto the chief obstacle to reform has been the home rule
system of the Cantons; but the sound sense and patriotism of the
people, stimulated by their practical knowledge of the conditions
indispensable to military efficiency, is surely leading to the advice
■of the military and civilian leaders of the country being
accepted. The conviction is penetrating everywhere that an Army
must be directed by one will to the attainment of one object, and
that its peace organization must correspond to its disposition in
war.
92. The difficulty of forming an assemblage of troops of diverse
arms into a single Army was increased by the number of parts (im-
perfectly related) into which the law of 1874 was divided, and by
the number of additional Acts. In the new law all the units are
co-ordinated and dealt with as forming parts of one organic whole.
Special laws will be required only for the military tax, justice, penal
code, and assurance.


93. The chief principles kept in view when framing it were —
(а) The omission of all details liable to change, such as=
Tables of Establishments.
(б) The re-organization of instruction to insure better train-
ing of leaders and troops. This was considered of the
first importance, it being recognised that technical
improvements and advances in military science during
the last 30 years demand more thorough training of
all ranks.
(<?) Extension of the duty imposed on Commanders (Art. 26,
Organization 1874), to co-operate in maintaining the
strength of establishments and the readiness for war
of their commands. This duty had been lost sight of
by the Commanders of troops, who became absorbed
by the new instructional duties imposed on them by the
law of 1874, for before that time the instruction of the
troops was entirely in the hands of the instructors, nor
was the staff so organized as to keep the Administra-
tive and Executive branches in proper touch. The par-
ticular measures proposed, which involved considerable
decentralization, were, however, not approved by the-
States Council.
94. The new law is divided into five parts —
(1) Military Obligations.
(2) Organization of the Army.
(3) Training.
(4) Military Administration.
(5) Active Service.
95. Military Obligations. —The new law precisely defines the extent
of the military obligations of the individual, which has not hitherto
been done, and also the obligations of the Communes and the
Confederation.
96. The obligations of the individual are—
(a) To render personal military service. This includes bear-
ing arms against foreign enemies, maintenance of
internal order, the service of instruction, maintenance
of arms and personal equipment, attending inspections,
obligatory musketry practice, and in general obedience
to military orders applying at times when men are not
embodied.
(b) To pay a military tax* if for any reason he does not
render personal service—this applies to men who are
enlisted but miss serving for a year as well as to all
men who are rejected as recruits.
The obligation lasts for the following periods Personal service
begins on the Ist January of the year in which a man’s 20th birthday
falls, and ceases at the end of the year in which his 48th f birthday
falls (officers 52-t). The military tax is payable from the age of 20
to 40—the year in which the obligation to come out for training
ceases.
* Consists of —
(а) Poll-tax of 4s. lOd. per annum. , , ... ~ ,
(б) Property tax of Is. 3d. (nearly) for every £4O net capital. Property under £4O not taxed,
(c) Income tax of per cent, of net income, less £24. Maximum tax, £l-0.
t Existing law 50th.
J Existing law 55.


It is to be observed that every man in the country who is
physically fit is bound to serve with the few exceptions mentioned
below. He cannot purchase a substitute or pay the tax in place of
serving. Also every one, when offered, is bound to accept promotion,
with its increased obligations.
97. The exemption from personal service are limited to the
following:—
After passing a school of recruits ; (a) Federal Coun-
cillors (Ministers), Chancellor of the Confederation;
( b ) clergymen who are not chaplains ; (c) staffs of
public hospitals and prisons, the police and frontier
guards, officials and employes required for railways, &c.,
in time of war.
During sessions of Parliament members are exempted from the
service of instruction.
98. The existing obligations of the Communes are unaltered,
viz.:—
Communes and citizens are obliged to furnish accommodation
for troops and horses, and places for parking vehicles, and to comply
with requisitions for military transport. For these services they are
compensated by the State.
The Communes are bound to furnish, without payment, places
for recruiting, medical inspection, inspection of arms and equipment,
staff offices, infirmaries, &c., and rifle ranges.
Owners of land cannot prevent it being used for military pur-
poses; but the State is responsible for any damage.
Every ten years, or when necessary, a census of horses is made
by the Communes and Cantons. Owners are obliged, at their own
> cost, to bring their horses to the place of census.
The law further provides that in time of war every citizen
is bound to aid in the defence of the country as far as he is able,
and that when war is imminent every one is bound to place all his
property at the disposition of the Commander of the Troops or
Military Authorities, the Confederation undertaking to compensate
him.
99. If the law imposes obligations on the individual it also im-
poses reciprocal obligations on the State. 1
The soldier, while serving, is entitled to pay, rations, lodging,
and travelling allowance. To insure soldiers feeling confident that
under all circumstances their families will be well looked after it is
enacted that when absent on duty the State must provide such
assistance as will prevent their families becoming destitute. This
assistance is not regarded as charity. The Communes fix the kind
nnd amount of assistance; half the cost is borne by the Confedera-
tion, a quarter by the Cantons, and a quarter by the Communes.
Men who become sick or lose their lives are entitled to compen-
sation for themselves or families. The Confederation is also respon-
sible for the consequences of wounds or death caused on duty; in the
latter case it is responsible to the wife, children, father and mother
of the deceased.


Maximum Age in each Class.
Classes.
Privates,
N.C.O.’s, and
Lieutenants.
Captains.
Above
rank of
Captain.
Remarks.
1. Elite or Auszug
Yrs.
20-32
Yrs.
36
Yrs.
48
N.C.O.’s and men of Cavalry
2. Landwehr ..
3. Landsturm ..
33-40
Private
44
s and '
t
48
•
serve only ten years in
Elite
41-48 ; all Officers to
52
Under the law of 1874 compensation took the form of small
pensions; now officers and men are insured by the State against the-
result of accidents. For this purpose not less than £20,000 is taken
from the revenue every year.
The State has also been accumulating a fund for payment of
pensions that would be incurred in the case of war. This fund in
1902 amounted to £727,987, but it is estimated that £3,000,000 would
be required for this purpose.
ORGANIZATION OF THE ARMY.
100. The basis of the organization of the Army is its division into
classes by age.
By the law of 1874 it was divided into two classes (Elite and
Landwehr), but in course of time four classes were formed, viz.,
Elite, Landwehr, Ist and 2nd ban, and Landsturm (see para. 7).
This was found to be inconvenient, and as the Landwehr and Land-
sturm only trained at long intervals, or not at all, rapid
changes of the personnel destroyed the cohesion of the units, besides
complicating the administration.
The new law divides the Army into three classes as shown in
the following table:—
With their consent Officers may serve when older.
For number of days’ service in each class see Appendix 111.
The changes are —
(a) Adding another year’s class to the Ist ban of the Land-
wehr and absorbing the 2nd ban in the Landsturm,
which will be composed only of men who have served
in the Elite or have shown themselves to have a suffi-
cient practical knowledge of musketry.
( 'b ) The maximum age of the Landsturm has been reduced
by two years, ceasing for soldiers at 48 in place of 50,
and for officers at 52 in place of 55.
(c) To provide more and younger officers for the Landwehr
and Landsturm, the age of subaltern officers in the
Elite has been reduced from 34 to 32, and in order to
compensate for the change captains and field officers,
will be retained longer.


101. Soldiers who have become unfit for service in the Elite and
Landwehr may be incorporated in the Landsturm, and also volun-
teers who are physically fit and have a sufficient knowledge of
musketry.
102. Transfer from one class to another is effected on the 31st
December, but the Federal Council can postpone the date of
transfer in case of menace of war.
In case of war the Landwehr can be called on to complete the
Elite and the Landsturm the Landwehr.
103. The division of the Military Forces into a Field Army and
Fortress Garrisons has already been dealt with, and the composition
of an Army Corps explained. The further changes proposed in the
new law under heading “ Organization ” are not fundamental, but
are of interest in showing the tendency to bring the whole Army
under a single control, and increase its fighting efficiency.
The requirements of discipline and subordination have made clear
that distinctions in rank are necessary, that the commands of Bri-
gades, Divisions, and Army Corps can no longer be held by officers
of the same rank. Gradations in rank for these Commands are
accordingly prescribed, which illustrates the tendency of the Swiss
Army to assimilate itself to the practice of modern armies, though
the States Council struck out the classification of “ General Officer ”
and included all officers from Major upwards under the heading
“Field Officer.”
Another instance of the tendency towards bringing the Armv
under one central authority is the proposal to limit the Cantonal
Troops to Battalions of Fusiliers and Squadrons of Dragoons. All
the Field Artillery Batteries and Companies of Position Artillery will
become Federal troops, at present one-third of the Field Batteries
belong to the Confederation and two-thirds to the Cantons.
ADMINISTRATION.
104. The proposed organization of the Military Department
corresponds on the whole with that laid down in the Federal law of
1901, but the number of sections is reduced to thirteen, and practi-
cally the scope of its business remains in the condition into which it
has developed during the last ten years.


Section.
Head or Chief of Section.
Principal Duties allotted to each Section.
Duties
of Heads of
Sections.
. General Staff
Chief of the General Staff
Mobilization, Intelligence, and War Preparations
generally. Questions relating to National
Defence and the Army as a whole.
d
o
2. Infantry ..
'Chief of the Infantry Arm
O
: <D
§ cc
3. Cavalry
4. Artillery
5. Engineers
6. Fortification
.
Chefs d’arme or
Waffencliefs.
Chief of the Cavalry Arm ..
Chief of the Artillery Arm
Chief of the Engineer Arm..
'‘Chief of Fortifications ,,
-•
All matters affecting their respective Arms.
Administration of Federal units and Staffs
• and Auxiliary Services. Organization and
Training of their Arm, employment of In-
structors, appointments, promotions, dis-
charges' &c.
o o
® ts
£ *
- £
StD M
.a
§ . g
aS <1
Allotment of The following table gives the main outlines of the organization and division of duties in the
duties. Military Department. The total personnel of Head-quarters, exclusive of clerks, exceeds 100 otticers ana
others :
HEAD OF MILITARY DEPARTMENT
(or Minister). i-
Secretariat.


7.
Medical Department
Principal Medical Officer
Includes Military Insurance '
Xfl
PH
<D
„ *6
® p
8.
Veterinary Depart-
Same duties for
-4— >
c3
n3 m
PH 0>
Principal Veterinary Officer
Instruction of Farriers
their re spec-
a
"cs
d
ment
tive Depart-
P
o
P
52
9.
Commissariat
ments as the
Ph
.2 W
Chief Commissary
Pay and Subsiste-nce, Maga-
Chiefs of
£
zines, Barracks, and Print-
Arms
r c3
bn d
mg J
° ® £
§■« 4
10.
Manufacturing De-
Chief of the Technical Section
Manufacture of War Materiel, Manufacturing
Ph
< HH HH
o o
partments
and Experimental Establishments and proof
P
p p
grounds. Delivers to Administrative Section
c3
‘•+H *4h
War Materiel manufactured
m
PH
PH PH
11.
Administration of War
Chief of the Administrative Section
Storage and issue of War Materiel, including
ph
pH
Ph Ph
<D o
PH PH
Ph Ph
Materiel
personal equipment received from Technical
Section. Federal Magazines for all explosives
r*H
PI CO
'
and supervises Cantonal Magazines
12.
Topographical
Chief of the Topographical Service
See para. 86
1.3.
Horse Depot
Director of Regie
See para. 87


105. Hitherto the Secretariat has formed a distinct section of the-
Military Department; hnt in future it will be merely the office of the
Head of the Department and have no business functions of its own.
106. It has been found that the sphere of action assigned to the
Chief of the General Staff under the law of 1874 was too restricted.
It is now proposed that certain duties formerly allotted to the Chief
of Infantry shall he transferred to the General Staff, so that its
range of action shall be commensurate with its proper responsibili-
ties in preparing the Army for war. The duties will be —
(1) Mobilization and concentration of the Army for war and
general preparations for war.
(2) Reports and proposals relating to questions of national
defence, the Army as a whole, and the Army Staff.
(3) Manoeuvres of Divisions and Army Corps and exercises
of-the superior staffs.
(4) Organization and direction of schools and courses for
officers of the General Staff and posting officers of the
General Staff to units.
(5) Railways, lines of communication, field posts and tele-
graphs, and instruction of the personnel of these
services.
(6) Intelligence relating to Switzerland and foreign coun-
tries, including military geography.
(7) Administration of Military Library and maps and pre-
paration of military maps.
The General Staff consists of the Chancery and five sections each
under a permanent officer —(1) Intelligence; (2) General Staff;
(3) Mobilization; (4) Geographical; and (5) Railways.
A certain number of Militia Officers qualified for the General
Staff are called every year by roster to work in the office of the
General Staff. Appointments to the General Staff are made from
Captains and Ist Lieutenants who have qualified for promotion to
Captain, and have passed Staff School I. (para. 61).. In order to
enlarge the field of selection it is proposed that Captains who have
been noted as fit for the General Staff at Central School 11. while
remaining in their own branch of the service may, after passing the
second part of Staff School 1., be attached to the General Staff. For
instruction of General Staff see para. 61. In order that General
Staff Officers may keep in practice it is also proposed that they
shall he given an opportunity in each rank of commanding a unit.
107. A Committee of National Defence, consisting of the Head
of the Military Department (Minister) as President, the Comman-
ders of Army Corps, the Chief of the General Staff, and the Chief
of Infantry is appointed to consider all important questions affecting
the defence of the country, and to make recommendations for
appointment, promotion, and retirement of Field Officers. When
appointments of officers are being considered the .Divisional Com-
mander and Chief of Service of the unit and service to which the
officers belong may take part in the discussions. The Committee
ceases its functions on the appointment of a General, with whom the
appointments of Field Officers will rest.


108. At least once a year Commanders of Army Corps meet
together to confer with the Head of the Department regarding
improvements in the Army. Chiefs of Services also take part in
the discussions.
109. Officers of the Cantonal Troops (Squadrons of Dragoons
and Fusilier Battalions of Infantry) are nominated by the Canton
to which the unit belongs. All other officers, including those of units
formed by more than one Canton, are nominated by the Federal
Council.
110. Up to the rank of Ist Lieutenant promotions are made
by seniority; above that rank by selection. The new law
provides that before being promoted every officer must
obtain a certificate of capacity; this applies to all ranks from
the lowest to the highest. Hitherto certificates have only been
required in the case of promotion to the rank of Lieutenant and Cap-
tain, and in the Infantry to Major. In the case of non-commissioned
officers the certificates are issued by Commanders of Companies,
Batteries, or Squadrons, or Commandants of Schools the man has
attended.
For appointment to Lieutenant and promotion to Ist Lieutenant
or Captain the certificate will be issued by the Chief of the Service
of the Arm (Member of Board), and for promotion to Major and
higher ranks by the Committee of National Defence (see para. 107).
The object is to ensure uniformity in method of training and
proper appreciation of all the circumstances attending promotions
throughout the whole Army. It is a further step towards bringing
the whole Army under one central authority.
111. All units are provided with adequate staffs from battalions
to Army Corps. Appointments to the Staff are made by the Military
Department. The appointment of Adjutant is limited to four years.
112. The proposal to decentralize administration by forming an
office under the Divisional instructor in each District in order to
form a link between the Commanders and the Central Administra-
tion was rejected by the States Council on the ground that it would
be unconstitutional to form Divisional Staff Offices, and that the Dis-
trict Instructors who, it was suggested, should be placed in charge
of the offices would be distracted from their legitimate work and
absorbed in office duties. Generally speaking, the conviction is
penetrating the country that the duties of the higher commands
make such great demands on the individual and are so responsible
that no man can carry them out without devoting his whole life
to the study and practice of the profession. Future changes may
therefore be looked for in the direction of having professional
soldiers appointed to command Divisions and Army Corps.
TRAINING.
113. The Swiss thoroughly recognise that an Army requires more
training to-day than formerly, which is due not only to improvements
in arms, but also to the progress of military science in training,
organization, mobilization, &c. They realize that they can no
more ignore the improvements and progress of other Armies in


employment and training of troops than they can ignore the progress
of armaments. On the other hand, it is admitted, though not
unanimously, that the total number of days’ training cannot be
increased, thus the problem that faced them was how to train their
men up to modern standards without increasing the length of
service. They have sought the solution in increasing the length of
training during the earlier years of service, and by confining the
instruction in the later years to practising what has already been
learnt.
114. The Swiss soldier receives his training first, in a school of
recruits, which turns him out a trained soldier fit to take his place
in the ranks, and secondly, in repetition courses or annual trainings
during which units from companies to Army Corps are mobilized
and trained.
115. The periods of training prescribed by the law of 1874 (see
Appendix III.), consists (for Infantry) during the first year’s
service of a recruit’s course of 45 consecutive days and five or six
annual trainings of sixteen days each in alternate succeeding years
up to the age of 32, with compulsory musketry and inspection of
arms in the years when training is not done.
From 33 to 44 —two annual trainings of five days each and one
day’s inspection of arms in the other years. From 45 to 50 one
day’s annual inspection of arms.
The changes proposed are to lengthen the recruits’ course
from 45 to 70 # days (consecutive), and reduce the length of the
succeeding annual trainings from sixteen days to eleven days; but
to hold them every year in place of in alternate years.
In response to a widely-expressed demand, subaltern officers,
N.C.O’s. and men of the Elite and Landwehr troops armed with
rifles, will he required every year to fire in a rifle club a prescribed
course of musketry. Those who fail to do so will be called to a
special musketry course without pay.
116. Thus the minimum service of a Swiss infantry soldier,
exclusive of the days of joining, dismissal, and obligatory musketry,
will be as follows:
Days.
In the Elite —from 21-32 years of age—
A recruit’s course of .. .. .. 65
Seven annual trainings or repetition courses
of 11 days each .. .. .. 77
Five inspections of arms in the years he
does no annual training .. . . 5
In the Landwehr —from 33-40 years of age—
One annual training . . .. .. 11
Seven annual inspections of arms (1 day
each) .. .. .. .. 7
In the Landsturm —from 41-48 years of age—
Eight annual inspections of arms .. 8
Total .. .. .. 173
* The two Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding strong- protests from the Officers’ Associations,
have decided to reduce this to 65 days.


The course in the Landwehr is regarded as necessary, for if the
Landwehr could only be called out when war is imminent it would
not be efficient. •
117. Promotion in the Swiss Army when offered cannot he re-
fused, and it will be noted from the tables (Appendix III.) that the
military obligations increase with rank. The 173 days shown above
are a minimum. Sergeants have to serve more than 300 days, and
field officers more than 700 days.
118. From the foregoing it will be seen that it is not proposed
to make any fundamental changes in the Swiss military system. The
military obligations will not be increased, but better use will be
made of the time for training, and military service will be rendered
less irksome to the individual by being confined chiefly to his earlier
years. In future a private will be able to do the greater part of
his service before his 29th year.
There is a distinct tendency towards bringing the Army under
cue central authority shown by—
(a) The proposal to limit the Cantonal troops to Fusilier
Battalions of Infantry and Squadrons of Dragoons; and
( b ) By requiring all officers, before promotion, to obtain cer-
tificates of capacity, which will be issued for higher
ranks by the Committee of National Defence.
The practice of other Armies is adopted by allotting an increased
sphere of action to the General Staff, and in a minor way by intro-
ducing gradations of rank for the higher commands.
Increased efficiency is to be gained by increasing the length of
training of (for Infantry) recruits from 45 to 65 days, and the
principle that the fittest, irrespective of personal considerations,
should command is recognised by incorporating all permanent
officers in the Army.


PART III.
THE AUSTRALIAN AND SWISS SYSTEMS COMPARED.
119. This report, notwithstanding its length, would be incomplete
if it did not contain some comparison of the Swiss and Australian
systems.
Before entering into details it may be pointed out that an effec-
tive defence can be provided only by a military system based upon
the political and social conditions of the people, and suited to their
habits and customs, the physical conditions of the country, and its
relation to neighbouring countries. Briefly the Army should be
adapted to the country.
The Armies of the four countries which enclose Switzerland
number on a peace footing nearly two millions of men, more than the
total male population of Switzerland, and on a war footing exceed
eleven millions of men or considerably more than three times the
total Swiss population. Under such circumstances the need of an effi-
cient Army is daily brought home to every one, and the standard of
efficiency attained is readily compared with that of other Armies.
Opposite conditions prevail in Australia, which is separated by great
distances from the rest of the world, and where a foreign soldier is
rarely if ever seen: consequently the need for defence is not so
constantly realized. This increases the difficulty of keeping an Army
efficient during long periods of peace; a difficulty not altogether
unknown in Switzerland.
The physical conditions of the two countries are also unlike.
While the population of Australia does not greatly exceed that of
Switzerland, its area is more than 180 times as large, in fact, the area
of Switzerland is considerably less than one-fifth that of Victoria,
and its productive area is less than half the area of Tasmania.
The small territory of Switzerland, with its comparatively dense
population, greatly facilitates organization, makes administration
easier, and lessens the expense of the instruction of the Army.
Owing to the dissimilar conditions in the two countries, it may
be taken that it is not in the details of organization and administra-
tion that we must seek instruction from Switzerland, but in their
methods and the principles of the Swiss system, though the manner of
applying the principles may differ. The Swiss recognise that as
war is the only purpose for which an Army is needed, it must be
organized for war in time of peace, and that the one test to apply to
all proposals is how far they insure fighting efficiency. Had this
essential test received due recognition in Australia great waste of
energy and money would have been avoided.
As regards the completeness of its equipment and readiness for
war, the Swiss Army affords a model well worth copying. The use
made of the time available for instruction, and still more the con-
stant stress laid upon the absolute necessity for training leaders,
by a people who have learnt from their own experience, deserve
most careful consideration.


—
Colonel.
Lieut. -
Colonel.
Major.
Captain.
Lieuten-
ant.
. —
Australian Militia
Yrs.
62
Yrs.
60
Yrs.
55
Yrs.
53
Yrs.
48
These ages may
be extended two
years in special
cases
Switzerland j Landweh’r
} 48 {
36
44
32
40
120. Organization. —The Swiss organization, based upon the divi-
sion of the Army into classes by age, provides a force of which the Ist
line is composed of young men in their physical prime who, as a rule,
have not incurred the heavier responsibilities of life, while the older
men who have been trained, form a reserve. Under the voluntary
system in Australia organization based on physical fitness is impos-
sible Here men are enlisted np to 35 (Militia) years of age, and
may remain in the ranks until 55. It may thus be inferred that the
Swiss Army is composed of much younger men than the Australian
Forces, as would also appear from the following comparative table
of ages of retirement of officers:—
Every man in the Swiss Army has to pass a medical examination
before enlistment. In Australia the men enlisting in the Militia
are examined, but not those enlisting in the Volunteers. A further
difference is that under Australian Regulations any man may
leave the service in time of peace by paying a small sum and giving
three months’ notice. The average length of service in Australia
varies from about five years in New South Wales to less than three
years in Tasmania.
121. General Staff. —ln one respect the Australian military system
differs from all modern systems, viz., that no provision is made for
a General Staff, i.e., a thinking department, or a staff composed of
specially trained and selected officers who, freed from administrative
details, are in peace charged with all general preparations for war,
and who in war deal with operations as distinguished from duties in
connexion with the administration and maintenance of the Army,
which belong to the Adjutant-General’s and Quartermaster-General’s
Departments. The formation of General Staffs in England, America,
and elsewhere is one of the most noticeable of modern developments.
A General Staff cannot he improvised when a crisis occurs, and no
force without a trained General Staff is fit to take the field.
122. Mobilization. —The extraordinary rapidity with which
mobilization is effected in Switzerland is mainly due to units being
always at war strength, and to units being strictly localized; though
the fact of each Army Corps being mobilized once in every four years
no doubt helps.
The expense involved in keeping an Army on a war footing m
time of peace prevents other nations following the Swiss practice of
having only one establishment.


The localization of the Commonwealth Forces was one of the
main features of the re-organization consequent upon Federation,
but in order to place them on the same footing in regard to mobili-
zation as the Swiss Army, it will be necessary to provide not only
equipment for units, but also places to store it in, and personnel to
care for it. A definite organization, however, is an essential pre-
liminary to any scheme of mobilization.
123. Administration. —Both in Switzerland and in Australia there
is no Commander-in-Chief in time of peace, and in both countries
the administration of the forces is confided to a Board of Officers, of
whom the Minister is President. In other respects the systems
differ. In Switzerland the Army Corps Commanders, who change
annually, are mainly responsible for the inspection of the troops, i.e .,
for ascertaining their readiness to take the field. In Australia, as in
England and Canada, an officer, without command or responsibility
for administration, is appointed to keep the Board informed as to the
condition of the troops, the theory being that an officer should not
report upon himself.
In the allotment of duties to members of the Board, there is
also a marked difference. In Switzerland, the Chief of Infantry,
for instance, is responsible for recruiting, training, discipline, and
in fact, everything connected with the Infantry, and the Chief of
Cavalry is similarly responsible for his arm.
In Australia all questions connected with the discipline of the
forces are dealt with by one member of the Board, and another
member is responsible for all the equipment. It can hardly be
doubted that in this respect, since it corresponds more readily to
war requirements, the local system is the better. Its main defect
is that it does not include means for co-ordinating the work of the
several Departments, in fact, the watertight compartment system of
administration is carried to an extreme, with the result that the
effect of changes on the whole force that are made in one part may
not be considered, thus the military machine is treated rather as con-
sisting of several unrelated parts than as an organic whole. In
Canada, as in Switzerland, this defect is obviated by conferences of
several members of the Board being held under the Chief of the
General Staff.
Whatever may be the disadvantages attending the publication of'
information on military questions, it can hardly be denied that it
is necessary to do so wherever the military system is based on
popular support. It is a marked feature of the Swiss practice to
supply full information respecting the policy of defence, the develop-
ment of the Army, and the lines on which it is proceeding, and upon
military expenditure. This is done to a far greater extent than in
Australia.
124. Training. —ln respect to the training of the forces, the two
systems afford a marked contrast. Unfortunately, an exact
comparison of the lengths of training cannot be made; but
if the periods in Appendix 111. are compared with the require-
ments for efficiency (12 days’ attendance annually) pre-
scribed in the Australian Military Regulations, it will be seen
that the Swiss soldier undergoes considerably longer training


—
Number of —
Average Cost
per
Efficient
Member.
Expenditure.
Clubs.
Members.
Efficient
Members.
Members
per 1,000
Population.
£ s. d.
£
Australia
834
42,598
27.016
10
1 19 11
53,906f
Switzerland ...
3,694
220,147
144,344
66
0 8 2
44,652$
than the Australian soldier. This is more marked in the case of
officers. Other things being equal, the longer the training the more
efficient the Army. The minimum length of training depends on
various factors. As the result of the experiment with the “Spectator”
Company last year, Lieutenant-Colonel Pollock, who conducted the
training, proposed “ six months’ training on enlistment; 22 drills
and exercises and a course of musketry annually, and one week
in camp not less frequently than in alternate years,” but, he also
stated, “ I do not pretend that a fighting unit, fit for immediate ser-
vice, had been created by the six months’ training. The young
N.C.O’s., in spite of all their rapidly-acquired knowledge, necessarily
had not sufficient experience, and they had absolutely no influence
whatever, so that discipline could not have been properly maintained
under the stress of campaigning.”
The Swiss consider the minimum time required to train an
Infantry recruit is 65 days, and that more time is needed for the
other arms. The fact is, however, that the length of the periods of
training of a Militia Army is the result of a compromise between
cost to the country and the convenience of the individual on the
one hand and the requirements for security on the other.
The two systems differ in other respects. The compulsory system
admits or requires all training to be done on consecutive days, this
improves discipline, facilitates and cheapens instruction, and
simplifies administration; but under a voluntary system of enlist-
ment, in which men enlist all the year round, and the periods of
engagement are short, resulting in many changes in the ranks, better
results are probably obtained by a short camp and distributing the
remaining days of training throughout the year.
Another marked feature of the Swiss system is that each step
in rank carries with it the obligation of undergoing an increased
period of training.
The opportunities for study and training, both in schools and
handling the combined arms, afforded to officers in Switzerland are
far ampler than here. Careful instruction is given in Staff duties,
and there the opportunities for practising such duties are more
frequent.
125. Rifle Clubs. —The average number of members of each Rifle
Club and the average number per club who comply with the respec-
tive conditions for efficiency, are much the same in both countries,
but in other respects the contrast is somewhat marked, as shown .in
the following table: —
* Exclusive of rifles and supervision,
t Actual expenditure, 1906-7.
+ Estimated expenditure, 1906.


Year.
Number of Men
aged 20.
Accepted~for Service.
Rejected.
1907 ...
1908 ...
1909 ...
1910 ...
39,000
39,400
39,800
40,200
23,400
23,640
23,880
24,120
15,600
15,760
15,920
16,080
1920 ...
45,000
27,000
18,000
The strength in Australia of an Army based on
would be, in 1907:—
the Swiss system,
( a ) Elite, 20-32 years
( b ) Landwehr, 33-40 years
. 182,936
. 117,460
In Australia the rifle clubs are partly maintained with the
view of enabling men to fit themselves to serve in the forces,
whereas in Switzerland they are looked on as affording means for
supplementing the instruction given in the Army.
The short ranges at which most Swiss practice is carried out
should be noted, the theory being that short ranges are still the
decisive ones for Infantry fire.
126. Cost. —lt will be seen from the table in para. 81 that about
half the Swiss Military expenditure (Federal) is devoted to instruc-
tion and about one-third to maintenance.
The main contrast between the Swiss and Australian estimates
is the larger sums absolutely and relatively spent in Australia on
rifle clubs and cadets, the amounts being £63,652 and £52,506
respectively in Australia, as against £44,652 and £720 in Switzerland.
If the estimated total military expenditure of Switzerland is
divided by the number of men in the Elite, it will be found that the
cost per man works out at about £lO. This method, as a
basis of comparison, is somewhat misleading, a better way is to com-
pare the cost per diem of trained soldiers in both countries.
The Swiss Infantryman in the Elite costs for training about
2s. lid. per diem; in Australia an Infantry soldier costs £l3 per
annum on the basis of 16 days’ training, which works out at about
16s. 3d. per diem. Deducting from this the cost of clothing and
pay of the Instructional Staff (4s. 4d.), included in the Australian
estimate, but not in the Swiss, the difference,, 95., is mainly accounted
for by the difference in pay (7s. 4d.). Practically the same result
is reached on comparing the cost of a Cavalry private in Switzerland
and a Lighthorse man in Australia. The cost of rations in both
countries is about the same, though the Swiss ration of meat is only
about half that of the Australian.
The cost of the Swiss Infantry recruit may be taken at £2O, made
up of 65 days’ training, £lO 18s. 6d.; clothing, £5 165.; rifle, £3 ss.
127. Concluding Remarks. —lf the Swiss system were in force in
Australia, and in carrying out the annual enlistments the same
proportion* of recruits were rejected here as there, the numbers
enlisted annually are estimated as follows:
* 40 per cent.


These rnimbers give little or no idea of what the military strength
of the country would be, because comparisons of the relative strength
of Armies based on mere numbers are entirely misleading; otherwise
the numerically superior Army would always win. This, we know, is
not the case. The chief factors for success in war are the character
and experience of the leaders, the discipline and training of the
troops, and in a lesser degree, their arms and equipment. This is
fully recognised by the Swiss. Therefore, if compulsory universal
service is introduced in Australia, an efficient defence will not be
provided, unless the system secures the adequate training of a suffi-
cient number of leaders and N.C.O’s. It seems that, in order to
provide experienced Officers and N.C.O’s., any system of compulsory
service which only requires each man to undergo four or five annual
trainings should be modelled on the German system (under which
N.C.O’s. voluntary engage to serve for several years) rather than
on the Swiss system. However that may be, under any system of
compulsory service that is designed to provide an Army for war
the troops must be localized, which involves men being assigne
to arms or departments according to military requirements, and
not according to their individual choice.
When compulsory service is introduced in Australia, it will be
necessary to secure the active co-operation of the States,. munici-
palities, and other local bodies for recruiting, administration, and
other matters.
128. Finally, it may be well to recapitulate six principles esential
to the Swiss system. Other systems may be devised which are
better, as good, or worse than the Swiss system, but if they do not
embody all the following principles they cannot be termed the
Swiss system: —
(1) The whole of the resources of the country in men and
material are placed at the disposal of the Government.
The military obligations are universal —the fit serve
in the Army; the unfit pay a tax. Service cannot be
escaped by purchasing a substitute.
(2) The period of training in the first year’s service is suffi-
ciently long to enable the recruit to be turned out a
trained soldier.
(3) The length of training, at least, to the rank of Major,
increases with each step of rank.
(4) Promotion with its increased burden cannot be refused.
(5) There is no Commander-in-Chief in peace. The adminis-
tration and executive command are divided, the former
being carried out by a Board of Permanent Officers
with the Minister as chairman.
(6) The basis of the organization is the division of the Army
into classes by age.




APPENDIX I.
LIST OF ORDERS, REGULATIONS, ETC., ATTACHED TO
REPORT.
Annuare de la .Confederation Suisse 1906.
Organisation Militaire de la Confederation Suisse 1874.
Annexe de l’organisation militaire (1898).
Reglement D’Administration pour L’Armee Suisse 1886.
Organisation Militaire 1906. (Bill as passed by States Council.)
Rapport du Department Militaire Federate sur sa gestion en 1905.
Ordre de bataille der Schweizeriscben Armee, 1 April, 1906.
Tascbenkalender fiir Scbweizerische Wehrmanner 1905.
Budget de la Confederation Suisse pour l’Annee 1906.
Message du Conseil Federal a l’Assemblee Federate sur le Budget de
l’Exercice 1906. ....
Ordonnance sur le recrutement des bommes astremts au service militaire,
( 19 °3). .
Loi Federale concernant I’organisation du Department Militaire (Du
20 decembre 1901).
Livret de Service.
Livret de tir.
Loi Federale concernant l’assurance des militaires contre les maladies et
les accidents.
Loi Federale sur la taxe d’exemption du service militaire.
Code Penal Militaire (1905).
Organisation Judiciare et procedure Penale pour I’armee Federale (1889).
Militar —Schulen im Jahre 1906.
Unterrichtsprogramme fur die Scbulen und Kurse der Artillerie im
Jahre 1906.
Plan d’instruction pour les Ecoles de Recrues d Infanterie 1906.
Reglement sur T encouragement du tir volontaire (15 Fevrier 1893).
Aux Comites cantonaux de I’instruction Militaire preparatoire.
Programme pour les Exercices des societes volontaires de tir (1906).
Programme pour l s instruction militaire preparatoire volontaire de lllme
degre (1898). . ...
Instruction concernant la comptabilite des cours de 1 instruction militaire
preparatoire de lllme degre.
Reglement concernant les indemnites a payer par la Confederation au
personnel charge de la direction et de l’instruction des cours militaries
preparatoires du lllme degre (1900.)
Prescriptions sur la remise a titre de pret de fusils et de carabines aux
officiers et sous-officiers superieurs de I’armee, ainsi qu’aux societes
volontaires de tir.
Prescriptions sur le nettoyage des fusils. _
Prescriptions relatives a la remise de vetements d’exercice, d eflets
d’equipment, d’armes et de munition pour l’instruction militaire
preparatoire.


Men.
Hotses.
<L>
3
Units.
Officers.
N.C.O.’s.
Others.
O
H
Biding.
Draught.
r*
c«
CL,
3
o
H
c3
o
nd
§
CD
s
S -
Machine Guns.
i
o
Ammunition
Waggons.
Other Waggons
Infantry —
Company ( b)
(i.) 1
5
Jnits o
26
the
150
Field A
181
rmy (a)
•
168
Staff of a Battalion ..
5
6
27
38
8
. .
8
Battalion (6)
25
110
627
762
8
20
28
(c)672
2
8
Cavalry —
Squadron ( d ) .. 1
4
17
103
124
123
8
131
105
3
Company of Guides ( d )
2
8
34
44
46
46
36
Maxim Gun Company .. ..
4
17
51
72
69
14
(e) 16
97
54
8
4
2
Artillery —
145
22
10
Field Battery
6
139
106
4
4
Mountain Battery
7
194
201
10
96
4
Position Company
7
38
124
169
1
1
153
Position Train Company
4
6
100
110
10
150
160
Engineer Troops —
Sapper Company
4
12
173
189'
2
178
Pontoon Company
4
12
107
123
4
4
112
Train Section of Bridging Section
4
7
99
110
13
154
167
37
Bridging Section (/) . .
16
31
318
365
25
154
179
224
37
APPENDIX II.
FIXED ESTABLISHMENTS.


Telegraph Company ..
7
14
9
127
78
148
90
9
9
30 1
14
1 “
39 I
16
no |
76
9
4
Railway Company
3
Medical Troops —
8
5
9
15
34
150
51
170
1
19
9
1
.
4
Ambulance
Medical Train Company
242
33
261
42
••
13
Divisional Field Hospital (g)
29
31
123
183
Supply Troops —
10
34
51
Q
3
48
Administrative Company (h) ..
7
O
* *
Administrative Company, actual strength
(about)
Transport Detachment
I
11
25
23
150
256
180
290
3
39
364
3
403
50
Corps Transport and Supply Column
about (h)
(i
22
73
555
650
47
364
411
100
i.) Composite
Units c
/ the Field Army (]).
6
12
4
52
278
26
53
9
21
19/
169
684
Infantry Regiment
Infantry Brigade
Cavalry Regiment
Add Maxim Gun Company
Cavalry Brigade
Division
Army Corps (Tc)
80
166
17
4
38
458
1,328
332
665
51
17
104
1,589
4,394
1,885
3,770
311
51
623
9,341
26,304
2,297
4,601
379
72
765
11,388
32,026
32
75
376
67
761
416
2,085
64
130
24
14
50
767
3,478
(c)16
(e)16
96
205
400
97
811
1,183
5,563
2,016
4,032
315
54
630
9,212
24,188
8
8
24
84
u
©
©
g
‘rS
<3
b CO
a .2
cS
CO 0*
g o
M °
©
"3 3
*-W 3
o w> -
©
00
rH . ©
8 1
pH -+J.
9 n
® o
'S t+H
„ CO - ■>*
CO
© £
■8 |
Pm
3 g "'1
s .>
bT,
1 s
4i
£ m
r© O
rn 43
© ©
S S *V
a
S 03
P P 3
r£j £1
ls
2 •§
M <L>
£ ©
5
rP . H *
co J 5
CO *2
•Jh h n -+-j
pi 2 o ©
cS O TJ
a | § § I ®
8 2» if 1
n P ® m “ Mi
$ a d.a
p -e m -a cs ®
"fS § p _jm -£3 .p
e 3 ® „ Mi Mi
S W> % r- ffi ««
O ®CB TS JP -P rtf
°? ® R ® PtS
us la §-c
® gpq
„ 2.* ‘3 n 3 1:3
® a 2 ~ 3d a p
.2 s 1 & 1:3 o•§
§3 ® & i 8 .2 *1
.2 S fP ° ® S «
c 3 "P H cl c$ M
-+-> _Q , O M £ t> r,
O Oh P
p © ° u 2^.»a©
f 3 tn © ■Mp e*p tt
® +i © it 3 P d Mi ~j
q--P o P d P r P
»o -BJ
ligl§sS!l|J
g £p b C ;s to
8 S 8 | -S
©2 c 3 c! rt r H £
O <|
'e'S'ls 2SSS3:S.Sw
-P>
c 3
r©


—
Infantry.
Cavalry.
Artillery.
Engineers.
oo
Proposed.
OO
rH
Proposed.
OO
Proposed.
. 00.
rH
Proposed.
Elite —
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Recruits’ Course
45
70*
80
90
55
70
50
70
Repetition Courses (or Annual
Trainings ..
80
77$
100
88f
90
77$
80
77 f
Inspections of Arms ..
12
5
10
2
12
5
12
5
By Art. 83 of the Military Organi-
137
157
142
••
zation the Federal Assembly is
empowered to require supple-
mentary days duty from the
Elite as follows
16
18
16
153
152
190
180
175
152
158
152
Landwehr —
Repetition Courses
10$
11
12§
11
lot
11
Inspections of Arms ..
10
7
14
10
10
7
10
7
Landsturm —
Inspections of Arms ..
6
8
6
8
6
8
6
8
Total
179
178
210
198
203
178
184
178
APPENDIX III.
SHEWING PERIODS OF TRAINING UNDER THE LAW OF
1874 AND THOSE PROPOSED IN THE BILL OF 1906.
Days of joining and dismissal and time spent in obligatory musketry
practice are not included.
{a) Privates.
* Reduced by Parliament to 65 days,
t Each course lasts 11 days,
j Two of 5 days each.
§ Two of 6 days each.


Infantry. 1
Cavalry.
Artillery.
Engineers.
■
00
rH
Proposed.
r*
I>
00
Proposed.
OO
Proposed.
T*
t-
co
o
o
a
2
Ph
Corporals.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Elite —
70
Recruits’ Course
45
70*
80
90
55
70
50
N.C.O.’s School
28..
20
42,
35
35
35
28
35
Corporals and Lance Corporals
Recruits’ Course
73
90
122
125
90
105
78
105
53
70
80.
90
55
70
58
70
Repetition Courses
96
77
100
88
108
77
96
77
Inspections of Arms '..
12
5
10
2
12
5
12
5
Landwehr —
234
242
312
305
265
257
244
257
Repetition Course
18
11
12
11
18
11
Inspections of Arms ..
10
7
-20
18 i
10
7
10
7
Landsturm —
8
6
8
Inspections of Arms ..
6
8
6
Corporal
Sergeants.
268
268
332
323
Recruits’
School or ro
N.C.O. School
283
278
283
Repetition Course, less 4 In-
20
21
40
40
spections of Arms (Cavalry 2)
40
268
308
332
343
314
323
278
323
Days of joining and dismissal and time spent in obligatory musketry
practice are not included.
(6) Non-Commissioned Officers.
* Reduced by Parliament to 65 days.


Infantry.
Cavalry.
Artillery.
Engineers.
N
00
T—1
Proposed.
*>
oo
Proposed.
oo
Proposed.
oo
T-f
Proposed.
Elite —
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Recruits’ Course
45
70
80
90
55
70
50
70
N.C.O.’s School
28
20
42
35
35
35
28
35
Repetition Course
16
11
10
11
11
11
Recruits’ Course
' 53
58
. .
Officers’ School
42
80
60
80
105
105
63
105
Lieutenant
184
181
192
216
195
221
199
221
Recruits’ Course
Shooting, Reconnaissance and
53
70
80
90
55
70
58
70
Technical Courses ..
28
11
11
14
14
27
27
Repetition Course
32
55
60
66
54
66
64
66
First Lieutenant
297
306
343
383
318
371
348
384
Repetition Course
64
66
70
33
54
55
32
55
Musketry School
14
Landwehr —
361
386
372
426
380
439
Repetition Course
18
22
16
22
18
22
Total
379
408
413
416
388
448
398
461
Days of joining and dismissal and time spent in obligatory musketry
practice are not included.
( c ) Lieutenants and Ist Lieutenants.


Infantry.
Cavalry.
Artillery.
Engineers.
'd
nd
CD
'd
<D
'd
a>
O
ft
O
ft
rH
ft
o
ft
i>
OO
rH
O
a
GO
rH
A
00
rH
Ph
00
M
Ph
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Elite —
Up to Lieutenant without a
210
Repetition Course ..
168
170
182
205
195
210
199
Repetition Courses
Recruits’ Course as Lieutenant
144
198
180
198
162
198
144
198
55
70
80
90
55
70
58
70.
Musketry, Reconnaissance and
Technical Courses
N.C.O. or Officers’ School as Lieu-
28
14
11
11
14
14
27
27
tenant
42
35
30
30
Central School I.
42
30
42
30
42
42
Tactical Courses (3 of 11 days)
Technical Courses as Captain (2 of
20 days)
Recruits’ Course as Commander
33
33
70
40
58
40
70
of Unit ..
55
70
80
90
55
Total
492
552
650
692
523
592
568
645
✓
Landwehr —
Repetition Course (sometimes
twice)
9
11
8
11
9
11
Total
501
563
650
692
531
603
577
656
Days of joining and dismissal and time spent in obligatory musketry
practice are not included.
(d) Captains.


(e) Majors.
Infantry.
Cavalry.-
Artillery.
Engineers.
—
d
<D
8
ft
O
d
<v
d
<D
d
<D
T*
T*
I-
ft
o
d
O
ft
o
d
O
ft
Ah
oo
Ph
00
An
00
Ah
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Days.
Duty in Elite as Captain
492
552
650
692
523
592
568
645
Central School II. as Captain
42
60*
42
60*
42
60*
42
60*
Service in Elite as Major from 39 th
< *
to 4r4:th year.
V
Repetition Courses
Tactical, Musketry and Technical
48
66
60
66
54
66
48
66
Courses .. .. ..
33
33
30
30
40
40
Half Recruits’ Course as Major. ..
23
23
28
28
30
35
Central School III.
14
14
14
14
•
619
701
691
776
742
846
Landwehr from 44 to 48 years of age.
Repetition Course twice with half
Batt.
18
11
8
11
9
11
Total
637
712
799
851
699
787
751
857
Days of joining and dismissal and time spent in obligatory musketry
practice are not included.
* Reduced in States Council to 50 days.


APPENDIX IV.
THE DOMINION ARSENAL, QUEBEC.
1. —Dominion Arsenal.
The Dominion Arsenal, situated at Quebec, manufactures small-
arm ammunition and 12-pr. shells, common and shrapnel. Its
capacity is 20,000 12-pr. shells and 12,000,000 rounds of small-arm
ammunition per annum, or working night shifts, 18,000,000 rounds
per annum. The cost of the sinall-arm ammunition in 1905 was
about 20 dollars per 1,000, but it was costing more in 1906, owing
to the increase in price of metals. This includes 10 per cent, depre-
ciation in plant and 5 per cent, depreciation in buildings. The
methods of manufacture were similar to those in England, with the
exception of drying, annealing, and cleaning the cartridge cases.
Some of the machines were obtained from the United States,
some were made in the arsenal, but the majority came from Eng-
land. Cordite and tin were obtained from England; copper, spelter,
nickel, and tool steel from the United States.
The proof of ammunition is carried out by the arsenal staff, but
a foreman is never permitted to inspect his own work.
The arsenal was formerly under the Minister, but it is now under
the Deputy Minister, the member of the Council who deals with
contracts. The Master-General of Ordnance has the right to inspect,
but does not interfere with the administration.
The staff consists of a superintendent, an assistant superinten-
dent, a chemist, a storekeeper, two clerks, a typist, six foremen and
six clerks. The salaries of the staff amount to about 18,000 dollars
per annum, and the wages of day labourers and mechanics (46),
about 28,000 dollars. In addition, there were, in 1904-5, 459 mechanics
and labourers employed on piece-work, who received about 47,000
dollars. For a nine hours working day mechanics earn from 6s. to
125.; labourers —permanent hands, 55., and temporary hands, 65.;
boys, 2s.
2.—Manufacture of Small Arms.
Rifles are manufactured by the Ross factory, a private firm which
also turns out sporting rifles, &c. The factory is under a contract to
supply 1,000 rifles per month. The rifles cost 25 dollars each, and
with components and spare parts may run up to 31 dollars each, ex-
clusive of the cost of inspection.
The inspection of small arms is carried out by the Inspection
Staff, which is under the Master-General of Ordnance. It consists
of one inspector of small arms, one assistant, one foreman, and 37
men, employed in various ways. The cost in salaries is about 1,800
dollars per month, the average pay for unskilled labour is about
ss. per diem. Inspection charges, besides the cost of salaries and
wages, include the cost of buildings, light, and ammunition gauges,
which cost about £3,000 per set. Chemical testing is a further
charge. The cost for ammunition is at least 6d. per rifle. Hitherto
the finished arm only has been inspected, but in future component
parts are to be inspected. In the event of any small-arm factory
being established here it cannot be too strongly insisted upon that
besides the finished arm every component part should be examined
before assembly, and the material subjected to both physical and
chemical tests.


Rank.
Switzerland.
Australia.
On
Active
Service.
During
Instructional
Courses.
Militia
Infantry.
£
s.
d.
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
Colonel, Commanding Brigade
1
0
0
13
7
2
5
0
Colonel .. . i
0
16
0
13
7
2
5
0
Lieut.-Colonel ..
0
12
0
10
5
1
17
6
Major
0
9
7.
8
0
1
10
0
Captain
0
8
0
6
5
1
2
6
Lieutenant
0
5
7
4
0
0
15
0
Sergeant-Major
0
2
5
2
5
0
12
0
Colour-Sergeant
0
2
0
2
0
0
11
0
Quartermaster-Sergeant ..
0
1
7
1
7
0
10
6
Sergeant
0
1
2i
1
2*
0
10
0
Corporal
0
0
9*
0
9*
0
9
0
Private
0
0
7|
0
73
' 4
0
8
0
Recruit .. .. ■
• •
•
0
A3
• t 4
• •
APPENDIX V.
SHOWING DAILY KATES OF PAY OF MEMBERS OF THE
MILITIA FORCES IN SWITZERLAND AND AUSTRALIA.
By Authority : J. Kemp, Acting Government Printer, Melbourne.




