









REPORT
ON THE
PROPOSED RAILWAYS
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
MADE BY
THOMAS WOORE
TO
THE PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.
1848.




TO THE
PROVISIONAL RAILWAY COMMITTEE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Gentlemen, —
I have the honor now to submit to you the survey, which I have completed,
under your authority, with a view to the establishment of a Great Line of
Railway, between Sydney and Goulburn, traversing the Counties of Cumber-
land, Camden, and Argyle, and connecting the principal townships therein.
In taking a general view of the country to be traversed, I find that
the greatest difficulties we have to overcome lie between the County of
Cumberland and the Mittagong Range, in Camden, not only on account of the
uneven surface of that part of the country, but from the great and sudden
elevation that must be attained to cross that range.
The formation of this portion of the country is principally sandstone,
lying in horizontal strata, of so soft a nature as to be easily cut into fissures by
the action of the running streams ; the sides of which are continually crumb-
ling away, and opening into extensive ravines from atmospheric influences,
which have been at work for ages.
This gives rise to the unusual appearance the rivers of this country often
present, for where they pass over the sandstone formation, they traverse the
country in deep ravines, the sides of which are mostly precipitous, and in some
cases terrific to behold; then suddenly breaking from this, they enter into tracks
of a totally different geological structure, where they gently meander between
grassy banks, formed principally of alluvial deposits, and so abruptly do these
changes take place, as to have a very singular and picturesque effect.
The streams descending from the Mittagong Range into the Nepean River,
all passing over sandstone formation, have cut the country into a series of deep
ravines, most of them of an impassable character; to cross any of these by a
railroad must always be a work of considerable difficulty and expense
Fortunately they generally take the direction we have to traverse in order to
reach Goulburn, otherwise the formation of a Railroad would be extremely
difficult ; but by taking advantage of the leading ridges between these rivers,
(some of which are very level,) a railroad may be formed at a moderate
expense.
The elevation of the Gap in the Mittagong Range, (through which I
propose to carry the line,) being the lowest point, is 2330 feet above the level
of the sea, and this rise takes place principally between the Nepean River and
the range ; for the course of that river is extremely level, and not much above
the sea at the points of crossing it, being at Vermont, 97 miles from its mouth
in Broken Bay, only 128 feet ; at Camden, 145 feet ; and at the Pheasant’s
Nest, where the Eastern Line crosses about 250 feet above the sea, consequently


an ascent 'of upwards of 2000 feet must be attained between the Nepean
River and the Gap in the Mittagong Range.
The attainment of this elevation, by such inclines as may be worked with
safetv and economy, is, I conceive, an object of the first importance, I have
consequently given the most anxious attention to this point, for there are
no obstacles either within the County of Cumberland, or between Bong Bong
and Goulburn, that may not be overcome with comparative ease.
To traverse the country thus described, two distinct routes may be taken,
as far as the Mittagong Range.
One across the Cataract and Nepean Rivers, through the estate of Sir
Thomas Mitchell, and up the ridge that lies between the Nepean and Bargo
Rivers to the Range. This I designate The Eastern Line.
The other crossing the Nepean River at Vermont, and passing through
the Oaks country, up a parallel ridge that lies between the Bargo and the Natai
rivers, which may be termed The Western Line.
These three rivers take their rise in the Mittagong Range, and flow to the
northward in a nearly parallel direction, leaving two lengthened ridges
between them.
In comparing the two Lines I find a saving in distance of 10 miles, on
the Eastern, the whole distance to Goulburn by it, being 122 miles, while
that by the Western is 132 miles; but in considering the elevations, I find
that the distance between the point of crossing the Nepean River, at East
Bargo, on the Eastern line, and the point where the lines conjoin near the
Gap in Mittagong, is 16 miles; while that between the Nepean at Vermont,
and the same point on the Western line, is 34 miles; consequently, we have
a base on the Western line of more than twice the length of that on the
Eastern, to enable us to gain this great elevation, namely, 2000 feet. This
is a matter of considerable importance, and gives the Western Line a deemed
Advantage over the other, as the inclines will consequently be more gradual.
Tor instance, in comparing the immediate ascent to the high land of
Mittagong, which is the greatest difficulty to be surmounted on either line,
that at the Little Forest on the Eastern Line rises 305 feet in a mile for 2160
yards, or about a mile and a quarter, which would form an incline of 1 in 21;
while that at the Wall on the Western Line rises 170 feet in the mile for a
distance of three miles, making an incline of 1 in 30, which I imagine is
as much as any locomotive engine can perform.
In reviewing the difficulties to be overcome in the construction of these
two Lines, I find that those on the Eastern are of much greater magnitude
than those, on the Western, as the former takes its direction across two of the
ravines already described.
The point of crossing the Cataract River, as shewn in the plan, is 514 feet
wide and 241 feet deep, the sides of this chasm being formed for the most part
of perpendicular walls of rock; and the crossing of the Nepean River, at the
Pheasant’s Nest, also on the Eastern Line, is 875 feet wide, and 295 feet
deep, from the edge of the cliff, but the depth from the banks on each side is
350 feet, exceeding the Menai Strait, at the point where the Britannia Bridge
is now being constructed by that most ingenious engineer, Mr. Stephenson;
but such works are quite beyond the means of this country. Sir Thomas
Mitchell has proposed to cross them by taking advantage of the neighbouring
water-courses, and descending into the chasm; but such a plan I conceive
wholly inadmissible for a railway; for although very practicable for Turnpike-
roads, the danger of such a descent on the sudden curves that would be here
unavoidable, renders it highly objectionable, if not altogether impracticable.
A 0€*^-'^4^ e /*6vV£y4) C 'y
,&vC £'Ms / }' >s^


The most extensive works required on the Western Line are the Bridge
and Viaduct across the North Head of Bargo River, where the gully is 98
feet deep; and that across the Deep Creek, near A ermont, which would
require a viaduct 400 feet long and 98 feet high over the Water-course,
lessening to 40 feet at each extreme. .. . , ; , £ ,
The difficulties of the Eastern Line here pointed out, led me in the first
instance to search for a more convenient one, without any reference whatever
to the future traffic; for taking into consideration the great elevation of the
county of Argyle, which it was our object to reach, the question with me was
—whether it was possible to find any practicable Line? Not that having a
choice of Lines, I might consider which was the best; but m this point 1 find
the Western Line has also a decided advantage over the Eastern, as the first
24 miles of it, (starting from Sydney,) which runs directly into the centre of
Cumberland, will answer as a trunk line affording great facility for extending
Branch Lines to the different towns, collecting all the produce, and affording
communication through every part of the County. That to Penrith will
provide accommodation to the Bathurst, Wellington, and Mudgee districts,
so that in point of fact, the whole of the wool, tallow, _ hides, &c., exported
from the port of Sydney, with the exception of that received coastwise, and ail
the produce of the Country consumed there, must pass over this Trunk Line;
it would also have the advantage of the conveyance of all the internal mails,
and of affording direct communication between the northern and southern
parts of Cumberland, as well as connecting them with Sydney.
Whereas the Eastern Line passing along the eastern verge of the county,
can only afford communication to Campbelltown and Appin; it is excluded
from extending Branch Lines into the centre of Cumberland, unless at con-
siderable expense, by having a range of high land immediately to the
northward, extending in a parallel line from the Orphan School Hills to tlio
Nepean Biver. . ,
The Western Line passes through a much more productive country than
the Eastern. _ .
Taking these circumstances into consideration, I have been so impressed
with the superiority of the TVestern Line, that my attention has been devoted
chiefly to the details of it, and I have made a minute survey throughout its
whole extent, comprising the Branch Lines to Windsor, 1 enrith, 1 aiiamatta,
Camden, and Liverpool. Either the Penrith or TV indsor Lines may be heie-
after extended to Bathurst, as may be found practicable, and the Liverpool
Line I purpose carrying on through Campbelltown to Appin, so as to gne
those districts the benefit of Railway communication in common with the lest
of the Colony. # . .
The line proposed by Menangle Ford being open to all the objections of,
the Eastern Line, with the additional inconvenience of being obliged to. cross
the Nepean River at a lower level than the Pheasant s Nest, and of being so,
confined between that river and the Razorback Range, that we should be
obliged to cross all the spurs extending from the Range, at considerable
expense, and deviation from a straight line, I have not thought it advisable to
delay bringing forward this Report by minutely examining it.
The direction of the line I described when last I had the honor of reporting
to you, has been scarcely deviated from, with the exception of the neighbour-
hood of Parramatta, where I found that, instead of diverting the Main Line
from its direct course between Sydney and Prospect, in order to approach that
town, it was necessary to keep a higher level crossing the ridge which
divides the waters of Prospect Creek from those of the Parramatta River, moi e


to the southward, and avoiding the high land in Sherwin’s Estate, but I have
carried a Branch Line from Haslem Creek into the town.
Had the Main Line been carried into Parramatta, as I originally proposed,
we should first have to descend nearly to the level of high water, losing the
elevation already gained, and having afterwards to ascend a much higher level
than where we now cross the ridge. The waste of tractive power both ways
would necessarily be great, besides the increased distance; and when it is
taken into consideration that nearly the whole traffic by land between Sydney
and the interior of the Colony will pass along this line, the loss would be very
considerable.
Whereas a Branch Line will afford equal advantages to the town and
surrounding district, and not cause any additional expense to a Company ; for
were the Main Line to pass nearer to Parramatta, the Branch to Liverpool
must be extended in proportion.
In dealing with the Main Line, I have divided it into three Sections :
The first, which may be called the Northern Section, comprises that part of
the line extending from Sydney to the Nepean River, being 40 miles in
length.
The second, or Middle Section, comprising that portion between the
Nepean River and Bong Bong, 44 miles.
The third, or Southern Section, from Bong Bong to Goulburn —46 miles.
The Northern and Southern Sections of the line are comparatively level,
while in the Middle Section, the great rise in the country takes place, conse-
quently the working of the two former Sections will be less expensive than the
Middle, and the Northern less than either, and it is probable that engines of
different power will be required to work each; but these are matters on which it
would be premature in me to hazard an opinion—they must remain for future
consideration when the experience of English engineers is brought to bear on
the local information I have collected.
Having obtained the best Section I could find of the intervening country,
it next became my duty to lay down the gradients —these I found considerable
difficulty in determining on, from the absence of any thing like authentic
information as to the capabilities of the improved locomotive engines, and from
the want of experience in the practical working of Railroads ; besides, as we are
in hopes of introducing rails composed of our hard timber in lieu of the iron
generally used, a somewhat new system must be adopted in this Colony, and
experimentalized on, before a correct judgment can be come at. Were the
country all as level as Cumberland, I apprehend there would be no difficulty;
but in the great ascent to Argyle, the powers of the engine will be tested to the
utmost, and every advantage must be taken.
I have however attempted it, in order to come at the probable expense of
constructing the line, and although it is probable some of the gradients, par-
ticularly those in Camden, and Argyle, will require to be altered, still I find
from information I have since received from England, that the estimate I formed
of the capabilities of the engine, has been pretty correct, and that the alterations,
if any, will be slight, and not materially affect the general estimate.
Before entering on the gradients, I beg to transcribe the extract I have
received from England on that subject: it is very satisfactory, and of con-
siderable importance to us, as giving us data from which we may now draw
correct conclusions:—
“ The difference of expense in construction between a line of first-class
gradients, as it was called, i. e., none steeper than 1 in 200, and one of second-
class gradients, rising up to 1 in 100, was frequently not less than £IO,OOO,


£20,000, or even £30,000 per mile. The London and Birmingham, Great
Western, and Brighton Lines for instance, averaging about £50,000 per mile ;
while the Grand Junction and South Western did not exceed from £20,000 to
£25,000. Experience has fully proved, that no saving, either of time or
economy of working, has been attained at all commensurate with this enormous
additional outlay of capital. Indeed, in many cases, cheaply constructed lines
have been worked at an equal or less expenditure for locomotive power, and at
as high an average velocity as lines constructed at twice the expense.
“ This is so universally admitted, that such gradients as were formerly
thought objectionable, are now adopted every day as a matter of course; and
as the capabilities of the locomotives have been enlarged, gradients of a class,
which would have been a few years ago altogether impracticable, have come
into general use.
“ It is important to ascertain, by reference to actual practice, the resuite that
have been already arrived at, and which must be taken as starting points to
guide us in the consideration of any new scheme.
“ The Lickey incline, on the Birmingham and Gloucester Railway, is a
conclusive proof that a gradient of 1 in 37J for a length of 2 miles 3 chains,
may be worked by the aid of an engine constructed for the purpose, without
serious inconvenience to an extensive traffic. It is also a proof that such an
incline may be descended without danger, by the force of gravity, regulated
by the action of breaks.
“ The Sutton incline of 1 in 88, on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway,
is surmounted by the ordinary trains of that Railway, whose traffic is of a very
heavy description, with a single locomotive engine.
“On the Newcastle and Carlisle Line, an incline of 1 in 106 for four
miles consecutively, is surmounted by the ordinary trains of that Railway
without difficulty or delay.
“ The use of a stationary engine, for ascending an incline on the
Manchester and Leeds Railway from the Victoria Station, which is 1 in 59
for 1000 yards, and 1 in 49 for 640 yards, has been in a great measure
discontinued, the ordinary engines being found capable of taking up it heavy
passenger and goods trains of not less than 80 tons weight.
“On the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway, stationary power has also
been discontinued, the locomotive engines being found a more efficient and
economical substitute on the Glasgow incline of 1 in 42 for If mile ;
and recently the locomotive engine has been equally substituted for stationary
power on the inclined planes of the London and Birmingham Railway, from
the Euston-square terminus to Camdentown, parts of which are 1 in 66 and
1 in 75.
“ Many other facts of a similar nature might be quoted, but the above
seem quite sufficient to establish the general propositions.
“ First . That gradients of 1 in 50 to 1 in 100 are perfectly practicable to
the ordinary locomotive engines with moderate loads.
“ Secondly. That gradients up to 1 in 37f, or higher, may be surmounted
by heavy trains, with the aid of an assistant engine of peculiar construction.
“ The application of these facts requires much discrimination. Nothing
can be more fallacious than a mere comparison of gradients, upon two lines,
without reference to the peculiar circumstances.
“ Experience seems also to establish, that under these circumstances, i. e.,
of a large local traffic, with frequent trains, light loads, and numerous
stoppages, the traffic may be conducted not only with far greater economy,
but also without loss of speed, or other inconvenience to the public.


“ A remarkable instance of this is afforded by the working of the traffic
between Oldham and Manchester, which has to pass over inclines of 1 m 59,
1 in 48, and 1 in 27, for two miles, the whole distance being 7 miles, and the
gradients for the remaining 5 miles, 1 in 150.
“ Ten trains are run each way, carrying on an average of 1200 passengers,
and 300 tons of goods, per day, at an average speed of 22 miles per hour.
“The working of the North Union, Newcastle and Carlisle, and othei
Lines, also afford a proof, that with light trains, the effect of steep gradients
on speed is very limited.
“ The experience of the cases above quoted, appears also sufficient to shew
that gradients ranging from 1 in 100 up to 1 m 50, or even a higher me illa-
tion may be worked, under ordinary circumstances, with perfect safety.
“ 2ndly. With regard to curves. — .
“ On this point, also, practical experience has led to a great modification
of the ideas formerly entertained. . .
«The Newcastle and Carlisle Railway presents an instance of a line,
which is almost one continued succession of curves, of every degree of
curvature, up to 8 chains radius, and with steep inclines, being worked with
economy and safety. .
“ The Manchester and Liverpool Railway Company, m their extension
line through Salford, have introduced curves bending in a serpentine direction,
two of which have radii of 10 and 12 chains respectively, over which all their
trains pass daily. , _ . . .
« The Manchester and Leeds Line has two curves of 10 chains radius,
awav from any station, and on a gradient of 1 in 82, over which their trains
have been worked for upwards of four years, without the slightest accident or
practical inconvenience.” . . , ,
From this it will be seen that the expence of forming Railroads m England
is enormously decreased, simply by the improvements effected in the locomotive
engines—that inclinations, that a few years since it was thought impracticable
to "ascend, are now traversed with ease ; consequently there is no occasion for
tunnelling through mountains or cutting through hills at a ruinous expense, as
the engine has become so powerful as to drag loads of 80 or 100 tons over
considerable heights, and when that is not to be done it can take the load round
the base of the hills in safety. , ,
This affords us every encouragement to proceed, and 1 trust will be the
means of dispelling the prevalent "apprehension of the great cost of these
In reviewing the gradients, as I have laid them down in the Northern
Section, and Extended Branches, that is, throughout the county of Cumberland,
it will be found that they range from 1 in 60 upwards ; there are none higher,
and only six that reach this pitch, the longest of which is a mile and a quartei.
These, according to the foregoing statement, can be worked with ease by a
locomotive engine of the ordinary power, consequently all the Lines throughout
Cumberland may be worked without difficulty or unusual expense.
I have seen no reason to cause me to alter my original proposition of
fixing the Sydney terminus at the head of Darling Harbour, where theie is
great facility for shipping and receiving goods conveyed by water, and also of
opening a communication with the main street at the bottom of Brickfield T 1 ,
for the convenience of passengers and light goods. _
Starting from this point, the line will ascend the ridge to O Connell I own,
where it gains a height of 111 feet above high water level, by a gradient of 1
in 60, 2383 yards in length, passing over Blackwattle Swamp on a brick


viaduct of fifteen arches, each of 30 feet span, and over Parramatta-street on a
handsome askew bridge of sandstone. This bridge will have two arches of o
feet span each, and 15 feet high, over the roadway, and two sma ei, o
span, over the footways, the whole forming a very handsome object at the
principal entrance to the City. ,
The cuttings on this gradient amount to 30,600 cubic yards : we then tra-
verse a level of 483 yards, skirting O’Connell Town, when we are obliged to
descend 22 feet, on a gradient of 1 in 170, m order to traverse a valley in
Cooper and Holt’s land, and again ascend 1 m 91 to cross the Petersham Hills ,
the embankment across this valley is the heaviest on this section of the lme,
containing 44,081 cubic yards; the level might be preserved without tins
cutting, but at the sacrifice of making a considerable detour. We now find oui-
selves 141 feet above high water mark, which I may here remark is dated from
a course in the masonry 3 feet 8 inches below the Steam Packet Wharf head at
Parramatta, and are again obliged to descend to Cross Iron Creek, near the
spot where the Canterbury road crosses it, by a gradient of 1 m -1, yaras
long. There is another heavy embankment here of 35,312 cubic yards, whic
is procured from the cuttings in Petersham. We now ascend the last
considerable rise to Ashfield, (for after passing this village the country becomes
more level,) on a gradient of 1 in 67, 1333 yards m length, when we arc
again at a height of 115 feet above the datum line. . aa ,
Our next gradient is descending to Baron’s Creek, 1 m 60, 1466 yards,
running on a curve, with a radius of 3000 feet, and at the end of the gia lcm
another curve extends of 2080 feet radius—these curves may be enlarged, on
more minute examination, but at the time I measured them, not knowing to
what extent they could be worked with safety, I made anot er section o
a different line, that avoids them, but on which the cuttings are more extensive.
Up to this point the line describes a curve in its general direction, but
from hence it pursues nearly a straight line, west a little northeily, to \ope s
Creek, a distance of 17 miles. Prom Baron’s Creek to Haslem Creek station
which is 10| miles from Sydney, and from which it is proposed to extend
branch lines to Parramatta and Liverpool, the line is formed by gradients ot I
in 149, 1 in 92, 1 in 281, 1 in 92, 1 in 64 of 750 yards, a level of 1000 yards,
and lin 60 of 883 yards. Qn
The cuttings up to this point amounting to 324,413 cubic yards, or oU,M.
cubic yards per mile; they are heavier than on any other part of the lme, m
consequence of the hilly nature of the country about Sydney.
Leaving Haslem Creek Station, we pass over the ridge between tfiat
creek and Duck Biver, on an ascending gradient of lin 60, 950 yards; and . a
descending of lin 70, of 1333 yards. Crossing Duck Iliver we ascent m
70, 1100 yards, and then pass over gradients of lin 81, lin 183, 1 m ,
lin 433, lin 77, 966 yards, and lin 90, ascending 1 in 93, 950 yards ; 1 in-
-89, of 800 yards; lin 158, lin 615, lin 107, lin 984, 1 m 60, of 800 yards;
and 1 in 76, of 733 yards, descending to Eastern Creek, from which the
Windsor Branch extends; then 1 in 90, of 600 yards; 1 in 100, 1 m 75, o
of 1100 yards, ascending; and 1 in 75, descending to Bope’s Creek, of 1 o
yards in length.
We are now nearly 24 miles from Sydney, and 182 feet above high water
level. ... • r.
It is on this creek I propose placing the principal internal station, as from
this point would diverge the lines to Penrith and Bathurst, and through it t o
communication between the northern and southern parts of Cumberland wi
pass.


From Haslem Creek Station to this point, the cuttings will amount to 824,413
cubic yards, on an average of 24,116 cubic yards per mile; and there being 32
bridges required for crossing roads, water courses, and for accommodation
between Sydney and this creek, the average will be 1± lor each mile, lhere
will also be 35 culverts required. . .
From Rope’s Creek Station the Main Line takes a more southerly direction,
and falls into a very level country, on the banks of the South Creek, passing
through Bailey Park and Fleurs, the estates of Major Darvall and his son.
After ascending a gradient of 1 in 66 for 666 yards, the Mam Line de-
scends for 2 miles on gradients of 1 in 114, and 1 in 130 ; the next 5 miles are
on a level, and two gradients of 1 in 714, and 1 in 647, crossing the South
Creek at 6 miles from Rope’s Creek Station; it then ascends linlib lor 1466
yards, at which point, on the bank of the South Creek, in Captain King s
estate, called Bellevue, the Camden Branch takes off.
This station will be 8 miles from Rope’s Creek, and nearly 32 miles from
Sydney, although only 176 feet above the sea. < ~
The cuttings on these 8 miles are very light, being only 68,406 cubic
yards, or 8551 cubic yards per mile. _
We now commence a continuous ascent of 3 J miles, in order to cross the
ridge that separates these waters from the Nepean River, on gradients ! in 75,
1 in 95, 1 in 166, and 1 in 86, passing through the estates of Captain King,
R.N., Messrs. Hutchinson and Liddington, to Greendale, the estate of George
Wentworth, Esq., at which point it gains the summit level of this section of the
line, being 373 feet above the datum line. . ;
In descending from this we have the heaviest gradient on the line,
being lin 60 for 2466 yards, or not quite a mile and a half. We continue
descending the Bringelly Creek, leaving the estates of Shancamore on the
right, and Vermont on the left, by gradients of 1 in 164, 1 in 975, 1 in 106,
and 1 in 230, till we reach the Nepean River, 40 miles from Sydney.
The bed of the river is at this point 128 feet above high water level, but as
the line passes 40 feet over it, our level is 168 feet.
Here it is probable a more extensive station will be required to facilitate
the repairs of the heavier engines that will be required for the next section of
the line, and that assistant engines may be at hand if required to assist heavy
trains up the long inclines on the Eurethe Range. The cuttings on the last
8| miles amount to 104,114 cubic yards, averaging 12,607 cubic yards per mile.
There will be 25 bridges required to cross roads, water courses, and for
accommodation between Rope’s Creek and this station, averaging 1§ to the
mile ; also 22 culverts.
I shall now review the Branch Lines, as they come under the same class ol
gradients, as the Northern Section does.
To commence with that to Penrith, being of the greatest importance, m
consequence of its leading to the present line of road from Bathurst, the line,
after leaving Rope’s Creek, continues the direction of the main trunk, west a
little northerly, and runs nearly straight to Penrith, passing through Erskine
Park, the estate of Major Darvall, Mamre, Sir Maurice O’Connell’s pro-
perty, and that of Messrs. Smith, Tindall, and Mrs. MTlenry, leaving the
town of Penrith on the left, and terminating on the bank of the Nepean River.
It first ascends 1 in 155 for a little more than a mile, then descends 1 in 60,
1300 yards; lin 306 ;1 in 63,866 yards; and lin 111 till it reaches South Creek
on a level, 3f miles from Rope’s Creek Station ; it then ascends 1 in 62, 1466
yards; descends 1 in 69, 666 yards ; again ascends 1 in 63, 1200 yards,where
it arrives at an elevation of 190 feet, on the top of the same ridge that the


Main Line crosses at Greendale, as that ridge extends for a considerable way
along the right bank of the Nepean Liver. It here descends lin 60, 1066
yards, passes along a level, and ascends 1 in <6, 1016 yards ; then descends
1 in 63, and 1 in 140, to the level of the banks of the Nepean: the bed of
which at this point is 72 feet above high water level.
This branch is 9| miles in length, making the banks of the Liver 33 5
miles from Sydney.
The cuttings amount to 166,312 cubic yards, averaging 18,410 cubic yards
per mile.
There will be 11 bridges wanted, averaging 1$ per mde, and 6 culverts.
The Camden Branch leaves the main line in Captain King’s Estate,
Bellevue, and passes up the left bank of the South Creek thiough the
Letreat Farm, Alfred Kennerly, Esq., the Hutchinson Estate, Nonnorah and
Netherbyers, the estates of M. 1). Hunter, Esq., a part of Orielton, and Kirk-
ham, the property of John Oxley, Esq.
The banks of this Creek are particularly level throughout, and little more
will be required than forming the road before laying the rails down.
The gradients are lin 620 and lin 300 for four miles; we then leave the
Creek and ascend the ridge we have already crossed twice, once on the main
line, and again, on the Penrith Branch, by a gradient of 1 in 87, 1900 yards,
traversing a level of 1466 yards, we again ascend 1 in 86, 1500 yards, which
brings us to the summit level of this branch ooi feet above high watei le\el.
W e now descend 1 in 100 for lj mile, and making a short ascent of 1 in 100
again descend to the Kirkham flats, by an incline of 1 in 65 of lather moie
than a mile in length. On the flats we preserve a level till we reach the
neighbourhood of the Cowpasture Bridge, over which the present traffic to and
from the Southern Counties passes ; but I am in doubts whether there is not a
better line in descending from this ridge, by keeping to the northward of
Kirkham House. This I shall examine more particularly at a convenient
opportunity.
The extent of this Branch is 10J miles, which makes the Cowpasture
Bridge 42j miles from Sydney.
The cuttings amount to 258,299 cubic, yards, averaging 24,508 cubic
yards per mile, the first portion of the Branch being peculiarly le v el; the
heavy cuttings are on the ridge, and that at Kirkham, in order to obtain
sufficient earth to form an embankment to cross the flooded lands, is the
heaviest in Cumberland, amounting to 121,205 cubic yards ; but this 1 hope to
avoid, and obtain a better gradient by taking the course above mentioned.
There are 15 bridges and 18 culverts required on this line, averaging
of the former to a mile.
The Windsor Branch is extremely level, and very straight throughout its
whole length: it passes down the left bank of the Eastern Creek through
Wallgrove, the property of Mr. Loberts ; Booty Hill, the Church and School
Estate, Mr. Hall’s property at Black Town, and those of Messrs. Pye, Bobart,
Betts, Marsden, Fitzgerald, Teale, Allen, and Hale.
The gradients are 1 in 195, 1 in 600, 1 in 218, 1 in 680, 1 in 350, 1 in
686, a level, 1 in 256, 1 in 2180, and 1 in 326; the cuttings very trifling,
amounting to 149,654 cubic yards, and averaging 9,644 cubic yards per mile.
There will be 20 bridges and 18 culverts required, averaging V z of the
former to a mile.
This Branch is 15| miles long, making the whole distance from Sydney to
Windsor 36| miles.
The Parramatta and Liverpool Branches leave the Main Line at llaslem s


Creek, 10 £ miles from Sydney. The former, after describing a curve, the radius
of which is 1600 feet, takes" a north-westerly direction, and passes through
White’s, Hall’s, and Ellison’s land, crossing the Parramatta Road, under an
askew bridge, so as not to interrupt the traffic on the turnpike road, then
through a corner of Newington, Mr. Blaxland s propeity, crosses Duck Rivei
at the junction of Duck Creek, enters the estate ol Colonel Mucarthur, and
passing over the flats terminates at the Steam Packet Wharf, at a distance of
miles from Haslem Creek Station, making the whole distance from Sydney
rather more than 14 miles.
The gradients are lin 193, ascending lin 390, lin 66, of 933 yards; 1
in 150, and 1 in 468 descending, and a level of a mile in length.
The cuttings amount to 31,225 cubic yards, or an average of 8096 cubic
yards per mile.
There will be five bridges, and two culverts required, and a dam across
Duck River.
The Liverpool Branch leaving Haslem Creek, describes a curve of a mile
radius, and then takes a south-westerly direction, passing through the proper-
ties of Mrs. Chisholm, Messrs. Jenkins, Barber, Whitfield, and Graham, where
it crosses the Dog-trap Road on a level; then through the properties of Messrs.
Johnson and Horsley; crossing Prospect Creek, which is 130 feet wide, on a
viaduct, and the Liverpool Road, about a quarter of a mile from Lansdown
Bridge ; then through the properties of Messrs. Bowler, Prout, Dickson, Eecles,
Church, and Government land, terminating at a point near the Hospital at
Liverpool, from which the line may be conveniently extended up the banks ol
George’s River to Campbelltown and Appin.
This branch will be 7§ miles in length, making the distance from Sydney
to Liverpool 18| miles.
The gradients are 1 in 55, 1100 yards, ascending; 1 in 70, 1533 yards,,
descending; lin 102, 2033 yards, ascending; lin 90,1516 yards, descending;
lin 240, 833 yards, ascending; and 1 in 92, 1666 yards, descending to Pros-
pect Creek, where it is only 12 feet above high water. The sea ebbs and flows
in this creek, the rise and fall being about 3 feet. Trom thence we have
gradients of 1 in 350, 1 in 560, and 1 In 640, to Liverpool.
The cuttings amount to 176,396 cubic yards, averaging 22,194 cubic yards
per mile.
There will be seven bridges and five culverts required.
I do not apprehend there will be any difficulty in the excavation of the
cuttings, as there is no appearance of primitive rock,
The soil in the County of Cumberland may for convenience be classed
under the following three denominations: it is apprehended that these will suffi-
ciently comprehend all the varieties through which any Gutting will be requisite.
Ist. Coarse grained sandstone, or that in the neighbourhood of Sydney.
A sandy or gravelly surface alternating with ledges of coarse grained
eilicious sandstone, generally very easy to quarry, or cut, and resting in beds
nearly horizontal, seldom exceeding a few feet in thickness.
2nd. The forest or scrubby country.
A surface of poor gravelly or sandy loam, of little depth, resting on a
strong tenacious clay, varying from a few feet to 4 or 5 yards in thickness,
which again reposes upon shale, generally of a loose shelly description, and in
beds, with thin beds of fine grained calcareous or clayey
sandstone, alternating with the shale.
3rd. The open forest hills, of generally a fertile character, with abrupt
slopes,—such as the ridge lying along the eastern bank of the Nepean River,
which we cross in fhree places.


The surface soil for the most part a friable loam, resting upon mild reddish
clay which after 2 or 3 feet, usually passes into a soft disintegrating stone, m
which are embedded moderately sized blocks of hard calcareous sandstone.
The greater part of the line passes through the secondly described
formation. . , , .
The Main Line in Cumberland, with the adjoining branches, comprises a
distance of nearly 86 miles. , T -n •
In the Middle Section, or that part extending between the IS epean Liver
and Bong Bong, where the great rise in the country takes place, immediately after
crossing the river (which I propose doing by means of a bridge of 80 feet span,
constructed of timber, resting on stone piers, the bridge supported by three
lamina ribs placed over the roadway), we commence the ascent on the Eurethe
Rano-e through the Theresa Park Estate, by an incline of lin37 j, which
extends 3967 yards, or 2£ miles, this I call the “ Theresa Incline.” We then
traverse a mile on a level, and again ascend another incline of 1 in 38 of 2667
yards, and 1 in 44, of 2067 yards, or nearly 2f miles, called the “ Oaks
incline,” when we reach an elevation 867 feet above the sea.
At the top of each incline there is a curve, that on the Theresa of 1800
feet radius, and that on the Oaks of 3800 feet.
On the Theresa Incline we cross the deep creek at an elevation of 98 feet
over the water course —this is one of the most extensive works we have to
form, being 400 feet in length, and 98 feet high in the centre. I propose doing
it by’means of four arches, of 60 feet span each, constructed of wooden framing,
resting on sandstone piers, the centre 98 feet high, the adjoining 76, and 80
feet, and the extremes at the head of the embankments, 44 and 54 feet high—a
plan of which I lay before you.
There are two other Creeks, Turk’s Creek and Hughes Creek, to be
crossed by this incline, which I intend doing by means of wooden viaducts,
constructed of our rough unhewn timber, plans of which, with a simple method
of erecting them, I also lay before you ; there is abundance of both timber and
stone in the neighbourhood.
The cuttings on the Oaks Incline are heavy, in consequence of the
difficulty of describing the curve from the range being extremely narrow at this
part- —abruptly descending into gullies of two and three hundred feet deep on
each side ; but the soil being composed of a reddish loam apparently without any
rock, the excavation will not be difficult.
We continue ascending 1 in 60, 1100 yafds, and 1 in 244, 1467 yards,
when we reach the summit level of the Oaks, or 949 feet above the sea, or
datum line; we then descend to the Werriberri Creek on an inclination of lin
60 for rather more than a mile, crossing that Creek, which is narrow but deep,
on an embankment 60 feet high, containing 86,340 cubic yards of earth. The
Creek here takes a due southerly direction, so that we are enabled to follow up
its course, which is level and straight, through the properties of the Rev. Mr.
Hassall, Messrs. Wild, Luther, Inglis, West, and Shepherd, on gradients of 1
in 560,1 in 202, a level, lin9o of 967 yards, and lin 173 ascending, when the
ascent increases to 1 in 59 of 633 yards, and 1 in 35 of 1400 yards.
At this point, where the line crosses the road to Burragorang, 15f miles
from the Nepean River, it reaches an elevation of 1132 feet above the sea.
In Mr. Inglis’ land, 13 miles from the Nepean River, I propose forming a
station, for the convenience of collecting the produce of the Oaks and Stone-
quarry districts.
From the Nepean River to this point, we pass through an extremely rich
loamy soil, rendered more productive by the quantity of moisture it attracts,


from its elevated situation ; but we afterwards enter into a very barren
broken country, which must be passed through, whatever direction is taken,
before the rich country in the neighbourhood of Mittagong can be entered
It is one of the peculiarities of this country, that the land lies m good and
bad patches, very distinctly marked: and in this spot singularly so, as the
moment we cross the Crocodile Creek, we enter the barren sandstone formation,
that is rendered extremely rugged by the action of the streams and atmospheric
influences; however, I have obtained tolerable gradients, by taking advantage
of the head of Cedar Creek, which runs in a northerly direction from the
lagoons. We pass up its right bank, and find gradients of lin 113, 1 m 550,
and a level, crossing Crocodile Creek, Jumper’s Creek, Blind Creek, and loxal
Creek, on wooden viaducts, as shewn in the plans.
We then descend the Monument Range, and cross Cedar Creek, where it
breaks into two heads, on a descending gradient of 1 in 50, of 1767 yards, or
about a mile. The crossing of this Creek will be performed by means of the
rough wooden viaducts before mentioned, a plan of which is laid before you.
We then have gradients 1 in 128, 1 in 575, and 1 in 370, ascending, which
brings us to the Great Lagoon; on the bank of which, 20 miles from the
Nepean, I propose forming a watering station, as from this we ascend a dry
barren ridge, where that necessary is not to be obtained.
We commence the ascent by a gradient of 1 in 31, of 1310 yards; but this
may be reduced if necessary by increased cutting. We then proceed with
o-radients of 1 in 115, 1 in 47 of 1033 yards, 1 in 74 of 1J mile, 1 in 45 of
1330 yards, 1 in 950, 1 in 122 of two miles, and 1 in 210, ascending, at
which point we have attained an elevation of 1515 feet abo\e the sea level,
and 28j miles from the Nepean River.
We have now arrived at the foot of the most difficult ascent on the whole
Line, where the full powers of the engine will be required. It is an incline oi
1 in 30 for nearly three miles, which brings us to the height of 2045 feet above
the sea, at a distance of 31 | miles from the Nepean. This is the easiest
ascent to the Range, that extends from the coast to Bullio, on the Wollondilly
River, over which we must pass to reach Argyle. It is an arduous one ; but
it is my impression that it can be accomplished by a powerful locomotive. It
is not capable of being much reduced; but half way up it there is water to be
obtained —which may be of great service.
The long Ridge, that we have been lately traversing, with the Bargo River
on our left, and the Natai River on our right, lying in beds 500 to 600 feet
beneath us, is connected with this great Range by a perpendicular wall of
solid sandstone, only 100 feet in width. This wall has ravines on each side of
it of 200 feet deep; and it is only by talcing advantage of ledges of rock that
lie on each side of the wall, and by making a cut through it of between 60 and
70 feet deep, that I have been enabled to procure this gradient.
Should the work be carried out, this portion of the line will have a
singular and extremely picturesque appearance. We shall find ourselves
travelling, at a rapid pace, along the face of a stupendous cliff, towering
over our heads on our right; with a deep abyss beneath us on our left, where
apparently there is scarcely room for the trains to pass; and in an instant after
passing through the rock we shall find the picture reversed, with the cliff on the
left and the abyss on the right, and the next moment we shall enter an open
grassy plain, where most probably a picturesque hamlet will spring up, the effect
of which will be very singular. But this is not the only place, where our
admiration will be excited; there are many spots of peculiar beauty on the
line, among which the descent on the Eurethe Range, with the Blue Mountains,


and the Sea Coast Line in the distance, and the rich valley of the Nepean,
studded with farms and cottages, beneath us, takes a prominent place.
After gaining this height, we have 1 in 100, and descend two shoit
gradients of 1 in 44, and 1 in 31, to cross the north head of Bargo River on a
similar bridge to that described over the Deep Creek; the height ol the
structure required here being 100 feet. Passing along a level, we have anothei
arm of Bargo River to cross, which will be effected by an embankment.
These two tributaries to Bargo River form extensive ravines, and it is
singular that at the very spot we are obliged to cross them, they are contracted
by the projection of the cliffs on each side, which enables us to do so without
much difficulty; but we are confined within a space of 100 feet. Consequently
there are three spots on this line thus limited; and were it not for the facilities
which Nature there offers, with however sparing a hand, I consider it would
be impracticable to drive a locomotive engine into Argyle. We now ascend
another short gradient of 1 in 30, and passing over 1 in 123, and 1 in 161,
descend to Chalker’s Flat on an incline of 1 in 39, leaving the Sugar Loaf Hill
on the right.
From Crocodile Creek to this point, (20 miles,) we have been traversing
the barren sandstone country, but as we approach the Sugar Loaf, we again
enter the rich lands. This country, although unproductive, has its advantages,
as from its structure it is admirably adapted to the formation of Railroads ; and
the ridge being extremely level, the cuttings are very slight upon it, and with
the exception of the wooden viaducts, there will be no bridges required, and
but few culverts, as the water will descend from each side of the road.
The cuttings on these 20 miles amount to 315,619 cubic yards, averaging
15,781 cubic yards per mile. They are less than on other portions of the line,
but more difficult of excavation.
The neighbourhood of Chalker’s Flat appears to be a desirable place to
form a station for the supply of fuel and water, and for the convenience of the
public.
We now commence a gradual ascent to the Gap in the Mittagong Range,
by gradients of 1 in 151, 1 in 74, 1 in 43 of 900 yards, 1 in 85, and 1 in 242,
where we cross over the great South Road, at Mrs. Cutter’s inn; then a level,
and lin 36 of rather more than 1| mile, which brings us to the Gap, which is
2307 feet above the datum line, or high water level. Here the heaviest cutting-
on this section of the line will be required, amounting to 92,186 cubic yards.
We now descend through Wingecarribee, the estate of J. Oxley, Esq., on
gradients of lin3l of 1100 yards ; 1 in 182, 1 in 326, and 1 in 77, which
brings us to the Wingecarribee River, at Bong Bong, 44 miles from the
Nepean, and 84 miles from Sydney, and at an elevation of 2157 feet above the
sea.
The cuttings between the Sugar Loaf, and this point amount to 388,807
cubic yards, averaging 38,888 cubic yards per mile.
There will be two viaducts, one 100 feet, and the other 98 feet high in the
centre, on stone piers, 11 wooden viaducts, 26 bridges over roads, water-
courses and for accommodation, and 39 culverts required on this section,
which will not average one to a mile.
On the banks of the Wingecarribee River, I propose forming a more
extensive station, being an equidistant point between the Nepean River and
Goulburn, situated in the centre of a very rich agricultural country, within
four miles of Berrima, and commanding a good supply of water, which is
essential, as there is no doubt that a considerable town will spring up wherever
this station is placed.


But we are not confined to this spot, as there is another point that may
be fixed upon with equal advantage—that at Sutton Forest, where the line
crosses Nicholson’s Creek. , . ,
From Boim Bong the line passes through the Hutchinson estate, the
properties of Messrs. Waite, Nicholson, Wright, Holland, Underwood Moore,
and Gray, where it enters Government land, through a country generally very
level i t
We ascend gradients of lin 466, lin 146, 1 in 81 of 1000 yards; then
descend lin 76, 516 yards, to cross the Midway Rivulet; then ascend 1 m
85 600 yards; when we make a long descent to Nicholson’s Creek, on gra-
dients of lin 211, lin6s of 633 yards, lin 124,1 in 216 ascending, and 1 m
76 descending, crossing over the Bong Bong road.
We are here 2112 feet above the datum line, and Of miles from Bong
Bong, having descended 195 feet since leaving the Gap, in Mittagong Range.
We now ascend to the high land, near Ivy Hall, first by 1 in 75, lor about a
mile, then descend 1 in 162, 433 yards, before taking the steep asevnt of 1 m
60, and lin3oof 14 mile, which brings us to the summit level 23 i 0 teet above
the datum line, and nearly nine miles from Bong Bong.
But I am not satisfied but that this last ascent may be avoided by taking a
direction from Nicholson’s Creek more to the right, and not entering Mr.
Badgery’s land, but leaving it to the left, At all events, this ought to be
examined before this part of the line is finally determined on.
We then have 1 in 800, and descend to Black Boy’s Creek, by 1 m 53.
In this Creek there is abundance of coal, of easy access, consequently it will be
a desirable place to form a station. It is also in the midst of a very fertile
country, and at a convenient distance from Bong Bong, being 10j miles.
The cuttings here amount to 194,983 cubic yards, averaging 19,011 cubic
yards per mile.
The line from hence passes over a very level country, for several miles, on
gradients of 1 in 61, 1 in 600, 1 in 300, 1 in 135, 1 in 95, 1 in 583, 1 in 100,
and 1 in 68, when it is at the height of 2335 feet above the datum line.
The country now descends considerably to Paddy s River, and we have
gradients of 1 in 40 of 1600 yards ; then 1 in 550 for 4800 yards ; then again
1 in 40 of 900 yards, and one in 33 \ of 1500 yards, passing close to the Hang-
ing Rock. We here cross the Crooked Swamp, having descended 339 feet, we
then make a short ascent of 1 in 47, 450 yards, and continue descending lin
50, 1050 yards to the river. # .
This I propose to cross three times, on Avooden viaducts; but it may be found
more economical to keep the right bank, and cut through a bluff of sandstone
rock, which lies in our way, crossing the river below it, about 14 miles from the
present crossing of the Great South Road, or of skirting the base of this bluff
if the curve is not too great ; but these are points of such nice consideiation
that it is folly to speculate on them till further information of the piactical
workings of lines is obtained, or till the work has reached this point, as so many
changes may take place in the interim.
I have laid the line down as I describe, but it is probable the above devia-
tion from it may be found the less expensive.
Along the bank of the river we are descending 1 in 377 ; but on crossing
we ascend lin 175, 1167 yards; lin 67, 46/ yards, a level of 267 yards, and
1 in 30, of 1000 yards, which places us on the top of the ridge, which divides
the waters flowing into Paddy’s River, from those of Night Cap Creek. It is
on this ridge that Ward’s Inn stands.
We then descend 1 in 384, 1500 yards, wdiich brings us into the flats oi


Wingello, which we traverse on gradients 1 m 59, 1 in 81, 1 m 110, and 1 m
185 when we ascend to Mount Otway, following the course of Night Cap
Creek, by 1 in 131, 1 in 81, and 1 in 56, here waagam cross the Great South
Road in a considerable cutting, the amount of which will be 68,641 cubic yards.
At Wino-ello, the estate of Robert Campbell, Esq., there is a suitable x
place for forming a station 23 miles from Bong Bong, being a convenient
distance from that at Nicholson’s Creek, and a desirable position for promoting
the traffic of the extensive surrounding country, and the nearest point to the
copper mine now opening at Arthursleigh, the estate of Hminibal Macarthur,
Esq., M.C. Up to this point the cuttings amount to 240,806 cubic yards,
nvpvno-inp- 18 167 cubic yards per mile.
Descending Mount Otway, by a gradient of 1 in 33 of 1200 yards, and 1
in 90 of 933 yards, we get into the level tract of country in the of
Mai or Lockyer, and following up Jaromai Creek, find gradients of 1 in 185, 1
in 131 and lin 73, ascending; and lin 68,1 in 264, and lin 83, descending ;
this brings us to Cockmai Creek, on which stand Major Lockyer’s residence,
and extensive sheep establishment ; passing it, we make a short ascent of 1 m
40, and descend to Frederick Yale, by 1 in 63 ; another short ascent of 1 m
96’ and descend to the Wollondilly River, by 1 in 136. .
At this point, which is 36 miles from Bong Bong, I propose forming
another station for supplies, and the convenience of this part of the country.
The cuttings on the last 13 miles amount to 207,229 cubic yards, averaging
15,940 cubic yards per mile. . . ~ .
We are here obliged to cross the Wollondilly River, m order to avoid the
Towrang Ranges, but that is not a matter of any great difficulty, I propose
doin°' it by means of a bridge of 80 feet span, suppoited by three lamina ribs,
constructed of timber resting on stone piers, the roadway on each side of the
river, being made good by the wooden viaducts already descubed.
This description of bridge appears the best adapted to such of our rivers
as are subject to great inundations, as where we find it necessary, from the
nature of the gradient, to cross them but little, above the highest flood mark,
any arch turned beneath the road would considerably obstruct the course of
the stream, and be subject to injury from the heavy timber carried along by
the torrent, but by this construction,, the arch being over the roadway, it will
be free from danger, and no obstruction offered to the current, with the excep-
tion of the piers, which need not be massive, as the top weight they have to
carry will be comparatively light, and the wooded viaducts on, each side being
open will afford ample space for the passage of the stream.
I lay before you several plans of these bridges, with their estimated cost,
but I shall be better able to judge of their strength, when I have had experiments
made on a great variety of specimens of our forest timber, which I have had
collected for the purpose of taking to England to have examined. .
We cross the River on an incline of 1 in 72, and then find 1 in 50, of 567
yards, 1 in 92, 1 in 121, 1 in 74, 1 in 500, 1 in 141, 1 in 123, 1 in 200, 1 in
84, and 1 in 78, along the left bank, when we again cross it at about half a mile
from Towrang Stockade, and keep the right bank on gradients of 1 in 444, ljn
96, lin 200, a level, 1 in 240, another level, 1 in 360, 1 in 210, 1 in 177,
when we cross the IVlulwarri Ponds, and ascend 1 in 57 to the Pei minus on
Goulburn Plains, within a quarter of a mile of the township, which is 46 miles
from Bong Bong, and 132 from Sydney. The elevation of this point is 2103
feet above the sea level.
The cuttings on the last 11 miles amount to 132,690 cubic feet, averaging
12,063 cubic yards per mile.


On this section there will be 2 lamina bridges, 12 wooden viaducts, 38
bridges over roads, water courses, and for accommodation, and 4o culverts,
averaging about 11 to the mile.
In laving down these gradients, I have made as little cutting as possible,
giving due consideration to the working of the line; they may be nearly all
improved by increased expense, and I _ may find it necessary to alter some ol
them, particidarly on the Southern Section of the line. .
It will be seen that to work the Northern Section, or that in the County
of Cumberland, where the gradients do not exceed 1 in 60, the common
locomotive engine is capable of traversing it, with trains attached of from 80 to
100 tons. . . „
To work the Middle Section it will be necessary to have engines of par-
ticular construction, that will ascend the long incline of 1 in 30 at the \V all
With moderate loads, an engine of sufficient power to accomplish this, will
traverse any other part of the line without difficulty.. Our traffic will not be so
great for many years as to require heavy loads at this point, and at all times 1
imagine the down traffic will considerably exceed that to be carried up.
On the Southern Section there are two places, where the inclines are
heavier, than they generally are on that line: the ascent to Ivy Hall, and the
descent’to Paddy’s River. These I should be glad to reduce, so as to work an
engine of less power on this section also, and I am inclined to think this may be
effected on more minute examination; but with so extensive a survey, as I have
had in hand, I have not had time to examine this and some other parts on this
section sufficiently, but before the works can possibly reach this point, there
will be ample time for more careful investigation.
The following is a Table of the average amount of cutting per mile on the
whole line: —
Cubic Yds.
On the Northern Section 19,024 per mile.
On the Middle Section 27,830 „
On the Southern Section 16,295 „
Taking it in detail:—
Cubic Yds.
From Sydney to Haslem Creek 30,819 per mile.
Thence to Rope’s Creek 24,116 ~
„ to Bellevue 8,555 ~
~ to Vermont 12,607 „
„ to Burragorang 28,830 „
~ to the Sugar Loaf, near Chalker’s F1at5..15,781 ~
„ to Bong Bong 38,880 „
~ to Black Bob’s Creek 19,011 „
„ to Wingello 18,167 ~
~ to Wollondilly River. 15,940 ~
„ to Goulburn 12,063 „
Penrith Branch 18,410 „
Camden 24,538 „
Windsor 9,644 „
Parramatta 8,096 „
Liverpool . 22,194 „
Having laid down these gradients, and ascertained the amount of cutting
required, I have been enabled to make a detailed estimate of the whole, taking


each section and each Branch line separately. These I now beg to submit to
the Committee, accompanied by plans of all the works, with their estimated
cost, and the calculations on which it is founded, so that the Committee may
satisfy themselves as to the correctness of the result.
On referring to them, I find that the total cost of the whole line, provided
we can make use of wooden rails, will amount to £-364,000 ; and there being
177 miles of line proposed, the average rate will be £2IOO per mile.
In making this estimate, after having allowed freely for every thing that I
can conceive will be required, with the exception of superintendence, I have
allowed £37,514 for unforeseen expenses ; and if we can make use of wooden
rails, and the money is judiciously laid out, I have no doubt but that sum will
cover the outlay. To make doubly sure, however, add an additional £4OO per
mile, making the estimate £442,500, or £2500 per mile, which would provide
the large sum of £108,341 for unforeseen expenses, or nearly J of the
estimated cost.
The cost of the Northern Section, comprising 40 miles (exclusive of the
allowance for unforeseen expenses) is estimated at £74,942, averaging £1,873
per mile.
The second section of 44 miles amounts to £97,784, averaging £2222 per
mile.
The third section of 46 miles amounts to £73,009, averaging £1587 per
mile.
It will be seen that the Middle Section is by much the most expensive,
owing to the cutting being principally through sandstone, and the excess would
have been greater, was it not counterbalanced by the paucity of bridges in the
barren district.
The Northern Section is rendered more expensive than the Southern, from
the additional outlay in entering Sydney, and from that part of the line passing
through a more populous country, where a greater number of bridges are
required.
The Branch line to Penrith of 9 § miles in length, amounts to £17,846,
averaging £1877 10s. 4d. per mile.
The Branch to Camden of 10J miles amounts to £19,029, averaging
£lßl2 ss. Bd. per mile. But I have no doubt this amount would be con-
siderably reduced by the alteration I propose at Kirkham.
The Branch to Windsor of 15| miles amounts to £20,002, averaging
£1,290 9s. per mile.
The Branch to Parramatta of 3f miles, amounts to £8704, averaging
£2321 Is. 4d. per mile.
The Branch to Liverpool of 7f miles amounts to £15,139, averaging
£1953 per mile.
As I have for the convenience of separating the expense of each part of the
line estimated a like number of engines, tenders, carriages, and waggons, to
each branch, the cost of them not bearing an equal proportion to the expense
of constructing the long and short lines, causes the short lines to exhibit a
higher average than is strictly correct, more particularly on the Parramatta
Branch, where it swells the amount unduly, for in reality the expenses of
constructing that line are light, and although it will require locomotive power,
still not in the same proportion as longer Branches.
All appear conscious that we shall derive advantage from the establish-
ment of Railways, but I doubt whether the amount of that advantage is so
generally appreciated.
At present our rich lands in the interior are lying waste, for I consider


Tariff used merely for grazing purposes is nothing more. Our small
farmers can scarcely exist from the want of a market to dispose of then
nroduce there being so large a quantity raised in the immediate neighbourhood
thesis no sale for it there ; and to convey it to Sydney
is attended by so much expense, and what is still worse, so long an absence
from their families and farm occupations, that it becomes inconvenient and
unprofitable, while Sydney is drawing from Van Diemen s Land, and other
places beyond sea, its supplies of wheat, potatoes, and ot ler pro uce,
outht to come from our own lands, and the money be expended m this
country. The indolence and evil habits, that this hopeless state of things
produces are destroying the energies of the existing labouring population, and
neither offer inducement for exertion nor good example to that,growing U P-
The larger establishments suffer a yet greater inconvenience, from the
difficulty of obtaining conveyance of any kind, particularly m dry seasons, an
from the serious losf they sustain from the exposure of their wool and stores
and from other casualties, during the protracted journeys to fiom Syd y
in wet seasons. Whilst to all classes the exclusion from the Metropolis, and
almost prohibition of all social intercourse, arising from the difficulties and
expense of travelling are highly detrimental m a religious, social, and politics
POm T°he Vl lhie now proposed will provide a remedy for these evils, greatly
facilitate our present means of export, and open, up others, that. have hither
not been thought of, from the difficulty of carriage to a shipping port, and
will be the forerunner of others of much greater importance and extent,
eventually opening to us the markets of Victoria and bouth Australia, an
bringing the whole of the intervening country into active productiveness.
Ve cannot look at the position of the country lying between Sydney and
the Southern Colonies, without being struck with the extreme importance of a
Railway extending between them; for the whole extent of it is so cut off from
the coast by the precipitous nature of the ranges, that its entire produce must
be conveyed by sLh a road, either to Sydney or Port Phil ip, for shipment.
No country in the world appears to me to offer greater inducements f
the establishment of Railways than that traversed by this Southern Line the
nature of the country is so peculiarly adapted to their construction, from its level
character, dry climate, and porous structure, that the cost will be comparatively
Sm There are no means of conveyance to compete with it: we have no canals;
and our present roads unformed, unmetalled, and laid out in the worst possi e
manner, are but makeshifts. . , , ■, ,1
The absence of any fund for the safe investment of capital (proved by the
large sum of £85,000 now lying in the Savings’ Bank unproductive) wifi be
supplied by one, the stability of which cannot in my opinion be questioned
1 The long droughts, that we are subject to, call loudly for the application ot
steam power ; for when they take place communication is all but cut off, bom
the want of food for the animals employed on the roads ; and what will
when the country is so occupied that these are fenced m . In other countries
a thick population would indicate plenty; but it is not so in this; for when
these droughts take place, there is a general failure of crops, as well as
native grasses; and if the evil is but partial, the difficulty o conveyance o
where the scarcity exists precludes its being remedied. . n ,
And, again, the highly prosperous state and. unexampled rise ot this Oniony
offer the greatest inducement to such a projection;. for although, we have
lately had a severe check, caused by that very prosperity leading us into undue


speculations, the ingredients for forming a great nation are still here, un~
diminished, and nothing but the Divine Will can prevent us, in the order of
nature, from becoming one.
But the child must walk before it can run, and, in this instance, I should
propose that we do not at first undertake more than the completion of the
Northern Section, or that portion of the line extending from Sydney to the
Nepean River, with the branch line to Penrith, comprising 49 J miles.
Although it will be desirable to form a Company for the purpose of eventually
carrying out the whole.
This portion will open the communication on the two main thoroughfares
40 miles towards Goulburn, and 33 miles towards Bathurst, and will facilitate
the communication with Parramatta, Liverpool, and Windsor, as it will pass
within 3 J miles of the former, 15| of Windsor, and 7f of Liverpool.
It will also be the easiest of construction, as there are no extensive works
upon it, with the exception of the bridge over Parramatta-street and the ad-
joining viaduct, which may be omitted in the first instance if desirable.
And it will always yield the greatest return, for as I have before said,
the main part of the exports of wool, tallow, hides, &c., the wheat, butchers’
meat, and other country produce, consumed in Sydney, and the transfer of
all the mails and passengers to and from the interior must pass along it.
And if the iron bark rail be found sufficient to support the necessary
weight without crushing, the easy nature of the gradients relieves us of any
apprehension as to the want of power in the locomotive engine, even on
wooden rails.
The amount required to carry this out (if wooden rails are used), will be
£120,000, which allows £27,212 over and above what I have estimated, for
unforeseen expenses, averaging £2,424 per mile.
To meet this expenditure I have made the following calculation of the
revenue to be derived from the Work, but I have only included those articles,
respecting which I have positive data to work from—there are many others
now conveyed, that I have not taken notice of. Had I, instead of calculating
from the amount of the present conveyance, made a statement of what that
amount may fairly be expected to reach, as soon as the facility of Railway
transfer is attainable, I have no doubt that the sum total of revenue would be
quadruple what I have computed it at. But I have endeavoured as much as
possible, in this and all other calculations, to avoid anything like theoretical
conclusions, and to confine myself to statements drawn from existing facts.
''/ I /'/ Jit i t i / Af /7 11 < .A/f*? f 7 jA l i J A r AAs
Wf, AyA* ‘ cA/y/A An- /lAAil AnAry
/*'/,.i y — A
tiijAAAiA A }s"* > ?y^Ay AA
'&?//? Jsi-<rir L /£&/Aa7iJ
// 7^
■i


Amount of the present Traffic on the Southern and Western Roads,
CALCULATED FROM THE POLICE AND CUSTOM-HOUSE RETURNS FOR THE
Year 1847.
Wool —Exported, 1847 11,154,9681b5.
Received from Hunter’s River . .8000 Bales.
Clarence River . .2500
Port Macquarie . . 897
” Moreton Bay 3700
}) Other places on 4 90^3
the Coast .~. j
24,710, avg. 2901b5. &bl 7,165,900
Leaving. .3,989,0681b5. or
1780 tons, to be carried 36 miles, ©£l 10s. per ton £2,670 0
Tallow —Exported, 1847 2,356 tons.
Received Coastwise 664
Leaving. .1,692 ©£l 10s„ . .£2,538 0
Hides —From Cattle slaughtered for Tallow)
and Inland Consumption, 12,525 © > 335| tons © £llos.. 502 15
601bs. each • )
Wheat —Consumed in Sydney, at the rate of j 000 bushels
7000 bushels per week ;
Received Coastwise (not including the j
Hawkesbury) j
Leaving. .275,000 bushels
at 601bs. per bushel=7366 tons, at 6s. Bd. per ton, being j
at the rate of 6d. per bushel, from Goulburn ) 3
Cattle—2s,6 oo head consumed in Sydney, not including those ) 19 g 0 0
boiled for Tallow, at Is. 6d. per head >
Sheep —79,42l do. do. at 3d. per head J 1
Pigs —9,Boß, do. Lard, at 3d
Horses —1,000 head, 2s. each
Hay —2,ooo tons, at 10s. per ton U
Dairy Produce —150 tons, © £1 10s 0
Small Parcels c
Deturn Supplies —4ooo tons, © £1 10s 0
Carriage of Mails = “
32,000 Passengers, © 6s. each y,ouu u
£29,959 5
Say £30,000.
And allowing 60 per cent, of this, or £IB,OOO, for working the line, we
have still £12,000, or 10 per cent, on the whole estimated outlay as a dividend.
But as I have said before, the above is only a moiety of the probable return.
I have the honor to be,
Gentlemen,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
THOMAS WOOHE


REPORT
ON THE
PROPOSED RAILWAYS
IN
N EW SOUTH WALES
MADE BY
THOMAS WOORE
TO
THE PROVISIONAL COMMITTER
:SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.
1848.
[Price Ps QcL~\










