

LAW REFORM COMMISSION.
REPORT
CRIMINAL LAW CONSOLIDATION
BILL.
SYDNEY: CHARLES TOTTER, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1876.
[Price Is.]
lOrt 74—76.
f hKLI*.


NOTE AS TO THE COMMISSION AND CRIMINAL
LAW CONSOLIDATION BILL.
The Commission was appointed, during the Cowper-Bobertson
Ministry, on 21 st June, 1870. Members: Sir Alfred Stephen,
President, Sir W. M. Manning, A. 0., J. IS. Salomons, S.G., Sir
Jas. Martin, Q.G., JEdwd. Sutler, Thos. Iceton, and Wm. Barker;
Mr. Oliver being Secretary. The Commission sat repeatedly, —often
daily, —between July and December, 1870; during which time the
greater part of the Bill was drafted. In December, the Martin
Ministry acceded to office; and Mr. IVindeyer was as Solicitor
General substituted for Mr. Salomons.
The Bill ivas completed in March, 1871; and laid before Parlia-
ment, with this Beport, in May, 1871. Nothing teas done with the
Bill there, however, until September, 1872 —when it was read in
Hie Assembly, on the motion of Mr. Butler, then Attorney General.
In September, 1873, Mr. Butler again introduced the Bill; and it
went into Committee, and was proceeded with as far as the 169 th
section. There the measure stopped—the October Circuit inter-
vening, and Mr. Butler resigning his office in November. It was in
the next year introduced into the Legislative Council by Mr. now
Sir George Lines, A. G.; but dropped on the accession of a new
Ministry in 1875.
In the interval between April, 1871, and September, 1872, some
additions tvere made to the Bill, and some verbal alterations intro-
duced—with the sanction of the Board ; but they were verbal only,
with one exception, and even this left the principle previously
agreed on untouched.


TABLE OE CONTENTS.
Clause. Page.
Note as to the Commission and the Criminal Law Consolidation Bill ... 2
Commission of July, 1870 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3
Circulars inviting suggestions ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3
Codes of Procedure: Law and Equity... ... ... ... ... 2a 4
Lunacy and Jury Laws ; also Justices Acts ... ... ... ... 3 4
Bankruptcy Law... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 a 5
Criminal Law Consolidation ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 5
Do. and Amendment Bill prepared ... 5 6
Inequality of Punishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6
Minimum terms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 7
The like: Hard labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7
Discretionary Punishments ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 8
Case of Death Punishments ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 9
Murders ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 9 9
Technical Murder ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 9
Homicides not murderous in character ... ... ... ... 10a 10
Forfeiture for Felony ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 11
Do. Substituted provisions... ... ... ... 11 11
11 11
Do. Subject continued ... ... ... ... 12 11
Distinction between Felony and Misdemeanor ... ... ... 13 12
Punishments ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 12
Whipping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 13
Reformatory Schools ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 13
Cumulative Sentences ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14a 13
Tickets of leave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 145 13
Investigations after Yerdict ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 14
Certain technical difficulties ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 14
Perjury ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 15
Witnesses for prisoner ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 15
Witnesses dangerously ill ... ... ... ... ... ... 18a 15
Rules of Evidence ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 186 16
Cases of Bigamy... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 16
Certain difficulties provided for ... ... ... ... ... 19a 17
Jurisdiction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19a 17
Challenges to Jurors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 17
No challenge in Misdemeanors ... ... ... 20 18
Unanimity of Jurors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 18
Miscellaneous provisions... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 19
Nature of the work performed... ... ... ... ... ... 23 19
*i ( . <n z.


NOTE AS TO THE COMMISSION AND CRIMINAL
LAW CONSOLIDATION BILL.
The Commission was appointed, during the Gowper-Bobertson
Ministry, on 21 st June, 1870. Members: Sir Alfred Stephen,
President, Sir W. M. Manning, A.G., J. B. Salomons, S. Q., Sir
Jas. Martin . Q. 0., JEdwd. Butler, Thos. Iceton, and Wm. Barker;
Mr. Oliver being Secretary. The Commission sat repeatedly, —often
daily,—between July and December, 1870; during which time the
greater part of the Bill was drafted. In December, the Martin
Ministry acceded to office; and Mr. Windeyer was as Solicitor
General substituted for Mr. Salomons.
The Bill was completed in March, 1871; and laid before Parlia-
ment, with this Report, in May, 1871. Nothing was done with the
Bill there, however, until September, 1872 —when it was read in
the Assembly, on the motion of Mr. Butler, then Attorney General.
In September, 1873, Mr. Butler again introduced the Bill; and it
went into Committee, and was proceeded with as far as the 169 th
section. There the measure stopped —the October Circuit inter-
vening, and Mr. Butler resigning his office in November. It was in
the next year introduced into the Legislative Council by Mr. now
Sir George Innes, A. G. ; but dropped on the accession of a new
Ministry in 1875.
In the interval between April, 1871, and September, 1872, some
additions were made to the Bill, and some verbal alterations intro-
duced—with the sanction of the Board; but they were verbal only,
with one exception, and even this left the principle previously
agreed on untouched.


Clause. Page,
lion Bill ... 2
1 3
2 3
2 a 4
3 4
3a 5
4 5
.i ... 5 6
6 6
6 7
7 7
8 8
9 9
9 9
lO 9
loa 10
ll 11
ll 11
l2 11
l3 12
X/iDllUOUiun __ ••• • • •
Punisliments ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 12
Whipping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 13
Reformatory Schools ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 13
Cumulative Sentences ... ... ... ... ... ... 14a 13
Tickets of leave ... ... ... ... ... ... •• • •• • 146 13
Investigations after Yerdict ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 14
Certain technical difficulties ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 14
Perjury ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 15
Witnesses for prisoner ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 15
Witnesses dangerously ill ... ... ... ... ... ... 18a 15
Rules of Evidence ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 186 16
Cases of Bigamy... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 16
Certain difficulties provided for ... ... ... ... ... 19a 17
Jurisdiction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19a 17
Challenges to Jurors ... ... ... ... ... ••• 20 17
Ho challenge in Misdemeanors ... ... 20 18
Unanimity of Jurors ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 18
Miscellaneous provisions... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 19
Nature of the work performed... ... ... ... ... ••• 23 19
- 11 . «5t 2~


•
•' ■


LAW EEEOEM COMMISSION.
FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS.
To The Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty :
The undersigned Commissioners —appointed respectively by Commission of
Your Majesty’s Letters Patent dated the lAth day of July last,
and hy a Supplementary Commission dated the 16th day of
December last, substituting the present for the late Solicitor
Greneral, —to inquire into the state of the Statute Law of this
Colony, and submit proposals for its revision, consolidation, and
amendment, —and also to make a like inquiry into the Practice
and Procedure of the Colonial Courts, and propose amendments
therein, with a view to the simplification and improvement of the
same, and to the removal of the inconveniences arising from the
separation of jurisdictions at Law and in Equity, —have the honor
humbly to certify and report to Tour Majesty in obedience to
the said first-mentioned Letters Patent the several matters
following: —
2. We caused circular letters to he issued and circulated, soon circulars
inviting
after our appointment, addressed to the Judges of the District suggestions.
Courts and of the Supreme Court, as also to many other persons,
not exclusively professional, inviting suggestions from them on
the subject of Practice and Procedure, and more particularly as
to certain points specified; and we have received answers and
suggestions (to which we shall more fully advert in our next
Report) from several of those gentlemen. Copies of those circu-
lars are annexed. We at the same time, by our Secretary, caused
a general intimation to be conveyed to the public through the
Press, that the Commissioners would gladly receive suggestions
on the same matters, addressed to him, from any individuals who
might be disposed so far to favour the Board. Very few commu-
nications have been received in reply to this appeal; but among


them is one recently sent, which we are glad to notice as contain-
ing the valuable suggestion, although not new to us, of the
institution of Tribunals of Conciliation, or Arbitration Courts,
for the settlement of disputes between Employers and their
Workmen,
2a. In a view to the proposal by us, at as early a period as
possible, of the introduction (with the necessary adaptations) of
recent measures of British legislation, by which many improve-
ments have been introduced into the Codes of Procedure at
home, both at Law and in Equity, we secured the professional
services of three counsel, under our supervision, with instructions
to prepare Consolidation Bills for the amendment of the practice
in both jurisdictions. The draftsmen were instructed, however, so
to frame both measures, as to be applicable to any amalgamation of
those jurisdictions ; in other words, so as not to prevent or delay
the establishment of uniform principles, and an uniform method
of procedure, in all actions or suits in the Court, whatever may
be their nature —legal or equitable. The preparation of such
Bills, as of all others of a like kind where a leading object is con-
solidation, is necessarily a work of time ; but they are now nearly
completed, we believe, and in a state for revision by us as we
hope at an early date.
3. Our own personal attention has been directed, hitherto, to
the Colonial statute book; in which the following subjects
appeared to us urgently to demand attention. These are, the
Laws affecting the treatment and care of the Insane and their
property, —the Insolvency and Jury Laws, —the several enactments
affecting Procedure before Justices, in or out of Sessions, —and
the Criminal Law ; all requiring consolidation, and admitting if
not calling for extensive amendment. On the first of these, we
found that by direction of the then Attorney General, before our
appointment, a very comprehensive measure had been prepared
by two members of the bar, after repeated conferences with the
able Superintendent Physician at Gladesville; which appeared to
us on perusal to be so complete in its details, and well calculated


to effect the objects of such a law, that we thought it our duty at
once to recommend the Bill as it stood, or with very few
suggested alterations, to the late Government, It will be found
to contain some enactments, borrowed from recent English legis-
lation, in immediate connexion with the subject, which we believe
to be of great importance to the community at large.
3a. The Insolvency Laws, involving a consideration of the Bankruptcy
entire Bankruptcy code and system, will require not only our own
careful study in all their details, but, on some of the leading
principles of the measure, whatever shape the new measure may
assume, the assistance of members of the mercantile body. The
Chief Justice, in conjunction with Sir James Martin, has under-
taken the preparation of a Bill, which will not be submitted to the
Board until after conference with a Committee of the Chamber of
Commerce, now sitting on this subject; and we trust to be able to
propose a measure, eventually, which shall be efficacious, safe,
and satisfactory. The Jury Laws, although embracing several
statutes, are of a far less complicated character than either of
the preceding ; and may be consolidated and improved, we think,
without much difficulty.
4. We conceived that the most pressing, as it most unquestion-
ably is the most important subject for consideration, in a view to
consolidation and amendment, was the Criminal Law; and to
this we have accordingly, not unconscious of the magnitude and
difficulty of the task, earnestly and unremittingly devoted our-
selves. It was necessary for its due accomplishment to consult not
merely the older English Acts, to which our own had been closely
assimilated, but all the most recent enactments ; in addition to
which, we thought it desirable to look into some other codes —
colonial and foreign —as well as such treatises as were accessible,
on the subject of Criminal Law Eeform. The result is, after
very careful deliberation by us separately and collectively, ex-
tending over a period of several months, the draft Bill which we
submit with this Report in obedience to the terms of our com-
mission, and propose for the consideration of Parliament.


5. The Bill consists of 464 clauses ; of which number, 226 are
founded (although not in the majority of cases identical with)
the English Consolidation Statutes of 1861, and 96 are more or
less taken from various enactments English or Colonial, while
112 are wholly or substantially new. It embodies, therefore,
among other subjects, all the enactments affecting Larceny and
kindred offences, Forgery and crimes against the Person, Mali-
cious Injuries, Offences respecting the Coin, and Offences by
Accessories, which are comprised in the six Acts of 1861; and it
consolidates also the Laws against Perjury —all enactments
respecting other specific classes of crime (those under the Bank-
ruptcy Laws for instance) being omitted. The new clauses, on
the other hand, suggested in almost every case hy difficulties occur-
ring within our own experience , and relating chiefly to Pleading,
Procedure, and Evidence, embrace all crimes. The combined
effect is the repeal and re-enactment, in a condensed form, of
above fifty Colonial Statutes ; while on the very difficult subject
of Punishments, every provision affecting it is introduced, grouped
together in one concerted series. We may add, that in the
framing of this extensive Code (if the term may be thought not
too ambitious), every sentence—even the effect of each word in
it —has been most carefully weighed, and every superfluous word
avoided; so that no enactment shall be reasonably liable to mis-
construction, and that the law shall be intelligible as far as may
be to every educated person, without the embarrassment occa-
sioned by a cloud of terms.
6. We have not failed to give attention to the subject, so often
discussed without tangible result, of the inequality, —occasionally
the inadequacy, and in some instances the undue severity, —of
punishments. In deference to the expressed opinion of the
Legislative Council, and in a view to the establishment of uni-
formity and system where certainly neither has yet prevailed, we
have introduced enactments to the effect following. The Bill
proposes five maximum terms of Penal Servitude ; that is to say
for life, fourteen years, ten years, seven years, and five years,
severally. This maximum term will, of course, in each instance,


be fixed by tbe Legislature, according the enormity of the
crime in itself, or its injurious consequences to individuals or to
the public. We have in each clause suggested, as it was proper
for us to do, what appeared to ourselves to be the desirable
limit; but it is in many cases almost arbitrary, and subject to no
definite principle. In any event, the limit is exclusively for the
wisdom of Parliament.
It seems thence to follow, that when legislative authority has Minimum terms,
thus set its mark on an offence, by assigning to the offender (in
respect at least of the worst examples) his due place in the scale
of crime, the Court can have no right to reduce that offence
practically to a lower one, by awarding him a punishment pre-
scribed for offenders of a stated less degree. We propose there-
fore, to establish uniform rules for the guidance of Judges in
this respect; limiting their discretion considerably in appor-
tioning punishment, in the more aggravated forms of crime.
Thus, where the fixed period is Penal Servitude for life, the
minimum term proposed is seven years ; and, where Servitude
for fourteen years or ten years is prescribed, the minimum
periods are five years and four years respectively. The rule will
be a simple one, easily borne in mind ; and it is contained in a
single section, instead of being repeated with variations —as in
the English Consolidation Acts —in above two hundred.
7. With respect to offences of minor degree, indicated by The like.
, „ , _ , , .. , Hard Labour.
the terms of seven years and five years Servitude, we propose a
similar but not altogether the same. rule ; namely, that in each
class there shall be the alternative of Imprisonment —with the
minimum of twelve months in the former case, but subject to
no minimum limit in the latter. Every sentence to imprison-
ment however may (as provided in a separate section) be made
more effective, by adding to it Hard Labour or Solitary Con-
finement, or a direction to find Sureties for good behaviour.
It must be remembered, that crimes subjected to these smaller
terms of Penal Servitude are, or may be in some cases, of a
trivial character, although in other instances attended with


circumstances of great aggravation. The old and trusted servant,
who deliberately avails himself of his position to steal some
article of value, and the girl who under sudden temptation pilfers
a ribbon, are necessarily in the same legal category; but the two
offences differ so widely in every other aspect, as obviously to
require the allowance of extreme latitude to the tribunal which
apportions punishment to them. Many illustrations of similar
character will readily present themselves.
8. Other crimes indeed, although offences of the same class
and nature, vary similarly in degree ; and some, as in the case of
Manslaughter , may be said to vary infinitely. Not merely the
circumstances attending the act or omission, in any case of crime,
but those which led to it, the deliberation of the design, or its
having arisen from distress or momentary pressure, its actual
wickedness, the age, character, and position of the offender, the
amount of injury done or in fact contemplated and intended to
have been done, and the probable effect of a light or heavy sen-
tence in deterring other offenders, are all matters to be con-
sidered in meting out an appropriate measure of punishment,
Two men may alike be guilty of robbery or housebreaking ; but
one, an old and hardened ruffian, shall have planned and mainly
executed the crime, and the other, young and inexperienced’
have been over-persuaded by him at the last moment to aid in its
commission. It would be impossible therefore without injustice,
and the necessity of frequent appeals to the Executive for miti-
gation, to prescribe one fixed rule or period,—whether of penal
servitude or imprisonment,—for all offenders committing even
the self-same act; and, still more obviously, those who simply
fall within some prohibitory enactment, in which offences them-
selves comprising various shades of guilt are all made subject to
one scale. Think what we will about particular instances, much
must be left in each case to the discretion of the presiding
Judge. In England, that discretion is perhaps too unfettered ;
and it may be, that there as well as in New South Wales it has
not always been wisely exercised. Greater evils, however, it will
be perceived, would flow from an entire abolition of the system.


We have suggested a middle course, which has occurred to us
after much consideration to he the only practicable modification-
9. In by far the greater number of instances, the punishments Case of Death
r Punishments.
provided in the Bill are much below the English and our own
existing scale. But, except in two instances, we have not felt
ourselves able to propose for adoption, as in the Acts of 1861,
the abolition of the penalty of death for crimes of great atrocity,
at present subject in this Colony to that infliction. It is not
within our province to enter here into elaborate discussion on so
vexed a subject as that of the expediency or propriety generally
of death punishments. The Legislature will determine that
question for the Colony, in respect of the crimes referred to, and
embraced by the present Bill. But it is right to observe, that
this last (often the only dreaded) penalty is retained in every
British code, as a just and salutary measure, for the technical
crime of murder, without exception or qualification of any kind.
We advisedly use the word technical, in order to notice the fact Murders,
that this crime, although popularly by no means so understood,
may be committed without previous malice ; that an immediate
intention to kill any one, much less the particular individual, is
not essential to it; and that, in certain cases, even an omission
may suffice to constitute the legal guilt. Eejecting these con-
siderations, let any ordinary case of achieved murder be com-
pared, in degree of wickedness, or in its effects on society—in
reference either to the insecurity of our homes or persons, or the
persons of helpless women unprotected in the wild bush, or pro-
tected only by the terror to offenders of impending death, —with
one of those dreadful outrages, of late only become less common
among us, of meditated, and attempted, and all but accomplished
murder. Or with rape brutally committed; or burglary by
armed gangs, accompanying their act of violence by not terror
only, but the wounding of the inmates with an intent to kill, or
a reckless indifference whether the wound shall kill or not.
10. The act of shooting at a tame fowl with intent to steal it, Technical
. . ’ Murder.
whereby a man is killed whom the malefactor never saw or heard


o£, is murder; and punishable by death. Two or more men
engage in a design to commit some felony, perhaps equally trivial;
and, in the prosecution of it, one of them in a scuffle kills his
assailant. All the party are equally guilty of murder. The
Judge, moreover, by a recent statute, must in every case actually
pronounce the capital sentence. A mischievous'beast, known by
the owner to be so, is turned loose by him among a crowd with
intent merely to frighten people ; and the death of one among
them is the result. Or a labourer throws stones from a height
into a frequented street, without giving any warning; and a
passer-by is accidently killed. In each instance the act is Murder.
On the other hand, the most atrocious conspiracy to commit that
crime, under circumstances combining every aggravation, is in
the English Acts lightly dealt with. And any crime whatever,
or any series of crimes in succession, against either person or
property, or both, if death though intended do not supervene,—
a Burglary at midnight, stripping the dwelling of its contents,
and violating or stabbing the inmates, or a planned Bobbery with
arms, accompanied by the most brutal ill-usage, and wounds that
shall cripple the victim for life, —may be committed without a
greater punishment than penal servitude ; which the Judge may
mitigate to imprisonment for a single day.
10 a. We have endeavoured to avoid both extremes. Eetaining
the death penalty for certain more flagitious acts, the Bill
proposes to take it away from cases of Murder not actually
malicious, in the ordinary sense of the word, or (in their nature,
or in respect of the probable consequences of the act) not
wicked in a high degree. The mode adopted, it will be perceived,
although creating a distinction so great, infringes no established
rule or maxim, and removes no known land-mark, of the Criminal
Law. The definitions of Murder and Manslaughter, as of
Homicide Justifiable or Excusable, will remain ; but, supposing
the leading requisites established, the punishment of Murder
will be made to depend, in the cases provided for, on specific
established facts —and not on the Executive alone.


11. We pass to a subject o£ scarcely less practical importance. Forfeitures for
By an Imperial statute passed last year only (the 34 Yic. c. 23),
Forfeiture to the Crown for Felony is abolished ; the offender’s
property nevertheless being made answerable to a limited extent,
at the discretion of the Court, for the costs of the prosecution,
and the payment of compensation to persons whom his act may
have injured. The Court may also, if it sees fit, assign the
residue of the property to a person called an administrator, for
the benefit of the offender’s creditors and family—he being him-
self under disability, and therefore unable to deal with it. We
have introduced clauses into the Bill, adopting in substance that p^^sions' 1
very desirable measure ; but without its elaborate and in some
respects complicated provisions. It has appeared to us, that by
making use of the already existing machinery of our Insolvent
Act, and conferring on all such assignments, of which there will
not be many, the effect of an Adjudication in that jurisdiction,
the proof of the offender’s debts and the collection and preser-
vation or distribution of his property will follow as a matter of
course —without the necessity of any new officer, or of special
enactments and an untried code of procedure. By this simple
expedient we have been able to substitute six clauses for the
twenty-nine of the English Act; and at the same time to add a
provision, not found in the latter, for the protection of the
offender’s wife (and, through her, of their children) during his
own legal incapacity.
12. By the Common Law, we need scarcely observe, the for- subject of
. „ , Forfeiture
feiture of property —of lands by attainder only —was consequent continued,
on every Felony; and such has continued to be an incident of
that class of crime, whatever its absolute or assigned degree of
guilt or punishment. This very heavy infliction attached, for
instance, even to cases of Involuntary Manslaughter and the
like; where, as a general rule, no offence morally is imputed
to the convicted person. But, in Misdemeanors, the class of
offences supposed to be (and ordinarily being) inferior in their
degree of wrong-doing, no forfeiture of property ensued even in
the grossest case, and although marked as heinous crimes by the


severity o£ the prescribed punishment. Perjury, Obtaining
money by Pal sc Pretences, and Prauds by Trustees, Bankers, and
other Agents, all being in England misdemeanors only, are
examples. Yet, in some of these, the last especially, forfeiture
of goods would seem to be more appropriate than in any ordinary
felony. Moreover, as there can be no legal 'arrest for a Misde-
meanor on oral information , or without a Justice’s warrant,
offenders of that class have an additional advantage in the
chances of escape.
13. But if Forfeiture be abolished, or retained only to the
extent and for the purposes mentioned, there appears to be no
sufficient reason for omitting to place all crimes of magnitude, or
crimes in degree of wrong-doing equal at least to Larceny, which
(if of property above a shilling in value) was always Pelony, in the
stated rank of Pelonies. "We had then to consider, whether
some fixed and easily understood rule could not be established,
for marking if not defining the legal distinction between Felony
and Misdemeanor. And for this purpose it is proposed by the
Bill to enact, that offences made punishable with Death or
Penal Servitude shall be in the former , and all offences not so
punishable shall belong to the latter class. We do not, therefore,
suggest the abrogation of either term ; although neither, in fact,
ever conveyed any accurate or definite idea. An enactment that
a person should by any given act be guilty of felony, has meant
only that the incidents of the crime, or class of crimes so called,
shall attach to the doing of such act. In that respect the law will
continue the same, although the incident of Forfeiture icill exist no
longer. But the imposition of the penalty of Death or Penal
Servitude, in any section, will be equivalent to such an enactment.
The prescribed punishment for any act or omission will indicate,
in every case, its class of crime; and Perjury, with Swindling,
Prauds by Trustees in misappropriating moneys, and some other
offences of the fraudulent class, become Pelonies—as we think
that they always ought to have been.
14. On the subject of Punishments we will here mention one
or two provisions, adopted substantially from the Imperial statute


book, and more or less in force in some of our sister colonies. In Whippllls '-
certain cases of crimes against the person with violence, such as
the crime called garotting, cases of bestiality and indecent
assault, certain wanton and malicious injuries, as for instance
to books and works of art in public institutions, felonious assaults
by prisoners already in gaol, and offences by lads under sixteen,
whipping is provided. But we have introduced clauses for
limiting the number of strokes, establishing one uniform kind of
instrument, for adults and boys respectively, and (as in Victoria)
authorizing the gaol surgeon to stay any such punishment, if in
any case injurious to the offender’s health. Where security for s C hoo™ at ° iy
good behaviour can be given, the Judge may in certain cases
defer passing any sentence; and the existing enactment is
inserted as to sending offenders to a Reformatory School.
14 a. Longer periods of punishment are prescribed for offenders senTences™
more than once previously sentenced; and the mode of pro-
cedure in such cases, or cases of cumulative punishment, is
simplified. The Judge need not actually pronounce, but may
simply record sentence of death, in any case where he shall see
cause for so doing ; but, whenever he exercises that power, he is
required to state his reasons on the record. Ample powers of
mitigation are reserved to the Governor in every case —to be
granted with or without conditions ; among which are those of
residence for a time in a named district, and good behaviour there.
145. In a view to the occasional exercise of this last power, TlcketB of leave-
very stringent enactments are framed, —founded on the most
recent English regulations, —for ensuring that good conduct, and
summarily punishing misbehaviour. Experience will show to what
extent these indulgences may be carried. But it will be borne in
mind, that the great mass of offenders against the law must
sooner or later mingle again with the community; and the pro-
posed system, which provides for their gradual restoration , under
prescribed probationary rules in the meantime, may therefore be
well worth the trial.


15. It not unfrequently happens after a prisoner’s conviction,
generally on his representation, hut sometimes at the instance of
strangers, that doubts or questions are raised as to some part of
the evidence, or some matter not in evidence, tending to impeach
the verdict. Such doubts must in the course of years have pre-
sented themselves, without suggestion elsewhere, to the mind of
every Judge. There is, however, as we all know, not only no
Appeal in such cases, but no mode provided by law for investi-
gating the facts represented, or satisfactorily solving any doubts
so raised. The absence of such a provision has often been
regretted ; but there is great difficulty in applying an adequate
remedy. We have endeavoured to meet this, to some extent, by
an enactment enabling the Governor, or the presiding Judge, in
any case, to cause witnesses to be examined on oath before some
Justice ; and thus to obtain materials, under legal sanction, for
determining how far the doubt or representation is well
founded.
16. Many serious difficulties, some of them purely technical in
character, are experienced in prosecutions for Larceny and
kindred offences. Lor example. Under the Bailee Act, and
similarly in analogous cases of Embezzlement, the appropriation
relied on as fraudulent must be of the specific thing received; and
the act is not punishable if the accused was bound only to return
an equivalent, but not that very thing. On trials for Cattle
Stealing, and commonly for the receiving of meat the produce of
cattle stolen or feloniously killed, it occasionally happens that
the sex of the animal cannot be proved. A more general occur-
rence is, the difficulty experienced by juries in determining
whether the person charged is guilty of stealing, or of receiving
the property in question. There are cases clearly of theft, in
the moral sense, in which criminal responsibility depends on the
original intention, and not on the actual appropriation, however
dishonest. Others, where the prisoner’s defence is that he
intended eventually to return, although he took, the property.
Some gross frauds escape punishment, under the existing law,
because they are not deemed representations of some matter of fact ;


although the line of separation from the statutory offence is a
very thin one, and the wrong done the same in effect and degree.
The Bill contains clauses, framed, and we believe adapted, to meet
these several points.
17. Notwithstanding many useful statutes directed against perjurj.
Perjury, the law on this head is still defective. Some provisions
are therefore inserted, for simplifying and facilitating (but in
frivolous cases for restraining) prosecutions for this crime, and
removing certain technical difficulties connected with False
Swearing not amounting in law to Perjury. And, as being of a
kindred character, we introduce under the same head False
Eeturns and Declarations relating to Births, Deaths, and
Marriages—already punishable by existing Colonial Acts. But
if these offences are punishable, because of their injurious
probable results or effects on society, we are able to discover no
valid reason for not similarly punishing False Eeturns, and
Declarations, deliberately made in fraud of the Public Eevenue.
The Bill proposes, therefore, to place offenders of either class in
the same category.
18. On the subject of Witnesses, and especially those SOUght Witnesses for
• «/ o Prisoner.
to be examined on behalf of accused persons, some important
provisions are suggested; the most prominent among them—
recommended in this Colony many years ago —taken from recent •
British legislation. The first is, an enactment entitling a prisoner
to call witnesses in his defence, before committal; and allowing
the expense of travelling, to such of them as shall be certified to
be material, the same as to witnesses for the Crown. Such a
provision may be thought sufficiently recommended by its humanity
and justice; but it has this recommendation also—that painful
appeals to the Court or the Executive, on the ground of some fact
not having been before the jury because of the prisoner’s inability
to bring up a witness, will in future have their fitting answer.
18a. We propose also for adoption another English enactment, witnesses
for securing the evidence of persons dangerously ill; whose daugerously m *
testimony would probably otherwise be lost. Numerous examples


might easily be given, in which this provision will be found of
value. Every available precaution is taken, however, by providing
for the cross-examination of the witness as soon as practicable, to
prevent injustice to parties who may be implicated by any such
evidence. The statements of persons, by what is termed a Dying
Declaration, have always been receivable —in cases of Homicide—
without oath, and without provision for cross-examination; but
only where they relate to the cause of death, and the declarant
has abandoned all hope of life. An alternative if not a preferable
course is now provided. A sick or wounded person need not,
under this new enactment, be in a state that excludes all hope of
recovery, and he must be sworn. On the other hand, we propose
(for a like reason) that his belief of certainly impending death
shall not be necessary, to sustain in certain cases a Declaration
under the old law.
185. There are rules of Practice on some other points, affecting
the reception of evidence and the examination of witnesses, which
the Bill seeks to alter or modify. The following are the most
material.
1. Admitting evidence in mitigation of punishment, where
the Judge shall conceive it to be just on trials so to do.
2. Allowing witnesses to state their own knowledge of a
prisoner’s habits and conduct, when testifying to his
character, instead of being as at present restricted to
evidence of repute, which may or may not exist in the
particular instance as to that character.
3. Permitting evidence to be given of inconsistent statements,
in contradiction of a party’s own witness, although he
may not have “ proved adverse” within the meaning of
the embarrassing enactment passed to remove difficulties
in that behalf.
19. In cases of Bigamy, we propose that the wife (or husband,
as the case may be) of the accused shall be admissible, but not
compellable, to give evidence for or against the prosecution. In
every other case of injury, cognizable as a crime, committed by


the one against the other, the wife or husband is a competent
witness. It seems therefore to be an anomaly, excused by no
sufficient reason, that in this—the gravest of all offences against
married life, since adultery is here preceded or followed by perjury,
and abandonment or open repudiation,—the same rule has not
prevailed. But the Bill provides, that marriage shall not be
proved by the evidence of the alleged wife or husband alone.
19 a. A very serious difficulty exists in respect of this crime. Certain difficui-
J ties provided for,
The Legislature of New South Wales, as of every other colony,
has no jurisdiction over persons or things in another country or
colony. No enactment passed here, therefore, having effect
beyond our own territorial limits, and our Courts possessing no
power, except by Imperial authority, to try offences or take cog-
nizance of acts committed outside those limits, it seems clear that
Parliament could not effectually enact a law for punishing Bigamy,
where the second marriage shall have been in any country other
than Neiv South Wales. It follows that the act can only be pun- Jurisdiction,
ished, or the offender tried, in the country where such act was
committed, (supposing his marriage to be an offence against the
laws of that country), or, if in any other, then by virtue solely of
some enactment binding equally both territories. Such an enact-
ment fortunately exists as part of the law of this Colony, (the 9
deorge 4 c. 31 s. 22, extended here by 9 George 4 c. 83), under
which Bigamy is an offence, icheresoever committed, triable in any
part of the Empire. We have therefore so framed the Schedule
of Repealed Acts and Statutes, as to retain that 22nd section.
And, for a similar reason, the Schedule retains section 32, relating
to Offences on the Sea—over which, beyond a short distance from
our coasts, the Legislature has of course no jurisdiction.*
20. Among the new provisions in our proposed Bill, those challenges to
relating to Jurors, and to the trial of all Indictable Offences on Juior3-
one uniform system, are such as to demand special notice, in
*lt retains als.3 section Bas to Homicide ; where the wound or the death
may have been beyond the jurisdiction. But, by the 23 and 24 Yictoria
c. 122, power is conferred on Colonial Legislatures to provide for such cases.


commending them to the favorable consideration of Parliament.
By the existing law, every man charged with Felony , however
trifling, is entitled to twenty Challenges, without assigning any
cause or ground of objection, to the persons summoned to
try him. This extensive right, utterly unnecessary in any case
for the ends of justice, or for securing a fair trial, enables the
accused to eject nearly one-half, and in the smaller towns two-
thirds, of the entire panel; and thus, either to compel a post-
ponement of his trial, or to force into the Jury box some one
person (or perhaps more), disposed beforehand if not resolved to
acquit him. The Crown Prosecutor, on the other hand, can only
exclude persons conditionally, although without limit; for, if the
panel he exhausted by the double process, those objected to for
the Crown must he called again—when, unless excepted to for
cause assigned and proved, they are sworn to try the case, what-
ever their known prejudices or character. If however the offence
charged he not Felony, there is no right of Peremptory Challenge
on either side; whatever the nature of that offence, or the extent
of feeling likely to exist respecting it or the parties to it. Our
suggestions are, to place both Felonies and Misdemeanors in this
respect on the same footing; to give a right of Challenge in each
class alike ; to reduce the number of Challenges (that is to say,
without cause assigned) to eight or in Capital cases twelve; and
to restrict the Crown’s right to the same number, but to make that
right absolute. The right of Challenge “for cause ” to remain
as at present. It is proposed further to assimilate the law, by
extending to defendants in cases of Misdemeanor the privilege
• —existing at present in Felonies only —of “ pleading over ” to
the indictment, after judgment for the Crown on demurrer.
21. From the earliest times, the unanimity of Jurors on
Criminal trials has been secured, or sought to be so, by the
expedient, —hard! f reconcilable with ideas of modern civilization,
or altogether with justice to the sufferers, —of denying them all
food whatsoever, after leaving the jury box, until they shall have


delivered their verdict. Some o£ them in a given case, honestly
seeking to concur with their fellows, may desire time for dis-
cussion or for thought, hut deliberation has been proscribed except
under that condition. We propose that a rule felt to be so
oppressive, whatever may have been the reasons which led origin-
ally to its adoption, shall be abolished ; and Juries be in all cases
allowed reasonable refreshment. And, to avoid all question as
to the propriety of discharging a Jury, by reason of exhaustion
or inability to agree, a clause in the Bill vests that power in
the Judge, after certain inquiries and the lapse of a specified
time.
22. There are numerous other provisions in the Bill —such as Miscellaneous
, . provisions.
giving power to the presiding Judge to enlarge Jury Panels, and
to bring up Prisoners by Order without Writ; the allowing of
Writs of Error, and facilitating proceedings on (or in some cases
dispensing with) Writs of Habeas Corpus ; the removal of diffi-
culties in carrying out Sentences of Courts Marshal; rendering
formal proofs unnecessary in certain cases; and so on. Many
of these are too technical to admit of easy explanation. A clause
will be observed, respecting the creation and jurisdiction of
Courts of General Sessions and Petty Sessions. This has been
inserted, because of the suggested repeal of the Eelons Act, and
existing Quarter Sessions Acts. And, at the instance of Your
Majesty’s Law Officers, we have added a clause limiting prosecu-
tions for Blasphemy ; the undefined nature of which offence, it is
suggested, demands definite legal restraint.
23. It may perhaps be thought, but not by those most compe- Nature of the
J 1 ' ° J 1 work performed.
tent to appreciate it, that the result of our labours thus far is
scarcely adequate to the amount of time apparently occupied.
We desire on this head to say, only, that we conceived it to be
unbecoming our position and the importance of the work, to
allow this comprehensive measure to leave our hands, without
the bestowal on it of an amount of care, and minute revision,
that may well excuse delay. Not only, as already observed, have


every sentence and word been dwelt on and considered, but many
clauses have been repeatedly re-considered, and many as often
entirely remodelled, and again written and re-written.
All which we hereby certify under our hands, this 28th day of
March, 1871, and of Your Majesty’s reign the Thirty-fourth.
ALFRED STEPHEN, C.J.,
E. BETTER.
President.
t THOS. ICETON.
¥M, BARKER.
*W. C. WINDEYER, S.G.
W. M. MANNING, Q.C.
Alexe. Olitee,
Secretary.
* While convinced of the necessity of some amendment of the present Law of Challenge,
I doubt the expediency of that proposed. I also question the policy of the alterations of the
Law suggested in clauses 128, 148, 327, 347, and 358 of the Bill.
W. C. WINDEYER, S.G.
11 doubt the necessity or expediency of converting into Felonies some offences hitherto-
known to the Law as Misdemeanors only.
THOS. ICETON.
Sydney ; Charles Potter, Acting Government Printer.—lB76.
jAPf
16 MO
6 ■ 6 Lj
