

Presbyterian Church of Victoria
REPORT OF JUBILEE FUND COMMITTEE.
The Jubilee.
As every one knows, every fiftieth year was a year of release in Israel.
The slave was set at liberty, the debtor had his debts remitted to him, and
every one who had mortgaged or sold his land had his land restored to him.
This was the Year of Jubilee in Israel.
Our Church will complete the fiftieth year of her existence in the year
1888, the Rev. James Clow, of the Honourable East India Company’s
Service, having begun to preach the gospel after the manner of the Presby-
terian Church, in Port Philip, in the year 1838. Mrs. Hamilton, one of
Mr. Clow’s daughters, has informed me that her father preached his first
sermon in Port Philip on the last Sabbath of 1837, but his regular work
of preaching began in the year 1838 ; so that it is correct to say that our
Church will complete the fiftieth year of her existence in the year 1888.
On the suggestion of my predecessor in office, and the recommendation of a
large Committee, which had his suggestion for a year under their con-
sideration, the last General Assembly unanimously resolved to celebrate
this event by inviting all the members and adherents of the Church to join
in raising a Jubilee Thanksgiving Fund of £60,000 before the Assembly of
that year. In resolving to invite the members and adherehts of the Church
to unite in raising this fund, the Assembly had two things in view. First,
it was thought that this was a fitting way in which to testify our
gratitude to God for His great goodness to us as a Church and as individuals
(luring these many years. And secondly, it was thought that the raising of
such a fund would greatly help us in securing the more efficient and more
extensive preaching of that gospel which “ proclaims liberty to the captive,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound.” In this way the
fiftieth year of our existence would be a Year of Jubilee in the highest and
best sense of the word.
Work Done.
The Assembly having come to this resolution appointed a large central
Committee for the purpose of carrying it out, and at the same time instructed
all the Presbyteries of the Church to appoint local Committees to co-operate
with the central Committee; all the members of these local Committees
to be members also of the large central Committee. That Committee has
not made much noise ; it has not done much in the way of attracting public


attention, but it has not been idle. Immediately after the rising of the
Assembly, it set to work in the most practical way by several of the
members of it announcing what they would be prepared to give. 11 st 01^ < i
gentleman said that he would give so much, then another said he would
give so much, and so on. When a number of good subscriptions were in
this way promised by the members of the Committee, an appeal in behalf
of the Fund was prepared, to be circulated among our people; and as the
months of January, February, and March were not deemed suitable tor
addressing the richer congregations about the city, the Convener was asked
to bring the matter under the notice of the wealthier friends of the Chuich
by letter or by personal application. After that, it was agreed that a
deputation should visit the wealthier friends of the Church in the Western
District. In accordance therewith, Mr. Campbell and the Convener visited
the larger proprietors who belong to our Church in the district by way
of the Leigh, Ballarat, Carngham and Skipton. We were everywhere
received with the utmost kindness, and the result in a pecuniary point ot
view was that we returned home richer by £3OOO. After a short pause, it
was thought desirable that the remaining half of the district should be
visited. Mr. Campbell not feeling quite equal to the work, Mr. Or. lait
was appointed by the Committee of the Mortlake Presbytery to accompany
me. Here our experience was the same as in the other half of the distnct.
We were everywhere received with the greatest kindness, and although we
received very few definite promises of subscriptions, by reason of the
drought in New South Wales and Queensland, yet, from the hearty
approval which our friends gave to the movement, and from the anxiety
which thev displayed not to give small subscriptions, I am hopeful that in
the end the result of our visit will be as large an addition to the b und as
that which was made to it by the visit to the Ballarat District.
Subscriptions Promised.
Without going into further particulars as to the various applications
which we made to the wealthier friends of the Church, I may now state
in a word the present position of the Fund.
We have received definite promises of subscriptions from thirty-five
ladies and gentlemen, amounting in all to £10,456, while more an
twenty others have promised to give without stating the amoun wic i y
will give. Of course I cannot tell with accuracy what they will give , but
from the fact that many of them did not promise anything dehmte at
present, because they wished to give a good subscription, I think I am not
too sanguine when 1 reckon that their united subscriptions will amount to
not less than £SOOO. If, then, we reckon the indefinite promises as
equivalent to so much, we may consider that the amount vntua y P ro ™'® ef
to the Fund since last Assembly amounts to the goodly sum ot £ ,•
This very day I have received another subscription of £SOO tiom e on.
James Munro, M.L.A., raising the amount to £16,000. Now, I thin t m
that is a result for which we ought to thank God and take courage.
Subscribers.
But, Sir, I think we ought not to be satisfied with merely knowing the
cross result. I think the Church and the world ought to know the names
of those who have helped to raise this goodly sum. In the appeal wine i
has been printed, and which has been sent to some of our richer friends,


paragraph spsl>imgrthat “ it has been suggested that a book should
it there sTTOuId be tflist of all the subscribers to this Fund —young and old,
rich and poor —so that our children who come after us may find therein a
record of the gratitude and generosity of their ancestors.” Now, I have
received a letter from a gentleman, signifying his disapproval of that
paragraph as fitted to provoke invidious and unfair reflections. I cannot,
however, sympathise with that objection. We have such a record in the
Scriptures. Nehemiah mentions by name all those who took part in
the building of the walls of Jerusalem in his time; aye, and he mentions
also that the nobles of the Tekoites put not their necks to the work of the
Lord. We have high authority, then, for mentioning the names of those
who have shown their willingness to take part in building the walls of
Jerusalem in our day.
At the dedication of the tabernacle in the wilderness, the twelve
princes of Israel brought their offering before the Lord—six covered
waggons and twelve oxen, a waggon for two of the princes, and for
each one an ox. At the dedicating of the altar, they also offered their
offering, each prince on his day, and the offering of each was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was 130 shekels, one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, one spoon of 10 shekels of gold, one bullock, one ram, one lamb of
the first year, and one kid of the goats. Now, it seemed to us that in like
manner the merchant and proprietor princes of our Israel should take the
lead in presenting their offering to the Lord, and some of them have not
been slow to do so. They have been willing of themselves, and have
required no pressing from us ; in fact, some of them have given without
being asked. Four of them have each brought a waggon containing, the
goodly sum of £IOOO. They are gentlemen who are well known for their
liberality. Their names are —The Hon. James Macßain, President of the
Legislative Council; The Hon. James Balfour, Member of the Legislative
Council; The Hon. Philip Russell, also Member of the Legislative Council ;
and John L. Currie, Esq., of Larra. We hope that there will be eight
other princes in our Israel who will each bring his waggon containing a
like sum.
Next to these come seven gentlemen giving £SOO each. These gentle-
men would refuse to be called princes. Nevertheless, they have given like
princes. First comes W. Inglis, Esq., who has the honour of being the first
to give to the Fund. Then comes Andrew Harper, Esq.; then J. M.
Davies, Esq. ; then Mr. J. M. , a gentleman who does not wish Ins
name to be known, but I am sure it would have no small influence upon
others if he would allow it to be known; then come John Murray Esq of
Ballarat; James Kinnimonth, Esq.; and the Hon. James Munro, M.L.A.
Next come three gentlemen giving £3OO each. They are, George Shaw,
Esq Alexander Armstrong, Esq., and a gentleman who wishes on the
present occasion to be nameless. Then comes one gentleman who gives
£2OO ; his name is Peter McCracken, Esq.
Then come seven giving £l5O each. They are, John Sharp, Esq.
J. Richmond, Esq., J. M. Campbell, Esq., Mrs. S. Officer, J. C. Lloyd, Esq.,
G R Esq and Dr. Morrison. Then come nine, giving LIOO each —
Robert Chirnside, Jun., Esq.; The Hon. W. Bayles; Mrs. Cairns; N. G.
Elder Esq. ; M. K. McKenzie, Esq.; R. G. Wilson, Esq. ; R. Grieve, Esq.;
Evander Mclver, Esq.; and Chas. McDougall, Esq. Then come two at
£75 —Alexander Anderson, Esq.; and George Lewis, Esq. ilien come tour


at £50 —Joseph Ma 3 k, E»q.; Thos. Alston, Esq.; A. Whiting, Esq. ; and
Mrs. Forbes. And finally, come—one at £3O ; one at £25 , one at £ ,
and one at £l. Their names are, D. Brodie, Esq.; Rev. A. J. Campbell,
Mrs. Simpson, and Mrs. Murdoch.
I have also the names of the twenty-four who have promised to give, but
who have not specified the amount which they will give, but I am sure that
the Commission will not expect me to mention them at present.
Visiting of Congregations.
Such is our account of what we have already done, but much remains yet
to be done. We propose, therefore, to set about visiting all the Congrega-
tions of our Church without delay, in order that the claims of this 1 und
may be brought before every member and adherent thereof, for we hope
that every one will be anxious to contribute his share to it.
Such, then, is our report of what we have done since last Assembly, and
our statement of what we wish to do before next Assembly; and with the
presenting of this report I had hoped that my work this evening should
end I had hoped that some lay gentleman would move its adoption, but
in this I have been disappointed. The gentlemen to whom we applied
could not conveniently be present this evening. After receiving then
declinature it was too late for me to ask any one else to move its adoption-
Mr. Campbell, whose assistance to me has simply been invaluable, naa
agreed to second the motion, and there was nothing for it but that 1 shouici
move its adoption myself. I wish I had had more time to prepare some-
thing worthy of the occasion ; but to win your approval I am satisfied that
much speaking is not needed.
The Movement Fitting and Appropriate.
(1.) I am sure that the movement which we have commenced will
commend itself to you all as one that is most fitting and appropriate in the
circumstances. Think of what God has done for us as a people during the
past half-century! Was ever people more highly favoured than we have
been? What a rich inheritance has God given us, and how has prosperity
flowed in upon us in a continuous stream! Are there not many who came
out here with only a few shillings in their pockets who are now m affluence
And is there any nation where material comfort is more generally dittused
among the people ? And although there are clouds in the sky, yet at this
present moment is there any nation in the world so prosperous as the
Colony of Victoria? Everywhere else there is depression. is
depression in America, there is depression in Great Britain, and there is
depression in the neighbouring colonies; but, except to a very limned
extent, it has not come nigh us. Hundreds of men are going idle in
Adelaide, and hundreds of thousands are going idle in London, and know
not how they are to provide for themselves and their families. But here as
yet there is bread enough and to spare, and work for every man who is able
and willing to work. Now, should we not thank God for these things . And
now that we are approaching the time when our Church will complete the
fiftieth year of her existence, is it not fitting that we should review the
past, and make preparation for offering a special offering of thanksgiving tor
the wonderful goodness which He has shown us from the our
history even to this day ? So obviously right and reasonable is this that,
in our travels through the country, we have not met with one sing e


individual who raised any objection to it. Some declined to give for one
reason or another, but all professed heartily to sympathise with the move-
ment. God’s goodness to us during the past forty-seven years has been so
marked and manifest that the proposal to present a special offering ;of
thanksgiving to Him for that goodness seemed at once to awaken a response
in every heart, and all seemed to feel that the General Assembly only did its
duty when it resolved to call on all the members and adherents of the Church
to join in presenting such an offering. So obviously right and reasonabe is
this that it suggested itself to other denominations, such as the Baptists, the
Independents, and the Wesleyans, even before it was suggested to us.. But
though we have been somewhat behind other denominations in beginning
this movement, let us not be behind them in carrying it out.
The Movement Unselfish and Christian.
' (2 ) But as this movement is most fitting and appropriate, so I hold it to
be most unselfish and Christian. Sir, what do we want ? We want to
strengthen the Sustentation Fund. We want to extend the Church in
destitute districts, and we want to free new and weak congregations from
that burden of debt which so often crushes all missionary enterprise out of
them. These are three objects, but they may be resolved into one. I
regard our present movement as a great Home Mission movement in the
best and truest sense of the words. And I regard it as a token for good that
our Church has resolved to engage in it. I regard it as an indication
that she is awakening to a higher sense of her responsibilities, and that
she is determined more than ever in the strength of God to do her part in
securing that the stated means of grace shall be planted within the reach of
all the people of this Colony, and that pastors shall be set over them who
shall be able to feed them with knowledge and understanding. Far be it
from me to undervalue any effort to do good. Far be it from me especially
to undervalue the passing visits of evangelists, provided that they are wise
and prudent, as well as fervent. But, in order that even the good which such
men may do may be rendered permanent and productive, it needs that there
be a stated ministry, who shall watch over the people from year to year.
Now, I regard the present movement as one which aims at having such a
ministry everywhere in the Colony. In other words, I regard it as a stienuous
effort on our part to extend and perpetuate the Kingdom of God in all parts
of this land. Now, is not that a worthy object? Is not that an object
which may well call forth our liberality ? Shall we not give towards it ?
Shall we not deny ourselves, and make sacrifices even, that we may give
towards it ? One thing which will tend to hinder the success of this move-
ment more than perhaps anything else is just the congregational selfishness
which is so widespread among us. We think only of having everything
about our own congregation as we would like it to be, and we do not think
of anything else. But, as the followers of Christ, it ought not to be so with
us. What! shall we think only of our own things, and not also of the things
of others ? If we make all comfortable for ourselves, shall we do nothing
to help our less favoured brethren ? There are people all over the Colony
crying to us for help. There are districts where congregations might be
formed which would soon be self-sustainiug and flourishing, and where a
godly peasantry, which would be the strength of the Church and the Colony,
might be raised up, if only those who dwell there had assistance from some
central fund to help them over their initial difficulties. And shall we dis-
regard these things ? Shall we wrap up ourselves in our congregational
selfishness, and turn a deaf ear to the cry of our brethren ? 0 let such a


tiling be far from us ! “Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
though He was rich yet for our sake? He became poor, that we, through His
poverty, might be rich.”
Additional Reason for Giving.
An additional encouragement to give to this Fund is, that as the inteiest
only will be expended from year to year, our gifts maybe a perennial source
of good, yielding fruit and blessing long years after we are in our graves.
What an amount of good has the Baird trust at home been instrumental in
accomplishing! By means of the agencies which it has set agoing in destitute
and neglected places in Scotland, “ the wilderness and the solitary place
have been made glad, and the desert has been made to rejoice and blossom
as the rose.” Similar results, though not on so large a scale, may be expected
to flow from the Fund which we propose to raise, if wisely administered.
The purposes to which the Fund when raised are to be devoted,, point so
manifestly to the extension of the Redeemer’s Kingdom, that in going
through the country we did not find a single to object to them.
One or two objected to any part of the Fund being applied towards the
extinction of debt, but when we explained how that pointed in the direction
of the extension of the Church, they seemed to be perfectly satisfied.
The Movement Practicable.
(3.) But as the movement is a good one, so also is it thoroughly practicable
I know that it will be said that it is not possible to raise so large an amount
in three years. I have heard of one gentleman who considered that we
miglit deem ourselves happy if we raised the hundredth part of it. The
sum which has already been promised is a full and an abundant answer to such
obiectors. 0, Sir, let us have faith in God, and faith in the Christian people.
Let us not measure God, or measure our fellow-Christians by our own narrow
thoughts. “ The silver is mine and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of Hosts.”
God is wont to do great things for them who attempt great things for Him,
and the Christian people are not slow to respond when a great object w set
before them. Do we not see that in the case of other Denominations ? The
Independents have already raised £40,000 as their Jubilee Fund, and the
Baptists have raised nearly £50,000. Now, if these Denominations can
raise these sums, it will be a strange thing, it will in fact be a shame, if we,
who are so much more numerous and more wealthy, cannot raise the sum of
£6O 000. Only do not let ministers or managers take upon themselves to
iud<4 for their people, but let the object be set before them and let them
judge for themselves, and I have no doubt that that sum will be raised.
The Power of Littles.
But for the purpose of satisfying the most timid, for the purpose of
showing that there is nothing Utopian in what we propose, but that
the thing is thoroughly practicable, let us leave out of view at
present the larger contributions, and think for a moment on what Dr.
Chalmers used to call the power of littles. Suppose that 3000 will give
6d. per week, or £1 6s. a year for three years, that will amount to £l 1,700,
suppose 1500 will give £2 a year for three years, that will amount to £9000;
and suppose that 1000 will give £lO in three years, that will amount to
£lO 000. Now surely that is not too much to expect from a Church like
ours’, which has 150 charges and nearly 300 congregations, and which


numbers 42,000 members and adherents above 16 years of age. When I
set this before such of our friends in the country as I found incredulous as
to the raising of the sum proposed, their incredulity was at once scattered to
the winds, and they declared that the thing was thoroughly feasible.
The Movement Profitable to Ourselves.
(4.) And as it can be done, so I am satisfied that the doing of it will be
attended with blessing, even in a temporal point of view. Too often people
think that money given to the cause of God is just so much money lost.
But there could not be a greater mistake. God will be no man’s debtor.
That which we give to Him will He repay to us again. There is no invest-
ment that will yield such interest. There is no sowing which will yield so
abundant a return. “ The liberal man deviseth liberal things,” and what
then ? Is it he is sure to come down ? No ; but it is “by liberal things
shall he stand. He hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor.”
And what then ? Is it he will soon bring himself to poverty, and have
nothing to give? No; but it is “ his righteousness,” his beneficence, his
means of doing good, “ abideth for ever.” “ There is that scattereth and yet
increaseth, there is that withholdeth more than is meet, and it
tendeth to poverty.” If we build God a house He will build us
a house.
The Time Unfavourable.
But it will be said that the time is unfavourable. Now I
know that to seme extent the time is unfavourable;, and I deeply
sympathise with thosfe of- * our %fcnds who by reason the drorgffT
in Queensland and New South Wales, and the fall in the price of wool, have
had their incomes very much reduced, and may not even know in what
position they are. But if these friends cannot give as they used to do, and
as they would like to do, they will not be slow to give as they are able.
They will remember how in the case of the Macedonians “ the abundance of
their joy and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality ; ”
and how when the widow of Sarepta shared her last meal with the Lord’s
servant, “ the barrel of meal did not waste, neither did the cruse of oil fail
till the day that the Lord sent rain upon the earth.” When we withhold
from God He may withhold from us, and when we give to God He will surely
give to us.
Case of Israel in the Days of Haggai.
It is a remarkable fact that in the history of ancient Israel then-
prosperity was so often connected with their giving. When they showed an
interest in God’s cause they prospered. When they did not show an interest
in God’s cause, things went against them. Thus, after the return from
the captivity, they neglected the building of the Lord’s house, and
thought only of the building of their own houses. And what was
the consequence? “Ye have sown much,” saith God to them, “and ye
bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough ; ye drink, but ye are not
filled with drink ; ye clothe you, but there is none warm, and he that earneth
wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. Ye looked for
[much and it came to little ; and when ye brought it home I did blow upon
lit! Why? Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man
■into his own house.” Look now on the other side. Under the prophesying
If Haggai and Zechariah the people were stirred up to take an interest in
fcrod’s cause, and began to build the temple. I hey laid the foundation of




the house on the 24th day of the 9th month. And what was the conse-
quence ? Very remarkable is what God says with regard to this. “ Consider
now,” says He, “ from this day and upward, from the four-and-twentieth day
of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lord’s
Temple was laid, consider it. Is the seed yet in the barn ?—yea, as
yet the vine, and the fig- tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive
tree hath not brought forth: from this day will I bless you.”
In the Days of Malachi.
Again, in the days of Malachi, the people were given to covetousness, and
they thought that they would add to their store by withholding from
God His due. And what was the consequence? “Ye are cursed with
a curse, saith God; for ye have robbed Me, even this whole nation.” And
how was this curse to be removed ? “ Bring ye all the tithes, saith God, into
the storehouse that there may be meat in Mine house, and prove Me now
herewith if I will not open the windows of heaven and pour you out a
blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will
rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of
your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the
field; and all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome land,
saith the Lord of Hosts.” If we wish prosperity as a nation, that is the way
to get it. By withholding the rain, or by sending the locust or the caterpillar,
God can easily take from us far more than we withhold from Him; and He
has pledged Himself on the other hand to open the windows of heaven and
- x& oi ,t a bowing that th a e shall r f ial.be rc> m enough to.%c-.-ive it, if we
bring all the tithes into the storehouse that there may be meat in His house.
Tending to the Glory, of God.
(5.) But not only will this be attended with blessing to ourselves, but the
highest end of all will be gained by it—it will redound to the glory of God.
The apostle tells us that the liberality of the Corinthian Christians not only
supplied the want of the poor saints at Jerusalem, but “ was abundant also
by many thanksgivings unto God,” while they glorified God for their
professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ and their liberal distribution
unto them and unto all men, and while they offered up supplications in their
behalf. I trust that such will be the result of the raising and distributing
of the Jubilee Fund,—that not only will it give help to those who need our
help, but that it will be abundant by many thanksgivings unto God ; they
who receive our aid being led to glorify God for the assistance which we
render to them, and to pray that, in return for our kindness, His blessing
may descend upon us.
. I). S. McEACHRAN, Convener.


