

REPORT
OF THE
SPEECHES
(Reprinted from “The Temperance News.”)
3487
DELIVERED AT THE
WESLEYAN TEMPERANCE MEETING,
HELD IN
THE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
On MONDAY, JANUARY 29th, 1872.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Any profit arising from the sale of this Report mill be devoted to the
benefit of a Wesleyan Temperance Society about to be formed.
Melbourne:
MASON, FIRTH, & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
"TEMPERANCE NEWS" OFFICE, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXXII.




[?]T.
A grand Wesleyan Temperance Meeting was held in the
Town Hall, Melbourne, on Monday evening, 29th ult.,
above 4000 persons being present. The occasion was one of
universal interest, arising partly from the circumstance that
this was the first temperance meeting held in Melbourne in
connection with the assembly of a Wesleyan Conference;
in no little measure from the well-known eloquence of the
speakers, who were in almost every instance known as
“representative men;” and also, perhaps, in some degree
from the commodiousness and beauty of the spacious hall,
the elegant proportions and exceedingly chaste decorations of
which have been seldom seen to greater advantage. The
meeting was promoted by a committee of one hundred
abstaining laymen of the Wesleyan Church, associated with
some of the ministers of the Melbourne District; and to their
united influence, added to the indefatigable exertions and
excellent arrangements of their secretary, the great suc-
cess which was achieved is to be attributed. It is
estimated that applications for upwards of 2000 tickets
had been refused during the preceding week, and therefore
advertisements of the meeting were not inserted in the daily
papers. Had such been done, the Hall could not have
accommodated half the number who would have attended.
At the hour fixed for the commencement of the meeting—
half-past seven o’clock—every available inch of sitting and
standing room was occupied—orchestra, platform, galleries,
hall and passages, being crowded by an expectant audience.
On the platform we observed, in addition to the speakers
of the evening, the Revs. Charles Dubourg, J. C.
Symons, R. C. Flockart, G. Daniel, E. S. Bickford, and
John Higgins; Hon. Francis Longmore, Hon. W. M. K.
Yale; Messrs. J. B. Crews, M.L.A.; J. James, M.L A.;
James Callaghan, J.P.; H. Beauchamp, J.P.; Councillor
T. J. Crouch (St. Kilda); Councillor Hunt (Geelong);
Mesrs. Richard Hodgson, R. Callaghan, John Bedford,
J. M‘Cutcheon, E. Barrett, T. Brown, &c., &c. In the
orchestra were assembled the choirs of Lonsdale-street,
North Melbourne, Bruns wick-street, Richmond, Fitzroy-
street, Carlton, Brunswick, Prahran, Wellington-street,
Hoddle-street, Sackville-street, Fi’anklin-street, Emerald
Hill, Sandridge, Preston, South Preston, Northcote, Wil-
liamstown, Cheltenham, Coburg, Flemington, and Fitzroy
(Bible Christian) Churches. Mr. Wilson, leader of the
Richmond choir, acted as conductor, and Mr. W. E. Ellis
led the singing, which, echoed through the spacious building,
had a magnificent effect. In the galleries and in the body
of the hall were many hundreds of visitors from Ballarat,
Geelong, Sandhurst, Castlemaine, and all the centres of


population on the lines of railway; while the regalia of
a large number of Rechabites and Sons and Daughters of
Temperance lent pleasing variety to the scene. It is hardly
necessary to add that the most perfect order was observed
throughout the evening.
Punctually at half-past seven o’clock, Rev. C. Dubourg
read the first, second, and fourth verses of the hymn in
Wesley’s collection commencing “ Praise ye the Lord,”
which was sung by the choir to the well-known and beauti-
ful tune, “ Sun of my soul,” the large audience heartily
joining. Singing concluded, the Rev. G. Daniel offered a
prayer suited to the circumstances under which they were
assembled, after which the Rev. C. Dubourg, in a few well-
chosen words, introduced the Rev. James Bickford, of
Wesley Church, as the gentleman chosen to preside over the
meeting.
The Ch airman, on rising, said : —I have great pleasure in complying
with the unanimous request of the committee of this movement, in
taking the chair and presiding over the largest attendance which has
ever been brought together in favour of the total abstinence move-
ment in the southern world. I rejoice greatly that the meeting has
been designated a Wesleyan Temperance Meeting, as it will show
the communities in other countries that we on this side of the world
are arrayed together to check to the utmost of our power the drinking
customs of the age. In having such a demonstration in connection
with the Conference of the ministers of our church, we are follow-
ing the example of our fathers at home, and of our brothers in other
parts of the world. At the last British Conference, held in the city
of Manchester, where there were upwards of 600 ministers present, a
most important resolution was passed upon the subject of total absti-
nence, and especially upon the necessity of the English Parliament
passing a Permissive Bill. They say—
“ Impressed by the terrible social and moral evils resulting from intemperance
and believing that more earnest and effective measures are necessary in order to
check and repress these evils, the Conference is convinced that the reformation
desired must be secured chiefly by means of moral suasion and the influence of
Christian truth. It is, nevertheless, of opinion, that the facilities afforded fur the
opening of public-houses and beer-houses, and the temptations presented by
them, especially to the young and the intemperate, render the effects of the
present law grossly demoralising, and constitute a legalised hindrance to the
efforts of Christian churches. The Conference, therefore, declares its judgment
that a reform of the present licensing system is absolutely necessary, and that in
any measures which may hereafter be adopted provision should be made, in har-
mony with a recognised principle of self-government, that the ratepayers, who
bear the charges resulting from the prevalence of intemperance and its conse-
quent pauperism and crime, shall also have power to control the issues of
licenses for the sale of intoxicating drinks within their respective districts. The
Conference further expresses the hope that any well-considered measure tending
to secure this object will meet with general and earnest support.”
This was passed by that venerable body with great cordiality and
unanimity, not a single hand being held up in opposition to it. lam
thankful to be able to refer to the Wesleyan Conference in Canada,
which, last year, passed a resolution upon the same subjects, and, if
possible, in stronger terms. And we in Australia are following in
the footsteps of our fathers; for, last year, at the Hobart Town Con-
ference, my brethren gave a similar deliverance. We are living
in serious times, and it is necessary that our minds should be made
up upon all those questions that affect the social and spiritual
well-being of our fellow-creatures. We must also have the courage
of our opinions, and show to the world on which side we are.
One hundred laymen connected with the church in this city and
the neighbouring circuits have shown that courage in arranging
for, and bringing to the triumphant issue we now witness, this
glorious demonstration in favour of the principles of total abstinence.


I am delighted with this great gathering in this splendid hall, in
which ministers of religion, church officers, members of churches, and
Sunday-school teachers, have come up “to the help of. the Lord
against the mighty” evil of intoxicating drink. My voice is familiar
to most of you, for often have I addressed you in many places in this
city and in the surrounding circuits; and if God spare me so to do,
that voice you shall hear yet again and again. I will, therefore, now
call upon the Rev. Samuel Knight, from South Australia, to move
the first resolution.
The Rev. Samuel Knight, of South Australia, moved the first
resolution —“That the social habits of this country in relation to the
use of intoxicating drinks, entailing as they do so much misery and
want, immorality and crime, demand the putting forth of earnest
and continuous efforts on the part of the Government, the church,
and the public. This meeting hails with gratification the altered
state of public feeling, the changed views of Christian churches, and
the modified tone of enlightened statesmen in reference to these
baneful habits, and would indulge the hope that a Bill based on what
are called permissive principles will speedily become the law of the
land.” He said Sir, Ido not think that we bring more zeal than
others to this cause, but by organisation we gain strength. We
have opposed to us, in the habits of the people, and in the
publican interest, which supplies the means of indulging those habits
a strong, a terrible organisation. And if we are to expect suc-
cess to the temperance movement, we must organise too. Every
man, and every woman, and all together, must do their share of
this great work. Take one of those beautifully-cut quoins or cor-
bels which adorn the facade of this noble building, and put it in the
roadway, and it is no more an ornament or a thing of beauty : it is
but trampled in the mire, and rolled over by the passing car—its
very presence below is unsuspected. But put it in its right place, its
designed position, and how beautiful does it now appear; how it adds
to the symmetry and the finish of the edifice to which it belongs;
how unseemly was the gap which now it fills. And so every one of
us, by taking his own part and place in this work in union with
others, will contribute to the strength and efficiency of the whole.
Some people, it is unfortunately true, are foolish enough and illogical
enough to sneer at the idea of taking the pledge. The pledge, for-
sooth ! fit only for weak-minded men and craving tipplers! But, sir,
so far from this, I maintain that it is sinful for those who are on the
side of temperance not to be pledged abstainers? But why not
pledged? Are not our magistrates pledged? Are not ministers of
the Grown pledged? Are not our legislators all pledged? Is not the
exalted lady who is at the head of affairs in this great empire pledged
—pledged to her people ? Is not the bridegroom pledged to the bride,
and pledged openly too ? Of what avail is a secret marriage ? And
why, then, should not all abstainers be pledged ? Theirs is a great
and good object—a noble enterprise ; and the pledge is but com-
mensurate with the end to be attained. But, sir, in addition to pledg-
ing ourselves to abstain, we seek by all lawful means to put down and
curtail this loathsome drink-traffic. This resolution asks for restrictive
measures. In the name of 50,000 Methodist teetotallers we ask it; in
the name of 70,000 electors who are teetotallers, we ask it; and if our
legislators will not hear us, they shall hear a voice at the elections that
shall tell them we mean it. The people must be educated on this sub-
ject ; they must be taught to value their rights and liberties of mind and
body; they must be enlightened and impressed as to the real nature
and effect of intoxicating liquors upon themselves and their posterity.
Our legislators must be warned of the danger which threatens us
from ignoring the teachings of history and experience in this very
matter; and if they will not hear the voice that warns them, they
will soon hear another, a more terrible and louder sound —the
thunder-voice of Communism, which even now is knocking at our
doors. Men are now seeking to realise a state which will be the com-
plete reverse of the feudalism of the middle ages. Formerly, it was


the* many who were taxed and oppressed for the ease, the wealth, the
aggrandisement of the few; now, it is contended that all property
belongs to the people, and “share and share alike” is the watch-
word of the Republicans. And, sir, if the masses are supplied ad
libitum with the maddening, adulterated, intoxicating drink, those
millions, in their quenchless, unscrupulous thirst for drink, will
pull down those institutions under which we now dwell so safely,
and will not cease until they have squandered the national estate for
alcohol. Why, sir, it has been done already—we have seen it.
Twenty years ago Providence gave the people of this country wealth
that would purchase three continents, and what did they barter their
country for ? For something like a revolver and a pot of beer. And
if ever this uncontrollable passion for drink takes possession of our
people—as it most assuredly will unless vigorous measures are
adopted—they will be ready to sacrifice everything—country, home,
honour, aye, even life itself, for beer. Many of us have seen the
miserable wrecks of old boiler-houses in various parts of our mining
metropolis, Ballarat —mute witnesses of the effects of some terrific
explosion. We can fancy the engineer when he discovers that the
water is all gone, the boiler is over-heated, and that an explosion is
imminent. See him, as he stands aghast with fear—almost power-
less in his consternation. But cannot something be done? Yes,
surely —something must be done. Shall he shout with might and
main to his fellow-workmen, and warn them of the impending
danger? No—it is too late for that. Quick! Shall he add more
water? No, no—too late for that—it would but precipitate their
doom. Only one thing can save them —he must draw the fire,
and draw it instantly. Now this is exactly our position, and this
is just what must be done. We must draw the fire by getting
a Permissive Bill, and so prevent destruction. Our appeal must be
to the people; and so it is. This is not a rash measure. It pro-
poses to divide the colony into 300 districts, and thus to poll and try
the question 300 times over; and the day that it becomes law will
mark the beginning of an era of social and moral importance to the
people of this country. But, it may be said, the partisans of
drinkism will strain every effort to defeat us, and will pour forth such
a flood of beer gratis at election times as will drown the senses of
the electors and win their votes against sobriety. But, sir, that must
be stopped; and the way to do it is this—Licenses must be suspended
during the election, and every non-abstaining voter allowed time
and opportunity to come to a right decision upon this vital social
question. There can be no political purity while there is bribery by
beer. The resolution, sir, further pledges us to resist the baneful
customs which prevail. See how the young are affected by those
customs. Their character is not moulded by abstract theories, but by
example, by custom—by what the children see day after day in our
streets, in our homes, at our tables. The ruin or regeneration of the
country will be effected by custom. Your little child of to-day may be
trained by custom into a useful member of society, or into one of these
degraded sots who may be seen under any lamp-post muttering the
drunkard’s song. And would any of us like to see our children grow
up to be a tippler or a drunkard ? What is such a being ? He is a
nothing, or worse than nothing. What good is he ? what can you get
out of him, either for his own advancement or for the good of his
fellows ? Squeeze him, and what will be the result ? beer, and beer
only. His life is purposeless, save for evil; and the most you can
extract from him in his most lively mood is only “Tooral, right
tooral 1” or “ Shoo fly ! don’t bother me!” To correct these horrid
drinking customs, then, must be our task, remembering that our chil-
dren may grow up to be the degraded, worthless, hopeless things I
have just pictured; or that they may be such as those of whom the
great American poet sings—
“ Lives of great men all remind us
We may make our lives sublime;
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time;”


remembering, too, that the youth of our land may grow up to become
pests to society and snares to their fellow-men ; or that their path
on earth may present, in the words of the same writer,
“ Footprints that perhaps another,
Sailing o’er life’s solemn main,
Some forlorn and shipwreck’d brother,
Seeing, may take heart again.”
Sir, I will conclude these remarks by repeating the substance
of an allegory concerning “custom,” written by Coleridge. Once
upon a time, when the earth was young, when evil as yet was
unknown, when work was but play, and when recreation was only
another name for enjoyment, there arose a prophet in the land.
The burden of the prophet’s utterances to the people was that
their happy state should not last; that even now it was almost
over; that a great and terrible danger was impending; that a
poisonous mist and vapour would arise, apparently from ocean, and
spread over the whole land ; and that whosoever inhaled this vapour
would become raging mad, and many would die thereby. The
words of the prophet were fulfilled. One bright afternoon the mist
was on the sea; and it crept on and on till it touched the shore, stole
up the mountains, tilled the valleys, and covered the whole land with
darkness and woe. But the prophet was wise in his generation. He
saw the danger, and, fleeing swiftly, he shut himself up in a cave,
where the poisonous vapour could not reach him. By-and-by the
cloud passed over, and then the prophet came forth from his retreat.
He gazed around; but a sad sight greeted him. The prophecy was
literally fulfilled : mankind had gone mad ; and he was alone in the
world—alone with madmen. He wept; but despair followed his
tears. In an agony he descended into a ravine, where some of the
vapour was yet lingering; and hastily collecting a portion in a flask,
he held it to his mouth, drank it off, and straightway became the
maddest of them all!
The Bev. Richard Sellors. of New South Wales, seconded the
resolution. He said : —Mr. Chairman, I come amongst you a Son of
Temperance. The friends of the cause in New South Wales were
very glad to hear that there was to be a Temperance Demonstration
in Melbourne during the session of the Wesleyan Conference; and
I am sure that next year, when the Wesleyan Conference will be held
in Sydney, there will be held even a larger meeting than the present
one in the Exhibition Building in behalf of the same cause. This
resolution pledges us to urge this great question upon the Govern-
ment. We do not lack enlightened statesmen who favour temper-
ance, who are themselves total abstainers, and who use their powers
and talents to stay the progress of intemperance; but we want more
men of that class. We want to have a happy, industrious, healthy,
virtuous population. But wherever intemperance prevails there is
the absence of these qualities, and instead of them, misery and want,
immorality and crime. We might empty this large hall, and fill it
to-night with victims of intemperance. I could crowd this hall with
children, who could tell of the wretchedness of their existence
through the drinking of their fathers and mothers. I could fill every
corner of the building with wives made miserable by the cruelty
and neglect of their husbands. And yet, we are told that the cry
for help comes from a lot of reformed drunkards. But, even were
such the case, who so well as a reformed drunkard can tell of the
terrible evils which arise from drink. They may speak of loss
of revenue if the liquor-traffic be put down, but what have
we to pay for the cost of drunkenness 1 It would be better to be
taxed far more than we are, if that would put a stop to it. Dr.
Guthrie has well said that it would be better for England to
fight ten Waterloos every year than to lose 60,000 of her sons
annually by intemperance. I rejoice, sir, in the thousands of
sons and daughters of temperance, and especially the young mem-
bers of the Band of Hope. If we may not succeed in reforming
many of the old drunkards, we may by these associations save the


young. I hope the time is not far distant when we shall have a per-
missive law for New South Wales. In Sydney we turned out into
the open air, and addressed the people by the thousand. The bill
was to have been read a second time this month, but (alas for my
country !) the Ministry was upset. We are meeting opposition
from those interested in the drink-traffic, but they are in a minority.
In our district meeting we passed a resolution in favour of a
permissive law; and I am convinced that, if ministers and people
unite heart-and-hand in this good work, glorious success will yet
crown our efforts.
The Rev. Joseph Dare, St. Kilda, saidln making a few remarks
in support of this resolution, I can scarcely do more than repeat
and amplify what I have before said on this question to the total
abstainers of Melbourne. Those who have preceded me have dwelt
on that part of the resolution which refers to the importance of our
obtaining a Permissive Bill: I will therefore confine myself to the
altered state of feeling towards the temperance cause, and to the
baneful effects of intemperance, of which the resolution speaks. And
with reference to that altered state of feeling, sir, I specially rejoice
that the Wesleyan Church has so fully committed itself to the prin-
ciples of this great enterprise. It was the view of expediency which
led me first to join the ranks of total abstainers, and no other
argument of its advocates ever produced so deep and powerful an
impression on my mind. I felt that it was my duty to forego what I
might deem a privilege and luxury, rather than my example should be
injurious and perhaps ruinous to others. I felt that thus I should
possess a higher moral power, and that in this position I could say
to a brother whom intoxicating drink was destroying, “ Abstain, and
I will stand beside you and keep you in countenance.” I saw, sir,
that intemperance was the curse of the land, the shame of our people,
the blot of our churches, and the chief source of crime in our midst ;
that it was the cause of two-thirds of all the poverty, wretchedness,
and immorality of the country ; that it was overpowering, degrading,
and destroying thousands of our people; that it was filling our
hospitals with the diseased, our prisons with criminals, our asylums
with the insane, and supplying our scaffolds with the unhappy
victims of death. I saw that in various forms it was the great
enemy, the deadly foe of my fellow-man, leading him to the pinings of
want, to the loss of property, to the torments of conscience, to the
dishonour of character, to the repudiation of society, to a premature
grave, and to the wrath and curse of God in the world of retribution;
and under a sense of the most urgent obligation, I concluded that,
from the instincts of humanity, the dictates of reason, and the prin-
ciples of religion, it was expedient to abstain. lam persuaded, sir,
that the more fully the principles of this noble enterprise are
examined and understood, the more highly will they be estimated,
and individuals and churches will rally around the standard we.
unfurl. None can rightly understand its designs and despise them
None can rightly estimate its benefits and withhold their sympathy-
None can witness its achievements and not wish it God speed-
It is an instrumentality feeble in itself, but under God the agent
of a great moral reformation, made mighty to grapple with a
more than herculean power with the strongholds of intem-
perance. Its past successes commend this enteiprise to every lover
of his kind, and the more it is examined by the unprejudiced mind,
the more clearly do its simplicity and purity appear, producing
its effects of happinesss and blessing; turning abodes of wretched-
ness into homes of comfort; rescuing men from a bondage more
servile than slavery; throwing around our rising youth a protection
firm as a barrier of brass; and still, in spite of ridicule and opposi-
tion, going forward in its triumphant march of conquest, destined
still to win its victories, bloodless but glorious, and eventually to
remove the worst curse that ever rested upon humanity. Some years
since, a young man was to be seen in a low tavern in New York,
clothed in rags, deep sunk in degradation, the jester of fools, a con*


firmed drunkard. In spite of early religious instructions and a
mother’s prayers, habits of intemperance had grown upon him, the
quenchless thirst had been engendered, and loathed by society, he
was a wretched, debased inebriate. Sometimes there were lucid
intervals, and the voice of conscience and the strugglings of his
better nature reminded him of the past and of his degradation;
then there were agonies of remorse, in which he would meditate self-
destruction, and the phial containing the deadly draught chattered
against his teeth. That man was invited to join a temperance society.
He resolved, he struggled against the foe that had held him; and
what was the result 1 No sooner was the curse removed than you
saw the coruscations of genius and the bright flashings of intellect.
He became the champion of the cause by which he was rescued, and
for years advocated it with an eloquence of force and feeling of
surpassing brilliancy and power; an eloquence which, in the thrilling,
melting tones of its pathos, and the thunder of its appeal, has been
overwhelming to the vast audiences of Britain and America, and has
led thousands to sobriety and life. That man, sir, is an example of
the depth from which the temperance cause can rescue, and of the
height to which it can raise. In his own beautiful words, “it sends
its divers down amidst the foul waters of intemperance, and the
dark rocks of oblivion, to bring up the bright and beautiful pearls
which are hidden there.” I need only mention the name of J. B.
Gough. In all warfare it is important to understand the movements
of the foe. What has intemperance done? Man is the noblest of all
the great Creator’s work. So graceful in his form, so perfect in his
symmetry, so noble in his erect position. In the words of the great
dramatist, “ How infinite in faculties, in form and moving how
express and admirable, in action how like an angel, in apprehen-
sion how like a god.” There is a glory resting on his brow, there
is an immortality moving in his breast, there is a sceptre wielded
in his grasp. But intemperance robs him of his glory, effaces the
image of his Maker, wrests the sceptre from his hand, and pros-
trates him in shame and ruin. It destroys him. Says Lord Bacon,
“All the crimes on.earth do not destroy so many of the human
race as drunkenness.” Physically , it prostrates every faculty,
engenders almost every disease, undermines the constitution, palsies
his whole system, and by the pathway of debility or tormenting
pain leads him to the grave. Mentally , it dethrones his reason,
destroys his conscience, quenches the fire of genius, and, throwing the
intellect off its balance, leaves him the victim of delirium, or idiotcy.
or madness. Morally , it is the shipwreck of his chastity, and
destroying all that is high and noble, generous and pure in the
affections of the heart, it leaves him in the lowest degradation, a foul
excrescence of humanity. Spiritually , it hurries him away shrieking
and unsaved to a lost futurity, an eternity of hopeless agony and
despair. When you think of the soul, of the vastness of its powers,
of the price by which it was redeemed, of the concern pervading the
intelligent universe for its salvation, and then of its limitless duration
—that when the sun’s last fire is quenched—that when the everlasting
hills are moved as a cottage—that when the great white throne is
fixed—that when the retributions of eternity are announced, and
years have passed away as many as the stars of the spangled night
or the dew-pearls of the vernal morn, as many as the drops of the
boundless main, or the sands which form its strand—years innumer-
able, endless—it will still be living on, not one power impaired, notone
capacity destroyed, not one principle of its immortality decayed—*
on, on for ever—you can form some estimate of its mysterious worth,
and of the evil of this terrible vice as it compassess its destruction and
loss. Drunkenness has done all this, and is doing it now; and I hold,
that it becomes our duty as ministers of Christ, your duty as members
of His church, the duty of every philanthropist, of every moralist, of
every patriot, aye, of every individual who boasts himself a possessor of
the finer, the nobler instincts of our common humanity, to stand forth
in one mighty phalanx of opposition against an agency so fraught with


sorrow, and infamy, and death. Whence do these drunkards come ?
these debased ones, shunned by society and loathed by all around—
whence do they come? They come from our rising youth, from homes
of intelligence, from the firesides of Christian families, from the ranks
of talent and influence, as well as from the abodes of ignorance and
vice. That degraded man, swept out with the filth of the dram-shop,
fallen beneath the level of the brute, with eyes so bleared and face
so bloated, and with a nose so swollen and pimpled that, as Professor
Wilson once said, “ You’d suffer an insult rather than pull it ” —that
was once a ruddy bright-eyed boy, with dimpled cheek and ruby lips
and pearly teeth—the pride of his father and the joy and hope of his
mother. But, alas! he has fallen beneath the influences of that
monster, “ the worm of the still,” a serpent more deadly than the
cobra of India or the poisonous snake of Australia, and scarcely less
fatal than the old Serpent himself. That fallen woman, whose life is
a curse and a shame, whom drink has made “ such a thing that the
vilest wretch turns from her in disgust,” and who seeks death as a
refuge from her woe—
“ Mad from life’s history,
Glad to death’s mystery
Swift to be hurled,
Anywhere, anywhere, out of the world.”
that was once a fair young girl, virtuous and happy; but drink has
proved her ruin. Whence do they come? Why, sir, they come from
the children of our homes, from the hope of our churches, and from
the promise of these fair Australian lands. 0! sir, as I have wit-
nessed the results of strong drink; as I have knelt beside the felon in
his cell; as I have stood beside the manslayer on the scaffold; as I
have gazed upon the suicide who in a paroxysm of intemperance had
nearly severed his head from his body, and as these very hands were
sprinkled with his reeking blood, I have prayed that God would save
our rising youth from this dark and destructive vice. How are drunk-
ards made ? This vice is undoubtedly perpetuated by the drinking cus-
toms of society; if these ceased, it would pass away with the present
generation of drunkards. These fallen ones were all to be found
first in the ranks of moderate drinkers. What is moderation ? It is
to be found somewhere between the glass and the barrel, but who
can draw the line ? Moderation in one would be excess in another.
“ Surely you can carry off one glass,” said a lady to Dr. Johnson.
“ No, madam,” he replied; “it would carry me off.” A stipendiary
magistrate in South Australia once told me that while, before the
penalty could be inflicted, it was necessary the witness should state
that the man was drunk, it was with the utmost difficulty he could
bring this about. “ Was he drunk?” “ I couldn’t say he was drunk,
your worship; he was lying all at length, and feeling upward for the
ground.” The steps from moderate drinking to intemperance are
easy, and almost imperceptible. There are so many occasions for
indulging—if you are weak; if you feel depressed; if you are wet,
to prevent a chill; if you are dry, to moisten the stiffening clay; if
you are suffering from indigestion, to correct the stomach; if offered
by a friend, because it is not polite to refuse; a little in company,
not to be singular. A London caricature represents a man saying,
“ I never drink unless I get my feet wet.” There he was, sitting
with a good stiff glass, and his feet in a small tub of water. Mode-
rate drinking has been compared to a voyage, which commences with
pleasure, but which may terminate in disaster. See that mariner :
he has launched his bark, he has commenced his voyage. The bright,
blue sky is overhead, the rippling waves dance around, and on
sweetly he glides. Everything seems propitious, and leaving her
silvery wake, his boat skims the blue billow, and skips away over the
buoyant waters like a thing of life. ’Tis a voyage of pleasure. The
landscape is yet in view reclining behind him; sea-birds on airy
wing float past; the wind is fair; he hoists more sail to catch the
breeze; the last reef is shaken out, and—
“ Away she hounds, like deer from hounds,
The fairy of the sea.”


All at once, a strange feeling creeps over him. What was that
unnatural vibration? The thought of insidious currents flashes upon
his mind. Already he has entered them. He is sweeping the circles
of a whirlpool. He is within the verge of the Maelstrom. What
can be done? The sail flaps against the mast, there is no breeze to
carry him out, and the helm is useless. See him—he is pale, he is
horror-stricken with affright! What can be done ? On sweeps the
quivering bark; “ the circle lessens—the very surface slopes.” See!
it is but a moment; the frail bark like a shell is tossed upon the
dark heaving centre, and as the shriek of the mariner rises upon the
moaning wind, it is gone —gone for ever. Young men, God help you
—never commence that voyage. Keep out of the circles of that
treacherous whirlpool, and you can never be swallowed up in its
mighty roaring vortex. I have already exceeded my allotted time,
and must not detain you longer. Much could be said on the evils
and inconsistencies of the present Licensing Law, and on behalf of a
Permissive Bill; and much could be said too of the advantages which
are resulting from the closing of public-houses on the Lord’s Day.
Efforts will be made to deprive us of these advantages, but let our
stand be firm and decided. I am sure I express the sentiments of
70,000 Wesleyans in Victoria when I say—Let every public-house in
the land be closed throughout the entire twenty-four hours of the Sab-
bath Day. Will you permit me, sir, to conclude these remarks in the
beautiful words of a temperance advocate, Paul Denton, of the
Methodist Episcopal Church of America. Addressing his hearers,
he would pour out a glass of the bright, sparkling fluid, and hold-
ing it up before them he would say:—“ This is the liquor which
God the Eternal brews for His children. Hot in the simmering still,
over smoky fires, choked with poisonous gases, and surrounded with
sickening odours, doth your Father in Heaven prepare the precious
essence of life—the pure, cold water. But in the green glade and
grassy dell, where the red deer wanders and the children love to play—
there He brews it; and down, low down in the deep valleys, where
the fountain murmurs and the rills sing; and high upon the moun-
tain tops, where the grey granite glitters like gold in the sun, where
the storm-cloud broods and the rolling thunders crash—and away
far out on the wide, wild sea, where the hurricane howls the music,
and the big waves roll the chorus, sweeping the march of God—there
He brews it, this beverage of life, this health-giving water. And
everywhere it is a thing of beauty—gleaming in the dew-drop—
singing in the summer rain—shining in the ice-gem, till the trees all
seem turned to living jewels—spreading a golden veil over the setting
sun, or a white gauze around the midnight moon—sporting in the
cataract —sleeping in the glacier—dancing in the hail-shower —
folding its bright snow-curtains softly about the wintry world—and
weaving the many-coloured iris, that seraph’s zone of the sky, whose
warp is the rain-drop of earth, whose woof is the sunbeam of heaven,
all chequered over with celestial flowers by the mystic hand of refrac-
tion. still always it is beautiful, this blessed life-water. No poison
bubbles on its brink; its foam brings no madness and murder; no
blood stains its liquid glass; pale widows and starving orphans weep
no burning tears in its depths; no drunkard’s shrieking ghost from
the grave curses it in words of eternal despair. Speak out, my
friends, will you give it up for alcohol ? ”
The Ist and 4th verses of the hymn— *• Bid me of men beware,”
were read by the Rev. it. C. Flockart, and sung by the choir —tune,
“ Cambridge.”
The Chairman said the mover of the next resolution would be
The Rev. W. Kelynack, of Sydney, who said —Sir, I rise with much
satisfaction to take part in this meeting. The objects at which Tem-
perance Associations aim have long since commanded the allegiance
of my understanding, and secured the loyalty of my heart. That a
mighty change has taken place in public sentiment within the past
few years on the great question of temperance reform is a fact as
pleasing as it is patent. There was a time—and that not so won


drously remote —when even the pulpit looked upon it askance, when
the press was almost silent upon its claims, and when temperance
advocates were looked upon as very well-meaning but very weak-
minded men, whose presence was as unwelcome as that of a ghost
at a wedding, and whose perpetual prating on the one worn and
thread-bare theme was felt to be as irritating as a perpetual blister.
But that period is passing away. Men of all ranks, of all professions,
and of every creed, are now found to emulate one another in build-
ing up its interests. The power of a right principle has fermented
in public sentiment with such rapidity and force, that now the utter-
ances of statesmen in their legislative halls, the echoes of judicial
wisdom and warning that reach us from the judgment-seat, the voice
of strong condemnation and bitter sorrow that rings out from every
section of the clergy—all combine to pronounce intemperance one of
the greatest enemies to happiness, to morality, to religion, with which
our nature has to deal; and that to limit the ravages of this terrible
curse, and ultimately to crush it out of existence, is an object well
worthy the combined action and the best efforts of every well-wisher
of his kind. That so much has been gained is matter for congratula-
tion. And although much still remains to be done, yet, as one who
in some humble measure has watched, and waited, and wrought, in
the grey twilight of the early dawn, for the good time coming, I do
rejoice, and will rejoice, that temperance principles are thus assert-
ing themselves, that the cause of sobriety and order is thus rallying
around it the intelligence and the character of the age, and that
at this moment the promise of our cause is like that of the morning
spread upon the mountains, which will certainly broaden and brighten
into the splendour of the perfect day. I rejoice, Mr. Chairman, in
the many organisations that exist for dealing with the gigantic evil
of intemperance. We have those among us who are labouring for
the purification of the licensing laws, and we go with them with
heart and hand, for we cannot but regard some features of the exist-
ing law as a blot upon our statute-book, and a disgrace to our
civilisation. If the system is to be tolerated, we would have
the Bill that regulates its operations more in the interests of
the public, and less in the interests of the publican. If the evil
is to continue, we would say to it in effect—We will draw your
teeth, and pare your claws, and put a muzzle on you, and tether you
up in your den with a very short chain; so that those who are small-
witted enough to wander within your reach shall receive as little
harm as possible. I say then, sir, that I go most heartily with
those who are labouring for the purification of the licensing
laws, and so deal with the tempters. Then there are the societies
which aim at the reformation of the drunkard, and thus deal
with the tempted. And a noble work these have accomplished.
They have lifted the fallen from the mire, and brought deliverance
to them that were ready to perish. And however some may smile at
that earnestness which runs in one groove and harps on one string,
and sneeringly say that they are but men of one eye and one idea,
I say, sir, commend me to these men of one idea, when, as in this
case, it is the idea of morality against vice, of sobriety against
debauch, of happiness against misery. But much as I rejoice in the
operations of our temperance societies, we cannot blind our eyes to
the fact that, despite their utmost efforts, multitudes pursue their
troubled course to the bitter end. Then we have the advocates of
the Permissive Bill, that seek to remove the evil by removing the
temptations to its indulgence. lam one of those, sir, who think that
this is both a just and politic measure. In seeking for this measure,
we do not contemplate anything revolutionary or coercive. But we
say —Here is a system that degrades the individual, that destroys the
home, that saps the purity of our social life, and that is fostered by
our existing law ; and what we propose is, to transfer this matter for
the present to the parliament of free speech. We do not want to
secure any law that has not its origin in the convictions, and that is
not demanded by the voice of the people. We do not seek to wrench


a triumph from reluctant hands. But this we do propose: we pro-
pose to teach, to argue, to discuss this great question of the drink
traffic, before the people, until we have convinced them that the
evils are so great as to demand abolition. We propose to use in this
crusade the only legitimate weapons—indisputable facts, clear argu-
ments, stated and re-stated in every variety of form. We propose, in
a word, to agitate, agitate, agitate, until we have gained the object,
not of a few dreamers who are haunted with the visions of a
disordered brain, not of a few enthusiasts who build up an Utopia
in their fancy which can never be translated into fact, not of a
few despots who would rule others by the tyranny of their own
wild demands. But we propose to agitate until a free people,
educated in this matter to see their duty and to do it, shall secure
by statute the power to say, in any given district where a two-
thirds majority are wishful to avail themselves of its provisions, not
that they will have ten, or five, or two public-houses, or even one,
but that they will abolish the common sale of intoxicating drinks
altogether. Then there are the Juvenile Temperance Associations,
which propose to deal with the matter in another way, and beyond
all doubt or dispute a most wise and effective way. This movement
maps out its work among the youth of our land. It announces its
mission to be the preservation of the young from that evil which, by
its commonness and witchery, is such a standing menace to their
virtue and well-being. Its supporters say, in effect, we will work
for the purification of the licensing law, and will labour to secure it;
we will bid God-speed to all who struggle to save the drunkard, and
will give them a helping hand; we will give our assistance to
secure a law that will shut up the pest-houses in which so many have
drunk and died. But in addition thereto, we will see to it that our
youth are trained in the principles and habits of temperance, and,
so far as we have the power, we will build up a race strong in the
habits of sobriety and rich in all the blessings that sobriety brings
in its train. Now, sir, this is a noble idea, and is well worthy of
being translated into a noble reality. If we can but succeed in this
project, or if we can go far in the task of its achievement, we shall
deal an effective blow to the drink-traffic, and shall bless the land.
The torrent of vice would not then be so impetuous. The prevalence
of crime would not be so common. The ranks of our paupers would
be thinned. The inmates of our gaols would be lessened. The
number of our destitute children would be fewer. The angel of
death and desolation that has hovered in our midst so long, smiting
so many hearts and shadowing so many homes, until almost every
family may be said to mourn for the beating of his pinion and the
poison of his dart, would then hide in obscure places; and in his
stead the angel of light, of life, of blessing, would thrill our hearts
with gladness, and fill our habitations with peace. And, sir, how
many are the arguments that urge this duty upon our earnest atten-
tion. Look at the number of public-houses. They gape at almost
every street corner, and, like so many whirlpools, seek to draw both
young and old into a vortex of destruction. Look at the attractions
which they employ, attractions which serve but to mask the face of
a sorceress whose enchantments lead down to hell. The bar is all
ablaze with brilliance. And then there is the free-and-easy, with
its songs comic and sentimental; and the bagatelle-board and the
billiard-table, where many learn their first lessons in gambling and
take their first steps to ruin; and the gay saloon, where youth and
maiden commence a gallop of pleasure that ends in wantonness and
infamy. Now, I say these things seriously jeopardise the safety of
our youth, and constitute a danger which only the utmost watchful-
ness and care can guard against. Let no one say we are magni-
fying a danger which is for the most part imaginary. No; it is
real, intensely real. Let no one say, “ I will leave my child until he
has risen to an age when he can deliberate and decide for himself.”
Do we not know that principles early instilled, habits early formed,
have framed a robustness of character that was the better fitted to


cope with the temptations of life, furnished a moral harness which
the shafts of the archer could not easily pierce ?
“The pebble in the streamlet scant
Hath turned the course of many a river,
The dewdrop on the baby plant
Hath warped the giant oak for ever.”
And we must have learned the lessons of our streets to little purpose,
and marked the phases of our social life with a dull eye, and with a
yet duller mind, if we have not arrived at the conviction that the
number of temptations to intemperance which surround our youth
demand and deserve our most serious attention, that we may shield
them from their insidiousness and power. Further, the mischief
that has been already wrought among many of our youth adds to the
impressiveness of the argument. Many a youth that was once his
father’s hope, his mother’s pride, has through drink bowed their
heads in shame, and wrung their hearts with agony. Many a maiden
has been shorn of all that was gentle and womanly by drink, and in
their stead it has given her a face of brass and a heart of fire. And
sometimes the Sunday-school teacher finds that the labour of years
has been smitten and blighted by the plague and pestilence of
drink. Not all at once was the evil wrought. Like the night-moth
they played around the flame, attracted by its brightness, but at
length it burned their wings. Gradually they came under that
influence which has proved so fatal to their welfare, until they found
themselves caught in the meshes of successive indulgence as in a net.
There they are, meeting us in the several walks of life, some of them
broken in body, broken in mind, broken in morals; the disgrace of
their friends, the disgust of themselves; dragging out a wounded life
in shame and sorrow, and almost longing to find a refuge in the quiet
grave. Sir, I know not how others feel, but when occasionally I
meet with cases like to these, they fill me with a palpitating fear for
my own children. I have vowed that if care and zeal to keep them
from this evil can keep them, they shall be kept. And for myself I
would say, that sooner than bear the load of a calamity so crushing
as that involved in my children’s overthrow by drink, I would be con-
tent to consign them all to an early tomb, and pursue a solitary path
through life; for then, at least, I could live upon the pleasures of
memory, and cherish the pleasures of hope. Again, sir, there is a
political aspect of the question which commends this movement to
our regard. From what we have already said, it will be evident
that whoever may think the temperance cause a very narrow,
petty, sentimental enterprise, which is repudiated by manly and
practical intellect and common sense, we do not. On the con-
trary, we regard it as one of the weightiest, broadest, most
momentous, that a citizen under democratic institutions can con-
template—especially under democratic institutions in a country like
ours. The Anglo-Saxon race is a drinking race. As a people we
crave the material stimulus that shall wake up and hurry the currents
of the live fast, and seek to recruit our iaded powers by the
nervous excitements of the bottle. Our means are ample, andtHe
facilities for gratifying" the craving for drink abundant. And yet,
with this weakness and the means at our command for its indulgence,
—with the heavy working of democratic institutions resting on the
basis of the people themselves, their sense, and virtue, and purpose,
the only base upon which the great machine of government must be
built—with these yawning gulfs on each side our national progress,
there are men who set their faces against the temperance agitation,
and bid us beware of taking up too much time with the narrow and
petty interests which we assume to champion. Sir, I need not say
to you that a drunken people were never the safe depositories of the
power of self-government. Hurried on, the mere victims of dema-
gogues, uncontrollable passion their temptation and their guide, we
cannot safely trust the future to men who grope their way amid such
evils and such weakness. I contend therefore that every man who
desires the security of democratic institutions should see to it, first of


all, that every possible means be exhausted to secure, so far as
human means can do so, a sober people. This done, manhood suf-
frage and the ballot-box will be a power for good and not for evil.
But, sir, looking yet higher, it is because I see in this movement the
promise of a great moral revolution that will raise us to a higher
level of public life, that I give it my adhesion and advocacy. One
great impediment to the growth of religious sentiment and religious
life around us, is the shade of this deadly upas—drink. But if we
can remove this hindrance out of the way, we shall succeed in puri-
fying the morals of the people, and shall thus prepare the way for
leavening them with the influence of religion. No one will deny that
there is ample room for improvement in the matter of public morality.
Rich enough we are in material riches. We have treasures in our
most barren hills: we have waving harvests on our uplands; we
have flocks that yield the golden fleece, and herds that will yet sup-
ply the markets of the world. So far there is much to waken a high
satisfaction. But these things can never make a great nation : that
comes from character. And as one who most truly loves this land,
and who humbly but earnestly labours for its honour, I would ring
out in the ear of every man this cry, that we must purge out the
evils that are now our weakness and disgrace, and that we must shape
our sentiments and our conduct by the law of a high morality, and
quicken them by the life and power of religion, if our country is to
became the home of freemen and the mother of a noble race. But I
will hasten to a close. Yet, ere I sit down, let me press the matter
at which we aim upon the consciences and hearts of this assembly.
I would that I could condense into one burning appeal the emphasis
of feeling of which my own heart is full on this great question. I
would I could select and seize some sharp incisive words that
would cut right into your tenderest sensibilities, and stir you to
instant and hearty effort. But I must trust to the gravity of my
cause to give effect to the weakness of my endeavour. Standing
then in view of the tens of thousands of our children on the one
hand, and the dire evils by which their safety is endangered on the
other. I implore you to save them from the ruin that threatens, more
terrible than death. Think of what drink has done—how it has
shrouded the brightest hopes, crippled the noblest powers, shattered
the intellect, broken the heart, bereaved the home, prepared the
sepulchre, withered all the blossoms of this life, and bartered all
the blessings of the next. Think of what temperance will do; and
then, placing your hand upon its altar, pledge yourself to the utter-
most to extend its sway. ‘ Motives are not wanting that should rouse
you to the highest ambition in a cause so well deserving of your
zeal. Let not their voice be disregarded. I speak to every parent,
to every Sabbath-school teacher, to every minister of the gospel, and,
I say, iet us strive to the uttermost to save the children. There is a
loud call to the effort. I plead the number of their temptations,
which, alas, are so subtle and so strong. I plead the inexperience of
their youth, which in the trust of its simple credulity renders them
so liable to become the victims of a misplaced confidence. I plead
the wreck of so many that have already gone down in the sweltering
waves of early dissipation. I plead the claims of social sobriety,
which now are so outraged by excess; and the honour and stability
of the commonwealth, which are now so seriously compromised and
endangered. I plead in the sacred name of religion, that is so sadly
hindered in its beneficent progress, that it may advance with swifter
step to the glory of greater and wider conquests. Lastly, I plead
for His sake, who, in the days of His flesh, yearned over the children,
and who Horn His throne in heaven still echoes the cry which fell
from His lips while on earth —“ Suffer the little ones to come unto
Me.” And thus, urged by every consideration of reason, of humanity,
and of religion, I trust that we shall join to-night in solemn league
and covenant to defeat the stratagems of the evil of drink, and to
save the children.


Rev. W. J. WATKIN said :—I am a barbarian. I come from the
land of blood and the land of shame. I represent New Zealand, and
can tell of the baneful effects of intoxicating drinks upon the natives
of New Zealand. They used to dislike even the smell of liquor, and
showed their disgust by the name they gave to it, viz., stinking
water ; but they have adopted the white man’s social habit—they
drink to excess, and, consequently, to their own degradation. They
have learnt to swear too. The resolution recognises the presence of
a terrible evil in the land. You have had some fearful pictures
drawn before you to-night, limned, as it were, in fire; but they
were true. You know, you have seen, the facts of life that have
been represented here so vividly to-night. I saw in your town of
Melbourne three men who had been conforming to your “ social
habits ” going up the street, and they were very loving to one
another. But by-and-by one will say, “ This is white another will
say, “ No, it is black,” and to prove it, hits his friend on the eye and
makes it black. I once dined with a gentleman who gave me a
very good dinner. He pressed me to take beer. I took some, but
going down the street soon after, I lost my dinner. So much for
social habits. The effects of our social habits are debt, con-
fusion, and misery. And we may look out from our own land and
learn the devastation that has been wrought in the world by intoxi-
cating drinks. We might visit some old sachem of a red Indian
tribe, sitting by the banks of a river; and asking him of his people,
he could tell a sad tale of their ruin and destruction through the use
of that firewater which had been introduced among them by the
white man; and when he had recited the story, he would cover his
head in his wretched blanket, and, though he would not weep, yet
you could perceive the emotion that was heaving his frame
as he thought of his degradation and of the ruin of his people.
And now about these social habits. We see some strange exhibitions
of friendship on the part of those who are under the influence of
drink; but too often we know that violence prevails, and many a
savage blow is struck in evidence of this social habit. It seems a
strange thing that when men meet, they must show their goodwill
by drinking together. Why should they not go to a fruiterer’s
and indulge in a pineapple, instead of some pineapple rum? or in
place of wine, why not purchase some grapes and enjoy them?
And another phase of these social habits:—There is some poor
wretch who appears before the august presence of a justice of the
peace, a legislator who has his cellar well filled, and is condemned by
the irate gentleman for disturbing the public peace, by shouting in
the excess of his animal spirits ; while, if we could put especial
inquiry, we should find that the gentleman had to be put to bed by
his serving man. Which of these men is the more to be condemned ?
The remedy for the complicated ills that drunkenness induces is
the simple one of total abstinence. We want legislation on the sub-
ject, and must have it; we’ll make them do it. Election time
approaches. A gentleman asks you for your vote. Say to him, “ Sir,
are you a teetotaller?” “ What right have you to ask me if lam a
teetotaller?” “ What right have you to ask me for my vote?” That
is the way we must do it; but we specially want personal devotion
to this noble cause of reformation. I second the resolution.
The Rev. John Watsfoed, ex-President of the Conference, for-
mally supported the resolution, which was adopted by acclamation.
The resolution read as follows :—“ That while all suitable means
should be used to deliver our country from the baneful influence of
its social habits in relation to intoxicating drinks, this meeting is of
opinion that total abstinence being a safe, simple, and effectual
remedy, should commend itself to all who know the value and power
of personal example.”
The first and second verses of the hymn, “My God the spring”
tune, “Evan”—were read by the Rev. G. Daniel, and sung by the
choir; after which Mr. James, M.L.A., moved, and Mr. J. B. Crews,
M.L.A., seconded, a vote of thanks to the speakers.


The Hon. Francis Longmore, in supporting the motion, referred
to the subject of a Permissive Bill, which had been so frequently
spoken of during the evening, and , said that he believed such a
measure would only be valuable under certain circumstances.
They must as & community be prepared for it. No one desired such
a measure carried through Parliament in its entirety more than he
did, but he believed that unless the people were prepared for and
educated up to it, it would be an evil rather than a good. They
needed not to be told that the publicans had an immense influence in
the community—an influence that could only be defeated and over-
come by winning large accessions to the ranks of total abstainers.
What was wanted was, not men satisfied to be pledged teetotallers
only, but men earnest in the work of converting others to an adoption
of total abstinence principles. He believed the demonstration of
that evening would bear good fruit, and trusted that what had been so
well and eloquently said would lead many then present to at once
identify themselves with the temperance cause.
The motion having been put, was carried by acclamation, and the
speakers were thanked in suitable terms by the Chairman.
The Bev. J. C. Symons, in moving a vote of thanks to the one
hundred laymen who had promoted the meeting and undertook to
defray the expenses, said that he trusted what had taken place that
evening would not be without practical results. It was of compara-
tively little use talking unless they were prepared to act also. A
great number of those before him were possessed of the franchise; and
when the elections came on again, he thought they ought to sink all
merely political considerations, have done with the questions of Free
Trade and Protection, which had been a bone of contention for a long
time past, and go straight in “for the Permissive Bill, the securing of
which would have such an important influence on both the moral and
material interests of the colony, and only required a united effort.
Bev. J. A. Nolan seconded the motion, which, having been
carried by acclamation, was suitably responded to by Mr. James
Callaghan on behalf of the committee, whose names are appended:
Committee. — Wesley Church —Dr. Phillips, Messrs. J. Callaghan, R. Hodgson,
R. Callaghan, Osborne, Wray, Gray, and Cooper. North Melbourne —Messrs.
John M'Cutcheon, S. G. King, Wm. Clarke, T. R. Andrews, LL.B., Wheeler,
Fenton, Mountain, Downey, and Pearce. Emerald Hill —Messrs. Thomas Bee,
Cleverdon, Gibson, Parry, Thomas Stead, Hiddlestone, Hannan, C. Kirk, and
Josiah Stead. Sandridge— Mi-. Lowe. Carlton— Messrs. Oakley, Grey, and J.
Cowperthwaite. West. Melbourne —Messrs. R. G. M'Cutcheon, W. Ellis, and
Lormer. Flemirtgton —Mr. Niehol. Footscray — Mr. Leake. Brunsioickstreet —
Dr. Daniels, Councillor Grant, Messrs. Morcombe, Chamberlain, Hordern, Wills,
E. Barrett, Phillips, Bullock, J 7 Robert, Miller, W. J. Galagher, Stone, Haynes,
Ricketts, and J. F. Lewis. Fitiroy-street— Messrs. Orton, Hendy, T. Delbridge,
jun., Hurst, and T. Brown, Brunswick— Messrs. Bedford, Straw, C. Burchett,
and Kyle. Northcote —Councillor Bastings and Mr. South. Coburg —Messrs.
G. B. Wilson and E. J. Stranger. Sackville-street, Collingivood— Messrs. Nettle-
ship, Cantrill, and Sergeant Fenton. East Melbourne— Mr. Henry Gooke. Wel-
ling ton-street —Messrs. Bullard and Wynne. St. Hilda —Councillor Grouch, J.P,,
Messrs. H. Beauchamp, J.P., and W. Forster. Prahran —Messrs. J. B. Crews,
M.P., R. Nicholson, G. T. Geer, E. T. Clapham, W. H. Geer, Scott, D. Blanchard,
and W. J. Lormer. Richmond— Messrs. Woods, Grierson, and Tod. Hawthorn
—Messrs. B. D. Smith, Eades, and Biggs. Hoddle-street —Messrs. J. W. Evans,
Hall, and Hendy. Moorabbin— Mr. Jamison. Brighton—Mr. Harbison. Wil-
liamstown—Captain M'Callum, J.P., Messrs. Murrell and Burridge. Preston—
Mr. Green. South Preston—Mr. Hutton. Greensborough— Mr. Scotland. Geelong i
—Councillor Hunt. Ballarat —Mr. James, M.P. J
A vote of thanks to Mr. Thomas Brown, who had very ably acted
as secretary to the committee, was proposed by Mr. H. Beauchamp, ’
seconded by Mr. Crouch, and carried by acclamation.
Mr. Brown, referred to the probability of the for-
mation of a Temperance Society, with a view to
secure increased interest and more unity of action on the part of
the church in relation to the great question of temperance.
A well-merited vote of thanks was then accorded to the reverend
Chairman, on the motion of Mr. Bichard Hodgson, seconded by Mr.
John M'Cutcheon; and the same having been acknowledged, the
united choir sang the first verse of the National Anthem, after which
the benediction was pronounced, and the meeting separated.
