





No.2
ALLIED WORKS COUNIL
REPORT
FOR PERIOD FEBRUARY 26, 1942
TO JUNE 30, 1949
SECRET


REPORT
ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE
ALLIED WORKS COUNCIL
FOR THE PERIOD
FEBRUARY 26, 1942 TO
JUNE 30, 1943
Published by authority
of the Minister for the Interior,
Senator the Hon. J. S. Callings.
•
1943




FOREWORD
IN order to appreciate the development and manifold functions of the
Allied Works Council, it is necessary to revert to the nature and extent
of the work previously carried out by the Works and Services Branch of
the Department of the Interior, whose activities were later merged with
those of the Allied Works Council.
In July, 1941, a report was tendered by the Department of the Interior,
outlining the activities of its Works and Services Branch during the war
period, and more particularly for the financial year 1940-41.
Owing to the greatly accelerated programme of works, and the heavy
demands made on the Allied Works Council’s officers during its formative
period, it was not possible to prepare a further statement covering the
financial year 1941-42.
The report now put forward, however, broadly covers the operations of
the Works and Services Branch of the Department of the Interior from
July 1, 1941, up to the time when it was merged with the Allied Works
Council, and of the Council’s activities from that date until June 30, 1943.
In its beginning, the Allied Works Council was given the responsibility
of carrying out the works required by the American Forces in Australia.
But it soon became evident that it would be more advantageous to amalga-
mate the activities of the Allied Works Council and those of the Works and
Services Branch of the Department of the Interior, giving rise to one organi-
sation responsible for carrying out the whole of the works required by the
Commonwealth Government and by the American authorities in Australia.
This plan was given tangible expression when it was arranged that the
Works and Services Branch would be merged with the Council, and that the
whole would function as one organisation under the title of Allied Works
Council.
The works carried out by the Council are executed in an order of priority
laid down by the Chiefs of Staff Committee, to which recommendations are
made by the Works Priorities Sub-Committee.
In the report which follows, the remarkable increase which has taken
place in the works programme is clearly indicated.
Prior to the financial year 1939-40, a normal year’s expenditure on
works was approximately £2,100,000. The expenditure during the financial
year 1939-40, amounted to approximately £9,000,000, while for the year
1940-41, the amount involved was almost £20,000,000. In 1941-42 this
figure was increased to £32,000,000, and the financial year just completed
ended with an expenditure of £56,000,000.
[?]
Director-General of Allied Works.
June 30, 1943.


CONTENTS
PAGE
HISTORY OF THE ALLIED WORKS COUNCIL 5
ORGANISATION 8
FACTS ON A.W.C .... 13
THE PROGRAMME 15
PROJECTS 17
DOCKS 17
MARITIME WORKS 24
LIGHTER CONSTRUCTION AND SHIP REPAIRS 27
GUN EMPLACEMENTS 29
MUNITIONS 32
AERODROMES 40
ROADS 49
OIL INSTALLATIONS 57
HOSPITALS 60
TIMBER 65
STORES 68
CAMPS 1 71
DEHYDRATION 73
WORKS DIRECTORATE 75
FINANCE DIRECTORATE 78
PERSONNEL DIRECTORATE 85
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS SUPPLY DIRECTORATE 107


CHAPTER
1
HISTORY
OF
THE ALLIED
WORKS
COUNCIL
February 15, 1942 SINGAPORE FELL!
On that day also, the Australian Prime Minister
(Mr. Curtin) took the first step in the formation
of the Allied Works Council, by requesting the
Hon. E. G. Theodore to accept responsibility for
the establishment and direction of the Council.
Mr. Theodore assented and, on February 17,
1942, Cabinet decided upon the formation of the
Allied Works Council.
The decision to form the Council was brought about
by the unprecedented demand for construction of
defence works, following the catastrophic entry of
Japan into the war and the consequent arrival in
Australia of American Armed Forces and equipment.
Some months before the outbreak of war in
September, 1939, the Defence Department, as then
constituted, initiated an extensive works programme,
which necessitated immediate expansion of the
Departmental organisation of the Department of the
Interior to meet the new requirements.
This expansion provided for establishment of a
Liaison Section with the headquarters of the then
Defence Department, and also the establishment of a
Works Directorate at Port Moresby.
Later, upon the outbreak of war and the division of
the Defence Department into the Department of
Defence Co-ordination, the Department of the Navy,


the Department of the Army, the Department of
Air, and the Department of Supply and Development
(which incorporated the Ministry of Munitions), it
became necesary to again expand the organisation.
In this new alignment, the direct liaison aspect
became a matter of such considerable importance that,
coincident with the declaration of war, the Director-
General of Works (Mr. C. A. Hoy), together with
several officers of the head office staff, transferred from
Canberra to Melbourne, in order to maintain an
effective liaison with the Departments concerned
directly or indirectly with the Defence effort.
From then on, activities increased to such an extent
as to necessitate the formation in December, 1941, of
a Directorate of Works, composed of the Director-
General of Works, Mr. C. A. Hoy; the Assistant
Director-General of Works, Mr. M. W. Mehaffey; the
Director of Architecture, Mr. H. M. Rolland; the
Director of Engineering, Mr. E. F. Borrie I whose
services had been made available to the Department of
the Interior by the Melbourne and Metropolitan
Board of Works) ; and the Director of Administration,
Mr. W. H. Viney.
Prior to this, under an arrangement with the Chief
of the Air Staff, officers of the Works and Services
Branch had largely taken over the duties of the Works
Directorate of the Department of Air at its head-
quarters in Melbourne.
The Commonwealth Directorates were expanded in
the Stales and Territories, the helpful co-operation of
the state instrumentalities was enlisted and, with the
assistance of private firms of architects, engineers
and quantity surveyors, the Works and Services
Branch was able to cope with the heavy programme
entrusted to it.
On the entry of Japan into the war, and the arrival
in Australia of officers of the American Army, dis-
cussions and conferences were held between the Chiefs
of Staff, representatives of the American Forces, the
Department of Defence Co-ordination and officers of
the Department of the Interior, with a view to
formulating a procedure under which works required
for the American and Australian Forces could be
carried out without undue and possibly harmful com-
petition. As a result of a series of conferences held
in December, 1941, and January, 1942, it was decided
to set up the Administrative Planning Committee, to
promote Australian-American co-operation in defence
works. This committee was to be a facilitating and
expediting body, to ensure the smooth functioning of
their joint requirements.
In February, 1942, a decision was made to devise
special machinery for implementation of the decisions
of the Administrative Planning Committee.
To this end, the Allied Works Council was formed.
Following Cabinet’s decision of February 17, 1942,
National Security (Allied Works) Regulations No.
88, establishing the Allied Works Council, were pro-
mulgated on February 26, 1942.
First members of the Allied Works Council were:—
The Hon. E. G. Theodore, Director-General of
Allied Works.
Mr. C. A. Hoy, Assistant Director-General of Allied
Works.
A nominee of the Commanding General of the U.S.
Army Forces in Australia, the first nominee being
Brigadier-General Dwight F. Johns.
The Allied Works Council commenced activities
in a small room at Victoria Barracks, Melbourne, on
February 28, 1942.
Mr. H. F. Yoxon, who had been appointed Secretary
to the Council, commenced duty on February 28.
First real domicile of the Allied Works Council
was a block of flats in Queen’s Road, South Melbourne.
The staff in the first week of operations consisted of
three clerks, two typistes and a messenger boy.
During this period, Council meetings were held
daily and sometimes even more frequently, to cope
with the volume of work being apportioned to the
Council by the respective Services.
In the following weeks, three new Directorates were
added to the organisation. These were the Director-
ates of Personnel (Mr. D. F. H. Packer); Mechanical
Equipment and Materials Supply (Mr. Ellis H.
Davies); and Finance (Mr. W. K. Black).
In May, two Deputy Directors-General were
appointed, Mr. J. R. Kemp being appointed in
Queensland on May 14, 1942, and Mr. E. R. Bradshaw
in New South Wales on May 21, 1942.
By June, 1942, the head office staff had grown to
such proportions that a shift to more commodious city
offices was essential.
Removal to a Collins Street bank building, almost
all of which was subsequently taken over, was made
on June 27, 1942.
On July 4, 1942, the Directorate of Works of the
Department of the Interior moved into the same
building.
At June 30, 1943, the Allied Works Council
administrative and technical staffs totalled 4,609.
This total was made up as follows:
Head Office 384
Victoria (and Tasmania) 844
New South Wales 1,662
Queensland 1,239
South Australia 134
Northern Territory 142
Western Australia 204
Having established a nuclear staff and begun to
execute the gigantic task allotted it, the Allied Works
Council soon found itself faced with a major problem
in the dearth of available manpower.
To solve this, and as a result of recommendations
made by the Director-General of Allied Works, the
Civil Constructional Corps was formed by National
Security (Allied Works) Regulations No. 170,
gazetted on April 14, 1942.
The Department of Air approached the Director-
General of Allied Works on August 15, 1942, with a
request that the Allied Works Council undertake
mining of mica in the Northern Territory.


By August 20, arrangements had been completed
with the Minerals Development Section of the De-
partment of Supply and Shipping, for the Allied
Works Council to undertake the mining of mica on
behalf of that Department.
In September, 1942, a Central Advisory Account-
ancy Panel was set up to examine the existing cost
plus fixed fee agreement, with a view to submitting a
final form of agreement for uniform application in all
States, and to prepare a detailed programme of audit
for the guidance of the Council’s auditors.
Messrs. A. H. Barraclough (Chairman), A. J. Han-
cock and F. G. Harding, Chartered Accountants, had
signified their willingness to serve on the Central Ad-
visory Accountancy Panel in an honorary capacity,
and their appointment was duly confirmed.
At a conference held on November 2, 1942, and
attended by the Minister for the Interior, the Director-
General of Allied Works, the Secretary to the Depart-
ment of the Interior, the Assistant Director-General of
Allied Works, and the Secretary of the Allied Works
Council, it was recommended that the Works and Ser-
vices Branch of the Department of the Interior be
merged with the Allied Works Council, and that the
whole should function as one organisation, under the
title “Allied Works Council.” This was approved by
the Minister for the Interior on November 5, 1942.
On December 29, 1942, an inquiry into Allied
Works Council administration opened in Sydney.
The inquiry, which was conducted by the Co-
ordinator-General of Public Works (Sir Harry
Brown), was brought about as a result of the publica-
tion in the Sydney Daily Mirror on November 19,
1942, of the report of a meeting of the Federated
Clerks’ Union, at which members of the Sydney Office
of the Allied Works Council were alleged to have
made charges against the Council’s administration.
Sir Harry Brown’s report, which was tabled in the
House of Representatives on March 23, 1943, stated
that no evidence had been tendered that would sub-
stantiate any of the allegations that had been made
against the Council’s administration.
As a result of investigations which were conducted
over a period of months, a complete reclassification of
the Allied Works Council’s administrative staff was
carried out in Queensland, Victoria, New South Wales
and South Australia between November, 1942, and
June 30, 1943. This reclassification was made
necessary by the rapid growth of the staff and the
lack of opportunity to properly classify it during
the formative stages of the Council.
On May 8, 1943, the Allied Works Council sus-
tained its first fatal casualty, with the death of Mr.
R. W. Parkhurst, an officer loaned to the Bitumen
Control Section of the Mechanical Equipment and
Materials Supply Directorate by the U.S. Army. Mr.
Parkhurst was killed in an aeroplane while on duty in
New Guinea.
A third Deputy Director-General of Allied Works,
Mr. W. T. Haslam, was appointed on May 12, 1943.
Mr. Haslam was appointed Deputy Director-General
for the Northern Territory.
At June 30, 1943, the Allied Works Council had
completed 923 major projects and had another 1,380
under construction. Each of these undertakings was
valued at more than £5,000. In addition, there were
thousands of projects costing less than £5,000 each.
With the removal of the threat of invasion of the
mainland, and the gradual mounting of an Allied
offensive in the South-West Pacific, the fruits of the
Allied Works Council’s efforts are becoming evident.




1 0 pp. pagm 6 ]
ALLIED WORKS COUNCIL


PRIORITIES COMMITTEE: The Works Priorities Sub-Committee holds a weekly
meeting to discuss priorities to be accorded various projects. From left corner of
table: N. K. S. Brodribb (Assistant Director-General of Munitions); C. A. Hoy
(Assistant Director-General of Allied Works); Hon. E. G. Theodore (Director-General
of Allied Works); W. Brown (Sub-committee staff); W. E. Dale (Acting Secretary);
Major-General J. H. Cannon (Chairman); W. H. Tucker (Department of Supply and
Shipping); Commodore G. D. Moore; Air-Commodore J. P. J. McCauley (R.A.A.F.);
Col. H. R. Cole and Brig.-General Carl W. Connell (U.S. Army nominees).
CHAPTER
2
ORGANISATION
The circumstances which gave rise to the formation of
the Allied Works Council were such that those who
were entrusted with the Council’s executive functions
were confronted with the heavy responsibility of creating
an organisation, and at the same time implementing a
vast and urgent works programme.
The Time factor precluded all possibility of plan-
ning an organisation that would be in readiness to
meet the demands that would be made upon it.
Urgent works of varying magnitude were required
at once. Neither time nor executive officers could be
spared to devise a planned organisation. So, in the
process of developing the Council’s implemental
machinery, predetermination had to give way to
evolution.
This evolutionary process, however, possessed the
redeeming feature which the various sections and
directorates that were subsequently brought into being
were in themselves direct responses to the Council’s
requirements, made manifest by experience. There-
fore, it is not surprising that the various sections and
sub-sections that have been set up at different times
have all enjoyed permanency a factor making for
stability and efficiency.
The Allied Works Council now functions through
a series of directorates which individually control the
matters pertaining to personnel, finance, mechanical
equipment and materials supply, works (encompass-
ing engineering, architecture, and administration).
These directorates, in turn, operate through the
Deputy Directors-General of Allied Works for New
South Wales, Queensland, and Northern Territory,




the Works Directors for Victoria, South Australia,
Western Australia, and the Australian Capital Terri-
tory, and the Works Registrar, Tasmania.
Superimposed upon this decentralised structure is
the Administrative Branch of the Council, which is
distinguished by its initiating and co-ordinating
characteristics.
The organisation as a whole then functions under
the control exercised by the Director-General of
Allied Works and the Assistant Director-General of
Allied Works.
In subsequent sections of this report, specific treat-
ment is accorded the various directorates, and, as
the Administrative Branch acts as the fulcrum of the
organisation, a better appreciation will be gained of
the functional aspects of those directorates if the
administrative activities of that branch are clearly
understood.
A cross-section of the functions of the Administra-
tive Branch shows its activities being carried on
through the Allied Works Council proper, the
Secretariat, Staff Section, Works Priorities, Requisi-
tioning and Progress Section, Public Relations and
Statistical Sections, Registry and Despatch, Stationery,
Printing, and Equipment Section, and a section to
arrange the necessary details associated with travelling
and accommodation.
ALLIED WORKS COUNCIL.
The Council meets on the Thursday of each week
to deal with matters of policy and to decide upon
action to be taken in relation to matters that come
within its jurisdiction.
The Director-General of Manpower and the
Director-General of War Organisation of Industry
are represented at the Council meetings, and thus a
most effective liaison is maintained with these two
departments.
THE SECRETARIAT.
Within the Secretariat proper, comprising the
Secretary of the Council, the Assistant-Secretary
(Administrative), and the Chief Clerk, the Council
agenda and minutes are drawn up and their dis-
tribution effected. Ministerial and general corre-
spondence is also dealt with, while all matters per-
taining to regulations and delegations of authority
come within the ambit of this section. Financial
authorisations are prepared for approval, and general
office instructions are issued as necessity requires.
The Secretary then exercises through his senior
officers a discretionary supervision over the remaining
sections of the Administrative Branch.
STAFF SECTION.
During recent months the Staff Section has been
greatly augmented as a result of the decision to
centralise this aspect of the Council’s activities.
In this section, complete records are maintained
relating to (he administrative, professional, and
clerical staff of the Allied Works Council in all
States. The records of permanent officers of the
Works and Services Branches are kept by the Director
of Administration, Head Office.
It is the responsibility of the Secretariat to prepare
Commonwealth-wide instructions in connection with
staff matters, procedure, determinations, rulings, and
policy, as well as the statistical records relating to
the staff and its movements. The recording of appli-
cations for employment, conduct of interviews, and
subsequent selection and recommendation of staff
appointments, are also covered by the Staff Section.
Duties carried out by this section with respect to
the local staff in particular involve the handling
of all matters relating to travelling and living allow-
ances, sick, recreation, and special leave, salary
adjustments and variations, the preparation of over-
time schedules, and the payment of salaries and
overtime. The preparation and recording of travel
vouchers, and the checking of all claims in connec-
tion therewith, as well as the making of cash advances
against travelling allowances, are further duties of
the Staff Section.
WORKS PRIORITIES, REQUISITIONING
AND PROGRESS SECTION.
The Works Priorities Section deals with the neces-
sary preliminaries associated with the implementation
of a project, following the allocation of a priority
rating to the work by the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
When a proposed work is conceived by a Service or
a Commonwealth Department, details of the proposal
are submitted to the Works Priorities Sub-committee,
which subsequently makes a recommendation to the
Chiefs of Staff Committee as to the priority that
should be given to the project under review.
The three Australian Services, the United States
Army Services of Supply, the Ministry of Munitions,
the Department of Supply and Shipping, the Allied
Works Council, and the Director-General of Man-
power, are represented on the Works Priorities Sub-
committee, which meets weekly.


War Cabinet Minute No. 2038 of March 19, 1942,
prescribed the machinery and procedure for the
determination of priorities of Commonwealth works
and the appointment of an authority for the direction
and control of such works as are placed on the
Priorities List.
The cardinal features of this procedure were that
the Chiefs of Staff Committee should determine what
Commonwealth works, whether for Allied purposes
or otherwise, should be placed on a priority list,
and in respect of works so placed, should determine
their relative priorities; that all Commonwealth works
appearing in such priority list, should take precedence
over all other Commonwealth works; and that, upon
the determination of such priorities, it should be the
duty of the Director-General of Allied Works (except
in the case of works which are carried out by some
other authority designated by the Priorities Sub-
committee) to direct and control the carrying out of
all such works, and that the provisions of the National
Security (Allied Works) Regulations should apply to
such works.
The term “Commonwealth works” was to be taken
to include all works being carried out, or proposed,
by any Commonwealth authority, as well as those
works projected or undertaken by the United States
authorities in Australia.
The Works Priorities Sub-committee, in the main,
deals only with works involving an estimated expendi-
ture of £5,000 and upwards, but works are dealt with
as to priority rating by representatives of the Allied
Works Council in the various States in consultation
as necessary with representatives of the requisitioning
department. Works Directors in allotting priorities
to works under £5,000 are required to ensure that
such works are defence projects, or are required for
essential maintenance of existing capital works.
Immediately following the allocation of priorities
to the various projects that are submitted for con-
sideration each week, the Works Priorities Section
of the Allied Works Council issues a Works Priority
Certificate for each project. These certificates show
the serial number, priority rating, requisitioning
department, locality, description, and estimated cost
of the project to which they relate. The certificates
.are then forwarded to the Deputy Directors-General
or Works Directors of the States concerned, and
copies are also sent to the Directorate of Works.
Works Requisitions are placed with the Council
for the carrying out of those projects which have been
accorded a priority rating and for which the Allied
Works Council has been designated the constructing
authority. These requisitions are forwarded to the
Council by the Service or Department requiring the
work.
In the Works Priorities Section the requisitions
are identified as to serial number, priority rating,
and priority certificate number, and prepared for their
subsequent approval by the Director-General of Allied
Works or the Assistant Director-General.
Approved requisitions are then forwarded through
the Directorate of Works to the State office concerned.
Contract submissions which require the approval of
the Director-General or the Assistant Director-General
are likewise identified and prepared for approval in
the section.
Each week Schedules of Approvals by the Director-
General and Assistant Director-General are prepared
and circulated to those concerned. These schedules
show the requisitions approved, the contracts let,
varied, cancelled, or extended, and the expenditure
authorised under the special authority delegated to
the Director-General of Allied Works.
Construction Progress Reports on projects appear-
ing on the list, showing the priority grouping of
projects, are submitted fortnightly by the various State
offices.
A special signalling system is in operation to
record the percentage of progress on each project,
and to indicate whether such projects are ahead,
behind, or maintaining their scheduled rate of pro-
gress.
These reports are analysed with a view to ascer-
taining any “defects” which might be hindering the
progress of any project. These analyses are then
forwarded to the Directorates of Personnel,
Mechanical Equipment and Materials Supply, and/or
Works, where the necessary corrective action is
taken.
OTHER SECTIONS.
The Allied Works Council has its own Central
Registry, which is quite distinct from that main-
tained by the Directorate of Works.
In this section all incoming correspondence and
papers are registered and attached to their respective
files. The Registry has been sectionalised, resulting
in the preparation and maintenance of general, per-
sonnel, mechanical equipment, and finance files.
Despatch is a sub-section of Registry. Its particular
function being to attend to the despatch of all out-
going correspondence and papers, and provide
messenger services.






CHAPTER
3
THE PROGRAMME
Without parallel in Australian history, the works programme
carried out hy the Allied Works Council has transformed the
physical and economic features of the continent.
While effected as vital and urgent auxiliaries in the gearing of the
nation for total war, the programme, hy its very nature, is of far-reaching
consequence for post-war Australia.
FOR U.S. FORCES.
FOR ARMY.
Access roads; Ordnance stores and de-
pots; Camps; Portable huts; Army
schools; Workshops; Hospitals; .Am-
munition depots; Convalescent depots;
Transit stores; Aerodromes, including
runways, dispersal strips, etc.; Relief
landing grounds; Hangars; Depot ware-
houses; Refrigerated storehouses; Air-
craft erection depots; Mobile hospital
units; Prison stockade; Laundry facili-
ties; Engine overhaul repair shops;
Mess and recreation facilities; Road,
rail and wharf facilities; Transhipment
depots; Administrative headquarters;
Radio intelligence; Cool storage ware-
houses; Motor depots; Barge assembly
depots; Staging camps; Pile anchor-
ages; Barracks; Ammunition storage
magazines.
FOR NAVY.
Graving docks; Berths for warships;
Operational and maintenance bases for
defence motor launches; Piling; Nets
and boom anti-submarine defences;
Controlled mining bases; Bulk seaboard
oil storage facilities; Stores and bar-
racks; Degaussing ranges; Dockyard
improvements; Hospitals; Schools.
Strategic roads; Railways and bridges;
Ordnance stores and depots; Bulk
petrol and other fuel storage facilities;
Camps; Portable huts; Schools; Work-
shops; Barracks; Hospitals, Artillery
ranges; Aircraft facilities; Ammuni-
tion depots; Convalescent depots;
Remount depots; Mechanical experi-
mental shop; Transit stores; Fixed
defences (gun emplacements).
FOR R.A.A.F.
Wireless receiving station buildings;
Splinter-proof operational buildings and
electrical installations; Aerodromes, in-
cluding runways, dispersal strips, hide-
outs, camouflage, extension of runways
and taxiways; Relief landing grounds;
Camps; Messes; Kitchens; Storage;
Operational facilities; Workshops;
Hangars; Power-houses; Bulk petrol
storage tanks; Pipelines; Stores and
railway sidings; Maintenance depots;
Repair and salvage units; Training
schools; Hospitals; Hangars (prefabri-
cated) ; Flying boat stations.
FOR MUNITIONS.
Factories for manufacture of: Ball-
bearings; Guns; Tanks; Ammunition
and explosives; Torpedoes; Mines;
Armor-piercing shot; Ammunition stores
and depots; Electrical and engineering
services and facilities; Railway sidings;
Munition workers’ hostels and housing.
FOR AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION.
Factories for production of aircraft;
Alterations; Additions and extensions
to civil aerodromes (involving construc-
tion of hangars, aprons and runways).
MISCELLANEOUS.
Other major projects include: Con-
struction of all types of defence annexes
and factories for supply of clothing,
equipment and medical supplies; A.R.P.
and camouflage works; Water supply
facilities; Wharves and shipping faci-
lities; Erection of telephone exchanges,
telephone and telegraph lines; Food
dehydration factories; Scientific re-
search laboratories; Flax mills; Marine
engine factories; Abbatoir; Broadcast-
ing stations; And many others on the
ultra secret list, which will not be
known until the end of hostilities.




CHAPTER.
4
PROJECTS
Its magnitude and complexity prohibit a complete analysis of the Allied
Works Council’s programme being made in the limited scope of this report.
However, the largest and most interesting items of the programme have
been grouped and are described in the following pages.
DOCKS
Two graving docks, the strategic and permanent values of
which cannot he adequately estimated, are being constructed
by the Allied Works Council.
Located at Sydney and Brisbane, the docks are of capital
ship and cruiser capacity respectively.
Discussions relating to the construction in Australia
of a graving dock capable of handling capital ships
began in 1938.
At the invitation of the Commonwealth Government,
Sir Leopold Savile, a partner of Sir Alexander Gibb
& Partners, Consulting Engineers, London, arrived in
Australia in June, 1939, to investigate and report on
the most suitable site for such a dock, and to provide
an estimate of the cost.
Sir Leopold visited a number of possible dock sites,
and as a result, Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners, in a
report dated January 31, 1940, advised adoption of
the Potts Point-Garden Island (Sydney) area as
the site, and estimated the cost of construction at
£2,997,000.
At June 30, 1943, indications were that the finished
cost of the dock would be £6,750,000.
War Cabinet approved of the undertaking on May 1,
1940.
On July 4, 1940, War Cabinet decided that the
Minister for the Interior should be responsible for the
construction of the dock. Action taken before that
date had been the responsibility of the Department of
the Navy.
DOCK: View looking north along the floor of Sydney Graving
Dock. Overhead gantries are used for pouring of cement in
construction of walls.
A start was made on preparatory reclamation work
on August 7, 1940.
Late in 1941, when construction of the coffer dam
by the Maritime Services Board was well in hand, a
programme of work was drawn up by the consultants,
ivhich provided that the dock should be ready to take
a ship in August, 1944.
This programme was used as a guide until
December, 1941, when, on the entry of Japan into
the war, advice was sought as to whether or not
construction should be accelerated.
The matter was referred to the Department of the
Navy.
On receipt of information regarding the current and
proposed procedure for construction, the Department
of the Navy recommended that:
(a) It was essential to speed up concreting to the
utmost by working seven days a week.
(b) Pumps and cranes be ordered from the Lnited
Kingdom forthwith.
(c) All departments and others concerned with the
building of the dock be informed that delivery
dates were being put forward by six months.
(d) The Department of the Navy take up with the
appropriate authority the question of approval
for flood-lighting to continue, irrespective of
the blackout.


INITIAL: First step in the construction of the Sydney graving
dock was the relaying of submarine service lines from the
mainland to Garden Island.
War Cabinet approved of this recommendation, and
action was taken immediately to put it into effect.
State instrumentalities, municipal bodies and private
contractors have carried out the construction of the
dock under Allied Works Council supervision.
CONSTRUCTION.
Dimensions: The dock is being constructed on a
reclaimed area of Sydney Harbour, covering 32 acres.
Length from outside cope at northern end, to cope on
centre line of dock at south wall, is 1,177 feet. The
dock can be divided into two compartments, length of
the outer compartment being approximately 360 feet,
and that of the inner compartment, 700 feet.
Width between the east and west copes is 152 feet,
and depth below finished surface level, 55 feet.
Depth below low water Spring tide is 45.4 feet.
The walls are 41 feet thick at base and 13 feet
6 inches at top.
FLOOR: Work was commenced on the first of the concrete
blocks which form the floor of the dock, on November 3, 1942.
FILLING: To form the coffer dam for the graving dock, filling
from quarries was dumped outside the sheet piling which
enclosed the harbor area to be reclaimed.
The floor is 18 feet thick at the sill area (opening)
and 14 feet 6 inches thick at the head. Minimum
thickness is 5 feet.
The caissons, of which there are two, are 151 feet
long, 37 feet wide and 53 feet 3 inches deep.
History: On assumption of responsibility for
the dock in July, 1940, the Department of the Interior
arranged that Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners be
retained by the Commonwealth as consulting
engineers to prepare plans, specifications and quan-
tities, and also to send to Sydney an experienced civil
engineer for consultation and advice.
Borings were made to secure information necessary
for the preparation of working drawings.
Action was also commenced to acquire the water
frontages along which the dock was to be built. The
first acquisition of property was completed in
January, 1941.
Arrangements were made for the submarine
telephone, power cables and water mains from Potts
Point to Garden Island, which crossed the dock site,
to be replaced by new cables and mains laid well
clear of construction operations.
The new telephone cable to Garden Island was laid
by February 20, 1941, and the new power cables were
available for use on March 26, 1941.
The new water mains were not finally laid until
May 18, 1941.
Relaying of the telephone, power and water mains
cost £20,444.
The balance of 1940 was occupied mostly with pre-
parations for construction work, and on December 31,


CAISSON: On the finished portion of the floor, shipwrights
fabricate the ship-like caissons for the dock. The caissons will
be launched by the flooding of the completed dock.
1940, the Maritime Services Board took over the work
of building the coffer dam and completing
reclamation.
Work carried out by the Maritime Services Board
between December 31, 1940, and May 9, 1942,
included :
(a) Investigation of the nature and stratification of
materials in the harbour bed.
(b) Reclamation of an area from Potts Point near
Woolloomooloo wharves. Total quantity of
material used in reclamation w T as 305,991 cubic
yards.
(c) Dredging over the area of the dock. During
13 Y> months, 474,620 cubic yards were
dredged.
(d) Depositing ballast and core-filling for
formation of the coffer dam. This occupied 11
months, the quantity of material deposited
totalling 779,070 cubic yards.
(e) Construction of temporary trestle jetties and
rail tracks for the travelling pile-driving
frames, which drove the sheet piling for the
coffer dam. This work took 11 months and
required 89,295 linear feet of piles, and
402,600 super feet of decking and bracing.
(f) Driving of sheet steel piling. In the nine
months required to complete this operation, a
total length of 166,514 feet of piles was driven.
The length of the coffer dam was 4,089 feet.
The total cost of coffer dam construction, dredging
and reclamation work carried out by the Maritime
Services Board and the Public Works Department,
was £749,194.
MAZE: This accumulation of gantries and cranes gives some
impression of the mechanical might concentrated on the
construction of the Sydney graving dock.
From the quarry at Ball’s Head, approximately
410,000 cubic yards of stone quarried by the State
Public Works Department was transported to the
dock and used in construction of the coffer dam. An
additional 40,000 cubic yards was obtained from
contractors.
On May 9, 1942, the Dock Construction Section
took over the coffer dam from the Maritime Services
Board and has since maintained it.
In March, 1941, the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage
and Drainage Board commenced preparatory work
on its section of the undertaking by developing a
construction scheme and commencing the assembly
of plant for de-watering, excavation and concreting.
The de-watering plant was ready for operation as soon
as the Maritime Services Board completed the coffer
dam.
On February 19, 1942, the Metropolitan Water,
Sewerage and Drainage Board commenced to de-water
DEEPEST: Civil Constructional Corps members working at the
deepest point at the Sydney graving dock.


1. Dock area being dredged while
sheet piling to form coffer dam is
erected.
2. Almost completed coffer dam, prior
to dewatering.
3. Dock site showing dewatered coffer
dam immediately before excavation
commenced.


the coffer dam. At intervals of 5 days the water was
reduced by 5 feet. Actual pumping for each stage
occupied about 2 1 /> days, the remainder of the 5 days
being allowed for any settling or stabilising of the
banks of the coffer dam. Actually there was very
little movement of material during or after de-water-
ing. De-watering finished on April 2, 1942, and
excavation commenced the same day.
Excavation was completed in June, 1943, having
occupied 14 months. The total quantities involved
were: 260,000 cubic yards of soft material and
130,000 cubic yards of rock.
The Metropolitan Water, Sewerage, and Drainage
Board commenced concreting on November 3, 1942.
At June 30, 1943, 130,000 cubic yards of concrete
had been placed. The estimated final quantity is
288,300 cubic yards. Unfortunately, the Fuller-Ken -
yon pump, part of the plant for bulk handling of
cement, was lost en route from U.S.A. It has since
been replaced and the new pump installed and placed
in operation.
The whole concrete-mixing equipment was ready
for use by the time excavation had advanced suffi-
ciently to enable concrete to be placed. At June 30,
all five of the gantries used in placing concrete were
in operation.
In addition to the excavation, concreting, and flood-
lighting carried out by the Metropolitan Water, Sewer-
age and Drainage Board, that body also completed
an underground air-raid shelter, storm-water drainage,
and a temporary extension of Wylde Street, Potts
Point, to Cowper Wharf Road.
Pumps: The main dock pumps each have a capa-
city of 71,000 gallons per minute.
Cranes: A 250-ton crane is to be erected on the
fitting-out wharf. This crane, which is estimated to
cost £280,000, has a loading capacity ranging from
40 tons at 171 feet maximum radius, to 250 tons at
118 feet maximum radius, or 48 feet minimum radius.
In addition, there will be two 50-ton travelling cranes
at the dock sides, and a 40-ton travelling crane on
the fitting-out wharf. There will also be two 3-ton
electric cranes, and two 3 to 5-ton mobile cranes.
Caissons: These are being constructed simul-
taneously with the dock. They are being built on
the completed section of the dock floor. It is esti-
mated that 28,000 cubic feet of granite, to be secured
from New South Wales and Victoria, will be required
for the caisson grooves.
Fitting-out Wharf: The wharf is actually an
extension of the existing Wooloomooloo wharves, and
PILING: Civil Constructional Corps workers erecting a wall of
sheet piling to bolster a section of the coffer dam.
cannot be completed until after the north end of the
coffer dam has been removed, that is until after the
dock has become available for use. The wharf is
estimated to cost £500,000.
General: To June 30, 1943, no serious engineer-
ing difficulties had been encountered. The only
serious problem had been occasional shortages of
labour.
At June 30, 1943, the average number of men at
work each day was 3,500. They were working three
eight-hour shifts.
Apart from the significant part it will play in the
war in the Pacific, the Sydney Graving Dock will
make Sydney one of the foremost centres of world
trade in the post-war years.
MODEL: A graphic impression of the completed Sydney graving
dock can be gained from this large-scale model showing the
dock proper, the fitting-out wharves and the 250-ton crane.


MIXER: The total quantity of concrete required
for construction of the dock was handled by this
medium-sized concrete mixing plant.
WALLS: A length view of Brisbane graving dock,
showing both unlined and concreted sections of
the wails.
BRISBANE GRAVING DOCK
Situated at Cairncross on the Brisbane River, the
Brisbane Graving Dock was at an advanced stage of
construction at June 30, 1943.
The dock will accommodate vessels up to 770 feet
in length.
Structural engineers claim that the dock site is pos-
sibly the best so far selected anywhere in the world.
Their claim is based on the fact that the site is
composed of soft but extremely watertight sandstone,
thus necessitating the concrete lining of a very small
area of the dock walls.
Estimated to cost £908,410, the dock was com-
menced on August 17, 1942. To June 30, 1943, a
total of £445,558 had been expended and the job was
more than 50 per cent, complete.
CONSTRUCTION.
DIMENSIONS: Length, 875 feet from outer wall
to dock head.
Width, 110 feet across the top and 110 feet at 30
feet below datum (low water Spring tide), the floor
of the sill. The depth of the chamber will be 34 feet
below datum.
The floating, ship-type caisson is 130 feet long and
32 feet wide, having a deadweight of 1,010 tons.
EXCAVATION: Excavation of the site occupied
eight months, during which time 327,914 cubic yards


of earth were removed. The excavated material was
used for reclamation of mangrove swampland imme-
diately surrounding the dock site.
Concreting: The minimum of concreting was
provided for. Concrete used totalled 31,000 cubic
yards. Except for the stair walls, the sill area, and
wall surfaces in the vicinity of the pump inlets, all
of which were either Gunited or concreted, the natural
sandstone walls were unlined.
Manpower: Maximum number of men enployed
750, and the average just over 600.
Caisson: About 8,000 cubic feet of local granite
were required for lining of the two caisson sills. The
inner sill is 50 feet from the entrance.
Pumps: A 30-inch dredge pump, taken from the
former dredge HERCULES, is being installed. It
will be driven by the original triple-expansion steam
engine, which is capable of developing up to 1,650
h.p. A circular well, 41 feet deep, has been built,
forming an underground pumping station to house the
engine and pump. Two 15-inch diameter electrically-
driven auxiliary pumps will also be used. Four
undertube boilers, marine type, are being installed.
Two were taken from the dredge HERCULES and two
from the original H.M.A.S. AUSTRALIA.
Cranes: One 40-ton fixed steam crane and four
3-ton Diesel locomotive cranes will be installed.
The 4-feet-high keel blocks are constructed of Aus-
tralian hardwood.
Concrete piers which are at 20-ft. intervals, sup-
port the ends of the breast shores and will also serve
to buttress the walls.
In addition, the piers will support the rail tracks
for the locomotive trains which will run on either
side of the dock.
Store and workshop buildings, 40 feet by 120 feet,
are being erected, and plans for future expansions
and additions to supplementary workshops, have been
prepared.
Before the dock can be used, in addition to the
concrete gravity wall, 20,000 cubic yards of earth
and rock which compose the coffer dam, will have
to be removed.
One of the outstanding features of the undertaking
has been the manner in which the constructional
authorities responsible for carrying out the project
have improvised, using men and materials to hand,
rather than calling for the services of highly-skilled
labour and the installation of new and costly
equipment.
CONSTRUCTION STAGES AT BRISBANE DOCK.
1. Power shovels excavating site.
2. Sandstone walls being sprayed with Gunite.
3. Formation of first of concrete blocks which
compose the dock floor.


MARITIME
WORKS
In addition to graving docks which are dealt
with elsewhere, works of a maritime nature
carried out by the Allied Works Council include
the design and construction of berthing facilities,
slipways, harbor defences and other associated
works, as well as the dredging operations,
necessitated thereby.
The Outbreak of war with Japan, and the coming
of United States Forces to the South-West Pacific,
necessitated the provision at Australian ports of
accommodation for a large influx of Allied ship-
ping, and created a sudden demand for a compara-
tively large volume of maritime work.
Associated with such projects has been a demand
for large areas of warehouse accommodation.
The willing aid rendered by the various harbour
and maritime boards throughout Australia has
enabled the Allied Works Council to meet this
demand.
BERTHING FACILITIES.
These had to be provided at Darwin, Cairns,
Townsville, Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, and
Fremantle.
At Darwin, the Army commenced construction of
'a jetty at Southport, which was later taken over
and completed by the Allied Works Council. This
project was the first carried out by the Civil Con-
structional Corps in the Northern Territory, a special
JETTY: Wharfage constructed at Darwin in record
time by the Allied Works Council for the accommoda-
tion of naval vessels.
unit having been formed for this and other similar
works in and near Darwin.
Following completion of the Southport jetty, this
unit proceeded with the construction of another jetty
at Darwin, and with the repair of the civil jetty, which
was damaged in the first Japanese raid on Darwin on
February 19, 1942.
Both these projects were approaching completion
at the end of the period under review.
At Cairns, including the transhipment port referred
to in detail later, a total of 16 new berths are being
provided, while at Brisbane, Sydney, and Fremantle,
24 additional berths and many associated works of
a lesser nature had either been constructed or were
in course of construction at June 30, 1943.
SLIPWAYS.
These structures are of a specialised nature, re-
quiring careful and detailed consideration of local
conditions.


At the termination of the period covered by this
report, seven slipways of various sizes had either
been completed, were under construction, or were
in the design stage, at Darwin, Thursday Island,
Cairns, Townsville, Melbourne, and Fremantle. In
addition, plans had been prepared and materials
secured for similar structures to be constructed in
the islands by military personnel.
HARBOR DEFENCES.
The protection of Australian harbors against sub-
marine attack has been another important phase of
the Allied Works Council’s activities. Harbor
defences of various types have been constructed at
many ports round the long Australian coastline.
DREDGING.
The provision of berthing facilities, the construc-
tion of slipways, and the provision* at certain ports
of additional depth of water to enable their use by
ships of greater draft than previously, has required
a considerable amount of dredging.
In most cases the local dredging facilities have
been quite inadequate for the new tasks imposed on
them.
Some idea of the amount of work involved is
gleaned from the approximate quantities of material
to be dredged in the following major projects: —
Fremantle 2,750,000 c. yds. solid measurement.
Brisbane River 1,130,000 „
Townsville 310,000
Cairns 3,000,000 „
Darwin 320,000 „
(The above works were only in their early stages
at June 30, 1943.)
A number of projects at various ports, involving
FUELLING BERTH: Constructed as an auxiliary to
fuel oil storage installations in Sydney, this combina-
tion of pipeline and wharfage will take the largest
tankers.
smaller quantities of dredging, were also carried
out.
To put these works in hand, it was necessary to
recondition and move between ports a considerable
number of dredges of various types, together with
tugs and barges, an undertaking which presented
many difficult problems of manning, navigation, and
supply.
To secure the requisite number of vessels, it was
necessary to make a survey not only of the vessels
available, but of their suitability for the particular
class of work involved in each case, the normal
maintenance requirements of the various ports, and
of how far maintenance could be reduced without
unduly affecting navigation in those ports. These
are problems calling for expert knowledge and
guidance, and in this phase of its work the Allied
Works Council has been greatly assisted by the Port
Equipment and Development Committee established
by the Director of Shipping.
By agreement between the Director of Supply, the
Department of the Navy, and the Allied Works
Council, this committee has been made responsible
for advising on these problems.
CAIRNS TRANSHIPMENT PORT.
The largest maritime project entrusted to the Allied
Works Council in the period under review was the
building at Cairns of a Transhipment Port for the
United States Forces, at an estimated cost of
£3,500,000.
This undertaking is designed to create facilities
for the reception and despatch of up to 25 per cent,
of all material sent to Australia from the United
States, whether for use in the Commonwealth itself,
or for the conduct of the war north of the main-
land.
BERTH: Another view of the jetty constructed at
Darwin to accommodate warships.


CATWALK: Perspective view along the catwalk join-
ing dolphins which compose birthing facilities built
on the Brisbane River.
The work, which was commenced very late in the
period under review, was only in its early stages
at June 30, 1943.
The chief works involved are the dredging of
about 3,000,000 cubic yards of solid material from
the harbor; the building of 6,000 feet of wharfage,
to be divided into 12 sections, each 500 feet in length;
the erection of 12 transhipment sheds adjacent to the
wharves, each shed 400 feet by 100 feet; the erection
on a site removed from the wharves of another 83
warehouses and storerooms, similar to the tranship-
ment sheds; the construction of two concrete access
roads, each about three miles long; the building of
about 15 miles of subsidiary roads to link the wharves
with the network of stores and warehouses; and the
laying of about 10 miles of railway line to connect
the wharves with the rail transhipment sheds.
In all, about 4,000,000 square feet of concrete
DRILLING: A Civil Constructional Corps bridge
carpenter uses an electric auger to drill piles and
planking which form the foundations of a wharf in
northern Australia.
DOLPHINS: Four dolphins, or landing stages, con-
nected by catwalks, form a 1,200-feet oil-fuelling
berth at a northern port.
floor space will be provided for the handling and
storage of cargoes.
Apart from the construction of the stores and
warehouses, housing and office accommodation will
be provided for the 12,000 men who will work in
the centre on its completion.
Estimated quantities of materials to be used in
construction of the project include;—
Concrete, 75,000 c. yards.
Piles for the wharves, 6,000.
Round timber. 60,000 linear feet.
Timber, 5,000,000 super feet (including 2,000,000
feet used in prefabrication in New South
Wales).
Cement, 15,000 tons.
Steel mesh reinforcements, 4,000,000 square
feet.
Crushed metal for concrete and roadways,
175,000 c. yards.
Sand for concrete, 40,000 c. yards.
Railway track, 75,000 linear feet.
Sleepers, 37,500.
Water supply piping, 140,000 linear feet.
Roofing, 2,700,000 square feet.
Bolts, nails, etc., 220 tons.
The work includes the provision of complete
sewerage facilities for the area, the reticulation of
water for ordinary usage, and for fire-fighting, and
the installation of a complete electricity service.
About 3,000 men will be employed on construction
of the project.
Completion of the scheme is required within 12
months, and it is anticipated that this will be
achieved.


LIGHTER CONSTRUCTION
AND
SHIP REPAIRS
The Small Ships Section of the Allied Works
Council’s Works Directorate was formed by
the Director-General to meet an urgent demand
which was not being satisfied by any Common-
wealth body.
From its establishment on August 20, 1942, to June
30, 1943, the section had constructed, repaired, and
overhauled 93 lighters and small-powered craft.
This programme was carried out on behalf of
the Central Cargo Control Committee, Australian and
United States Forces, the Australian Shipbuilding
Board, and the Allied Works Council.
Expenditure involved totalled £335,799.
Principal feature of the work was the construction,
repair, and overhaul of lighters.
This part of the programme falls into the following
classifications:—
(a) Repair and overhaul of dumb lighters;
(b) New construction of portable, timber lighters
of the Tobruk type;
(c) New construction of composite timber-and-
steel lighters of the Armco type;
(d) New construction of all-steel lighters of the
Philippine type, and aircraft salvage units.
Below is a brief description of production and con-
struction details of the classes listed above: —
(a) REPAIR AND OVERHAUL
OF DUMB LIGHTERS.
Eleven 100-ton Sydney type lighters were repaired,
overhauled, and outfitted on behalf of the Central
Cargo Control Committee. A further four were being
reconditioned at June 30, 1943.
Plans and specifications for this work were pre-
pared by the Small Ships Section, and the work
supervised in Sydney by a qualified shipwright
attached to the section.
This type of lighter is constructed of heavy timbers,
the smallest unit being approximately three inches
thick. Its dimensions are:—Length, 66 feet; width,
26 feet; and depth, 5 feet. Capacity is 100 tons. It
has double swim ends approximately 45 degrees.
LIGHTER: A Sydney-type lighter being
reconstructed at a Sydney shipyard.
(b) NEW CONSTRUCTION OF PORTABLE
TIMBER LIGHTERS, TOBRUK TYPE.
Orders had been received from the Central Cargo
Control Committee for the construction of 30 of
these lighters. Three were also on order for the
Allied Works Council.
Approximate cost of these units is £1,160 each.
Production commenced on December 12, 1942, at
Lismore (N.S.W.), and at Hobart (Tasmania).
At June 30, 1943, six had been delivered from
Lismore and five from Hobart.
Production rate has averaged one unit every 14
days at Lismore and one every 17 days at Hobart.
The Tobruk lighter consists of three compartments
connected by steel couplings. It was designed thus
to facilitate transport to forward areas in an emer-
gency. Each section is a self-contained unit from
the point of view of flotation. All three units can
be readily assembled in the water. Maximum weight
of each section is approximately seven tons. Overall
dimensions are: —Length, 48 feet; width, 18 feet;
and depth, 5 feet.
Each compartment is 18 feet wide and 16 feet
long.
(c) NEW CONSTRUCTION OF COMPOSITE
TIMBER-AND-STEEL LIGHTERS
ARMCO TYPE.
Thirty-three 40-ton units of this type had been
completed for the Central Cargo Control Committee.
Designs for an 80-ton unit which has been tested
and proven to be more versatile and stable than
the 40-ton unit, were drawn by the Small Ships
Section. The Committee has indicated its intention
of having its original order for 100 of the 40-ton
units completed by construction of six more 40-ton
and 12 of the 80-ton units. This would involve the
same cost as the original order, namely £76,000.
Originally designed by the United States Army
for rapid construction, the Armco lighter consists


SLIPWAYS: A series of Tobruk-type lighters
under construction on slipways at Hobart, Tasmania.
of three 12-gauge, corrugated-iron cylinders, each
six feet in diameter, with three feet coned sections at
each end, making a total length of 31 feet. The
cylinders act as buoyancy compartments, and are
placed parallel. A superstructure of ordinary green
hardwood is attached. Modifications in design to
meet Australian conditions were effected by the
Section. Carrying capacity is 40 tons and 80 tons
respectively.
(d) NEW CONSTRUCTION OF ALL-STEEL
LIGHTERS, PHILIPPINE TYPE AND
AIRCRAFT SALVAGE UNITS.
At June 30, 1943, orders had been placed by the
Central Cargo Control Committee for the building
of five 300-ton Philippine units, by the Department
of Army for eight 300-ton units and eighteen 100-ton
units, and by the Department of Air for six 3-ton
salvage units, entailing installation of a crane and
mechanical equipment.
Work was well advanced at Port Kembla (N.S.W.)
on the necessary ancillary works, including two slip-
ways, assembly gantries, and other construction units.
The slipways are of sufficient length to enable three
lighters to be in production on each slip at one
time.
Design for the Philippine lighters was originally
prepared in the United States, and the units pre-
fabricated in steel for shipment to the Philippine
Islands in peace time. However, it was necessary
to redesign the whole craft for use by the Australian
Army, and to use welded construction instead of
rivetted.
The units’ dimensions are: —Length, 100 feet;
width, 27 feet; and depth, 8 feet. There is 24 inches
sheer on the deck on the fore and after ends.
DEMOLITION OF SUPERSTRUCTURES.
On September 30, 1942, and October 8, 1942, the
STRIPPED: A Sydney-type lighter from which the
decking has been stripped, undergoing extensive repairs.
show boats KOONDOOLOO and KALANG were re-
quisitioned from Sydney Ferries Ltd. by the Central
Cargo Control Committee, for conversion to heavy-lift
floating cranes for use in forward areas.
The Small Ships Section was entrusted with the
demolition of the superstructure of these vessels. This
was done to reduce them to their original vehicular
ferry structures.
Estimated costs of these undertakings were £6,500
and £6,300 respectively.
REPAIR, OVERHAUL AND REFITTING
OF POWERED CRAFT.
This work consists of the complete overhaul of
hulls, engines, and equipment necessary for the safe
travel of each vessel, and the addition of crew and
staff accommodation, which frequently has to be
designed and built into the ship, together with sig-
nalling and navigational equipment.
The vessels concerned are generally steam and
Diesel tugs of various sizes, launches, both Diesel
and petrol, and cargo ships of up to 250 tons
capacity.
In some cases the conversion of steam tugs from
coal-burning to oil-fired boilers is a major opera-
tion.
At June 30, 1943, extensive alterations and over-
hauling had commenced on the former Victorian
Public Works Department vessel TARNEIT, which is
to be converted into a 250-ton twin-screw cargo ship
for the Department of the Army. This work involves
hull strengthening, provision of crew accommodation,
installation of two 165 h.p. Diesel engines, with
sufficient oil and water storage to give the ship a
1,000-mile range, design and casting of propellers,
and necessary tail shafts. Estimated cost of this
work is approximately £lO,OOO.


FORTRESS: A 9.2 inch fortress gun projects from an
emplacement which is nearing completion. Below: To
facilitate mounting of the 9.2 inch gun, a steel gantry
was erected outside the emplacement. Note the break in
the apron (front wall) showing thickness of concrete.
GUN
EMPLACEMENTS
While for obvious reasons numbers and locations of
gun installations constructed on the Australian coast-
line by the Allied Works Council cannot be disclosed,
the following statistics give some appreciation of the
work involved in carrying out this programme.
The installations cover a range of batteries includ-
ing 9.2-inch; 155 m.m.; 6-inch; 4.7-inch; 3.7-inch
(anti-aircraft) and twin six-pounder guns.
Associated with an actual battery is a network of
ancillary structures which also vary in number and
size, according to the site chosen for the battery.
These structures include plotting rooms, battery and
fortress observation posts, command posts, reserve
magazines, electric light posts (searchlights), radio
range finding stations, workshops, accommodation and
gun crew shelters.
With the exception of the guns, machinery, search-
lights and instruments, the design and construction of
29


the batteries and ancillary structures was carried out
by, or under the direction of, the Allied Works
Council’s engineering staff.
Gun batteries are sited from a strategic rather than
an economic point of view, and many were located
in isolated places very difficult of access.
The special use to which the various structures were
to be put and their location, combined to present many
difficult problems both in design and construction.
Owing to variations consequent on the differing
physical features of the sites, the quantities of
materials required in construction vary between wide
limits for the same type of installation.
9.2-INCH BATTERIES.
A 9.2-inch battery of the most modern design con-
sisting of two guns, command post, plotting room,
battery observation posts, shelters, magazines, etc.,
required the following approximate quantities:—
Excavation, between 20,000 c. yds. and 4,000
c. yds.
Back filling, between 8,000 c. yds. and 4,000
c. yds.
Concrete, between 16,000 c. yds. and 9,000 c. yds.
Steel reinforcement, between 800 tons and 400
tons.
Fabricated steel, between 230 tons and 300 tons.
At the peak period of construction in one case,
approximately 200 men were engaged on the project.
155 M.M. (Approx. 6.1-inch) BATTERIES.
One battery consisting of two guns, command post,
plotting room, battery observation posts, crew shelters,
magazines, etc., for which figures are available,
required:—
Excavation, 100 c. yds.
Concrete, 900 c. yds.
Steel reinforcement, 13 tons.
Fabricated steel, 2 tons.
6-INCH BATTERIES.
Batteries constructed on the surface and compris-
ing two 6-inch guns, command post, plotting room,
battery observation posts, shelters, etc., involved: —
Excavation, between 2,000 c. yds. and 160 c. yds.
Concrete, between 900 c. yds. and 400 c. yds.
Steel reinforcement, between 13 tons and 6 tons.
Fabricated steel, 3 tons.
In addition, one battery involving considerable
tunnelling has been built. It required 3,000 c. yds. of
excavation and 18,000 sq. feet of 9-inch brickwork.
CONCRETE: Solidity of the reinforced
concrete structure of is 9.2 inch emplace-
ment is graphically illustrated in this rear
view of the engine-rooms, magazines and
gun room under construction.


4.7- BATTERIES.
A typical battery consisting of one 4.7-inch gun,
command post, magazine shelters, etc., required:—
Excavation, 71 c. yds.
Concrete, 190 c. yds.
Reinforcement, 6 tons.
Fabricated steel, 5 tons.
3.7- ANTI-AIRCRAFT BATTERIES.
On batteries consisting of four 3.7-inch anti-air-
craft emplacements, predictor, height finder and
plotting room stations, etc., the following approxi-
mate quantities were used:
Excavation, between 100 c. yds. and 120 c. yds.
Concrete, between 240 c. yds. and 156 c. yds.
Reinforcement, between 8 tons and 6 tons.
Fabricated steel, 4 tons.
TWIN SIX-POUNDER BATTERIES.
Quantities for the standard twin six-pounder battery
design now being used and which is made up of one
emplacement, director station, magazine and gun crew
shelter, are:—
Excavation, between 52 c. yds. and 195 c. yds.
Concrete, between 270 c. yds. and 130 c. yds.
TUNNEL: Civil Constructional Corps workers
concreting the floor of a passage hewn through
the rock to connect the plotting room with
other sections of a 9.2 inch gun emplacement.
Reinforcement, between 8 tons and 3.9 tons.
Fabricated steel, between 30 tons and 26 tons.
Several batteries were constructed involving
approximately double the maximum quantities shown.
In addition to the work indicated by the above
quantities, it was necessary to construct access roads,
provide water supply and sewerage facilities, and
other developmental works essential for the con-
struction and efficient operation of the batteries.
These naturally vary considerably with the site, and
sometimes involve the use of large quantities of
materials.
MOUNTING: Army engineers make final adjustments to the mounting of
a 4.7 inch gun in an emplacement constructed by the Allied Works Council.


FACTORY: Panoramic view of a section of Finsbury
S.A. case and ammunition factory, which covers an
area of 137 acres.
MUNITIONS
Commenced in 1940, and accelerated under the
Allied Works Council, the munition plant con-
struction programme is the largest building
programme ever undertaken in Australia.
With every State represented, and involving a total
estimated cost of £22,160,332, the programme em-
braces 28 localities.
The total number of buildings constructed to June
30, 1943, was 3,702, while the total area was
approximately 13,200 acres.
Ranging from a £31,343 fuse factory at Albury
(N.S.W.), to the £6,500,000 explosives factory and
magazine depot at Salisbury (S.A.), the programme
covers the following types of project; —
Explosives Factories: Salisbury (S.A.), St. Mary’s
(N.S.W.), Villawood (N.S.W.), Mulwala
(N.S.W.).
Pyrotechnic Factories: St. Mary’s (N.S.W.), Mari-
byrnong (Vic.).
Case and Ammunition Factories: Rocklea (Q.),
Welshpool (W.A.), Rutherford (N.S.W.), Tam-
worth (N.S.W.), Derwent Park (Tas.), Finsbury
(S.A.), Hendon (S.A.), Footscray (Vic.).
Ordnance Factory: Bendigo (Vic.).
Guncotton Factory: Ballarat (Vic.).
MAINS: Reticulation mains entering and leaving one of
the seven boiler houses which supply the Salisbury (S.A.)
explosives factory with superheated water.


Fuse Factories: Goulburn (N.S.W.), Wagga (N.S.W.),
Albury (N.S.W.), Broken Hill (N.S.W.).
Magazine Depots: Salisbury (S.A.), St. Mary’s
(N.S.W.), Longlea (Vic.), Derrimut (Vic.).
Small Arms Factory: Lithgow (N.S.W.).
Stores and Transport Depots: Botany (N.S.W.),
Tottenham (Vic.).
Reserve Materials Storage: Oaklands (Vic.).
Soda Stores: Deer Park (Vic.).
Some of the major plants, such as Salisbury and
St. Mary’s, combine a number of phases of munition
manufacture.
The nature of the work to be performed in them
called for specialised design in many of the buildings
involved in the programme.
For example, “cleanways,” a feature of explosive
factories, are pathways constructed of gritless con-
crete. Maximum gradient of cleanways along which
explosives trucks are to travel has been fixed at
1 in 100. This necessitates obtaining the most level
stretch of ground possible as site for such a factory.
“Mounding” of individual buildings by either sand-
bagging or earthwork is carried out in all magazine
areas or process sections to provide protection for
surrounding buildings in the event of an explosion.
Magazines and process buildings are generally
constructed of brick or concrete, with both eaves
projecting approximately eight feet, to provide pro-
tection from the sun. Their floors have a gritless
asphalt finish, walls are enamelled, wall ventilation
specially designed, and all fittings are of non-ferrous
metals.
Typical examples of the plants composing the
programme are:-
ROADWAY: One of the several full-scale roadways
constructed on the Salisbury explosives factory area.


ENSHROUD: Steam issu-
ing from safety valves,
enshrouds the walls of
this four-storey ammo-
nium nitrate building on
an explosives factory
area.
SALISBURY EXPLOSIVES FACTORY
AND
SMITHFIELD MAGAZINE DEPOT.
Area: Salisbury, 3,672 acres; Smithfield, 1,313 acres.
Total, 4,985 acres, or 7% sq. miles.
Perimeter: Salisbury, 9.65 miles; Smithfield, 5.73
miles. Total, 15.38 miles.
Estimated Cost: £6,500,000.
Sections: Cap, Detonator, N.C.(Y), Fuse, Shell Fill-
ing, Bomb Filling, Cordite, Acetone Solvent
Storage, Burning Off Area, Acid, T.N.T., Tetryl,
Proof At Rest, Bulk Store Area, Maintenance,
Residential, Administration, Magazine Depot
(Smithfield).
Number of Buildings: 1,593.
Excavation: Excavation outside area for mounding
magazines involved 690,000 c. yds. of earth
(842,000 tons).
Manpower: At peak period of construction, 4,000.
Railways: On area, 13 miles.
Roads: On area, 41 miles.
Cleanways: Connecting buildings within sections, 34
miles.
Fencing: Around sections, 20 miles. Within sections,
Sy 2 miles.
Electric Mains: 150 miles of wire for low tension
mains.
Telephones: Main underground cables, 6V2 miles.
Mechanical Services: External superheated water
reticulation, 45(/2 miles.
External steam reticulation, 11,500 feet.
External superheated water piping insulation,
45 x /2 miles.
External steam pipe insulation, 11,500 feet.
Heating and hot water servicing to 600 buildings.
Laundry and associated equipment including
mechanical services, boiler installation, water
softening plant.
Two central kitchens, including boiler installa-
tion, water softening plant.
Twenty-one messes built and supplied with
heating and hot water service.
Forty-one buildings installed with automatic fire
sprinkler systems.
Stand-by generator 88 k.w. Diesel electric generat-
ing set.
Coal handling plant-grab transporter of handling
capacity 760 tons per day (8 hrs.).
Seven boiler house installations comprising 15
superheated water boilers and 4 steam boilers.
Total capacity 190,000 lbs. per hour.
Accessories include feed pumps and water treat-
ment plants.
Distilled water plant. Rating, 2,300 gallons per
hour. Total length of reticulated piping, 8,256
feet.


Sewerage: Sixteen miles of 4-inch to 18-inch pipes.
Stormwater: Drains varying from 60 feet wide to
10 feet deep, to 1 foot wide by 1 foot deep. Total
length 27 miles.
A.R.P. and Fire: Water mains, 32 miles of 4-inch
to 12-inch pipes. “Static” ponds for emergency
fire fighting with capacity of 100,000 gallons
each. Air raid shelters throughout area. Full-
scale fire station.
Construction: Total of 400 lorries on site at peak
of construction. Also drays, tractors, bulldozers,
concrete mixers, front-end loaders, ditching
machines, steam rollers, graders, watering carts,
and cars.
Quantities: Cement, 81,900 c. yds. Bricks,
31,500,000. Steel, 6,350 tons.
Each section of the factory is self-contained, having
its own administrative and maintenance areas, made
up of offices, laboratories, casualty buildings, guard
houses, pay boxes, identification races, mess rooms,
general stores, engineers’, fitters’, electricians’ and
tinsmiths’ workshops.
Salisbury has been constructed as a permanent
factory, requiring large quantities of durable
materials, such as brick, steel, and concrete. Timber-
frames were used only when necessitated by the
manufacturing processes associated with the build-
ings.
Drawings and plans prepared totalled 7,600.
SALISBURY EXPLOSIVES FACTORY.
1. Boiler house pumps.
2. One of seven boiler houses on site.
3. Casualty station.
4. Explosives truck cleanway.


ST. MARY'S MUNITION PLANT.
1. Bulk Store. 4. Cleanway.
2. Constructing mounds. 5. Change room
3. Protective mounds. 6. Process house.
ST, MARY'S (N.S.W.) EXPLOSIVES FACTORY
AND MAGAZINE DEPOT.
Area: 3,500 acres.
Estimated Cost: £4,423,328.
Sections: Shell Filling, Bomb Filling, Bulk Stores,
Fuse Filling, Pyrotechnic, Magazine Depot, Proof
At Rest, Residential, Maintenance, and Adminis-
tration.
Number of Buildings: 906.
Excavation: 700,000 c. yds. earth.
Manpower: Number of men on job at peak period,
3,700.
Railways: On the factory area, 22 miles, with ex-
tensive marshalling yard and two full-scale pas-
senger stations. Two road and railway bridges,
one about 140 ft. long, are part of railway
system.
Roads: Surfaced roadways total 26 miles.
Cleanways: 17 miles (each 10 feet wide).
Fencing: 35 miles.
Electric Mains: 130 miles of cable for light and
power, exclusive of telephone system.
Services: Three boiler houses, each supplying 30,000
lbs. of steam per hour, feed steam through 14
miles of piping. Six compressor houses provide
chilled water equal to 2,900 tons of ice per
day through similar piping mileage.


7. Full-scale passenger railway station on site.
Sewerage: Whole area sewered with a treatment
works capable of serving a township of 5,000
people.
A.R.P. and Fire: Water mains service whole area and
are supplemented by a number of 30,000-gallon
“static ponds.” Pressure is maintained by two
75,000-gallon steel reservoirs and pumping
stations. Two hundred air raid shelters and
warden and control posts. Blackout provisions
allow continued production in event of air raids.
Full-scale fire station.
Air Conditioning: Hundreds of the buildings
equipped with full mechanical ventilation, in-
volving construction of miles of sheet metal
ducting and installation of air conditioning
equipment.
Auxiliaries: Four modern large-scale Kitchens
serving mess rooms. Casualty Stations and first-
aid posts. Change Rooms. Housing for muni-
tions staff and employees. Guard Houses.
Construction: A temporary factory, St. Mary’s,
except where essential to comply with safety or
process requirements, is built of timber and
asbestos cement, with concrete floors.
Quantities: Concrete, 150,000 c. yds. Bricks,
20,000,000. Timber, 5,500,000 super feet. Iron,
1.300.000 square feet. Asbestos cement,
1.900.000 square feet.
VILLAWOOD EXPLOSIVES FACTORY.
Area: 820 acres.
Estimated Cost: £1,214,900.
Sections: Acid Manufacture, T.N.T., Tetryl, Adminis-
tration.
Number of Buildings: 249.
Excavation: 300,000 c. yds. earth.
Manpower: Number of men employed at peak period,
2,200.
VILLAWOOD EXPLOSIVES FACTORY.
8. Acid-storage tank.
9. Acid production house.
10. Coding tanks.
37


PERMANENT: The administrative block pictured above
illustrates the permanent nature of some munition plants.
Bottom: A static pond for fire-fighting.
Railways: Marshalling yards, coal, and factory
sidings.
Roads: Surfaced roadways, 7 miles.
Cleanways: 8 miles.
Fencing: 9 miles.
Electric Mains: 12 miles of mains for light and
power.
Services: Two boiler houses each supply 40,000 lbs.
of steam per hour through 4 miles of steam
mains.
Sewerage: Seven miles of piping take sewer wastes.
A separate acid waste disposal scheme involved
laying of 4 miles of acid-resisting drains, with
large settling tanks and a pumping station.
Extensive stormwater disposal system involved
much heavy excavation for concrete-lined chan-
nels crossed by road and railway bridges.
A.R.P. and Fire: Water mains provide fire fighting
service throughout area. Shelters, control posts,
and wardens’ shelters total 30.
Water: Manufacturing requirements called for
separate salt water supply service, pumping
130,000,000 gallons annually from a nearby
source to a 50,000-gallon reservoir and through
approximately one mile of mains to cooling
towers.
Auxiliaries: Central Kitchens, Mess Rooms, Casualty
Stations, First Aid Rooms, Change Rooms, Guard
Houses.
Construction: Involved chemical manufacturing pro-
cesses called for buildings of highly specialised
character.
Quantities: Concrete, 57,000 c. yds. Bricks,
1.800.000. Timber, 2,200,000 super feet. Iron,
400,000 square feet. Asbestos cement, 95,000
square feet.
FINSBURY CASE AND AMMUNITION
FACTORY.
Area: 137 acres.
Estimated Cost: £1,290,322.
Sections: Machine Shops, Case Factory Shops,
Foundries and Rolling Mills, Fuse Shops,
General Stores, Administration Blocks, Messes
and Kitchens, Case Repair and Store, Faboratory
and Casualty Buildings, Guard Houses, Metal
Recovery Plant, Tool Room, Maintenance Shop.
Number of Buildings: 55.
Floor Area: Total of main buildings, 1,375,655 sq.
feet.
Roads: 4% miles.
Gas Mains: 3,140 yds.
Steam Mains: 2,020 yds.
Sewer Mains: 4,426 yds.
Water Mains: 2,720 yds.
Construction: Finsbury factory is of highly
specialised design and permanent nature. Most
buildings are constructed of either brick or steel,
with tile or galvanised iron roofs.
Quantities: Steel sections, 3,750 tons. Bricks,
4.500.000.
RECLAMATION: Used for mineral reclamation,
this is one of many specialised buildings on a
munition plant.
38


BENDIGO ORDNANCE FACTORY.
Area: 91 acres.
Estimated Cost: £731,459.
Sections: Machine Shop, Heat Treatment Shop, Plate
Shop, Inspection Building, Bulk Store, Adminis-
tration, Casualty Station, Kitchen, and Messes.
Number of Buildings: 30.
Excavation: 274,500 c. yds. of earth.
Manpower: At peak period about 450 men.
Railways: A four-track siding. Three sets of tracks
are spanned by a 15-ton gantry crane.
Roads: Sealed gravel pavement totals 33,000 sq.
yards. Concrete pavement, 3,000 sq. yards.
Paths, 3,000 feet.
Water: Length of 6-inch and 4-inch mains totals
8,500 feet. Stormwater drains total 25,000
feet.
Sewerage: 7,500 feet.
Construction: Main machine shop, with roof area of
414 acres, and inspection shop are of steel-
framed construction, with brick walls. Bulk
store, plate shop, and heat treatment shop are
steel-framed, with part brick and part corrugated
iron walls.
The heat-treatment shop, with a floor area of 2%
acres, is almost 100 feet high in the centre bay.
In this building is a gun furnace pit 50 feet by
30 feet, by 54 feet deep. The pit required
excavation of 4,500 c. yards of earth and con-
creting 1,300 c. yds.
OAKLANDS RESERVE MATERIALS STORAGE.
Area: 290 acres.
Estimated Cost: £313,200.
Number of Buildings: 58.
Excavation: 50,000 c. yds. earth.
Manpower: 400 men employed at peak period.
Railways: 5 miles.
Roads: 4 miles.
Fencing: 4 miles.
Quantities: Concrete, 6,000 c. yds. Bricks, 420,000.
Timber, 980,000 super feet. Iron, 550,000
square feet. Asbestos cement, 240,000 square
feet.
In addition to the 28 units in the above programme,
several minor annexes, designed to feed the major
plants, have been constructed.
These consist either of additions to existing build-
ings or of converted garages and workshops located
in the same district as the parent plant.
MUNITION PLANT FEATURES: 1. Geometric - patterned
foundations for an acid building. 2. Escape chutes provide
quick exit from this "danger" building. 3. Section of super-
heated water reticulation, system, totalling 45 ½ miles in length.
39


AERODROMES
OPERATIONAL: A United States Army Air Corps
Lightning fighter taking off from a runway recently
constructed by the Allied Works Council.
More than 300 airfields had been constructed in Australia by the Allied
Works Council, to June 30, 1943. While bulldozers, graders, and other
mechanical aids used in their construction were still at work, some of the
airfields were being used by the Allied Air Forces to smash Japanese
invasion fleets in the waters off the coast of North Australia.
The Programme was carried out on behalf of the
R.A.A.F., the Department of Civil Aviation, and the
United States Army Air Corps.
“Airfield” is the general term applied to an area
of land used for the operation of aircraft, and may
vary from a simple grass strip or area of flat
ground without camp or buildings, to a large aero-
drome with four or five hard-surfaced runways, each
150 feet wide and from 6,000 to 7,000 feet in length,
together with all classes of camp and operational
buildings, water supply, sewerage, electric light and
power, as well as all incidental engineering services
and training facilities.
The selection of an airfield site is made by officers
of the service concerned, in consultation with Allied
Works Council engineers. But the whole of the
work in connection with preparation of the ground
to carry the necessary loading imposed on it by the
planes, erection of buildings and engineering services,
is carried out under the supervision of the Council.
The magnitude of this work can be better appre-
ciated by a comparison with road work. Material
and work involved in the construction of an average
runway is equivalent to that required for 10 miles of
roadway. Construction of 300 runways would equal
the construction of about 3,000 miles of 15 feet-wide
roadway. To this must be added the construction of
taxiways and hideouts, which on some aerodromes
would be equal to from 10 to 15 miles of roadway.
The construction of camp and operational buildings,
drainage, water supply, sewerage, and electric light
and power, all have to be considered, and, in many
cases, the work involved is equivalent to that required
for servicing a town.
Aerodromes are classified under three headings:—
Heavy bomber, medium bomber and fighter, and
advanced operational bases.
The design and layout of each aerodrome varies with
the type of aeroplane to be used on it, and is governed
by the following factors:—
Accessibility to road and rail;
Soil classification;
Drainage facilities;
Watering facilities;
Availability of materials;
Topography;
Rainfall;
Direction of prevailing winds;
Temperatures;
Humidity.


Most runways built in Australia are of gravel, and
are sealed with tar or bitumen. To determine the
thickness of gravel required, all materials and soils
used have to be tested in a laboratory for classification,
moisture content, and bearing strength under different
conditions.
The importance of determining minimum pavement
thickness by scientific methods is evident when it
is realised that each inch of pavement thickness on
an average runway amounts to approximately 3,500
c. yards of materials, and that this material may
have to be carted 20 or 30 miles.
LAYOUT; Plan of a typical operational base aerodrome
built by the Allied Works Council on behalf of the Royal
Australian Air Force.
There are striking examples throughout the States
of the difference in bearing strength of various types
of soil. This is reflected by the thickness of gravel
used. Thickness varies from 4 inches in some parts
of Western Australia, to 24 inches and more in parts
of New South Wales.
Although gravel is generally used when available
in sufficient quantity, other methods have been investi-
gated and used in order to overcome transport, supply,
and engineering difficulties.
One of the most interesting of the alternate methods
is the use of cement stabilisation of the soil, a process


BEGINNING: The site having been cleared, bulldozers carry
out the initial process of forming a runway.
developed in America to improve the characteristics
of low-grade aggregate for use in road and aerodrome
pavements. The process involves the admixture of
from 8 to 16 per cent, of cement with natural soils
or gravels, the addition of the correct amount of
water, and finally the compaction to form a weak
concrete.
To investigate the possibility of saving bitumen by
use of this method of stabilisation, experimental strips
were built in several parts of Australia, viz.. Quorn
Hall (Tasmania), Gawler (South Australia I, and Roto
and North Bourke (New South Wales).
These experiments have shown that, owing to in-
sufficient resistance to the action of natural weathering
forces, cement stabilisation is not a satisfactory
substitute for bitumen in general construction. Its
main use appears to be in the construction of higher
upper base courses of higher bearing value in areas
where no good-grade aggregates are economically
available. Present comparisons indicate that the cost
of this type of construction is 50 per cent, or more
LEVELLING: The bulldozers are followed by mechanical
scoops which distribute the earth evenly over the runway
surface.
above the cost of equivalent construction with gravel
with a bituminous surface coat, where gravel can
be obtained within a reasonable distance.
At Laverton and Point Cook (Victoria) the run-
ways have been put down in various types of con-
crete.
DRAINAGE: An essential feature of runway construction is
drainage, which ensures an ail-weather surface.
FORMATION: Operating simultaneously, a mechanical scoop,
a tractor-drawn grader, and a "sheep's foot" roller form
and consolidate the earth surface of the runway.
With gravel construction one of the greatest troubles
is the dust nuisance which causes considerable damage
to planes. Abatement of this nuisance has been
attempted by the use of calcium chloride. But this
is effective only where the humidity content of the


air is sufficient to keep the surface moist. It has
been found that the calcium chloride is harmful to the
aeroplane. In most cases, it has been found necessary
to seal all runways with bitumen or tar.
As it takes about 150 lons of bitumen to completely
seal one average runway about 6.000 feet long, the
supply and transport of bitumen has been one of
the major problems.
ROLLING: A heavy roller is used to consolidate the gravelled
surface.
GRADING: A tractor-drawn grader continues to grade the
surface after it has been spread with gravel.
The supply and maintenance of heavy constructional
plant for many of these projects, together with trans-
port over vast distances, has been, and still is, one
of the greatest difficulties.
As with the road building programme, strategic
conditions resulted in the greatest concentration of
SEAL: A bitumen plant sprays a sealing coat on to the
gravelled surface. A final coating of fine gravel Is then
roiled in.
aerodrome work being carried out in Queensland and
the Northern Territory.
However, a large section of the programme was
concerned with the construction of training and
operational stations in the southern area, particularly
New South Wales, where work has been carried out
on 52 aerodromes.
hi Western Australia, the position is totally different
from that in the eastern States. The vast distances in
that Stale, the lack of roads and transport facilities,
and the fact that for four months of the year no heavy
transport is possible in the northern area, are not
generally realised.
In all, about 30 runways have been constructed
in Western Australia, including those at Wyndham,
Argyle. Noonkambuk, Filzroy Crossing, and Yanrey.
These latter aerodromes were carried out with
relatively small day-labor gangs and small plant.
This was necessary because of the extreme difficulties
in getting supplies and equipment to the area. No
shipping was permitted to go beyond Broome, and
RUNWAY: The finished runway being used as an opera-
tional base by American bombers.
43


GRAVELLING: A Civil Constructional Corps worker spreads
gravel over the surface of a runway newly-sprayed with
bitumen.
there were only limited unloading facilities at
Exmouth Gulf, plant being restricted largely to that
already available in the north-west.
Plant for Yanrey was taken by road from Carnarvon,
and building materials by motor convoy from Perth,
the journey taking 10 days because of the bad condi-
tion of the track beyond Carnarvon.
In the entire north-west no road traffic is possible
for four or five months of the year during the wet
season.
During the construction of Argyle, the men were cut
off from the outside, except for air transport, and it
became necessary to freight foodstuffs from Perth by
air until the track improved sufficiently for stores to
be obtained from reserve supplies at Wyndhain, 100
miles awav.
Western Australia has also been at considerable
disadvantage on account of the limited quantity of
materials and plant available in the State, and the
difficulty of obtaining sufficient space on rail or boat
to keep up supplies.
With the limited amount of plant available in
Australia, it has been impossible to proceed with the
full schedule of work required at the one time, but
there are a number of spectacular items on the pro-
gramme, where the work has been carried out with
such speed that it can he regarded as a considerable
achievement.
CHARTERS TOWERS AERODROME.
flight weeks after the United Slates Army Air
Corps lodged a requisition for the construction of
llighl strips at Charters 'bowers, American planes were
using the runways in their round-the-clock operations
against the Japanese in the Battle of the Coral Sea.
Commenced less than 36 hours after the request
for its construction was received, the aerodrome was
ready for hea\ y bombers 17 days later.
First intimation of the urgent need for construction
of the aerodrome was received at 8.30 p.m. on a
Saturday night.
A high-speed organisation was immediately pul
into operation.
A halt was called to practically every constructional
job in the area, and an order issued that all con-
structional plant on those jobs be despatched without
delay to the nearest railhead, or to Charters Towers
direct.
Three special trains were requisitioned, and by-
Sunday morning plant and equipment were converging
on Charters Towers from a score of points.
The problem of assembling manpower called for
even greater organisation.
Many men had gone from their jobs to their homes
for the week-end, and were not due back until the
CLEARING: Carved out of virgin bushland, a floor area
for a huge aerodrome workshop is consolidated by the use
of steam rollers.
44


Monday morning. This meant that most of the men
had to he contacted individually.
However, by 7 a.m. on the Monday morning, work
on construction of the first runway was in full swing.
Two hundred men, 100 trucks, 12 bulldozers, and
large numbers of scoops, tractors, power-graders and
other heavy mechanical equipment had been as-
sembled on the project.
During the next three months, 1,000,000 cubic
yards of earth were removed from the site.
The night before the first plane was due to arrive
on the area, a drainage trench was still open across
the full width of the runway.
By working all through the night, the workmen
finished the drain and closed the trench by 11 a.m.
the next day. At 11.30 a.m. an American bomber
landed on the runway.
By May 8, 1942, the date of the Coral Sea Battle,
a second runway had been built, thus allowing the
aerodrome to play a prominent part in that battle.
To June 30, 1943, £284,000 had been spent on
the construction of this aerodrome.
The greatest number of men engaged on it at any
one time was 600.
Taxiways measure a total length of 5J4 miles,
are 40 feet wide, and are sealed with bitumen.
TAXI WAY: An outsize in concrete mixers is employed in
the construction of a concrete taxiway.
CONSOLIDATE: Rollers are used to compact the concrete
surface of an aerodrome taxiway.
Nine miles of access road 12 feet wide, and five
miles of perimeter road, have also been built.
Apart from camp facilities, buildings to house
salvaging and repair plant have been erected.


IGLOO: Providing maximum space and camouflage protec-
tion, this "igloo" design is typical of the hundreds of
workshops and hangars constructed by the Allied Works
Council on aerodromes throughout Australia.
GIGANTIC: Constructed of nailed wooden trusses, this
hangar on a Queensland aerodrome measures 350 feet by
170 feet by 34 feet in length.
TOCUMWAL AIR DEPOT.
The most spectacular item in the whole programme,
Tocumwal Repair and Assembly Depot, was built
under supervision of the Victorian section of the
Allied Works Council.
Located on the River Murray, this gigantic project
was commenced on February 19, 1942, nine days
before the Allied Works Council began operations.
Work on the project actually began on February 23.
Two months later, on April 24, 1942, the first
U.S. plane landed on the aerodrome.
There are 608 buildings on the project, which covers
more than 16 square miles.
The buildings compose a depot area made up of
six hangars, 18 stores, four engine repair shops, two
engine test buildings, two propeller test houses, two
machine shops, two parachute huts, electrical repair
shop, wireless transmitter repair shop, instrument
repair shop, woodworking shop, fabric dope buildings,
air operations buildings, motor transport building,
two power houses, electroplating shop, five warehouses,
13 mess huts, three fire stations, one bombproof
telephone exchange, a camp site, a permanent 250-
bed hospital (six miles from the aerodrome proper),
an ammunition camp, and an A.S.C. camp.
Each 6,600 feet long by 150 feet wide, and covering
a total area of 366,900 square yards, the four runways
are designed to take the heaviest plane. They are
connected by taxiways which in turn lead to the
flight and erection hangars. The taxiways cover
254,000 square yards.
Sealing of the runways and taxiways, together with
tarmacs and roadways, consumed the whole of three
months’ supply of tar from the Broken Hill Pty. Ltd.
The total tarred surface (three coats) was 1,375,590
square yards.
There are about 71 miles of roads on the project.
The Albury Road, which ran through the area, was
deviated. Gravelled areas total 1,098,400 square
yards.
Gravel was carted 188 miles from the mine dumps
at Rutherglen, until a quarry was opened up closer
to the project.
The railway siding within the area has a station
platform 900 feet by 65 feet. This was completed
in 21 days. The siding is served by both Victorian
and New South Wales-gauge railways.
The flying field is drained to prevent flooding and
so keep the aerodrome serviceable in all weathers.
To prevent flooding from the Murray, the levee banks
for many miles on either side of the project were
increased in height by about two feet.
Open drains required excavation of 232,000 cubic
yards of material.
Concrete drains have a total length of 72,000 feet,
sewer mains 59,362 feet, and water mains 92,105 feet.
A 300,000-gallon concrete water storage tank was
constructed.


At one stage, materials arrived on the site at the
rate of 165 railway trucks a day.
At the peak period, 2,700 men were employed on
the project.
Two hundred and seventy-four motor trucks, 431
horses, 64 tractors, 52 scoops, 47 graders, 32 concrete
mixers, 17 air compressors, 16 rollers, 11 rippers,
five ploughs, four ditching machines, four road main-
tainers, three dragline excavators, three power shovels,
two front-end loaders, and two paving machines were
included in the plant used.
Two of the dragline excavators, each of 4 cubic
yards (5 tons) capacity, and weighing 120 tons,
were brought to the project from Deniliquin (70
miles), under their own power.
Because of the effect their weight would have had
on the roads and bridges, the machines travelled
across country. When creeks and channels were
encountered, the draglines filled them in and crossed
over, then turned round and dug the filling out
again.
The main transmission line into New South Wales
had to be cut to allow them to pass. Phone lines
were also cut and repaired. The mechanical giants,
travelling at the rate of one-third of a mile-an-hour,
completed their 70-mile journey in 11 days.
On May 15, 1942, less than 12 weeks after com-
mencement of work, the U.S. Army Air Corps arrived
WATER: A 300,000-gallons water reservoir built to supple-
ment the regular supply available at Tocumwal.
on the project with their gear. The project was
sufficiently advanced to accommodate them.
On September 11, 1942, the first trainload of
Civil Constructional Corps workmen and equipment
left Tocumwal for Queensland, to be employed on
the construction of the Inland Defence Road.
HANGAR:
Dwarfing the
Civil Construc-
tional Corps
workmen en-
gaged on its
construction,
this is one of
the many huge
hangars con-
structed at
Tocumwal.
47




ROADS
Strategic highways and access roads covering a
total distance of 4,621 miles were built, recon-
structed or maintained by the Allied Works
Council in the period being reviewed.
If Placed end to end, these roads would link Sydney
with Tokio.
Dictated by Allied strategy, the greatest mileage
was constructed in Queensland and the Northern
Territory.
Mileages in the respective States were:
Queensland 1,856 miles
Northern Territory 1,322 miles
Western Australia 722 miles
Victoria 428 miles
New South Wales 151 miles
South Australia 142 miles
The three outstanding items in the road construction
programme were the North-South Road from Alice
Springs to Darwin, the highway from Mt. Isa
(Queensland) to Tennant Creek (Northern Territory),
and the Queensland Inland Defence Road from Ipswich
to Charters Towers.
NORTH-SOUTH ROAD (STUART HIGHWAY).
The North-South Road, or Stuart Highway, linking
Alice Springs with Darwin, covers a distance of 954
miles. For the purpose of description, this road can
be divided into two sections Alice Springs to
Larrimah (622 miles), and Larrimah to Darwin (332
miles).
ALICE SPRINGS-LARRIMAH.
Construction of a road between the railhead at
Alice Springs and the terminus of the Darwin railway
at Birdum, (327 miles south of Darwin) had been
advocated for many years.
A pioneer road existed between Alice Springs and
Tennant Creek a distance of 314 miles.
This section of road consisted of 97 miles of gravel
pavement, 16 feet to 20 feet wide, and 217 miles of a
natural earth formation averaging 18 feet to 20 feet
in width. Much of this formation was below the level
STRATEGIC: On the opposite page is pictured a stretch of the
gravel-surfaced strategic Queensland Inland Defence Road.
of the surrounding country, thus becoming flooded in
the wet season.
In September, 1940, work was commenced on the
clearing, formation and draining of a road from
Tennant Creek to Larrimah. This was undertaken by
the New South Wales Department of Main Roads, the
Queensland Main Roads Commission, and the South
Australian Highways Commission, at the request of
the Department of the Army.
The road was completed as far as Larrimah (5 miles
north of Birdum), by December, 1940.
There are no bridges in the Alice Springs-
Larrimah section, but paved causeways were con-
structed at water-way crossings. The longest of these
is the Newcastle Waters Causeway, which is one mile
long.
Formation of this road varied from 24 feet to 40
feet in width, with a 16-feet gravel pavement through-
out.
The State authorities continued to maintain the
Tennant Creek-Larrimah stretch until December, 1941,
when it was taken over by the Works and Services
Branch of the Department of the Interior, which
continued to improve and maintain the section from
Alice Springs to Tennant Creek.
In this latter section, a difficult engineering problem
was to widen the road and achieve a standard crowned
cross-section without causing dusty conditions that
would hold up traffic. Re-siting or deviation of the
road without gravelling, was out of the question.
The road was cleared and grubbed for a width of
50 feet. The bladed track was widened out to 40 feet,
and while this was in progress, the traffic was kept out
on either side, thus gradually widening the compacted
base.
This proceeded until a bladed track 40 feet wide,
with a flat cross-section was obtained. Then the
gradual process of crowning the road commenced.
On other sections, the old bladed track was too deep
to develop this way, and the new formation was
developed at the side. This was done prior to the wet


PAVEMENT: A section of the bitumen-surfaced
highway which will eventually stretch from Alice
Springs to Darwin.
season, and when the rain came the tralfic was turned
on to the new formation to consolidate it.
As a result of military concentrations in Northern
Australia, following the outbreak of war in the
Pacific in December, 1941, traffic on the Alice Springs-
Tennant Creek section rose from 400 tons gross to
1,200 tons gross per day, and from Tennant Creek to
Larrimah (with additional traffic traversing the Mt.
Isa-Tennant Creek Road) it rose to 2,500 tons gross
per day. This, combined with wet season conditions,
resulted in a rapid deterioration of the road surface.
In February, 1942, it was decided that the road from
Alice Springs to Larrimah should be strengthened
and sealed with bitumen. The Allied Works Council
arranged with the Country Roads Board of Victoria to
carry out this work.
However, before the bitumen surfacing began,
deterioration of the road between Tennant Creek and
Larrimah became so rapid as to necessitate almost
complete reconstruction in advance of the bitumen
work. This reconstruction was carried out by the
Victorian Country Roads Board, the South Australian
Highways Department, the Allied Works Council and
the Army.
The gravel pavement of the Alice Springs-
Larrimah section varies from 3 inches to 6 inches in
thickness, according to the class of sub-grade. For
short lengths across swamp areas, the thickness is
increased to 12 inches, and for one particular section
of loose sandy soil, 14 inches of gravel had to be
used to obtain a satisfactory pavement.
At the commencement of the bitumen work, con-
crete mixers were used. Later two Barber Green
plant mix-units, specially imported from America,
were put into service. These units are capable of
an output of 1,200 c. yds. per 8-hour shift.
Increasing the rate of bitumen work from l ] /2 miles
per week at the commencement on June 15, 1942, to
an average rate of 15 to 20 miles per week, the
Victorian Country Roads Board completed the sealing
of the Tennant Creek-Larrimah stretch (308 miles),
by February, 1943.
To June 30, 1943, 422 miles of the 622 miles from
Alice Springs to Larrimah had been sealed, and it
was anticipated that the bitumen pavement would,
together with relocation and reconstruction, be com-
pleted to Alice Springs by October, 1943.
The bitumen seal consists of a priming coat, a tack
coat and a plant mix-mat.
The general specification adopted was as follows:
Primer coat: 0.22 gals, per sq. yd. of a road oil,
consisting of 100 parts bitumen to 180 parts
furnace oil.
Tack coat: 0.10 gals, per sq. yd. composed of 100
parts bitumen, 10 parts furnace oil, and 20
parts power kerosene.
Binder for plant-mix: Varies according to weather
conditions and clean or dusty state of
aggregate.
Range: 100 parts bitumen, 2% parts furnace
oil, 5 parts kerosene, to 100 parts bitumen, 2' , />
parts furnace oil, and 30 parts power kerosene.
Quantity used varies from 8 gals, to 14 gals,
per c. yd.
The aggregate used is screened ridge gravel, and
screened creek sand.
It was realised from the outset that full use would
have to be made of local materials, and that there
would have to be strict economy in the use of road
plant. Bitumen supplies were strictly limited, and the
supply of water for preparation of the road entirely
inadequate.
IMPROVISED; Until two Barber Green plant mix
units arrived from America, concrete mixing machines
were used for bitumen work on the North South Road.


These factors determined the type of bituminous
construction adopted by the Country Roads Board.
The following quantities of materials were used in
the construction of this section of the road
Gravel 100,000,000 c. yds.
Flux Oil 4,200 tons
Power Kerosene 700 tons
Piping 4,500 linear feet
LARRIMAH-DARWIN.
At first construction of this section which is
parallel to the railway, was not deemed necessary.
However, to serve local traffic, it was decided to
reconstruct the Darwin-Adelaide River road (72
miles I. This was carried out in 1941 by the New
South Wales Department of Main Roads.
Early in 1942, the need for the construction of a
road from Adelaide River to Larrimah (260 miles I
became urgent, and work on this stretch was allocated
as follows:
Adelaide River to Katherine (143 miles), and
bridge construction work: New South Wales
Department of Main Roads.
Katherine to Larrimah (117 miles I: South Aus-
tralian Highways Department.
Later the Army assisted with the work and under-
took construction of the section from Maranboy to
Katherine (30 miles).
Most of the construction work was completed by
the end of 1942, and improvement and strengthening
has been proceeding since.
Early in 1943, the New South Wales Department
of Main Roads took over the responsibility for the
full length from Darwin to Larrimah (332 miles).
It was also decided early in 1943 to place a
bitumen seal on the length from Darwin to Larrimah.
BITUMEN: Civil Constructional Corps workers laying
a bitumen surface on a section of the North South
Road.
PIONEER: A bulldozer and a mechanical scoop at
work forming the pioneer trails for a section of the
North-South Road.
This work was in progress at June 30, 1943, and,
when completed, will result in a bitumen-surfaced
road from Alice Springs to Darwin.
The gravel formation of this part of the road
follows the same specification as that of the Alice
Springs to Larrimah section. Because of the country
traversed, heavy earthworks were carried out on
some sections.
Concrete and steel bridges totalling 1,890 linear
feet were constructed, and 1,959 linear feet of railway
bridges were decked to carry traffic when the low-
level road bridges are flooded.
One of the greatest problems encountered during
the construction of the North-South Road was weather
conditions.
Influenced by the monsoons, the wet season usually
commences towards the end of November, and con-
tinues until April. Southern disturbances sometimes
cause winter rains at Alice Springs, and as far north
as Barrow Creek (175 miles north of Alice Springs).
During the summer, shade temperatures are per-
sistently high, sometimes reaching 120 degrees
Fahrenheit. Daly Waters is the second hottest place
in Australia.
Alice Springs, situated in the Mac Donnell Ranges,
is 1,900 feet above sea level. The highest point of
the road is 15*/-> miles north of Alice Springs, 2,380
feet above sea level.
The North-South Road has incalculable strategic
value, and after the war will constitute a valuable
asset in the development of the Northern Territory.
MT. ISA-TENNANT CREEK ROAD.
Connecting the central Queensland railhead at Mt.
Isa with the North-South Road at Tennant Creek,
this highway stretches for 403 miles across some of
the most arid country in Australia.


SURVEY: A survey party at work about 200 miles
west of Camooweal on the Mt. Isa - Tennant Creek
Road.
BULL DUST: A section of the Mt. Isa - Tennant
Creek Road shortly after the route had been blazed,
and before gravelling.
JUNCTION: Military policemen on traffic duty at
the junction of the North-South Road with the
Mt. Isa - Tennant Creek Road. The picture was taken
before this portion of the road was sealed with
bitumen.
Two hundred and seventy-eight miles of its total
length are in the Northern Territory.
The Mt. Isa-Camooweal, or Queensland section
(117 miles), was started as a Queensland Main Roads
Commission project in January, 1941.
In May, 1941, it was decided to extend the road
from Camooweal to Tennant Creek.
Construction of the whole road was taken over by
the Allied Works Council in February, 1942.
The highway consists of a gravel pavement 20 feet
wide, with a 16-feet-wide bitumen seal.
The quantity of gravel used amounted to 1,500,000
cubic yards, of which 1,430,000 cubic yards were
spread while the road was under Allied Works Council
supervision.
The area of road surface to be sealed with bitumen
totals 3,801,000 square yards, and will require
760,320 gallons of tar, 2,280,960 gallons of bitumen,
and 106,656 cubic yards of screening.
Nine bridges, ranging in length from 12 feet to
320 feet, were constructed. Except those across the
Georgina and Rankine Rivers, which are 12 feet
between kerbs, all the bridges are 18 feet wide.
Concrete strengthening was required at nine cross-
ings.
Lack of water was the greatest construction problem.
To surmount this difficulty, 23 sub-artesian bores


ranging in depth from 300 to 600 feet, and giving
from 300 to 1,500 gallons of water an hour, were
sunk along the road.
The finding of underground water in the hitherto
waterless 130-mile desert stretch between the 82-mile
and the 212-mile points west of Camooweal, not only
rendered practicable the provision of water for camps
and road construction, but justified selection of the
route. This selection had been criticised because of
the lack of water and the reputed impossibility of
finding any.
Large transport problems had to be overcome in
the initial stages of the project. These involved the
transportation of three organisations, comprising 400
men, 80 tip trucks, and a large quantity of plant and
equipment from Charleville, Blackall, and Eidsvold.
In the latter case, a distance of 1,407 miles was
travelled by rail and 331 miles by road.
The maximum number of men employed on the
road was 659.
Estimated cost of the road is £1,180,000. To June
30, 1943, expenditure under Allied Works Council
supervision was £900,000.
QUEENSLAND INLAND DEFENCE ROAD.
The third great strategic highway the Queensland
Inland Defence Road linking Ipswich with Charters
Towers (875 miles), was also constructed in two
sections.
The Ipswich-Duaringa section (473 miles), was
constructed by the Queensland Main Roads Commis-
sion, and the Duaringa-Charters Towers (402 miles)
portion was carried out by the New South Wales
Department of Main Roads.
IPSWICH-DUARINGA.
The Queensland Department of Main Roads had
commenced the Ipswich-Duaringa portion of the
QUAGMIRE: Condition of road surface after one
inch of rain at a point 35 miles west of Camooweal,
on the Mt. Isa-Tennant Creek Road, in May, 1941,
before the bitumen seal was laid.
CONVOY: While Allied Works Council was still
conditioning and surfacing it, great military convoys
were continuously using the Mt. Isa-Tennant Creek
Road.
DISTANCE: Disappearing into the
horizon this bitumen - surfaced
stretch of the Mt. Isa-Tennant
Creek Road is in marked contrast
with earlier scenes.
BRIDGE: This bridge, which spans
the Georgina River, is one of the
nine constructed along the Mt. Isa-
Tennant Creek Road.


project before the formation of the Allied Works
Council, and had constructed 257 miles when the
Council took over.
The gravel pavement of the 257-mile stretch was
20 feet wide, but the remaining 216 miles were
gravelled to a width of 12 feet only.
DUARINGA-CHARTERS TOWERS.
When the urgent demand to complete the road from
Duaringa to Charters Towers was received, the intensity
of the Allied Works Council’s programme in Queens-
land made it impossible for authorities in that State
to complete the work within the stipulated period.
Therefore the undertaking was handed over to the
New South Wales Department of Main Roads. Work
commenced on this part of the road on September
7, 1942.
About 2,600 men and £350,000 worth of plant,
weighing approximately 8,000 tons, were transferred
to the project from New South Wales and Victoria.
A large section of the men and 365 tip-trucks and
other equipment were transported 1,708 miles by
rail from an Allied Works Council project at
Tocumwal, on the Murray River, to Clermont, the
base camp, about midway between Ipswich and
Charters Towers. To carry out this wholesale transfer
of men and materials, 26 special trains were requisi-
tioned.
About 160 miles of the 402 miles from Duaringa
to Charters Towers are in black soil country.
Although the average rainfall over the area for
the previous 50 years was 7% inches for the last
quarter of the year, during the corresponding period
while the road was under construction there were
falls totalling 49 inches. These falls resulted in
weeks of labour time being lost, particularly in the
black soil regions. Several of the rivers which
crossed the road overflowed their banks, damaging
the formation and in one place flooding the area for
40 miles around.
Because of the rains and subsequent floodings,
construction of bridges over these rivers was com-
pletely held up for weeks.
Four sawmills were established along the route to
supply timber for the 34 bridges, which have a total
length of 3,155 feet. The longest bridge was that
across the Nagoa River 420 feet in length.
QUEENSLAND INLAND DEFENCE ROAD.
1. TRANSPORT: A 12-wheel trailer transports a huge dragline
excavator on to the project. 2. BULLDOZERS: The concerted
power of this battery of bulldozers makes short work of original
formation of the road. 3. CUTTING: A stretch of the road
which was punched through undulating country to obviate
climbing. 4. FLOOD: A typical scene on the northern sections
of the road during the wet season.


Construction of causeways and abutments accounted
for the use of 34,000 cubic yards of stone.
A total length of 17,678 feet of culverts was con-
structed.
Fifty-one fully-formed cattle grids were built.
For formation of the 12-feet-wide gravel pavement,
1.100.000 tons of gravel were won from more than
34 pits opened up along the route. In addition,
450.000 cubic yards of earthworks were excavated
by scoops and bulldozers.
With Clermont as the base, 16 construction camps
were established on the project. Between Duaringa
and Clermont there were five camps, including three
subsidiary sawmill camps. North of Clermont, seven
main camps with subsidiary units were established.
ELEVATOR: An elevator-grader at work levelling a
section of the Queensland Inland Defence Road prior
to gravelling.
GOUGED: Excavation of rock and earth to form a
deep cutting for the Queensland Inland Defence Road,
present no difficulties when the bulldozer is brought
to bear on them.
In addition to these fixed camps, there were a number
of mobile units.
During the wet season, certain of the camps were
isolated for lengthy periods.
On one occasion, a message was received that a
Civil Constructional Corps worker in one of the
isolated camps was dangerously ill.
Using the radio telephone which had been estab-
lished in the camps along the road, the engineer-in-
charge contacted a United States Army officer from
a nearby camp, and asked for assistance in getting
the man to hospital.
The American officer instructed the engineer to
have a flight strip constructed on solid ground near
the camp, and promised to send an American plane
to take the man to hospital. Every man in the camp
BOGGED: Even tractors became bogged during the
wet season on northern sections of the Queensland
inland Defence Road.


BEFORE: Typical Central Australian terrain through
which the best means of access used to be either a
wheel-rutted or camel-pad track.
worked at full pressure to clear a flight strip, and
in five hours a 600-yard runway was completed.
Half an hour later, the American plane landed
on the flight strip and took the patient to a hospital,
where he was immediately operated on and subse-
quently recovered.
The Duaringa-Charters Towers stretch was com-
pleted in April, 1943.
About 3,600 men were employed in construction
of the full length of road from Ipswich to Charters
Towers.
A total of 69 bridges, comprised of 185 spans,
with a total length of 5,310 feet, were constructed.
Expenditure by the Allied Works Council on the
combined project totalled £2,170,000.
SUBSIDIARY ROADS.
To link Charters Towers the head of the Queens-
land Inland Defence Road with the coast, 93 miles
of road were constructed from Charters Towers to
Townsville, at a cost of £260,033.
ROAD: An elevated
section of the
Queensland Inland
Road sweeping
through thickly-
wooded country be-
tween Duaringa and
Charters Towers.
AFTER: The same locality a few weeks later, when
Allied Works Council had constructed a graded road
through the district for access to mica mines.
A second Queensland Inland Defence Road had
been planned to connect Hughenden (168 miles
south-west of Charters Towers) with the New South
Wales border, a distance of 640 miles.
However, only the section between Charleville and
Blackall, via Tambo, a distance of 187 miles, was
completed.
Work on this road was commenced by the Queens-
land Main Roads Commission in April, 1940, and
completed in May, 1943, under Allied Works Council
supervision.
The road connects the railheads at Charleville and
Blackall, thus providing an alternative route through
Hughenden, either to Charters Towers or Mount Isa.
Apart from the improvement of a 700-mile dry-
weather road from Meekatharra to Marble Bar, in
Western Australia, the remainder of the road pro-
gramme was made up of construction and maintenance
of access and internal roads associated with muni-
tion plants, aerodromes, and camps.
56


PIPELINE: Crossing a backwater, the pipeline
connects berthing facilities on the Brisbane River
with oil tanks located a short distance inland.
OIL INSTALLATIONS
A major oil and petrol storage construction programme,
comprising 174 tanks, with a total capacity of 110,092,000
gallons, was carried out between March, 1942, and June 30,
1943.
The total capacity of the programme was divided
among the States as follows: —
New South Wales 22,308,000 gallons.
Western Australia 22,258,000 „
Victoria 21,828,000
Queensland 20,562,000 „
South Australia 15,208,000 „
Tasmania 6,174,000 „
Central Australia 1,754,000 „
The programme falls into four main groups; —
(a) Bulk inland storage of aviation spirit for
Royal Australian Air Force and United States
Army Air Corps, consisting of: —
Twenty-three 400,000-gallon tanks.
Fourteen 300,000-gallon tanks.
Thirty 200,000-gallon tanks.
Six 100,000-gallon tanks.
Nineteen 54,000-gallon tanks.
Installations in this group are composed of a
small mixing tank (54,000-gallon) and three larger
splinterproofed steel tanks. Splinterproofing is
usually an outer wall of concrete. Road access,
water supply, rail siding, pumping and handling
facilities, and a number of ancillary buildings, such
as guardhouse and drum filling stores, are included.
(b) Bulk seaboard storage of aviation spirit,
comprising:—
Three 1,000,000-gallon tanks.
Two 600,000-gallon tanks.
Two 400,000-gallon tanks.
One 300,000-gallon tank.
These installations consist of standard oil company
design steel tanks, with concrete splinterproofing, plus
generally the same facilities and ancillary buildings
as in group (a).
(c) Naval fuel storage: —
Two 13,500-ton tanks.
Two 12,000-ton tanks.
Eight 6,000-ton tanks.
Two 5,000-ton tanks.
Nine 4,800-ton tanks.
Three 4,000-ton tanks.
(One ton equals 230 gallons.)


These tanks were constructed of reinforced concrete,
to conserve steel plate. Pumps, pipelines, wharves,
and other facilities for the filling of the tanks and
bunkering of naval vessels were also constructed.
(d) Rulk seaboard petrol storage: —
Three 1,500,000-gallon tanks.
Two 1,250,000-gallon tanks.
Thirty-six 1,000,000-gallon tanks.
Two 750,000-gallon tanks.
Three 500,000-gallon tanks.
Mainly for storage of motor spirit from abroad,
these installations are located at the major seaports.
Built to replace steel tanks taken over from oil com-
panies which had used them for storage of black
oils, ten tanks in this group were constructed of con-
crete. Balance of the tanks were of composite design
concrete floors and roofs, steel walls with concrete
MASSIVE: Thickness of the walls of this concrete oil
tank are illustrated by contrasting the man with
the width of the cross-section upon which he is working.
PILLARED: Thickly studded with concrete
columns, the oil tank interior pictured above is
reminiscent of an ancient temple or court.
splinterproofing. Where tanks were eontinguous to
established installations, existing handling facilities
were utilised. In other cases, new facilities were
constructed. Largest tank was in naval fuel storage
group. Construction details of this tank are:- -
Location: Woolloornooloo (Sydney).
Capacity: 27,000 tons (3,105,000 gallons).
Structure: Rectangular, 300 ft. x 175 ft. Divided
into two by a heavy reinforced concrete central
wall. Whole terraced and roofed with reinforced
concrete and covered with earth.
Excavation: Rock, 40,000 c. yds.; earth, 12,000 c.
yds. Commenced May 25, 1942, was 90 per
cent, complete by September 1, 1942, when
concreting began.
Concrete: 9,000 c. yds.
Pipe Line: Approximately 4,000 feet, 13-inch dia-
meter, connecting with fuelling arrangements on
wharves.
Pumps: One electric centrifugal, with 100 h.p. motor.
Capacity 300-400 tons per hour. One 10 h.p.,
4-inch, for de-oiling main under wharves.
Manpower: Maximum, 800.
58


During the period under review, splinterproofing
and some reconstruction work was carried out on
existing installations at Darwin.
In addition to the above programme, numerous
minor installations were constructed in all States.
Formally requisitioned at the beginning of the
month, construction of a second major installation
programme was under way by June 30.
This programme embraces erection of Australian
installations with a total capacity of 26,450,000
gallons, and establishment of a pool of materials to
be used in construction of installations outside Aus-
tralia.
Sites had been chosen, surveys made, steel and
other materials ordered, and fabrication of steel
tanks arranged.
TANK: Built to replace steel tanks and contain black
oil, this South Australian installation is constructed of
reinforced concrete. It has a capacity of 1,000,000 gallons.
NOVEL: An unusual feature of the
design of this oil installation is its
cubic shape. Construction of the
installation is described on the
previous page.
UNDERGROUND: Being constructed in Central
Australia, this tank has been set into the side
of a hill and will be buried when completed.


HOSPITAL; Constructed of brick with tiled roofing,
this section of 112th A.G.H. Greenslopes (Brisbane)
is permanent, and will add greatly to local post-war
hospitalisation.
HOSPITALS
As necessary auxiliaries to the Defence programme, the Allied Works
Council has constructed hospitals of both temporary and permanent nature
for the Australian and United States Forces.
Located in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, Western Australia, and the Northern
Territory, some of these establishments will continue
to play a vitally important part for repatriation and
other purposes for many years after the cessation
of hostilities.
The largest establishment constructed to June 30,
1943, was the Temperate Zone Hospital, built for the
United States Forces at Herne Bay (Sydney).
HERNE BAY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
This hospital occupies an area of approximately
236 acres, situated within 35 minutes travelling time
from Sydney, and is served by two railway lines.
The project is composed of three separate portions,
each varying in size one 1,000-bed unit and three
750-bed units.
Buildings have been erected in accordance with
the United States Army Standard Design for Tem-
perate Zone Hospitals, which provides for buildings
generally 20 feet in width by varying lengths, to suit
the circumstances. The buildings are constructed of
timber framework, and have corrugated asbestos
cement roofs. The external walls are sheeted with
weatherboards to sill height, and plain asbestos cement
sheets on the underside of the eaves.
Floors generally are of timber constructiop.
All windows and door openings have been fitted
with flyscreens.
The majority of the buildings have been connected
by covered ways.
Each unit of the hospital is complete in itself, and
provides generally for the provision of wards and
operating theatre unit, ancillary buildings such as
administration, post office, recreation buildings,
messes, and kitchens, together with quarters for the
hospital staff.
In addition to the buildings, services for the supply
of electric light, water, sewerage, and roads have been
provided. In connection with the sewerage installa-
tion, it is interesting to note that the nearest available
main was three miles distant from the site, and situated
at a higher level. This necessitated the installation
of a low-level pumping station, by which means the
sewerage is pumped to a gravitation main.
The total cost of the project, including all services,
was nearly £1,000,000.
Work was commenced on the site on December
15, 1942, and it was anticipated that the undertaking
would be completed by about September, 1943.
Five months after commencement of the work,


1,000 patients were moved into one of the units, which
had then been completed in all its detail.
The following statistics are of interest:- -
Buildings are of varying lengths, ranging from
80 feet to 160 feet, and if placed end to end
would measure more than eight miles in length,
and give a floor area of approximately
1,000,000 square feet.
In all, 480 buildings have been erected.
Covered ways connecting the buildings approxi-
mate three miles in length. The longest
straight stretch of covered-way is 1,400 feet.
A telephone exchange capable of dealing with
200 extensions has been built.
Sewerage mains total more than 13 miles in
length, and about six miles of water mains
and three miles of gas mains have been required
to connect the various buildings with these
services.
For the construction of the timber framework of
the buildings, 6,500,000 super feet of timber
were used.
An average monthly total of 1,005 men was en-
gaged on the construction of the hospital.
HOLLAND PARK.
Another hospital has been constructed for the United
Stales Army at Holland Park, Brisbane.
This is a standard type construction, similar to
Herne Bay, but with variations to suit the northern
sub-tropical conditions.
The capacity of the hospital is 2,000 beds. It has
been constructed in two units, each of 1,000 beds.
In this project there are eight specially-designed
wards for psychopathic patients.
As in the Herne Bay establishment, the majority
of the buildings are connected by covered ways.
FLOORING: A small section of the 1,000,000 square
feet of floor area occupied by buildings which com-
pose the U.S. hospital at Herne Bay (Sydney).
COVERED WAY; Stretching for 1,400 feet in a
straight line, this covered walk connects a number of
the buildings in one of the five units at Herne Bay
Hospital.
Where required, in such buildings as the operating
theatre, and other specialist units, air conditioning
is provided.
Construction was commenced on December 24,
1942, and it was anticipated that the hospital would
be available for occupation about September, 1943.
Two hundred and eleven buildings are being erected
on the 102-acre site.
The total length of covered-ways is approximately
1 '/2 miles.
Two miles of water mains and two miles of sewer
reticulation have been laid.
One-and-a-half miles of roadways have been con-
structed throughout the area.
Approximately 2,000,000 super feet of timber have
been used in the construction of the timber-framed
buildings.
112th A.G.H., GREENSLOPES.
This hospital, situated near Brisbane, is a com-
bination of permanent and temporary buildings.
The original hospital was designed as a permanent
institution, and comprises staff quarters, main
administration building, and ward blocks, together
with the boiler house and other ancillary buildings.
61


Of the above buildings, the staff quarters, which are
of brick, two storeys, and of modern and up-to-date
design and finish, have been completed and are fully
occupied. Three permanent ward blocks of modern
design, completed with covered ways and all services,
have also been completed.
In addition to these, three temporary or mobilisa-
tion-type wards have also been constructed and are
in occupation.
Due to the acute constructional difficulties experi-
enced in northern Australia following the entry of
Japan into the war, it was found necessary to curtail
the constructional programme for this hospital.
To June 30, 1943, approximately £243,000 had been
expended on buildings and services, and additional
approval had been given by the Department of the
Army for completion of the project.
It is proposed to continue the completion of the
main administration building, which is to be of
permanent and modern design, and will include
operating theatres, kitchen, and facilities for other
specialist medical services.
Another three ward blocks of permanent design are
also to be constructed.
Preparation of sketch plans for these additions has
been carried out in the Allied Works Council Liaison
Office, in consultation with officers of the Department
of the Army.
When completed, the hospital will provide accom-
modation for 612 patients.
In the construction of the project 25,000 cubic feet
of earthworks had to be removed, and 36,000 cubic
yards of filling dumped to prepare the site.
Approximately 40,000 super feet of timber and
about 1,000,000 bricks were used.
It was expected that the whole project would be
completed within twelve months from June 30, 1943.
105th A.G.H., ST. MARYS, ADELAIDE.
Located in Daw’s Road, this hospital has been built
to a design based on the provision of permanent
buildings. But here again, owing to the construc-
tional difficulties experienced with the entry of Japan
into the war, some of the permanent buildings were
abandoned and temporary types substituted to enable
ward accommodation to be provided more rapidly.
Permanent buildings for the accommodation of
medical and nursing staffs, the administration block,
operating theatre, and other specialist medical units,
together with four ward units of a design similar
to those erected at the 112th A.G.H., Brisbane, to-
gether with kitchen and other ancillary buildings,
have been completed at a cost of £210,000.
WARDS: Civil Constructional Corps carpenters roofing
a ward at the Herne Bay Hospital. A small portion
of the remainder of the wards surround the building
on which they are working.


The hospital occupies an area of about 36 acres,
and provides accommodation for 612 patients.
In the construction of the buildings, which occupy
a door area of 154,000 square feet, over 1,000,000
bricks, 157,000 tiles, and 25,000 square feet of
asbestos cement were used.
Covered ways total 1,450 feet in length.
Steam mains total 4,650 feet, sewerage mains 8,000
feet, water mains 11,000 feet, and gas mains approxi-
mately 5,000 feet.
The area surrounding the buildings has been laid
out in lawns, flower and vegetable gardens, with
necessary roads and paths.
2/2nd AND 2/6th AUST. GENERAL
HOSPITALS, ROCKY CREEK (ATHERTON
TABLELANDS).
bach of 1,200-bed capacity, these hospitals are
being erected to standard designs prepared by the
Allied Works Council Liaison Section in co-operation
with officers of the Directorate of Engineer Services
and Medical Directorate, L.H.Q.
The designs provide for the buildings to be con-
structed of timber framing with asbestos cement roofs,
VERANDAH: These verandahs, at 105th A.G.H., St.
Mary's, Adelaide, are in contrast with the temporary
type ot covered way constructed at Herne Bay and
Holland Park.
THEATRE: Interior of the operating theatre at
105th A.G.H., St. Mary's, Adelaide. Below: Typical
permanent ward at the same hospital.
and wall-covering of timber and asbestos cement
sheeting.
The whole of the work in connection with these
hospitals was almost completed in the seven months to
June 30. 1943.
Kvery facility required for medical and surgical
treatment of Army patients has been provided for in
these establishments, including a modern operating
theatre block, pathological, dispensary, and dental
units, and specialists" consulting rooms, administra-
tion buildings, together with pay and post office,
canteen, Q.M. stores, and large kitchen and mess
buildings. The kitchen caters for the whole of the
patients and part of the staff.
In designing the ward blocks, provision has beet!
made for accommodation of psychiatric patients, and
for resuscitation.
63


LARGEST: Built for Hie American Forces, this is the largest military or civilian hospital, in Queensland. It is located at Holland Park (Brisbane).
Special attention has been given as part of the
design to the dysentery annexe, which enables modern
and positive treatment of this disease to be carried
out.
The hospital group is complete with all necessary
services, including sewerage, water supply, electric
light, and power.
The buildings cover a site of approximately 50
acres, and are planned in a semi-dispersed manner.
Approximately 55 buildings have been erected in
each group.
The project, required the use of 190,000 square
feet of asbestos cement roof coverings.
Roads approximate two miles in length, and for
sewer drainage about two miles of piping were
required.
The majority of the floors of these buildings are
of concrete construction, and required 5,872 cubic
yards of concrete.
2/1 sf AUST. GENERAL CONVALESCENT
DEPOT, ROCKY CREEK.
A convalescent depot, which will accommodate
1,500 patients, is also being erected in the Atherton
Tablelands District, at a cost of approximately
£42,000. It is composed of standard-type kitchen
and messes, ablutions, and latrines. Sleeping accom-
modation consists of tents.
Water supply, sewerage, and electric light services
are also to he provided.
noth A.G.H., HOLLYWOOD (W.A.).
Designed on a permanent basis, this hospital was
erected in brick construction, with tiled roofs.
The administration block, which includes the
operating theatres, together with ward accommodation
for about 50 patients, comprised the first section.
Six ward blocks, with accommodation for approxi-
mately 200 patients, and a modern pathological de-
partment, together with covered ways, kitchen, and
ancillary facilities, the boiler house, and quarters for
the nursing and medical staff, comprised the second
section.
Recently-completed additions, made up of four
additional ward blocks to accommodate 120 patients,
together with staff quarters, brought the total cost
of the project to £263,000.
103rd A.G.H., BAULKHAM HILLS.
A 1,200-bed capacity hospital was set up on an
existing structure at the Masonic School, Baulkham
Hills (Sydney).
The cost will be in the vicinity of £90,000.
Ancillary buildings, such as operating theatres
and other specialist units, have been constructed,
together with all services and roads required. The
ancillary buildings are of timber construction. Wards
are mostly of tentage.
106th A.G.H., BONEGILLA.
In this instance, the existing standard type of camp
hospital set up within the Bonegilla Camp (Victoria),
has been supplemented by the taking over, alteration,
and addition to a section of the adjacent camp build-
ings.
In addition, a complete operating theatre block,
administration, and other buildings, together with
staff accommodation, were built at a cost approxi-
mating £50,000.
PERSPECTIVE: A study in perspective vanishing
points is effected by the junction of these two
covered ways constructed at Holland Park Hospital.
64


TIMBER
Confronted with a huge building programme to
meet the requirements of war, and realising the
necessity to conserve steel, the Allied Works
Council’s Directorate of Works quickly recog-
nised the advantages of the use of Australian
timber as a building material for large engineer
ing structures.
Many thousands of square feet of covered space
for the storage of supplies, aeroplane hangars, main-
tenance shops, large workshops, munition factories,
and the like, which normally would have been buih
with steel, have been constructed of timber.
Hitherto the use of timber had been limited in this
country to small structures, but Allied Works Council
engineers quickly adapted themselves to the designing
of all types of timber-framed buildings, and overcame
associated difficulties.
With the ever-increasing demand for supplies of
Australian hardwoods, came the difficulty of allowing
sufficient time for seasoning. Finally, use of green
timber became unavoidable.
Green timber had not previously been employed in
a major structural role, and its behaviour was a
subject for experiment.
Much valuable assistance has been afforded by the
Forests Products Division of the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research.
Greater scope in design was possible when a type
of joint-connection new to this country was made
available by the Timber Engineering Company.
The use of split rings and shear plates as supplied
by that company, greatly facilitated the design of the
large-span timber trusses which are particularly useful
for aeroplane hangars and workshops. At Tocumwal,
Werribee, and Charleville, timber hangars have been
erected which provide clear spans of 130 feet and 96
feet.
At Maylands aerodrome (W.A.), the roofs of 96-
feet-span timber-framed hangars support overhead
hoists capable of lifting large aircraft completely off
the ground.
Overhead hoists of various capacities have been hung
from large-span timber-framed roofs in many factory
BARKING: A Civil Constructional Corps timber
worker trims the bark from a giant tree felled by
other Civil Constructional Corps workers at the
Allied Works Council timber camp.
buildings, and heavy latticed-timber posts were de-
veloped to carry crane gantries handling big loads.
Another development, where large spans were
needed, was the introduction of laminated timber
construction in which glue was used in the fabrica-
tion of arches from timber otherwise unsuitable for
structural purposes, thus eliminating bolts and
washers.
This is believed to be the first large-scale use of
this type of construction in Australia.
A building suitable for large stores and hangars,
in which the principal feature is the use of timber of
small size, nailed together to form arches of com-
paratively large span, was introduced by the U.S.
Army.


A large number of these so-called “igloo” struc-
tures have been built by the Allied Works Council
for the American and Australian Forces.
These structures were essentially temporary, but
the development had so much merit that somewhat
modified types have been designed by the Allied Works
Council and used for more permanent structures.
Thus at Archerfield (Queensland), nailed arches
spanning 170 feet have been used in the construction
of hangars and workshops, totalling approximately
1,000 feet in length.
The advantages of nailed timber construction, utilis-
ing timber of small sizes, have also been availed of
in store construction requiring trusses having spans
of from 30 to 35 feet.
A recent inspection of the condition of many of
the buildings erected by the Allied Works Council
throughout the Commonwealth, in w'hich timber has
been used in place of steel, has shown that the use
of Australian hardwoods has been entirely justified.
PREFABRICATION.
Perhaps the most interesting phase of timber work
carried out by the Allied Works Council has been
the development of large-scale prefabrication.
An outstanding example of this w'as the construction
at Victoria Park and Gregory Terrace, Brisbane, of
offices for the C.S. Army, two offices for U.S. Navy,
a transport building, offices, civilian and enlisted
men’s barracks, and messing and recreation facilities.
Ninety-seven buildings, with a combined floor space
of six acres, were erected on a 50-acre site.
The principal buildings vary in size from 108 feet
by 20 feet, to 354 feet by 47 feet.
OFFICES: This large timber-framed building is one
of many being built in Queensland by the Allied
Works Council to house U.S. Headquarters personnel.
TRUSS: Having fabricated it on the Job, Civil Con-
structional Corps carpenters wheel a half truss into
position for raising into the framework of the " gloo"
store seen in the background.
All building material was prefabricated in Sydney
and railed to Brisbane. To June 30, 1943, one bun-
dred and sixty railway trucks containing material had
been despatched.
The walls and roofs of the building are sheeted
with asbestos cement. The roofs required 10V2 acres
of this material, and the walls another 8,000 square
yards.
Six hundred thousand super feet of timber were used
in the frames and floors.
Along each side of the buildings are glazed shutters.
These required 35,000 square feet of glass. Where
glass were not used, many thousands of square feet of
glass-substitute cloth were employed.
All window and door frames, glazing, and complete
fittings were prefabricated in Sydney and transported
to the site.
Steam and hot water is connected to kitchens and
all ablutions from a number of boilers on the site.
Sewerage is connected to the Brisbane Council’s
mains for disposal.


SHADOWS: A tracery of
light and shade is drawn
by the play of sunlight
through the rafters on
to the floor joists of a
U.S. hospital being con-
structed by the Allied
Works Council.
The total cost of the project is estimated at approxi-
mately £207,900.
Prefabrieation of camping equipment sufficient to
provide ancillary services to three divisions of troops
was constructed by the Allied Works Council Works
Depot at St. Lucia ( Brisbane).
The prefabricated sets comprise food preparation
rooms, wash-up benches, ablution benches, portable
showers, meat safes, 200 and 500-gallon water tanks
and stands, grease traps, incinerators, garbage tins,
latrine and show'er shelters.
PREFABRICATION: Flooring and other timbers re-
quired for construction of one unit in a large project,
which have been prefabricated in Sydney and shipped
north, are laid out in ordered assembly lines.
in addition, 1,071 tent floors (1,500 at 16 feet by
16 feet; 39 at 14 feet by 12 feet; and 132 at 16 feet by
50 feet ) have been built.
Apart from military work, the Works Depot has
prefabricated material sufficient to house and provide
services for between 3,000 and 5,000 members of the
Civil Constructional Corps.
A considerable amount of similar work has also
been carried out for the American Army.
On an average, 50,000 super feet of timber is used
at the depot each week, together with a large quantity
of Masonite, Caneite, galvanised and black iron,
Ormanoid, hessian, nails, bolts, and spikes.
The average number of men employed is about 90,
and comprises carpenters, plumbers, drainers, truck
drivers, builders’ laborers, and painters.
TIMBER-GETTING.
To cope with the huge demand for timber in that
State, the Allied Works Council has its own lumber
and timber-getting camp at Cloudy Clearing, on Mount
Spec, Queensland.
Cloudy Clearing is 3,200 feet above sea-level.
Timber for Allied Works Council projects has been
supplied from the camp at the rate of 120,000 super
feet and 340 piles ranging from 40 feet to 60 feet
in length per week.
The timber produced is used for girders, wharf
piles, house blocks, and head-stocks.
On occasions, single poles measuring 90 feet in
length have been transported from the camp down a
winding mountain road on jinkers. Some of these
journeys have taken up to three days.
67


SPACIOUS: The huge dimensions of this marine
engine store built by the Allied Works Council can
be gauged by contrasting the Civil Constructional
Corps workmen with the structural components of
the building.
STORES
Stores and warehouses with a total capacity of many millions of cubic
feet, were built in every State and in the islands north of Australia.
This huge building programme included the erection of ordnance stores
for the Services, munition stores, ration stores, wool stores, transit stores,
warehouses for Lend-Lease materials, and warehouses for storage of aero-
plane parts.
Of Varied construction and design, the stores are
of both permanent and temporary character.
In many cases building records were smashed by
the times taken for erection of the stores.
To June 30, the largest single project in this
programme was the warehouse scheme built for the
U.S. Forces at Meeandah (Brisbane).
Spread over an area of 420 acres, the project
embraces sites at Meeandah, Virginia, and Banyo.
The 47 warehouses will occupy 260 acres. Forty-
five of the buildings measure 400 feet by 100 feet.
The remaining two are 300 feet by 100 feet.
The scheme includes the construction of three rail-
way sidings and platforms, eight miles of roadway on
the areas, and a system of access roads.
Constructed of timber, with soil-cement floors and
iron roofing, the buildings are temporary.
All timber components are being fabricated on
the site. Individual buildings have been completed
in a fortnight.
A total of 2,183,000 super feet of timber will be
required for the project.
Drainage of the low, flat land on which the buildings
are being erected, presented a most difficult problem.
About 350 Civil Constructional Corps tradesmen
and laborers were engaged on the project.
In February, 1943, work began on the erection of
13 large warehouses to form a subsistence depot at
Regents Park (Sydney).


The buildings measure 416 feet by 96 feet. Rail
and road loading platforms are attached to each.
Clearing and levelling of the site was carried out
by means of eight bulldozers working in three shifts.
Two building sites were cleared and available for
floor formations to be prepared every 24 hours.
Immediately the formations had been filled by bull-
dozers, tractors, and scoops, and soundly compacted
by water carts, “sheep’s-foot” and smooth rollers,
the sites were trimmed and brick retaining walls
erected. An average of 26,000 bricks per building
was used. The brick walls were completed at the
rale of one every I 1 /-* days.
During the lime occupied in preparing sites and
building walls, huge stock piles of blue metal, sand,
and cement were being prepared for the concreting
of floors.
The area of each floor concreted is slightly over
an acre.
The floors were poured with a six-bag-capacily
mobile steam pavior. Each floor was completed in
four days. This included the fixing of screed boards,
placing steel reinforcing, fixing expansion joints, and
pouring and finishing the concrete.
Ninety thousand super feet of timber were cut and
erected in each building.
With the aid of a mobile crane, a gang comprising
four men, erected the entire structure in two days.
Roof timbers were fixed as the structure was erected,
wall framing installed, 24 large sliding doors to each
building hung, corrugated iron and corrugated asbestos
wall sheeting, and corrugated roof sheeting fixed.
Electrical installation and painting all followed
rapidly in sequence.
A completed building was handed over every seven
days.
STORE: Exterior of a marine engine store built by
the Allied Works Council. Of permanent nature, the
building has a post-war as well as an immediate value.
For fast, efficient, and mobile access to the buildings,
a complete railway system connecting with a main
line was built through the nearby scrub country, with
a main line, marshalling sidings, and a branch line
to each building. In all, over 5 1 /> miles of railways
were constructed on the site.
Roads also service the site and all buildings. Four
and a quarter miles were formed, graded, and con-
structed.
The buildings were occupied by Army authorities
immediately following completion. Access to each
has been maintained.
A fire service capable of meeting any emergency
had to be provided for. Therefore a service using
four miles of water mains, with numerous hydrants
at vital points, was laid on the project.
A camp, comprising headquarters block, kitchen,
and mess buildings, ablution, lavatory, laundry,
shower block and recreation building, complete with
road access and paths, was also erected. This section
of the project was completed in 23 weeks.
ORDNANCE: A section of a large ordnance depot
constructed in Victoria by the Allied Works Council.


WOODEN: Composed of nailed wooden bow-trusses
springing from 18-in. high abutment pads, the frame-
work of this store allows for a maximum of storage
space. The store was built by the Allied Works
Council for the U.S. Forces.
Materials used were: 10,000 cubic yards of concrete
mixed and placed, 1,440,000 super feet of timber,
7,500 squares or 113,000 sheets of corrugated asbestos,
452,000 bricks, and 3,687 yards of drain pipes (2 1 /s
miles).
An average of 580 Civil Constructional Corps work-
men was engaged on the project.
The cost of the undertaking was £380,000.
Typical of the ordnance stores section of the
programme is the erection of a depot at Wallangarra
(Queensland).
Commenced in May, 1942, works to a total value
of £350,000 have been carried out on this project.
First requirement was the building of small storage
huts with a total floor area of 42,000 square feet.
A month later, however, the storage floor area was
increased to 300,000 square feet, with the addition of
ancillary buildings.
In August, 1942, it was found that hutted camps,
a workshop, and accommodation for female personnel
were required, as well as water supply and drainage.
Again, in September, a requisition was received
for erection of workshops of a total floor area of
122,000 square feet, power houses, and an electricity
generating plant.
By the end of November work in hand was estimated
to cost more than £300,000.
Since November, 1942, an additional 22,000 square
feet of special storage sheds were required. These
were provided within two weeks.
Most spectacular of all items in this section of
the Allied Works Council’s programme was the Cairns
transhipment scheme, which had reached only a very
early stage of construction at June 30, 1943, and
details of which were given in the chapter dealing
with maritime works.
WAREHOUSE: One of 47 buildings which make up a
gigantic warehouse scheme being constructed by the
Allied Works Council in Queensland.


AMERICAN: Section of a huge camp built on a
northern aerodrome by the Allied Works Council on
behalf of the United States Army Air Corps.
CAMPS
A vast programme of camp construction has been
carried out for the accommodation of all Services,
including large numbers of female personnel.
The influx of U.S. Forces into Australia added
greatly to the existing demand for camp accommoda-
tion.
Despite the infinite variety in size and type of
the various projects, standardization in design and
construction has been a feature of camps for both
the Australian and U.S. Forces.
In providing for both these Forces it has been
necessary to take into account the variation in their
organisation and administration. Although both
camp standards are similar in character, each has
been designed to suit the particular needs of the
respective Forces.
The Australian standard has been adopted after
careful consideration by a Standards Committee set
up under the chairmanship of the Co-ordinator-General
of Public Works, (Sir Harry Brown). The adoption
of such a standard has resulted in provision of a
uniform accommodation for all Services.
Working drawings for standard camp buildings
were produced by the Allied Works Council.
Typical buildings included in the Standard “C.A.”
Series are: sleeping huts, kitchen and messes, can-
teens, ablution and latrine units, administration and
post office units, and dental clinics.
Special consideration has been given to the design
of a standard hut suitable for tropical and sub-tropical
localities.
Generally all camps are provided with electric
light, water, drainage and in some cases sewerage
services.


Prefabrication has played an important part in
camp construction, and small timber-panel units
have been developed which have proved most success-
ful in place of tents, of which there has been an
acute shortage. These units have also been sent to
the islands, where provision of accommodation by
ordinary construction methods has not been possible.
Steel prefabricated huts have also been largely
used. These are now being developed with modifica-
tions, to be used in northern areas for hospital
accommodation.
Many large projects have been carried out during
the period under review.
The Australian Army Camp on the Atherton Table-
lands, Queensland, when completed as a fully-hutted
camp, will have exceeded £1,000,000 in cost.
This project provides camping facilities, including
all ancillary services, for up to four divisions of
troops.
The sites selected for the camps are within an area
comprising many hundreds of square miles.
Lying just outside the heavy rainfall belt, in heavily-
timbered country and on the edge of virgin tropical
jungle, the sites have the advantage of considerable
natural cover, but presented great difficulties, especially
in the early stages, for the transport of material.
So that immediate use could be made of the
sites, large quantities of prefabricated huts, kitchens,
latrines, etc., were rushed to the area by the Allied
Works Council, and were erected by Army personnel.
Meanwhile, about 500 members of the Civil Con-
structional Corps were directed to the projects, and
an immediate start made upon the erection of more
permanent structures.
Three months later, 60,000 troops were encamped
in the area, and were provided with at least the
minimum services. Work on the camps was still only
in its early stages.
Most advanced in construction to June 30, 1943,
Kairi Camp includes ration stores, administrative
ACCOMMODATION: Camp accommodation erected in
Victoria by the Allied Works Council for the housing
of Australian Service female personnel.
huts, a large canteen bulk store, 15 assembly huts,
two theatres and recreation halls, a canteen, 22 meat
houses, a post office, latrines and ablution huts.
In addition, work was commenced upon the con-
struction of 414 miles of camp road, and the installa-
tion of tank stands and small water reticulation
services.
First of the great division camps erected in Queens-
land by the Allied Works Council was the U.S. Army
Camp, The Caves, in the vicinity of Rockhampton.
The Parkhurst section of this camp was erected at
a total cost of £373,000, while the administration
section at The Caves cost an additional £132,663.
Work on the Parkhurst Camp was commenced
towards the end of June, 1942.
The whole of the division was practically in occu-
pation before the end of September.
The arrival of troops in the early stages of the
construction caused a considerable amount of dis-
turbance in the erection of the camp buildings, and
added greatly to the cost.
More than the usual amount of wet weather was
experienced during construction, adding to the diffi-
culties as well as to cost.
Mess huts averaging 124 feet by 20 feet, total 122,
and were completely fitted up with stoves, water, and
other requirements.
Troops commenced to arrive within a month of the
start of the job, so that kitchens measuring 40 feet
by 24 feet were erected as mess huts for temporary
accommodation, and the dining portions added later.
A very speedy undertaking was the decking of the
Alexander Railway Rridge across the Fitzroy River
to take military traffic. A one-way track was placed
over the bridge in a little more than a week, and the
whole project completed in three weeks.
The R.A.A.F. project at Higgins’ Field, Queensland,
now in course of construction, will have cost more
than £500,000 when completed.
A large number of camp constructions have also
been undertaken for the Navy, particularly for the
accommodation of the Women’s Royal Australian
Naval Service.
Two large projects were carried out in Victoria
early in the period being reviewed namely the
staging camps at Royal Park and Watsonia for the
accommodation of the first 20,000 U.S. troops brought
to Australia.
Construction of these camps was undertaken as a
matter of extreme urgency. They were completed in
a matter of weeks, at a cost of approximately £235,000.
Seven separate contracting firms were employed to
ensure rapid construction.


FOOD: A Victorian dehydration factory in which food
for front-line troops will be processed. Of permanent
nature, the factory will be a post-war asset.
DEHYDRATION
Dehydration of foodstuffs, an industry compara-
tively new to Australia, assumed an important
place in the war effort when the Commonwealth
accepted responsibility for feeding the United
Nations’ fighting forces in the South-West
Pacific area.
The building of food dehydration plants was started
early in the war and accelerated under the Allied
Works Council.
Dehydration plants have either been completed or
are under construction in Victoria, New South Wales
and Tasmania.
Construction of 13 plants at an estimated total cost
of £286,058 was undertaken by the Allied Works
Council in the period under review.
The following are the locations and estimated costs
of these projects: Cost
Location £
Fisherman’s Bend (Vic.) 75,790
Maffra (Vic.) 28,000
Ballarat (Vic.) 20,150
Warrnambool (Vic.) 20,000
Colac (Vic.) 18,580
Dandenong (Vic.) 16,000
Smithton (Tas.) 11,960
Ulverstone (Tas.) 11,000
Scottsdale (Tas.) 10,500
Devonport (Tas.) 7,000
Dover (Tas.) 3,780
Waterloo (N.S.W.) 40,000
Morpeth (N.S.W.) 23,325
£286,085
The largest plant is that at Fisherman’s Bend.
Built on a site of 16,666 sq. yards, the four build-
ings which compose the plant cover an area of 5,315
square yards.


The main factory building was designed with south
and east walls of permanent brick construction, and
north and west walls of timber framing and asbestos
cement covering to allow for future extension.
The floor is of reinforced concrete finished with
Ironite carried on brick piers, and is raised to vehicle
level, about 3 ft. above natural ground. The offices
and dining hall are floored with Lignolio covering on
the concrete base.
The roof is of sawtooth construction in four spans
extending the full length of the building, with Oregon
main trusses, hardwood secondary trusses and steel-
framed, glazed sawtooth lights fitted with mechanical
opening gear. Roof covering and gutters are of
asbestos cement without ceiling lining.
Internal partitions to offices and staff rooms are
of timber covered with fibrous plaster sheets, plywood
and asbestos cement, whilst partitions to lavatories
and vegetable store are of brick and cement rendered,
hollow terracotta blocks.
The temporary timber and asbestos cement front
wall of the building is finished with a parapet to
mask the ends of the sawtooth roofs, and the staff
and office entrances have surrounds of brickwork.
The boiler house is of reinforced concrete frame
with brick panel walls on the south, east and west
sides, and a temporary timber and asbestos cement
wall on the north side to provide for the future exten-
sion when additional boilers are required.
A timber and asbestos cement engineers’ shop and
store is provided.
Owing to the somewhat isolated location of the fac-
tory, it was planned to make adequate provision for
the comfort of the staff by providing a large dining
hall with the necessary servery equipment for the
supply of hot meals. The change rooms are spacious
and well equipped, with accommodation for clothes
and personal property. Hot water is installed
throughout the building. There is a well-fitted first
aid room and a sewing room for maintenance of staff
working uniforms.
Approximate quantities involved in construction
of the project were: —
Excavation, 13,105 c. yds.
Filling, 11,861 c. yds.
Drains, 1,480 feet.
Concrete, 2,450 c. yds.
Reinforcing steel, 146 tons.
Ironite floor, 4,298 sq. yds.
Lignolio, 750 sq. yds.
Terra cotta lumber, 214 sq. yds.
Structural steel, 36 tons.
Steel window frames, 11,757 sq, ft.
Glass, 12,380 sq. ft.
Oregon roof, 17,500 super ft.
Hardwood roof and wall, 160,000 super ft.
These construction details are typical to a greater
or lesser degree of the other plants in the programme.
Provision for expansion has been made in the
construction of these plants because this new industry
is expected to play a part in the Commonwealth’s
post-war economy.
PROCESS: Trolley lines are set in the
floor of the factory to allow movement
of the processing trays (at left), to and
from the various process rooms.


[o pp. pag« 761
WORKS DIRECTORATE


CHAPTER
5
WORKS DIRECTORATE
The Works Directorate of the Allied Works
Council is under the control of the Assistant
Director-General of Allied Works and the
Deputy Director-General of Allied Works.
The Directorate comprises four main sections
1. Directorate of Architecture,
2. Directorate of Engineering,
3. Directorate of Works (Air Services),
4. Directorate of Administration,
and is responsible for formulating works policies for
the Allied Works Council, for liaison with client
departments on architectural and engineering matters,
co-ordination of the Council’s works activities, and
the progress of works carried out.
The functions of the various sections are as follow:
DIRECTORATE OF ARCHITECTURE.
The Directorate of Architecture is responsible
for formulating policy for the design and execution
of architectural works, and is under the leadership
of the Director of Architecture, who controls the
central or headquarters office architectural staff,
headed by the Superintending Architect and the
Designing Architect.
This organisation comprises the Central Design
office and the Barracks Design office, in which pre-
liminary plans and specifications for all architectural
undertakings are drawn up in consultation with client
departments.
When all the necessary preliminaries, such as
design and materials, have been arranged and requisi-
tions have been received from client departments, the
Central Office passes the project on to the archi-
tectural staffs of the various state branches.
The Deputy Directors-General and Works Directors
in the States are responsible for the preparation of
working drawings, arrangement of contracts, and the
erection, supervision, and co-ordination of the works
and services.
Close liaison is also effected between the Directorate
of Architecture and other sections to facilitate the
carrying out of the services required on the project
in hand.
Architectural works designed, planned, and co-
ordinated include:—Army camps throughout Aus-
tralia and in the islands north of Australia; aero-
dromes; naval victualling yards, naval depots, naval
training establishments; military hospitals, prisoner
of war camps, standard plans for magazines, standard
plans for all types of Army and Naval buildings;
ordnance workshops; Army and Navy drill halls;
wireless stations, signal depots; transport stores;
munition factories, munition annexes; camouflage
designs, A.R.P. designs; aircraft production work-
shops; marine engine shops; meteorological stations;
rifle and gun ranges; P.M.G. works; administrative
blocks; recreation huts, houses for munition workers;
secret wireless experimental stations, and secret
operational stations.
DIRECTORATE OF ENGINEERING.
The Directorate of Engineering is responsible for
formulating engineering works policy for the Allied
Works Council, for liaison with client departments
on engineering matters, co-ordination and direction of
the Council’s engineering activities, and progress of
engineering works being carried out by the Council,
with the exception of the Sydney Graving Dock,
responsibility for which rests with the Deputy
Director-General of Allied Works.
After consultation with the client department, in-
structions are issued to the various State offices of
the Allied Works Council, with such interpretation
and direction as may be necessary. Responsibility for
execution then rests with the various Deputy Directors-
General and Works Directors, who have their own
designing and supervisory engineering staffs.
The Director of Engineering is assisted by a Chief
Civil Engineer, a Chief Mechanical Engineer, a Chief
Electrical Engineer and a Construction Engineer.


Each of the three Chief Engineers is responsible
for liaison with other departments and with the
Council’s Directorate of Architecture on all matters
falling within his particular branch.
Because the greater proportion of the engineering
works carried out appertain to civil engineering, the
Chief Civil Engineer, besides maintaining general
liaison with all client departments, has special officers
for liaison with the Departments of the Navy, Army,
Air, Munitions, and Civil Aviation, from whose
requirements the main engineering problems arise.
In regard to design, each Chief Engineer has a
small designing staff which deals with preliminary
problems of design and problems common to more
than one State. But as far as practicable, detailed
design is carried out by the engineering staffs of the
Deputy Directors-General and Works Directors.
Where problems of a specialised nature arise, it
is the general policy to utilise, where possible, the
services of the designing staffs of state instrumentali-
ties, which have the requisite specialised knowledge,
rather than for the Allied Works Council to build up
its own specialised staffs. State instrumentalities have
willingly given very considerable assistance in this
matter.
In the petroleum products storage programme,
design and organisation were largely carried out by
the major oil companies on behalf of the Allied
Works Council, but recently the Council agreed with
these companies that the work in hand, because of
its nature and location, could be carried out more
expeditiously by the Council. To this end, two of
the major oil companies each made a senior officer
available for full-time duty with the Council. These
officers are attached to the staff of the Chief Civil
Engineer.
Assistance is rendered to the various State branches
in securing equipment and supplies unobtainable
locally.
As in the pre-war period construction of engineer-
ing works was largely in the hands of state instru-
mentalities, there were comparatively few private
organisations capable of carrying out works of the
type and magnitude entrusted to the Council. Where
feasible, these have been used. It was, however, early
apparent that most of the engineering projects would
have to be carried out by day labour.
Rather than build up a large supervisory organisa-
tion of its own, the Allied Works Council has enlisted
the services of a large number of state instrumentalities
to organise and supervise much of its engineering
construction programme, and has thus obtained the
benefit of the established organisations and trained
staffs, as well as the accumulated experience of these
instrumentalities. The help afforded by such instru-
mentalities has been of considerable assistance to the
Council.
Although day labour organisations directly under
the control of the Allied Works Council exist in all
States, it is only in the Northern Territory that large
numbers of men are directly employed, and even in
that area, organisations from Victoria, South Aus-
tralia, New South Wales, Queensland, and Western
Australia have, and in many cases are still, carrying
out work for the Council.
Under this arrangement, progress of the work is
largely in the hands of the various State bodies
engaged thereon, and the Council’s supervisory
engineering staff, in so far as construction is con-
cerned, acts largely in a co-ordinating and liaison
capacity.
However, it is the responsibility of the Construction
Engineer of the Directorate to watch progress and
to take, through the Council’s state staffs, such steps
as may be necessary to overcome the many difficulties
which, under present-day conditions, tend to retard
the expeditious completion of works.
As the wide demands for the services of trained
engineers have made it difficult to build up a technical
staff of sufficient strength to deal with all immediate
needs, it has not been possible to take full advantage
of opportunities which the large and varied engineering
programme has presented of obtaining data of interest
and value to the engineering profession. However,
the Allied Works Council has initiated investigations
into the following matters: —
(i) The use of cement as a means of stabilising
soils for construction of aerodrome run-
ways.
(ii) The behaviour of bituminous surfacing in
road and runway pavements.
(iii) The behaviour of Australian hardwood as
a structural material.
WORKS DIRECTORATE (AIR SERVICES)
By a War Cabinet minute, dated April 4, 1940, it
was decided to establish an Air Force Directorate of
Works and Buildings, to be staffed by officers of the
Department of the Interior.
Under the directorship of a Department of Interior
Works Director, this Directorate was made responsible
for the preparation, under instructions from Air


Board, of schemes of works for the Department of
Air. It was also to act in an advisory capacity to
the Air Board.
The Air Directorate’s staff was to remain under
the control of the Department of the Interior in
respect to those responsibilities then vested in that
department.
Owing to the difficulty of completely staffing the
new directorate with civilians, it was later agreed to
augment it with Air Force personnel.
Certain civilian officers of the directorate, including
the Director (Group-Captain Knox), were granted
honorary commissions with the R.A.A.F., with appro-
priate rank.
On formation of the Allied Works Council in
February, 1942, the Works Directorate (Air Services),
along with other sections of the Works and Services
Branches of the Department of the Interior, was
absorbed into the new organisation.
The Air Force Directorate of Works and Buildings
has both administrative and executive functions.
Its administrative functions are primarily the
advising of the Air Board on all works matters, adopt-
ing necessary procedure for initiation of a project, and
provision of funds.
Its executive functions cover surveys of sites, pre-
paration of working drawings, specifications and
estimates, and the exercise of a measure of control
over execution of projects from preliminary to final
stages. These executive functions are subdivided into
the following:—
Property transactions;
Preparation of layout plans of aerodromes and
designs of new buildings;
Supervision and maintenance of new buildings;
Supply of furniture and fittings, other than
barrack and camp furniture and equipment;
Supervision and installation of workshop
machinery and machine tools;
Provision of accommodation;
Seaplane moorings provision, laying, and
maintenance;
Layout of bombing and gunnery ranges;
Direction of technical functions of works wings,
mobile works squadrons, works maintenance
units, works supply units, survey and design
units, and works training units;
Direction of Divisional Works Offices.
Organisation of the Directorate comprises the
Director, an Assistant Director, Administration (Ser-
vice), Administration (Civilian), Aerodrome, Archi-
tectural, Engineering, Property and Plan Records.
State Divisional Works Offices, which are miniature
replicas of the Directorate, have been established to
decentralise the work of the Directorate of Works and
Buildings. They exercise both administrative and
executive functions as outlined above.
At June 30, 1943, the staff of the Directorate com-
prised :
Service Personnel 330
Civilians 199
Total 529
The Works Director (Air Services), as Director
of Works and Buildings, R.A.A.F., is the Department
of Air representative on the Allied Works Council.
All plant and materials for works carried out by
the Directorate when employing Service personnel in
forward areas are supplied by the Mechanical Equip-
ment and Materials Supply Directorate of the Allied
Works Council.
DIRECTORATE OF ADMINISTRATION.
The Directorate of Administration, Works and
Services Branch, Allied Works Council, is controlled
by the Director of Administration.
Its functions include:—
(i) The maintenance of complete staff records
for permanent organisation and officers of
the Works and Services Branch, staff trans-
fers, promotions, increments, reclassification
of positions, and the preparation of periodi-
cal advices and returns to the Permanent
Head, Public Service Board and Superannua-
tion Board, as required under the Public
Service Act and Regulations;
(ii) The handling of works requisitions received
from client departments, the authorisation
of funds for such works, and issue of advices
to the state branches of the Allied Works
Council;
(iii) Works contracts and agreements and asso-
ciated problems arising therefrom;
(iv) The maintenance of complete records and
the issue of correspondence on works matters
to client departments and state branches of
of the Council;
(v) The co-ordination of the various sections of
the Directorate of Works on administrative
matters generally.
Thus this .third directorate ties together the various
functions of the other three directorates which form
the Works Directorate.




CHAPTER
6
FINANCE DIRECTORATE
When the Allied Works Council assumed responsibi-
lity for the carrying out of the Allied Works programme,
there were Accounts Sections in the Works and Services
Branch of the Department of the Interior, with adminis-
trative control in Canberra.
To Develop and strengthen this organisation, co-
ordinate and make maximum use of facilities
available in state instrumentalities, and financially
control the entirely new activities entered into, the
Allied Works Council’s Finance Directorate was
formed and Mr. W. K. Black appointed Director of
Finance on May 4, 1942.
ORGANISATION.
The rapid development associated with the vast
increase in the works programme made necessary a
complete reorganisation of the financial administra-
tion.
The Director assumed complete responsibility for
existing accounting in the Works and Services branches
throughout the Commonwealth and initiated new
methods to cope with the financial control of the
establishment and maintenance of the newly-formed
Civil Constructional Corps.
A vast amount of accounting work, covering the
provision of accommodation, messing, canteens,
medical and dental services, payment of allotments,
establishment of training camps, employment and
call-up bureaux, bulk supply of rations, provision of
compensation, sick leave, holiday pay, travelling
expenses, waiting time, and maintenance of personal
records is associated with the Civil Constructional
Corps.
Expansion of the works programme and
establishment of the Civil Constructional Corps also
brought a huge increase in the Council’s bulk
purchasing activities, through the Directorate of
Mechanical Equipment and Materials Supply.
Within the period under review, accounting
procedure instructions were drawn up and issued
throughout Australia for use in Accounts Branches
and by Works Instrumentalities, to ensure all accounts
being promptly made up, checked and paid, all
materials and equipment issued being either invoiced
or issued on a rental basis, recoveries for these items
being promptly brought to account, and finally to
maintain an adequate internal audit of these activities.
Despite the obstacles that had to be surmounted, an
efficient and smooth functioning organisation now
exists.
Accounting staff directly under the control of the
Director of Finance and distributed throughout the
Commonwealth exceeds 900.


CAPITAL
WORKS
PROGRAMME
Summary of Authorisations
, Commitments and
Expenditure as at
30th June, 1943.
Departments
Authorisa■
Commit■
Expen-
tions
merits
diture
U.S.A.S.O.S
33,383,098
24,696,590
20,206,686
Army
14,993,782
13,356,378
11,370,992
Munitions
11,961,344
10,376,770
8,602,118
Air
11,071,320
8,369,894
6,606,352
Navy
5,251,157
4,971,643
4,017,847
Other Administrations
2,338,249
1,902,679
1,386,862
Supply and Shipping
2,007,025
1,783,533
1,069,408
Aircraft Production ..
1,456,912
1,328,982
1,084,263
P.M.G.’s
952,329
726,465
554,735
Civil Aviation
660,052
440,941
256,492
Interior
576,888
475,110
268,393
Repatriation
280,395
136,224
59,038
Trade and Customs ..
201,629
199,820
182,205
Health
173,678
143,813
112,833
Defence
114,407
88,351
78,061
Prime Minister’s .. ..
52,397
50,256
32,411
Lab. and Nat. Service
30,777
29,158
25,190
Parliament
16,588
15,950
8,292
Commerce
15,731
15,415
13,903
Treasury
13,992
9,101
7,815
Attorney General’s ..
8,948
6,901
6,512
Post-war Reconstr’n ..
7,109
4,118
3,775
War Org. Industry ..
4,929
4,484
3,854
Social Services
3,333
2,754
2,436
Information
762
651
637
External Affairs
332
301
288
TOTALS .. ..
85,577,163
69,136,287
55,961,398
SUMMARY OF
STATES
Queensland
24,662,325
20,172,546
18,306,781
New South Wales ..
24,070,209
21,790,988
17,516,037
Victoria
15,995,021
13,208,192
10,546,040
Western Australia .. ..
7,751,805
4,571,006
3,331,167
Northern Territory ..
6,974,434
4,739,384
2,901,784
South Australia
4,628,677
3,777,837
2,836,632
A.C.T
786,979
660,816
357,142
Port Moresby
615,928
137,681
137,677
Tasmania
91,785
77,837
28,138
TOTALS
85,577,163
69,136,287
55,961,398
CAPITAL WORKS EXPENDITURE.
The greatest amount of financial responsibility and
accounting activity is associated with the capital works
programme. The works are mainly carried out by
day labour or contract. In regard to contract work,
it became virtually impossible to work on the peace-
time basis of calling for tenders and letting a contract
on a lump sum basis. Because of increased costs of
raw materials and labour and uncertainties associated
with both of these major expenditure items,
contractors could not be expected to supply a fixed
price.
This situation resulted in adoption of the cost-plus-
a-fixed-fee basis for execution of the bulk of works
carried out by private contractors. It provided for,
broadly:—
(i) Completion of works within specified dates.
(ii) Payment to contractors of actual costs of
executing work, nature of costs to be
allowed being defined in the agreement,
and
(iii) Payment to contractors of a fixed fee based
on estimated costs of works.
This procedure placed a heavy responsibility on the
Director of Finance as it necesitated the introduction
of a new system of financial investigation and check
for each contract let, so that Commonwealth interests
might be effectively safeguarded.
The remarkable expansion in the constructional
programme may be seen at a glance from the
following summary showing the total expenditure on
capital works over the last four financial years; —
Year ended Total Expenditure
June 30, 1940 £6,713,730
June 30, 1941 £18,582,157
June 30, 1942 £32,297,808
June 30, 1943 £55,961,398
The following table illustrates the total authorized
programme for the financial year ended June 30,
1943, commitments incurred in respect of authorised
works, and actual expenditure. These three
classifications are split up to indicate the volume in
respect of each department and United States Army
Services of Supply, and also the totals in respect of
each of the various States. In this table, particulars
given under the State headings do not necessarily
reflect true expenditure in the various States as, in
many instances, expenditure is recorded in one State
in respect of works actually carried out in another.
For example, the bulk of expenditure on Tasmanian
works is actually recorded in Victorian figures.
A graphic illustration of the development of the
works programme during the year is contained in the
chart on page 81. Approximately £37 million of
authorised works were brought forward from the
previous financial year, and commitments totalling
approximately £l7 million were also carried forward.
At the commencement of the year, a bold estimate
was made of expenditure likely to be achieved, and
from the outset an effort was made to reach an average
expenditure of £1 million per week. How this
estimate was not only achieved but exceeded, is also
shown in the graph.


RECORD OF MONTHLY EXPENDITURE
Financial Year, 1942-1943.
MONTHLY EXPENDITURE BY STATES
July
August
1942
September
October
November December
January
February
1943
March
April
May
June
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
N.S.W
1,096,087
1,679,558
1,012,304
1,350,708
1,647,224
1,328,791
1,697,756
1,305,752
1,951,282
1,234,599
1,192,755
2,019,221
Vic
798,881
1,051,443
508,930
1,126,500
796,108
611,863
1,079,526
812,538
873,131
934,320
872,742
1,080,058
Q’land ....
255,755
541,416
2,328,772
868,775
2,212,161
1,023,475
1,575,398
1,132,153
1,816,146
1,838,040
1,537,405
3,177,285
S.A
103,795
266,808
335,138
220,411
275,500
262,357
247,401
155,684
196,468
246,005
216,327
310,738
W.A
74,281
129,947
206,141
235,981
138,473
203,323
222,983
425,370
345,591
388,696
315,837
644,544
Tas
2,836
2,500
2,025
2,469
3,108
3,893
2,011
1,360
1,323
1,181
207
5,225
N.T
104,617
58,863
164,797
372,688
296,426
257,058
670,227
231,382
(Credit)
473,777
113,391
174,595
446,727
Pt. M
3,800
18,183
—
17,639
4,763
6,926
30,205
9,019
15.490
12,575
13,684
7,608
A.C.T
22,960
46,935
56,210
23,274
19,453
27,641
22,188
29,022
20,682
21,555
26,069
41,153
CUMULATIVE EXPENDITURE BY
STATES
July
August
1942
September
October
November December
January
February
1943
March
April
May
June
£A
£A
£ A
£A
£ A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
£A
N.S.W
1,096,087
2,775,645
3,787,949
5,138,657
6,785,881
8,114,672
9,812,428
11,118,180
13,069,462
14,304,061
15,496,816
17,516,037
Vic
798,881
1,850,324
2,359,254
3,485,754
4,281,862
4,893,725
5,973,251
6,785,789
7,658,920
8,593,240
9,465,982
10,546,040
Q’land ....
255,755
797,171
3,125,943
3,994,718
6,206,879
7,230,354
8,805,752
9,937,905
11,754,051
13,592,091
15,129,496
18,306,781
S.A
103,795
370,603
705,741
926,152
1,201,652
1,464,009
1,711,410
1,867,094
2,063,562
2,309,567
2,525,894
2,836,632
W.A
74,281
204,282
410,369
646,350
784,823
988,146
1,211,129
1,636,499
1,982,090
2,370,786
2,686,623
3,331,167
Tas
2,836
5,336
7,361
9,830
12,938
16,831
18,842
20,202
21,525
22,706
22,913
28,138
N.T
104,617
163,480
328,277
700,965
997,391
1,254,449
1,924,676
1,693,294
2,167,071
2,280,462
2,455,057
2,901,784
Pt. M
3,800
21,983
19,768
37,407
42,170
49,096
79,301
88,320
103,810
116,385
130,069
137,677
A.C.T
22,960
69,895
126,105
149,379
168,832
196,473
218,661
247,683
268,365
289,920
315,989
357,142
AUSTRALIAN TOTALS
July
August
1942
September October
November December January
February
1943
March April
May
June
Month ....
Progress.
£A
2.463.012
2.463.012
£A
3,795,653
6,258,665
£ A
4,612,102
10,870,767
£A
4,218,445
15,089,212
£A £A £ A
5,393,216 3,725,327 5,547,695
20,482,428 24,207,755 29,755,450
£ A
3,639,516
33,394,966
£A
5,693,890
39,088,856
£A
4,790,362
43,879,218
£ A
4,349,621
48,228,839
£A
7,732,559
55,961,398
PAGE 81
PROGRESSIVE AUTHORISATIONS,
COMMITMENTS AND
EXPENDITURE,
1942/43.
With Expenditure Target,
£1,000,000 Weekly.
An additional analysis is
given in the next table,
which sets out expenditure
for each month of the finan-
cial year under review,
giving monthly expenditure
recorded in each State,
cumulative total for each
month, and Australian monthly and progressive totals.
Here again, however, expenditure shown against each
state is not actually a true picture of works carried
out in that State.


Total expenditure recorded in the financial ledgers in the various States may
be quickly appreciated for comparative purposes from the following graph:—
EXPENDITURE ON CAPITAL WORKS 1942-1943
BULK PURCHASES AND
INDIRECT EXPENDITURE.
In normal times, it is practicable to allocate most
expenditure directly against approved requisitions for
works, and buying activities are therefore restricted
to known and immediate requirements, but the
unprecedented activities of the Council soon made it
apparent that large sums of money would have to
be spent to secure bulk supplies of plant, materials
and equipment in excess of current needs.
To facilitate control of what might be termed its
“indirect expenditure,” an Allied Works Council
account was opened up with Treasury approval, styled
the “Allied Works Plant and Materials Trust
Account,” which was to be used for the following
defined purposes: —
“For purchase of plant and materials, construc-
tion of camps for workers, payment of certain
wages and such other expenditure as may be
necessary in connection with administration of
the National Security (Allied Works) Regula-
tions and conduct of other works.”
To June 30, 1943, a working advance of £3'/2
million was provided for this account, against which
initial expenditure is charged pending reimburse-
ment.
Principal items financed through the Trust
Account are: : —
Bulk purchases of plant, equipment, and
materials.
Provision of Civil Constructional Corps pool
and transit camps and training schools, pay-
ment of compensation, sick leave, holiday pay,
annual leave, waiting time, travelling expenses,
etc., of members of the Corps, which cannot
be charged against any one particular job.
Provision of storage facilities for bulk purchases
by the Council, and payment of large cartage,
freight, and shipping accounts.
Provision of Civil Constructional Corps canteens
throughout Australia, and provision of camp
messing whilst in pool, transit, or group
camps.


PLANT AND MATERIAL TRUST ACCOUNT
OPERATIONS TO 30th JUNE, 1943
Summary of Authorisations, Commitments and Expenditure
State
Balance Cash
Authorisations Commitments Claims Passed Required at
for Payment Early Date
Northern Territory
143,680
96,350
69,046 27,304
Queensland
1,941,362
1,887,015
1,123,231 763,784
New South Wales ...
2,090,414
2,093.820
1,907,391 186,429
Victoria _
11,310,224
11,309,991
4,854,971 6,455,020
South Australia ....
6,959
6,969
6,969 —
Western Australia ...
151,777
67,366
60,988 6,378
TOTALS ....
£15,644,416
15,461,511
8,022,596 7,438,915
Analysis of Cash Operations
Section
if Gross
Payments
Gross
Recoveries
Net
Expenditure
1.
A.W.C. Plant on Hire
1,397,447
0
10
970,113
9
4
427,333
11
6
3.
Equipment and Materials in Stock
5,798,113
19
0
2,966,554
10
1
2,831,559
8
11
4.
Works Oncost
556,206
18
11
933,530
13
8
Cr. 377,323
14
9
5.
Plant and Materials Oncost
190,624
16
5
216,153
10
11
Cr. 25,528
14
6
6.
Canteen Supplies
250,174
6
7
282,523
12
2
Cr. 32,349
5
7
7.
Messing Costs
174,349
7
6
78,851
12
3
95,497
15
3
8.
Cash Advances
429,104
8
9
283,715
8
11
145,388
19
10
9.
Hutments for C.C.C.
accommodation
178,538
10
7
166,473
19
6
12,064
11
1
10.
Compensation Expenditure for
C.C.C. members
23,222
17
0
142,248
13
7
Cr. 119,025
16
7
11.
A.W.C. Repair Workshops
60,870
0
7
60,870
0
7
12.
Bulk Purchases Camouflage
Materials
505,070
5
4
215,082
18
9
289,987
6
7
13.
Estimated Liabilities
Cr. 92,540
12
0
92,540
12
0
TOTALS
£9,471,181
19
6
6,255,248
9
2
3,215,933
10
4
Also, purchase and supply of pre-fabricated huts,
used largely as portable camp accommodation,
provision of repair workshop facilities in various
centres for repair of the Council’s plant, and
advance of cash to various instrumentalities for
payment of allotments to interstate dependants
of Corps members, and other purposes.
This expenditure is recovered by charge upon issue
against approved works by cash from various Service
Departments and canteens, and by transfer to Division
110 A in the case of supplies made available to
U.S.A.S.O.S. under Reciprocal Lend-Lease terms and
conditions. The bulk of the cost of the Council’s
plant is recovered by rental charges, calculated to
liquidate capital cost within a fairly short period,
while indirect costs associated with the Civil Con-
structional Corps are recovered by a works oncost
levied, originally as a percentage on wages and, later,
as a percentage on the total expenditure on capital
works. Cost of storage, freight, and shipping
charges are also recovered by percentage oncosts, but
the balance of the transactions are financed by direct
charge.
Operations of this account are shown in the fol-
lowing summary of authorisations, commitments, and
expenditure as at June 30, 1943. Authorisations and
commitments approximate £15% million, and actual
expenditure exceeds £9 million, of which more than
£6 million has been recovered by means of cash
adjustment, rentals, and transfers against Reciprocal
Lend-Lease Accounts. Outstanding expenditure,
which exceeds £3 million, is additional to -the capital
works expenditure of £56 million.
if Includes payments for interstate transfers.
To control the expenditure and recoveries financed
through the Allied Works Plant and Materials Trust
Account, bi-monthly returns are forwarded from all
branches to the Finance Directorate. Movement of
both expenditure and recoveries is illustrated for
each fortnightly period over the last six months of
the financial year by the following chart:—


DEBITS AND CREDITS TO PLANT & MATERIALS TRUST ACCOUNT
STAFF TRAINING.
As in other directorates, acute shortage of com-
petent personnel seriously retarded the staff expansion
that was essential. Apart altogether from the well-
known shortage of qualified accountants, the
Directorate was faced with the problem of making
efficient, in as short a time possible, the men avail-
able, who, although capable in other spheres,
possessed little knowledge of Treasury accounting.
The magnitude of operations, and the ramifications
of the Allied Works Council, are of such a vast and
varied character that it is difficult for any new staff
member to get immediately a proper appreciation of
the Council’s major activities, no matter what his
capacity may be.
As there are unrivalled facilities for acquiring this
knowledge in the Finance Directorate, which is
responsible for the financial control of the whole
of the Council’s activities, and is closely connected
with the whole field of operation, the Director of
Finance decided to establish a staff training school.
An administrative staff training course was mapped
out, designed to give, not only a broad outline of
the Council’s activities, but also to illustrate govern-
mental accounting procedure methods and routine.
The school has trained more than 40 new staff
members, who have been sent to various administra-
tive positions throughout Australia.
GENERAL.
Behind the broad outline presented in figures and
graphs lies a range of operations, each of which
brings its own peculiar accounting and auditing
procedure difficulties.
Distinctive treatment is necessary for effective
financial control of such activities as the running of
sawmills, operation of mica mines and quarries, and
administration of the Civil Aliens Corps.
During the year, the record total of approximately
220,000 claims was passed to the Treasury for pay-
ment by all branches. Many claims so passed were
of a composite nature. Therefore this total does not
by any means give an adequate picture of the total
volume of accounts dealt with.
There was, at June 30, 1943, no evidence of any
slackening in the rate of expenditure for the Common-
wealth as a whole, and each week sees additions to
staffs of Accounts branches.


CHAPTER
7
PERSONNEL DIRECTORATE
Brought into existence by the grim exigency of total war, the Civil
Constructional Corps has proved the wisdom of its conception.
Unprecedented in the history of Australian labor
organisation and control, the Corps has, with few
exceptions, worked efficiently and without friction.
As an integrant section of the organisation of the
Allied Works Council, the Personnel Directorate,
which controls the Civil Constructional Corps, has
an achievement record of which, considering the
difficulties under which it has worked, it may be
justly proud.
While apparent mistakes and errors were com-
mitted in the formative stages, these can now be
placed in their true historical perspective and appear
almost insignificant when contrasted with the work
achieved by the Personnel Directorate in the days
of urgent improvisation to meet the challenge of
invasion.
With a membership of 53,518 at June 30, 1943,
the Civil Constructional Corps is now firmly estab-
lished.
To administer and control the Corps, a Personnel
Directorate staff of 1,562 persons has been built up
throughout Australia under the directorship of Mr.
D. F. H. Packer, who was appointed Director of
Personnel on March 13, 1942.
In the establishment and operation of the Corps
to June 30, 1943, the Directorate spent £178,538 on
hut accommodation, £70,000 on medical services
(exclusive of private medical fees and hospitalisa-
tion), £46,858 on training of cooks, motor transport
drivers, mechanics, and earth-moving equipment
operators. Civil Constructional Corps wages
amounted to £22,360,000 per year, representing an
average weekly earning of £B/0/8 per man.
The Directorate’s Supply Department was catering
for more than 1,000,000 meals a week, at a cost of
£45,000, or £2,340,000 a year.
In the period under review, the Directorate trans-
ferred 6,550 men to Queensland and 4,230 men to
the Northern Territory from southern States, for
work on most urgent projects.
HISTORY.
The Civil Constructional Corps was created by the
promulgation on April 14, 1942, of National Security
(Allied Works) Regulation No. 170, which em-
powered the Director-General of Allied Works “to
establish a Civil Constructional Corps, consisting of
persons who volunteer and are accepted for service
in the Corps and persons who are directed to serve
in the Corps.”
Between March 13, 1942, the date of establishment
of the Personnel Directorate, and the establishment
of the Civil Constructional Corps, labor for Allied
and Australian defence works programmes had been
recruited on a purely voluntary basis. These recruit-
ments were carried out with the co-operation of state
instrumentalities and allied bodies.
As the gigantic programme of works required by
the Allied Chiefs of Staff could not be satisfactorily
carried out under this voluntary system, on the
recommendation of the Director-General of Allied
Works, and after many conferences at Canberra,
regulations governing establishment and control of
the Civil Constructional Corps were promulgated.
In the weeks preceding formation of the Civil
Constructional Corps, and at a time when the menace
of Japanese invasion loomed large, a most spectacular
labor direction and organisation feat was performed
by the Personnel Directorate.
Working day and night in the race against time,
the Directorate’s staff recruited workmen from Vic-
toria and New South Wales, and poured them in
an endless stream on to the Al.-ranking priority
aeroplane assembly and repair depot at Tocumwal




(N.S.W.). In one day, more than 1,000 men were
placed on the project. “Flying squads” had to be
organised to feed, shelter, and accommodate them.
Simultaneous with this activity, the Directorate
was receiving urgent calls for labor to fill the
demands of the feverish construction programmes in
other states.
First step in the establishment of the Corps was
the appointment of Deputy Directors of Personnel,
and the opening of Civil Constructional Corps enrol-
ment bureaux in Victoria, JNew South Wales, Queens-
land, and Western Australia.
First appointment was that of Mr. W. Stewart
Howard as Deputy Director of Personnel in New
South Wales. He was then Secretary to the New
South Wales Works Co-ordination Committee.
Other appointments were: Mr. G. Remington, who
had been acting as a liaison officer between the De-
partment of War Organisation of Industry and the
Allied Works Council, to Queensland, Mr. R. Keane
to Victoria and Mr. G. W. Lavater to Western Aus-
tralia.
First large-scale operation on the part of the State
bureaux was the finding of labor for high-priority
projects being carried out in their respective States.
ORIGINAL: Walter Jell, a mechanical scoop operator,
of Melbourne, first member of the Civil Constructional
Corps.
First man to be enrolled in the Civil Constructional
Corps was Walter Jell, of Melbourne. He was en-
rolled on a job in Melbourne on April 29, 1942.
At June 30, 1943, he was working on an Allied Works
Council project in the Northern Territory.
First call-up of men for the Civil Constructional
Corps took place in Victoria on May 4, 1942. Other
first enrolment dates were: —
New South Wales June 10, 1942.
Queensland July 6, 1942.
Western Australia July 28, 1942.
South Australia September 29, 1942.
Tasmania February 16, 1943.
Although men had been despatched by the Per-
sonnel Directorate to urgent works in the Northern
Territory almost from the beginning of its activities,
it was not until July, 1942, that this work became
a prominent feature of the Directorate’s programme.
On July 1, 1942, an appeal was launched in
Broken Hill for volunteers to form a mobile unit
for the carrying out of vitally urgent works in
Darwin.
After being medically examined, a group of 156
men was chosen from the volunteers. The first batch
of 53 men left Broken Hill for Darwin on July 10.
They were followed by the remaining 103 men on
July 22.
A number of these men had worked for the Allied
Works Council, as a mobile unit of “shock workers,”
at Tocumwal (N.S.W.) and Salisbury (S.A.), before
establishment of the Civil Constructional Corps.
To supplement the Broken Hill party, 134 men
were selected in Melbourne from hundreds who
responded to a call for volunteers. First batch of
these men, numbering 33, was despatched from Mel-
bourne on July 19. They were followed by 89 men
on July 26, and a final batch of 12 on July 30.
During their stay of nine months in the Darwin
area, these men were frequently exposed to enemy
air raids while carrying out their work. A few
minor casualties were sustained.
Coincident with this movement, 1,000 carpenters
were transferred from New South Wales to Queens-
land at the rate of 50 a day, in response to a call
from that State for reinforcements.
EXAMINATION: Three Melbourne members of the No. 1
Mobile Unit of the Civil Constructional Corps await
medical examination before being despatched to Darwin.
87




JUNGLE: On their first day in Darwin, the No. 1 Mobile Unit of the Civil Constructional Corps construct their camp in a tropical setting.
To overcome tire marked dearth of skilled men,
it was decided at this stage to form a school in
Melbourne for the training of truck drivers and
maintenance men. This was the beginning of the
Mechanical Training Section of the Directorate, the
history of which is detailed below.
At the end of August, 700 men were transferred
to Townsville to fill heavy demands in that area.
In the first week of September, 1942, the whole-
sale transfer of men from New South Wales and
Victoria to Queensland for work on the northern
section ol the Inland Defence Road began. In the
following eight months, more than 3,000 men were
transferred interstate to work on that project.
Supervision of this huge transfer task was the
responsibility of Assistant Director of Personnel
J. M. Bristow, who, with his headquarters in Brisbane,
operated over the 102 miles covered by the road.
Organisation and control of labor on the vast
project was one of the largest of the Personnel
Directorate’s undertakings in the period under review.
Based on Clermont, 13 camps were spread out along
the road. A slaughter yard was constructed to
provide the camps with fresh meat daily.
A field hospital at Clermont, and nine smaller
hospitals, were established. The base hospital was
equipped with a portable operating theatre, which
was dismantled on completion of the project, and is
held in readiness for assembly and use on some
future project of like proportions.
On January 18, 1943, the Queensland Cabinet
recommended five members of the Civil Construe-
tional Corps for recognition of their bravery in
assisting police and soldiers to extinguish a bush fire
in a bomb dump at Torrens Creek (North Queens-
land!, on October 17, 1942. The men were: James
McSharrv, John Ferrett, Charles Bartley, Walter H.
Lowe, and Patrick McGoldrick. (The British
Empire Medal (civilian division! was awarded to
the men on Julv 30, 1943.1
During an air raid on Darwin on March 15, 1943,
four Victorian members of the Civil Constructional
Corps risked their lives to remove cases of gelignite
from a bombed Allied Works Council store. The
men were: Arthur Hill, Colin Munro, Henry Manlein,
and Leslie Poulter.
The first members of the Civil Constructional
Corps to leave Australia for duty beyond the main-
land left Sydney on April 3, 1943, for New Guinea.
EMBARKATION; Bound for New Guinea, the first
members of the Civil Constructional Corps to leave the
Australian mainland assemble at the point of departure.
89


The party comprised 39 volunteer Civil Construc-
tional Corps tradesmen, cooks, and laborers, required
for work on behalf of the United States Forces at
Port Moresby.
At June 30, 1943, other members of the Civil
Constructional Corps had been working for eight
months on Thursday and Horn Islands in the Torres
Strait, and on several smaller islands off the east
coast of Queensland. Carrying out their work under
almost regular enemy action, and in the most trying
climatic conditions, they have overcome seemingly
insuperable geographical difficulties.
ORGANISATION.
Apart from the administrative sections which
control the actual flow of labor to Allied Works
Council projects, the Personnel Directorate is divided
into .seven main sections Supply, Medical Services,
Compensation, Industrial, Mechanical Training, Legal,
and Civil Aliens Corps.
Each of these sections is controlled by a Federal
officer with representatives in the States.
SUPPLY.
An Allied Works Council Supply Department was
established on April 12, 1942, to handle purchasing
for both the Personnel and Mechanical Equipment
Directorates.
With the rapid and vast expansion of the Civil
Constructional Corps, it became necessary to divide
this department and establish a Supply Section within
the Personnel Directorate.
This was done by the appointment on June 30,
1942, of a Commonwealth Controller of Supplies.
Branches of the section were set up within the
Personnel branches in New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, and Western Australia.
Supplies for the Northern Territory are purchased
by the head office, which also effects some purchases
for the other States.
LIFE IN THE C.C.C.
1. C.C.C. at basket ball. 3. Mobile canteen.
2. Indoor recreation. 4. Camp canteen.


The Supply Section’s functions are: —Catering for
Civil Constructional Corps camps; purchase and
supply of certain camp equipment; supply of re-
frigerators and cool rooms for camps; purchase and
resale of goods through camp canteens; purchase
and supply of equipment issued free to members of
the Corps; training of Civil Constructional Corps
cooks; purchase of material and supervision of its
manufacutre into clothes; purchase of medical
supplies; provision of certain amenities.
CATERING: All Civil Constructional Corps
workers required to live in camps are supplied with
free food composed of the basic Army ration, plus
a supplementary ration of IVsd. to 3d. per man
per day, according to the locality. Supplementary
rations include fruit, extra meat, and condiments.
At June 30, 1943, there were 53,518 members
of the Civil Constructional Corps, the feeding of
whom involved provision of more than 1,000,000
meals a week at a cost of approximately £2,340,000
per year.
A graphic example of the supply problems asso-
ciated with the feeding of Corps members is pre-
sented in the following quantities of food supplied
for 3,000 men engaged for eight months on a huge
project in Queensland: —
Fresh meat 565,212 lbs.
Potatoes 280,226 lbs.
Fresh vegetables 704,597 lbs.
Bread 281,206 lbs.
Butter 53,626 lbs.
In addition to these items, more than 1,000,000
separate packages, including 28,800 tins of canned
vegetables, 243,000 paper bags for wrapping lunches,
6,580 bottles of Worcester sauce, and 1,200 30-ounce
tins of canned pineapple, were delivered on the
project.
5. A medical orderly treats a C.C.C. member in the First Aid hut.
6. C.C.C. workers eating in a Victorian camp mess hall.
7. Rendering first aid in a C.C.C. camp in North Australia.
8. Cooks preparing meal.


LAUNDRY: All facilities for laundering have
been provided for C.C.C. members in a New
South Wales staging camp.
REFRIGERATION: More than 200 cool-rooms of
150 c. ft. capacity have been installed in Civil Con-
structional Corps camps throughout Australia. An
additional 500 refrigerators of 5% c. ft. capacity have
also been installed.
EQUIPMENT: The following are issued on charge
to every Civil Constructional Corps worker upon
enrolment or posting to a camp: One knife, one
fork, one spoon, three plates, and one mug. Men
proceeding to northern areas are supplied free with
mosquito nets and water bottles.
The Supply Section is also responsible for the pro-
vision, free of charge, of tentage, camp beds (either
iron-frame or camp stretcher type), palliasses, and
straw. Tents are often used in tropical areas, in
preference to the prefabricated Masonite, bond-wood,
or corrugated-iron hutments.
The following is a list of some of the items covered
by this activity: —
Calico 325,000 yds.
Mosquito netting 500,000 yds.
Cheese cloth 200,000 yds.
Sand fly nets 40,000
Cotton duck 500,000 yds.
Tents 25,000
Stretchers, palliasses and
straw 60,000
Jute canvas for stretchers 52,000 yds.
CLOTHES MANUFACTURE: Clothing materials
are purchased by the Supply Section and passed out
to manufacturers for fabrication. Three hundred
thousand yards of flannelette for pyjamas and
3,750,000 yards of material for trousers, shirts, and
shorts, have been purchased for this purpose.
AMENITIES: A vote of £2O is allowed each camp
for the purchase of sporting equipment. Purchases
include basketballs, footballs, cricket sets, bobs sets,
table tennis sets, chess sets, dart boards, dominoes,
drafts, and community song books. Four hundred
and fifty radio sets costing £9,500 have been installed
in the camps.
MEDICAL SUPPLIES: Equipment, drugs, and
dressings for use in Civil Constructional Corps camp
first aid posts and hospitals are supplied free.
HUTMENTS: Ordered rows of huts make this
Queensland C.C.C. camp a miniature township.
TRAINING OF CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL
CORPS COOKS: Two schools have been established,
one at Maribyrnong (Vic.), and the other at Banks-
town (N.S.W.), for the training of Civil Construc-
tional Corps cooks. More than 200 men have been
trained to cook efficiently, using Army rations.
CANTEENS: To make accessible to Corps mem-
bers commodities which otherwise they would not
be able to purchase, 157 canteens have been estab-
lished in the camps, while seven mobile canteens
service the most inaccessible jobs.
Canteen stock purchases include such figures as: —
Tobacco, 6,240,000 ozs.
Sweets, tooth-paste, tooth brushes, razor blades
and general sundries sold in canteens, costing
more than £300,000.
Socks and stockings, 195,000 pairs.
Boots and shoes, 120,000 pairs.
Underwear, 150,000 garments.
MEDICAL SERVICES.
Satisfactory medical services have been established
on every Allied Works Council project throughout
the Commonwealth, on which 100 or more men are
working.


Arrangements have also been made for the
thorough medical examination of every man called
up for service in the Civil Constructional Corps, and
of every man who has developed disabilities which
appear likely to interfere with either his health or
his efficiency as a member of the Corps.
Before the appointment on December 17, 1942, of
Dr. H. Leighton Kesteven as Commonwealth Allied
Works Council Director of Medical Services, each
State in which the Civil Constructional Corps had
been established worked independently in the matter
of medical services. Attached to each enrolment
bureau was a medical section which carried out the
examination of men called up for service in the
Corps, while the placing of medical orderlies in
Civil Constructional Corps camps in the respective
States was dealt with bv the Labor Supply Section
of the respective bureaux.
In September, 1942, Dr. Kesteven, who was then
Chief Medical Officer for the Civil Constructional
Corps in New South Wales, was set the task of
organising the medical services for the Queensland
Inland Defence Road project, which was then be-
ginning.
VEGETABLES: A member of the C.C.C. tends
the vegetable garden which supplies a large
staging camp in Queensland.
Staff for the base hospital established at Clermont
and the nine medical aid posts attached to camps
along the road above and below Clermont was
appointed from New South Wales.
On his return from Queensland, Dr. Kesteven
reported on the urgent need for organisation of
medical services in that State, and for the proper
examination of men being called up for service
throughout the Commonwealth.
He was then appointed Director of Medical Ser-
vices, and charged with establishment and direction
of the necessary services throughout the Common-
wealth.
In the next three months, medical services were
organised in Queensland, medical aid posts being set
up at Townsville, Cairns, Charters Towers, Too-
woomba, Warwick, Wallangarra, at several projects
around Brisbane, and on the Atherton Tablelands.
In the same period, Deputy-Directors of Medical Ser-
vices were appointed in both New South Wales and
Queensland.
In March, 1943, a Deputy-Director of Medical
Services was appointed in Victoria.
Following an extensive survey' of conditions by
the Director, arrangements were made for the pro-
vision of medical aid posts and sick bays at a number
of localities in the Northern Territory.
Next step was the appointment of an Assistant
Medical Officer in charge of Queensland services,
north of the Tropic of Capricorn.
The Director also visited Hobart and Launceston,
and arranged for medical examination of men called
up in Tasmania. Similar arrangements have been
made to cope with call-ups in Adelaide.
Serving on Medical Services staff, both Federal
and State, are: —
22 Doctors.
53 Orderlies.
87 Sisters.
Before enrolment in the Civil Constructional Corps
every man is now subjected to a medical examina-
tion in order that his industrial capacity may be
ascertained. Because of the peculiar circumstances
surrounding the establishment of the Civil Construc-
tional Corps, it was not possible in the early stages
to medically examine each member.
If a man suffers any disability, his enrolment and
medical classification will depend largely on his
occupation before being called up for service in the
Corps.
STAGING CAMP: To accommodate men being
transferred interstate, this camp was estab-
lished close to a large Queensland centre.


Before being enrolled in the Corps a man is also
subjected to an X-ray if
(a) he has been in contact with a patient suf-
fering from tuberculosis.
(hi there are any clinical symptoms suggesting
the need for such an examination.
(c) he is proceeding to the Northern Territory
or North Queensland.
Every member of the Civil Constructional Corps
who is to proceed north of the Tropic of Capricorn
is blood grouped, and this grouping marked on his
BADGE: Lapel badge worn by members of
the Civil Constructional Corps.
identity card. Members proceeding north of the
Tropic of Capricorn are also immunised against the
typhoid group of diseases and tetanus.
To obviate wastage through physical unfitness and
improve the efficiency of the Corps, medical services
are constantly being expanded in an effort to keep
pace with the growth of the Corps.
COMPENSATION.
Administration of the special scheme of Workers’
Compensation approved by War Cabinet for members
of the Civil Constructional Corps is the responsibility
of the Directorate's Compensation Section.
At J line 30. 19-1-3. the scheme was operating in the
Northern Territory and Queensland. In other States,
existing Slate Workers’ Compensation schemes were
being used to cover members of the Corps.
l.'nder the Allied Works Council scheme, members
of the Civil Constructional Corps are covered against
accident for 24 hours of the day whilst in camp,
providing the injury is not the result of the member's
own default or wilful act. Men not in camps are
covered while at work and while travelling to and
from jobs.
All members of the Corps working under the
Council’s scheme are covered in respect of war
injuries.
The scheme also provides benefits in respect of
incapacity resulting from injury by accident or certain
industrial diseases. Payments are made for the total
period of incapacity, or until discharge from the
Corps, or for six months, whichever is the shortest
period. After that, and during any further period
of incapacity, payment is made by the Department
of Social Services. If injury results in death, pension
payments are made to dependants by the Depart-
ment of Social Services.
To June 30, 1913, claims lodged in Queensland
totalled 2,003, of which 19 were in respect of fatal
injuries. Of the total, 43 claims were rejected.
Accepted claims amounted to £22,005.
From December, 191-2 (date of adoption of the
scheme I. to June 30, 1943, claims in the Northern
Territory totalled 133, of which 7 were in respect of
fatalities. Eleven of the Northern Territory claims
were rejected.
As compensation in other States was administered
under the respective Stale schemes, by State insurance
offices, statistics were not available.
INDUSTRIAL.
Establishment of the Civil Constructional Corps
has resulted in a number of unprecedented gains for
the Australian worker.
Both under the original determinations made by
the Director-General of Allied Works, and the uni-
form Civil Constructional Corps Award promulgated
by Judge O’Mara on March 8. 1943, a number of
industrial gains, for winch the Australian Labour
Movement had been working for many years, were
granted to members of the Corps.
Paramount among these gains were: Continuous
employment; rest pauses during working hours f2O
min. per dav I ; increased leisure 110 days annual
leave I ; security against wet weather: increased sick
pay (at least 1 week additional pay I;£s 10 - pay-
ment on discharge: increased fare allowance (general
laborers l; unprecedented improvement of camping
facilities; medical supervision (with certain personal
medical payments I ; compassionate allowances; addi-
tional statutory holidays; canteen service (for
camps); continuous inspection of jobs and camps
to police the award and working conditions.
To administer the application of terms and co ndi-
lions of awards, an Industrial Section was established
under the direction of a Chief Industrial Officer.


REFUSE: Conditions obtaining in a road construction camp
when taken over by the Civil Constructional Corps.
The Industrial Section is also responsible for the
handling of industrial disputes.
Perhaps the most outstanding improvement resulting
from the establishment of the Civil Constructional
Corps is the revolution in camping accommodation
and conditions.
While this has been evident in all States, it has
been most marked in the Northern Territory.
Before the coming of the Civil Constructional Corps
to the Northern Territory, a worker’s conditions on
projects being carried out by private contractors was
his own business. He provided his own needs.
Men lived in humpies and rough shacks which
they themselves built from boughs and hessian or
whatever material they could find at hand. Or, if
fortunate enough, they provided their own tents.
They made their own sanitary, washing, and messing
arrangements. The floor of their huts was the earth,
and whatever they could improvise composed their
bed. Many slept in mosquito-infested areas without
nets.
Even with governmental bodies, conditions were
equally primitive. Men working on road construc-
tion carried their swags and camped in the bush as
the job moved forward. They made their own
arrangements about rations.
CONTRAST: In Central Australia, this C.C.C.
camp is in great contrast with that picturedabove.
PRIMITIVE: Sleeping accommodation as found in a camp
taken over by the Civil Constructional Corps.
Advent of the Civil Constructional Corps altered
all this.
Today in Civil Constructional Corps camps in the
Northern Territory, camping accommodation, food,
and certain amenities are provided free by the Allied
Works Council.
Tents are provided in each camp, large mess huts
with attached kitchens, both of which have fly-wire
doors and overhanging roofs, have been built. Messes
contain proper tables and seating.
Each man is provided with a proper bed or stretcher
and a mosquito net, free of charge.
Hygiene and sanitation are strictly supervised by
camp officials.
Amenities are the special responsibility of a Per-
sonnel Directorate Amenities Officer, who is equipped
with a mobile entertainment unit carrying a piano
and public address amplifying system for community
singing, a library, and games material.
MECHANICAL TRAINING.
To smash bottlenecks caused in its construction
programme by the dearth of skilled tradesmen, the
Allied Works Council established its own mechanical
training schools.
SETTING: Every effort was made to preserve
natural setting in this tropical C.C.C. camp.


From the inauguration of the scheme on July 9,
1942, to June 30, 1943, the two schools controlled
by the Mechanical Training Section of the Personnel
Directorate trained 1,015 men.
One school trains motor transport drivers, motor
transport mechanics, tractor mechanics, and Diesel
mechanics. The other specialises in the tuition of
mechanical equipment operators.
Impressed by the efficiency of the schools, the Aus-
tralian and United States Armed Forces availed them-
selves of the facilities,
A section of the United States Army personnel at-
tending a mechanical equipment operators’ course
current at June 30, was flown to the school from
Burma. Other American personnel were flown to
the school from forward areas of the Pacific.
Numbers of Australian Army personnel have also
been transferred from forward areas to the schools,
to either learn about or increase their knowledge
of the wide range of earth-moving and other mechani-
cal equipment which has taken its place in the
accoutrements of total warfare.
Confronted with a fast-dwindling supply of trained
truck drivers to fill the rapidly mounting demand,
the Allied Works Council decided in July, 1942, to
set up its own school for the training of these men.
The Personnel Directorate was made responsible for
the school and a Manager of Mechanical Training
appointed on July 9, 1942.
The first class in the Driving and Maintenance
Course, composed of 24 men who volunteered and
were enrolled in the Civil Constructional Corps,
started at the Maribyrnong School (Melbourne) on
August 6, 1942. They were followed by a special
class of instructors who commenced training on
August 17. To June 30, 1943, a total of 543 men
had been trained in this course.
The Driving and Maintenance Course was de-
veloped by the introduction on November 2, 1942,
of a Motor Transport Technical Course, which
occupies 10 weeks. To June 30, 1943, graduates from
this course totalled 162.
A further development of the Maribyrnong School
was the setting up on April 12, 1943, of Tractor
Mechanic and Diesel Mechanic Courses, each of which
occupies 10 weeks. First class to pass out of this
section of the school was composed of 28 members
of the Civil Constructional Corps and 17 men of
the Royal Australian Engineers.
1. Truck drivers' class.
2. Motor mechanics' class.
3. Blackboard instruction.
4. Diesel mechanics' class.


As early as May, 1942, an attempt was made by
the Mechanical Equipment and Materials Supply
Directorate, to alleviate the existing shortage of earth-
moving equipment operators by arranging with an
earth-moving plant supply firm in Sydney for the
training of a number of members of the Civil Con-
structional Corps as plant operators.
On November 16, 1942, Personnel’s Mechanical
Training Section opened its second school at Rydal-
mere (Sydney) to train mechanical or earth-moving
equipment operators in courses lasting six weeks.
The first class from this school was made up of
37 members of the Civil Constructional Corps.
To June 30, 1943, the following personnel had
been trained in the Rydalmere school: —
Australian Army 107
Civil Constructional Corps 70
U.S. Engineers and Marines 61
Royal Australian Air Force 20
Department of Civil Aviation 7
TOTAL 265
A motor transport driver trained in the Maribyr-
nong school is qualified to handle efficiently and
safely a truck of up to 10 tons capacity with or
without semi or full trailer, and is capable of carry-
ing out ordinary field maintenance on any such
vehicle, within the scope of the tool kit. He is
also able to drive in or control convoys, operate a
vehicle over any type of country, and get it out of
any kind of difficulty.
A motor transport mechanic is trained as a field
or bench service man, able to effect any light or
heavy repair work to any wheeled vehicle.
The tractor mechanic is specially schooled in field
and bench repairs to crawler tractors of all descrip-
tions.
A Diesel mechanic specialises only in compression
ignition engines.
A graduate from the Rydalmere Mechanical
Equipment Operator’s School is trained to drive or
operate heavy crawler tractors, scrapers, scoops
of various types and capacities (hydraulically and
cable operated), bulldozers, angledozers, rippers,
mobile cranes, excavators, power-control units,
drawn-graders, light and medium patrol graders, and
heavy power graders.
It should not be imagined, nor is it intended to
convey, that in 12 weeks a man can be made a fully
1. Trainees operating bulldozers.
2. Instruction in tractor mechanism.
3. Repairing a tractor.
4. U.S. negro soldiers undergoing instruction.
97


trained automotive engineer or a Diesel engineer.
That is still a five years’ job.
However, the right type of student can and does
learn to dismantle vehicles, tractors, and other plant,
to remove worn or fractured parts and instal new
ones. He can also diagnose trouble and rectify
scores of common minor breakdowns encountered
in the operation of heavy equipment on the various
construction works being carried out by the Allied
Works Council or the Armed Forces.
As far as is known, the Allied Works Council’s
Mechanical Equipment Training School is the only
one of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere.
LEGAL.
The Legal Section, which was established on June
29, 1942, covers a variety of work ranging from
conveyancing to common law.
The most significant phase of this section’s work,
however, is its assistance in the maintenance of
discipline in the Civil Constructional Corps.
Investigators attached to the section are engaged
continuously in tracing men who fail to answer
call-up notices directing them to serve as members
of the Corps, those members of the Corps who go
absent without leave from projects, and those who
commit various other breaches of the National
Security (Allied Works) Regulations.
It has been found that most defaulters are amen-
able to reason, and that when the dislocation in the
working of the Corps, resulting from their breach of
discipline, is pointed out to them, they are generally
willing to return to work immediately. In other
STOP-WORK: Civil Constructional Corps mem-
bers who attended a stop-work meeting in
New South Wales on April 12, 1943.
cases it has been found sufficient to warn members
of the consequences of their actions. Except where
organised strikes have occurred, only in the most
rare cases has it been necessary to institute prosecu-
tions.
Despite the obstructionist tactics adopted by a
section of union leaders, in the period under review
the Civil Constructional Corps has been singularly
free of serious industrial trouble.
The first strike occurred in September, 1942, at
Seymour (Vic.), where members of the Corps were
building a hospital for the United States Army. This
entailed, amongst other things, digging a pipeline
across an open paddock for a length of about three
miles. This work was carried out by laborers who
were entitled to the Australian Workers’ Union
Award. A Builders Laborers’ Union organiser per-
suaded these men to join his union on the under-
standing that they would thereby receive the higher
rate of wages payable to builders’ laborers. After
joining the union and finding that they were not
entitled to the higher wages, the men took the advice
of the organiser and went on strike, calling on the
other men engaged on the job to strike in sympathy.
As the men were not prepared to return to work,
the Allied Works Council had no option but to issue
summonses against some of the defaulters.
The men then expressed regret for what they had
done, and gave an undertaking to return to work
immediately.
In view of this undertaking, and the fact that the
men had been misled by the union organiser, the
Allied Works Council withdrew the prosecutions, and
the men returned to work.
The second stoppage occurred at Daly Waters
(Northern Territory) in October, 1942. On that
occasion, 37 truck drivers and laborers refused to
work under a certain ganger.
A full investigation by both the engineer in charge
of the works and the Deputy Director of Personnel
for the Northern Territory, revealed that there was
no justification for the men’s action.
After being addressed by both the Deputy Director
of Personnel and the engineer-in-charge, the men still
refused to work.
Proceedings were instituted at Alice Springs, where
all 37 were convicted and fined £2O, in default 30
days’ imprisonment.
A third strike was staged at Bogong (Vic.), on
a State Electricity Commission project, with which
the Allied Works Council was connected only in that


Civil Constructional Corps labor was supplied. Here
the union alleged that the management was inefficient
and that it was unfair to request men to work in a
tunnel which they considered to be dangerous.
Despite the efforts of the management and the Allied
Works Council, the men refused to return to work.
Summonses were issued, and the defendants convicted.
The magistrate found that there was no justification
for the allegations of inefficient management, and
that, on the expert advice tendered both by the
defendants and the informant, the tunnel was not
dangerous.
The last dispute took place in April, 1943, at a
vital food dehydration project being built by Hansen
& Yuncken Pty. Ltd., at Fisherman’s Bend (Mel-
bourne).
In this case, the men were requested by the con-
tractor to work shift work under a new award made
by Judge O’Mara, and applicable to all members
of the Civil Constructional Corps in Victoria and
other States. This award provided a lesser rate of
pay for shift work than a previous award under
which the men had been working.
The men objected to these instructions, thus making
it necessary for the Allied Works Council to serve
them with formal notices directing them to work
shift work.
While these notices were being served on the men,
D. Thomson, Secretary of the Building Trades Federa-
tion arrived on the job and directed the men to cease
work and attend a stop-work meeting. This meeting
declared the job black and the men went on strike.
The Allied Works Council then had no option but to
issue summonses against the 81 men who refused to
work. The Attorney-General’s Department was
requested to summons Thomson for counselling the
men to commit a breach of the National Security Act.
When the summons against Thomson was return-
able at court, application was made by counsel briefed
by the Attorney-General’s Department for a month’s
adjournment. In answer to the magistrate, counsel
stated that all the witnesses for the prosecution were
in court and that he was ready to proceed with the
case, but that an adjournment was required, as the
Acting Attorney-General was considering laying
further charges against Thomson. The magistrate
granted the adjournment.
The summonses then proceeded against the men.
Five cases were dealt with, each defendant being fined
£5. The remaining cases were adjourned for a fort-
night.
The men subsequently agreed to return and work
shift work under the O’Mara Award. The Allied
Works Council decided to withdraw the summonses
against the men but desired that the summons against
Thomson proceed. The Acting Attorney-General,
however, subsequently dropped the charge against
Thomson.
In each of these strikes, the men returned to work
under exactly the same conditions as they were work-
ing prior to the strike, the only result being that they
lost a considerable amount of pay, and the war effort
was dislocated.
While the men involved in the last dispute were on
strike, the secretaries of the Carpenters’, Painters’,
Plumbers’, Plasterers’ and Builders’ Labourers’ Unions
respectively, had advertisements inserted over their
names in the Melbourne daily newspapers, calling on
all their members enrolled in the Civil Constructional
Corps to stop work and attend a meeting during work-
ing hours at the Richmond Cricket Ground.
The counselling of such persons to cease work was
clearly a breach of the National Security Act.
In an endeavour to prevent a complete cessation
of work by over 4,000 members of the Corps, and also
to have the persons who had committed a breach of
the Act punished, the Director-General of Allied
Works instructed that the union secretaries should be
arrested. Messrs. G. H. Frank and A. W. Chalk, sec-
retaries of the Carpenters’ and Plasterers’ unions
respectively, were arrested. The police were unable
to find the whereabouts of the other secretaries.
Even this prompt action did not prevent the stop-
work meeting being held, nor did the Attorney-
General’s Department see fit to conduct prosecutions
against the union secretaries, although charges were
actually preferred against them, and evidence which,
in the opinion of counsel, would substantiate the
charges, was furnished to the Attorney-General’s
Department.
The only stoppages other than those recorded above,
which took place in the period under review, were
one-day stop-work meetings, held at various times in
New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland, to discuss
new awards or matters which may have been con-
sidered grounds for a dispute.
The most serious of these was the simultaneous
holding of stop-work meetings in Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland on April 12, 1943, by members
of the Civil Constructional Corps, who were also mem-
bers of unions associated with Allied Works Council
undertakings, to discuss the newly-promulgated Civil
Constructional Corps award given by Judge O’Mara.


ALIENS: Engaged on the production of firewood
two Victorian members of the Civil Aliens Corps
operate a power-saw.
CIVIL ALIENS CORPS.
Seventy-five per cent., or 8,000 of the 12,000 alien?
registered in Australia at June 30, 1943, had been
called up for service in the Civil Aliens Corps.
But only 32 per cent., or 2.521 of these were
actually enrolled in the Corps. Forty-two per cent,
had been exempted by Manpower authorities, 21 per
cent, were medically unfit, and 5 per cent, were
exempted on other grounds.
While the Civil Aliens Corps was not formed until
May, 1943, National Security Regulations had been
promulgated in 1942, for the purpose of directing
to civil employment of a national character all male
refugee and non-refugee enemy' aliens between 18 and
60 years of age.
Under National Security (Aliens Service) Regula-
tions announced on February 3, 1942, the Department
of the Army arranged for enrolment and registration
of all aliens coming within the above categories.
Those passed medically fit and not reserved on occu-
pational grounds were subject to perform such services
as were determined by the Minister for Labour and
National Service.
At the end of February, 1942, it was decided that
this pool of alien labour should be made available
to the Director-General of Allied Works. To this end.
the regulations governing aliens were amended on
February' 26, 1942, to include the Minister for the
Interior as an authority who could order aliens to do
work of a national character.
At that date, where aliens were to be employed by
a State government department or private company,
the terms and conditions of their employment were
as determined by the Minister for Labour and
National Service. Their wages were to be the equiva-
lent of Army rates of pay, the difference between such
rates of pay and the relative award rates being paid
to the Commonwealth by the employing authority.
Where aliens were employed by the Commonwealth,
the terms and conditions of their employment were
determined by the Minister for the Interior.
In June, 1942, the Aliens Section of the Allied
Works Council’s Personnel Directorate was set up,
and a start made on the enrolment and employment
of aliens by the Allied Works Council.
The initial projects to which aliens were allotted
were production of firewood in Victoria and Western
Australia, production of charcoal in New South
Wales, and work on roads and in forests in Queens-
land under the control of the Main Roads Commis-
sion.
The divided control provided for under the Aliens
Service Regulations, and difficulties surrounding the
employment of aliens on civil work at Army rates
of pay, made it necessary to amend the regulations.
In addition to the division of control which created
administrative problems, the decision by the Depart-
ment of External Affairs as to the type of work to
which aliens could be allotted had practically elimin-
ated the possibility of using such alien labour on
Allied Works projects.
A meeting of representatives of all interested de-
partments which was held at Army Headquarters in
September, 1942, recommended an amendment of the
FIREWOOD: Another group of Civil Aliens
Corps members cut, stack, and cart firewood
at a camp in which they are working.


EMPLOYMENT SUMMARY.
WHERE ENROLLED
Vic.
N.S.W.
WHERE EMPLOYED.
Qld. S.A. W.A.
Tas.
N.T.
Total
Victoria
534
—
—
1
—
—
45
580
New South Wales
—
325
—
—
—
—
69
394
Queensland ....
—
—
90
—
—
—
296
386
South Australia
—
—
180
—
—
7
187
Western Australia
—
—
—
—
157
—
—
157
Internees
286
38
—
373
—
120
—
817
TOTAL:
820
363
90
554
157
120
417
2,521
GROSS ENROLMENTS, DISCHARGES,
ENROLMENTS AS AT JUNE 30,
AND NET
1943.
State or
T erritory.
Gross Net
Enrolments. Discharges. Enrolments.
New South Wales
... 30,731
7,565
23,166
Victoria
... 14,258
3,092
11,166
Queensland
... 18,534
1,721
16,813
Western Australia
... 1,325
297
1,028
South Australia
... 1,041
63
978
T asmania
311
17
294
Northern Territory
74
1
73
AUSTRALIA
... 66,274
12,756
53,518
regulations to allow complete control of aliens by
the Minister for the Interior, who would delegate such
power to the Director-General of Allied Works.
Several conferences were subsequently held until,
in April, 1943, the matter was finalised by a sub-
committee of War Cabinet.
On May 3, 1943, the necessary amendments to the
National Security (Aliens Service) Regulations were
gazetted.
Under the new regulations it was proposed that all
aliens subject to service were to be enrolled in a Civil
Aliens Corps.
The general policy governing the employment of
aliens was revised and a special determination intro-
duced covering rates of pay and conditions of employ-
ment. These conditions provide for a base rate of
pay with margins for skilled labour and tradesmen.
Sick leave, annual leave, and compensation are also
provided.
As the Department of External Affairs had also
modified its views as regards the projects on which
aliens might be employed, call-up of aliens was acce-
lerated with a view to employing them wherever
possible on works controlled by the Allied Works
Council.
The following table summarises membership of the
Civil Aliens Corps at June 30, 1943. It was antici-
pated at that date that, when the enrolments then
in train were completed, the Corps would have a total
membership of approximately 4,000.
Arrangements were made with Security Service for
the release of certain selected aliens from internment
camps, subject to their enrolment in the Civil Aliens
Corps and employment by the Allied Works Council.
The number so released to June 30, 1943, totalled
817.
The organisation established by the Allied Works
Council for the administration of the Civil Construc-
tional Corps is being utilised as far as practicable for
operation of the Civil Aliens Corps.
Members of the Civil Aliens Corps are employed
on the maintenance of inland railways, on construc-
DEPARTURE: Members of the Civil Aliens
Corps leaving Victoria to work on an Allied
Works Council project in Tasmania.
tion and maintenance of inland roads, the production
of firewood and charcoal, and the mining of strategic
minerals. At June 30, 1943, a large inland mechani-
cal workshop was being progressively staffed by Civil
Aliens Corps members, who were skilled fitters,
mechanics and electricians.
SOME C.C.C. STATISTICS.
The following tables give an interesting picture of
the numbers, classes, age, etc., of the men enrolled
into the Civil Constructional Corps.
TOTAL ENROLMENTS.
Illustrative of the speed with which the Corps has
been built up are the following figures of total enrol-
ments between April 29, 1942, the date of the first
enrolment, and June 30, 1943.


DISCHARGES ACCORDING TO
REASONS
AS AT
JUNE 30,
1943.
Reason for Discharge.
N.S.W.
Vic.
Qld.
S.A.
W.A.
Tas.
N.T.
Aust.
Medical Unfitness
3,505
1,857
787
44
113
16
6,322
Personal Hardship
69
23
7
2
7
—
—
108
Voluntary Enlistments in Armed
Forces
10
41
1
1
9
62
Released to Armed Forces by
A.W.C
609
191
98
—
7
905
Released for Seasonal Work
(permanent)
33
8
2
—
i
—
1
45
Released for Other Work (pro-
tected undertakings, etc.) ...
1,093
133
342
1
46
—
—
1,615
Deaths
52
23
20
1
3
—
99
Over 60 Years
475
133
53
25
686
Under 18 Years
40
8
29
2
1
80
Unsuitable, Misconduct, and
Other
1,679
675
382
14
84
—
'
2,834
TOTAL
7,565
3,092
1,721
63
297
17
1
12,756
CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL CORPS NET ENROLMENTS
ACCORDING TO METHOD OF RECRUITMENT.
State or Territory.
Volun-
teered
Enrolled
on the
Job
Called
Up
Total
New South Wales ....
3,482
10.948
8,736
23,166
Victoria
2.111
5,541
3,514
11,166
Queensland
1,787
11,746
3,280
16,813
South Australia
537
6
435
978
Western Australia ....
509
113
406
1.028
Tasmania
46
—
248
294
IN orthern Territory ....
71
—
2
73
AUSTRALIA '.
8,543
28,354
16,621
53,518
CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL CORPS NET ENROLMENTS ACCORDING TO
CIVILIAN REGISTRATION CATEGORY.
State or Territory.
16-17
years
18-34
years
unmarried
Civilian Registration Category
35-44 18-34 35-44
years years years
unmarried married married
45-59
years
60 years
and over
Total
New South Wales
27
2,647
1,253
3.565
5,380
8,786
1,508
23,166
Queensland
39
2,550
1,002
2,986
3,700
5,692
844
16,813
Victoria
3
1,260
769
2,000
3,202
3,698
234
11,166
South Australia"
—
168
156
166
286
201
1
978
Western Australia
—
147
115
64
137
524
41
1.028
Tasmania
—
56
25
84
102
27
294
Northern Territory
—
10
18
9
8
21
7
73
AUSTRALIA
69
6,838
3,338
8,874
12,815
18,949
2,635
53,518
DISCHARGES.
The following tables on the discharges from the
Civil Constructional Corps, according to reasons and
age group, show a very large proportion of discharges
being caused through medical unfitness, and also indi-
cate the high age groups of the personnel discharged.
Two reasons can be advanced to explain what must
be considered a very substantial “discharge” figure.
Firstly, the shifting of the bulk of Allied Works
Council projects to the forward areas, with the con-
sequent need to use only the fittest men. Secondly,
the speed with which personnel were enrolled in the
early days of the Corps, existence made impossible a
thorough and complete medical examination of all
men being enrolled.
SERVING MEMBERS.
The tables below give various dissections of Civil
Constructional Corps personnel still serving with the
Corps as at June 30, 1943.
(a) ‘Method of Recruitment’: There are three
broad classes of personnel enrolled into the Civil
Constructional Corps. Firstly, persons who appear
at the several bureaux and volunteer for service.
Secondly, those enrolled on the job, or persons who
were already working on an Allied Works Council
project when they were enrolled in the Corps.
Thirdly, those called up for service with the Corps.
The following table shows numbers of men in
each of these classes who were enrolled by the various
State offices.
(b) Ages and Conjugal Conditions: The following table, showing net enrolments according to Civilian
Registration Category, gives a broad picture of the ages, etc., of the men in the Corps, as at June 30, 1943.


CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL
CORPS PERSONNEL
ACCORDING
TO
DESIGNATION
Civil Constructional Corps
Designation.
N.S.W.
Vic.
Qld.
S.A.
W.A.
Tas.
N.T.
Aust.
Blacksmith
68
19
87
4
3
1
—
182
Bricklayer
466
260
93
19
—
—
—
838
Carpenter
5,211
3,404
2,856
411
128
179
3
12,192
Clerk, Timekeeper
102
221
458
66
1
1
1
85U
Concrete Worker
166
48
54
3
—
—
—
271
257
144
314
64
10
4
4
797
Cook’s Assistant
263
97
318
36
4
4
6
728
Driver, Truck
790
794
1,637
113
7
5
10
3,356
Electrical Tradesman
252
61
19
12
1
1
—
346
Fitter, Turner (and Fitter) ....
186
68
97
12
6
4
2
375
Foreman
104
230
230
1
1
—
—
566
Ganger
281
80
382
5
4
—
1
/53
Laborer, Builders’
1,469
531
1,440
27
—
5
—
3,472
Laborer, Other
9,127
3,009
5,862
94
638
69
25
18,824
Machineman
236
1
26
1
—
—
—
264
Mechanic (inc. Diesel)
176
212
107
14
—
3
1
513
Mechanical Equip. Operator ....
546
262
769
15
—
2
1
1,595
Painter
534
407
318
3 '
5
3
—
1.270
Plasterer
330
98
67
5
—
2
—
502
Plumber
598
385
258
6
i
1
3
1,252
Rigger
140
54
20
9
2
1
226
Stationary Engine Attendant ....
176
77
91
3
—
3
1
351
Storeman
90
35
76
15
—
—
1
217
Timber Worker
55
20
59
i
—
1
—
136
45
12
14
6
—
1
•
78
Other
1,498
637
1,161
33
217
4
14
3,564
TOTAL ....
23,166
11,166
16,813
978
1,028
294
73
53,518
CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL
CORPS PERSONNEL
NUMHER
ACCORDING TO CIVIL REGISTRATION
OF DEPENDANTS.
CATEGORY
AND
Number of Dependants.
16-17
years
18-34
years
unmarried
Civilian Registration Category
35-44 18-34 35-44
years years years
unmarried married married
45-59
years
60 years
and over
Total
No Dependants
63
6,117
2,931
113
483
5,284
802
15,793
One Dependant
4
581
306
2,477
2,534
6,385
1,369
13,6bb
Two Dependants
1
98
69
2,944
2,936
3,160
251
9,459
Three Dependants
1
29
24
1,978
3,142
1,853
115
7,142
Four Dependants
10
3
828
1,842
1,017
44
3,/44
Five Dependants
—
2
1
347
969
600
26
1,945
Six Dependants
—
1
2
124
499
316
16
958
Seven Dependants
—
—
—
50
238
167
8
463
Eight Dependants
—
—
2
8
91
92
I
194
Nine or More Dependants
—
—
—
5
81
75
3
164
TOTAL
69
6,838
3,338
8.874
12,815
18,949
2.635
53,518
(c) Trade Classification: The following table shows “Civil Constructional Corps Designation”. Civil
Constructional Corps Designation means the trade under which a man was enrolled in the Corps.
(d) Ages and Number of Dependants: The following table shows personnel serving with the Corps, as
at June 30, 1943, in each Civilian Registration Category according to the number of dependants.
CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL CORPS
PROCEDURE.
Labor demands for projects are received by the
Allied Works Council from the various employing
authorities carrying out work on behalf of the Council,
and transmitted to the Personnel Directorate.
When labor of a special class or type is required,
Personnel requests the Manpower Directorate, through
the Manpower Liaison Officer attached to the Civil
Constructional Corps Enrolment Bureau in the State
concerned, for a list of names of suitable tradesmen.
As well as such specialised lists, Manpower authori-
ties forward to Personnel progressive general lists
containing the following information: —Name of per-
son, address and age.
From these lists direction-to-serve notices are com-
piled and posted to the individuals concerned, requir-
ing them to report at the local Civil Constructional
Corps Enrolment Bureau on a specified date.
When the man reports at the Bureau, he is inter-
viewed by the Manpower Liaison Officer, who checks
his name against specially-prepared lists to ascertain
whether or not he is available for enrolment in the
Civil Constructional Corps.
The National Security (Allied Works) Regulations
providing for establishment of the Civil Construc-


CIVIL CONSTRUCTIONAL CORPS ENROLMENT PROCEDURE.
1. Interview with Manpower Liaison Officer.
2. Preliminary enrolment procedure.
3. Undergoing medical examination to test fitness.
4. Completing enrolment in Civil Constructional Corps.
5. Being paid for waiting time.
6. Receiving travelling instructions and equipment issue.


tional Corps state that all men between 18 and 60
years of age are subject to service in the Corps,
except
(a) men employed in protected industries or pro-
tected undertakings, other than men whom the
Director-General of Manpower has notified the
Director-General of Allied Works in writing,
are available for service in the Corps;
(b) members of the Defence Force performing
continuous full-time war service;
(c) members of British, Dominion and Allied De-
fence Forces;
(d) diplomatic, consular or trade representatives.
If marked available, the man reports to the enrol-
ment counter, where an enrolment form is completed
except for his signature, which is secured later.
He is then sent to the Medical Section, where he
undergoes examination by Allied Works Council doc-
tors, and is classified medically, ranging from “fit
for work anywhere” to “fit for light work only.” If
he has been placed in the lower category, he returns
to the enrolment counter, where his signature is affixed
to the enrolment form and he is issued with instruc-
tions to report again at the Bureau, preparatory to
travelling to a project.
If, on the other hand, he is classed “fit for any-
where,” he is subjected to an X-ray examination,
with a view to ascertaining his suitability or otherwise
for work in the tropics.
Should the X-ray show him fit, he is vaccinated,
inoculated and completely enrolled. At a later date
he reports again to the Bureau, prepared to travel
north.
If he is being sent to the tropics, he is issued with
a water bottle, messing gear and a mosquito net, all
free of charge. Blankets and working clothing are
also available at his own expense should he require
them.
On the day he is despatched to a project, each man
is paid in full from the date of his enrolment to the
despatch date.
He is then handed over to the Transport Section,
where travelling arrangements are handled by the
transport officers up to the time he boards the train
or other conveyance. If travelling interstate, he is
accompanied from embarkation point to the project
by one or more Conducting Officers, according to the
size of the party travelling.
On arrival at a project camp, and during his stay
there, his welfare is the concern of a Personnel
Officer.
On completion of the project to which he was
assigned, or for some other reason, he may be in-
structed to report once more to the employment
bureau, where, if he is under 50 years of age and
has been working elsewhere than in the tropics, he
is again medically examined with a view to being sent
to North Australia. Should he be passed “fit for
anywhere,” he goes through the Transfer Section and
is despatched as before.
If over 50 years of age, he is also sent before a
medical board and if found “unfit,” discharged from
the Corps. He may also be discharged for other
reasons.
In the case of a discharge, the man is interviewed
by the paymaster, who notes all money due to him
and arranges to have this posted to the member’s
address.
The man is then discharged and sent to the Man-
power Liaison Officer, who marks him as discharged
from the Civil Constructianal Corps and instructs him
to report to his local National Service Office without
delay.
ENCIRCLED: A Civil Constructional Corps workman
stands erect inside a munition plant boiler house
stack, to carry out final welding before the stack
is raised into position.
105




CHAPTER
8
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND
MATERIALS SUPPLY DIRECTORATE
To procure, allocate, and control the plant, equipment, and
material necessary for the execution of the Allied Works
Council’s vast construction programme, the Mechanical
Equipment and Materials Supply Directorate was established
on March 25, 1942.
To June 30, 1943, the Directorate had placed orders
for the procurement of plant and materials valued at
£13,800,000.
First Director was the late Mr. Ellis Davies, who
died on October 2, 1942, and was succeeded by-
Mr. A. C. Fleetwood.
PLANT AND MATERIALS FOR SERVICES
AND GOVERNMENT INSTRUMENTALITIES.
In many cases plant and materials were procured
through close co-operation with Ministry of Munitions,
Department of Supply and Shipping, and the Division
of Import Procurement, for allocation to R.A.A.F.,
Australian Army, U.S. Forces in Australia, Timber
Control, Controller of Minerals, and Allied Works
Council projects throughout Australia, including those
being carried out by state instrumentalities acting on
behalf of the Allied Works Council.
The Directorate also supplied plant for Mobile
Works Squadrons and Works Units attached to Navy,
Army, R.A.A.F., and U.S. Forces.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
At the inception of the Allied Works Council,
urgent requirements of the Armed Forces in Australia,
both Australian and American, and the immediate
needs of high priority mainland defence works, includ-
ing the North-South Road, called for prompt acquisi-
tion of large quantities of machinery, of which
manufacturers could quickly supply only a small
portion.
Considerable quantities of plant operated by
government departments, councils, and other bodies
were impressed. This provided a breathing space in
which Australian manufacture could be increased to
required levels.
Plant and equipment were also secured in those days
of desperate improvisation, by diversion of stocks
intended for export, by purchase from overseas either
direct or by Lend-Lease Agreement, and by combing
refugee or diverted cargoes from Malaya, Java, and
other Far East locations.
In arranging for the manufacture of plant in
Australia, the Directorate used the organisation of the
Factory Equipment Section of the Ministry of
Munitions.
The task set the Directorate involved much planning
and organisation, not only in allocating stocks
available, but in particular in ascertaining
capabilities and capacity of local manufacturers, and
arranging the stepping up of their production to meet
requirements. As many times Australian pre-war
output was involved, manufacture had to be spread
to a number of firms who had not previously handled
road machinery.




Plant
Or-
dered
Im-
pressed
Air compressors (portable)
37
38
Bitumen and emulsion sprayers
98
2
Bulldozers and trail builders ..
835
3
Boring plants
6
2
Concrete mixers and plant
214
40
Cranes (mobile and fixed)
437
1
Crushing plants (complete)
84
1
Excavators (or power shovels)
97
19
Engines (Diesel, etc.)
533
2
Generating sets
383
4
Graders (drawn and power) ...
665
62
Loaders (front and other types)
466
5
Pile-driving plant
69
—
Power control units
774
1
Pumps
187
11
Rippers and rooters
522
11
Rock drills
361
46
Rollers (drawn and power)
302
21
Rollers (sheepsfoot)
182
—
Scoops and scrapers
1,119
72
Tractors (crawler and wheel)
1,594
259
Trucks (motor)
1,681
591
Trailers
139
15
Welding sets
209
1
Winches and hoists
877
4
TOTAL: 11,871 1,211
Some idea of the magnitude of the task can be
gauged by statistics of new plant ordered and second-
hand plant impressed, in the 15 months ended June
30, 1943:
Future Requirements from Overseas: To procure
supplies of equipment from overseas for the Fighting
Services, and others, the Allied Works Council is
represented on the Commonwealth Programming
TRAILER: A 12-wheel low-level float or trailer being
used to transport a tractor.
Committee convened by the Allied Supply Council.
Procurement was effected through the Division of
Import Procurement.
A complete programme has been prepared, setting
out estimates of all equipment to be procured over-
seas by the Allied Works Council during the years
1943 and 1944. With respect to crawler tractors and
main types of earth-moving equipment, the Allied
Works Council acted as collating authority. This
meant collection of the requirements of all other
programming departments, and their consolidation
into one complete programme for submission to
Washington.
MATERIALS.
The difficulties of locating and supplying materials
for manufacture of plant for use in construction work
have become increasingly greater. Although great in
1942, some relief was given then by reserve stocks
held by merchants, while refugee or diverted cargo
from Malaya, Java, etc., provided much material such
as steel plate, piping, steel angles, shafting, electrical
cables, tools and wire rope. Obtaining refugee cargo
meant considerable searching of ships’ manifests and
cargoes to quickly locate the required items.
In 1943, the position has been aggravated by the
expanding programme of building construction, both
in Australia and forward operational areas, and by
the general depletion of stocks.
Co-operation of the Controller of Timber was sought
to assure best distribution of timber available,
especially to northern areas, where demand is
greater than supply.
In the nine days, commencing February 18, 1943,
arrangements were made for the railing from country
centres, assembly at Melbourne wharves and loading
of 3,624,927 linear feet of flooring and 838,165 super
feet of scantlings.
SHEEP'S FOOT: Drawn by a tractor, this " Sheep's
Foot" roller is used to tamp the surface of aerodrome
runways.


GRADER: A patrol grader being employed to form
the surface of a road in a New South Wales munition
plant.
The actual loading operations of this, the largest
shipment of timber in the port’s history, were com-
pleted in 62V0 hours.
Expert control and co-ordination by officials of
Timber Control stepped up the ordinary loading
rate of 16,000 feet an hour to a record figure of
50,000 feet.
About 30 timber suppliers were involved in the
operation.
The Directorate also found it necessary to arrange
definite quotas of iron, mosquito netting, Fibrolite,
and to some extent timber, to facilitate planning and
direction of tbs supply of such materials. Conferences
were arranged with the various departments’ Con-
trollers of Materials regarding the following:—
Corrugated and plain iron, Plywood, Masonite,
Cane-ite, Mails, Piping, steel and Fibrolite, Fribrolite
corrugated and plain sheeting. Timber, Mosquito
netting (metal), Pipes, drainage and sewerage,
Steel reinforcing rods.
Arrangements were made whereby stocks will be
carried by reserve merchants throughout Australia for
MANUFACTURE: Mechanical scoops for use on Allied
Works Council projects are manufactured in a New
South Wales plant, under orders from the Mechanical
Equipment Directorate.
SCOOPS: Tractor-drawn earth scoops being operated
by trainees at an Allied Works Council Mechanical
Equipment Training School.
use on Allied Works Council projects, such stocks
being released only on presentation of a special
certificate issued by the Council’s Directorate of
Works and Services. This is designed to assure only
the correct quantity being used, with priority for the
most important works.
Quantities: The following schedule shows approxi-
mate material requirements for Allied Works Council
projects for one quarter: —
Timber, 72,000,000 super feet.
Corrugated and plain iron, 9,100 tons.
Mosquito netting, 2,600 rolls.
Wire nails, 1,050 tons.
Roofing nails, 150 tons.
Wood screws, 66 tons.
Bolts and nuts, 900 tons.
Asbestos sheeting, 4,800,000 sq. yds.
Masonite, 3,750,000 sq. ft.
Cane-ite, 2,450,000 sq. ft.
Plywood, 2,760,000 sq. ft.
Glazed earthenware pipes, 870,000 feet.
Wrought iron pipes, 3,000,000 feet.
Fibrolite pipes, 1,000,000 feet.
Cement, 22,800 tons.
Reinforcing rods, 4,500 tons.
In addition to this general building constructional
material, many other materials such as wire rope,
electrical cable, motor truck, and other tyres, oils,
chemicals, hessian for camouflage, Sisalkraft, and hard
paint have been procured.
TRANSPORT.
With facilities on sea, land and air taxed to the
utmost, transport has been a major task.
But through special liaison with Shipping Control
Board, Land Transport Board, and the Civil Aviation
Department, transfer of plant and material has been
satisfactorily effected.


Transport difficulties will, however, always be a
difficult problem, owing to such large quantities of
materials and plant being required in Northern
Australia, Western Australia and operational areas
beyond Australia.
To facilitate transport arrangements, special ship-
ping officers have been appointed in each State.
STORAGE.
A special storeyard and buildings were designed,
and two large stores erected in Melbourne, to handle
quickly-moving stores of all kinds, including
tractors, trucks, loaders, compressors, bitumen heaters
and materials. Stores in other States have been
established in conjunction with State road instru-
mentalities.
WORKSHOPS.
Lack of private facilities for the overhaul of earth-
moving and other equipment in Northern Australia,
and the increased number of types of plant which
were moved into that area, made it necessary to build
new workshops and add to those already built.
The repair and maintenance of trucks and plant has
become a major phase of the Directorate’s activities.
The workshop position is governed by size of the
project and locality concerned. On small jobs, a
bough shed or lean-to building is provided, in which
any minor repairs and servicing can be carried out.
If, however, the size of the job justifies it, a mobile
workshop with machining and welding facilities is
supplied.
In areas where there are two or three projects, a
small base workshop copes with machining, welding
and servicing. Base workshops are situated in
advanced areas and, as near as possible, central to all
the projects. In addition to the original set-up of
small field workshops, mobile workshops and repair
squads operate from the base workshop to carry out
urgent repairs.
In the early days of the Allied Works Council
plant maintenance problems were manifold, as most
equipment was second-hand. The long hours the
equipment had to work (sometimes round the clock,
seven days a week), coupled with the hot, dusty
conditions in the north, caused very rapid wear.
Difficulties in providing transport for broken down
equipment, made it necesary to use a number of low-
level floats attached to base workshops or large pro-
jects in inaccessible areas. These floats are also used
in the salvaging and transferring of equipment.
All areas are now covered by Plant Inspectors, who
report on the general condition of plant and instruct
operators in its operation and servicing.
DITCHER: A Barber Green ditching machine cutting
a trench tor the laying of sewerage lines on an
Allied Works Council project.
Biggest problem connected with the workshops has
been lack of skilled labour. To combat this, Personnel
Directorate set up a Mechanical Training Section.
A large number of machine tools and servicing
equipment, which have been installed in the work-
shops, was obtained through the Ministry of
Munitions’ Directorate of Machine Tools and Gauges.
All machining processes are now carried out by
the Allied Works Council.
The following parts are made when not available
through normal trade sources: —
Pistons, gudgeon pins, spline shafts, liners, bevel
gears, work wheels and shafts, piston rings, gear
wheels and pinions.
Cylindrical and crankshaft grinders are now in use,
and all types of crankshafts are being ground for use
by the Services and Allied Works Council.
Equipment used by the Services in operational
areas is being overhauled in Allied Works Council
workshops.


SPARE PARTS FOR TRACTORS (CRAWLER).
These parts are now controlled throughout
Australia by the Mechanical Equipment and Materials
Supply Directorate, and released by a special officer
in each State, to Services and other priority users.
RUBBER TYRES AND TUBES.
Arrangements have been made with Rubber Control
for supply and release of tyres and tubes for motor
vehicles employed on Allied Works projects.
PLANT CENSUS.
An Australia-wide census of all privately-owned
earth-moving plant was taken in April, 1942, for the
purpose of recording the quantity of such equipment
available in any particular district, should an
emergency arise. Power to do this was given to the
Director-General of Allied Works under National
Security Regulation No. 57.
The census covered some 30 classifications of plant,
including a variety of sizes and capacities. More than
26.000 returns were lodged, embracing approximately
260.000 separate plant units.
Plant of a size and type suitable for national use is
transferred more than 25 miles from the location
held under census. This plant must not be sold
registered, or otherwise disposed of, without written
authority of the Director of Mechanical Equipment.
Certain plant held under census by the Allied Works
Council, and which may be used for agricultural
purposes, is also controlled by the Controller of
Agricultural Machinery. Details of permits granted
to agriculturists for purchase of such equipment are
immediately made available to the Allied Works
Council, so that these details may be included in the
earth-moving equipment census.
PLANT RECORDING.
A complete record of all plant acquired by the
Allied Works Council is being prepared, so that statis-
tical information that may be required from time to
time may be quickly obtained.
PLANT HIRING.
A considerable quantity of plant and equipment is
hired to Allied Works Council projects, each project
being charged for the use of such plant and equipment
in the form of hire. A hire rate, designed to cover
depreciation and estimated cost of major overhauls
and repairs, has been determined for each item of
plant owned by the Allied Works Council. That por-
tion of the rate covering depreciation providing for
cost of the plant, is completely written off by the time
the end of its useful life has been reached.
PLANT ALLOCATION AND MOVEMENT.
After arranging for manufacture or purchasing of
plant, it is necessary to allocate it to projects, accord-
ing to priorities. This allocation and movement
covers the whole of Australia and often involves large
scale transfer of plant from one project to another.
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS.
Requisition and distribution of bituminous mate-
rials essential in the vast national defence construction
programme, whether employed directly on Council
work or on projects carried out by the U.S. Army,
are responsibilities of the Allied Works Council.
These materials include bitumens, asphalts and tars,
of all types, and are dealt with by the Mechanical
Equipment and Materials Supply Directorate.
Through close collaboration between the Mechani-
cal Equipment Directorate, the Directorate of Works
and Services, the various State construction authorities,
Australian and U.S. Army Engineers, R.A.A.F., and
the U.S. Air Corps, ample supplies have been pro-
vided at distribution points.
Under National Security Regulations, stocks of bitu-
men in Australia, belonging to various government
bodies and importers, are subject to control by the
Department of Supply and Shipping, Releases for
urgent work are effected by a Central Bitumen Control
Committee upon which the Allied Works Council is
represented. The releases are made through subsi-
diary State Control Committees, which are responsible
for bitumen stocks within their respective States.
These Commonwealth bitumen stocks are augmented
by overseas supplies secured in accordance with re-
quisitions submitted by the Allied Works Council.
Purchase by the Division of Import Procurement is
implemented either through Lend-Lease or by direct
negotiation. The U.S. Army has also supplied large
quantities.
While tonnage cannot be disclosed, it may be stated
that sufficient bitumen has been made available for
surfacing aerodromes, and scores of flight strips in all
corners of the Commonwealth, as well as for hundreds
of miles of strategic roads. Reserves against unfore-
seen contingencies have also been built up at strategic
points.
Tar, the bi-product of the gas and coke oven indus-
tries, has also been used on numerous projects.
Coupled with the supply of tar has been the inevitable
question of transport, involving the obtaining of the
necessary drum containers.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
PRINTERS PROPRIETARY LIMITED
27 Little Bourke St., Melbourne, Australia
