

REPORT OF A SURYEY
(WITH PLAN AND SECTION)
THE WATER TUNNEL
(Known as “BUSBY'S BORE'” )
BETWEEN
LACIILAW SWAMP AND SYDNEY,
MADE BY ORDER OP THE
CITY COMMISSIONERS,
In December , 1854, and January, 1855.
PUBLISHED FOR GENERAL INFORMATION BY DIRECTION OF
The RIGHT WORSHIPFUL CHAS. MOORE, Esq.,
Mayor op Sydney.
OCTOBBE, 18 6©.
S'lj&nei):
S. T. LEIGH & CO., HUNTER STREET.




DETAILED SURVEY of the Water Tunnel and
Shafts between the Lachlan Swamp and Hyde
Park, made by order of the CITY COM-
MISSIONERS, in December, 1854, and January,
1855.
STATE OF TUNNEL AND SHAFTS.
A careful examination of the Tunnel, so far as practicable, has
been made by the Superintendent of Water Works, John
Warner, and his reports, as he proceeds in his work, are handed
herewith to the City Commissioners.
The reports are very satisfactory. The Tunnel is in excellent
condition, as are also the Shafts, with the exception of Shaft No.
16, to which the Superintendent recommends that immediate
repairs should be made to prevent its probable fall, and the
consequent total obstruction of the Tunnel. This is a matter of
very great importance, and should not be delayed.
There are certain obstructions in the Tunnel arising from quarry
rubbish and stones which appear to have been left in the Tunnel,
and from sand and mud which have flowed into it from the
Swamp, or have got access to it by the Shafts or otherwise.
Although it would be satisfactory to have these obstructions
removed and the Tunnel clear from end to end, still as they do
not appear much to impede the flow of the water, and as their
removal would deteriorate the water during the process, it does
not appear advisable to enter upon such a work until another
supply to the City be procured, when the water might be shut
out of the Tunnel, and a thorough cleansing effected. These are
the causes of the differences in the levels at the two ends of the
Tunnel, and which are most apparent when the water is low.
The Superintendent’s reports are very minute, and give a
particular description of the Tunnel and Shafts, at every part
which he had an opportunity of inspecting, and I cannot allow this
opportunity to pass without stating to the Commissioners my
opinion (from personal observation as well as from his descrip-
tions and reports) of the zeal displayed by the Superintendent in
the exploration of the Tunnel, and the risks he not unfrequently
ran of his life (and health), from his anxiety to obtain a full
knowledge of the state of this most important work.
The Superintendent speaks highly of the conduct of the men
employed on this occasion. They have received a small addition
to their wages for the time they were so employed.
GEO. WILSON,
„ , , T 1f) _. Inspector Water Works.
Sydney, 17th January, 1855. r


No. I
7th December, 1854,
THE TUNNEL SHAFT, No. 3.—COURT HOUSE.
In obedience to your instructions, I opened this Shaft yesterday.
On descending to the Tunnel, I found that I could stand dry shod
under the Shaft, there was a ripple of barely eight inches on each
side of the rubbish. The plumb of this Shaft from the surface to
the water is now sixty-one feet, six inches. The laborers employed
to bucket and lift the rubbish, worked with a will, and did good
work ; they continued working until half-past 2 this morning, at
which time I found the water rising high in the Tunnel, in con-
sequence of all the main locks being shut. lat once sent them
up and directed them to muster at the Shaft at 6. They are now
at work, and I fear that to clear the Tunnel at this Shaft will
occupy the whole of this day. I beg further to report to you, Sir,
that this work will result in a knowledge of the state of the
Tunnel, which we have never yet attained.
From Shaft No. 3 I proceeded to Shaft No. 5 (Toll-bar, South
Head Road.) I was careful in feeling my way, but found to my
surprise that the bottom was, to say, level as a footpath. I could
not guage the silt which lay on the floor with accuracy, but I
may say generally, that all along it covered my ankles. I then
turned back to Shaft No. 1 (pump, Riley-street) and I found to
my astonishment that a very deep and dangerous hole between
Shafts 1 and 2 has been entirely filled up since 1849. I beg to
tell you that in the latter part of that year, being then employed
in the Tunnel under Mr. Doling, I could not touch the bottom of
this hole with a 12-foot rod; yesterday I passed over it safely.
The depth of silt from Shaft 2 downward to Shaft 1, is the same
as from 2 to 3, and from my own knowledge, I assure you that
there exists the same depth of soft mud on the floor of the Tunnel
down to its terminus at Hyde Park. I further beg to say to you
that in my opinion, no more favorable season can offer for
traversing the Tunnel from end to end than the present one, and
if you will recommend such a work to take the breadth and depth
of the Tunnel right through, &c., I think that I can do it with
three men within three days.
No. 11.
9th December, 1854.
TUNNEL SOUTH OF DARLINQHURST COURT HOUSE.
I beg to report to you that, between 10 and 11 a.m. yesterday,
I descended Shaft No. 2, with three labourers, we took down


with us an iron bar, with which to feel our way, three lamps in
lanterns, and some candles. I had arranged for one man to
assist me in taping the distance traversed, always leaving another
man at my mark to guide him when he came up to it. I think
that, by this means, I secured accurate measurement. For the
first 300 feet I found the fioor covered with about eight inches of
soft mud, at 320 feet we came on a heap of ballast, over which
we had to climb. There is no appearance of this ballast having
fallen from the roof or walls. lam of opinion that it was left
there when the Tunnel was excavated—water finds its way well
through it. I was surprised that silt had not accumulated in a
mass south of this obstruction. But we passed over another 100
feet, the mud only seven or eight inches deep, when we arrived
at a very narrow gut —the narrowest of three we had met with.
These narrow portions of the Tunnel are walled with masonry,
flagged over head, and scarcely two feet wide. We found their
extent to vary from twenty to forty feet, at the south end of this
third gut—the mud is 2ft. 6in. in depth, for a length of fifty
feet. The depth of water (quarter past 11 a.m.) averaged only
four inches over this bank. We passed on carefully over a length
of eight or ten tapes (tape one chain) without meeting much to
remark on besides the heap of ballast and the one deep bank
of mud, when we arrived at another narrow pass, so low roofed
that we found we could get through! it only by dipping our heads
in the water. We had passed, I should say, through twenty feet
of this pass, with little or no inconvenience, when, unfortunately,
the water entered our lanterns, and we were in dai’kness. I was
reluctantly compelled to retrograde. We made Shaft No. 3at
forty minutes past one.
The three labourers appeared to take much interest in the
work, and would, Xam sure, have gone much further. The air
was pure and good throughout.
The portion of the Tunnel through which we passed ia a very
rough excavation indeed. The height of the roof varies from
4to 10 feet; the breadth from 1 foot 10 inches to 3 feet 6 inches.
The stone is a hard sandstone. The walls, except the masonry,
slope from roof to floor, and owing to the roughness of the work
appear water worn. I beg in conclusion to say that I judge
from yesterday’s trial that with small lamps which can be pro-
tected from water as occasion may require, the Tunnel can be
travelled from end to end at this season with safety.
I have omitted to mention that, except on the sand or mud
banks, the depth never fell below 2 feet, or guaged more than
3 feet 6 inches along the line travelled.


No. 11l
13th December, 1854.
I descended the Hospital Shaft at the new Military' Barracks
yesterday with three men. We proceeded first towards the
swamp. During the length of the two first chains the average
depth of water is now 2ft. Sin.; height of roof, 8 feet; width of
Tunnel, at surface of water, from Ift. lOin. to 3 feet. Walls
barely moist. From the second to the fourth chain the depth of
water now averages 3ft. 6in.; height of roof, 5 feet; width at
surface of water, 2ft. Gin. From the fourth to the fifth chain the
water deepened to 3ft. 9in. ; height of roof, 4ft. sin.; width at
surface of water, 2 feet. At the end of this chain the roof dipped
so close to the water as to compel us to return. At the point
reached we were within a short distance of the shaft within the
provost, near the south wall of the Barrack.
A rougher piece of tunnelling than this five chains presents
can be scarcely imagined; it looks as if done in haste ; the sides
are left as blasted ; sharp angles are common, and the projections
along the sides do, no doubt, obstruct the current; the bottom is
covered to a depth of eight inches with a soft mud, mixed with
small stones. Between the third and fourth chains a large piece of
astler is lying in the water way. No built work through the five
chains. Fine hard sandstone —striking fire at the blow of a pick.
On returning to the Hospital Shaft we made way towards
Sydney. At twelve and a-half chains we met a shaft six feet
diameter and, as far upwards as could be discerned by the lights,
sunk through solid sand stone. A large quantity of water trickles
down this shaft. Six chains further one of the men became so
unwell that I considered it necessary to leave the other two men
in care of him whilst I went onward. At 240 paces, say 480 feet,
I arrived at the Toll-bar Shaft. This shaft is sft. Gin. diameter,
lined with mnsonry from top to bottom, A fine stream of water
pours down this shaft. The built walls at each side of the Tunnel
immediately under it narrow the passage to two feet. As I had
already nearly made this point from the Court House Shaft
upward, it was needless to proceed further. I returned to the
men and we got up without accident.
I beg now to tell you that from within half chain distance from
the Barrack Shaft (Hospital Shaft) the Tunnel is a noble piece
of work. The roof is very seldom less—often more —than 8 feet
high. The walls and floor are rough—no mark of pick work,
except for a few yards, but the breadth of water at surface is at
no point less than 3ft. Gin., widening occasionally to 5 feet, and
for short lengths to 7 feet, depth of water (guaged in many
places) from 2ft. llin. to 3ft. Gin. The floor much cleaner of
mud and stones than nearer Sydney.
The air throughout was found pure, the walls only moist.


16th December, 1854.
I beg to inform you that in obedience to your suggestions of
the previous day, I yesterday (15th December) descended the
Shaft marked No. 12 on the lineal map. I turned towards the
City. During the two first chains, nothing occurred worth
noticing ; the soft mud about 8 inches depth, breadth of Tunnel,
3 feet, height of roof from floor, 4 feet 6 inches to 6 feet, water
averaging 3 feet from the floor. At two chains, I met a built
Tunnel, 45 links in length, breadth, 2 feet height from floor,
(floor rough rock) 4 feet 6 inches, depth of mud, 12 inches, flow
of water above the layer of mud, 2 feet. At the northern end of
this Tunnel 1836 is chiselled on the key stone of the arch. At an
interval of 30 feet, I came on another built Tunnel, height, 4 feet
6 inches, breadth, 2 feet, length, 25 links, deposit of silt, 18
inches, depth of water above silt, 19| inches, flow rapid, time,
half-past 7 a.m. At another interval of twelve links, I met
another built Tunnel, 14 links in length, 4 feet 6 inches in
height, from the floor, 2 feet in breadth, silt, 2 feet deep, depth
of water over silt, 18 inches. Thenceforward during the whole
progress made, I found the Tunnel excavated through solid rock.
At 4f chains, I met a Shaft, diameter, 5 feet 6 inches, sunk through
the solid, if there was any masonry it was above the reach of
our light. Starting again ;at chains, I came to another Shaft,
5 feet 6 inches diameter, sunk through the solid. To the next
Shaft 4 chains, Shaft sunk through the solid, very little water
trickling down these three Shafts. The walls of the Tunnel only
moist; proceeding on I met another Shaft, at the length of 4
links, here is the off-shoot shown on the chart. This Shaft is
immediately under the quarry at the rear of the Military Barrack,
diameter, 6 feet, a stream of water pouring down it of two inches
diameter, quite clear of the walls. From this Shaft the turning
to the off-shoot (south) or to the Barrack (north) is sharp, in fact
at right angles. I followed the off-shoot, 3chains, the water
gradually deepened from 3 feet 2 inches at the Shaft, to 5 feet, 2
inches at the end of the 3£ chains. To proceed further was
dangerous, and as 1 could meet only a dead end, perhaps useless.
In this off-shoot the height from floor to roof is seldom less than
10 feet, width at surface of water averages 4 feet. After turning
back to the Shaft, I proceeded onwards to the Barrack, 3| chains,
when all progress was stopped by the dip of the roof. At this
point the water guaged 4 feet, the silt through the whole of this
3i chains averaged only three inches. Our voices were, I learn,
distinctly heard at a Shaft within the wall of the Barrack, and
many of the military were prepared to haul us up. Therefore, I
think, looking at the relative distances of the Shafts we had
passed, that at the point of turning back, we were half chain
from the Shaft within the Barrack. I may as well say here that


within the Military Barrack there are two Shafts, one at the
Hospital, the second near the eastern wall; the first is open, the
second is enclosed in a substantial stone building. Both are draw
wells, but the one enclosed is worked by a crank upon which ten
men can work ; the water is lifted from the Tunnel into cisterns,
and distributed through the Barrack by cocks outside the
building. On returning to Shaft numbered 12, we attempted to
proceed towards the Lachlan Reserve, but the dip of the roof at
half chain left us no breathing room, and I at once directed a
return to Shaft 12.
At 4p.m. I entered the Tunnel at its eastern end; 12 links
from the guaging stone at the mouth, the soft mud is 12 inches
in depth; the water 2 feet; at a chain the mud is 15 inches,
water 1 foot 9 inches ; at two chains the mud increases in depth,
but so also does the water, owing doubtless to some uneveness in
the floor; at 4 chains, Shaft No. 1 is reached. The whole of this
4 chains is a Tunnel of good masonry, arched ; the first 2 chains
4 feet 6 inches in height, the next 2 chains 4 feet only; at the
westernmost side of the Shaft the excavation is through the solid,
but the roof dips suddenly 8 links from the Shaft and forbids
passage. The depth of deposit under Shaft No. lis 2 feet.
Returning to the morning’s work, I beg to report to you that
the character of the Tunnel from Shaft 12 to the turning back
point is uniform (of course I am not speaking of the built
portions.) The height from floor to roof is never below 4 feet 6
inches, scarcely ever above 6 feet; average width at surface of
water, 3 feet 2 inches ; depth 2 feet 4 inches to 5 feet. Although
the walls are not picked, there are no projections. The excavation
is through hard sandstone, and the walls are fair, except in the
built portions, when the width narrows, the deposit on the floor
is not worth mentioning. i
I mentioned to you yesterday, that the exploration of yesterday
morning had satisfied me that on Thursday I had only repeated
the day’s work of Tuesday, that is to say that orf Tuesday I made
way from the Toll-bar to the Barrack, and that descending the
Barrack Shaft (Hospital) on Thursday, I mistook the direction,
and retraced my steps to the Toll-bar. The extreme similarity
of appearances struck me at the time, and on comparing the
measurements I had no doubt on the matter. It is a day’s work
lost, but as any report on the state of the Tunnel will be worse
than useless, if not accurate, I trust that you will receive my
explanation in good part.
No. Y.
18th December, 1854.
On Saturday last, the 16th inst., I directed the men to bring
up the gear to the shaft at the Court House and to open the


9
shaft. I was very unwell from the previous day’s work, having
entered the Tunnel twice, viz. : at 6 a.m., at No. 12 Shaft, and
at 4 p.m., at the Tunnel mouth. At 12, noon, however, on
Saturday, I descended the Court House Shaft with three men,
and proceeded towards the Racecourse. At 9 chains 10 links
I came on a shaft, which must now be considered as No. 2 from
the terminus, Sydney. This shaft is of 6 feet diameter, and
sunk through the solid. From subsequent surface measurement
I have reason to believe that this shaft is very nigh Walter’s
shop, west of Palmer Street, and immediately under the gutter
course no doubt. At the next 9 chains and 2 links we reached
the Pump Shaft, at Riley Street, Shaft No. 1. We proceeded
only 1 chain further towards Hyde Park, when the lights became
dim, and at a few paces in advance our two leading lights were
extinguished. The only light remaining being carried by the
man who followed me with the chain. The air was close, and I
thought it advisable to return in time, to proceed safely to the
terminus. A flag must be lifted off the Tunnel at the Racecourse
to give a free current of air. The character of that portion of
the Tunnel traversed on Saturday is very uniform. The height
of roof from floor is never less than 4 feet 6 inches, never more
than 6 feet; depth of water, through the whole course, 3 feet,
rising occasionally to four feet. The current was very strong.
Width of Tunnel 3 feet, with scarce any variation. No masonry
until we reached Shaft No. 1. The floor is covered with soft mud
to a depth of only five inches on the average, except at No. 2
Shaft—where there is a deposit 18 inches in depth. We met
with no ballast or spauls. This portion of the Tunnel is quarried
through a sandstone of superior quality. There is no scaling of
roof or sides, and although there appear no marks of pick work
the sides of the Tunnel are fairly plumbed—no projections worth
noticing. I suspect, from the depth of water waded through,
that there is some obstruction betwixt Shaft No. 1 and the N.W.
terminus —a few hours work would suffice to satisfy you on this
matter.
No. VI.
19th December, 1854.
This morning I caused a flag to be lifted off the built wails of
the Tunnel at Hyde Park, within twenty yards of the terminus,
just where the screen intended to prevent any rubbish, &c. from
entering the 9 inch main supplying the Hyde Park fountain, the
Park-street and the King-street 9 inch mains, is fixed. Some
months ago, I informed Mr. Ryder that this old screen was fast
rotting, and under his requisition a new screen was made to


replace the old one. I selected this spot for entry to put down
the new screen. This was effected.
I now beg to report that through our progress along the
Tunnel from say the guaging hole to the sluice gate at Shaw’s,
just above Lyons’ Terrace, we found the Tunnel of an uniform
width of 2 feet, height 6 feet; walled with cut stone and covered
with flags overhead ; depth of water invariably 4 feet 10 inches;
length from guaging hole to sluice gate, chains. One of the
three men who went down with me returned back at the first
chain, not being able to dive under or climb over two butt ends
of pine planks 12x3, which cross the Tunnel nearly in a line
with Bathurst-street. Long before reaching the sluice gate, we
felt a want of air. At times our three lights were reduced to one.
The progress was very tedious. On reaching the sluice gate the
want of fresh air could be at once accounted for. At the sluice
gate the Tunnel stood 4 feet 10 inches, but the bottom of the
gate is in fact only 12 inches above the floor, lifted as the" gate is
to its maximum. All progress upward was now barred, and we
returned to the Racecourse, I regret to say, with difficulty. We
were much chilled, and dived under the pine planks only after
many attempts. After getting under, I waited a quarter hour for
my two men, before they could succeed in following me.
We got up without any accident. An hour or two brought us
well round. I beg to tell you that I have many times travelled
the portion of Tunnel gone over this day, with the sluice gate
down, and I am honestly of opinion that the silt on the floor has
not increased one inch since January, 1849. There is in fact no
obstruction from the sluice gate to the terminus at Hyde Park.
I fear from what I have just noticed above the sluice gate that I
shall not be able to report favorably on that portion of the work.
No. YII.
20th December, 1854,
Having opened the Tunnel at the sluice gate, just above Lyons’
Terrace, to which point I had reached on a previous day (see
report) from the terminus at Hyde Park, I beg to inform you
that the new sluice gate, worked by inch screws, when lifted
as high as possible, allows a passage of water, 15 inches in depth
and of 17 inches width. This sluice gate was fixed by Mr.
Bradridge, about years since, under the inspection of the City
Surveyor. A groved sill is fixed on the floor of Tunnel, into
which the gate should drop, and thus prevent the passage of
water from the Tunnel upwards, to the City-mains. This gate
works up and down in a groved frame, but from want of brass
chasing it is a work of some labor to move it. So far from


stopping, when down, the flow of water, it does no such thing
it is all but useless. Fifteen inches above this screw gate is the
old gate, working on hinges, put down by Mr. Shields, in 1843.
This gate, I found on opening the Tunnel this morning, shut
close. In the centre of this hinge gate there is cut a round hole
3 inches diameter, so that, in fact, the Tunnel below has, for
years, been supplied through this small orifice, and by the
leakage through the stone work. This fact will at once shew
you that the masonry cannot be depended on for staying the flow
of water if the sluice gate were ever so perfect. I have since
secured back the hinge gate—it cannot close except by hand.
On proceeding from the sluice gates towards the shaft at Eiley-
street we found the water deeper from 4 feet 6 inches to 4 feet
10 inches, within only 1 chain. At the third chain the water
stood 5 feet. At this point I found that the roof had been
repaired. Here there is lying on the floor of the Tunnel rubble
rubbish to the height of two feet, extent twelve feet. This
rubbish does not, in my opinion, oppose any material obstruction
to the flow of water. Height of water at this point, 5 feet. At
\\ chains our three lights went out. The labourers, 3 in
number, decided on returning at once, and left me, taking back
the chain. As I felt no oppression from foul air I proceeded
onward, trusting to reach the Pump Shaft, Riley-street. At 340
steps, each step no more, I am sure, than twelve inches, I
reached a shaft. Although in darkness I satisfied myself that I
was under a shaft, for I had at the time a batten 8 feet long in
my hand, and with this I struck the walls of the shaft, and
judged it to be of sor 6 feet diameter. Eight steps further the
built work ceased, and I found myself in the natural excavation.
Water at this point, I should say, about 5 feet 1 inch, being
close up to my mouth. At three steps in advance the roof dips
into the water, and accounts for my not having seen any light
from the open Pump Shaft. I returned to the sluice gate, and
found that the men had got up without accident. At 4 o’clock
in the afternoon I descended the Pump Shaft with the intention
of proceeding towards the sluice gate, as nigh as possible to the
point at which I had been turned back in the morning. At
2 chains a defect in the roof has been repaired substantially, but
the workmen have dropped a flag into the Tunnel and left it
there. Six yards further the roof dips to the water. By surface
measurement I believe I may safely report that I had then
reached to within a very few feet of the built Tunnel. I may
here say that travelling towards the Reserve the Tunnel is all
built, from the terminus, Hyde Park, to say 50 yards west of
Riley-street, from that point to the shaft just west of Palmer-
street, the Tunnel is excavated through a hard blue slaty clay.
Within a very few feet from this shaft, looking east, a hard
sandstone takes place of the clay. Tire shaft at the Court House


is sunk through, first, 20 feet of the clay and then through 40
feet of hard sandstone to the floor- Generally speaking I may
report the portion of the Tunnel traversed this day in excellent
condition. The silt on the floor is of an almost uniform depth of
seven inches, and although I travelled a portion of it without
light, not a foot of the wall or roof was left untouched—all is
sound and substantial. The roof all along this portion of the
Tunnel and down to the N. West terminus is of flags.
If it be considered necessary to put down an effective sluice
gate I beg to recommend that the Tunnel be opened at a few
yards above and the flow of water dammed by a few loads of
pipeclay, which can be nearly all taken out after the sluice gate
is fixed, and a few yards of wall above it built solidly with good
cement.
No. YIII.
27th December, 1854.
In obedience with instruction, I entered the Tunnel yesterday
at Shaft 17, with a relay of labourers (three in number)
proceeding towards the Lachlan Swamp to reach as far as
possible. At 3| chains, I met a heap of large ballast difficult to
climb over, the ballast reaching at one point within 1 foot of the
roof; width of Tunnel on the surface of the water, 4 feet; height
of roof from floor, 5 feet; a very strong current; time 9to 10 a.m.
Passing this obstruction, I arrived at a quarter chain, to one of
a more serious character; the first heap of ballast I met with,
certainly fills the passage to within, at one point, a foot of the
roof; but ballast, unless blocked by silt at the upper end, affords
a free passage to water. At 4 chains, I met the next obstruction,
ballast rising nearly to the roof; with much difficulty a way was
made over it; the stones are large, and I have no hesitation in
saying that on an examination of the sides and roof of the Tunnel
at this point, from which there appears not the least scaling, this
ballast was left in the Tunnel by the original excavators.
Travelling towards the reserve, beyond this ballast heap, the silt
is of depth, 2 feet for chain, where it lowers to 8 inches. At 5
chains, I met Shaft 18, and made two chains towards Shaft 19,
when the roof dipped under water, and I was compelled to return.
Two of three lights, those leading, were extinguished, and the
man behind me and myself, felt at this point oppression on the
lungs and extreme pain about the temples, we backed in perfect
safety to Shaft 17. West of this Shaft there is an off-shoot,
running north, the mouth only 10 feet from the Shaft. I followed
this bye Tunnel 1 chain, where it terminates at a dead end of
hard rock; roof, sides, and floor, hard sandstone; but almost


filled at upper end with sand. No doubt one of those off-shoots
quarried into the low ground to draw soakage into the Tunnel.
Proceeding then towards the Military Barrack, at 3 chains, less
9 links, (each link on this chain 1 2 inches), I met two Tunnels,
one setting N.W. towards the Barrack, at a rather acute angle,
the other branching off at a slight angle to the N.E. I followed
this latter, and safely crossed a deep sand hole, which on Saturday
last turned me back. This sand hole is 12 feet in length, depth
unknown, but the sand is firm for footing, with care. At 27 feet
the roof dipped four inches under water. The three lights
extinguished at once we returned safe to the Shaft. lam glad
to say that on Saturday last , I followed up the piece of Tunnel
setting as I have said N.E. towards the Barrack, and at 2 chains
could not crawl over the sand ; this is no doubt an off-set into low
ground to draw drainage. The true Tunnel is the slight turning
N.E. at which I was yesterday turned back by the dipping of the
roof. The character of this portion of the Tunnel is one of
extreme roughness and solidity, all blasting, no pick work, no
built work ; height of roof from floor, 3 feet 6 inches to 6 feet;
average height, 4 feet 2 inches; surface of water from floor,
2 feet 11 inches to 3 feet 6 inches; width at surface, 3 feet;
depth of silt (except above the ballast obstruction between 17
and 18 Shafts), 7 inches. After four hours’ examination of this
portion of the Tunnel, we came up Shaft 17 at 10 a.m. The men
refreshed. I may as well remark here that the position of Shaft
16 is not at all certain ; between the Shaft marked 17, and the
Shaft marked 15, (on the covering flags) there is over the line of
Tunnel an excavation 132 feet in length, 78 in width, and not
less than 12 feet deep on an average, (utmost depth 20 feet.
Advancing NE. from Shaft 17, I met a Shaft at 6 chains ; this
Shaft is well built; lined with masonry to a depth of 27 feet,
where a set-off supports a floor of 2-inch stuff (hardwood.)
Fifteen feet under this floor, the Shaft is quite choked with
ballast; a small trickling of water is heard, no more, no water
visible. Is not this Shaft the end of a mistake ? The true Tunnel
trending towards the Barrack, and Shaft 16 sunk either in the
large excavation I have spoken of, or immediately N.W. of it.
Six men are at work this day, to clear up this matter, by sinking
below the large excavation down to the roof of the supposed
Tunnel.
At 12 noon, I descended Shaft 15 with a fresh relay of three
laborers. Towards Shaft 14, made two chains, and met three
sharp angles, two to the east and one to the west, when the roof
dipped to the Tunnel and barred progress; Tunnel rough and
solid; roof 5 feet from floor; surface of water, 3 feet 6 inches
from floor, with 15 inches of silt; width on surface of water, 4
feet. At the bottom of this Shaft, I came on an off-set towards
the Military Cricket Ground two chains in length; 3 feet in


width; depth of water at entrance, 2 feet, lessening at - 2 - chain to
1 foot, at one chain to 6 inches, terminating at 2 chains, with no
water. During chains of this off-set, the sand is so nigh the
roof that I travelled on my belly. The quarrying is rough and
solid ; the set-off is built up at the termination with rough rubble.
Returned and made progress towards the Reserve ; made 6 chains
and 7 feet, (403 feet) when roof dipped to water ; but still I could
hear just beyond, a dropping of water, which satisfied me that I
was then close on a Shaft. This portion of the Tunnel is as usual
solid and rough ; all powder; no pick work ; but yet with no sets-
off from the wall worth speaking of as obstructions. Height of
roof, 4 feet to 4 feet 6 inches ; depth of water 3 feet to 3 feet 6
inches; width on surface of water, 3 feet 6 inches to 4 feet; silt,
7 inches. Shaft 15 is sunk 15 inches below the floor of the Tunnel
on either side. Two chains to connect Shafts 17 and 15 is all that
now remains to be examined of the Tunnel, between its terminus
Hyde Park and Shaft 19, to afford so far a certainty of its merits
and of its defects. I beg to state that the flags covering the
Shafts from 10 to 20 at least are of soft sandstone, quite unfit for
the purpose, not sufficiently strong to bear the span of the Shaft;
dangerous to move or stand on; a 3-inch hardwood planking
would be far safer. In endeavouring to cover Shaft 19 on
Saturday last, two flags broke and went down in 6 feet water,
very nearly taking the men with them. At the bottom of Shaft
19, the water stands much above the roof of the Tunnel.
No. IX.
30th December, 1854.
On Friday, December 29th, I descended a Shaft between Shafts
15 and 17. At a depth of 15 feet I landed on a hard wood
flooring fitted to the diameter of the Shaft (4 feet 2 inches) and
resting on a set-off in the masonry. Removing a couple of
boards of this flooring, I descended 27 feet, and landed on an
apparent heap of ballast. With no great exertion this rubbish
was hauled up by a large bucket. When I found this rubbish
covered a second floor, resting on a 3-inch scantling morticed
into the sandstone. Dropping to the floor of the Tunnel, I found
the passage barred either way. The Shaft is sunk four feet
below the true bed of the Tunnel, and filled of course with silt.
I beg here to say that I have always taken with me a quarry
needle, 7 feet 6 inches ; a 2-foot rule, and a 7-foot rod, in addi-
tion to the chain; so that you may have the most perfect reliance
on my measurements. By diving slightly I am able to report
that the width of the Tunnel at this Shaft either way is 3 feet
fi inches; the depth of water at the immediate sides E and W


of the Shaft 1 foot 7 inches deepening at once, as I found by my
needle to at least three feet in depth within a yard of the Shaft.
This shaft is no doubt Shaft 16 on the plan ; and now let me
state to you the condition of the Shaft itself. To a depth of 41
feet 6 inches masonry—then a depth of 2 feet rock to surface of
water —then a depth of rock 9 feet 6 inches to the bottom of the
Shaft; guage of water —to silt 4 feet 1 inch—silt, 5 feet 5
inches; height of water in Shaft oyer Tunnel 2 feet 6 inches.
The three lower courses of masonry are perfect (8-inch courses)
but the eight courses resting on these three are much dilapidated.
These eight courses measure six feet; and the rubbish we lifted
from the floor below them had fallen from their face. This is
I assure you the only unsafe portion of the Tunnel I have yet
met with; and I scruple not to say that if means are not at once
adopted to secure these eight courses in their beds, and looking
at the facts that the superstratum is loose sand—that this shaft
has been rebuilt within nine years, and that in so short a space of
time six courses have given way, there is reasonable ground to
fear that the flow of water will in a short time be obstructed at
this point.
No. X.
Ist January, 1855.
On Saturday, 30th inst., I descended No. 20 Shaft, formed of 13
feet masonry, and below this to floor of Tunnel, 21 feet rock,
depth of water 2 feet 6 inches, depth of silt 2 feet 10 inches,
diameter of Shaft 4 feet 2 inches, width of Tunnel 3 feet 6 inches.
Turning towards Shaft 19 1 traversed the best piece of Tunnelling
I have yet seen, much pains has been bestowed on it. lam
sorry to say that at one chain twenty links the roof dipped under
water. I was so anxious to see more of this piece of fine tun-
nelling that my elbow man and myself made repeated attempts
to get through this obstruction by diving, but we failed, and I
was unwillingly compelled to return. The sides are plumbed by
pick, the roof is as square as if flagged, at a short distance from
the Shaft the water deepens to 3 feet 6 inches, width of Tunnel
on surface of water 3 feet 6 inches to 5 feet. Returning to Shaft
20 I then made way towards Shaft 21, that is to say approaching
the Reserve. I traversed this portion of the Tunnel 2 chains 22
links, the height of the roof from floor varied from 4 feet 6 inches
to 3 feet 6 inches, depth of water 3 feet to 3 feet 8 inches, we
dived safely through many places. This portion of the Tunnel is
truly a fine work, the walls are plumbed, the roof is, as if flagged,
solid rock from floor to roof. I tried a pick on the wall and it


struck fire at every blow, the silt is about seven inches in depth
through the whole of the course. At the end of 2 chains 22 links
towards Shaft 21 the roof dipped so low into the water as to
render further passage impossible.
Through all the line traversed this day the current set strong,
a favourable indication that, whatever obstructions exist in the
Tunnel, these obstructions do not much impede the flow of water.
No. XI.
2nd January, 1855.
In obedience to instructions I yesterday continued the exami-
nation of the Tunnel and descended Shaft 21. This Shaft is 36
feet 7 inches, plumb to the floor of the Tunnel; the upper 4 feet
is masonry (8-inch courses) sound, the lower, 32 feet 7 inches, is
sunk through hard sandstone. The bottom of this Shaft is free
of silt, current very strong. Turned at once toward Shaft 22,
advanced 2|- chains, when roof dipped below water, and after
many attempts to dive through the obstruction returned. The
general features of this portion of the Tunnel are very good ;
there is no built work—no need of any, but the walls are
plumbed, or nearly so, by the pick, and worked up to the roof
at a sharp arms, so as to give the Tunnel the appearance of
being flagged over. The average height from floor to roof
through this course is 6 feet, depth of water 3 feet 6 inches to
4 feet, width of Tunnel at surface, 3 feet 9 inches to 4 feet; the
whole 2|- chains very free from silt. I returned to the Shaft, and
made way toward Shaft 20 —that is toward the city—passed a
length of three chains through a fine Tunnel, excavated through
sandstone, 4 feet 6 inches to 6 feet in height from floor to roof;
depth of water 3 feet to 4 feet, width 3 feet 9 inches to 4 feet.
At the end of the third chain we were at once stopped by a sin-
gular obstruction, the roof dipped at once to 2 feet 6 inches, and
the passage narrowed to 2 feet 6 inches, not built work but solid
rock. I returned to the Shaft, and in a few minutes descended
Shaft 22. Upper part of Shaft cut stone 8 feet, and then 21
feet rock to floor of tunnel, diameter of Shaft, 4 feet 2 inches ;
the water at the bottom of this Shaft stands 3 feet 9 inches, but
the walls show clearly that the water has risen to at least 6 feet
in this Shaft. The only way made from this Shaft was 7 feet
towards 21 Shaft, and 4 feet towards 23 Shaft. At these points
passage is barred by the dip of roof into the water. The rock
work of this Shaft and the sides and roof of the Tunnel for the
very short distance traversed, gave fire at every blow of the
pick. As I have tried the pick on the sandstone through which


the Tunnel is excavated, at very many places, I think I am jus-
tified in stating that the stone is of a hard and durable quality.
I have never yet struck a blow on it without bringing fire—a
sure sign of its goodness.
I afterwards descended Shaft 23, 10 feet cut stone, 12 feet rock
to true bed of the Tunnel, but the shaft itself is excavated 4 feet
deeper, which 4 feet is filled with silt. Width of Tunnel, 4 feet ;
diameter of shaft, 4 feet 6 inches, sinking through the rock very
rough indeed ; depth of water, at bottom of shaft, 2 feet 6 inches,
deepening at a few feet in either passage to 4 feet 6 inches.
The actual depth of silt at the bottom of this shaft is 6 feet,
progressing toward Shaft 22. At forty feet roof dipped, and our
leading light dimmed, and extinguished. I considered it unsafe
to attempt to force a passage. On returning to the shaft we
proceeded toward Shaf 24 (the shaft next the reserve) but pro-
gressed only 16 feet when the dipping of the roof again arrested
us. Eoof, sides, and floor of the Tunnel traversed good hard
sandstone —wall and roof well finished. Width of Tunnel, 4
feet; height from floor, 5 feet to 6 feet; depth of water, 4 feet
6 inches to 4 feet 10 inches; silt, 7 inches. Seeing that the
general character of the Tunnel from Shaft 17 towards the
Reserve is so uniform I did not think it advisable to incur risk
by forcing a passage from 23 to 24, a risk which I have incurred,
harmless, nigher the city. During the whole day I have met
with no built work. Eoof, sides, and floor sound and good, but
between Shafts 21 and 22 there is at 1 chain 10 links (these links
are each 12 inches) from Shaft 21 a commencement of a layer
of sandstone of a rather soft nature between the floor and roof,
continuing 40 feet, but the silt in the neighbourhood of this
soft stone is not deeper than is usual, nor does the wall show
any sign of wear.
No. XII.
4th January, 1855.
I beg to tell you that on Tuesday, the 2nd inst., I descended
the Shaft opposite the Court House, Darlinghurst, to proceed
eastward and to ascertain the precise position and bearing of the
Tunnel leading to the Shaft in the gaol yard. I took down with
me the best three men I could select from eight. We found an
increase of 3 inches of water since we were before in this part
of the Tunnel, On reaching the bed of silt which I have already
described to you 400 feet east from the Shaft at the Court House
I guaged 7 inches of water, an increase of 3 inches since I passed
over it a few days since. At this point our leading lights went


out and my three men at once returned back. I beg here to
remark that I can say from personal experience that the extin-
guishment of light does does not always, in our Tunnel, involve
risk of life, the free current of water affords air sufficient for life
if there be the smallest interval between the roof and the surface
of the water. After my men left me I waded on to a point just,
I should say, east of the church of the Sacred Heart, judging by
my stepping and by overground taping. The Shaft leading to
the gaol, is, as far as I could traverse it, really good work,
quarried through good sand stone, much sand lies at the mouth
of this offshoot. At 100 feet from the main Tunnel towards the
gaol I found the depth of silt and water 4 feet, nearly equally
divided, breath on surface averages 3 feet 6 inches, height of
roof 5 feet. I was previously made aware that a strong iron
grating was fixed in this Tunnel to prevent escape from the gaol
(quite needles) but the depth of water and accumulation of sand
barred my reaching it. At the point of return I could just see
the light from the gaol shaft, but I was, in truth, too much ex-
hausted to spare strength to arrive at a known conclusion. I
returned to the Court House Shaft and found the men all well.
Well I now beg to tell you that I have never found myself in
better health than on this occasion of walking the Tunnel, diving
occasionally, after my men left me, with no inconvenience what-
ever ; but on my return to the Court House Shaft at 7 p.m., I was
seized with a violent fit of retching which, in spite of good medical
attendance, continued until two o’clock the next morning, when I
dropped off to sleep for two hours, when I woke, quite free from
sickness, but weak indeed.
Getting rid of this personal matter, I beg to assure you that
the Commissioners have now done all that they can do to ascertain
the soundness or the unsoundness of the Tunnel, and although I
have not been able to travel right through it, through the roof
dipping at points below the surface of the water, I beg to
inform them, through you, that all the blasted or quarried work,
is through good hard solid sandstone. Where the Tunnel is
built, say from the terminus at Hyde Park to within a few yards
of the Pump Shaft at Eiley Street, it is flagged over, the walls
good and sound. The other portions of built work I came on
were good indeed—arched, well keyed, and the arms of the stone
as sharp as on the day when it was set. In my opinion the only
weak point in the Tunnel is Shaft 26, eight courses of the
masonry of which should be repaired at once, at any cost.
Yesterday, by permission of the authorities, I inspected the
Shaft within the gaol. It is of depth, 56 feet to the water —
all masonry—depth of water, 4 feet, but the shaft is sunk as is
often the case, 3 feet below the floor of the Tunnel, (water
abundant.) And now on the subject of obstructions. On the
floor of the Tunnel passed through, doubtless the worst of it lies


between the Court House Shaft and the Shaft at the City
Boundary, and between the Tunnel mouth, and the first Shaft
from it. Yet I am of opinion that having at present a good
supply of water, even after so long a drought, it will not be
advisable to disturb the Tunnel by attempting to clear it of the
silt and ballast. I should say let this cleaning out be an after-
work.
In conclusion I beg to recommend that the laborers employed
in this examination of the Tunnel, do receive some extra pay for
the wear of clothes and risk. They have done their best.
And although they did, as I have reported, desert me on two
occasions, I consider that they were quite right in doing so,
when the lights went out. With me it was a matter of duty to
follow out my instructions. I could hardly expect that the
laborers would be willing to incur as much risk as myself; but I
repeat that they have done all that could be fairly asked of them,
and have behaved well.
JOHN WARNER,
Superintendent Water Works.
January 4th, 1855.
Printed by order of the Right Worshipful the Mayor,
CHAS. H. WOOLCOTT,
Town Clerk.
Town Hall, Sydney, Ist October, 1868
S. T. Leigh. & Co., Printers, Hunter-street, Sydney.




Scale /or Itycm.


felftUO
