

REPORT
OF
COMMISSION APPOINTED BY SYNOD
ON JUNE 9TH, 1907,
TO ENQUIRE INTO
“The Religious Knowledge and Habits
of the People of the Diocese."
Part I.
INTRODUCTORY, STATISTICS, Etc
Part II.
EVIDENCE AND DIGEST.
Part III.
SUMMARY.
Part IV.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
BRISBANE:
R. S, HEWS & Co, PRINTERS TO THE DIOCESE, 229-231 ELIZABETH STREET.
1909




Part I
INTRODUCTORY.
In Synod on June 9th, 1907, at the expressed wish of His Grace
the Archbishop, the following’ resolution was unanimously passed, on
the motion of the Archdeacon of Brisbane :
" That the present widespread ignorance of the Bible, and of Christian
faith and practice, cdils for the earnest consideration of the Church ;
and that it be an instruction to the Committee of Religious Education
of the Young to appoint a commission to consider the whole question,
and to report to Synod— (a) Upon the condition of religious
knowledge in all classes of society in the Diocese of Brisbane; (b)
upon the agencies now in existence for imparting religious knowledge.”
This resolution was the means of bringing the Commission into
existence, as in accordance with this resolution the Commission was
appointed, on which the undermentioned were asked to accept
seats : The Archdeacons of Brisbane and Toowoomba, Rev. Canon
Osborn, Revs. E. Oerton, E. C. Ganly, J. W. Ashton, Mrs. J. H.
McConnel, Mrs. Gocher, AJessrs. R. O. Bourne, F. W. S. Cumbrae-
Stewart, J. Allen, C. A. Flint, C. A. Pearce. The whole of these
accepted office, with the exception of the Archdeacon of Toowoomba,
who found the distance too great to allow of him attending the
meetings of the Commission.
The Commission began its labours on August 16th, 1907, when the
first meeting was held, at which meeting Mr. C. A Pearce was
unanimously elected Honorary Secretary. Since that date the work
of the Commission has been vigorously carried on. The special
character of that work being the obtaining of all possible information
on matters coming within the scope of the Commission.
An interim report was presented to Synod at its last meeting, when
the Commission obtained leave to continue its work, that being found
necessary in consequenee of the absence of His Grace the Archbishop,
who has at all times taken the greatest interest in the work of the
Commission.
In order to obtain all possible information from every part of the
Diocese, and from every possible source, two series of questions
were formulated and appended to circulars which were issued—
1. To the whole of the Clergy of the Diocese.
2. To many of the Laity, both men and women, especially to
Church officers, Teachers of both Private and Public
Schools and to others whose experience would be of value.
There are several of the Clergy from whom much information
might have been expected who have failed to send in replies ; this, in
view of the fact that the Commission was brought into existence by
Synod at the wish of His Grace the Archbishop, is a matter of
surprise.


The information which has been obtained both from Clergy and
Laity on all the points sought is of the very utmost value, and is
amply sufficient to enable the Commission, not only to formulate its
report, but also to suggest to Synod some recommendations. The
startling nature of replies to the more vital questions seemed to the
Commission to make it absolutely necessary in the interests of the
Church for such recommendations to be made.
To place all facts before Synod it will be necessary to give some
statistics to show as nearly as possible how the Church stands, and
how the members of the Church in the Diocese are assisting to carry
on the work of the Church, and the different organisations of the
Church, and how the general work of the Church is being supported.
These statistics are taken from the only available source, viz, the
Year Book of the Diocese ; it is most unfortunate that these statistics
are not more complete—at present they are almost useless for our
purpose,—and it will be a recommendation from the Commission
that steps be at once taken by Synod to make these statistics
accurate and reliable. There are, however, some figures which can
be used with safety, viz., those bearing on the population of the
Diocese, and on Church accommodation.
The population of the Diocese is given at 354,344. Thirty-seven
per cent, of this are members of the Church of England, in round
numbers, say 131,000, for this number there is Church accommoda-
tion provided for 23,145, or for only about 18 per cent of Church
members. Taking the Churches throughout the Diocese, the attend-
ance, reckoned liberally, averages two thirds of the accommodation
provided ; therefore out of a nominal membership of 131,000 about
15,000 only attend Church. These figures speak for themselves.
The statistics shew that the numbers on our Sunday School rolls
are diminishing, and also that the number of Sunday School teachers
is considerably smaller than it was : but too much reliance must not
be placed in the figures on account of the incompleteness of the
returns, and it is fair also to note that the average attendance of
scholars has slightly increased.
Sunday School Scholars.
Number on Roll ... 1907 —11,097 1908 —10,109
Teachers.
Number on Roll ... 1907 — 976 1908 — 842
The Commission finds it impossible to give any particulars res-
pecting the Communicants, owing to the defective nature of the
returns.
In the circulars issued a series of questions were given to which
replies were desired. These replies have been carefully tabulated,
and those received from the clergy have been divided as follows :
(a) Those from the city and suburbs.
(h) Those from country towns.
(c) Those from outlying and bush districts.


To some of the questions only a very general answer has been
given, specially to those relating to the attendance at both Church
and Sunday School) but to the other questions in nearly every
instance most emphatic and decisive answers have been sent, and it
is on these that the Commission in this report must unfortunately
strongly dwell.
Part II.
EVIDENCE AND DIGEST.
In this division of the report there is presented a digest of the
evidence received, and in some cases the actual words from replies
are quoted. The Commission does not feel itself able to endorse in
every instance the opinions expressed; they are given as the
individual expressions of those from whom replies have been
received.
REPLIES TO CIRCULAR I.—FROM CLERGY.
Question i. —Church Attendance.
In the City and Suburbs the attendance is fair, generally better in
the evening than in the morning ; the greater proportion attending
is of women, the proportion being about 75 per cent, of women.
The absence of men from Church is everywhere strongly remarked.
In country towns the attendance is fair ; about the same proportion
of women to men as in the City and Suburbs.
In the Bush anti outlying districts the attendance seems to be
most Erratic and fluctuating, the proportion of men to women,
however, being much closer than in the City and Towns. Many
reasons are given for the fluctuating attendance. In some districts
the ordinary work of the week is carried on, especially is this the
case in districts 'where dairying is the chief industry. In others
(especially amongst the men) the usual Church hours are devoted to
games, shooting, and fishing expeditions, and many forms of gambling.
As one reply puts it, “ Many of the men who are not engaged either
shooting or fishing, spend Sundays in gambling and dodging the
police round the back lanes of the town.”-.
Question 2.—Attendance at Sunday School.
To this the answers are also given mostly in a general way, but all
point to the conclusion that the Sunday School, as the principal
agency now in existence for imparting religious knowledge, is not
doing the work of training the children of the Church in a manner
that is satisfactory. There is a great outcry throughout the Diocese
for teachers, and it is a matter of grave concern that there is such
difficulty in obtaining capable teachers; it is also a matter of the
gravest concern that the number of Sunday School teachers instead
of increasing is diminishing.


In the city and suburbs the attendance is only fair ; there is great
lack of interest on the part of parishioners. The want of teachers
is not so urgent as in the country. There is great need of home
interest and of home influence: the children are left to their own
wills.
In the country towns much the same state exists as in the city
and suburbs. The attendance in some cases fair, but the interest
taken is generally slight and the work not well supported. There is
a great need of suitable leaders and teachers.
In the bush and outlying districts Sunday School work is almost
at a standstill. Bush schools are few and teachers hard to find.
In the matter of attendance children are generally allowed to please
themselves. In many places the dairying industry is given as the
principal reason for non-, or irregular, attendance.
Question 3. —Religious Knowledge.
Following on what has been said on the two preceding questions
it is not hard to understand the nature of the replies to this. In
city and suburbs the religious knowledge of young people is vague,
and most unsatisfactory. There seems almost a complete lack of
any home teaching ; what teaching is given is given by the Sunday
School, and, in consequence of the meagre attendance at the
schools, the ignorance of the mass is lamentable. With the
majority the Bible is almost an unknown book, and with the mass
the use of prayer is practically non-existent.
The religious knowledge of children in the bush and outlying
districts is lamentably poor. The great majority of these children
are growing up in complete ignorance of any of the truths of
religion, and it is a deplorable fact that the Sunday Schools and
other scanty means of religious instruction seem to be totally
inadequate to bring to these children the knowledge of that teaching
which is the only true basis of sound morals and upright living.
There is grave danger lest the children of the bush should become
white heathen.
Question 4. —Habits of the People.
(a) Sunday Observance.
The replies to this are sufficient to cause the very greatest
concern to the Church generally. From city and suburbs, country
towns, bush, and outlying districts comes the same report that the
Sunday is not observed either as a day of worship or as a holy day.
In the city and suburbs there is a grave tendency on the part of
the majority of our people of nearly all classes to regard the Sunday
as a day of rest and recreation, and to treat very lightly its call to
prayer and worship. This is noticeable on the part of many who
have other opportunities for leisure, and replies sent in to the
Commission indicate plainly that individuals who hold important


office in the Church cannot be held blameless in this respect. The
river and the bay are a great attraction to the people; in fact,
loyalty to their own Church, and a desire to obey the Fourth
Commandment, seem to have a very insufficient hold upon the
hearts and lives of a considerable number of our Church people.
From country towns there comes the same cry: the day given
up to excursions, games, gambling, and in many places to carrying on
the regular work of farm or dairy.
In many places of the bush and outlying districts there is
practically no Sunday in the proper acceptance of the term. There
is in many cases rest from ordinary work only to take on that which
is more harmful.
(b) Private and Family Prayer—Bible Reading.
In most cases these are almost non-existent. Private prayer is a
practice with some, but not general. Family prayer practically does
not exist. Bible reading not observed ; the Bible as a rule is an
unused book.
(c) Support of the Church.
This in a general way is fair, but in many cases there is an absence
of systematic giving; too much reliance being placed upon outside
efforts, such as bazaars, concerts, euchre parties, dances, etc.
In outlying districts the financial needs of the Church seem to be
usually met.
Question 5. —Special Causes which Exist to Interfere with
the Religious Habits of People.
There are three special causes which are made painfully prominent
in replies which have been received, and it must be said with intense
regret that the same causes seem to exist in all parts of the Diocese,
and amongst all classes. Indifference, ignorance, immorality—these
three causes exist in city and suburbs, country towns and outlying
districts; and these are the causes which at the present are at the
root of most of the evils. It would be impossible and highly unde-
sirable to publish in this report exact details of the replies that have
been given under the third of these headings, but your Commission
has been made aware of the existence of such a state of things as will,
if allowed to continue, bring disaster not only on the Church, but on
the State generally.
Question 6.—Prevalence of Unbelief.
There seems to be very little evidence of any general prevalence
of unbelief. In some isolated cases it is known to exist, but in
replies received the evil that is so prominent is not that of unbelief
but that of indifference—“ brutish indifference,” as it has been Styled
in one of the replies.


REPLIES FROM LAITY TO CIRCULAR 11.
In the replies that have been received from the Laity, the different
questions have been treated in a much more general way than in
those from the Clergy. This to your Commission appears to be an
advantage, as it has enabled those who have replied to give their
views without any reservation, and on the matters remitted to them
it is almost astonishing to note the unanimity of opinion that
prevails.
Question i.
(a) Sunday Observance.
That the Sunday is losing its hold upon the people of the Diocese
seems to be the opinion of all those from whom replies have been
received. Sunday as a holy day, a day of worship, a day of Church-
going, is fast becoming a thing of the past.
In city and suburbs it is observed by the great majority as a day
of rest from work, but not from pleasure. The non-Churchgoers are
in an immense majority. The absence of men from the Churches
is most marked ; even officers of the Church in many cases are noted
for their absence, rather than for their presence, at the regular
services of the Church. The Churches that are well filled are the
exception. This absence from Church applies to all classes, but
specially to the higher class and to the actual working classes, the
attendance generally being almost wholly made up from the middle
class of the people.
(b) Special Reasons for Non-Attendance at Church.
The replies to this from the Laity are varied. The following are
extracts from replies received :
“ The Church is out of touch with the people.”
“ Services too dull and monotonous, and in many cases
conducted in a lifeless manner.”
“Too much left for the Minister and Choir; no interest by
the congregation.”
“ Attendance affected by the personal like or dislike to the
Clergyman.”
“Too much exhortation from the ignorant to the ignorant.”
“Great lack of sympathy on the part of the Clergy.”
“ Want of interest by the Clergy in individuals except of
a particular class.”
(c) Habits of Reverence, especially in Church.
The replies to this show that the habit of reverence in Church is,
on the whole, fairly satisfactory ; there are cases where an improve-
ment could be made, and it is noted that the spirit of reverence at
worship is more marked in country towns than in city and suburbs.


In some city Churches this need for improvement is marked.
There are some people who seem to forget that Churches are places
of worship, and are not for conversation ; as one reply puts it, “Some
people act as if they were either in a circus or concert hall.”
Special Causes which may interfere with the Religious Habit.
The answers received under this heading from the Laity are very
decided, and can be summarised as follows :
Utter indifference.
Ignorance of Bible and of the Church.
Desire for pleasure.
Non use of prayer.
Dislike to Clergy.
Absence of restraint on part of parents with children.
The need of example by those who should show a good
example to others.
The conduct of those holding prominent positions.
The absence of such places as Mission Halls, where the
less favoured classes might be mirftstered to by the
Church.
Question 2. —Is the use general of any Special Literature
for Children to assist them in the Religious Habit.
It would appear from answers to both divisions of this question
that there is not a general use of any special literature that would
assist them, but evidence points to the fact that there is a very
general use of literature which is having a very harmful effect on
both young people and adults. As one reply has it—
“ That frothy, exciting, sensuous, and unhealthy reading
matter (hardly deserving the name of literature) is only too
commonly indulged in by our young people.”
Question 3. —Prevalence of Unbelief.
Very little is said on the question of unbelief. This does not
seem to be one of the pressing troubles. The three causes
mentioned earlier are again made prominent: Indifference, Ignorance,
Immorality.
Question 4. —Religious Knowledge of People.
This is of the very scantiest, and extends to all classes, and is very
pronounced even amongst professing Christians.
Question 5.— Amusements.
The desire for pleasure is most prominent, and is undoubtedly a
great hindrance to the religious habit, and the Church by giving
countenance to so many forms of amusement is an offender. While
she is continually running shows, entertainments, dances, card
parties, etc., for the purpose of raising funds, can it be surprising that


people are led into extravagances in this direction. The following
are extracts from replies received —
“ The materializing effect of amusements most marked.”
“ Gordon Clubs not always what they should be. Many of
their members think more of the Club than of their Church.”
Question 6.—Special Vices.
Gambling is a special vice which is producing a most harmful
effect in many directions, and it seems from answers received by
your Commission that this vice is on the increase. There are many
men and women occupying high positions in society, and Church-
goers besides, who set a sad example here, and by that example are
helping to cause this vice to spread.
Question 7. —Any Other Information.
Under this heading many matters have been brought under the
notice of your Commission which have been most useful- Some of
these have been dealt with in other parts of this report. There are,
however, a few which must not be omitted. They are as follows —
“ The need of home influence and teaching.”
“ The need for greater unity between Clergy and people.”
“ The need of more Clergy and teachers, especially those
wiph practical knowledge of the people and their surround-
ings.”
“ The great need of friendliness between members of the
Church, especially on the part of those in authority towards
others.”
“ The inability of the Church services to reach the people.”
“ The continual requests for monetary help to carry on the
work of the Church.”
Part III.
SUMMARY.
On reviewing the evidence your Commission note, not without
surprise, that certain features of the life of the people have been
insufficiently emphasised ; for instance, the decay of family life, and
the sense of parental responsibility, and behind this the loss of
reverence for the marriage tie and its obligations, appear to the
Commission to be full of menace to the future, and to demand
earnest attention ; but the main elements of the situation are brought
■out clearly enough. From all sides there comes the sad confession
that Sunday observance in the I iiocese is most unsatisfactory,
Church attendance as naturally follows is erratic, uncertain, and in
many places lamentably'poor. That Sunday Behoofs do ppt appear
to be doing the work pf Instructing the youqg so satisfactorily a?
they should, consequently religious knowledge, even of elementary


religious facts in the case of many of the younger generation, is sadly
deficient, and in many bush districts is almost non-existent.
Many causes for this state of things have been alleged and
undoubtedly many weaknesses and defects havelseen pointed out,
and with almost monotonous regularity. Three evils have been
brought forward as contributing mainly to the unsatisfactory condition
of our religious life, viz.: indifference, ignorance, and immorality.
It is against these that the Church must wage war. It is evident that
there is urgent need of a great spiritual revival in our midst, and
your Commission venture to hope that this report will be instrumental
in arousing all loyal Churchmen and Churchwomen throughout the
Diocese of Brisbane to greater efforts, more willing sacrifice, and
more earnest prayers in support of any steps that may be taken- to
overcome these special evils that seem to be so rife amongst us.
Part IV.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. That steps be at once taken to have the statistics of the
Church placed upon a proper basis, and to have them made accurate
and reliable.
2. That, with a view of maintaining the family life as the best
school of moral and spiritual character, branches of the Mothers'
Union be started throughout the Diocese.
3. That with a view of increasing the efficiency of Sunday Schools
it is desirable that Conferences of Sunday School teachers be held in
all the large centres of population.
4. That far greater and more widespread efforts be made by Clergy
and Laity alike, to use the opportunities offered for teaching the
children in day schools outside school hours.
5. That more use be made by the Church of the ministry of
women as Sisters, whose chief work would be to minister specially to
the sick, the degraded, and the fallen.
6. That, with a view to further Mission work, it is desirable to
form centres for social intercourse and religious instruction in the
more populated districts.
7. The Commission desires heartily to recommend the Church of
England Men’s Society as a bond to bind men together in the
religious life, and as a missionary force to witness among the
indifferent. 1
8. With a view to the encouragement of purity amongst men, the
Commission begs earnestly to recommend the formation of branches
of the White Cross League.
Signed on behalf of the Commission,
CHARLES A. PEARCE,
May 21st, 1909.
Hon Secretary.
