

REPORT
OF AN
Extraordinary General Meeting
OF SHAREHOLDERS IN THE
SOUTH COAST & WEST CAMDEN
CO-OPERATIVE CO., LTD.,
HELD IN THE
TEMPERANCE HALL, KIAMA,
On Tuesday, January 4th, '98.
BUSINESS :-To discuss Proposals for Altering the Name of
the Company, and for the Extension and Re-Organ-
ization of its Business.
The extension proposals were very fully discussed, and accepted
by the Meeting ; and suqsequently the formal resolutions, in
accordance with the Companies’ Act, providing for some of the
necessary alterations in the Articles of Association, were at the
close of the Meeting passed unanimously.
SHOALHAVEN STREET, KIAMA:
JOSEPH WESTON, GENERAL STEAM PRINTER.
MDCCCLXXXXVIII.




NEW PROPOSALS.
THE CO-OPERATIVE AWAKENING
which is now so evident among the Dairy Farmers and Agriculturists
all over the Colony, and their determination so definitely expressed of
embracing this principle with a view to marketing their own produce,
and thus rid the distributing trade of the many speculative abuses
which exist at present, has practically made it imperative upon the
Directors of this,
THE PIONEER OF FARMERS’ CO-OPERATIVE INSTITUTIONS
to widen its sphere of usefulness, and enable the Dairymen, Maize
Growers and Farm Producers generally of the Colony, to secure to
themselves the full legitimate profits of their industiy.
Since the establishment in 1881 of this Company by a small
handful of producers in the South Coast and West Camden districts, the
success of the principle, as applied to the marketing of produce, has
been demonstrated beyond all doubt.
As the first in the field, with but a small capital, it had experiences
to gain—mistakes were made and some capital lost —but, despite all
this, it has done phenomenal work on behalf of the Dairymen and
other Producers, and the cash turnover for the year ending April,
’97, with BUTTER, BACON, CHEESE, EGGS, MAIZE, LUCERNE,
HAY, CHAFF, LIVE STOCK, &c., reached the fine total of
£233,000
while that for the half year ending October, 1897, amounted to
£149,015.
These figures, taken from the cash book of the Company, are
sufficient evidence of the confidence reposed in it by the general
Producers, and their full appreciation of the actual £ s. d. benefits
gained by them in the protection and advancement of their interests.
Although the turn-over has of recent years been steadily
increasing, speculative business has been consistently avoided, aDd
losses by bad debts have been reduced to a minimum.


Some of its Achievements.
1 •—lt has created a standard of trading which other sellers of
farm produce are now imitating.
2. —lt established the butter trade with Great Britain for the
benefit of and to the immediate gain of the producer.
3. —lt was the first institution to give producers the profits of the
export trade and a direct voice in the fixing of the market value of
their produce, by the aid of conferences and the creation of a
Co-operative Council of Producers to act in conjunction with the
Management.
4. The Directors are representative men drawn from the different
producing centres.
•5. The Branch Distributing Depots of the Company recently
established in consuming centres such as Newcastle, Wollongong,
Orange and Fremantle (West Australia), ensure to Producers a wider
and more profitable distribution of all lines of produce.
6. —The affiliation of interests between this institution and the
large Wholesale Co-operative Organisation of Great Britain saves to
the producers here the expenses of London middlemen, by the direct
distribution of their exported produce through the 1100 English
co-operative retail stores.
With these achievements behind them, the Directors and
Management anticipate with confidence the fullest possible support
from the dairy farmers, maize and wheat growers of the colony, as set
forth in the present proposals.
Although much of the successful work of this institution has
hitherto operated to the benefit of the dairymen, a large business has
been done in maize, hay and general produce, In addition to embrac-
ing the newer dairying centres (more particularly on the Northern
Rivers), it is the intention of the Directors to devote these new
proposals for extension to the bringing about in some degree of
centralisation in the distribution of maize, wheat and other produce.
Once this is accomplished and the sales concentrated under co-operative
management, then the producers in these lines can reap equally with
the co-operative dairymen the full reward of their labour by a direct
control of the sale of their crops.
The speculative abuses and disadvantages of the old-time
commercial agency system have been unfortunately made too apparent
to all growers. Once the produce is placed on rail or steamer the
farmer loses all command of it. Under an experienced co-operative
system he retains full control up to the time of realisation, no matter
how great his distance from market may be.
By availing themselves of this opportunity, Producers are not
interesting themselves in any new venture under inexperienced
management, but, on the contrary, they will be joining hands with a
BONA FIDE FARMERS’ CO-OPERATIVE INSTITUTION,
with all its 16 years’ experience behind it.


Reduction in Capital.
The reduction in the existing capital is rendeied necessary Ist.
By the losses sustained in establishing the export butter trade with
Great Britain during the seasons 1891-2-3. 2nd. lo meet the
depreciation and loss upon an extensive refrigerating plant wbicn,
although having done good service in the interest of Producers, has in
a sense become obsolete by the recent introduction of more modern and
economic machinery. 3rd. In order to place the incoming shareholders
on an equitable footing. In this connection, it mnst not be overlooked
that in 1888 £2,808 out of the Reserve Fund was paid over in shares
to the existing shareholders.
:o-
Producers’ Shares and Debentures.
It will readily be understood that during the 16 years of co-
operative work —and more particularly to meet the expansion of trade
of the past ten years —a large amount of capital had to be called into
requisition.
Simultaneously with this progress, the dairymen of the various
centres were busy creating Co-operative Butter Factories at a cost
varying from £l5OO to £2500 each (and recently again in the e r | ct i
of large Central District Refrigerating Factories.) It is estimated that
fully £150,000 has been expended in this way.
This, though absolutely essential for the general productive good,
practically prohibited the Directors of this distributing institution from
securing necessary capital from the farmers. Another equally
important factor which debarred the issue of shares was the unfortunate
bank crisis of 1893. Consequently, the Directors were compelled to use
capital drawn from financial institutions at a high rate of interest..
The Directors hare now for the FIRST TIME an opportunity of
remedying this, and the object of issuing these Producers’ Shares and
Debentures is to gradually extinguish the bank overdraft, and to
return to the Producers the interest that has hitherto been paid to
the Bankers. „
It must be clearly understood that the object of an institution oi
this character has not been to realise heavy profits, but it was solely
established for the protection and advancement of the Producers, w, th
the determination to rid the distributing trade of the abuses of the
speculative middlemen ; and by the sustaining of prices thus enable all
farmers interested to secure to themselves the bona-fide profits of their
industry, less amount required for actual w orking expenses and to paj
them a reasonable interest on the capital used.
In this connection the Directors particularly wish to draw attention
to the last two years’ Profit and Loss Statements given on page 8, from
which it will be seen that the surplus over working expenses available
for interest payment was as follows :—Year ending April, 96, £3,0-7 ;
Year ending April, ’97, £3,329. This is equivalent to 5 per cent, on
over £60,000. # .
Therefore, independently of the increased business of the current
year, the Directors, on these results alone, can with every confidence
anticipate the disbursement of an annual dividend on the share capital
of at least five per cent.


Extracts from Profit and Loss Account.
For Year exding 30th Ai*ril, 1896:
By Surplus over Working Expenses, after writing
off £531 4s. lid. for bad debts .. .. £3178 17 1
Out of this amount interest was paid amounting
to £3123 19s 4d.
For Year endixg 30th April, 1897:
By Surplus over Working Expenses, after writing
off £753 10s. 9d. for bad debts .. .. £3329 15 7
Out of this amount interest was paid amounting
to £3283 3s. lid.
The Directors and Management particularly desire to point out
that, pending the subscription of 10,000 shares by Producers, all new
capital will be placed to the credit of a TEUST ACCOUNT, and will
be refunded to the subscribers, less actual expenses, in the event of
the FULL NUMBEE NOT BEING TAKEN UP.
The Share List is now open to the Producers. Application for
less than five shares will not be received.
The Shares will be payable as under:—
2s. per Share on application,
2s. per Share on allotment,
And the balance by calls of 6d. per Share per month from the
day of allotment.


The South Coast and West Camden Co-operative
Company, Limited,
Extraordinary General Meeting
of Shareholders.
/-\N the 4th January, 1898, a meeting of Shareholders in the above
U Company was held in the Temperance Hall, Kiama, for the purpose
of considering resolutions submitted for changing the name of
the Company and making several alterations in the existing
Articles of Association.
I). L. DYMOCK, ESQ. (Chairman of the Board of Directors) presided,
and other members of the Board present were :-Messrs. ALEX. CAMP-
BELL, J. T. COLE, JAMES MONAGHAN, E. E. EVANS and JAMES
STEWART (Mr. JAMES CORK, Ulladnlla, was unavoidably absent);
besides Messrs. C. E. D. MEAEES (Commercial Manager),
ondD. Mel'AD YEN (Financial Manager). ME. E. J. FAIEBAIRN,
of the English Wholesale Co-operative Society, was also present; with
MESSRS. ANDREW JOHNSTON and DAWES, of the Byron Bay Factory;
ME H. BEIICE, of the Berry Central Factory; ME. GOLLAN, Richmond
River; MR. D. HARTIGAN, Tweed River; and about 130 representatives
of the dairying industry and shareholders in the Company.


Opening the Meeting.
mHE CHAIRMAN welcomed the gentlemen present, and expressed the
I pleasure he ielt at the large attendance, which was the greatest number
attending any meeting of the Company. He called upon the managers
of the Company to explain the nature of the proposals.
MR. McFAD YEN (Financial Manager) first read the advertisement
convening the meeting. He said that the resolutions to be put before them
that day would have to be confirmed at a subsequent meeting of the Share-
holders; but as the proposals mentioned would only form a part of the
scheme, further meetings would have to be called to complete it. It was
intended to call two meetings of the Saareholders about 17 days from that
date, the first of which would confirm what was done at that meeting, and
the second to put before them the remainder of the scheme, which would in
turn have to be confirmed at another meeting. Although these meetings
seemed cumbersome, they would give the shareholders an opportunity to see
what the management were doing, so that there would be no hole and
coiner business about it. Ihe first resolution to be considered that day was
to change the name of the Company to “The Farmers’ Co-operative
Company of New South Wales, Limited;” the second, that the articles
of association be altered as follows :
(a) By the insertion of the following articles after article 19, namely -—l9a
“The Company may from time to time, by special resolution, reduce
its capital, by paying off capital, or cancelling capital which has been
lost or is unrepresented by available assets, or reducing the liability on
shares, or otherwise, as may seem expedient. ”
“And the Company may also sub-divide or consolidate its shares or anv
of them.” *
(b) The following articles shall be inserted after article 53, namely 53 A
“The Directors may from time to time establish a local committee or
committees or co-operative councils for any purpose which appears to
them likely to promote any oi the objects of the Company, and may
assign for the action of any such committee any district of which they
think fit, and may from time to time discontinue all or any of such
committees as and when they shall see fit, and may from time to time
alter and re-adjust the boundaries of any district assigned for the
action of any such committee.”
(C) Ihe article providing for local or district representation on the Board of
Directors, and contained in the fifth of the special resolutions passed at
an Kxtroardinary General Meeting of the Company on the 17th August,
1893, and confirmed at a subsequent Extraordinary General Meeting of
the Company on the sth September, 1893, shall be and is hereby
cancelled.


At present they wanted to reduce their capital, or to cancel wlmt had
r. wo'm gsz
S" StXtt lort
Ce was aIC this safeguard for the shareholders-.hat notlung could he
done without their sanction. Article B. provided for giving new produci
districts a voice in the directorate of the Company. At present a number of
"jnTw rett represented, hut the management wished them oh.
(Hear, hear.) Article C. would expunge one that was made in 1803. as
fo "™Tliat in forming the hoard of Directors the principle of Local I> ' stn '*
Representation may, if the Board of Directors think it
observed, and the Board of Directors shall have power to define the
districts and re-adjust the boundaries of the same a, ” *
from time to time require, and each such distnpt shall be entitled to
elect a Director provided such district shall have taken up and holds
xt e Thousand or such a proportion thereof the D.re ors
may, having regard to the business capacity of the district, think
sufficient.” ,
At the time this article was passed it appealed to cover everything: buWhen
they came to put it into actual working order they found it impracticable
was possible for the general body of shareholders to elect two directors fi
a largely represented district and reject one from a district where the
numbered shareholders was not so great. On this account they had decided
, n - f f TToar bear ) He would ask them to remember that the
££££ tthlm’tLonly embraced a portion of the scheme to be
submitted, and that the balance would he brought or, at subsequent mee i „ .
—Applause.
MPr MFARES (Commercial Manager of the Company) repeated Mr.
McFadyen’s assertion that the resolutions submitted to them were only a
part of a scheme under considerati nlt was then- provmce to the*
Tironosals as fully, candidly and simply as they could. If he anted y
evidence of the vast and increasing interest that was bang aken y
farmers—if he wanted any further knowledge of the fact that a Protective
institution like the South Coast Company was every day becoming
necessary to the producers, he had it in the largo attendance at that meeting
Th?v were anxious that the shareholders should thoroughly consider their
piupeSs anThe was voicing the wishes of the Directors when he said they
w-ere all anxious to hoar the cand d opinion and criticism of everymm con-
i • flvnm Tlioir only object was to do goou o
The people-thtTotocers - who w« really their masters. He would ask
them aU to remember that their deliberations and their speeches should he
as broad a basis as possible. They were net dealing with a small provincial
company, or with the South Coast Company of some 10 years ago; but with
A LARGE REPRESENTATIVE COMPANY


whose principles and operations affected the whole of the dairying industry of
New South Wales. The result of that meeting would have a most lasting
effect on the whole of the colony. They could all recognise the importance
of this meeting. To enable them to grasp the position to the fullest
extent he would briefly trace the history of the Company. The farmers of
the South Coast, 16 or 17 years ago, had decided to throw off the mantle of
the old system of Commission Agency. They had found the Agents wanting
in all the best attributes of commercial life—that instead of the farmers
getting their legitimate profits themselves, the Agents participated in a lot of
the surplus profit that should have been given to the producers. They
started the Company on a small scale, and the co-operative example they
had set had been followed by the whole of the colonies in one form or
another. (Hear, hear.) They had always the glorious satisfaction of knowing
that it was the South Coast Company which instilled the principles of
co-operation into the producers of New South Wales. (Applause.) That
was the example and realisation of self-help.
AS THE PIONEERS OF CO-OrERATION
they had been subjected to the ordinary penalties of pioneering
and had perpetrated mistakes. They had had all their experience to gain,’
and had opposition from Sussex street to combat; that they had succeeded
in doing this, was evidenced by the meeting that day and more than all else
by the large turnover in their business. The Company would not have been
in existence to-day, or their business would not have been retained unless
it carried out the objects for which it was started. This was
sufficient evidence in itself. They began with a small capital, and in
rented premises, which had changed hands, and the new owner decided to
raise the rent. At this juncture the directors advocated the building of
a place of their own, which was done. At the same time, one of the many
planks in thoir platform was to establish the
EXPORT TRADE IN BUTTER,
and to do this it was necessary to procure refrigerating machinery. When
this machinery was purchased the science was very new—practically in its
infancy. The best machinery available was purchased; and with the
exception of that of the Fresh Food and Ice Company was the only Kofnder-
ating convenience of the kind in the country. These circumstances compelled
them to launch a certain amount of capital. Most of them knew the difficulties
they had to overcome in the export trade. Their butter at that time was not up
to the right standard, and was unsuitable for the London market. Still, it
was all they had ; and it was to their credit that they set the trade going. ' In
1886 the farmers were called in and shared the profits of the first shipments;
but through a want of concentration, knowledge and unity of interests
which had since eventuated-they did not continue. In the years 1892-3-4
the Company took upon their shoulders the responsibility of conducting the
export trade, on account of this want of concentration. Unfortunately the
quality of the butter was not up to the requiied standard, and it also met a
bad market. They had advanced the factories too high a price on it. The


result was a loss of £3,800 to the Company. But while this exportation was
going on prices were sustained on the local market to a profitable limit, and
realised a distinct
PROFIT OF BETWEEN £30,000 AND £40,000 TO THE PRODUCERS.
He would ask them all to take a broad view of this matter. The
refrigerating machinery they had purchased was a Dry Air process.
Since then the science had gone ahead. More economical machinery came
into the market, and theirs in a measure became obsolete. Other
companies sprang up specially to do the freezing of butter, sheep,
and perishable products. Competition brought the rates down, and it would
have been madness for them to contiuue working the out of date
machinery they possessed. These were two things which appeared to be
mistakes ; but at the time it seemed the best that could be done. If they
were mistakes, they were made in the interests of the producers. A company
of this kind might not only have made errors of this character ; but might have
gone in for heavy speculative business or indiscriminate credit, and lost
heavily in bad debts. For ten years of their transactions they had only ran
through £BOO of bad debts per annum, so that if they made mistakes in one
direction they did not do so in another, but protected the best interests of the
producers. The fact of them having lost this capital in the refrigerating
machinery and the export trade made it necessary for the directors to appeal
to the shareholders for the power to writedown a certain amount of capital to
meet the depreciation and also write off the loss in exportations. They had
not been exempt from the commercial depression which the colony had
experienced during the last five years. The Company had a lot of difficulties
to overcome ; but it appeared to him that the two mentioned were
THE ONLY DIRECT LOSSES THE COMPANY HAD EXPERIENCED.
And these losses were not recoverable in their ordinary process
of working. There were two kinds of capital which were necessary to
carry out a business: the first was fixed capital-in machinery and build-
ings ; and the second a working capital, for use in the ordinary working of
the business. At one time they had paid dividends of from 10 to 15, down
to 8 per c°nt. Money was plentiful, and there was not the slightest difficulty
in getting capital at a very low rate of interest from bankers. At this
juncture all the districts of the coast were erecting factories of their own,
and it was thought that capital could in this way be more profitably used
than in giving it to the Company. They decided to let this go on, and get
what money they could from the banks ; and when the factories were in good
working order it was their intention to ask for more capital. Then came
the bank crisis. They were aware that the rates of interest on their
current capital rose, and they had been unable to make an appeal, and
like everyone else, they were handicapped by the rates of interest.
Their present object was to remedy this. When he took up the joint
management of the Company he recognised first that before they could ask
the dairy farmers to take up more shares they must show them that they
were capable of


SUCCESSFULLY MANAGING THE COMPANY,
Secondly, they must demonstrate that the farmers themselves
were the owners of the Company, and the profits derived from it
must he returned to them. The result had been a large and steady increase
in the business. There had been a splendid return of confidence, so much so
St f ;o r^ 81 mr nthBendil,g ° Ctober ’ 1897 > th(> y tad enjoyed a turnover
ol £14.),000. The year before they thought they had put through a very
good twelve months with a turnover of £233,000. He had a
Certificate from an accountant, Mr. James R. Campbell, that the actual cash
takings for the six months mentioned were
£143,331 15s. 4d.
This was from the cash books. (Applause.) In all their dealings they wanted
to bo fair and aboveboard. He need not tell them how great and rapid
had been the growth of the dairying in lustry. They had evidence before
them dally to tins effect, and the turnover he had mentioned showed that
tlie Northern Bivers farmers were throwing in their lot with the Company.
They had further knowledge of the growth of the co-operative spirit in the
recent conference held in Kiama, when all the factories consigning to the
L ompany were represented and decided to support the South Coast Company
The meeting represented the intelligence of all the co-operative boards of
directors, and passed resolutions-Ist, to make straight for co-operation;
and 2nu, to accept the responsibilities and profit and loss of the export trade!
For their own benefit they had a right to do this. They also decided that
Histead of allowing the Agents to store heavy quantities of and gamble
with their butter they should themselves retain their butter under their own
control and reap what profits there were to be made upon it. (Applause.)
In storing this butter themselves for the winter trade they had a
TREMENDOUS LEVER AGAINST IMPORTERS,
and to work for their own good. Mr. Meares here read the following
proposals of the Directors for extension :
Ist.—The alteration of the name of the Company to that of “The Farmers’
Co-operative Company of N.SAV., Ltd.”
2nd. the increase of the number of Directors (as provided by the Articles of
Association), with a view to giving a fuller representation to producers.
° rc * - ie creation of local Committees or Co-operative Council or Councils of
Producers, to confer with the Management in the fixing of prices and
all matters connected with the marketing of produce, such as, say,
butter, maize, wheat, &c.
4th. The reduction in the value of existing shares of £1 each to 10s., with a.
view to writing oft' the capital lost in establishing the export butter
trade, and in refrigerating machinery.
oth. To issue to Producers Only and those directly interested in produc-
tion of 15,000 £l Shares at par.
6th.—The issue of debentures to the value of not less than £lO,OOO bearing
interest at the rate of 5 per cent.
The growth and advancement of co-operation had gone ahead during the past


two years: and the name of the Company was now too local to meet the
demands of the times and the producers of the colony. (Applause.) They
should forget that they had been a provincial company, and realise that
now the Company was the largest in the colonies for distributing produce.
Let them take as liberal a view of the matter as they could, and
EXTEND THE HAND OF CO-OPERATION TO THE PRODUCERS
IX THE NORTH AND ELSEWHERE—
Iet them say “the benefit we have achieved we will extend to you, and give
you a representation on our Board and Councils.” Let all producers band
together the same as the different co-operative butter factories did in August
last. Then the passing of the resolutions set before them would be only
a matter of form. Their working capital had been drawn from banking
institutions; but they wanted to alter that state of affairs. The interes
they now paid must divert to the pockets of the producers. They proposed
issuing 10,000 shares, to producers only , and another 10,000 debentures.
They had in writing from their bankers a distinct offer to the effect that
immediately the 10,000 shares were subscribed they will accept as security the
debentures and advance them working capital
AT NOT MORE THAN FIVE FER CENT. INTEREST,
and the balance of the overdraft will be reduced to seven per cent. This
seemed to him to be a complete indication of the confidence put in them. He
had also much pleasure in stating that a fresh deed of mortgage on the
Company had been completed at a reduction of 1§ per cent, in interest-
-41 per cent, instead of 6 per cent. (Applause). That was one more evidence
of satisfactory prospects. Mr. Meares here quoted the amount of interest
that was proposed to be saved by these arrangements, as follows .
The interest paid at present, Caledonian Company s
Mortgage, July 19th, 1897, was as under
The City Bank average overdraft, 8 per cent., say £2,400 0 0
Mortgage on building, 6 per cent 1.050 0 0
3,450 0 0
Under new proposals interest would be paid to
Mortgage on building, £17,600 at 4i per cent. ... 787 10 0
Debentures, £lO,OOO at 5 per cent - £OO 0 0
City Bank (subject to reduction), £lO,OOO at 7pr ct. t OO u O
Shareholder’ Capital, New, £lO,OOO, and Old
Capital reduced to 10s, £9,500, at 5 per cent. 975 O O
£2,962 10 0
After paying a 5 per ct. dividend to all Shareholders ..jo*? in
this will show a nett annual saving of ... £4B/ 10 u
This transference of the 8 per cent, to the producers
SAVED THEM £5OO TER ANNUM.
Some of them might say that it was a large amount to pay; and if thej
looked at it from a factory point of view it was. But when they considered
the large representative business the Company was doing they w ould say that
its surplus earnings should be something more like £4,000 or £5,000 per year.
Now, as to their ability to carry out their proposals, they were not taking a


dip into the future, but were dealing with the present and their tranactions
during the past two years. Mr. Meares here referred to the earnings and
amounts of interest paid' since April, 1896. They wanted, he said, to transfer
this interest to the pockets of the producers and carry on the business under
a reasonable rate of interest. It was a great deal to ask any management to
carry on this business and pay 8 per cent, interest. There was a very
strong co-operative awakening amongst the producers all over the colony to
market their own produce. He had found that the maize growers on the
Macleay River had formed themselves into a farmers’ union with a responsible
council. He had the pleasure of attending one of their meetings, and had
witnessed a strong and determined effort made for co-operation, so that they
had a splendid opportunity in their new proposals for extending and pro-
moting business of that character. They should
GET THEM IN AS SHAREHOLDERS
and give them all the facilities for maintaining their trade and obtaining the
legitimate profits which the dairymen of the coast had enjoyed. The tendency
of co-operation was upward. The example set by the South Coast Company
had been followed all over New South Wales and in the other colonies. A
great conflict was at present going on between the wheat growers and the
miller?. The millers had decided to give less for the wheat, but the
growers were also determined to get all the profits they could for themselves.
There was distinct evidence of the necessity for the expansion of the
Company in prospective; but leaving the future out of the question, the
business that had been done during the past two years was sufficient for the
shareholders in proving that they were capable of carrying out the proposals.
(Hear, hear, and applause.) He asked them all to give
their candid opinion on the questions before them; and he felt sure the
result of this meeting would be an object lesson to the farmers and the whole
co-operative movement of New South Wales. —Applause.
Ihe CHAIRMAN said that the power the Directors asked for was only
to altoi the Ai tides of Association, and they could discuss them durin < >' the
next meeting. The alteration would mean a reduction of their capital. 0 The
previous speakers had explained the need for altering the name of the
Company. It was one they all knew well for the past 16 years ; but when
they came to consider the Northern districts and the assistance the Company
cvt from the faimers there they must all see the need for the change The
Northern River farmers who consigned their produce to Sydney, when they
received their cheques in return looked upon the name, “The South Coast
Company, as simply some small institution like many others. Their aim
was to make the Company one for the whole colony. During the past 12
months they had established branches in Western Australia Newcastle
Wollongong and Orange. They wanted to bring all the outlets under their
protection and to dispose of the produce to the best interests of the producers
He was glad to say that their outlets in Great Britain did not consist of
consiguing to one or two stores in Rondon. Thev had a representative
present that day from the English Co-operative Wholesale Societies (Mr
Fairbairn) who was able to help them in v
DISTRIBUTING THEIR PRODUCE IN 11,000 RETAIL SHOPS.
(Applause.) The icduction in capital they were asked to go in for


would give everyone five per cent, interest, and would leave an annual
surplus in interest of £487 10s. Everyone of them were aware how property
had depreciated in value of late years ; and as a Company they had to tell
shareholders that their premises and machinery must stand at a lower value
than at the time they were built or purchased. And the C ompany bavin
incurred a debt, not their own, of £3,800 which had been paid to their clients
as advances on the butter, were asking them to write down a reduction of
capital not absolutely lost, but which they had actually received as an over
advance. People who were not producers, and who had invested their
capital had a strong case to complain. It was the producers who had got
the benefit, and not the capitalists. He believed that if the proposals were
carried and their shares reduced to 10s and they paid five per cent on the
remaining capital, and a reduction in interest of £ooo per annum on what
now opening up, it would not be very long before the shares
would be up again to their old value. This point was one of considerable
interest. Some people had an idea that if their shares were reduced they
might be called upon to pay another 10s. to make up the £l. This was a
great mistake. The 10s. would be
WRITTEN OFF AT ONCE
and no further calls could be made upon it He told them for the
benefit of those who were a bit foggy on the matter. The Company woie
about to do nothing new. There had been a complete revolution amongst
campaniesof late. 8 AU the institutions of the country'tod.had .ton*
before their shareholders, some of them several times foi the purpose' ot
reconstructing and altering their position. Che South Coast Company vw 3
not about to do anything of this kind, but the Directorate were about to
show the shareholders how they could receive
A “payable” interest.
If they were sensible men they must see that the reduction of 3 per cent, in
interest was a dividend in itself. (Applause ) Dunng the past few yefii 3
£150,000 had been spent in co-operative lactones alone, and £<2,000 h ad.
been spent by commercial companies competing for the iaimeis produce.
What was it going to be in the next few years ? The industry was going on
by leaps and bounds. It was their only safety as a company to carry out
these proposals. The competition was going on in the north and all over the
•colony They had the greatest amount of promises for assistance, by
farmers who saw the need for controlling their own industry. Consequent
on the 10.000 new shares being subscribed and taken up, their bankers h
promised to give them £lO,OOO at 5 per cent. (Mr. Hymock rood a
telegram from Mr. Alexander Perrott of the Croki Factory, statin 0 his
inability to be represented at the meeting,.but wishing it mry
Co-operation had several phases. By their own support a “ d undj
would risk nothing. They would be making a common fund fiom which
they all got an actual return for their money. They had had to fight them-
selves up to their present position, and it they had been worth nothm * G J
would not have been worth fighting against. (Applause.) The 1 hreetorsas
pioneers had had uphill work. But his work would not have been
Eiven to the Companv if ho had not known the benefits that would be donved
and the eventual they must attain. It was for the shareholders
now to take advantage of all the fighting in the past and their present posi-
tion. Thf ,J^ s J HE THIKO ur AXD carry it out themselves.
Let them ioin in with the Directors in their proposals, and by doing so they
would be strengthening themselves. They had their own representations ,
but let them also take in shareholders from other parts, give them also a fair
representation, elect their committees in these far off place« ami they kd a
representation from one end of the producing districts to the other. Ho felt


that they would have more than a passive expansion. In conclusion, he
moved that the proposals as read be carried in ylubo by the meeting.
—Applause.
MR. ALEX. CAMPBELL seconded the motion. He said he would with
all others who had the interest of the Company at heart like to place it in as
good a progressive position as he could. Thov were beating their opponents
on every ground they took up ; and now. failing on other points, their
opponents were going so far as to issue circulars,
TO WHICH TnEY HAKE NOT PUT THEIR NAMES,
pointing out the position of the Company with their bankers. lie hoped to
s°e the shareholders and producers generally place this farmers’ institution
above these attacks, bv subscribing more capital so that the business could
be conducted by the shareholders for themselves alone. The company had
absolutelv nothing to fear from the financial institution with which thev did
their business : and he had been assured by the head of the bank that if any
one had anything to say derogatory to the financial-dealings of the Company
to send them to him, and he would satisfy them as to whether or not the
bank was willing to carry on their business. (Applause.') That was of
some importance to those running the companv. lie felt convinced that the
producers would look at the matter in a natural way, and that there would
be no difficulty whatever in getting the capital necessary to have the business
in their own hands. He was sorrv such a lot of time would be taken up
with the several meetin gs ; but this fact was surrounded with the principle
of safeguarding the public. There would be plenty of time to consider them
by the next meeting, when the final touch would be given. The business of
the meeting was almost all of a preliminary character. He hoped there
would be a bigger attendance at the next meeting. —Applause.
MR. MEARES said the essential point of these proposals hung upon one
thing, and that was that everything put forth was subject to the 10,000
shares being taken up by producers. They could not obtain the advance
from the bank on their debentures unless these shares were subscribed—
which did not mean “paid up.” They were determined to adhere purely
and simply to the issue of shares to producers only. To show their honesty
of purpose in the matter, they intended placing all the capital subscribed
into a trust account, and failing the subscription of the first 10,000 shares the
whole of the money so collected would be handed back again to the producei’S.
Mr. Meares read a letter received from Mr. Alex. Hay. of the Berry
Estate, favoring the proposals, and expressing a wish that they would be
favorably received at the meeting. Mr. Meares also added that he had
received assurances of support from producers in every direction.
Mr. W. Harvey: Mr. Meares states that he has travelled in the North,
and that the Company would get a good deal of suppoi’t from thei-e. Were
the dairymen of those districts anxious to take up shares in the Companv ?
Mr. Meares said they had never been asked to do so yet. Some of those
who were present at the co-operative conference in TCiama recently would
remember that the same question came up there. He had replied that new
proposals would shortlv be submitted by which thev would have an
opportunity to become shareholders. The meeting that day was to lav these
proposals before the present shareholders. He could say that the feeling in
the North was just as strong and the spirit every bit as determined as in the
South to carry out in its entirety the principle of co-operation. Some of the
farmers in the North were more prosperous than those in the South, and the
prospect of their taking up shares was on that account much better.
Personally, he was hopeful of a number of shares being taken up by the
dairymen and maize growers. The whole after-success of their proposals
would depend on the action, the tone and spirit of that meeting.


a TdVmston (Byron Bay) said that with regard to the Northern
Mr. Andrew Johnston ( } £ A bad betm at many ot the
Eivers, lie knew fo1 '““““ Vhe iuestion was : How could they assist
movemcnt to a
succTsdul iSue to support the Company by taking up shares.-Applause
„ xt-itph BOYD said he came there fully intending to give e
HUGI i n i.ia nower. It looked very bad on the part
proposals all the opposit ,J? . W as very easy for a man with
ot tie Directors to bring hem forward. of the North to
one or two shares to say “wr te it oft , tat tor toe t m look
come in and derivethebenehts made by the capital ° Meare s had
well. In his opinion it showed a bajpnrfacing Bhareholderß would
made his explanation to the> efte JJ some^ y a P t and le , sene d his opposition,
he taken in, it had- alter d h d gtarted wlth nothing but producers.
He thought the Company snou bers had a right to considera-
As they had not done so, capitalist mtontoa ** not WO rHed we ll
tion and a fair interest on th f ir .“ on ' y ;. XSfat The expense of the
from first to last, lhey s u , They were writing off half their
cap.tali.ts, who were not.studied ut all. Ibej. were wn yery
“Sfh to « P wi»e oik tkeu capital.
- ,dma “ ase tho
taSi MrjOHN MONAGHAN said he would make bold to compliment
safeguard to the shareholders „ P^ rite o ff hal/his capital, but would
turn to Mr Boyd, he wished a n^ nbßo]Ab9 for as much more,
write off the other half, and then sit aown a that they
He hoped that was also the opumnol all presenu inter / s t was a
must carry on dmap J ’ rlt was removed the better. All
xniihtone round their nee . ° jt He sympat hised with the Directors,
they wanted was £10,01)0 to r y F f or t ae benehc
He t™" l he JTiwld «em ' must y eub S cnoe this capital, aod
Of those who had elected the WQU J be vote d fools if they went away
control their own market. J , . , pg . a ; n a f the mercy of the
from ff now. Tig murt■ wateti o£ the benefit the Company
middlemen. It they omy wenc tk eir butter it would
had recently given them in a x J visiting the Richmond River district
Pf ™ • fnSttel go"c into cSatious regarding the charges
lately he had with some menus g found that the farmers
of a large proprietary company , e XC essive ch an amount
Coas? Company's
Mr W Harvey : Will the reduction in capital affect the voti 0
power? The Chairman: No! . . ...
P vrD T T pot -R said he desired to say something in connection wit
MR. J• T V wMr Bovd. To those who held a large number of
the matter mentioned by Mr. Boyd • bt seem a hardship.
shares as a speculation. arose through shares being
The whole difficulty in b • Had it been so the difficulty
taken up not on a true co-opeiative basis. Hd t b wti ch the
would not have occurred. - ihe omy oojeci
Company started was to
ASSIST THE DAIRY FARMERS,


and put them in their proper position as regarded their produce. But to look
at the matter in even the light of a joint stock company, was it not a better
thing to get a lair dividend from half their capital than lo allow the whole
of it to be idle? 1 hey were not basing their calculations on things that
might happen, but upon those that had happened, and on the actual working
of the C ompany for the last twoyear>. They wou'd know that if the seasons
of late had been ordinary ones the turnover of the Company would have
been very much greater. If tnese proposals were carried into effect it
would mean a veiy gieat saving in interest and a handsome dividend would
be paid They had paid dividends before, and would co soagain. Give the
proposals all the help they possibly could, and not look at the matter from
the same point of view as Mr. Boyd. There was another point he wanted to
allude to. A great deal was being said by the opposition about the Com-
pany ’s financial position, but
XIIEIR CHEQUES HAD NEVER BEEN DISHONORED.
How many Commission Agents were there who could say the same thing?
How many were there at that meeting who had not experienced this ? This
was a big record ; and looking at all the difficulties they had gone through
during their 16 years’existence they could show a wonderful result. He
knew all the handicaps and the difficulties and the errors in the Company’s
working in years gone by; but look at the transactions for the past few
years. There was not a man but would say the Company had been run for
the benefit of the producers, and who would give the Management and
Directors a fair show in dealing with their work. If they had not been
doing good for the farmers they would never have met with opposition in
Sussex street. He heard a Commission Agent say a few days ago that he
had imported 12,000 boxes of butter into this colony during last winter , and he was
proud of the fact. What was the result of that so far as the producers here
were concerned ? Would they say that by the action of this man in bringing
in this butter they weie not put in the position of working from morning to
night lor nothing at all ? It they weie piepaied to hand over ammunition
to these men to fight them with, the butter would always be brought in
against them. What the Company was fighting for was to take the power
to regulate prices out of the Agents’hands. H was not a matter of the
Lompany, but of the farmers themselves. He was rather inclined to dispute
the fact that the Directors had not done five pounds worth of wora for the
Company ; and the farmers of the colony would back him up in that con-
tention. The most pleasing thing to him that day was to hear that the
farmers of the .North were only waiting the opportunity to give the Company
support. They as shareholders should look at the matter from a broad
standpoint, they must consider whether, by taking in new shareholders
and going in properly for the proposals, they were anxious to derive some
advantage fiom their capital invested, or to have none at all.—Applause.
MB. THOMAS ARMSTRONG said they should extend their confidence
to the Directors and thank them for what they had done in the past, and
their action in bringing these proposals the to shareholders. As to Mr. Boyd’s
remaiks about the capital, he thought that the assistance they would get
from other quarters of the colony would make the shares far more valuable
than they were at present. He held probably as many shares in the Company
as any man present, and had always felt a strong interest in it. As to the
Directors not doing any good, let the shareholders, by unanimous vote, back
them up in their proposals ; and if they did not do their duty in the future,
when they met them on another day they could come down upon them like a
thousand of bricks. Be hoped they would vote unanimously for the
proposals.—Applause.
MR. Chas. BARNES (Sydney) said he rather objected to Section A in the


second resolution, on account of its diffidence. It seemed to speck of: future
couMence’ffithe Company ;Tudl". . f»0 “for
worth of bacon for bm duong the past twelv. rnontha as agsin^
the previous year, and he hoped to make it i 10, S lha t the
He nelieved that all the new shaies would bf jaken p.
shareholders would not consent to. go hid done for
aura that Mr Bovd. when he considered what tne uompuujr «>«*
him m the past, woild consent to the writing off elf the
see it kept to the front and made a success.— Applause.
Mr. Meaies said the term, “ from time to time,” “ ac fth« SJSewd-
legal usages. He did not think that anyone reading a report ot the pioceed
ings would attach any importance to the teims used.
mQ'PPTT WESTON said that, as a shareholder, it appeared to
himftomfvef, of 'the business before the meehug rt
was a question as to whether or not the farmers were to go back to the old
*•?i -ss? u ?ic: m No'.r no,
ao 6 blck Mr Boyd's remarks ibo.it all of the capital being subscribed
by produced was qSite right. The shareholders should hays been
from the commencement. If there was an injustice or tt g a 8 a
thev would do it to the shaieholders who were not pioducers. He w
no/-producing shareholder, but he would willingly foreg£► one hafand g: ”
the other half to help to make up the losses of non-producers, for the sake ot
the Company.—Applause.
ME. G. SOMERVILLE said the Directors could not carry out their
work to the satisfaction of everyone without capital. It wouid Y
dav when the South Coast Company was broken up. As for himseii, ior
long period after the Company started he bad, through
the agency system, though he held shares m the Compa y. hatter served
vears he had been consigning to the Company, and had been far be “ er B ® rv ®.
bv them than ever he had been before. If he forfeited 10s each on his
shares he was of opinion that he would be paid back ten times over in
resaTt ofsales effected for him by the Company. Be
Boyd would have to admit that the Directors had done a lot lor the Company.
MR C J CULLEN expressed his hearty approval of the proposals put
before the meeting They w’ould legitimately extend the usefulness of the
Company, and also be the means of extending en . • . ori
dairying industry all over the colony. They mus a «. hiit thev
account of adverse seasons dividends had be ®°_ their* present capital than
would secure more of them on half the amount P capital
on all of it. It was better to have something in return tor half the capital
than to have none at all on the whole of it. App ause. ...
MB R. J FAIRBAIRN at this stage gave an address. He saidlhe must
apologise for intruding, but his explanation must be his
the co-operative movement. He was not there at the ujntatumof anyone
as he had expressed to Mr. Meares a desire to come amongst thom because
so far as he could gather and his knowledge went he believed, the interests oi
the producers connected with this movement were identical with tb ? ir ™
England. It was to get as near in touch with the producers m this country


ae he was at Home that he was here. Any news of the Co-operative move-
ment in tbi» country that he might seid Home would be interesting
to his people in England; and they would know at least that the people-
here were on the right track. He had been very pleased to hear some of the
remarks made, because he recognised that Co-operation must be of the first
importance in this country. It must be the first consideration. There might
be individual influences and sad tricks played upon it, and doubtful periods;
but depend upon it if once the upholders of the principle dissembled and got
away from the straight track they would make openings for their enemies to
destroy them ; and would then have to fight their battles over and over again.
The results of
CO-OPERATION MUST ALWAYS RE OF THE GREATEST GOOD
TO TIIE GREATEST NUMBER.
They could only attain that by collective energy. They would pardon him
for saying that he believed the Directors were acting in the right direction.
Commercial men would at once see the drift of their desires. The Company
was one that should not be bound to the interests of the South < /oast alone, but
the material interests of the producers at large. He had heard one gentleman
remark adversely upon the reduction of their capital from nearly £20,000 to
something under £10,000; but this was
A MERE FLEA-BITE TO THE BENEFITS THEY WOULD RECEIVE
from the movement, particularly after the Company’s experience
of sixteen years. When he came to the colony he had no idea that the
Company was in existence so long; but he was all the more pleased to hear
it, and to see so many present who had been connected with it for such a
length of time. It showed that their hearts and commercial knowledge were
in the right direction. The closer they stuck to their Co-operative principles
the better for the welfare of the staple industry of their district. They in
England recognised Australia as a food producing country—that their
products were to be exchanged for the gold oi the Old Country; and it was
for the producers here to endeavour to deiive the greatest possible benefit
from that fact. As their experience would teach them, it must be apparent
to all that they could only gtt the greatest benefit from their labours
BY THEIR OWN COLLECTIVE EFFORTS.
His people in England had experienced many difficulties; and it had just
occurred to him that the amount the South Coast Company were going to
reduce their capital by was similar to an amount lost some four years ago by
his Society at Home. They lost it because they were fighting the capitalists,
in order that the worker might get justice for his labour. It was not the
first money they had lost in the same direction. The movement in Great
Britain had lost no less a sum than £lOO,OOO in fighting the capitalists ; but
IT HAD ALWAYS BEEN MONEY WELL SPENT,
as teaching them something tresh. To-day the Co-operative movement in
Great Britain was in a sounder position than ever it had been. The £lO,OOO
which the Shareholders here were asked to write down would remain as an
object lesson to them. They had experienced their vicissitudes and their
misfortunes; but was there a Company that had not lost more in proportion
than the South Coast Company had done 't Of course they gained this
money in the past, as they had received constant advances; and the little
they would lose by agreeing to the new proposals, although it might appear
large in figures, was nothing to what they had gained. The 10,000 extra
shares they would subscribe would give them
THR GROUNDWORK OF AN ORGANIZATION SUPERIOR TO ANYTHING
IN AUSTRALASIA.
He was proud to say he could compliment the South Coast Company as the


inaugurators of something which had been and wonld be of vital importance
to the producers. In Victoria, Mouth Australia and New Zealand thev had
nothing like the Co-operation of the South Coast Company of New South
Wales, though New Zealand had tbe nearest approach to it. He was pleased
to see they had grown in 16 years to such an extent, that they had such
splendid prospects, and that the producers in the north were willing to join
them. It showed that they had a prospect for development beyond the
conception even of the gentlemen who all along had fought so manfully and
truthfully for it. (Applause.) They had naturally made mistake" ; but so
had every other man in business. It taught them not to do the like again.
If the Company had not made mistakes they would have been too good for
this world. (Applause.) He thought that, fiom a commercial point of
view they were taking the best commercial course they could under the
circumstances. They were going to save something like £5OO per annum
straight off They could, bv gradual reduction in their overdraft, reduce
their interest by something like £2OO per annum, and in the end be able to
pay it all back to the producers or shareholders instead of into the banks.
In a few years they would get back the whole of the £lO,OOO they were
asked to pay away, as it were, at present.
IN EIGHT YEARS THEY WOULD HAVE THIS CAPITAL BACK, AND
FIVE PER CENT. 'INTEREST BESIDES.
Tbr a continuous time after that they would, instead of paying the banks, be
paying themselves for the loan of their own money ; and that was a great
consideration in the management of their organization. He did not feel that
he should say more than congratulate them on their meet'ng and the
handsome manner in which they received the proposals. He would say,
however, that his Society had done business with the South Coast Company
by taking some of their butter to England. He thought his Society had
given satisfaction (hear, hear); and he could say that the South Coast
Company had given satisfaction also. (Applause.) They could depend upon
this that so long as thev could work in harmony together it would be to the
interests of his Society to work hand in hand with the Co-operators in this
country, and it would not be the fault of those at Home if they lost the grasp
of the interest and trade with this country. He could assure them that it
was not a question, as had been stated, of getting the produce irom his
country at as cheap a price as possible and selling it as dear as possible; but
of getting good produce at a reasonable price for distribution amongst the
Co operators in England. So long as they could support and assist the
producers here, the Co operators in England would not be backward in doing
so. As time went on he hoped the experiences of his Societv and the
Co-operators here would bring them into closer touch, and that the present
was the
COMMENCEMENT OF A NEW ERA.
He believed the time was not far distant when they could bring all they
required from the Old Countrv through tbe.r own Company. Instead of
using other methods, they would have their own channels, and save money
on many of the present commissions between here and England. He hoped
that before the meeting closed they would weigh well what had been said,
give their directors a good show, and let them see that thev were going to
support them in every possible way in their endeavors to reorganize and start
their institution in tbe new undertaking. From what his observations told
him. the Directors had done not onlv five pounds worth of work, but
manifold work, for which great credit was due to them. He was very
pleased to have addressed such a large and representative meeting.
Applause. ~
MR. McPHAIL, Chairman of the Farmers and Dairymen’s Co-operative


Company, said he was of opinion that the Company was taking the
wisest and best course for its advancement, and the proposals should meet
with the hearty support of every shareholder.
The Chairman at this stage put the motion to the meeting, and it was
carried unanimously.
■—n ,;o: ■■ ■
Mr. C. J. Cullen proposed a hearty vote of thanks to, and confidence in
the Directors, coupled with the Management, for the manner in which the
Company had been managed in the pa9t. Every producer who consigned his
produce to the Company knew that every individual Director and the
Managers had done their best to advance the interests of the Company and
its clients; and they would be wanting in their duty if they did not pass
thic vote.
Mr. John Stewart seconded the motion. He complimented the manage-
ment on the progress of the Company during the past two years, in the face
of bad seasons, by increasing their business when that of nearly every other
institution had decreased. This was the best evidence of good management
that could be shown.
The motion was carried by acclamation.
Mr. Dymock, in responding, thanked the meeting very heartily, on
behalf of the Directors and Management. He thanked them all the more
because he believed their vote embodied the fact that everyone was
satisfied with the proposals. It would give them a great impetus. He hoped
to see them all at the next meeting, which would be held on the 27th of
the month, when they could discuss the proposals in detail.
The meeting then terminated.
W. H. PALMER,
Shorthand Reporter, Kiama.
January 6th, 1898.




