





REPORT
ON THE
GOLD-.-MIWES
Muimt Morgan,
ROCKHAMPTON, QUEENSLAND,
J, MACDONALD CAMERON, M.P.,
MINING EXPERT, Etc.,
Fellow of the Geological Society of London; of the Chemical Society of
London ; and of the Institute of Chemistry of Great Britain and
Ireland.
Author of: —Papers on the “Quartz outcrops of Travancore Lower India,”
“The Copper Silver-lead and Gold Lodes of Huacaivo, Chihuahua,
Mexico,” “ The Gold Mines of Mezquital del Oro, Mexico“ The
Bituminous Deposits of Camamu Basin, Balria, Brazil “ A new
Mineral found in Invernessshire”; “Agricultural Education,” “Report
on the Ardross Agricultural Experimental Station,” 1871-72, &c. &c.
Board of Inland Revenue Scholar Royal School of Mines 1870, and joint
first-class prizeman in Organic and Inorganic Chemistry, Royal School
of Mines, 1872. Late Assistant in the Chemical Laboratory of the
Inland Revenue Department Somerset House, W.C., and from 1874-79
Instructor in the Chemical Original Research Department, Royal
School of Mines, London.




62 Lime-street, London, E.C.,
26th March, 1887.
To the Directors of the Mount Morgan Gold-Mining Company,
Rockhampton, Queensland.
Gentlemen, —I have much pleasure in forwarding to you my report
on the above mentioned gold mining property, the inspection of which I
undertook at your request last February.
The interest which the work of examination afforded me has only
been exceeded by the satisfaction I have in contemplating the results.
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours faithfully,
J. MACDONALD CAMERON.
PART I.
INTRODUCTION.
Visit to the Mines.
At the expressed desire of the Mount Morgan directorate, I visited
the above mining property on Tuesday the Ist February of thisyear in
company with the Chairman, Mr. William Pattison, and Messrs. Callan
and Jjjukin, and the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th of the same month I devoted to as
close an examination of the mines and Reduction Works as a I could
possibly do in so short a period of time.
Character of the district en route.
On the way from Rockhampton to the mines I was much struck with
the continuous evidences of the auriferous nature of the country. Gold-
bearing, slatey, and schistose rocks follow each other in alternate zones
except where disturbed by eruptive and intrusive rocks of the secondary
igneous system. Indeed the whole route to the mines is exceedingly in-
teresting and in some respects characteristic of the more northerly gold
bearing areas of Queensland that I have visited.
The mountain spurs in the Mount Morgan district strike south east
and north west, whilst the chain itself trends in an almost opposite direc-
tion viz. north east and south west.
Distance of Mount Morgan from Rockhampton,
Mount Morgan proper, that is, the rocky elevation apart from the
rest of the Company’s property of the same name, is situated on the left
bank of a small creek called the Dee, distant in point of time from Rock-
hampton about 3| to 4 hours. It consists of an elevated rocky mass
sparsely covered with gum trees.
Altitude of the Mount.
Its height from the bed of the creek has been reckoned at about
500 feet and above sea level at about 1225 feet. On the south side it rises
somewhat precipitously, whilst the ascent on the south-east can be made


gradually along the slope of the spur, until the summit is reached. Indeed
it is along this slopey ridge that the auriferous ore is at present being
carted to the crushing mill and chlorination works, at unnecessarily great
inconvenience and expense.
Misleading Nature of a Casual Inspection of Mount Morgan.
A cursory inspection of the southern front suggests a mountain of
ironstone of varying colour and richness. A closer examination dispels
this idea, and to begin with, lands the visitor, be he expert or tyro in
geologic and mineralogic sciences, in a veritable quagmire of doubt and
wonder as to the one, or the many causes that have operated, in the remote
past, to produce such a veritable El Dorado as even the very small amount
of present exploitation has verily revealed it to be.
Several Theories Advanced as to the Origin of Mount Morgan Gold.
Several theories have been advanced to account for the apparently
abnormal conditions under which the gold in Mount Morgan is being
met with, and, although they each deserve consideration, yet, in my
humble judgment, not one of them is sufficiently complete in itself to em-
brace all the conditions and circumstances under which we find the precious
metal in that locality. Before, however, I can discuss other theories, or
even venture to express the deductions which I have been able to draw
from the data collected by myself, it will be necessary to briefly glance
at the physical and geological character of the district, as well as of those
rocks which constitute the auriferous zone of Mount Morgan proper, so
far as these could be determined by a mere visual inspection.
PART 11.
PHYSICAL AND GEOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MOUNT MORGAN AND
NEIGHBOURHOOD, WITH AN EXAMINATION OF THE THEORIES ADVANCED
RESPECTING THE SOURCE AND CHARACTER OF ITS AURIFEROUS ORES.
Physical Character of Mount Morgan and District.
The physical character of the country in which this now celebrated
mountain is situated may be described as consisting occasionally of abrupt
cliffs, picturesque and beautifully sheltered valleys, clothed with rich and
succulent grasses, sparse undergrowth, and the many and ever present
varieties of gum treesthat form so peculiar and characteristic a feature of
the flora of the great Australian continent.
Character of the Rocks of the Vicinity.
The rocks in the vicinity consist principally of quartzites, grey-
wackes, fine grained indurated sandstones, hardened shales with occasional
bands of serpentine and trachyte. Several members of the secondary
igneous system are also to be met with, which to some extent will account
for the metamorphosm of the stratified rocks.
Estimated Area of the Mount at the Level of the Creek.
The trend of the Mount Morgan spur is W.N.W. by E.S.E., with a
longitudinal and diametric base of about one and a-half and half a mile
respectively. Its rock character presents to the geologist for solution a
problem of no ordinary difficulty, but, broadly speaking, it may be con-
sidered as consisting of a net work of quartz veins about 200 feet in width,
traversing on the one hand a metamorphosed matrix of a somewhat argillo-
arenaceous composition, largely impregnated where it has been exposed to
atmospheric influence with oxides of iron, and on the other what appears
to be a felspathic tufaceous igneous rock. The network of quartz veins
is bounded on the eastern side by a narrow belt of ferruginous gritty sand-
stone, and divided near its western boundary by what a high authority
has elsewhere termed an aluminous rock about sixteen feet in width, strik-


Ing N.W. and S.E., from which there brandies off in a fork-like manner
to the north at an angle of about 45°, another band of soft white clay con-
sisting mainly of the silicates of alumina and magnesia, due in my opinion
to the decomposition of a soft trachytic 'rock that doubtless contained
bands of talc or steatite. On the western side of so-called aluminous rock,
and at what may be termed the boundary of the central auriferous zone, a
<rich gold-bearing network of quartz veins passes through similar sintery or
tufaceous material to that which we find on the eastern side.
Tufaceous nature of the greater portion of Mount Morgan property.
Indeed the whole of this Mount except where we meet the so-called
-.aluminous rock, the aluminic and magnesic silicate dyke on the west, the
iron bound clayey sandstone on the east, and the eruptive rocks in the
-crosscut near the north end of No, ,1 drive may be considered as one mass
•of tufaceous material from which some of the alkaline constituents of its
felspar were washed out by aqueous percolations.
As previously noticed, several theories have been advanced to
•account for what, at first sight, appears to be the abnormal conditions
mnder which the precious metal is being found at Mount Morgan, but for
the present I shall only concern myself with two of these'
• Only'two theories to he noticed.
First, then, in importance, there is the excellently reasoned and
scientifically arraused paper of Mr. Robert I-. Jack, one of the geologists
to the Queensland Government; and second there are the theories advanced
b»y the practical managers of the mines, who from their continuous
presence at, and interest in the property, eagerly note every change in the
-circumstances and conditions of the ore bearing area that they may en-
-counter whilst conducting their daily mining operations. Moreover, their
.practical experience qualifies them to draw deduct! m and form opinions
-that, by no means, can be ignored. Indeed, it is such as they, who
furnish mostly the data that enab e scientific men to form theories for the
.guidance of the miner and geologist of the future.
Mr. Jack after minutely describing the chief characteristics of the
Mount says :—“ After a careful study of the whole formation I have come
cto the conclusion that nothing but a thermal spring in the open air could
have deposited the material under consideration. The * frothy ’ silicious
winter agrees in every respect with the deposits of New Zealand and Ice-
land Geysers, and the still more wonderful hot springs of the Yellow
Stone, National Fat k, so graphically and scientifically described by
-Dr. A. C.'Peale.
*.* * * * * * * *
The frothy and cavernous condition of the silicious sinter may be accounted
for by the escape of steam while the silica was yet (after the deposition or
-the evaporation of the water) .in the gelatinous condition so frequently
observed in the deposits of hot springs. The aluminous silicates represent
the familiar outbursts and flow of mud. The ion oxide appears to have
been deposited in some cases along with the silica and alumina and in
others to have been deposited later—its solvent fluid having been, as it
were, injected into the interstices vesicles and caverns of the silica and
alumina. In some cases it may have been originally pyrites, as it now and
then occurs in cubical hollows Calcerous sinter is very common in
silicious springs, an i its absence from Mount Morgan must needs imply
the local absence of limestones among the rocks from which the spring was
•fed. The silica would be found abundantly in the quartzites, and the
• alumina in the shales and greywackes of the country in the neighbourhood,
and possibly both silica and alumina may have come in part from a deep
sealed underlying granit-. The gold, and to some extent the iron may
have been dissolved out of the iron pyrites of such reefs as the mundie
>reef seen in Mundie Creek, the gold_ possibly >by chlorine produced by the


contact of hydrochloric acid, derived from the decomposition of chlorides
with manganese which occurs sparingly in the form of pyrolusite along
with the ironstone of Mount Morgan,
Is a thermal spring the only means that could produce the condition of
things found at Mount Morgan ?
If nothing but a thermal spring in the open air, could produce the
condition of things that obtain at Mount Morgan ought we not to find an
incrustation of the so-called silicious sinter surrounding the central portion,
or vent hole of the Mount ? and not only this but would it not overlap to
some degree at any rate the other formations of which the Mount is com-
posed.
Mount Morgan gold-hearing zone capable of other interpretation as to its
source and cause than that of the thermal spring theory.
I must freely confess that much as I respect the opinion of so pains-
taking and scientific a worker as I know Mr. Jack to be, and logical as are
the deductions which he draws from his own set premises, the condition
of things at Mount Morgan, will, in my humble judgment, bear quite
another interpretation than that of the “thermal spring theory.”
Character of the Sugar Loaf Mount.
If, as Mr. Jack remarks, the silicious sinter could only be produced in
the open air, how is it that about a quarter of a mile to the west of Mount
Morgan proper, it has been found in the bottom of what is known as the
“ Sugar Loaf shaft,” at a depth of about 250 feet from the summit of the
mountain immediately underlying a black lustrous quartz, similar in
appearance to that found in the central zone of the Mount ? Either the
Sugar Loaf Mount was itself a separate thermal spring, as it has been
suggested Callan’s Knob is, that vomited forth its auriferous contents fit-
fully for a time in the open air, and becoming quiescent, owing to a cessa-
tion of the forces that gave rise to it, was ultimately superimposed by a
mass of rock of different composition to the so-called sintery mass found
at thp depths alluded to, or it is in age, character, and method of formation
part and parcel of the iron bound clayey sandstone which is found to the
east and west of Mount Morgan proper. I must confess that my observa-
tions incline me to adopt the latter theory, though I shall certainly differ
from Mr. Jack as to the nature of the method of formation.
Absence of Calcarous Tufa from the so-called silicious sinter of Mount
Morgan,
Then again, the complete absence of calcarous tufa from the so-
called silicious sinter is somewhat against the thermal spring theory for we
know that from scarcely any of the eruptive rocks containing augite, horn-
blende, and similarly composed minerals do we find lime absent, and if
subjected to disintegrating solutions their lime would be taken up and de-
posited before, if not simultaneously with, the silica. Moreover, the
Kaolin dyke, which as previously indicated on page 4, I believe to be the
result of the decomposition of a trachytic rock that once traversed the
very ground now being occupied by the Kaolin, would have furnished lime
to the hot geyser water had the latter emerged in contiguity to it, which,
from the position of the so-called central pipe, it must have done if this
theory be correct. Neither is the presence, as Mr. Jack alleges, of iron
pyrites in the vent hole of the geyser, in favour of this theory, as water
bubbling up from below containing silica gold and iron does not furnish
the conditions for the formation of pyritous compounds, nor is the theory
strengthened by the absence of gold from the Kaolin dyke.
Oeologic Character of Mount Morgan District.
I have already indicated that the principal rocks of Mount Morgan
district are slates and grits largely metamorphosed by eruptive and intra-


sive masses of the secondary series of igneous rocks. Owing to this
metamorphosis it is extremely difficult to absolutely decide their geologic
age, and this difficulty is considerably increased by the fact that, up to the
•present, so far as lam aware no fossils have been discovered. Neverthe-
less, when the physical aspect of the neighbourhood is considered, with
its beautiful valleys, its picturesque ravines, and here and there its abrupt
cliffs, caused by the distortion and upheaval of the regular strata by the
igneous rocks already alluded to, I am disposed to think that its rock
system will yet be found more in harmony with the Silurian than with
the other systems of the Paleozoic period. The intrusions and upheavals
that have resulted in the formation of Mount Morgan proper, have not by
any means been confined to its immediate neighbourhood; yet it does not
follow that exactly similar auriferous results will be obtained where these
intrusions and upheavals exist. Previous to the upheavals by the igneous
disturbances that have also metamorphosed the once stratified rocks of the
district, I picture to myself group after group of quartz veins of auriferous
mundic, varying in width and richness, traversing and intersecting their
-regular lines of stratification.
Causes that have led to the Metamorphism of the Rocks of. Mount Morgan
district.
Igneous disturbances follow that distort and upheave their once
regular masses with abrupt cliffs and prominences. Their sandstones are
.converted into quartzites, ; their soft argillo-arenaceous slates, with their
.auriferous veins of mundic-charged quartz, are converted into more cryst
.alline and compact rocks, from which every trace of stratification has been
eliminated. Even the quartz itself becomes more crystalline, and the
sulphur of its contained" mundic is partially, and in some cases wholly,
oxidised—the extent of this oxidation being lesser or greater in proportion
as the mass of igneous matter was intrusive or eruptive. If the former —
and my theory on further examination of the district be found correct—
then the sulphurous condition will continue to “make” the further we
recede from the metamorphic, until the original mundic lode group is
reached; but if the latter, the metamorphism of the lode stuff may con-
tinue, even to an unworkable depth, which would be a matter for con-
gratulation rather than regret, as, in this case, natural forces will have
continued to do for the auriferous ore of Mount Morgan what would other-
wise require the skill of the chemist, with a consequent increased cost of
treatment.
Strike and Dip of the A uriferous Zone of Mount Morgan Proper.
It has been already noticed that the extent of the metamorphosm
has made it almost impossible to determine the exact strike and dip of
the original mundic lodes, to which I believe most of the gold of Mount
Morgan is due, and that once traversed the slatey rocks previous to their
altered condition ; but I have come to the conclusion that the mundic lode
.now traversing the bed of Mundic Creek may be taken, in the absence of
more complete evidence, as illustrative of the direction of the strike and
dip of the mineral zone of Mount Morgan proper.
Direction of the strike and dip of Mundic Creek lode.
Roughly speaking, this lode strikes north-east and south-west, and
dips to the south-east.
Auriferous outcrop of quartz on the Consolidated Claim.
About a quarter of a mile west of Mount Morgan proper there is an
auriferous zone on a claim belonging to the Mount Morgan Company,
known as the “Consolidated.” Its area amounts to about thirty acres.
Like those metamorphosed rocks that comprise Mount Morgan proper, it is
■ largely impregnated at the surface with oxide of iron, and is, likewise,
-traversed by a network of quartz veins. This I presume to be the “ over


flow ” rock of Mr. Jack’s report. It certainly appears auriferous, and Mr.
Lisle, the manager, informed me that samples taken from its western
boundary assayed 4 oz. of gold per ton. This portion of the property T
shall again refer to, when describing the extent and aim of the present
mining operations.
Metallic lustre and irridescent hues-of the central portion of the gold hearing
zone of Mount'Morgan proper.
One of the most striking features in connection with the ore of
Mount Morgan is the lustrous and irridescent zone of gold-bearing quartz
that is exposed in the southern face of the outcrop. As might be expected,
it has been the subject of much and varied comment, although, so far as I
am aware, no theory has been advanced to account for its exceptionally
lustrous and peculiarly beautiful hues.
Cause of the metallic lustre.
The metallic lustre has, in my opinion, been caused by the meta-
morphosm so often alluded to of the mundic contents of the lode, by their
contiguity to the eruptive tufaceous material which I have several times-
rpferred to as permeating to a greater or lesser degree the whole of the
Mount between the partially metamorphosed gritty sandstone on the
eastern, and a somewhat similar rock on the western boundary.
The decomposition, or reduction, of the pyritous material has,
evidently, not been completed as we find it in the form of what I believe
to be a low sulphide of iron with the gold in some instances disseminated l
throughout the mass in particles of impalpable fineness, or indeed it may
be in the form of a molecular compound, or double sulphide of iron and
gold : the proportion of sulphur to the metals being possibly as low as 1
to 50. To this low metallic sulphide is probably due that metallic lustre-
which is one of the peculiar features of the central zone, though it fails
to account for the extraordinary brilliancy of its irridescent hues, the
origin and cause of which must be sought for in quite another direction.
Method hy ichich lron Pyrites are formed.
It is a well known fact that alkaline and earthy sulphates when
present in an aqueous solution containing organic matter and iron, the
organic matter will deoxidise the sulphates converting them into sulphides
which in their turn will re-act on tho iron converting it into the sulphuret
condition ; but whether the resulting compound will be a fully saturated
sulphide in which the iron and sulphur will be present in the necessary
proportions to form iron pyrites will depend firstly, on whether there be
a sufficient quantity of sulphur,, and secondly, upon whether the organic
matter be present in sufficient quantity to completely effect this reduction.
Again, the pyritous condition can be induced by the passage of water
having in solution decomposing organic matter containing sulphur, the
latter uniting with the iron converting it into the pyritous condition.
Should such solutions contain gold in any of its combinations, it would be
deposited simultaneously either mechanically locked up in the crystals of
pyrites, or itself associated with the iron in the form of what is known
to chemists as a molecular compound of the sulphides of iron and gold.
Causes that have led to the formation of the irridescent hues.
That this obtained in the central auriferous zone of Mount Morgan
after the metamorphism of the original mundic lode and the reduction of
its sulphides in the presence of air, moisture, and the high temperature of
the eruptive tufaceous mass, I have not the slightest doubt. Subsequently
the lode stuff was subjected to the infiltration of sulphurous organic
waters, or to dissolved sulphates containing small quantities of organic
matter and gold, these meeting ferruginous solutions in the “ rugs ” and
cavities, caused by the disturbing and dislocating influence of the tufacceus
eruption, gave rise to the stalactitic structure as well as to the irridescent


hues. To the dislocating influence of the igneous tufa and its associated
rocks is also due the “bomb” like structure of the central zone.
Extent of the irridescent hues.
It is a noticeable fact that up to the present the extent of irridescent
stalactitic forms vary inversely as the distance from the central lode,
whether vertically from its summit, or laterally from its centre, and it is
probable that as depth is gained the irridescent hues will cease altogether
owing doubtless to the organic and sulphurous solutions which caused it
having become exhausted in consequence of the large surface presented to
its reducing action by the superincumbent mineral mass. Furthermore,
this explains the absence of the irridescence in those sintery or tufaceous
masses to the right and left of the central lode.
Source of the Gold present in the Tufaceous Material,
But the question may well be asked : from whence has come the
gold that permeates the quartz veins traversing the tufaceous masses as
well as that contained in the several iron-stained bands that show in the
face of the Mount, if originally there were only one large central group of
pyritous quartz veins, to which the central stalactitic and mass
is the key ?
Rocks in vihich Gold is usually found in Greatest A bundance.
Although it serves no good purpose to dogmatically assert that gold
can only be met with in rocks of a certain age ; yet, I may mention the
fact that hitherto it has been found in greatest abundance in the quartz
veins that traverse altered Paleozoic slates, and particularly where erup-
tive rocks junction with strata of Cambrian and Silurian age. It is also
a generally accepted fact that the original home of gold is in the granular
eruptive rocks of a granitic and hornblendic character where it is found
disseminated in infinitesimal particles throughout their mass ; and, as I
have already noticed, that eruptive rocks of a granular character, belong-
ing to the secondary igneous system, are to be found, not only traversing
the Mount itself, but in its immediate neighbourhood, we have not far to
seek for the original source of its gold. During the decomposition of these
by saline acidulated waters, their contained gold would become dissolved
and deposited along with the soluble silica in the crevices of the softer and
more porous rocks of their vicinity. That the tufaceous rock the
greatest facilities tor such deposition is evidenced by the fact that it is
permeated by a network of auriferous quartz veins that must have been
deposited subsequently to those of the original mundic group—a very
likely occurrence.
The Extent to ivhich the Red Oxides of Iron vary in the Central Zone of Mount
Morgan.
There is one fact, so far as I am aware, that has hitherto escaped
notice, and it is that the amount of the red oxides of iron varies in inverse
proportion to the distance from the summit and upwards from the southern
front of the zone. That they are present in the upper terraces in greater
abundance than in the lower, and diminish the nearer the centre of the
(zone) is approached, is obviously due to the greater facilities offered to the
oxidising influences of air and water at both these points.
Presence of Volcanic Dust or tufa a mile to the west of Mount Morgan
Proper , and its identity with the tufaceous material of the Mount.
Before dismissing this part of the subject, I think it well to notice a
remark Mr. Jack makes as to the presence of volcanic dust in the vicinity.
Referring to the geologic character of the country to the west of Mount
Morgan, he says, “ About a mile to the west of the * Mountain ’ is a mass,
apparently 150 feet in thickness, of horizontally bedded sandstone. It
rests, apparently, at this point on a mass of Rhyolite, but in other places


The work of mining, or rather quarrying, is now proceeding on the
southern side of the Mount by a series of five
terraces of height and
dimensions, as follow :—
No. 1 or top terrace 33 feet— ...
... vertical
No. 2 18
•• • n
No. 3 35 „
••• ))
No. 4 33 „
• ». ))
No. 5 15 „
••• 9 9
Each of these terraces has a width of face respectively as follow:—
No. 1 Terrace
... 200 feet
No. 2 ,,
... 275 „
No. 3 „
... 327 „
No- 4 „
... 380 „
No. 5 ,,
... 486 „
it may be seen lying on the upturned edges of quartzite and greywacke
strata, similar in character to those of the ‘country’ around Mount
Morgan. The base of this formation is */me volcanic dust.” Unfor-
tunately, I did not visit that part of the district; but may it not be
possible, even probable, that what is here viewed as “ volcanic dust ” is
identical in age, character, and composition with what has elsewhere been
termed the silicious sinter of Mount Morgan ? but what I verily believe to
be none other than a trappean tufa or scoriae.
Theory held by the Mine Managers.
The other theory as to the source of the gold of Mount Morgan to
which I alluded at page 5, is that held by Mr. Wesley Eall and the mining
manager, Mr. Lisle, viz., that the gold is derived from an oxidised mundic
lode, the heat of oxidation being such as to melt even the quartz, that
subsequently water from below caused what they call a chemical outburst,
during which the gold was precipitated along with the material that now
forms the stalactites to be found in the rugs and cavities of the mine.
They also believe that as depth is gained the ore will be found in its
normal condition.
I need hardly say that a moment’s consideration of the opinions I
have already expressed with regard to the causes that have operated in the
remote past in giving rise to the auriferous zone of Mount Morgan will
show that I cannot acquiesce in this theory.
PART 111.
WORK ALREADY PERFORMED AT THE MINES. EXPOSURE OF GOLD-BEARING-
ORE. ASSAY VALUES AND QUALITY OF GOLD.
Rough dimensions oj the terraced work of the Mount.
Tunnels driven in the Mount,
Scarcely more than one-third of No. 1 Terrace which constitutes the
crown or cap of the Mount, had, up to the date of my visit, been removed,
and this only to a depth of about 33 feet, whilst I am justified in saying
that the other terraces alluded to above are not much more than com-
menced.
No. I Tunnel.
Besides these terraces, two tunnels are in course of construction.
“No. 1,” which enters the Mount on the southern side will traverse and
explore its composition and character at a depth of about 320 feet. At
the time of my visit it had been driven 740 feet in a northerly direction,
and, when the whole mountain is traversed, the distance covered will be
about 1000 feet, I may mention that several mundic lodes are to be met
*ltalics mine.


with in this tunnel, but very little, if any, metamorphosm seems to have
taken place, and, as far as I can at present remember, it has not cut
through the sintery or tufaceous material found in such great abundance to
the east.
The “ 0 reway ” Tunnel.
The other tunnel referred to is known as the “oreway” one, and
has been commenced on the eastern side of the Mount on the slope of the
spur at about the same distance from the summit as No. 1. Its dimensions
when timbered will be 7 feet x 7 feet. Its entrance is close to the site
selected for the proposed new mill and chlorination works, to which it
will act as an oreway.
Central Shaft.
At the time of my visit it had been driven 160 feet, and the inten-
tion is to junction it with a central shaft now in course of construction,
and which, when finished, will tap the whole ore of the Mount.
No. 1 Drive.
Besides these two tunnels there have been driven in a northerly
direction, in the face of No. 5 terrace, and right through the Mount, what
is known as “ No. 1 drive.” Its distance along the whole length is about
485 feet. Two hundred feet from the entrance of this drive there branches
off a crosscut, which takes a semicircular course to the right, passing the
central shaft already alluded to, ends on the north-east side of the Mount.
Its distance from where it breaks off from No. 1 drive, until the north-
eastern limit of the Mount is reached, is about 306 feet.
No. 2 Drive.
What is known as “No. 2 drive” has been commenced in the face of
No. 4 terrace, somewhat to the east of the entry of No. 1, and been
driven for a distance of about 167 feet, in a north-easterly direction.
The timbered dimensions of all these tunnels and crosscuts, except
the “ oreway ” tunnel, are 6 feet 6 inches by 5 feet 6 inches. Taking No.
4 terrace as fairly representing the present exposed mass of auriferous
material, about 118 feet of which have, already shown, by assay, not less
than oz. of gold per ton of stone, whilst, as will be seen below, some
portions of it assayed very considerably higher.
Assay Values of the Several Auriferous Zones of the Mount as 'performed
at the Company’s Laboratory.
The following are the results of samples taken by Mr. Lisle from
the several zones of the Mount, and assayed at the Company’s labora-
tory ■
Commencing on the western side of the sandstone dyke, a mass of
stone 18 feet in width yielded 4 oz. per ton. Then come 4 feet of argillo
arenaceous material, that so far has been found quite barren. Next to
this there are four feet of the irridescent quartz, yielding 5 oz. per ton.
West of this we get 20 feet yielding 30z., and again, 50 feet, some of
which has yielded as high as 36 oz. per ton, and, lastly, 25 feet yielding
2| oz. gold per ton.
In what is known as “ No. 1 drive ” and at about 45 feet from the
southern entrance, there are merely traces of gold, and this condition
of things continues until there is encountered a vein of purple oxide of iron
about 18 inches in width that Mr, Lisle informed me yielded 17 oz. of
gold per ton. This vein neighbours a mass of tufaceous or sintery rock
permeated by a network of narrow quartz veins, the interstices of which
are filled up by small angular fragments of rocky tufa and dry ashy
powder. This mass of rock has a width, as exposed in this part of the
drive ” of about 30 feet and yielded by assay 1J oz. of gold per ton. It
Is terminated by a fine-grained and compact dyke of igneous rock about
16 feet in width. Passing this rock we come upon another auriferous group


of stone assaying from 6 dwt. to 2| oz. of gold per ton, and finally the-
drive ends in another igneous belt of compact rock.
Cross cut from No. 1 drive and its auriferous belts.
At page 11, I mentioned that about 200 feet from the entrance of
No. 1 drive an upward shaft is being constructed, and from this shaft a
cross cut has been driven which takes almost a semi-circular curve until
it ends on the north-east side of the Mount. In this cross cut there is
exposed a mass of tufaceous material 136 feet in width containing a net-
work of quartz veins. Fifty tons of this material, when dry crushed and
chlorinated, yielded an average of 5 oz. gold per ton. whilst some samples
taken indiscriminately from it assayed as high as 30 oz. gold per ton.
I may state that I believe this mass of auriferous materia] is identical with
that already alluded to as having been encountered in “ No. 1 drive;” and
as the so called cross cut passes somewhat obliquely through it, its true
width is more nearly approached by that of the auriferous tufa of that
drive.
I wish it to be clearly understood that I give these assay results as
they were given me, but although I cannot vouch, personally, for their
accuracy, as I had no time to devote to assay work, yet I am satisfied with-
the general appearance of auriferous richness that the stone possesses in
what are known as the various zones and drives of the im unt.
Assay Results of Samples taken by Mr. Jack.
It may be of importance in this connection, however, for me to state
that, although I had no opportunity of personally corrol orating the results
of the assays alluded to above as having been made at the mines, I can
refer to other results obtained from samples taken by the Government-
Geologist, who, from his official position, is bound to act a purely neutral
or disinterested part.
The description of the samples selected, as well as the results of the
assays, are as follow :
per ton.
No. 1. Brown haematite, ... 3 oz. 6 dwt. ~
No. 2. Red haematite .. 6 oz. 16 dwt. ~
No. 3. Aluminous rock from west dyke (no gold)
No. 4, Silicious sinter from among the aluminous rock,
3 oz. 15 dwt. ~
No. 5. Stalactitic brown haematite from middle cutting,
6 oz. 11 dwt. ~
No. 6. Silicious sinter veined with quartz... 4oz. 5 dwt. ~
No. 7. A mixed mass of ironstone and silica from the
level of the road, east of dyke ... 5 oz. 3 dwt. ~
No. 8. Ironstone silicious sinter from the west side of dyke
... ... ... ... ... ... lOoz. 14dwt. ~
Average ... ... ... ... ... soz. 1 dwt. ~
The Sugar Loaf Shaft.
About a quarter of a mile west from the terraced workings of the-
Mount, a shaft, known as the “ Sugar Loaf,” has been sunk to a depth
of about 206 feet, cutting quartz lodes containing mundic that has assayed
up to 2 oz. gold per ton. The first lode passed through was at a distance
of some 10 or 12 feet from the surface, and is said to have a width of about
50 feet. Immediately below this the miners passed through what seems to
be, from the specimens which I examined on the “ dump,” a greywacke or
slatey grit, having a width of about 100 feet, and below which 15 feet of
dark coloured quartz was met with—much resembling the stained and
irridescent quartz so often alluded to as forming the central portion of the
auriferous zone of the Mount. Beneath this quartz there was encountered


the sintery or tufaceous rock so often alluded to, but here it is somewhat'
stained with ferruginous filtrations. So far as I am aware, no samples
have been assayed from this mass of material.
Below this, again, the miners came upon very white quartz, contain-
ing isolated patches of bright mundic, in which the shaft now bottoms.
The Sugar Loaf Tunnel.
On the north-west side, a tunnel has been driven in a south-east
direction for a distance of 227 feet, that junctions with the shaft alluded to
above at a depth of about 80 feet from its summit. During its course, it
cut through the zone of dark coloured gold-bearing quartz alluded to above.
Gold was also found in the metamorphosed quartz-bearing rock at the entry
of the tunnel, and its auriferous character was maintained for a distance of
77 feet inwards.
I may mention that the auriferous mundic quartz lode alluded to
here, strikes in precisely the same direction as the auriferous zone of
Mount Morgan proper ; but as an igneous dyke crosses its course at some
distance to the N.E., the regularity of its course will be disturbed though
it will in all probability be found on the north eastern side of the Mount
Morgan spurs.
Mundic Lode in Mundic Creek.
Due west from the shaft of the Sugar Loaf Mount, there is Mundic
Creek, in the bed of which the mundic lode so often mentioned in this
paper is plainly visible. The direction of its strike suggests the probability
of its yet being cut in the sugar loaf ground but up to the present it does
not seem to have been met with.
The aurif rous zone of the Consolidated Claim.
A shaft known as No. 1 Mundic Creek Shaft has been sunk here tp
a depth of 114 feet and at* a distance of about 200 feet from the outcrop
in the creek ; but so far as the operations went, up to the date of my
visit no gold had been discovered.
At page 10 I alluded to an auriferous zone passing through the con-
solidated claim striking in a similar direction to that of the Mundic Creek
lode and the auriferous material of the Mount. It appears to dip at an
angle of about 35° to the east of south.
No. 2 Mundic Creek Shaft.
On the western side of the outcrop, a shaft known as No. 2 Mundic
Creek Shaft has been sunk to a depth of 70 feet but at a depth of from
35 to 40 feet the auriferous stone was passed through, and a grey slatey
grit encountered. Both here and in the Sugar Loaf Shaft the several lodes
and zones dip at very low angles, owing doubtless to the dislocations so
often alluded to.
Mundic Creek Tunnel.
Besides this shaft a tunnel known as the Mundic Creek Tunnel has
been driven a distance of 200 feet to the N.E. parallel to the strike of
this auriferous zone, but no gold had been encountered in it. This, I
pointed out to the manager, was due to the tunnel having been driven in
the quartzite country rock to the west, and not in the auriferous zone itself
as ought to have been the case.
Apart from the quotations which I have already made from Mr.
Jack’s report, I think it will be interesting to quote, as this gentleman
has also done, the remarks made by Dr. Liebius, the Director of the
Sydney Mint, in reference to the quality of the Mount Morgan gold.*
Opinion of Dr. Liebius, the Director of the Sydney Mint, as to the quality
of the Mount Morgan gold.
“ While from a geological point of view, the occurrence of this
gold is highly interesting, the character of the gold obtained is not less so.
*This paper was read before the Royal Society of New South Wales, 2nd July, 1884.


Xock in his work on gold published in 1882, says no gold has yet been
found in nature unalloyed with silver, yet this gold from the Mount
Morgan mine of which since February last already over 10,000 oz. have
been received as retorted gold at the Sydney Mint, is found to be free from
silver—a minute trace excepted. I have brought some of this retorted
gold rolled out very thin to show its toughness. It assays 997 % of gold,
'■the rest is copper with a trace of iron.
Value of the gold per oz.
“Gold assaying 99‘7 %is worth £4 4s. Bd. per oz. Gold from the
same mine received at the Mint assayed as high as 99‘8 per cent. It is,
as far as I know, the richest native gold hitherto found. A not less
Interesting though less satisfactory fact is this : that not only about half
the gold is extracted by the ordinary quartz crushing and amalgamating
machinery.” Dr. Liebius continues, the Capricornian says: “the tailings
■ which are being stored are said to contain as much gold as is saved,
and as they will be subjected to treatment at a future date, the result will
be highly advantageous to theovvners. Having the small quartz crushing
machinery erected at the Sydney Mint, under my charge, I have had an
opportunity of testing this fact. In November last (1883) we received
through Mr. Hall, of Sydney, 4581 b. of this ferruginous quartz, part of it
consisting of picked stone. It was carefully crushed and amalgamated in
the Chilian Mill with 2401 b. mercury. Thus 7'440z. of gold assaying
991'5 were extracted. Another lot weighing 1741 b. was similarly treated
and 12'J2oz. of gold extracted assaying 998‘2. Thus lot 1 gave gold at
the rate of 39'320z. standard per ton of quartz, while lot 2 gave gold at
the rate of 169'86 standard per ton of quartz. In lot lat the rate of 460 z.
2dwt. 12gr. per ton was left in the tailings, while in lot 2 the tailings
assayed 64 oz. sdwt. 18 gr. of gold per ton. Both lots of tailings were
now mixed and passed for two or three hours in the Chilian mill with
2401 b. clean retorted mercury. Only 1'660z. of gold, assaying 981 were
however obtained by this treatment. The tailings were dried and found
to weigh 476 lb,, containing gold at the rate of 41 oz. 13 dwt. 16 gr, per ton
—or, in about 476 lb. tailings no less than 8 oz. 17 dwt. 3gr. of gold. I
have brought some of those tailings here. Under the microscope there is
no gold visible. I thought that if the oxide of iron were removed by
boiling the tailings in hydrochloric acid and the solution filtered off the
gold might more readily be discernible in the boiled out residue. I found,
however, that this was not the case, and that 1000 grains of tailings thus
boiled in strong hydrochloric acid, by which about 20% were dissolved ;
gave me only 073 grains of gold, the same as when boiled with nitric acid.
The loss of gold by boiling in hydrochloric acid, was no doubt due to
the action of this acid upon manganese in the ore whereby chlorine gas
was formed, a ready solvent for gold. That the ordinary amalgamating
-Chilian mill did not extract all the gold in this stone, I can only attribute
to the supposition that the oxide of iron has literally coated some of the
fine gold, thus preventing it coming in contact with the mercury.”
I may add that, if I except the product of the Mezquital del Oro
gold mine in the state of Lacatecas, Mexico, I have never seen gold of
such extraordinary fine quality.
PART IV.
OLD AND NEW PLANT METHODS OF ORE TREATMENT AND CALCULATION OF
YIELD OF GOLD PER ANNUM.
Causes that have led to the adoption of the Chlorination Process.
For some time during the earlier career of the present Company
• the ores were treated by the usual wet crushing and amalgamation methods,
•but it was discovered that considerably more than one-half the contained
.gold was left in the tailings.


With the view to obviating this loss investigations were set on foot
that resulted in the adoption of the Chlorination Process with such modi-
fications as were suitable to the chemical nature of the ores ; and chlorina-
tion barrels with their auxiliary leaching and filtering vats capable od
treating 800 tons of ore weekly were subsequently erected, and the process
is now being worked so successfully that upwards of 98 per cent of the
gold shown by assay can be extracted.
Loss of Gold owing to its impalpable fineness. Adoption of Dry Crushing ;
Rollers.
It was further discovered that in consequence of the almost micro-
scopic fineness of the free gold present in the ore, a very considerable
amount of it was washed into the “ slimes ” by the current of water
necessary to wash the ground ore from the stamp heads, and over the
amalgamating copper plates. To obviate this, recourse has been had to
dry crushing rollers ; and, whilst I write, four sets of these are in courso
of erection. There is also being erected, about midway up the Mount, and
in close proximity to the oreway tunnel, additional crushing and chlorina-
tion machinery, that will crush and otherwise treat 1000 tons weekly ;
and I estimate that taking the ore to be treated as only capable of yield-
ing the amount per ton shown by the lowest assay of samples from the
southern front of the Mount—viz., 2| oz. of gold per ton, when both the
old and the new works are treating their maximum weekly amount, there
would be a yield from the old works of 800 tons crushed ore, and from the.
new works of 1000 tons, making together 1800 tons ; and their yields fon
a period of fifty-two weeks would amount to 93,600 tons, each ton yielding
2£ oz., or a total of 234,000 oz. of gold per annum.
Estimated Yield of Gold per annum from Old and New Works.
*Mount Morgan gold readily sells for £4 4s. per ounce—hence
234.000 oz. would yield £982,800 sterling. If we deduct from this amount
the cost of quarrying, carrying, crushing, and chlorinating, which, when
the new arrangements are completed, ought not to exceed 40s. per ton, or
£186,000 for 93,600 tons, there would thus remain a net profit of £795,600,
which, on the present nominal capital of the Company, would be equal to
about 79£ per cent per annum.
Erection of Wire Tramway Recommended.
In my introductory remarks I noticed that the present method of
transporting the ore from the Mount to the mill is very costly, as well
as cumbersome, and to obviate this a wire tramway should be erected
without delay connecting the “ oreway ” tunnel with the old crushing and
Chlorination works. My special reason for suggesting that this tramway
should be at once erected is, that in the paddock attached to the old
crushing mill there is stored an enormous quantity of auriferous stone and
sawed “tailings.” It was impossible for me either to weigh the stone or
the tailings, but I content myself with giving the Manager’s data.
A mount of Stone and Tailings lying at the Old Works.
The former amounts to about 30,000 tons, and the latter to about
25.000 tons. It is further asserted that these 55,000 tons will yield not ■
less than 5 oz. gold per ton. If these data be reliable, and I have no reason
to doubt that they are, there now lies in close proximity to the old mill
and chlorination works, an amount of stone that ought to yield not less
than £1,000,000 sterling net. At the present rate of working, about fifteen
months will have elapsed before the last of this ore will have passed-
through the chlorination barrels ; but, notwithstanding this, we cannot
forget how quickly time passes, and what unforseen and incalculable delays
are incident, particularly to the manufacture and erection of mining-
machinery.
*Vide extiact from Dr. Liebius’s report—Dage 14.


Cost of Transporting Ore from Mines to Mill.
Experience has shown that ore can be transported by aerial tramway
for any distance under one mile for little over Id. per ton. It will
therefore be clear that as soon as such a tramway is completed 3s. per ton
would at once be saved on all the ore in future to be treated at the old
works, whilst a similar reduction will necessarily follow at the new works
owing’to their close proximity to the new “oreway.” Furthermore, it is
but reasonable to hope that by the more systematic methods of working
that will follow the erection of the (new) and improved plant, considerable
reductions in cost of treatment may reasonably be looked for, and this
obviously means increased profit.
Plant at present erected at the Mines.
Besides the chlorination plant alluded to, there are reverberatory
furnaces for roasting the ores, two stamp mills, of 15 and 10 head respec-
tively with their necessary motor and amalgamating machinery, a well
fitted sawmill, blacksmiths’ and fitters’ shop, the latter containing the
most improved tools and machinery such as steam hammer, turning lathes,
&c.- so that really, if time were not an object with the directors, the new
machinery now ordered to be erected could be made on the Company’s
premises. There is besides, a well fitted smebing laboratory for the treat-
ment of the gold precipitate from the chlorination filters, and for the usual
assay work of a gold mine. All these departments are presided over by
able and competent men.
PART V.
concluding remarks and suggestions.
Work recommended to be undertaken at the Mines.
The work of mining and exploration are at present going on so
well at Mount Morgan that there is little that I can suggest, unless it be
a more thorough investigation of the western or “consolidated” ground
than has already been attempted “ Drives ” should, in my opinion, be at
once commenced, bearing south from the Mundic Creek Tunnel, to explore
that mass of metamorphosed quartz-bearing rock alluded to in pages 7
and 11. Tunnels should also be driven in the same direction at varying
depths from the top of Mundic Creek shaft, and the Sugar Loaf shaft
should also be sunk to a greater depth, and explorative “ drives” sent out
from it in various directions to explore the Sugar Loaf Mount. Careful
samples should be taken at different points traversed by the new opera-
tions and careful assays made and noted. If Mr. Lisle's inform ition to
me be correct, as to the auriferous yield of 4oz. per ton from that portion
of the ground in which the shaft has been sunk, I must repeat that I do
not see why it should be confined entirely to that spot. It would also be
advisable to continue the Loaf tunnel further into the Mount,
“ Winzes ’’ should also be sunk from No. 1 Tunnel, and drives sent out at
right angles to the direction of its course. These would explore Mount
Morgan proper at still greater depths than has yet been attained.
Site Selected for New Works, and point at which Oreway Tunnel is
excavated questioned.
If I desired to be hypercritical I would be inclined to question the
erection of the new crushing and chlorination works, as well as the exca-
vation of the “ oreway ” tunnel at a point so high up the Mount as it is
proposed the former shall occupy, and the latter already occupies. In my
opinion it would have been better to have laid the foundation of the one,
and to have excavated the other, at a point further down the Mount in
order to have the greatest possible amount of ore ground overhead ; but
I suppose the periodic floods that inundate the district, and the irresistible


force with which they sweep from out their path every obstacle, have con-
-stituted one of the principal reasons in determining the site selected for
the new works as well as for the “ oreway ” tunnel. Again, the desira-
bility of lessening the expense of handling the ores by arranging such con-
ditions as would permit of gravitation performing as large a part in the
operations as possible, doubtless also weighed, but were it not for the
danger already alluded to from floods, this end would have been better
attained by erecting the works and excavating the tunnel 100 feet further
down the Mount.
Abundance of Wood and Water.
It may be remarked in passing that wood and water are abundant
"though the latter has not been always so, but ample arrangements have,
however, now been made for its storage in order to be fully prepared to
meet the contingency of an abnormally dry season ; but if it were not for
■the danger already alluded to from floods, this end would have been better
attained by erecting the works and excavating the tunnel 100 feet further
-down the Mount.
Area of property owned by the Company.
I ought to have mentioned that the extent of the Company’s free-
hold property is 640 acres. Apart from this they have 48 acres of lease-
hold and 30 acres in the consolidated claims so that the area of ground is
unusually great. Indeed I may remark that it is now impossible to obtain
freehold mining property from the Queensland Government it being con-
trary to the new mining law to grant such.
One other remark before I conclude. With the far from careful
methods of working hitherto obtaining at these mines, I am credibly in-
formed that the directors have, during the last nine months, distributed
■upwards of £lBO,OOO in dividends. What we may expect from the more
-economic methods-imposed by the new plant, II eave my readers to deter-
mine for themselves.
I have now, I think, fully considered the data collected by me in
-the short period of time at my disposal, relative to what I may justly term
this phenomenal gold yielding property. After considerable and varied
■experience in almost every part of the world, I can conscientiously say
that I have not seen its equal for the extent and richness of its auriferous
ores. That when the vast zones of gold-bearing ore that are even now
exposed in the several terraces and “ drives ” of the Mount are considered,
our minds are apt to wander into the realms of imagination for a parallel;
for truly within the realms of fact no parallel has yet, so far as I am aware,
been met with. Whatever difference of opinion there may exist among
scientific and practical men as to the causes that have produced so large,
so varied in character, and so rich a mass of auriferous material, about the
■enormous quantity, the richness and the extraordinary natural advantages
offered for the manipulation of its ores, there is but one undivided opinion.
The vastness of the mass even now exposed is absurdly beyond even
.approximate computation ; but are we justified in thinking that this state
of things will continue ? So far as my observations went, I could see no
limits though doubtless there is one in the same sense as there is a limit to
all things ; and in this connection I may again quote the Government
-Geologist “ But the amount of auriferous stone at present in sight is
enormous, and there is no rashness in believing that it extends over »
large area, and to a considerable depth.” With this quotation, in which I
need hardly say I entirely concur, I conclude for the present what, from
a scientific as well as a practical standpoint, has been to me a most interest-
ing, a most instructive, and a thoroughly enjoyable work.
J. MACDONALD CAMERON.


Mount Morgan,
21st June, 1887.
The Chairman Mount Morgan Gold-Mining Company, Limited
Sir, —The directors and yourself are so well acquainted with my views
of the Mount Morgan formation, that an explanation is unnecessary, but
in justice to myself and for the information of the shareholders of the
Mt. Morgan G.M. Coy., Ld., I beg to call your attention to two para-
graphs in Mr. J. Macdonald Cameron’s report. As you are aware, I was-
not at Mount Morgan during his visit and only saw him on his return, in
fact, when he was on his way to the steamer. I am totally at a loss to
recall any opinion expressed by myself from which Mr. Cameron could
possibly formulate such an absurdity as the theory which he represents as-
that held by me.
Mr. Cameron, with an apology for being hypercritical, suggests that
the new works should be 100 feet lower down the mountain. The position
of the new works will command over 400 feet of the mountain, with 100
feet of fall for tailings. Had your Manager placed the works at the foot of
the mountain, the removal of tailings would soon have become an item of
more consequence than the raising of the stone, and in a few years your
works, like many of the batteries in the Colonies erected by new chums in
the early days, would be smothered up with tailings, and have to be
removed.
I am sorry to find fault with a report so interesting as Mr,
Cameron’s, but I would not like the shareholders to think it possible that
I went 100 feet up the mountain to escape flood, or imagined that the
formation of Mt. Morgan was due to a heat so great as to melt quartz.
Trusting you will give publicity to the above,
I remain,
Your obedient servant,
J. W. HALL*




