

7 hU*.
EEPOET
REV. G. GROWN k MR, P, P. FLETCHER,
COMMISSIONERS TO TONGA,
Appointed by the Committee of Privileges of the New South
Wales and Queensland Conference.
Melbourne:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Fundees Lane West.
MDCOCLXXXVIII.


We left Sydney on July 13th, and arrived at Samoa
on the 22nd. We left Samoa on the 24th, and arrived
at Nukualofa on Tuesday, July 26th, at 1.30 p.m. On
our arrival, and before landing, we forwarded a letter
from the President to the King, informing him that a
previous letter had been forwarded from Sydney, in
which the fact of our appointment (in accordance with
His Majesty’s request to Sir C. B. Mitchell to act as
mediator) had been communicated, informing His
Majesty of our arrival, and asking him to, appoint a
time when we could first call upon him to pay our
respects, and to receive His Majesty’s wishes as to the
work in which we were engaged. (See letter No. 1.)
A private letter (see No. 2) was also sent by one of the
Commission to the Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier. No
reply having been received up till 5 p.m., the President
landed, and called upon Rev. J. E. Moulton, the Chair-
man of the District. At 5 p.m. a reply (see A) was
received from His Majesty, refusing, for reasons given,
to grant us an interview. A second letter (see No. 3)’
in explanation, was then sent by the President to His
Majesty, and a private one (No. 4) was forwarded at
the same time to the Premier. A reply to No. 4 was
received irom the Premier at 1.30 a.m. on Wednesday.
The President then, after consultation, judged it best,
in the interests of the Commission, that lie should
return to Sydney by the " Lubeck” the same day.
On Wednesday, July 27th, we landed, and took
lodgings at the International Hotel. It is but right to
say that we received a most kind invitation from the
Rev, J. E, Moulton to stay at the Mission-house; but
for prudential reasons we thought it desirable that we
should occupy the most neutral position which was
possible, and we may state here that our action in this
matter was, in the end, most heartily commended by
all parties. On the same day we called upon the Rev.
J. B. Watkin and the Rev. J. E. Moulton,
From July 28th to August Ist was occupied with
correspondence. Between these dates we despatched
letters 5,6, 7, and 8, and received in reply letters C, D,
E, F, and G, From these letters it will be seen that the
first questions with which we had to deal were:—The


ignoring of the Premier in forwarding letters direct to
the King; the King’s refusal to grant us an interview
until a promise be given him that we would remove
Mr. Moulton; the difficulty of even seeing the Premier
and Rev. J. B. Watkin officially on Church matters,
though we could, and did, see them in a friendly
manner; the action of the Committee of Privileges in
not writing to the King before sending a Commission,
and in not accepting at once the basis of the New
Zealand Conference resolutions.
It will not be necessary for us to do more than
simply to refer to our letters for information as to how
these matters were dealt with.
From Wednesday, August 3rd, to August 17th, we
had frequent interviews with Hon. S. W. Baker,
Premier, and Rev. J. B. Watkin, who were the duly
authorised representatives appointed by the Conference
of the Free Church. The meetings were held from
time to time in Mr. Watkin’s house, and the whole of
the questions involved were fully and freely discussed,
Mr. Watkin then left Tonga on a visit to the Niuas,
but we frequently saw Mr, Baker, unofficially, up to
the hour of our departure.
During the whole time of our visit we saw Rev.
J, E. Moulton, Chairman of the District, almost daily,
and obtained from him all the information and advice
which he could give on the difficult matters which
were brought before us. We also conversed with the
British and German Consuls and most of the foreign
residents at different times, some of the Free Church
ministers and people, and met our own ministers and
office-bearers; and on Friday, August 12th, we had a
long interview with the King.
The results of these meetings, and the many inquiries
which were made, may be briefly summarised as follows,
taking the order of our instructions as a guide:—
1. At an interview with the King, we found that His
Majesty adhered most firmly to the conditions which
he had first laid down, and which he and the repre-
sentative of the Free Church had declared to be a sine
qua non of all negotiations. When informed that the
object of our visit was to try and re-unite the Wesleyan
Church of Tonga, he said; “Takeaway Mr. Moulton,
and the Church will be re-united.” Further; “Mr,


Moulton is tile cause of all the trouble; take Mr.
Moulton away, and the trouble will be ended.” We
informed His Majesty that we had no power whatever
to remove Mr. Moulton, but that we were sent down
to find out the truth, and to promote peace. He said:
“ The truth is that the Conference in Sydney has kept
Mr. Moulton in Tonga contrary to my wishes. I have
written to them several times to take Mr. Moulton away,
but they have taken no notice of my letters.” He again
affirmed: “ There will be no peace in Tonga while Mr.
Moulton remains; take him away, and there will be
peace.” In reply to a question as to what he could
suggest as a means of healing the breach if Mr.
Moulton were to remove, he said : “ Let Mr. Moulton go,
and everything will be right.” We then asked His
Majesty if, in such a case, he would extend his love
and sympathy to the members of our Church who had
remained loyal to the Conference. He instantly replied
with some warmth, and as if amused at the ques-
tion : “Do I want to murder them ? Are they not
Tongans? Ho I not love all Tongans? Are they not
my family V We then inquired particularly whethei
His Majesty thoroughly understood all that was implied
in his request that Tonga should be constituted an
Annual Conference, and he replied, “Yes, I understand
it.” The composition and obligations of the present
Conference, and the supreme control of the General
Conference, were then fully explained, and he again
declared that he fully understood the matter, and that
he wished Tonga to occupy a position exactly similar to
that of the other Annual Conferences. His Majesty
was very friendly and communicative, but on the
points named he was most firm and decided.
Our many meetings with Rev. J. E. Moulton were
of a very friendly, frank, and informal character,
and we did our best to guard against any impression
being made on his mind or in the minds of his people
that our Commission was in any sense one of a judicial
character, or that the question of our withdrawal from
Tonga formed any part of our instructions, \V e may
here state that to guard against any such misappre-
hension we furnished both parties with a copy of the
instructions which we received from the Committee of
Privileges.


Mr. Moulton’s opinions, we found, are not in any
way altered since the last Conference. He adheres to
the opinion that the two churches should still go on
side by side; that union in any form whatever would
be at the present time only a forced union, and would
not result in any real good; that if the Government
would issue a proclamation declaring that all are at
liberty to worship God according to the dictates of
their own consciences, and to be Free Church or
Wesleyan as they please, very many of the people
would join us. He believes that a great number of
the Free Church are still with us in heart, though
from fear or respect to the Iving and chiefs they have
joined in the secession. He also firmly declares that
although there has been no active persecution since
the inquiry by the High Commissioner, yet there is
still an amount of undefinable pressure brought to
bear upon those who remain loyal to our Church, and
that they are made to feel that to be a Wesleyan is
practically a bar to any Government office or favour.
He also says that in some villages, at all events, the
« Abis” of people have been taken away from them
for no other offence than that of refusing to join the
Free Church.
With the representatives of the Free Church we had
many meetings, both formal and otherwise, and after
the first little difficulty already mentioned, we are
bound to say that they met us in the most frank and
open way. We discussed with them very fully every
possible way of putting an end to the secession, but
found that they were bound by the express and oft-
repeated determination of the King about Mr. Moulton’s
•continued residence in Tonga, and also by the resolution
of their Conference, which limited their powers to the
question of Tonga being constituted an Annual Con-
ference. We urged most earnestly the argument that
before any such step could be taken there must be a
reunion, or, at all events, a basis of reunion to be
mutually agreed upon, and that the wishes and
opinions of our people should be considered and
respected, otherwise the proposed plan would be simply
an absorption, or a forced union, which would, in our
opinion, be neither fair, desirable, nor permanent.
We strongly urged, as a preliminary measure, that


an application should be made to the New South
Wales and Queensland Conference to recommend
that Tonga should be transferred to some other
Conference, in order that the whole question should
then be fully discussed and referred to the next
General Conference. In answer to an objection,
we suggested that they need not necessarily be con-
nected to any Annual Conference to which they might
be transferred for the whole triennial term, as a
resolution might be passed, should the General Con-
ference deem this desirable, authorising the President
to create them an Annual Conference, should they (the
Tongan Free Church) still desire it. We pointed out
that in all probability they would find it to be far
more advantageous for them to remain, for some time
at all events, so attached ; but that if they still thought
otherwise, provision might in this or some other way
be made by the next General Conference for their
separation, should it still seem expedient to do so.
On Thursday, August 11th, we met by appointment
the ministers, local preachers, and office-bearers of the
Tongatabu Circuit. About 108 were present. The
Rev. J. E. Moulton opened the meeting, and introduced
us to the brethren, after which he by own wish
retired, and left us in full charge. We briefly stated
the object of our visit; and to guard against any possible
misapprehension in the minds of the natives, assured
them most positively that we had no judicial authority
whatever, but that our duties were simply to make
the fullest inquiries about the state of affairs in Tonga,
and to ascertain their views and wishes upon the
reunion of the Churches. We also assured them that
we were not sent down with any idea of abandoning
our own Church in Tonga. We had a long meeting,
lasting about two and a half hours, and found no
difficulty in communicating freely with them; we
obtained the most full and free declaration of their
wishes and opinions. It will not, however, bo
necessary to repeat them, as they were identical in
almost every particular with those expressed to us by
Mr. Moulton as representing the people under his care.
Some of them spoke with considerable feeling in
favour of remaining still under the care of the Sydney
Conference. They were unanimous in their wish that


freedom of worship should be openly proclaimed; that
the two Churches should still go on side by side. Some
of them declared that they had no wish whatever to be
united with the Free Church, and one or two openly
declared that if such a union were effected they would
go to Fiji, and live with the refugees there. They
also believed that very many adherents of the Free
Church are still with us in heart, and only await a
favourable opportunity to rejoin us.
In addition to these meetings, we have, as before
stated, obtained all information possible Irom both
whites and natives. We have spoken in the most free
and open manner with the majority of the foreign
residents, either at our lodgings or in their own
homes. We can safely affirm that Mr. Moulton has
the respect and sympathy of almost every one of the
foreign residents in Tonga, including even those who
differ from him on some matters of polity. On every
side he was invariably spoken of in terms of admira-
tion for his great work, and of sincere sympathy with
him in the difficulties with which he has to contend
and the troubles which he has had to bear. It will,
however, be only fair to state that some of the gentle-
men declared very strongly their opinion that the
education given was too high for the Tongans, and one
which was not at all suitable for their requirements.
Still it may be safely affirmed that the sympathies of
the foreign residents are with Mr. Moulton rather than
with anyone connected with the Free Church.
We had also several interviews with R. B. Leife,
Esq., the Acting British Consul, and also with W. Von
Treskow, the German Consul, from both of whom we
received the most kind consideration and assistance.
Mr. Leife appears to us to understand the position of
affairs as well as any of those with whom we conversed,
and at the same time took up a more impartial position
than some of the other foreign residents seemed
to do.
We had also visits from native ministers and others,,
who had known Mr, Brown in Samoa and in New
Britain; and also conversed with ministers and members
of both Churches on every possible occasion.


From the preceding investigations it will be seen
that the subjects which will demand consideration
are:—
I. The continued residence or otherwise of Mr.
Moulton in Tonga.
11. The question of the continuance or otherwise of
the two Churches in Tonga under the present conditions.
111. The continuance or otherwise of Tonga as a
District in connection with the New South Wales and
Queensland Conference, its annexation to some other
Conference, or the establishment of the District into
an Annual Conference.
I. As to whether or not it is desirable that Mr.
Moulton should be transferred to some other district,
we may say that the arguments adduced to us in
favour of such a plan are:—
1. That the King most decidedly makes the removal
of Mr. Moulton a positive condition of all negotiations.
This he declared to us personally in the most absolute
manner. We ourselves can make no comment on the
justice or reasonableness of his demand; we simply
state the fact.
2. That there is little or no hope of any reconciliation
so long as Mr. Moulton remains in Tonga.
3. That, however unjustly it may be, Mr. Moulton is
still accused of having exercised upon the minds of the
students and some of the people an influence against
the present Government.
4. That Mr. Moulton’s transference to another
position does not necessarily imply any censure upon
his actions or want of confidence in his judgment.
He may he regarded as occupying the position of an
ambassador or agent who, though faithfully and
honourably carrying out the wishes and commands of
those whom he represents, has yet in some way become
at variance with the Government to whom he is
accredited, and so, for prudential reasons, is transferred
to another position without in any way forfeiting the
esteem and confidence of his Government. A similar
illustration, it is urged, may be taken from our own
Conference proceedings in stationing the preachers,
5. That Mr. Moulton’s great talents, especially in
educational work, do not now find sufficient or suitable
scope in Tonga. The number of students in Tubou


College does not now exceed twenty, of both sexes, and
his life appears to be practically wasted.
Against the proposal it is urged :
1. That Mr. Moulton has only acted in accordance
with the wishes and directions of the Conference in
the direction of affairs in Tonga, and so ought not to
be held responsible for results.
2. That his great knowledge of place and people are
necessary for the efficient carrying on of our work.
3. That it is his own oft-repeated wish to remain
with the people who have remained loyal to the Con-
ference, as he thinks that his presence is a source of
help and comfort to them, and that it would be an act
of cruelty to them if he were removed.
4. That it is the unanimous wish of those of our
ministers and people with whom we conversed that he
should remain with them.
5. That Mr. Moulton denies that the King has any
reasonable grounds for being displeased with him,
whilst he indignantly repudiates the accusation of
having in any way exercised an influence upon the
minds of the students or others prejudicial to the
Government.
6. That he believes that in a little time, and when
freedom of worship is openly proclaimed, many of the
people who were formerly under our care, and who are
still attached to us, will return.
11, The next question is that of the continuance or
otherwise of the two Churches in Tonga. The argu-
ments adduced in favour of this are :
1. The express desire of our people as stated by them
to us, and their earnest pleading that we do not consent
to abandon them or to force on them a union with the
Free Church at tins time.
2. Mr. Moulton’s expressed opinion and wishes.
3. That by so doing we can await the turn of
events, and shall be in a position to take advantage of
more peaceful and quiet times.
4. That our properties and leases will be retained,
and available for use at any future time.
The arguments adduced against this are;—
1. That the existence of the two Churches side by
side in this small group will be productive of much
evil, will tend much to make efficient Church discipline


very difficult indeed, and will excite and perpetuate
angry and embittered feelings in the hearts of the
people, especially in small villages and towns.
2. That although religious freedom is assumed to be
the privilege of all, yet practically our people are not
in a position of equality in this respect with the Free
Church, and for this and other reasons there is little
hope at present of any great increase in numbers, so
long as these hindrances exist. (Mr. Moulton, however,
and the native ministers and preachers, believe that
large numbers are sure to rejoin us if the way is made
perfectly clear to do so.)
3. The maintenance of our ministers and preachers,
the repair of churches and other properties, and the
weeding and cleaning of leased lands, will involve
expenses which our own people in Tonga are not at
all likely to be able to bear.
111. The next plan is that which is proposed by the
Conference of the Free Church—viz., that Tonga should
become an Annual Confei*ence, in organic union with
the Australasian General Conference.
In favour of this it is urged: —
1. That it is the express wish, through their repre-
sentatives, of the great majority of the people in Tonga.
2. That the Free Church have already constituted
themselves a Conference.
8. That the Free Church people attach great
importance to their having the control of all funds
collected by them, and to the reception and appointment
by them of their own ministers. ' They feel that in some
indefinable way this would be imperilled by their being
again made a District, This could probably be
explained away, but the feeling certainly exists.
4. That it might foster and extend the sense of
independence and power which undoubtedly exists in
the minds of the people. They have already created
a Foreign Mission Fund, and have determined, as soon
as practicable, to commence a mission in the Solomon’s
Group or elsewhere.
That there is some danger should this not be done,
and the Free Church of Tonga still remain apart from
all control from without, that complications may arise
in Fiji and Samoa, for it is, we believe, an undoubted
fact that they have already been applied to from both


these districts to establish a branch of the Free Church
in those groups.
The arguments adduced against this plan are;—
1. That, so far as we know at present, it is opposed
to the wishes of all our own ministers, office-bearers,
and people.
2. That in the present embittered state of our
people, arising from the persecutions and wrongs
which they have undoubtedly suffered, they would
regard their being handed over to the Tongan Free
■Church Conference as an act of injustice, and as
humiliating to them after their loyalty to the Confer-
ence. This, of course, would be avoided by a friendly
and equitable re-union beforehand ; but at present this
does not appear to be practicable.
8. That the want of sufficient experience and train-
ing of the great majority of the ministers who would
compose such a Conference would make efficient direc-
tion and care of Church interests in Tonga extremely
difficult, and complications might arise with regard to
the native members of the Conference which might
make such direction and care impracticable.
4. The difficulties which might arise in securing a
suitable supply of European ministers.
As we are not directed in our instructions from the
Committee of Privileges to make any recommenda-
tions, we content ourselves with thus endeavouring
simply to report the actual consideration of affairs in
Tonga. We have not dealt with any of the cases of
persecution in Tonga, because they have been already
fully reported, and also because it was decided by the
representatives of the Free Church that we should not
attempt to deal with any matter which had already
formed a subject of inquiry by the High Commissioner.
We have not been able to ascertain personally the views
entertained by the Rev. E. E. Crosby on the present
state of affairs. As there was an opportunity of send-
ing to Yavau immediately after our arrival in Tonga,
we asked Mr. Moulton if he thought of sending for Mr.
Crosby, but he replied that he did not think it necessary
to do so, and that it would not be well for Mr. Crosby
to leave Yavau at present.


As we have before stated, there is no active perse-
cution carried on against our people, but they are
made to feel indirectly that they are not regarded with
a,ny favour by the Government. Another great hind-
rance to our work is caused by the false stories and
reports which are continually being circulated to
prevent the people joining us. We found it necessary,
for example, to give a public denial to one of these
tales, in which it was declared that the Conference in
Sydney had sent us down to apologise (fa-hamole mole)
to the King for their having been misled by Mr.
Moulton’s deceiving letters, and that we were now going
to withdraw, and so make all the Tongans become
members of the Free Church. It is very sad that many
of those who were once our own native ministeis and
preachers are the most zealous in spreading these false
reports and threats against our people. It would be
unfair, perhaps, to say that these men have lost all
religion; but we may safely adduce it as another proof
of the evil caused by this unhappy division, as an
illustration of the present state of the people, and as
another reason why every effort should be used to put
an end to the secession, and to re-unite Tonga into a
Church where effective discipline can be enforced, and
by which these evils which threaten the very existence
of Christianity in Tonga may be for ever terminated.
GEORGE BROWN.
P. P. FLETCHER.
(Signed)
September 3rd, 1887.
LETTERS REFERRED TO.
Letter No. 5.
The first letter sent by the Commission after the
President’s departure.
Nukualofa, July 28th, 1887.
The Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier.
My dear Mr. Baker—l suppose I must address you
thus, as you reply to my last note in your official
capacity only. In reply let me first thank you for the
open and candid manner in which you have put the


present condition before us. The further discussion of
thequestions involved you will know, ere this, now rests
with Mr. Fletcher and myself, so far as the Commission
is concerned, as the Rev. W. G. R. Stephinson left for
Sydney by the Luheck yesterday. We are sorry that
you cannot at present see your way clear to accede to
our request that we should meet together to talk about
these matters in a friendly manner, but we are not
without hopes that you will, ere long, see that in no
other way can we secure from you that full and
accurate information which is so necessary to enable
us thoroughly to understand the case,and to make the
best recommendations to the Committee of Privileges
by whom we are appointed.
1. The first great difficulty, of course, is the decision
of His Majesty, as communicated to Mr. Stephinson,
not to grant us an interview unless we give a definite
promise that we will remove Rev. J. E. Moulton and
Rev. E. E. Crosby from Tonga. This determination
of His Majesty we are of course bound to accept and
to respect, though we are both very sorry indeed that
His Majesty has so decided. I, myself, feel this the
more, as I have been proud to consider myself amongst
the number of those to whom His Majesty entertained
some kindty feelings; and in the course of many
lectures and addresses in England, America, Canada,
and Australia, I have ever spoken of him in terms of
the highest respect and admiration.
2. You are, of course, fully aware, from your know-
ledge of Methodist law, that we, as members of the
Commission, one of us also being a layman, have no
power whatever to remove Mr. Moulton and Mr.
Crosby from Tonga. Our instructions from the Com-
mittee of Privileges are to “ interview King George of
Tonga, Rev. J. E. Moulton, and the ministers, officers,
and members of our Church, and also the duly author-
ised representatives of the Free Church; to gather
information from these and any other reliable sources,
and ascertain as far as possible the views of the King,
the Free Church, and our own Church upon the ques-
tion of the union of the two Churches; and to make a
report upon the subject to this Committee, which shall
send on its report to the next Conference.” From this
you will see that the utmost we can do in the direction


indicated by His Majesty would be to recommend the
Committee to advise the Conference to effect the
changes desired by His Majesty, should this appear to
us desirable after a full and fair consideration of the
present position.
8. We would submit, however, with all deference
and respect, that His Majesty’s present determination
is scarcely in harmony with the request of His Majesty
to Sir C. B. H. Mitchell, the High Commissioner, and
communicated by his Excellency to the President of
the New South Wales and Queensland Conference.
That request, as communicated by his Excellency, was
.as follows :—“ And if your Excellency would kindly
initiate negotiations with the Wesleyan Church in the
colonies on the plan proposed by rhe New Zealand
Conference I should be glad, and that is my mind.
Upon thus receiving His Majesty’s express wish to act
as mediator in these difficulties upon a certain defined
basis, his Excellency, in carrying out to the best of his
ability and judgment His Majesty’s instructions, and
•virtually acting in his capacity as mediator in His
Majesty’s name, requested the Committee of Privileges
that they should “as soon as possible write direct to
the King, and—on the opening made by his request to
me for negotiations —propose a preliminary meeting at
some convenient spot of two representatives of each
side, and that these might arrange (ad referendum?)
the details of a reunion.”
We would respectfully suggest the further considera-
tion of these facts, as we fear the present determination
of His Majesty is calculated to place Sir C. B. H.
Mitchell in a false position, he having acted in good
faith in accordance with His Majesty’s wish, and at his
request. It certainly places ns also in a similar position,
because we now find an obstacle presented to us which
quite blocks up our way, whilst the definite issue first
presented by His Majesty to the High Commissioner,
and by him presented to the President of the Con-
ference, and upon which we were appointed, we are
not at present able to discuss.
We would again present to His Majesty, through
you, our sincere respect, and our kind wishes for his
prosperity and welfare, and would assure him also, in
Hie name of the Committee, that we are actuated solely


by an earnest desire to promote the prosperity and
happiness of Tonga. I have, &c.,
G. BROWN,
For the Commission, &c.
pg. May I please to ask that in future communica-
tions to the Commission on official matters j 7 ou will
kindly address to us both. We are, however, anxious
that, as far as possible, our intercourse should be free
from all official restrictions.
[Letter No. 6.]
Nukualofa, July 29th, 1887.
Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier of Tonga.
Dear Sir —We have the honour to acknowledge
receipt of yours of above date, and, in reply, would
respectfully say that we fully admit the. force of your
reasoning as founded upon the words “ proposed to the
Kino-,” which were quoted by us from Sir C. Mitchell s
letter to the President, but we would assure you that in
the action taken by the Committee of Privileges they
believed that thev were acting in full accordance with
his Excellency’s’'judgment, and Majesty s
wishes as expressed by him to his Excellency, and
communicated in his name to the President.
That they were correct in the first instance is shown,
we think, by his Excellency’s reply to the letter
informing him of the appointment and speedy depar-
ture of the Commissioners. So far as we can remember,
for we can oidy give the substance from memory, he in
that letter approved the action of the Committee of
Privileges, and kindly expressed the hope that in the
meantime nothing would be done in Tonga which
mi oh t again complicate matters. The notice sent to
His Majesty of the concurrence of the Committee with
his Excellency’s proposition was posted within twenty-
four hours of the decision, and we can only express our
regret that it has not yet been received by His Majesty.
Ve feel some delicacy in giving any extracts from
his Excellency’s unofficial letter in justification of the
apparent haste > but we may say that he expressed the
hope “ that the Committee will take such steps as
may appear to tend in the direction of re-uniting


the Tongan Wesleyans to the mother society.” In
another part he says that his “object is to see whether
the Tongans can he re-united to the parent society, and
that speedilyand he also expresses the opinion that
“ the present opportunity, if promptly seized, will in
all probability afford the best chances of re-union that
may occur for years.”
Those of us who urged the speedy departure ot the
Commission, amongst whom we are free to confess were
the present members of it, did so under a strong con-
viction that the advice tendered hy His Excellency
expressed not only his own deliberate judgment, but
that such a course would meet with His Majesty’s
approval, and we beg you will kindly assure His
Majesty of this.
2. With regard to the question, What is to be done?
we beg to state that we will gladly meet with the duly
appointed representatives of the Free Church at such
time as may be most convenient to you, to arrange the
necessary preliminaries for our meeting in accordance
with the conditions which you named—That “ every-
thing is put down in writing, and all memos and
minutes intended for use be read over, and signed by
both parties.”
3. We, on our part, can assure you that we are only
anxious for some plan to be formulated by which
peace may be restored. We earnestly hope that some
plan may be agreed upon by which these unhappy
divisions may cease for ever, and that Tonga, which
we have always regarded as the glory of our Mission
work, may again occupy the honourable position she
has hitherto held in the Church which is so dear to us
all. We are, &c.,
G. BROWN & P. P. FLETCHER,
Commissioners, &c.
[Letter No. 7.]
Nukualofa, July 80, 1887.
Rev. J. B. W ATKIN, President Wesleyan Free Church,
Tonga.
Hear Sir—We have to-day received a communica-
tion from Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier, informing us
that lie purposes to ask His Majesty’s permission to


meet us as one of the representatives of the Free
Church. Having received this information, we beg to
forward you a copy of our Instructions, and would
respectfully ask that, in the event of His Majesty’s
consent being given, you would, as the other duly
appointed representative, kindly convene a meeting at
such time and place as may be most convenient to you,
to arrange the necessary preliminaries for our meetings.
We make this early application to you, as we under-
stand that you may be compelled at some early date
to leave Tonga on a visit to the Niuas. With our
united kind wishes,
We are, dear Sir, your obedient servants,
G. BROWN & P. P. FLETCHER,
Commissioners, &c.
[Letter No. B.]
Nukualofa, August Ist, 1887.
The Hon. S. W. Baker, Premier.
Dear Sir—Referring to your favour of the SOtli
ultimo, which we have the honour to acknowledge, we
would respectfully inform you that we have addressed
a letter to Rev. J. B. Watkin, the President of the
\Yesleyan Free Church in Tonga, informing him that
you purpose asking His Majesty’s permission to meet
us as one of the representatives of the Free Church,
and requesting him, if this is also in accordance with
his own views, that he will kindly convene a meeting
at such time and place as may be most convenient to
him.
We have also enclosed to him, for your joint informa-
tion, a copy of our Instructions from the Committee of
Privileges.
1. You will see from these Instructions, as well as
from the extracts given by us in a former communica-
tion, that the concurrence of the Committee of
Privileges was with His Excellency’s advice, that a
Commission should be sent down to interview the
King and all the other parties concerned, and to
propose a preliminary meeting at some convenient


spot of two representatives of each side, and that these
might arrange {(id referendum ) the details of a re-
union.
2. Referring to the second paragraph in page 2 of
your letter to us, we would say that the establishment
now, or at some future date, of the Wesleyan Church
in Tonga into a separate Conference, in organic
union with the General Conference of Australasia, and
the manner in which this is to be accomplished (if still
thought desirable) will demand, we think, our most
serious and careful consideration. But we aie not, as
you will see from our Instructions, justified in accepting
this as a foregone conclusion, though we are quite free
to state that there is no foregone conclusion against it,
but, on the contrary, the Committee of Privileges is
prepared to give the most earnest attention and
consideration to any recommendation whatever which
may tend to promote peace and harmony in longa.
3. It will, however, be apparent to His Majesty,and to
yourself, that the union of the Churches, or at all events,
an agreement upon the terms of such union, must
necessarily precede the establishment of Tonga into a
separate Conference. Otherwise,all our Wesleyan people
outside of the Free Church would be excluded, and
would feel that they were considered as not having
any voice or interest whatever in the mattei, and we
are sure that neither His Majesty nor you desire this.
Such a plan, indeed, would mean simple absorption,
and would, if carried out, only result in a forced union,
which would probably not be permanent, and would
certainly not be to either party.
4. Let us carefully and ' considerately discuss the
question of re-union, and we shall be able then to
formulate a plan which we can submit to His Majesty,
and to the members of the two Churches lor their
approval and modification, and which, we trust, both
parties may then honourably accept. We believe that
such a plan can be so formulated which will secure the
cordial union of the two Churches and the peace of
Tonga, and which will also be in full accordance with
His Majesty’s wishes.
We are, &c.>
G. BROWN & P. P. FLETCHER.


[Letter C.]
Nukualofa, 29 th July, 188/.
Rev. G. Brown, &c.
Rev. and Dear Sir —I have the honour to acknow-
ledge the receipt of yours of to-day, and in reply would
respectfully say that it is not His Majesty whom I
consider has placed Sir C. Mitchell in a false position,,
but the Sydney Committee; for if the Sydney Com-
mittee had acted on the suggestion of His Excellency
the present unpleasantness would not have occui led.
In your letter you distinctly admit that His Excellency,
in his advice to the Sydney Committee, said, “ As soon
as possible write direct to the King, and—on the
opening made by his request to me for negotiations
propose a preliminary meeting at some convenient spot
of two representatives of each side, and that these
might arrange ad referendum”
Had the Committee acted on this suggestion, His
Majesty would have most heartily agreed to it. But
the Sydney Committee have altogether ignored such
advice, and instead of first addressing His Majesty in
the usual official way, informing him that the Sydney
Committee are willing to enter into negotiations, the
first thing that is heard is that a Deputation has been
sent to interview His Majesty, and this is only gleaned
from the newspapers, for, although Mr. Stephinson says
he wrote to inform His Majesty that the Deputation
were coming, no such letter has even as yet come to
hand ; and had it come His Majesty would have most
certainly informed the Committee that he was not pie-
pared to meet Mr. Stephinson after the gross libel he
had printed in the newspapers concerning His Majesty.
On the arrival of the Deputation a letter is sent to
His Majesty asking for an interview, but for what
purpose is not stated, or what is the object foi which
the Deputation is sent. It cannot be supposed for one
moment that His Majesty, having commenced the riee
Church, would ever concede any one of those grounds
for which the secession took place, or be willing to enter
into negotiations on any other conditions than those His
Majesty stated to Sir C. Mitchell viz., the plan of the
New Zealand Conference. This the Sydney Committee
must have known before the Deputation was sent, so i


cannot conceive what obstacle His Majesty has thrown
in the way. He has simply repeated a request which
he has frequently made, and a course which was recom-
mended by a former Deputation, and, what is more,
one which was one of the principal causes of the
secession.
Had His Excellency’s advice been taken, and a
letter sent to His Majesty informing His Majesty that
the plan proposed by the New Zealand Conference, as
stated in His Majesty’s letter to His Excellency, had
been accepted, for it is not to be presumed that the
Sydney Committee, if they wished to take Sir C.
Mitchell’s advice, will ignore the conditions on which
negotiations were agreed to be entered into, for the
conditions were distinctly stated on which His
Majesty agreed that negotiations should take place
viz., on the plan proposed by the New Zealand Con-
ference ; but even to this moment His Majesty is not
informed whether the proposal made by His Majesty
will be accepted, or recommended by the Sydney
Committee to the next Conference.
Had this been done, then the remaining part of His
Excellency’s advice would easily have followed, and
two representatives on either side could have met to
consider (ad referendum ) the details of a re-union.
In fact, in anticipation that something like this would
be the case, the last Conference of the Free Church
appointed representatives, and passed a set of resolu-
tions as the conditions on which they were prepared
to agree to an organic connection, and which are fully
endorsed by His Majesty.
With these facts before you, I think that you will
admit that the difficulties that you complain of have
been the result of the action of the Sydney Committee,
in ignoring his Excellency’s advice and adopting a
plan of their own, and that His Majesty’s conduct is in
perfect harmony with his request to His Excellency Sir
0. Mitchell, for you yourself admit it was clearly under-
stood these negotiations were to be upon a “ certain
defined basis.”
The question that remains is—What is to be done?
1. It must be distinctly understood that His Majesty
will not recede from the position he has taken up; but
.this will not prevent His Majesty consenting to the


representatives of the Free Church meeting you, if you
so desire it, for the purpose of hearing what each party
has to say. I am aware you have no power to recall
Mr. Moulton, but the President has, or why did a
President recall me ?
2. As regards my meeting you to talk over matters,
I shall be glad to see you as old friends, but not to
talk over Church matters. But lam prepared to meet
you officially, as one of the representatives appointed
by the Free Church Conference, if everything is put
down in writing, and all memos and minutes intended
for use be read over and signed by both parties,
for, though I shall meet you only as a representative,
yet anything I may say may perhaps be taken as
said in my official character, and I am not prepared to
have statements circulated and reported to be mine,
and half statements made use of, in order to make out
a case, as I am sorry to say was done by the previous
Deputation.
I have informed His Majesty of your good wishes
for His Majesty’s welfare and prosperity.
I have the honour to be, Rev. and Dear Sir,
Your obedient servant,
SHIRLEY W. BAKER, Premier.
[Letter D.]
Nukualofa, July 30th, 1887.
To the Rev. G. Brown and P. P. Fletcher, Esq.,
Commissioners, &c.
Dear Sirs—l have the honour to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of July 29th, referring to a con-
versation you have had with Her British Majesty s
Vice-Consul relative to a breach of courtesy on the part
of the Deputation towards myself in my official capacity
as Premier. I note with satisfaction that you disclaim
any discourtesy whatever was intended, ami, in fact,
you first became aware that a breach of official etiquette
had been made on Her British Majesty s Vice-Consul
mentioning the matter to you. I would, in reply, say
I most willingly accept the sincere apology you have


given, and note it was not intended either on Mr.
Stephinson’s part or your own.
I have, &c.,
S. W. BAKER, Premier, &c.
[Letter E.]
Nukualofa, Tonga, July 30th, 1887.
To the Rev. G. Brown and P. P. Fletcher, Esq.,
Commissioners, &c.
Dear Sirs —I have the honour to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of July 29th, in reply to mine of
same date, and note your various remarks relative to
same. It cannot, however, but be deeply regretted
that the letter informing His Majesty of the concurrence
of the Committee with His Excellency’s proposition
should have miscarried, for then His Majesty would have
had reliable information to guide him, and the various
reports circulated here as to the object of the Deputation
would have been altogether disregarded; but it cannot
be wondered at that some credence was given to those
reports when Mr. Moulton’s conduct ever since the
Deputation has come is taken into consideration. I
will, however, inform His Majesty of your explanations,
and l have no doubt His Majesty will be pleased to hear
them, and will feel, I am certain, very grateful to His
Excellency for his kind advice to the Committee to see
that nothing will be done in Tonga which might again
complicate matters, and also for the great desire and
anxiety which His Excellency has expressed to the
Committee for the ending of these troubles and the
restoration of peace.
1 presume from your letter, wherein you state a
letter has been sent to His Majesty informing him of
the concurrence of the Committee with His Excellency’s
proposition, that I am at liberty to tell His Majesty
that the Committee are willing to recommend to the
ensuing Conference that the conditions on which His
Majesty was prepared to agree to the negotiations
taking place have been virtually accepted, and the
Deputation have really come down as to matters of
detail.
This being the case, I shall ask His Majesty s per-
mission to meet you as one of the representatives of the


Free Church; but as to the time and place, I must
request you to communicate with Rev. J. B. Watkin,
the President Free Church Conference, and
who, of course, as far as the Free Church is concerned,
is the convener of the meeting. I would, however,
urge an early application to Rev. J. B. Watkin, as that
gentleman is expecting in a few days to leave for the
Niuas. Thanking you for your kind wish that these
unhappy divisions may cease,
I have, &c.,
S. W. BAKER.
[Letter F.]
Nukualofa, August Ist, 1887.
Rev. G, Brown and P. P. Fletcher, Esq., &c.
Gentlemen—Your communication of July 30th came
duly to hand, and, in reply, I would respectfully state
that, owing to the fixed determination of His Majesty
to maintain the position he has taken up until the
request he has made to the High Commissioner, Sir C.
Mitchell, and also to the President of the New South
Wales Conference, be granted, we can therefore only
meet you in an informal though friendly manner. Mr.
Baker and myself will be prepared to meet you at my
residence on Wednesday, August 3rd, at 10 a.m,
I remain, Yours respectfully,
J. B. WATKIN.
[Letter G.]
Nukualofa, Tonga, August Ist, 1887.
Rev. G. Brown and P. P. Fletcher, Esq., &c.
Hear Sirs—Yours of this date duly to hand, and I
note you have requested Rev. J. B. Watkin, the Presi-
dent Wesleyan Free Church, to appoint a time to meet
the Commission, and, as you are aware, the rev.
gentleman has appointed Wednesday next, at ten a.m.,
at his residence.
Rev. J. B. Watkin has forwarded me the copy of
your Instructions for perusal. I am sorry that no
power whatever has been delegated to you, so that
some understanding might have been arrived at, for in


fact your commission is simply to collect information
which, as far as the Free Church is concerned, could
have been done by correspondence, without the expense
incurred by a Commission.
In reference to the paragraph marked No. 1 in your
letter, I must confess it does seem strange to me that
the concurrence of the Committee of Privileges should
only be given to a part of His Excellency’s advice, and
that the condition on which His Majesty was willing
that negotiations should take place has altogether been
ignored by them.
In paragraph No. 2 you state that the formation of
the Wesleyan Churches into a separate Conference in
organic connection with the General Conference of
Australasia will have your careful and serious con-
sideration. This, as you are aware, is the only con-
dition on which any negotiations can take place as far
as the Free Church is concerned.
If, as you infer in paragraph No. 3, there is a doubt
as to whether the few followers of Mr. Moulton will
agree to such an union, it is only but another proof that
the position they hold is not one of religion, but one of
political antagonism to His Majesty and his Govern-
ment.
As regards devising any plan which will be accept-
able to all parties, as you have your own instructions
from the Committee, so has Mr. Watkin and myself
from the Conference of the Free Church, and contrary
to these neither of us can act.
I have, &c.,
S. W. BAKER.
Mason, Firth & M‘Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
