

1861.
Legislative Assembly.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND CUMBERLAND.
REPORT PROM THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND
CUMBERLAND;
TOGETHER WITH THE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE,
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
(COMPRISING STATEMENTS OF PRISONERS),
AND
APPENDIX.
ORDERED BY THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY TO BE PRINTED,
10 May, 1861.
SYDNEY:
THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
PHILLIP-STREET.
1861.
157—A
[Price, 7s. 6d.]


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Extracts from the Votes and Proceedings g
Report .. ~ ~ .. > _ g
Proceedings of the Committee 12
(Schedule of “Expenses incurred on Visits of Inspection” .. 27)
List of Witnesses .. .. ~ ~ .. ~ _ _ ~ 27
Do. Prisoners .. ~ .. ~ .. ~ _ # .. 28
Do. Visits of Inspection (Index to Notices) 30
Do. Appendix ~ ~ .. ~ ~ . _ .. 31
Do. Separate Appendix
Do. Plans ~ .. ~ ~ .. , # # , _ _ .33
Do. Errata .. ~ .. ~ ~ # _ ~ 33
Minutes of Evidence (comprising Statements of Prisoners) ~ .. 1
Separate Appendix, Part I. (Separate “ Statements.”) 235
Do. Part 11. ~ .. ~ ~ ~ , # # > 248
Plans ~ ~ ~ .. ~ ~ ~ .. .. follow 250


1861.
EXTRACTS FROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGA OF
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
Votes, No. 8. Wednesday, 23 January, 1861.
13. Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland :—Mr. Parkes moved, pursuant to notice, —
(1.) That a Select Committee be appointed, with authority to send for persons and
papers, to inquire into and report upon the state and management of the Public
Prisons in the City of Sydney and County of Cumberland.
(2.) That such Committee consist of Mr. Cowper, Mr. Hart, Mr. Morris, Mr. Wilson
Mr. Windeyer, Mr. Lucas, Mr. Walsh, Mr. Sutherland, Mr. Mate, and the Mover. ’
Question put and passed.
Votes, No. 10. Saturday, 26 January, 1861, a.m.
7. Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland Mr. Parkes moved, pursuant to notice,—
(1.) That the Select Committee appointed to inquire into the State and Management
of Public Prisons be authorised to make visits of inspection to any Gaol or" Penal
Establishment in the City of Sydney or County of Cumberland.
(2.) That the said Committee be authorised to require the services of a short-hand
writer in such visits of inspection, and to receive the statement of any prisoner or
prisoners which a majority of any meeting of the Committee may deem necessary to
their inquiry.
Question put and passed.
Votes, No. 24. Thursday, 21 February, 1861, a.m.
10. Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland :—Mr. Parkes moved, pursuant to notice, —
That the Petition of Thomas Harrison, presented by him on the 19th February, be
printed and referred to the Committee now sitting to inquire into the state of the
Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland.
Question put and passed.
********
Votes, No. 54. Tuesday, 16 April, 1861.
29. Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland :—Mr. Parkes moved, pursuant to notice,
That leave be granted to the Select Committee on the State and Management of
Public Prisons in the City of Sydney and County of Cumberland to sit on Saturdays
and Mondays.
Question put and passed.
********
89. Member of Legislative Council as Witness :—Mr. Wilson moved, That the following
Message bo carried to the Legislative Council:—
Mr. President,
The Legislative Assembly having appointed a Select Committee “to inquire
“ into and report upon the State and Management of the Public Prisons in the City
11 of Sydney and County of Cumberland,” and that Committee being desirous to
examine the Honorable Edward Deas Thomson, Esquire, C. 8., Member of the Legis-
lative Council, in reference thereto, requests that the Legislative Council will give
leave to its said Member to attend accordingly, on such day and days as shall be
arranged between him and the said Committee.
Legislative Assembly Chamber,
Sydney, 16 April, 1861. Speaker.
Question put and passed.
********
157—A 2 46.


40. Member ot the Legislative Council as Witness :-The Speaher reported the following
Message from the Legislative Council :
Mr. Sp I E n A^ ns^cr tQ the M essa ge from the Legislative Assembly, dated the 16th
instant, requesting leave for the Honorable Edward Peas Thomson, C. 8., a Member
of the Legislative Council, to attend and be examined before a Select Committee of
the Legislative Assembly on the State and Management of Public Prisons m the
City of Sydney and the County of Cumberland, the Council acquaints the Assembly
that leave has been granted to its said Member to attend and be examined by the
said Committee, if he think fit.
Legislative Council Chamber,
Sydney, 16 April, 1861.
W. W. BURTON,
President.
Votes, No. 69. Friday, 10 May, 1861.
10 Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland Mr. Parkes, as Chairman, brought up a
Report from, and laid upon the Table the Minutes of the Proceedings of, and
Evidence (with Appendix) taken before the Select Committee, for whose consideration
and report the State of Public Prisons in Sydney and Cumberland was referred on
23rd January, 1861.
Ordered to be printed.


1861.
PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND CUMBERLAND.
REPORT.
The Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly appointed on the
23rd January last, u with authority to send for persons and papers, to
“ inquire into and report upon the state and management of the Public
“ Prisons in the City of Sydney and County of Cumberland ; ”
severally “ authorised,” on the 26th following, “to make visits of
“ inspection to any Gaol or Penal Establishment in the City of Sydney
“or County of Cumberland ,” “to require the services of a short-hand
“ writer in such visits of inspection, and to receive the statement of
“ any prisoner or prisoners which a majority of any meeting of the
a Committee may deem necessary to their inquiry to whom was
referred, on the 21st February, “ the Petition of Thomas Harrison ”
(presented on the 19th); and to whom, on the 16th ultimo, leave was
granted “to sit on Saturdays and Mondays,” have agreed to the
following Report:—
The inquiry intrusted to your Committee has demanded more time
and attention for its satisfactory conclusion than they have been enabled to
devote to it during the Session about to close; hut it has been deemed
desirable to report upon the evidence they have taken, and the results of
their visits to the principal penal establishments, and to submit for the
consideration of your Honorable House such reflections and recommen-
dations as their examination of the general subject has suggested, though
it may he expedient to continue their labours in the next Session of
Parliament.
2. The Committee have held twenty-two meetings, and have
taken the evidence of a large number of persons, including many
inmates of the several prisons. They have paid three visits of inspection
to the Penal Establishment of Cockatoo Island, two to Harlinghurst Gaol,
nne to Parramatta Gaol, and one to the proclaimed Gaol at Penrith.
They have also visited, during the night-time, when it was considered
such places could he best inspected, all the watch-houses in the City of
Sydney.
3. Many of these meetings have extended over five or six hours, and
in other respects have imposed severe labour upon the Committee. The
list of witnesses examined, includes the present Colonial Secretary, the
Chief


Chief Justice, The Honorable Edward Heas Thomson, (formerly Colonial
Secretary,) the Inspector General of Police, the Principal Gaolers, and other
persons whose official acquaintance with the question of criminal manage-
ment, as well as their superior intelligence, entitle their evidence to the
most attentive consideration.
4. Several written statements have been received from prisoners
undergoing sentence, which embody various complaints of the unequal
working of the penal system now in force, and allege other facts of a
serious nature in relation to their general treatment; and while the Com-
mittee regard these statements in some cases with distrust, and in all with
a feeling of caution, they have considered them of sufficient importance to
be appended to the evidence presented to your Honorable House. It
appears to the Committee necessary especially to notice the revolting
character of some of the evidence received; its very enormity is sub-
mitted in justification of its publication, as the ends of truth in disclosing
the actual state of our prison establishments must suffer by its being
suppressed or modified.
5. Their Report is accompanied by carefully prepared Plans of
Cockatoo Island and the Gaols at Darlinghurst and Parramatta, which the
Committee have considered necessary for the purposes of the inquiry
ordered by your Honorable House.
6. On the occasion of your Committee’s first visit to Cockatoo Island,
on the Ist of February, there were 167 prisoners in that establishment, 63
of whom on the previous night had been confined in one dormitory. The
men engaged in productive labour on the day in question were only 68
out of the whole number, and 10 of these were set down as overseers;
they were employed on the works of the Fitz Roy Dock. The buildings
assigned for the prisoners, especially for their confinement at night, are of
a deplorable description. There are in all five dormitories, which have been
built with very imperfect means of ventilation; on either side of each there
are double tiers of transverse sleeping berths, with coffin-like apertures open-
ing upon a narrow central passage. In this passage are placed night-tubs for
the common use of the men during the tw T elve hours they are locked up. Two
of the dormitories contain 88 berths each, two contain 52 each, and one con-
tains 48; in all there are 328 berths of the character described. But as
many as 500 prisoners have been upon the island at one time, though nothing
like'So large a number appear to have been confined there latterly. While
the physical suffering from this inadequate night accommodation must
aggravate the sentence of the law to many men to an extent beyond all
calculation, the moral results of such a state of existence are, as might
have been expected, of the very worst description. Your Committee
would direct particular attention in this respect to the evidence of the
Chaplains of the Island and Mr. Inspector Lane. The latter witness,
■who has been in charge of the police force on the island for the
last thirteen months, says he has paid much attention to the condition of
the prisoners at night; he has often seen them at the iron gratings
gasping for fresh air from without, and he “ wonders how they live.” The
brutalising effect upon the prisoners is admitted by all, and it is described
by


by some as terrible in depravity. Practices grossly obscene are common, and,
on evidence possessing the consistency of truth, and which your Committee
do not feel warranted in doubting, unnatural crimes of the deepest dye
are committed. The clergymen in attendance complain that as the men
are never alone for a single hour during the whole time of their sentence,
they literally have no opportunity for the exercises of religion, even if
they are so disposed; and similar complaints are made by the men them-
selves. It is almost unnecessary to add that there is no attempt at classi-
fication of prisoners in this establishment.
7. The heaviest grievance of which the men on Cockatoo Island
complain is the inequality of treatment to which they are subject in
carrying out their sentences. Formerly a system prevailed by which the
prisoners received marks for labour and good conduct which were placed to
their credit in partial remission of their sentences. On the Ist of June,
1858, new regulations were issued by the Government abolishing this
system of indulgence, which was done principally in consequence of the
abuses of the system previously existing, and, as stated in evidence by the
Colonial Secretary, as a temporary expedient. The sentences of the Courts
passed upon prisoners since then, except in cases where special circumstances
in mitigation have come to light, are being carried out to the letter in point
of time. Thus, there are at Cockatoo Island, prisoners working side by side,
some of whom, having been tried previous to the Ist of June, 1858, arc
enabled to make eight and nine days a week to count off their sentences,
while others who have received their sentences since that date, though
they work as hard, and behave as well, can only make the six days. It
could not be hoped that men, in the fallen condition of these prisoners,
would regard the operation of the new regulations, especially while the
old were still partially in force, in a spirit of submission ; and we find that,
on the 14th of August, 1860, the Church of England chaplain reported to
the late Governor General, in proof of the feeling of insubordination engen-
dered, that there had been eleven attempts at escape within the preceding
few months, and three open combinations to resist the authorities. The
more formidable acts of insubordination that occurred in January last are
mainly attributable to the alleged grievance arising out of the two sets of
regulations.
8. The prison discipline on Cockatoo Island, in the opinion of your
Committee, is very imperfect, and in no way determined by any of the
moral axioms of the present age which have been established by philo-
sophical investigations of the subject. Indeed, the principles of criminal
treatment laid down by Lord Brougham, Mr. Recorder Hill, M. He Metz,
and similar authorities, appear to be unknown to the persons in charge of
the criminal population of this Colony, and much improvement is loudly
called for in all the establishments your Committee have visited. On the
laxity and indiscriminating treatment that prevail at Cockatoo Island,
your Committee refer to the evidence of Mr. Inspector Lane, and other
witnesses.
9. The gaol at Harlinghurst possesses more adequate accommodation
for the proper management of prisoners than any other establishment in
the


the Colony, and, if the buildings were completed according to the original
plan, with suitable workshops in addition, it would be a commodious and
well-arranged prison. But your Committee regret that they are compelled
to represent a state of things in that establishment, at the time of their
first visit on the Bth of February, so far as it affects the personal super-
intendence, exceedingly unsatisfactory and censurable. The design of
the prison buildings embraces seven stone-built three-storied wings, radi-
ating from a central tower that would command the whole ; but only four
of these wings have been completed, and nothing has been done towards
the erection of the tower. The plan prepared by the instruction of your
Committee represents the prison as it now actually exists. The prison
cells are roomy and well ventilated, and the greater number are intended
each for three inmates. The workshops are merely temporary sheds, and do
not appear to be conveniently arranged.
10. Very little has been done towards classification at Darlinghurst,
and the discipline appears to have principally consisted of unlocking and
locking up, setting to work in an unskilful manner, and victualing at
fixed hours. It is certain that no regulation has existed for a long time
past to enforce personal cleanliness among the prisoners. Captain
Webster, it appears, mustered the prisoners every Sunday morning, and
required them to expose their limbs and bosoms to see that they were
clean ; but after that officer’s death, the practice was abandoned, and it
is stated that latterly, if a man allowed his skin to remain unw T ashed
for six months, he would not be interfered with, unless through the
complaints of his fellow prisoners. Complaints -were made of want
of cleanliness in the cells, and in the bed clothing ; some of the
blankets, it was asserted, had not been washed for twelve months,
and their dirty appearance would warrant the truth of the assertion.
Your Committee observed vermin in many of the cells, in the female
cells, particularly, the common house bug was in masses of hundreds,
forming dark patches on the walls.
11. Your Committee are of opinion that the labour of the prisoners at
Darlinghurst might be turned to more profitable account. With the
exception of the stone-cutting and wood work required for the extension
of the prison buildings, the work at present appears to be confined to
trifling jobs, for which little remuneration is received, and the whole is
conducted without much regularity or method.
12. The subordinate officers do not appear to have been selected with
much judgment as to their fitness for their duties, and your Committee-
on examining one of the warders, who was on duty in the u exercise yard”
at the time of the escape of the seventeen prisoners in February, could
not help noticing his apparent unsuitableness for such a post.
13. The prison at Parramatta, in its buildings and means of regula-
tion and safe custody, may be classed second to that of Sydney, and your
Committee are of opinion that the discipline in this gaol is more rigid and
uniform than in the establishments already noticed. If the complaints of
some of the prisoners may be trusted, the error would appear to be undue
severity,


severity, as it is stated that physical coercion is sometimes resorted to
on slight and unnecessary grounds. Gross irregularities were stated to
exist, but the prisoners making these statements did not appear to your
Committee deserving of much credit, as, by their own acknowledgments,
they were among the most refractory and turbulent. The prison exhibited
marks of general cleanliness.
14. The arrangements for directing prison labour at Parramatta
evince more business aptitude than at Darlinghurst, and the work performed
is of greater variety and more useful character. The plan accompanying
this Report will shew the state of the gaol at the present time.
15. The gaol at Penrith is a strong wooden building, of four apart-
ments, chiefly used for the confinement of prisoners in transitu ; and as only
a few persons are confined there for a longer period than forty-eight hours,
and none for more than seven days, it seems sufficient for the present.
In the Court House adjacent, there are several close cells which, both for
want of room and ventilation, are unfit for the confinement of prisoners.
A new brick-built lock-up is in course of erection in this town, which your
Committee consider is constructed on about the worst possible plan that
could be devised ; and it is stated in evidence by the Colonial Architect,
that several others of precisely the same design have been erected in different
parts of the country. The central room is intended for the lock-up keeper
and his family, at the back of which is a small sleeping apartment, while
on both sides of this living-room, with doors opening into it, are cells
for the confinement of prisoners. The building itself is small, and not
calculated to meet any want not already provided for.
16. Your Committee visited the watch-houses in the City of Sydney
between the hours of four and six o’clock in the morning, that being the
time when these places were most likely to be found occupied by peisons
in the custody of the Police. The principal receiving watch-house attached
to the Central Police Court is, in the opinion of your Committee, unfit
for its present purposes; the smaller cells are close and unwholesome, and
the larger ones are destitute of the means of common decency. The
building itself is fast falling into a state of dilapidation.
17. The other watch-houses are mostly strong buildings of recent
erection. A want of cleanliness was observable, more or less, in all of
them, with one exception, that of D division, near the gaol at Darling
hurst. The state in which these places were found is described in detail
in the Proceedings of the Committee.
18. It is gratifying to be enabled to report, among so many causes of
complaint, that, so far as could be ascertained by the careful examinations
of your Committee, the food supplied in all the gaols is good and wlO e
some, sufficient in quantity but not in variety. The hospitals in the & ao
at Darlinghurst and Parramatta and at Cockatoo Island also appear
adequate to the wants of those establishments.
19. Your Committee have arrived at the conclusion, that gieat
improvement in the whole prison system of the Colon} is
demanded, and that any step short of its complete revision^wo^^


ineffectual. Nor would it be sufficient merely to establish regulations,
however carefully framed and excellent in principle they might bo. The
administration must be under the responsible inspection of a competent
officer, whose time and attention would not be divided with other duties;
and whose education, knowledge of mankind, and habits of life, would
enable him to secure efficiency in subordinate appointments, as well as
to exercise a just discrimination in criminal treatment. Additional gaol
accommodation is indispensable, if the important ends of classification and
industrial training are to be secured.
20. If time were allowed for a fuller consideration of the subject,
your Committee would be disposed to offer suggestions that seem to arise
out of their inquiry, for the establishment of a great central prison, with all
the requisites in cellular dormitories and properly arranged workshops, to
secure the reformatory treatment of the prisoners, and the economical
division and piofitablo employment of their labour. Such a change,
however, could only be effected by a very large expenditure, and ought
not to be proposed without a closer examination of primary principles
than is possible within the limits of this inquiry. An interesting
appendix to the evidence of Mr. Edward Bell, the City Engineer, and
which is founded on a calculation by Sir William Denison, suggests the
establishment of a prison at Prospect, for the purpose of quarrying and
piepaiing road metal, by convict labour. In this locality, a very short
distance from the Western It ail way, stone of the hardest description,
such as is used for metalling the streets of Sydney, is found in
almost inexhaustible quantities. It is calculated, that it could be
delivered in Sydney at about half the cost of the metal obtained at
Pennant Hills, even if a railway should be constructed from the latter
quany to the Parramatta River; and at the reduced price the City of
Sydney would consume 50,000 tons annually. It is also supposed that
large quantities of the stone would be taken by the suburban munici-
palities, and for other roads. While this plan would give profitable
employment to the prisoners, and supply, at a cheap rate, an article of
great necessity, it is not conceived that it would, in any objectionable
manner, bring prison labour into competition with the free workman •
and it would have an economical advantage in affording a valuable
and permanent traffic to the Western Railway. Such an establishment,
it is submitted, would not involve a serious expense in erection, and
would be very beneficial in increasing the means of convict classification.
21. Your Committee conclude with the following recommendations,
calculated, as they believe, with the least delay and the least cost’
to alleviate the worst features of the existing state of things :
Ist. In carrying out the sentences of the Courts, good conduct
should be taken into account by the Executive, so as to
encourage the prisoner to accomplish his own redemption
by a reformed course of life.
2nd. An Inspector of Prisons should be appointed at a salary
that would secure the services of a man of ability and high
character,


character, and this officer should be intrusted with the
entire supervision and direction of the prison system of the
Colony.
ord. Classes for secular instruction should be established in all
ie gaols, a better description of books should be provided
or the prisoners, and greater facilities for religious teaching
should be afforded.
4th. The prisoners should be employed with a discriminating-
consideration of their capabilities, and with a strict regard
to making their labour contribute to their support, and° at
e same time, fitting them for an honest course in after life.
sth. Sufficient pecuniary recompense should be allowed for their
labour to enable them, at least, to leave prison at the
expiration of their sentences decently clothed.
Oth. The warders in the principal gaols should wear uniform
and some badge of authority.
7th. Either the central tower originally designed or an elevated
platform should be erected in Darlinghurst Gaol, to enable
the officers in charge to command a fuller view of the
prisoners.
Bth. Better sanitary provision should be adopted, to carry off
the sewage of this establishment, which now is a serious
matter of complaint to residents in the neighbourhood.
Oth. More commodious and better arranged dormitories should
bo at once provided for the prisoners on Cockatoo Island.
10th. Suitable buildings should be erected for the performance
of Divine service by the Chaplains.
HENRY PARKES,
Chairman.
Legislative Assembly Chamber,
Sydney, 9 May, 1861.
157— A 3


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.
WEDNESDAY, 30 JANUARY, 1861.
Members Present: —
Mr. Parkes,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Cowper,
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Windeyer.
On motion of Mr. Cowper, H. Parkes, Esq., called to the Chair.
Votes No. 8, 23rd instant, Entry 13, authorising inquiry into the sta te and manage-
ment of Public Prisons in the County of Cumberland; and Fotes No. 10, 26th instant,
the
especially with a view to ascertain the existing state of the Prison management.
quently taking the evidence of the authorities of those establishments, and
examining further witnesses upon the general question of penal discip me.
Committee further deliberated, and r i• „ nf
Ordered, That the meetings of the Committee, for the pm-pose of making \ u s
Inspection to the gaols, he convened by the Chairman on such days as he shall think fit.
[Adjourned.]
Yisit of Inspection, Cockatoo Island (lirst).
[Report, authorising insertion, 8 March. ]
FRIDAY, 1 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present ;
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Cowper,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr, Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson.
The Committee having assembled at lsland, proceeded to inspect the Mess
Room false used as a chapel], the Dormitories, Hospital, and Cells.
The Short-hand Writer (Mr ; Palmer), in attendance.
The Chairman directed Wm. Dwyer, a confine in one of the solitary cells, to be brought
before the Committee.
William Dwyer examined.
Mr. Byron, Principal Warder, examined.
William Dwyer further examined.
A Member of the Committee (Mr. Lucas) then inquired of Mr. Ferris respecting the
cellg and re turned to the dormitories, where they examined
the bars of Nos. 4 and 5 [which had recently been strengthened in consequence of an attempt
having been made to saw them through].
The Committee then proceeded to the Exempt Ground.
Mr. Byron stated that there were then 27 men exempt. .
One of the exempt men came forward and inquired whether the Committee would
hear complaints from any of the men. . ~ . , . . „
The Chairman replied that they would do so if the prisoners obtained permission trom
their officers to make them.
The Statements of John Page,
(2.) John Watson (written),
(3.) Joseph O’Halloran,
(4.) Hugh Montgomery Bland,
(5.) Michael Cantwell,
(6.) William Johnson,
(7.) Michael Frayne,
(8.) William Washington,
(9.) Charles Nixon,
(10.) John Hawkins,
(11-) Alexander Douglass (written),
(12.) Charles Wagner (written),
(13.) David Johson,
received. ( Vide Nos. Ito 25, Separate Appendix L)
(Id.) Michael Doran,
(15.) Robert Banks,
(16.) Frederick Somerville,
(17.) Frederick William Scrimes,
(18.) Daniel Sullivan,
(19.) Michael Grofton,
(20.) John M'Spadden,
(21.) Francis Moran,
(22.) William Thompson,
(28.) John Hassett,
(24.) John Smith, and
(25.) Louis Breton, then severally
Question


Question asked upon the Statement of J. Watson (No. 2).
The Committee visited the yard in the rear of the Police Barracks, and inspected a
boat [which had been built by one of the prisoners (Landells), and concealed by him in the
roof of the Carpenter’s Shop].
Having entered the Police Barracks, the Chairman took the Chair.
Mr. Byron, Principal Warder, called in and further examined.
Mr. W. A. Cahill, Principal Foreman of Works, called in and examined.
Statements from the following prisoners then severally received, viz. :
(26.) William Head, (30.) Thomas Fitzgerald,
(27.) James Edward Carnegie, (31.) Richard Hanson,
(28.) Richard Hart, (32.) William Craig, and
(29.) James M'Laren, (33.) Michael Cantwell.
( Vide A r os. 26 to 33, Separate Appendix /.)
The Visit terminated.
FRIDAY, 8 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
And proceeded to Darlinghurst Gaol.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
Visit of Inspection, Darlinghurst Gaol (First).
[Report, authorising insertion , 8 March
Having intimated to Mr. Beverley, the Principal Gaoler, the object of their visit, —
The Committee were conducted by that gentleman with Mr. Harrison, the Assistant
Gaoler, to the Joiner’s Department.
Mr. W. Macpherson, Overseer of Carpenters , examined.
Of prisoners working in the shop ;
James Thompson,
Thomas Hampton,
George Drew,
Edward Geogehan, and
James Frazer, severally examined.
A Member of the Committee (Mr. Hart) called attention to thfe fact, that when the
Committee entered the Joiners’ Shed, there was no one in charge of the men.
Of remaining prisoners working as above, —
Henry McCarthy,
George Barrett, and
William Evans, severally examined.
The Committee left the Main Joiners’ Workshop, and entered a'smaller one, where
three prisoners, viz.:—
William Morton,
John McMahon, and
Martin McMahon, severally examined.
The Committee next visited the Blacksmiths’ Shop.
Mr. S. Howarth, Overseer of Blacksmiths , examined.
Of prisoners working in the shop, —
Francis Trindall,
James Smith,
James Cotton, and
James Daly, severally examined.
The Committee next visited a small Blacksmiths’ Shop adjoining, in which three
prisoners, viz. :
John Carroll,
Edward Tarlington, and
John Hall, severally examined.
; J The


The Committee having left the Blacksmiths’ Shops, proceeded to the Cooking House.
The Cook examined. . . . .
Matthias Nolan, the prisoners’ delegate for approving the provisions, examined.
The Committee having examined the bread, &c., proceeded to the Labour W mg,
entering the ward of which, they passed to the Labour Yard.
Of the prisoners there, —•
John Lynch, and .
John Galahan, having expressed a wish to be heard, severally examined.
Of the other prisoners in the yard, —
George Williams, and
William Collins, severally examined.
The Committee re-entered the Labor Ward.
Thomas Harvey, prisoner, examined.
The Committee next visited the Solitary Cells occupied by insubordinate prisoners
from Cockatoo Island, and remarked upon the defective ventilation of the corridor.
William Henry, prisoner, examined.
The Statement of Robert Alexander, then received. ( Vide No. 34, Separate Appen-
dix 1. )
The Committee proceeded to the Trial Wing.
George Swan, there confined, examined.
The Statements of certain prisoners, severally received, viz.:—
(35.) George Taylor,
(86.) John O’Brien, and
(37.) Hugh Craddock. ( Vide Nos. 35 to 37, Separate Appendix I.)
Question asked upon the Statement of G. Taylor (No. 35.)
From Cell No. 7 in the same wing,—
Alfred Young,
Edward Chalk,
George Tagg, and
John Mulholland, alias “ The Cadger, ’ severally brought up and examined.
The several Statements of
Charles Oxburgh, and
James Binney, received. ( Vide Nos. 38 and 39, Separate Appendix I.')
Of other prisoners in the Trial Wing, —
James Wade,
John English,
Thomas Brown, alias Laniger, and
Louis Sims, severally examined.
The Statement of George Davis received. ( Vide No. 40, Separate Appendix /.)
Certain inquiries made in reference thereto.
The Committee next inspected the wall in rear of the Blacksmiths' Sheds, and then
proceeded to the Lumber Room.
Having also visited the room occupied by the shoemakers and tailors, they crossed
the yard to the Hospital.
One of the patients,—
Charles Rogers, at his own desire, examined.
Statement from Patrick Murray, also a patient, received. ( Vide No. 41, Separate
Avpcndix /.)
Questions put thereupon.
Question No. 864, also put to Murray.
The Committee next visited the Women’s Ward.
Mrs. M. Cullen, Principal Female Turnkey, examined.
Of prisoners in the Female Ward, —
Mary Bellamy,
Christina Watson, and
Sarah Neal, severally examined.
During the examination of M. Bellamy, the attending turnkey interposed a remark.
Committee received the Statement of Ann MTntyre. ( Vide No. 42, Separate
Appendix L)
Question No. 897, also put to her.
Of remaining prisoners in this ward, —
Sarah Johnson,
Mary Riley,
Mary Ann Richards, and
Hannah Nunn, severally examined.
After the examination of M. A. Richards, the attending turnkey interposed further
remarks.
The Committee proceeded to a Cell in which were three females, one of whom, Mary
Ann Rutter afforded information (following 938, page 24).
Mary Ann Mulhern examined.
The Committee having left the Women’s Ward, proceeded to inspect Cell No. 24.
Question asked of the attending turnkey.
As the Committee were leaving the gaol, Statement of Barnett Levi handed to the
Chairman. ( Vide No. 43, Separate Appendix /.)
The Visit terminated.
THURSDAY,


THURSDAY, 14 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present :—.
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Committee met pursuant to summons
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
HO. Beverley, Esq,, Principal Gaoler, Darlinglnrsl, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Messrs. Macpherson and Howarth, Overseers, and Mrs. Cullen, Principal Female
Dadmghm ‘ G • sammonei, and attending, this day-examinatioM severally
[Adjourned.]
Visit of Inspection, Parramatta Gaol.
[ Report, authorising insertion, 8 March.]
FRIDAY, 15 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
The Committee met at 6-45 a.m. at the Railway Station, Sydney.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
It was Resolved :—
That for the purposes of the inquiry among the prisoners, whenever a majority of
the Committee are present, it shall be considered that a majority have deter-
mined to take evidence, unless any one of the Members present shall dissent.
The Committee proceeded to Parramatta, and thence to the Gaol, where they arrived
as a gang of twenty-one men, who had been employed outside the prison, entered the gate.
; garrison, engaged in searching the prisoners, examined.
Mr. P. M'Cormick, examined.
The Committee visited the Stone-cutting Yard, and afterwards Wing No. 1.
ihe Committee inspected the several Cells.
Inquiry made of prisoner in No. 9 (preceding 1475, page 41).
John Wilkes, examined.
John .Driscoll, having expressed a wish to make a statement, examined.
Ihe Committee then proceeded with Mr. McCormick and other Turnkeys to Cell
No. 1.
Mr. P. McCormick further examined.
Cell No. 19 visited.
Thomas Chew examined.
James Collins, having stated that he wished to make a complaint, examined.
James Pearce brought forward and examined.
William Vv illiams, having said ho wished to make a statement, examined.
Statement received from Martin Kenny. ( Vide No. 44, Separate Appendix L)
The Committee inspected a cell in the first story.
Camille Valenti, brought in and examined.
Inquiry made of turnkey, in attendance.
James Taylor, requesting permission to make a statement, examined.
Thomas Nagle examined.
Patrick O’Heir, having requested to be heard, examined.
The Committee next visited the Cook-house.
John Passmore, Cook, examined.
Tae Committee then proceeded to the Female Yard.
Mrs. Freeman, Principal Female Turnkey, examined.
Prisoners, Elizabeth Parker, and
Mary Ann Perry, severally examined.
In the course of the former examination, remark interposed by Mr. Allen, the Gaoler.
The Committee next inspected the Female Cells, on the first floor.
Mrs. E. Freeman, Principal Female Turnkey, further examined.
The Committee then proceeded to the Solitary Cells, beneath the Women’s Wing.
Caleb George, a prisoner in the cells, examined.
Edward


Jot”co P Z“ totrtmplainod of his treatment when on Cockatoo Island,
examin^ e CommMee next yisited tlle Yard where the Joiners’ and Blacksmiths’ Shops arc
situa Q-odson, Overseer of Carpenters, examined. .
t i' tATk ;1 Prisoner working in the Blacksmiths’ Shop, examined.
John Nelly, a p h^y - gtated that it had been intimated to them by
various pri“n“s It they had complaints to make, hut wore afraid to do so in the presence
of their turnkeys, —
It was Resolved: . . . , .
That it is necessary for the satisfactory prosecution of these inquiries, that in
certain cases, the Committee receive Statements from the Prisoners in the
absence of the Prison Authorities.
On the motion of Mr. Lucas, the Committee then examined the following
prisoners, in succession, viz :
Alfred Baker,
Matthew Britton,
Nicholas Burns,
Hugh Downing, and
John Rowan.
The Visit terminated.
FRIDAY, 22 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Windeyer.
Mr. Cowpcr,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Committee met pursuant to summons. . , _ n •
Votes, No. 24, 21st instant, Entry 10, referring the Petition of Thomas Harrison
before Committee.
Original Petition produced.
Mr. T. Harrison (late Principal Turnkey, Darlinghurst ), Petitioner, called in and
examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. F. Pegg (formerly Turnkey, Darlinghurst ), called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
[Adjourned.]
THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Committee met pursuant to summons.
Reports of certain Visits of Inspection (3) by the Short-hand Writer attending same
(Mr. Palmer), —laid before the Committee.
On the motion of Mr. Hart, It icas Resolved ; —
That the Evidence, together with the accompanying Statements of Prisoners, and
other contents of the MSS., be printed.
Committee deliberated relative to the ticket-of-leave system, as exemplified in the
case of certain prisoners on Cockatoo Island.
Mr. S. Whiddon ( late Turnkey, Darlinghurst), called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. W. Olson called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. W. Macpherson, Overseer of Carpenters, Darlinghurst, called in and further
examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. S. Howarth, Overseer of Blacksmiths, Darlinghurst, called in and further
examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mrs.


Mrs. M. Cullen, Principal Female Turnkey , called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Committee deliberated.
[Adjourned.]
Visit of Inspection, Darlinghurst Gaol (Second).
[Report, authorising insertion , 8 March.
FRIDAY, 1 MARCH , 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
The above Members of the Committee having assembled at Darlinghurst at 6J5 A.M.,
proceeded to the Gaol Grate, which having been opened by the Gatekeeper, they, in company
with Mr. Inspector Read, Acting Principal Gaoler, visited the Hard Labour and Confine
Wings and Yards.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
While the Committee were in the Hard Labour Yard, —
The Statement of George Singleton received. ( Vide No. 45, Separate Appendix I.)
Prisoner questioned thereon.
The Committee inspected the Stockade, Exercise Ground, and wall in rear of the
Hospital [whence the seventeen prisoners recently escaped].
They then returned to the Gaoler’s house, on their way, tasting the bread which had
just been brought in by the contractor.
The Committee having entered the Office, the Chairman took the Chair.
Mr. J. C. Read, Inspector of Police and Acting Principal Gaoler, examined.
Mr. James Callaghan, Turnkey, called in and examined.
Mr. A. Elliott, Turnkey, examined.
The Committee removed from the Office to the Stockade Yard.
John Williams, having desired to make a statement, examined.
The Acting Gaoler informed the Committee that the Cockatoo Island prisoners had
chosen two of their number, Janies Arnott and Henry Clarke, as delegates to represent their
alleged grievances.
It was resolved to hear their statements.
James Arnott and Henry Clarke successively brought from their cells and examined.
In examining the latter, the Chairman retired a short distance, and having spoken
to the Acting Gaoler, returned and resumed.
Examination concluded.
Edward Power, having wished to speak, brought from his cell and further examined.
The Committee next proceeded to the Hospital, and examined the windows [whence,
as stated by Mr. Whiddon and Mr. Olson, communication had been carried on with the
prisoners in the Exercise Yard]. _ . .
It having been stated to the Committee that some of the prisoners desued to gno
information of a very serious character, —
They proceeded to the Lower Hospital.
Frederick McGregor, alias Lawry, called in and examined.
Also, George Jones,
James Scope, alias Williams, and
William Thomas McGregor, severally examined.
The Visit terminated.
FRIDAY ; 8 MARCH , 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Wilson.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
The'Chapman reported that upon the Ist instant he kid addressed a fetter to the
Honorable the Secretary for Lands, applying on behalf of Committee for
assistance of a competent Draftsman to prepare plans of Cockatoo Island, Darlmjiurst,
a Letter t of ( the l 6th instant, in reply, stating that the expense to be incurred did not
appear legitimately chargeable to the Lands Department, no sum . ei
purpose, but that there might be in the “ Parliamentary Contingencies, under
the Speaker”; and concluding with an offer of such Plans as the G overnment possess


Having deliberated upon communicating with the Honorable the Speaker,
Draft of letter by the Chairman read, viz.
“ Legislative Assembly,
“ No. 3 Committee Room,
(t gj r “ 8 March, 1861.
; “ As Chairman of the Select Committee on Public Prisons, I am instructed
a to a ppl y to you for the assistance of a competent Draftsman to prepare plans of the prisons
« they have visited, which are consid red to be necessary for the purposes of their inquiry.
J “ On behalf of the Committee, I have already applied to the Department of Lands
« f or this assistance, and have been referred to you, on the ground that the necessary expense
« wou ld, m ore properly come under the head of ‘ Parliamentary Contingencies.’
“ To the Honorable “ I have, &c.,
(( Speaker
« Of the Legislative Assembly. “ Chairman.”
Same agreed to. .
Committee then deliberated in reference to a formal authentication of the general
records of the several Visits of Inspection, prepared by the Short-hand Writer, and adverting
to the Resolution agreed to on the 28th ultimo, as regards the printing, considered the
order in which the "contents should be arranged, with a view to the ultimate form of
Report to the House.
On motion of Mr. Morris, It teas Resolved ;
That every Visit of Inspection made by this Committee to any Gaol or Penal
Establishment, be reported pro forma, by the Chairman, at the next meeting
thereafter.
On motion of Mr. Wilson, It was Resolved
That from the Record furnished by the Short-hand Writer, comprising the Pro-
ceedings of, and Evidence taken before the Committee, Statements received
from prisoners, and general observations of the state of the establishments,
the Clerk be authorised to extract entire the Proceedings of the Com-
mittee, and the (separate) Statements received from prisoners; the former for
insertion under the proper head, and the latter to form a Separate Appendix
to the Report.
The several Visits of Inspection made by the Committee, reported by the
Chairman, viz. :
To Cockatoo Island, on the Ist February;
Darlinghurst Gaol, on the Bth ;
Parramatta Gaol, on the 15th; and
Darlinghurst Gaol (second time), on the Ist instant,- —
The Statement of Richard Ainsworth, a prisoner in Darlinghurst, under date sth
instant (forwarded through the authorities) —before the Committee.
The Chairman stated, that having had the opportunity of speaking with Capt.
M'Lerie, the Inspector General of Police, it would appear, that the prisoner’s account
should be received with certain reservations; as his “Police History,” which would be
forwarded by Capt. M'Lerie, represented his career less favourably.
Statement read, and ordered to be appended, on motion of Mr. Mate. (Vide No.
46, Separate Appendix L)
The Chairman produced a letter, forwarded by the Acting Principal Gaoler,
Darlinghurst, addressed by prisoner wardsman Maekie, to that officer, on the Ist instant,
relative to the accessibility of further information from certain prisoners on the subject
of unnatural offences at Cockatoo Island.
Same read, and ordered to be appended. ( Vide Separate Appendix 11. Ad)
Mr. John Callaghan, Turnkey, Darlinghurst, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. W. Walsh, Dispenser, Darlinghurst, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. J. O’N. Brenan, Sheriff, a witness summoned this day, not attending,—
explained per note, as in consequence of indisposition.
[Adjourned.]
Visit of Inspection, Sydney Watch-houses.
[Report, authorising insertion, 19 March.~\
TUESDAY, 12 MARCH, 1861.
Members Present ;
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson.
The above Members of the Committee met at 8-45 A.M., at the Royal Hotel (Sydney)-
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
It was Resohed: —
That the Committee proceed to visit the several Watch-houses in the City.
The


of , POli “ WateWloUS0 ’ “ sate
Mr. L. Griffiths, Constable, examined
The Committee entered the cell in which the only prisoner was confined.
Mr. S. Haggerty Oonslalle having relieved Griffiths, examined.
The Committee then entered a second cell
Mr. E. Cowell, Inspector having joined the Committee, examined.
t i l ' TV ( yons table, coming forward, examined.
Mr. E. Cowell, Inspector, further examined
The Committee next visited the Solitary Cell.
Examination continued.
Mr. L. Gi iffiths, Constable, further examined.
Mi. E. Cowell, Inspector , further examined
CumlX, ““ kft "" W * toWra *' ” d — d a. Police Station in
Mr. Lee, Sergeant, haying admitted the Committee, examined.
The Committee visited a cell.
Mr. P. Sweeny, Constable, examined.
Examination being continued,
The Committee entered other two cells
And examination concluded.
Having then proceeded to the Female Watch-house, Erskine-street—
Mr. Levy, Constable, examined.
Mrs. M. Levy having been summoned, conducted the Committee to the cell in which
the only prisoners (2) were confined.
Examination of Constable Levy concluded.
Mrs. M. Levy, examined.
The Committee next visited the Central Watch-house.
Mr. M. McClure, Constable, examined.
A loud rapping being heard on the door of one of the cells,—
° el1 ’ W ' l<mo ° S ° lmd F °’ Ceeded ' *° U °P ened -
Ann Flynn, the prisoner therein, examined.
S IG ms P ectecl tlie cel! for male prisoners and also a smaller cell.
Mr. M. orClure, Constable, further examined.
The Committee next visited the Watch-house, Darlinghurst.
Mr. W. Cook, Constable, examined.
The Committee inspected two cells.
Examination continued.
Mr. N. Ryan, Sergeant, examined.
Mr. W. Cook, Constable, further examined.
~ The Committee then proceeded to the Watch-house, Parramatta-street, and visited
the cells ordinarily occupied by prisoners.
A Member (Mr. Lucas) called attention to the offensive smell arising whilst the first
cell was being washed.
Mr. Allan McDiarmid, Sergeant, in charge, examined.
The Visit terminated.
TUESDAY, 19 MARCH, 1861.
Members Present:—
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland.
Mr. Wilson.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
, O’Neillßrenan, Esq. (Sheriff), attended, pursuant to a further summons since the
otn instant.
■ r r ‘ ® renan ’ leave, informed the Chairman, that, prior to being examined, he
wished to draw attention to the circumstance of his official suspension ; and, although quite
prepared to submit himself to the Committee, to request a consideration of the desirableness
o postponing the examination until after the Government had decided upon his case.
Mr. Brenan withdrew.
Consideration deferred.
In accordance with the Resolution arrived at upon the Bth instant, —
The Chairman reported the following Visits of Inspection to the several Watch-
°uses in Sydney, on the morning of Tuesday, the 12th instant, viz, :
Watch-house, Water Police Court,
Do. Cumherland-street,
Do. (Women’s) Erskine-street,
Do. Central Police Court,
Do. Darlinghurst,
Do. George and Pitt Streets (South).
157— A 4 The


nhairman havum caused a communication to be addressed to the Honorable
tie >0 18th, requesting “e't £
fnmisbed with the Plans tendered in the last paragraph of letter betoie _ _ x- n f
“uni-now produced a reply from the Lands Department promtsmg attentmn, of
date the 18th.
History ” of prisoner Ainsworth, forwarded by the Tnspectoi General
of Police, whose Statement had been received on the Bth instant,—before the Commi .
Orderedto'be appended, on totion of Mr. Wilson. (» Separate
Letter received through Mr. Lucas, a Member of the_Committco>mg the stateme
of Charles Rogers, a prisoner in Darlinghurst, under date 13th instant •
Ordered to be appended, on motion of Mr. Moms. ( vtae no. , t
of Henry Carroll, a prisoner in Darlinghurst, under date 22nd February
last, r p r( j ere( j t 0 j |C a pp e nded, on motion of Mr. Mate. (Tide ho. -18,
signed by John Holland and Henry Carroll s araie
Ordered to be appended, on motion of Mr. Mate. ( vide i o > I
A/,pm,l <iUt,Lent of George Walter Howe, a prisoner in Darlinghurst, under date 21st
February^Hst,— read. mQt;on „ f Mr Sut herland. (Vide No. 80, Separate
of Laurence Powell, a prisoner in Darlinghurst, under date 21st February
on motion of Mr , Wilson . ( No. 61,
produced a letter addressed to him by Mr. 0 Kispen wMi reference
to his removal from the office of Turnkey, at Darlinghurst, under date 9th mstai .
Letter read.
"'That"*! 0 " Christophm at a future sitting of the Committee.
brought under notice, a letter from Mrs. M Cullen aceompanymg
the return of Evidence given on the 28th ultimo, requesting the omission of certain
answers relating to private circumstances, and the allowance of certain a era ions i
Evidence as written.
Evidence stand as tahen by the Short-hand Writer, but that the
corrections desired by witness, be shewn by notes, extracted from the gliecesgive
Memorandum (furnished as an Appendix to his Evidence) s ? o.i • tant __
employments as Turnkey, since 1851, of Mr. John Callaghan, examined on the Bth instant
before Committee. (Vide Appendix A.) .. Mnf T P flo - P recently a
Committee deliberated in reference to taking the evidence ot J. 1 age, recen y
prisoner on Cockatoo Island.
Ordered, on motion of Mr. Mate, —
That Mr. John Page be examined to-morrow. . . T t i
Referring to the Statements made by certain prisoners from Cockatoo Island, patie
in the Hospital at Darlinghurst, when visited by the Committee upon the Ist instant,
touching the occurrence of unnatural practices m the Penal Establishment
Committee considered the nature of such evidence, and the expediency of furt
investigating the matter.
Jt That, for the purpose of pursuing the inquiry as regards unnatural conduct among
the prisoners, the Committee hold a special Visit upon the Island at an early
Letter addressed 1 to the Honorable the Speaker on the Bth instant, with Minute
thereon, conveying Mr. Speaker’s reply—to the effect, that the expense of a Draftsmans
services might be borne by the Department, under the 47 th Standing Order,—before the
Committee^^ ce Qq a | rman SoU ght an opinion respecting the employment of
a Surveyor to prepare plans in furtherance of the general object.
Committee deliberated.
On motion of Mr. Morris, It was Resolved : — # ~
That the Chairman be authorised to engage the services of a competent Purveyor,
to furnish plans of the Darlinghurst and Parramatta Gaols.
The Short-hand Writer (Mr. Palmer) having applied to the Committee, m
respect of his responsibility for the accuracy of the descriptions and remarks, on t e
condition of the different buildings visited by the Committee, inserted in the Evidence,
it being explained that, in recording them at the instance of the Committee, —m the mius
of other duty and frequent interruption, he was sometimes guided so unauthontatively as
perhaps to mistake their views, —
It was Resolved : . . , . , ,i
That the Committee will subsequently adopt the several notices in whicii tney
concur - Committee


Committee then (recalling the subject of taking his Evidence) deliberated whether
to examine Mr. Brenan, having regard to the immediate circumstances of that gentleman’s
official position.
It teas Resolved :— 1
That Mr. J. 0 N. Brenan, Sheriff of the Colony, be not examined, pending the
action of the Executive Council in regard to his suspension from office.
Mr. Brenan called in and informed accordingly.
[Adjourned till to-morrow, 20th instant, at half-past One (p.m.) o’clock.]
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. J. Page called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Committee deliberated.
[Adjourned.]
WEDNESDAY, 20 MARGE, 1861.
Members Present ;
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Visit of Inspection, Cockatoo Island (Second).
\_Report, authorising insertion, 12 Aprili]
THURSDAY, 11 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr, Windeyer.
The above Members of the Committee having met at the Circular Quay, at 6‘30 A.M.,
proceeded to Cockatoo Island, and assembled in the Office of the Superintendent.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
The Chairman stated, that in consequence of the absence of Mr. Cowper from the
last several meetings of the Committee, he had explained to him, as a Member of the Com-
mittee, the nature of the evidence taken from the men in the Hospital at Darlinghurst Gaol,
on the subject of immoral practices at Cockatoo Island, and had put in Mr. Cowper’s
possession the transcript of the evidence. That he (the Chairman) was subsequently
visited by the Police Magistrate, Capt. Scott, who stated that he had come from Mr.
Cowper, to obtain the Chairman’s concurrence in an investigation to be conducted by him
(Capt. Scott) into these charges. That he (the Chairman) replied, —he could not express the
feeling of the Committee, and could do nothing without consulting them; but that his own
impression was, that the course proposed would seriously interfere with the investigation of
the Committee,—and asked Capt. Scott particularly to request Mr. Cowper to do nothing,
until the Committee had concluded their inquiry into this branch of the matter. That,
yesterday, to the surprise of him, the Chairman, Mr. Cowper placed in his hands, a copy of
depositions taken by Capt. Scott on the island, relative to the subject. The copy ot the
depositions he now laid before the Committee.
On motion of Mr. Lucas, the depositions read.
On motion of Mr. Windeyer, It ivas Resolved :—
That the course taken by Mr. Cowper, in making use of the evidence, was incon-
sistent with his duty as a Member of the Committee, and calculated to inter-
fere with the prosecution of the inquiry intrusted to them.
Prisoner, Frederick McGregor called in and further examined.
Prisoners, Henry Carroll, alias James Hogan,
James Neal, and
Gilbert Isaacs, severally called in and examined.
Prisoner, Edward Power called in and further examined.
Prisoners, Michael Horan,
John Mason, and
John Smith, severally called in and examined.
G. K. Mann, Esq., Capt., 8.E., Superintendent, Penal Establishment, called in
Mr. W. A. Cahill, Principal Foreman of Works, called in and further examined.
The Visit terminated.
FRIDAY,


FRIDAY, 12 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Committee met pursuant to summons.
In accordance with the Resolution agreed to on the Bth March, -
The Chairman reported a second Visit to Cockatoo Island, yesterday, seven jV embers
being present, when the Committee had specially investigated the crime alleged to be
practised; the examinations being confined to prisoners, with the exception of tae Supexm-
tendent and Principal Foreman of Works. Q
Letter received through Mr. Lucas, a Member of the Committee; being Statement
signed by James Arnott and George Thurston, prisoners in Darlinghurst, under date Uth
January^ast, e /ea on mot i o n of Mr. Sutherland. ( Vide No. 52, Separate
Appen informed Committee that he had caused a communication (dated the
10th) to be addressed to Sir A. Stephen, C. J., in order to ascertain the earliest day on
which His Honor might be able to attend the Committee.
His Honor’s letter (10th instant), in reply,—read. _
Ordered to be appended. ( Vide Separate Appendix 11. C.)
Committee deliberated in reference to extra sitting days.
Ordered, on motion of Mr. Morris, —
That the Chairman be requested to move in the House, for leave to sit on
Saturdays and Mondays. .
Letter from Turnkeys, Darlinghurst Gaol, of date the 2nd instant, applying tor
Committee’s consideration of their position and several duties, as set forth in List annexed
thereto,' —read.
Ordered to be appended. ( Vide Separate Appendix 11. D.)
Committee deliberated upon taking the evidence of the Colonial Secietary
Cowper.)
It was Resolved: —
That the Honorable G. Cowper, Esq., be examined at the next meeting.
The Chairman laid upon the Table the Statements of certain prisoners on Cockatoo
Island, forwarded this morning by Capt. Mann, the Superintendent.
When, Committee deliberating on the expediency of a further Visit to that establish-
ment, with a view especially to afford any prisoner an opportunity of submitting such
matters of penal discipline as might be conceived oppressive,—
It was Resolved : —
That the Committee will again visit the establishment at Cockatoo Island, and for
such objects as shall be previously expressed, through the Superintendent, to
the prisoners.
The Chairman requested to prepare a letter for the purpose—to be considered by
Committee before dispatch.
Of the documents from Cockatoo Island abovementioned, —
Statements of Henry Carroll and Rarnett Levy (latter dated 24th ultimo) severally
read and considered.
Statement of Patrick Byrne, under date, 24th ultimo, —read.
Ordered to be appended, on motion of Mr. Wilson. (Vide No. 58, Separate
Appendix I.)
Statement of William Smith, under date 10 February last, read and considered.
Further letter from the Lands Department, dated yesterday, forwarding plans (to be
returned) of the Gaols at Darlinghurst, Parramatta, and Cockatoo Island, —with the same,
before the Committee.
Committee inspected the plans.
Deliberation then, as to the other G-aols in the County of Cumberland, and the
prospect of visiting those at Windsor and other places.
Mr. T. Harrison (late Principal Turnkey, JDarlinylmrst Gaol), Petitioner, called in
and further examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. C. Rispen (late Turnkey, Darlinghurst Gaol), called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. J. M. May to be examined at the next meeting.
[Adjourned till Tuesday, 16th instant, at Eleven o’clock.]
TUESDAY, 16 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Cowper,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Wilson.
The Honorable €. Cowper, Esq., Colonial Secretary, a Member of the Committee,
examined in bis place.
J •


J. M. May, Esq., Superintendent, Destitute Children's Asylum, RandwicJc, called in
•and examined.
„ | iK Witness withdrew.
Committee deliberated.
Motion to be made in the House for Message to the Legislative Council, requesting
leave for the Honorable E. Deas Thomson, C. 8., to attend and be examined.
The Acting Principal Gaoler, Darlinghurst, and the Inspector General of Police to
be examined.
[Adjourned till Thursday, 18th instant, at Eleven o’clock.]
THURSDAY, 18 APRIL, 1861.
By reason of the adjournment of the House until to-morrow, the Meeting called
this day, lapsed.
Witnesses attended.
[To be convened to-morrow, 19th instant, at Eleven o’clock.]
FRIDAY. 19 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H, Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
Votes No. 54, 16th instant, Entry 29, granting leave to sit on Saturdays and
Mondays—before the Committee.
In reference to the further visit to Cockatoo Island, when prisoners might have a
special opportunity of representing any matter which they may regard as grievances, with
a view to their consideration, —
The Chairman’s draft of Letter to the Superintendent (Capt. Mann), authorised on
the 12th instant, read, viz.:—
“ Legislative Assembly Chamber,
“ 19 April, 1861.
“ Sir,
“ I am requested by the Committee of the Legislative Assembly on Prisons,
“to inform you that, in order to aiford the prisoners on Cockatoo Island the fullest
“ opportunity for any well-founded complaints they may have to make, the Committee
“ will visit that Island specially to receive such complaints, on Monday, the 22nd instant,
u at 9 a.m.
“ This communication is addressed to you, that the prisoners may be informed
u beforehand of the Committee’s intended visit; and the Committee desire that you will
“ make it known to them accordingly. It will be well, however, to let it be clearly under-
“ stood, that the Committee cannot enter upon any consideration relating to the sentences
“ of the Courts, and that all complaints must be confined to the prison accommodation and
“ food, and to the treatment and discipline of the establishment.
“ I have, &c.,
“ Gother K. Mann, Esq., “ Chairman.”
“ Superintendent of the Penal Establishment,
“ Cockatoo Island.
Same agreed to.
The Honorable E. Deas Thomson, Esq., C. 8., M.L.C., attending by permission of
the Legislative Council, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
T. Allen, Esq., Gaoler, Parramatta Gaol, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew. .
Committee deliberated, referring to the Gaols at Campbelltown, Penrith and Windsor,
•as yet unvisited.
[Adjourned till to-morrow, 20th instant, at Ten o clock.]
SATURDAY, 20 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
11. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Windeyer.
Committee sat pursuant to leave granted by the House on the IGth instant.
The Honorable Sir A. Stephen, Knight, Chief Justice, called in and examined.
His Honor withdrew. n ...
Committc


Committee deliberated generally, on the possible adaptation of Country Gaols to
purposes of penal discipline.
Subsequently, It was Resolved .
That it is desirable to visit the Gaols at Penrith, Windsor, and Campbelltown.
Certain witnesses then named for future examination.
[Adjourned till Thursday, 25th instant, at Ten o’clock.]
Visit of Inspection, Cockatoo Island (Third).
[Report, authorising insertion, 25 Apr Hi]
MONDAY, 22 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson.
The above Members of the Committee met at 8-80 A.M., on the Circular Quay,
whence they proceeded to Cockatoo Island, and assembled at the Office of the Superintendent.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
In the absence of the Chairman, J. B. Wilson, Esq., called to the Chair, pro tempore.
Gr. K. Mann, Esq., Capt. R.E., Superintendent, Penal Establishment, called in and
further examined. .
A list containing the names of about ninety prisoners who desired to see the Com-
mittee, having been handed to the Chairman, —
Committee deliberated.
And the men having been assembled in the yard according to their respective wards,
The Chairman, attended by the Committee, proceeded thither and addressed them to
the following effect That the Committee had received a list of ninety-six men who desired
to be examined; that it would be utterly impossible for the whole of them to be heard by
the Committee, and that if the occupants of each domitory selected two men as their
delegates they would be heard. That the new regulations were receiving the full consideration
of the Committee, who were anxious to do something during the present Session of Parlia-
ment, which must close in two or three weeks, —and that the Committee would be willing to
receive any evidence on the subject of general treatment, food, and accommodation.
The Committee then returned to the Superintendent’s Office.
Prisoners, Henry Clarke, and
James Arnott, delegates from Ward No. 1, severally called in and
examined.
Prisoners, Frank Somerville, and
Edward Power, delegates from Ward No. 2, severally called in.
The latter examined.
Question asked of the former.
Prisoners, Gilbert Isaacs, delegate from Ward No. 3;
William Simpson, and
Henry Carroll, delegates from Ward No. 4;
William Thomas M Gregor, and
Lawrence Cowan, delegates from Ward No. 5, severally called in.
G. Isaacs, and
W. Simpson severally examined.
L. Cowan, and
W. Simpson made statements respectively.
The latter further examined.
L. Cowan made a further statement, and examined thereafter.
W. T. McGregor made a statement, and examined thereafter.
The Visit terminated.
THURSDAY, 25 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
In accordance with the Resolution agreed to on the Bth March, —
Mr. Wilson, as Chairman upon the occasion, reported a third Visit of Inspection to
Cockatoo Island, on the 22nd instant, when ten prisoners, as delegates from the five wards,
were examined respecting the general treatment, food, and accommodation upon the Island.
The Chairman submitted a memorandum forwarded by His Honor Sir A. Stephen,
in reference to the evidence given by His Honor, on the 20th instant.
Ordered to be attached thereto. ( Vide Appendix A.)
J. M'Lerie, Esq., Inspector General of Police, called in and examined.
Witness undertook to furnish an Appendix relating to the improvement of prison
discipline and buildings. {Not furnished .)*
J.
* Memo {Appended to M.S. Evidence) : - The suggestions relating to the erection of a prison will he
sent as soon as my other duties will allow me sufficient time to do so.


J. C. Read, Esq., Principal Gaoler, Darlinghurst, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
H. Parkes, Esq., being about to leave the Chair for the remainder of the sitting,—•
J. B. Wilson, called thereto, p*‘o tempore .
G. K. Mann, Esq., Capt. R.E., Superintendent, Penal Establishment, Cockatoo
Island, &c., called in and further examined.
Witness withdrew.
[Adjourned.]
Visit op Inspection, Penrith Gaol.
[ Report, authorising insertion, 8 Mag.]
SATURDAY, 27 APRIL, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., Chairman.
Mr. Lucas,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Sutherland.
The above Members of the Committee having assembled at Penrith, proceeded to the
building used as a Court House and Gaol.
The Short-hand Writer, in attendance.
After inspecting the prison accommodation, —
Mr. H. Tubman, Acting Gaoler, examined.
The Committee visited the new gaol in course of erection.
Examination continued.
The Committee crossed over to the Court House, and inspected the cells referred to
by the witness.
Examination concluded.
The Visit terminated.
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
FRIDAY, 3 MAY, 1861.
Members Present ;
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mrs. Walsh,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
Committee met pursuant to summons.
And Mr. Brenan (Ex-Sheriff) being in attendance for the purpose of being
examined, —
Committee deliberated upon the expediency of restricting the examination within
the limits of the general inquiry.
In accordance with the Resolution agreed to on the Bth March, —
The Chairman reported that on the 27th instant, a Visit of Inspection to the Gaol
at Penrith had been made by a Quorum of the Committee; their intention to visit the
similar establishments at Windsor and Campbelltown, respectively on the 29th and 30th,
having been interfered with by the inclemency of the weather.
Plan of Cockatoo Island, furnished by Capt. Mann, the Superintendent (Vide
Evidence, 4477) —produced.
Colored lithographs required.
J. O’N. Brenan, Esq., late Sheriff, called in and examined.
The Colonial Architect also attending pursuant to summons, and public duties
urging his early attendance elsewhere, —
Mr. Brenan, by request, retired.
A. Dawson, Esq., Colonial Architect, called in and examined.
H. Parkes, Esq., temporarily vacating the Chair, —•
J. B. Wilson, Esq., called thereto, pro tempore.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. Parkes returned and resumed the Chair.
J. O’N. Brenan, Esq., called in and further examined.
Witness withdrew.
Messrs. Cahill, Fitzgerald, and (Inspector) Lane attending as witnesses—not
examined.
To be called on Tuesday.
[Adjourned till Tuesday, 7th instant, at Eleven o clock.]
TUESDAY,


Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
Mr. Morris,
TUESDAY, 7 MAY, 1861.
Members Present :
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Windeyer.
Pending the attendance of the witnesses summoned this day,—
Committee deliberated as to an early Report upon the Evidence.
It was Resolved : —■
1, That the Chairman he requested to prepare draft of a General Report,,
embracing only the broader features exhibited in the Evidence. _ A .
2. That such draft he first handed to the Printer, in order to its readier considera-
tion in proof at the following Meeting.
Mr. W. A. Cahill, Principal Foreman of Works, Cockatoo Island, called in and
further examined.
Witness withdrew. .
Mr. H. Fitzgerald, Foreman of Works, Cockatoo Islarid, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
Mr. Lane, Inspector of Police, Cockatoo Island, called in and
Memorandum from Mr. Fitzgerald, the previous witness, respecting certain answers —
allowed as an addendum to his Evidence.
Witness (Mr. Lane) withdrew.
E. Bell, Esq., M.1.C.E., City Engineer, called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
The Rev. P. P. Agnew, Chaplain, Darlinghurst Gaol and Cockatoo Island, called m
and examined.
Witness withdrew.
The Rev. S. A. Sheehy, 0.5.8. (_ formerly Chaplain, Darlinghurst Gaol and
Cockatoo Island), called in and examined.
Witness withdrew.
[Adjourned till Thursday, 9th instant, at Eleven o’clock.]
Mr. Cowper,
Mr. Hart,
Mr. Mate,
THURSDAY, 9 MAY, 1861.
Members Present: —
H. Parkes, Esq., in the Chair,
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Morris,
Mr. Sutherland,
Mr. Walsh,
Committee met to consider Draft Report.
Copies (in proof) npon the Table.
Proposed Report read I°.
Read 2°, paragraph by paragraph.
Paragraphs 110 7 severally read and agreed to, with or without verbal amendment.
Paragraph 8 read.
Amended, line 7, after “ indulgence,” by omitting “ and” ; and inserting _ “ which
“ wa s done principally in consequence of the abuses of the system previously existing, and,
“ as stated in evidence by the Colonial Secretary, as a temporary expedient.”
Then agreed to.
Paragraphs 9 to 22 (first part) severally read and agreed to, with or without verbal
amendment.
Recommendation 1, read, viz. :
“ The regulations of the Ist June, 1858, should he revoked, as they are at variance
“ with an admitted principle in sound criminal treatment—that the prisoner
“ should he encouraged to good conduct and should not he shut out from the
“ prospect of self-redemption.”
Amended hy substituting the following, viz.:—
“ In carrying out the sentences of the Courts, good conduct should he taken into
“ account hy the Executive, so as to encourage the prisoner to accomplish his
“ own redemption hy a reformed course of life.”
Then agreed to.
Recommendation 2 read, verbally amended, and agreed to.
Recommendation 3 read.
Amended, line 2, after “ gaols,” hy omitting “ and.”
Further, line 3, after “ prisoners,” hy adding “ and greater facilities for religious
“ teafiling should he afforded.”
Then agreed to.
Recommendations 5 to 9 severally read and agreed to, with or without vei'bal
amendment.
New


Date.
On what Visit.
Make op Party.
Profession or
Condition.
Particulars
op
Service rendered.
Total
Expenses
allowed.
1861.
Feb. 8...
Feb. 15
Feb. 16
Mar. 11
Mar. 12
Darlinghurst Gaol
James Curtis
Cab proprietor, &c.
Shorthand-writer)
to Legislative [
Assembly j
<
£ s. d.
3 15 0
1 7 0
15 0
2 4 0
3 10 0
Travelling Expenses, Sydney )
Parramatta G aol
•"t
to Parramatta, and back ]
Omnibus hire from Parramatta 1
Sydney Watch-houses,...
viz: —
Water Police Court
Cumberland-street
Erskiue-street (Women’s)
Central Police Court
1
William Hudson
Timothy Shaughnessy
1
Hotel-keeper
Cab proprietor
Station, and hack j
7 beds, at 4s.; refreshment, 16s....
2 carriages, 4| hours, say at 16s....
Apl. 27
Apl. 27
Apl. 30
George"and Pitt Streets ...
J
J. Williams
(5 Members) Refreshment, &e....
Tolls, 5s.; sundry services, 9s. ...
(5 Members) Refreshment,&c....
10 0
14 0
2 3 0
,T. Williams
15 18 0
New recommendation (10) read and agreed to without amendment.
The Chairman submitted the following Schedule :
EXPENSES incurred on Visits of Inspection.
Memo.* —No account received from Mr. Surveyor Weaver.
On motion of Mr. Morris, the several sums therein set forth—agreed to.
Payments awarded.
Referring then to the Resolution which the Committee came to upon the 19 March,
in regard to the adoption of the remarks and notices contained in the Evidence, respecting
the condition of the different Gaols, &c., —
On motion of Mr. Wilson, It was Resolved :—
That the Committee adopt, as agreeing with their own observations, the several
Notes, descriptive of the construction, accommodation, cleanliness and
general appearance of the Prison Buildings,—interspersed with the Evidence
taken upon the Visits of Inspection.
Committee resumed the consideration of the Report.
On motion of Mr. Morris, Draft Report, as amended, agreed to.
Ordered, to report, with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence,
Appendix, and Plans.
LIST OF WITNESSES.
{And others, whose Remarks or Answers are inserted in brackets.)
PAGE.
Agnew, The Rev. Philip Peters .. . • • • • • • • ■ • • • 229
Allen, Thomas Esq. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• -48, 156
Bell, Edward, Esq., M.I.C.E 22 ?
Beverley, Henry Clements, Esq .. •. • • • • • • • • • • 2^
Brenan, John O’Neill, Esq 194 > 200
Byron, Mr. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 1* 3
Cahill, Mr. William Augustine .. .. •. • • • • • • 6, 132, 219
Callaghan, Mr. James .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • •
Callaghan, Mr. John .. .. .. •• •• •• •• ••
Cook, Mr. William .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •* ••
Cowell, Mr. Edward .. .. .. •• •• •• •• ••
Cowper, the Hon. Charles, Esq., M. P. .. • • • • • • • •
Cullen, Mrs. Margaret .. .. .. •• *• •• •• 22, AT
Dawson, Alexander, Esq. .. .. •• •• •• •• *•
Elliott, Mr. Alexander.. .. .. • • • • • • • • * • • • „
Ferris, Mr *
Fitzgerald, Mr. Henry.. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• ’• .. "
Freeman, Mrs. Ellen .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• •* „
Godson, Mr. Richard .. .. .. •• •• •* *• " **in -no
Griffiths, Mr. Lewis ~7
Haggerty, Mr. Samuel •• an
Harrison, Mr. Thomas (Turnkey, Parramatta Gaol) . . •• •• " rp
Harrison, Mr. Thomas (Late Principal Turnkey, Darlinghurst Gaol) .. ->6 132
Howarth, Mr. Shepherd .. •• •• •• •* ** ** *' 'aw
Lane, Mr. John Francis .. •• •• •• ** ** " ”
Lee, Mr. (Sergeant) ’ Levyj
* Thoma^Weav^ —S' ol, Plans °f Darlinghurst and Parramatta
Gaols . •• •• •• " •• •* •• *35 o 0
2. Commissioner for Railways —Fares to Parramatta (16 Fcbi nary) .. .. 113 6
3. Mrs. Bird—4 days Carnage hire (27 to 30 April) .. • • • • • •
157—A 5


PAGE.
. 114 , 115
Levy, Mr. (Constable).. • • •* • 14,5
Levy, Mrs. Margaret .. •• •• •• ** *’ " ' 444 443
Little, Mr. Prince Francis 7 gl
Macpherson, Mr. William • • *' j3O 160 181
Mann, Gother Kerr, Esq., Capt. R.E
May, Mr, J ohn Matthews • • •• •• *• ” ’ * 115 116
M‘Clure, Mr. Matthew 40 42
M‘Cormick, Mr. Patrick .. •• •• •• 117
M'Diarmid, Mr. Allan ( Vide Errata, Question 4026)
M‘Lerie, John, Esq. .. .. •• •• •• •• *' " " on
Olson, Mr. William .. • • •• •• *• ** ** " " 447
Page, Mr. John '* gg
Pe D*JT, Mr. Frederick 17s
Read, John Cecil, Esq
Rispen, Mr. Christopher .. .. •• •• •• *• " ” 440
Ryan, Mr. Nicholas • v • • '* '* ’* " ** oo»
Sheehv, The Rev. Samuel Austin, 0.5.8. • > -
Stephen, The Hon. Sir Alfred, Knt,,. .. •• •» •• •* **
Sweeny, Mr. Philip .. -• •• • ♦ *• ’ * ** ” ~
Thomson, The Hon. Edward Deas, Esq., 0.8., M.L.C. ..
Tubman, Mr. Henry .. • • 99 9g 94.
Turnkey, The (Darlinghurst Gaol) •• ’ ’ X
Turnkey, Tiie (Parramatta Gaol) - 10 _
Walsh, William. Esq
Whiddon, Mr. Samuel
LIST OF PRISONERS.
(Whose Statements appear in the Minutes or Separate Appendix I.)
PAGE.
941
Ainsworth, Richard .. .. .. •. • • • • • • * • * * 9 „
Alexander, Robert "
Arnott, James 95,167,246
Baker, Alfred .. .. -• •• •• •• • • ” *• OOQ
Banks, Robert .. .. •. • • • • • • • • • • * •
Barrett, George .. .. . • • • • • • • • • * * * * 99
Bellamy, Mary “
Binney, James .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• ** 9 „;_
Bland, Hugh Montgomery
Breton, Louis .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• ••
Britton, Matthew ~ .. -. <■ • • • • • • • ♦ • • •
Brown, alias Laniger, Thomas .. .. .. .. • • • • • • ~ i rr
Burns, Nicholas .. .. •• •• •• •• •* 9^
Byrne, Patrick .. .. .. • • •. • • • • • • • • 9
“ Cadger, The” (John Mulholland)
Cantwell, Michael .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • j'C?
Carnegie, James Edward .. .. .. • • .. •• •• •• 199 9 T(
Carroll, Henry, alias James Hogan .. .. .. .. •• ••
Carroll, John •• •• ••
Chalk, Edward fi
Chew, Thomas .. .. .. • • • • . • • • • • • •
Clarke, Henry .. ~ .. • • •. ■. • • • • .. 90, 166
Collins, James .. .. .. • • •• •• •• •• •• "
Collins, William .. .. •• •• .. •• •• ••
Cook, The (Darlinghurst Gaol)
Corner, John .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• "g
Cotton, James .. .. •• •• L •• •• zz
Cowan, Laurence .. .. .. • • .. .. • • • • • •
Craddock, Hugh .. .. .. .. .. . • •• •• ••
Craig, William .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• ••
Crofton, Michael .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• ••
Daly, James .. .. . • • • • • • • • • • • • • "
Davis, George
Doran, Michael .. .. .. •. .. • - • • • • • • » r?®
Douglass, Alexander.. .. .. .. .. .. • • •• • • • 2ob
Downing, Hugh
Drew, George .. .. .. • • •. • • • • • • • • i*
Driscoll, John .. .. .. •• •• • • •• •• •• 9
Dwyer, William .. .. .. •• .. •• •• •• ••
English, John ..
Evans, William .. .. •• •• •• .• •• •• «• 9
Fitzgerald, Thomas .. .. .. .. .. .. •. • • “cr
Flynn, Ann 9 i~
Frayne, Michael .. .. • • . - .. .. .. • • • •
Frazer, James .. .. .. •. .. • • •. •• •• ••
Galahan, John.. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• ••
Geogehan, Edward .. .. .. .. •. •. • • • • • • . 9
George, Caleb .. .. .. .. •. •. •. • • • • • •
Hall, John
Hampton, Thomas *. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. •• 9
Hanson, Richard .. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• ••
Hart, Richard ~ .. .. .. » . .. .. .« •• -*
Harvey, Thomas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. -• ••
Hassett, John Hawkins,


PAGE,
Hawkins, John .. .. 236
Head, William 239
Henry, William 18
Hogan, James, alias Henry Carroll ~ 122,214
Holland, John 244
Isaacs, Gilbert 125, 169
Jobson, David 238
Johnson, Sarah , .. 23
Johnson, William 236
Jones, George,. 98
Kelly, John 52
Kenny, Martin 241
Laniger, alias Brown, Thomas .. .. .. ~ .. .. ~ 21
Lawry, alias M’Gregor, Frederick 96, 120
Levi, Barnett .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 240
Lynch, John 16
Mason, John 129
M'Carthy, Henry 9
M'Gregor, alias Lawry, Frederick 96, 120
M'Gregor, William Thomas.. .. .. .. 100,173
MTntyre, Ann.. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 23,240
M‘Laren, James .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 239
M'Mahon, John 10
M'Mahon, Martin 11
M‘Spadden, John
Moran, Francis .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. •. 238
Morton, William 9
Mulhern, Mary Ann 24
Mulholland, John (“The Cadger”) 20
Murray, Patrick .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22, 240
Nagle, Thomas .. .. 45
Neal, James 423
Neal, Sarah .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Nixon, Charles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 236
Nolan, Matthias
Nunn, Hannah .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . • 23
O’Brien, John ..
O’Halloran, Joseph 235
O’Heir, Patrick .. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 4(>
Oxhurgh, Charles
Page, John ( 117 ) 235
Parker, Elizabeth .. .. .. •• •• .. ••
Passmore John .. .. •• .. •• •• ••
Pearce, James ..
Perry, Mary Ann m , 4 i
Power Edward.. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• .. 00, 96, !-o, 168
Powell, Laurence ~40
Eichards, Mary Ann * 23
Eiley, Mary 243
Eogers, Charles .. .. •• -• •• •• •• •• •• 21 ’
Eowan John .. .. •• •• •• • ♦ •• •• ••
Eowe, George Walter..
Eutter, Mary Ann , ";r
Scope, alias Williams, James .. .. .. •• •• •• ••
Scrimes, Frederick William .. .. .. •• •• •• ••
Simpson, William
Sims, Louis
Singleton, George
Smith, .lames ion om
Smith, John •
Somerville, Frank .. -. .. • • • • • • • • • * * *
Somerville, Frederick .. .. • • • • • • • ♦ • * * •
Sullivan, Daniel .. .. •• •• •• •• ** •*
Swan, George .. 20
Tagg, George .. 15
Tarlington, Edward .. .. • • • • • • • • * • * * * * 239
Taylor, George .. .. • • • • • • • • • * * * * ’ 45
Taylor, James .. .. •• •• • • •• •* ** ** 7 g
Thompson, James .. .. •• •• •* ** ** " 238
Thompson, William .. •• •• •• *' ** ** ** 246
Thurston, George .. .. •• •• •• • • ** ’* *’ 21
Trindall, Francis .. • • • • • • • • * * * ’ * * * * 44
Valenti, Camille .. ... •• •• •• ** ** ** ’* 20
Wade, James .. .. •• *• ** ** ” 237
Wagner, Charles .. •. • • • • •• " ’ * * * " ’ 236
Washington, William.. .. •• •• •• *• ” ” ” 22
Watson, Christina .. • • • • • • * * * * * * * * ‘ * 235
Watson, John .. .. .. •• •• ** * * ** *’ ’ ’ 41
Wilkes, John .. .. •• •• •* ”* ** ** “ 47
Williams, George .. •. •• *• *’* ** ’* ’’ 99
Williams, alias Scope, James .. •• •• •* ** “ ” 94
Williams, John .. -• •• •• *• ** *’ ” 44
Williams, William .. •• •• •• ** ** ** ** 19
Young, Alfred .. •• •• ••
LIST


Date.
Where.
Premises or Buildings Visited,
Descriptions or
Notices op
Condition, &c.
Page.
No. of Question
preceding.
1 February ..
Cockatoo Island ....
fMess-room.
| Dormitories.
| Hospital.
<J Solitary cells.
1 Exempt ground,
j Yard in rear of Police Barracks.
[_Police Barracks.
1
1 (33
Erra-
j ta.)
) (Before)
j 1, 70.
Carpenters’ workshop
( (33
< Erra-
(
9
| 282
317
11
415
14
547
16
639
8 February ,.
Darlingburst Gaol.,
J Labour wing, ward, and yard ......
16
18
655
713
' Trial wing.
(Cell No. 7.)
(19)
21
(732)
(827) 839
Wall in rear of blacksmiths’ sheds.
Shoemakers’ and tailors’ rooms ....
j 21
850
Female ward, cell
\ 22
864
(_Cell No. 24, and those adjoining ....
J 24
938, 949
f Stone-cutters’ yard.
} 41
1474
No. 1 cell .
42
1501
Cells on the ground floor, (No. 19.)..
Cell in the first story
42
/ 44
1502
1602
15 February ..
Parramatta Gaol ..
Cook-house
( 45
46
1615
1687
Female yard
47
1710
Female cells, on first floor.
Solitary cells, beneath Women’s
wing.
Yard containing joiners’ and black-
smiths’ shops.
„ The shops.
f Hard labour and confine wings and
1 yards
} 89
3081
1 M arch....
Darlingburst Gaol..
| The office.
_) Stockade yard.
1 Exercise Ground
f (33
4 Erra-
l ta.)
\ 3082
| Wall in rear of the Hospital
lower ditto.
j 3291
f (Water Police) —Circular Quay.
Cell
Ill
3808
Cell
111
3819
Solitary ditto.
(Police Station) —Cumbcrland-street.
Cell
113
3903
Two cells
114
3911, 3913
3914
Two front rooms
114
12 March ....
Sydney Watch-houses
(Female Watch-house) —Erskiue-
street.
] Cell
114
3956
1 (Central Police) —George-street.
Cell
115
3983
3988
Male cell
Smaller cell
| 116
116
116
(Watch-house) —Darlingburst.
Two cells
4000
4003
(Watch-house) —George and Parra-
matta streets, South.
L Cells
117
4025
11 April
Cockatoo Island....
Superintendent’s office.
22 April
Cockatoo Island....
f Superintendent’s office.
\ Prisoners’ yard.
/ Interior of the gaol
192
5252
27 April
T% • j | ,
| Ditto, the new building
193
5291
5311
) Court House
1 Cells
| 193
LIST OF VISITS OF INSPECTION.
[INDEX TO NOTICES.]
LIST


LIST OF APPENDIX.
{To Evidence given hj Mr. Byron, 1 February, 1861.) Fagk *
State of Cockatoo Island, 1 February, 1861
•• •• •• •• •• 5
■ To Evid <™ce given by Mr. W. A. Cahill, 1 February, 1861 )
Plan of Cockatoo'lsland Prison. Vide First Lithograph following Separate Appendix.
{To Evidence given by 11. C. Beverley, Esq., 14 February, 1861.)
A.
Darlinghurst Gaol Establishment
" B ;
List of Books for use of Prisoners in Darlinghurst Gaol
q **
Darlinghurst Gaol Rations and Allowances
4O
{To Evidence given by Mr. T. Harrison, 22 February, 1861.)
N ° S Polack !’. 7 ’ StAtements of certain fellow Prisoners respecting the treatment of prisoner
No. 5, Similar statement, referring also to (Robert) Banks '
Nos. Bto 11. Similar statements respecting the history and character of (Robert) Banks ] ] 66
{Eo Evidence given by Mr. F. Pegg, 22 February, 1861.)
Addendum .. .. ..
72
A
H. C. Beverley to F. Pegg, 15 November, 1859
*• •• •• •• i U
{To Evidence given by Mr. S. Whiddon, 28 February, 1861.)
A.
S. Whiddon to Acting Gaoler, Darlinghurst Gaol, 27 February, 1861 .. ~
{To Evidence given by Mr. W. Macpherson, 28 February, 1861.)
A.
Particulars of Furniture made for private parties in Darlinghurst Gaol since 1 January, 1860.. 83
{To Evidence given by Mr. S. Howarth, 28 February , 1861.)
Addendum to Answer No. 2965 >
{To Evidence given by Mr. J. Callaghan, 8 March, 1861.)
Memorandum-—Particulars of Mr. Callaghan’s services as Turnkey, since 1851 106
{To Evidence given by O. K. Mann, Esq., Capt. E.E, 11 April, 1861.)
Plan of Cockatoo Island. Vide Second Lithograph following Separate Appendix.
{To further Evidence given by Mr. T. Harrison, 12 April, 1861.)
Diagram shewing the rotation of Turnkey’s duties .. .. .. .. .. ## 13^.
Duties of the Turnkeys—Printed Regulations.. .. .. .. ~ .. __ 234
C
List of Prisoners locked up for offences committed in the Gaol, Darlinghurst, from 1 January
1860, to 1 1861 ” ’ 135
Affidavit of Visiting Surgeon, Darlinghurst Gaol, respecting prisoner Polack, 5 October, 1854 136
E.
Rotation of Turnkey’s duties, 1 August 1860 to 16 January, 1861 ~ .. ~ .. 137
{To Evidence given by Mr. C. Rispen, 12 April, 1861.)
C. Rispen to Chairman, "9 March, 1861 139
(To Evidence given by the Hon, C. Cowper, Esq,, M.P., 16 April, 1861.)
Engineer-in-Chief and Superintendent, Cockatoo Island, to Principal (Under) Secretary, 10
September, 1860 144
[Appendix to Foregoing.']
A. Comparative Return of Punishments of Prisoners, prior and subsequent to Regulations, 1
June, 1858 .. .. .. .. .. 146
B. Comparative Return of Sentences of Prisoners received, prior and subsequent to Regulations,
1 June, 1858 .. 147
Numerical Return (number of convictions) of Prisoners on Cockatoo Island, 11 October, 1860 147
{To Evidence given by the Hon, Sir A . Stephen, Knt., 20 April, 1861.)
A.
Supplementary Memorandum, 22 April, 1861 164
{To Evidence given by J, M‘Lerie, Esq., 25 April, 1861.)
Vide Separate Appendix, HE 250
{To Evidence given by J, C. Read, Esq,, 25 April, 1861.)
Reporting School established, and correcting Answer No. 5136, 4 May, 1861 180
{To


. , . r. , fa It Mann, Esq., Capt. R.E., 25 April, 1861.)
(To Evidence given by tr. a. » 1
A. jgg
code ol Regulations relative to Prisoners' Probation, &c
lin s pr f orm er Regulations, returning on new Conviction
NU, t o £a?oeUea Set'-S-Sofand serving under present Regulations
Return of Comparative Sentences passed upon Prises at Cockatoo Island, from 1 June, 1855.
to 31 May, 1858 .. •• •' ' j)
Return ot Comparative Sentences passedupon Prisoners at Cockatoo Island, from 1 June. 1858,
to 24 April, 1861 *
l9O
State of Cockatoo Island, 25 April, 1861 • • • •
,„ . , a „ Porkatoo Island during March, 1861, shewing employment, *
NUm wk’p E erEe°d, amount of gratuity, and number of credit days obtained
(To Evidence given by Mr. Il Tubman, 27 April, 1861.)
Numerical Return ot Prisoners received at Penrith tock-up from 1 January to 80 April, 1861.. 194
(To Evidence given by A. Dawson, Esq., B May, 1861.)
A- .. IQQ
Return shewing the accommodation of the principal Gaols in the Colony
(To Evidence given by J. O'N. Brenan, Esq., 3 May, 1861.)
Numerical Return of Prisoners Sentenced to Darlinghurst and Parramatta Gaols respectively,
during 1856, 1857, and 1858 .. ••
Memorandum in support of application for supply of knives and forks at meals of Prisoners .. 207
0.
Rules for the Guidance of the Working Overseers, Parramatta Gaol .. •• •• ** 2 °‘
D • 207
(1 ) Introduction to Statement of the Sheriff’s Case (Mr. Brenan).. . . •• •• ' * 2 08
(2.) Statement
°°Retimi mf PriscmerT"imployed otherwise than at Hard Labour in Darimghuist Gaol,
all’monly earned by Prisoners "in Parramatta Gaol from 1856 to (81 2U
July,) 1858 .. .. •• •
(3.) Appendix to foregoing, viz. 213
1 * U (1.) Sheriff to Colonial Secretary, 12 Pehruary 1861 .. 2 !4
(2.) Sheriff to Principal Gaoler, Darlinghurst, 2 July, 1860
(3 ) Sheriff to (Colonial Secretary), 16 February, 1861 .. , ' 7
Affidavit of Visiting Surgeon, Darlinghurst Gaol, respecting prisoner Polack, 5
(5.) Visiting Surgeon to Governor, Darlinghurst Gaol, 15 February, 1860 .. .. 215
Minute of Sheriff .. .. • • . • • ' * * * ’ * * * oi g
Minute of Principal Gaoler inquiring of Visiting Surgeon -
Reply of Visiting Surgeon, 23 February, 1860 ..
(6.) Visiting Surgeon to Colonial Secretary, 19 January, 1861 .. •• •• _
(7.) Declaration of John Callaghan, Turnkey, Darlinghurst Gaol
(8.) Declaration of T. Lee, Do. .. .. •• •• •• *• ** * 2 i(i
(9.) Statement of D. M‘Koy, Do. .. .. • • •* •• •• *'
(10.) Declaration of T. Harrison, late Principal Do
(11.) Declaration of O. Rispen, late Turnkey, Do
(12.) Sheriff to Principal Under Secretary, 1 May, 1860 .. . •• •• •• ••
(13.) Sir J. N. Dickinson (late Acting Chief Justice) to Sheriff, 26 February, 1861 .. 217
Postscript, 15 March, 1861 .. .. •• •• •• '* ” 7>-io
(14.) Chief Justice (Sir A. Stephen) to Sheriff, 21 March, 1861
910
Sheriff to Principal Under Secretary, 9 March, 1859
(To second further Evidence given by Mr. IF. A. Cahill, 7 May, 1861.)
A.
Quantity of Work performed in New Building (continuation of Workshops) Cockatoo Island .. 220
(To Evidence given by Mr. 11. Fitzgerald, 7 May, 1861.)
Addendum
A
02?
1. Addendum to Answers Nos. 5474 and 5487 " 222
2. Remark on Answer No. 5489
(To Evidence given by Mr. J. F. Lane, 7 May, 1861.)
A
* 227
Remark on Answer No. 5572 (part)
B
Inspector in Charge, Cockatoo Island, to Visiting Magistrate, 2 November, 1860 ... ••
{To Evidence given by E. Bell, Esq., M.1.G.E., 7 May, 1861.)
A. 228
City Engineer to Mayor, 28 March, 1859 ... .. .. .. • •
{To Evidence given by the Rev. P. P. Agnew, 7 May, 1861.)
A. 28 jL
Chaplain, Cockatoo Island, to Governor General, 14 August, 1860
LIgT


LIST OF SEPARATE APPENDIX.
Part I.
Statements received from Prisoners. Vide List of Prisoners, page 28.
Part 11.
A.
1. J. H. Mackie to J. C. Read, Esq., 1 March, 1861 248
2. Minute forwarding same (Mr. Inspector Read), 4 March, 1861 ” 248
B.
Police History of R. Ainsworth, 8 March, 1861 243
C.
His Honor the Chief Justice (replying) to Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, 10 April, 1861 249
D.
1. Turnkeys, Darlinghurst Gaol, to Committee, (2 April, 1861) 249
2. Routine of Turnkey’s Duty, Darlinghurst Gaol 250
E.
{Transferred from Evidence given by J. M l Eerie, Esq., 25 April, 1861.)
Police History of R. Banks, 7 May, 1861 250
LIST OF PLANS.
{Following Separate Appendix .)
(1.) Cockatoo Island Prison.
(2.) Cockatoo Island (Sydney Harbour).
(3.) Darlinghurst Gaol (Sydney).
(4.) Parramatta Gaol.
LIST OF ERRATA.
Report, Page 9, Paragraph 17, line 3. Omit “ D insert “E” (Division).
line 4 (margin). Insert “ Vide List of Visits of Inspection, page 30.”
Minutes of Evidence, Page 1. After “ Minutes of Evidence,” insert (in parentheses) “ comprising
Statements of Prisoners.”
After Note following “ Chairman,” insert further (within the bracket)
“ viz. : the Mess-room, also used as a Chapel, the Dormitories,
“ Hospital and Cells.”
Page 3. After Note following Question 70, insert further (within the bracket)
“ —The Committee returned to the Dormitories and examined the
“ bars of Nos. 4 and 5, which had recently been strengthened in con-
“ sequence of an attempt to saw them through.—The Committee
“ having proceeded to the Exempt Ground, Mr. Byron stated that
“ there were then 27 men exempt.—The Committee visited the
“ yard in the rear of the Police Barracks, inspecting a boat
“ which had been built by one of the prisoners (Landells), and
“ concealed by him in the roof of the Carpenters’ Shop.”
Page 9. After Question 282, insert (in brackets) “Mr. Hart called attention to the
“ fact, that when the Committee entered the Joiners’ Shed there
“ was no one in charge of the men.”
Page 22, Question 865. Omit “Mary,” insert “Margaret.”
Page 24, Question 950. After “Henry,” insert “ Clements.”
Page 40, Question 1459. Before “ Thomas,” insert “ Mr.”
Page 89. In Note preceding Question 3082, after “Committee,” insert
“ inspecting the Stockade, Exercise Ground, and wall in rear of the
« Hospital, whence the seventeen prisoners recently escaped, returned
“ to the Gaoler’s House, tasting the bread just supplied by the Con-
“ tractor, and ”
Page 91, Question 3137. In blank, insert “ two feet.”
Page 96. Before Note following Question 3291, insert (within the bracket) “ The
“ Committee proceeded to the Hospital, and examined the windows
“ whence, as stated by Mr. Whiddon and Mr. Olson, communication
“ had been carried on with the prisoners in the Exercise Yard”—
Page 101, Question 3474. Before “ John. ” insert “ Mr. ”
Page 112, Question 3866. Before “ Lewis,” insert “ Constable,
Page 113, Question 3904. In “ Phillip, omit second “1.
Page 117, Question 4026. Insert (above) “ Sergeant Allan M'Diarmid (in charge)
Page 130. After Answer 4477, insert (in parentheses) “ Vide Second lithograph
following Separate Appendix. _ . Jf
Page 165, Answer 4880, last line. Omit “ nine \ insert 1 si-x.
Page 176 Answer 5049 After “ {Not furnished), indicate the following toot-note,
’ « v ; z . Memo ( Appended to M.S. Evidence ) The suggestions
“ relating to the erection of a prison will be sent as soon as my other
“ duties will allow me sufficient time to do so.”
Separate Appendix I, Page 235, lines 4 and 5. After “ Note,” omit “ Examinations &c.” ; insert
“ Questions put to certain prisoners in reference to their
“ Statements are included.”
Page 241 After the Statement of G. Singleton, omit paragraph resecting Com-
mittee (not pertaining to the Appendix.)




1861.
apsjioUttUe &00em&lg*
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
TAKEN BEFORE THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND
CUMBERLAND.
FRIDAY, 1 FEBRUARY, 1861.
lsr£o£nt
Mr. COWPER,
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. PARKES,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WILSON.
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., Chairman.
[The Committee Laving assembled on the Circular Quay at 9 o’clock, A.M., proceeded
to Cockatoo Island, and inspected various arrangements of the Penal Establishment.] Cockatoo
lsland Prison.
William Dwyer, a prisoner confined in the cells, called up and examined : 1 Feb., 1861.
1. By Mr. Cowjper : How long have you been on the island ? Two years and eight months. W. Dwyer. J
2. What were you sentenced here for ? Five years.
3. For what crime ? For a horse.
4. For stealing a horse ? That is what I was charged with.
5. What district do you come from ? Bathurst.
6. What Judge tried you? Judge Therry.
7. Were you ever convicted before ? No.
8. How long have you been in the Colony ? Twenty years.
9. What districts of the Colony have you been in ? In Sydney part of my time, and I had
a good character from many gentlemen.
10. By the Chairman : Are you a married or a single man ? Single; both my parents are
living.
11. By Mr. Cowjper: You must have come to the Colony very young ? Yes; I was eight
years old.
12. Have you been punished here before ? Yes, once, fourteen days for the same thing.
13. By Mr. Walsh : Did you come out with your father ? Yes.
Mr. Byron, Principal Warder, examined :
14. By the Chairman: Will you refer to the record book, and state the nature of this Mr. Byron,
man’s offence ?
Mr. Byron referred to the booh, and read as follows: —“ 4th January ,
1861.— Insubordinate conduct, refusing to go to work, and disobedience of orders.”
15. What was the nature of this man’s insubordination ? Falling out from the body of men,
refusing to go to work when a number of the men also refused.
157—8 16.


16. At what time in the morning was that ? At nine o’clock. I reported the circumstance
to the Superintendent, and he ordered the men to he con ned.
17 Did they allege any reason for their refusal ? Yes ; the men who were under the regu-
lations of the old Act, and those who were under the new regulations, were working together.
Under the old regulations a man is allowed half a day s remission of sentence foi e\ery day
he works, but, under the new, each day’s work is counted only as ono day.
18. By Mr. Lucas: That is to say, the work under the old Act is task-work, and according
to the old regulations all work over a certain quantity is earned to the credit of the prisoner,
and lessens the term of his imprisonment ? Yes.
W. Dwyer further examined :
19. By the Chairman: Let us hear your version of the matter—will you explain the reason
of your refusal to work ? Because half the men working on our side get half a day tor
every working day, and we get nothing—no matter how a man behaves he gets the same.
20. By Mr. Lucas: You mean some men under the old system who are on task-work .
Yes. If we do not get that work done, we are put in the cells.
21. Whatever over-work you do does not reduce the term of your sentence ? it does some
of the men’s, but not ours. . -
22. What you complain of is, that no matter how well you behave, or what quantity ot
work you do ? "We are treated all the same, we have got to do our time. _
23. By the Chairman: Can you not explain definitely the circumstances of this refusal to
WO rk—how many men were working together. You say the men on one side were working
at task-work—what work had these to do as compared with those who were not at task-work .
They had got to work as much as the old. The new Act had got to worx as well as the
24. If a man under the regulations previous to the passing of the new Act performed a
certain day’s work, it counted as more than one day in the term of his sentence . aes,
a day and a half. . 1 , .
25. You know what it is you have to complain of, will you state it to us as you would to
any one else? Because we get no indulgences, no marks, nor nothing. . c
26. You say “ we,” whom do you mean ? All the new Acts —all who came here since Ibob.
2?! How many men were working with you when you refused to work ? There were a
hundred. _ ,
28. Working with you ? Where I was working—l was working in the lumber yard.
29. How many were there ? Sixteen.
30. How many of these were getting more than six days a week ? Six.
31. How many were getting only six days ? Eight or nine.
32. About eight or nine out of this sixteen came after a certain date and got no indulgence,
and about six or seven came before that date and got indulgence ? Yes.
33. During the time you have been in that cell how have you fared whau soit ol rood
have you had ? A pound and a half of bread a day, nothing else.
34. The whole time ? Yes. .
35. You have never had anything but bread during the time you have been in the cell.
39°' Have you been in a good state of health during that time ? Yes—only my head.
37. Do you feel the place hot sometimes ? Yes. t
38. As compared with the place where you usually sleep ? A good deal worse, a man s
head is always bad here.
39. Would you rather sleep where the other men sleep? Yes.
40. By Mr. Wilson: Suppose you had a bed in the cell, would you prefer sleeping there,
to sleeping in the dormitory with the other men ? I would as soon sleep there as where
the men sleep, and sooner. T , Q , C
41. By the Chairman: How long have you been on the island ? Since June, ibob.
42. During that time you have been punished once? I got fourteen days for the same
thing; all the men fell out, and I fell out.
43 When you were sleeping in the common dormitory did you ever notice the occurrence
of immorality ? No, I never did, for I always kept myself to myself; I never kept company
with anybody in the ward or out.
44. Did you hear obscene conversation at night? No.
45. How"many persons slept in the dormitory where you were ? 70 or 80 in one, and about
58 or 48 in the one I was in before I came here.
46. What have you generally worked at since you have been on the island? In the lumber
yard and blacksmith’s shop.
47. All the time? No, I was six months in the quarry.
48. And you have had good health all the time ? I have never been off my work, only four
days.
49. When do you come out of the cell ? To-day.
50. Are you going back to work ? Yes.
51. By Mr. Walsh : You have some books in your cell? Yes.
52. What are they? Novels.,
53. What are their names? Ido not know the name of the one I have got now, i only
took it yesterday.
54. Have you had books all the time you have been there ? Yes, any time you asked you
would get it.
55. What books have you been reading? Chambers’ Journal for-a bit, and others.


56. Have you seen any clergyman since you have been there ? No, I have seen no person
till I saw you this morning. ]
67. You have not been out to prayers in the chapel ? I have never been out of the ceil but
three times, and that was to come up here to shave.
58. By Mr. Gowper: What do you suppose you will gain by refusing to work, —do you
suppose the Government will give way to you,—do you think that possible ? Ido not know.
59. You know that you came here under certain regulations then in force which were
announced to you by the Judge when he passed your sentence ? There are many who have
been here before, and before that again, who have got two years less than I have.
60. That has been by the sentence of the Judge ? Yes.
61. You do not suppose that it can be left to you to decide upon the sentences of other men ?
They were sent for the same charge.
62. Of which they have been convicted by a Jury, and for which they have been sentenced
by a Judge. You do not suppose it can be left to the men on this island to revise the
sentences of the Courts, and to decide whether they are just or not ? No.
63. By Mr. Mate: How did you plan it that you should all refuse to work at the same time?
We did not all strike at the same time —there were two days between.
64. By Mr. Lucas: You were all sentenced on the same day ? Yes, but there were some
men fell out one day and more on another ; they fell out on different days.
65. By Mr. Couper : Whose horse was it you were charged with stealing ? Ido not know.
66. Who prosecuted you ? No one prosecuted me.
67. Who were the witnesses against you ? The witnesses saw me buy the horse, they swore
first one thing and then another, because they knew the man I bought the horse of better
than they did me, and they wanted to get him out of trouble.
68. By Mr. Walsh : The horse was found in your possession ? No, it was sold to five or six
people.
69. Was it not proved by some person that the horse had been in your possession ? Yes, I
owned to having had the horse myself,
70. By Mr. Gowper: Had it been the subject of much discussion among you before you
came to the determination to resist these regulations ? I never spoke to a man in the yard,
but all the men called out, and shouted out to me at different times.
[Mr. Ferris, in answer to a question from Mr. Lucas, stated that Dwyer was
not a badly-behaved man, and that he seldom spoke to any of the men,]
[Committee having entered the Police Barracks, the Chairman took the Chair, ][
Mr. Byron called in and further examined :
71. By the Chairman : What office do you hold on the island ? Principal warder.
72. What are your duties ? To muster the men, and to see that the place is kept clean.
73. Are you responsible for them —are they in your charge during the night? They are in
no way under my charge during the night.
74. You merely superintend their muster ? Yes, in the day time.
75. Are you responsible for their safe keeping during the day ? No, I have merely to
muster them at meal times. _
76. You were with the Committee when we visited the sleeping apartments? Yes.
. 77. Bid we go through all the apartments? Yes.
78. Of which there are five in number ? Yes.
79. Can you state how many berths there are in each ? Yes. In Nos. 1 ana - wards there
are 88 in each; in No. 3 ward, 48 j Nos. 4 and 5, 52 each } altogether there are 3_B sleep-
ing berths. , , . L .
80. Have you ever had all the berths full ? Yes, and have had men sleeping on the top,
over the two tiers of berths.
81. Has that occurred often ? No.
82. How long have you been on the island? Nine years nexr month. 9
83. What is the greatest number of prisoners you have ever had on the isiand at one time -
490 or near 500.
84. When was that? Shortly after I came here. _ . 9 T o _._j .
85. Can you state how many slept in the dormitories last night. e °* n 1 J ’
No. 3, 18; No. 4,36 j No. 5, 2,9.
86. How many altogether in these wards ? 146. f , i «>
87. Can you state how the 146 who slept in these places las. night are deposedI of to-day *
f 'ewifiaed 0 in °celk^ r 8 & in attendance on hospital,
90. About how long has that man been on the islaiid ? More than a }c.u.
91. What has been his conduct ? Very good till this late affair. inoffensive
92. Without respect to this act of insubordination ? He has been a very quiet, inoffensive
ST'Was he a man who mixed himself up with the other prisoners ? I cannot tell. He is
a passionate man, but it is over in a minute. _ Forrm
Sil What is the character of the other two men in the cells whom we did not see terns


Cockatoo
Island Prison.
1 Feb., 1861,
Mr, Byron.
is a man who tried to escape from the island one night, and the other man is named Johnsou,
■ who also tried to escape.
95. Have you ever gone into these dormitories in the dead of night ? Never,
96. Have you ever gone to the gate ? Yes, when any one has been sick.
97. When the dormitories have been full? Yes, I have been to the gates.
98. Was the atmosphere very oppressive ? It was.
99. What kind of utensils have they ? Tubs.
100. Do they use those tubs for all purposes ? Yes.
101. Is there any system of requiring these men to go to any place for the offices of nature
before they go to bed, or are locked up ? Yes, there is a closet for that purpose in the yard.
- 102. Are these tubs ever filthy in the morning ? Yes.
103. Do the men smoke inside these places ? Yes.
104. Are vermin often found in the berths? Sometimes.
105. How often ? We fumigate the wards three times a year, there are 761bs. of brimstone
used.
106. What is the practice adopted in cleansing these places ? The tubs are carried out,
emptied, and whitewashed, and then the rooms are cleaned out.
107. Are they washed with a broom or besom? They are washed out with a mop, and
afterwards the berths are whitewashed.
108. Only that? They are scraped if the whitewash is too thick.
109. Do you frequently go to the gates at night ?
110. Do you frequently go to the gates at night ? No, it is my duty to go at about ten
minutes to eight, to see that the lights are put out.
111. Probably you have gone to the gates at different parts of the night? No, unless a
man wants to be sick, and then we let him out.
112. Have you ever noticed obscene conduct or heard obscene language ? You mean in the
berths ? No.
118. By Mr. Wilson: Where do the men get tobacco ? There is a shop at the North Shore,
Mr. Clarke’s.
114. Do they send for their tobacco through the Government officers ? Yes.
115. By Mr. Cowper : They receive some gratuity for extra work, and are allowed to spend
it ? Yes, in tobacco.
116. By Mr. Wilson : Have they the means of washing or bathing themselves every
morning ? No, they get leave from the superintendent to bathe every Saturday in the dock.
117. What means have they of bathing themselves in fresh water ? There are tubs in the
barrack square in the yard.
118. Are they found with towels ? Yes.
119. By Mr. Morris: Have they any means of washing allowed ? Not without they go in
the docks.
120. By Mr. Wilson: They have no means of washing in fresh water ? None, except what
I have stated.
121. The man Dwyer stated that he had novels in his cell? Yes, thereds a general library
which is provided by the Rev. Mr. Agnew.
122. Who selects these books ? Mr. Balls gives them out.
123. Any book a prisoner pleases ? Yes.
124. Is there a Bible in each cell ? No, if a man wishes for a Bible or a Prayer Book he
can get one by applying for it.
125. By Mr. Lucas: You say it is your duty to go to the gates at ten minutes to eight
to see that the lights are put out, what lights do you speak of? Candles.
126. Are the men allowed candles in the wards ? Yes, till eight o’clock, to read, or to
amuse themselves, after that there is a lamp in each ward.
127. By Mr. Wilson: Do you insist upon silence after the lights are put out ? Yes.
128. By Mr. Lucas: How many cells are there on the island ? Twelve.
129. By Mr. Mate: You say the men can buy tea, sugar, and other luxuries ? Yes, tea,
sugar, and white bread.
130. Do they get these things at reasonable prices ? At Sydney prices; they are served out
twice a week.
131. By Mr. Wilson: Certain persons are promoted on the island for good conduct? Yes
to what are called sub-overseers or constables.
132. Who promotes them ? The superintendent.
133. That is to say the superintendent promotes them on whose recommendation ? On the
recommendation of the free officers.
134. What are the grounds upon which a man’s promotion is generally recommended ? Good
conduct and short sentence.
135. No previous conviction, is that taken into account ? Yes.
136. By Mr. Cowper: What do you do with the men in wet weather? We put them
inside. 1
137. Where ? In the wards if it is very heavy.
138. Not merely in the dining hall, but in the sleeping wards ? Yes.
189. By Mr. Lucas : Suppose it rains for two or three days ? They are kept in the wards,
and brought out at meal times. The mechanics come out in wet weather, the others do not!
140. Do the men who are sentenced to work in irons work with those who have not irons ?
Yes, so many to each gang.
141. Do the men ever complain of the rations ? They do.
142. Is it generally with regard to their quantity or to their quality ? To the quality.
143. By the Chairman : What is your opinion of the quality of the rations ? It is gene'rally
very good. '


A.
STATE of Cockatoo Island, 1 February, 1860.
Detail.
3
O
d
Total.
Religious Denominations.
o
hH
Under Sentence to the Eoads
135
6
141
84
69
Ditto Transportation
Ditto to Irons .. .
5
5
Ditto as Vagrants
Jews ....
Ditto Tickets Cancelled
18
8
21
Pasrans
7
Ditto Further Orders....
158
9
167
167
Fight Mustek, 31 January, 1861.
Distribution, 1 February, 1861.
1 Ward ...
w
f Gateman, 1 ; Messenger, 1
2
** ’ *
§
Overseers
10
2 „
63
o
Labourers
32
t*
Light hand Carts
2
3 „
15
M
P
Mechanics
21
Binding - books for Prison Library
1
4 „
36
H
H
68
TTosmtal. 10 : Attendants. 3 ..
13
5 „
29
10
Cells...
3
Hospital
m
Cooks, 5; Wardsmen, 10; Servants, 16 ;
Watermen, 4, &c
35
W
Renairino - Clothin
g, Shoes, &c
6
Cook House..
3
10
1
<J .
Gardens
1
Cells ..
r A
B
Sweeper and Shedmen
Washermen
4
4
Passage..
M
i>
o
o L
Exempt by Surgeon
Signal Staff and Barbers
26
3
4
167
*
99
167
145' Wbllfo’yo™ heTd*”—I CSS room f ? ot " Iwa y s '
sometimes it is sour, although fresh in the morning before 7 ° U ' 1 “ ;
Y es “ a “ a “ Dawkins on the island, who has had his log
147. What is his conduct ? His conduct has been generally good
148. Quiet, respectful, and obedient ? Yes 6 b
149. There is another man named M'Snadden ?
150. A murderer ? Yes. F GS -
if.Tw^rhi ia aid ha tlTh n ? i 1 '“ T °- ■ 1 I,lTe ““ Hm
shoot him. d tl:c c have been going to murder him or to
152. During the whole time of his conhnpmpnf w iw. • i •
sometimes he has been very well, and he is a very good worMng man too ““ m ‘ y ' ’
153. Do you believe him to be insane ? Ido not know T L . ‘ , ,
expressions and his actions 1 think myself ho must he insane. JU ' 3S °’ ™ ‘ ! '° m ” S
are going to kill ’him ?* Vo •’heVys hVVdozen MonS’e"” 1 '” t°h h V part!cnlar P ersons wl > o
him, or to poison him. 7 d ° Zen people wlth Nonets ™ g«»>g to hill
155. By Mr. Gowper: Is he with the other prisoners ? Yes.
156. By the Chairman : You have no charges against most of the prisoners ? No.
157. How many are here for murder ? Ido not know 1
158. By Mr. Walsh: Have you heard M'Spadden complain of any particular class of
persons—of persons of any particular religion ? No J Ciass 01
1™ ww- f““ •'a® o . f u ’ tnow a prisoner of the name of Scrimes ? I do.
160. \v hat is his conduct ? He is a very well conducted man.
wif f! 6V l r offe ° ded . in wa /> or been put in the cells for any offence ? No.
162 i dl . at las bcen bls chara cter—l mean simply since lie has been on the island ? Yerv
good. There was a man here who for a long time acted as though he was insane, and there
malingeHng' examined him, hut Dr. West found out that he was only
168 By the Chairman : Who were the worst among the insuhordinates ? I could not say •
hut I believe there were twelve picked out in Sydney. They were all mixed up together. ’
APPENDIX.
Mr.


Mr. William Augustine Cahill called in and examined :
164. By the Chairman : What office do you hold ? lam principal Foreman of Works.
165. How long have you been on the island ? years. _ ~ ,
166. In the discharge of your duty have you to overlook the prisoners while they are
working ? The mechanics; in particular the masons, stonecutters; carpenters; and engineers,
&c. The erection of all buildings comes under my province. .
167. Can you state under what circumstances Hawkins had his leg brokeni les, m
fitting a piece of the machinery—a large wheel—a prop which was put under in a careless
manner, which was touched by him, fell, and smashed his thigh.
168. Was the careless manner in which the prop was placed attributable to mm or to otliers .
To him and others. .
169. Was the leg badly broken? Yes, across the thigh; it was completely broken.
170. What was the character of that man, generally? Very good; he is a very well
conducted man. . , , , ,
171. Can he work now ? He could until lately. He is a painter by trade. The other day
he took up a carpenter’s adze, and accidentally cut himself on the ball of the toe, which has
again incapacitated him. _ _ .
172. You were present when the Committee visited the dormitories? les.
173. Can you furnish the Committee with the dimensions of those rooms, their length, width,
and height; the number of windows in the walls, the number of berths, how
situated, and their size; also the space occupied by the passages ? Yes. ( Videßirst
lithograph following Separate Appendix.) i
174. Will you state how the two systems operate upon the minds of the men ? I here were
men who had received their sentences previously to the Ist July, 1858, working with those
who had been sentenced subsequently to that period, and who, under different regulations,
were working side by side. »
175. Will you state, distinctly and candidly, what effect this system had upon the minds ot
the men ? This has been the grievance, and the sole cause ot the insubordination of the
men. One man received half a day in addition to the current day if he performed the task
required by the Government, while the other had the same task to do, and received no
indulgence of time. , 1
176. Yv T hat time could the more healthy and industrious men make over-time —those who
were under the regulations in force prior to June, 1858 ? Half a day each day.
177. Then a man who came here prior to June, 1858, could make nine days a week against
the other man’s six ? Yes; and those men who wear blue jackets are entitled to half a day
for Sundays.
178. Practically the working of the system may be this —that two men may work together,
one of whom may be working off his sentence at the rate of nine days a week, while the
other, who stands much higher as to conduct, is working off but six ? It may be the case,
and frequently is.
179. The man of better character, who came after June, 1858, is making but six days
a week, while the other, of bad character, is making nine? Yes; I have known several
such cases.
ISO. What I want to ascertain from you is whether your opinion, from observing the
working of these two systems together, is that it creates a general feeling of insubordination ?
It is.
181. Whether it breaks out or not that is the feeling? There is no mistake that that is the
great cause of insubordination.
182. By Mr. Cowper: How many men of the old class are there now on the island ? About
fifty or fifty-one. If these men were kept at work by themselves the others would not feel it
so much, but when they see them working by their sides it excites a feeling of insubordination.
183. By Mr. Lucas: Are they not paid for any over-work they do? Yes, for all they do
over and above their task.
184. How are they paid for stonework ? The man who does feet of stonecutting is
entitled to 3d. per day. Some can do more than that; one man did 17 feet.
185. And they get paid extra for that ? Yes, they get paid once a fortnight.
186. They get nothing for the task itself? No, they do that for Government.
187. How much per foot are they paid ? It is divided into a number of quarters; their task
is 7 feet draft work.
188. How are they paid for what they do over 7 feet? If they do 5|- feet over that they
are entitled to 3d. a day.
189. In addition to this, under the old regulations, a man could work off nine days a week,
so that one who had been sentenced for three years would be set at liberty at the end of two
years-? Yes, under the old regulations.
190. And was paid 3d. a day also ? Yes, so long as he did as much work as entitled him to
that above his task. They are only allowed to draw 3d. a day, if they earn more than that
it is put into the Savings’ Bank.
191. Is that paid to them on the island ? Yes, before they leave.
192. When they leave the island what clothing do they get ? I believe they are allowed to
buy clothing.
193. By Mr. Wilson: Suppose a man does nothing more than his task-work, but performs
that, is he allowed to calculate seven days a week ? He must do more than his task-work
for that.
194. By Mr. Lucas : Do you know John Mason ? Yes, he is a man in the hospital.
195. Do you know anything of him as to his conduct on the island? Ido not know much
as to his conduct.
196.


196. I believe he was some time in the blacksmith’s shop ? Yes.
197. Do you know Scrimes ? Yes.
198. What has been his conduct? He is a well-conducted man.
199. Has he been in trouble ?I am not aware—he has been in the carpenter’s shop.
200. Is he a carpenter? Yes.
201. He is employed at present as a carpenter on the island ? Y T es.
202. His conduct has always been good ? Very good indeed.
203. By Mr. Gowper .* Do you gather from the convicts that they have any other ground of
complaint than the alteration of the regulations in June, 1858 ? I have heard they cannot
get their petitions forwarded.
204. By the Chairman .* You must have a good deal of experience of the island, having
been overseer of works so many years ? Yes, I should have.
205. Has it not often occurred to you that it would be much better if there were a greater
variety of employment according to the strength or adaptability of the prisoners ? I think as
far as their capability is concerned they are pretty well classified; those who are unable to
undertake mechanical employment are generally selected for the camp.
206. What employment is there for weak men? The band carts, which is considered light work.
207. Drawing hand carts is not light work ? It is considered so.
208. By Mr Gowper: A good many of the men are employed as servants and attendants ?
Yes.
209. By the Chairman: Does not the want of a sufficient variety of employment lead to the
employment of a larger number of the men as servants than is required? I cannot speak to
that correctly. The requirements of the camp are considerable; the washing is very heavy,
as each of the men have two clean shirts a week.
210. How many persons are employed in cooking to-day ? Five.
211. By Mr Sutherland: How much a foot is a man paid for extra work —you say 7 feet
a day is the task ? 7 feet a day is the task, and they are allowed 3d. a day if they do 121 'feet.
212. How do you do with the carpenters and blacksmiths? When they are upon any"fixed
work, there is a scale for them in like manner; but they are seldom employed upon fixed
work. It is very hard to define the blacksmith’s work as it is chiefly jobbing, as tools to be
sharpened, some two or three hundred chisels and picks; and there is the current work for
the fitting shop, such as making bolts and nuts, so that it is very rare to keep a man
constantly at the same work.
213. How do you pay them ? They are paid at the same rates, at the recommendation of
the foreman, according to their industry.
214. By Mr. Lucas: Do you not think it would be desirable to have the best behaved men
here? I should be glad to have none but men of the best character here.
215. Suppose twelve or fourteen of the ringleaders were removed ? I should take it as a
great boon to have them removed.
Cockatoo
Island Prison.
1 Feb., 1861.
Mr. W. A.
Cahill.
FRIDAY, 8 FEBRUARY, 1861.
I&mnt
Mr. HART, Mr. PARKES,
Mr. LUCAS, Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. MATE, Mr. WILSON,
Mr. MORRIS, Mr. WINDEYER.
HENRY PARKES, Esq. ? Chairman.
[The Committee having met in No. 1 Committee Room at 10 o’clock, A.M., proceeded to
Darlinghurst Giaol.]
Mr. William Macpherson examined :
216. By the Chairman : You are appointed overseer of the carpentering department here ?
Yes.
217. How long have you filled that office ? Since the Ist of January, 1860.
218. How many men have you generally at work here ? From nine to twelve; the average
is about nine.
219. Can you state anything about the sentences of the men who are working here ? They
are generally short sentenced men, from two to six months ; except one or two.
[Of prisoners working in the carpenter’s shop, ]
James Thompson examined: —
220. By the Chairman: What is your sentence ? Two years.
221. Are you a carpenter ? Yes. n _ . , , ,
222. How long have you been working in this prison ? Fourteen months, and twelve
months at my trade.
223. How have you generally been employed ? At all sorts of work. .
224. What are you making now? lam making spoons for the men; I was employed in
putting the roof on the new hospital—that was the first work I did. . _v
225. What is the work on the bench ? It is the frame-work for sofas or seats in the Domain.
226. How long does it take you to make one of those spoons ? Two or three minutes.
227. How long does it take you to make a dozen ? A couple of hours. Thomas
Darlinghurgt
Gaol.
8 Feb., 1861.
Mr. William
Macplierson.
J. Thompson,


Thomas Hampton examined
. 228. By the Chairman : What is your sentence? Five years.
229. On what charge ? Shooting a bullock at Shoalhaven.
230. Shooting a bullock out of malice ? No, I was going through the hush and shot it
accidentally. .
231. What was the offence you were tried for ? I was found guilty of shooting a bullock
with intent to steal it.
232. What is your age ? Seventeen.
233. How long have you been working in this shop ? Four months.
234. Had you worked at this trade before you came here ? No.
235. Was this the first time you had been before a Court ? Yes.
236. By Mr. Lucas: Who was with you at the time ? My stepfather, and my father’s
brother —they both received sentence for five years, and are on Cockatoo.
237. By Mr. Windeyer : Were you sentenced to Darlinghurst Goal ? To the public works.
238. Are you one of those who came from Cockatoo the other day ? No.
239. By Mr. Lucas (to Thompson') : Is this man getting on pretty fair with his work ? Yes.
240. By Mr. Windeyer (to Hampton ) ; How came you to be put to this work ? My father
taught me to carpenter before I came here.
■ 241. By the Chairman (to Thompson ) .• Do you obtain any extras for working at your trade?
No.
George Drew examined :
. 242, How long have you been in Darlinghurst Gaol ? About six months.
243. What was your sentence ? Six months.
244. It will soon expire ? Yes.
245. What was it for ? A charge of robbery.
246. Have you been working at your trade ever since you have been here ? Yes.
247. What do you do generally ? I made a lot of these seats for the gardens—these arms
are for seats.
248. Do you make any portable articles such as chairs ? No.
249. Tables ? No.
250. What is the kind of work you have been generally employed upon ? For the gaol,
251. Joiner’s work for the additional buildings ? Anything that was to be done.
252. Do you obtain extras for working at your trade ? Tea and sugar are allowed,
253. Do they all get tea and sugar ? Some do not get tea; some of the labouring men.
254. When will your time expire ? I shall be out the 2nd of next month.
255. By Mr. Hart .• What do you do with your tools when your work is over ? Go to the
shop with them, and see them locked up.
256. Who takes them there ? Each man takes his own.
257. By Mr. Windeyer .’ Are you searched before you are locked up ? No.
258. By the Chairman .• What are the hours of work ? Seven in the morning till four in
the afternoon.
259. Out of that you have a dinner hour, I suppose ? Yes.
260. From twelve to one ? Yes.
Edward Geogehan examined :
. 261. By the Chairman: How long have you been here ? Getting on for ten months.
262. Under what sentence ? Two years.
263. Charged with what ? I was brought in for a concern I -was not answerable for—my
wife’s deeds—l was in Goulburn, and a reward of £5OO was offered to any one who would give
information, about the bank robbery, and they gave me a sentence of two years as a com-
pensation.
264. Ido not understand you ? If you will understand me I was promised a reward of
£5OO, and I was done out of my reward for fulfilling the ends of justice. I gave information
about the bank robbery, and then after I was in prison my wife became loose and was married
to another man, and Capt. Scott would not take my evidence; he said I could not prosecute
the woman, and I am rewarded with a sentence of two years.
265. What occupation were you following before you came here ? Sawing.
266. Are you a sawyer ? Yes.
267. Have you worked in this shop all the time you have been here ? I was stone-cutting
until I had a little sawing.
268. "What work are you doing now ? Merely rough carpentering—assisting other tradesmen.
James Frazer examined :
269. By the _ Chairman: How long have you been here ? About two weeks.
270. What is your sentence ? Six months.
271. What is the charge against you ? Stealing from Mr. Malcolm, of Darling Point.
272. Who was the Judge that tried you ? Mr. Justice Cheekc.
273. Are you a cabinet-maker ? No.
2.<4. A\ hat trade are you? I have been working at the carpentering trade lately; by
profession lam a seaman; I have been master of a vessel in this Colony.
275. Of what ship were you master ? The “ Rival ” bai’que. I have also been chief mate
of several vessels, but I came to work on shore.
276. What are you doing now ? Carpentering.
277.


278! IV whom ■?° U ™do n o * know. 8 FrtlCular moment ? 1 think » is for a wardrobe.
is another raan
g: “ e *>
made. W ° haVe JOU S6eQ SinCe you have been here ? 1 sa w a chest of drawers
Henry McCarthy examined
ill in ? a
280. For what ? I was charged with a misdemeanour in the public streets—indecent-
exposure—but it was not in a street at all. puonc streets —indecent
oQ-* )S at trade are yOU ? A car P en ter and joiner.
28/. Did you serve a regular apprenticeship to that trade ? Yes.
900 wwl°! been e , mp °? ed m , that way since you have been here ? Yes.
-uoJ. What have yon been doino* during? that Hmp ? \f n i r * i i n
290. Is that a wardrobe you are making now ? Yes mn of it Wardr ° befor Some P 6rson '
291. Is that the only work you have"done ? wift> ft, '
believe was for the prison. * ° ’ Lie cxce pGon of a box, which I
292. A cedar chest do you mean ? Yes.
wasmte“d r ed for 7 With f " h ° lding clothes ? 1 <!o b>«w what it
Darlinghnrst
Gaol.
8 Feb., 1861.
J. Frazer.
H. McCarthy.
George Barrett examined :
204. By the Chairman : How long have you been in this place ? Four weeks were done of
00 y 2ww e W Ca ” e hCTe ; 1 111176 S6r76d fOTr altogether.
2yo, What was your sentence ? Eighteen months.
296. Who tried you ? Judge Cary."
Ill' T^ at ° ffence I ?°i obtainin S goods under false pretences.
298. What is your trade ? Rough carpenter
dfLn"„rtTZ"rL en CmP%ed Sin ° e JOU ° ame l6re ?In 0 “ e tM “S anotker—
on?*S S ave r ve yOU been e “P% ed this workshop all the time ? Yes.
oao n are yo . u doin S now -listing in making spoons.
oiU Cannot you inform us of any particular kind of work you have done ? Indifferent
the^hop 11118 WOrlaD =^ makin S door sfcuds > drawers, and boxes, and anything that came into
303. Are many articles manufactured to go out of the prison ? That I cannot tell.
j Ar , e man J Posable articles, small articles of furniture, and things of that kind made ?
I never take notice in regard of that. 6 *
mU ? kuo^. wliat « made in the workshop—have you never seen fancy articles
made, such as tea caddies ? There have been some odd ones made in the shop.
G. Barrett.
William Evans examined :
x/ Chmmian: Are you a cabinet-maker or a carpenter by trade ? Carpenter.
one* nn'! . S bave J ou been Harlinghurst ? Three months.
308. V\ hat is your sentence ? Six months.
309. What was the charge against you ? Felony.
010. Who tried you ? lam sure Ido not know their names; I was tried at the Police Office.
011. During the time you have been here how have you been employed ? I have made a
large chest of drawers for the hospital; I have made another chest of drawers, and have
worked at door frames and doors for the building.
312. Have you never made or seen any small articles made, such as work boxes, tea caddies
desks, or anything of that kind ? No.
313. By Mr. Lucas: With reference to these two chests of drawers, do you know what
became of them ? Ido not know who they were for.
oi c’ r ° U kDOW whether they are in the prison ? I cannot say,
015. What sort of drawers were they ? Cedar.
316. Large chests ? Regular sized chests.
31/. Have you seen any other drawers made by any other of the men, or any other cabinet
work ? There was one chest of drawers made, I think, for the clergyman, Mr. Agnew.
[The Committee left the main joiners’ workshop, and entered a smaller one
where were three men.]
W. Evans*
William Morton examined :
318. By Mr. Lucas: How long have you been here ? A year and ten months.
319. What is your sentence ? Five years.
320. Were you any trade when you came here ? A baker and confectioner.
321. How came you to take to carpentering ? I asked the superintendent to put me to it,
322. Are you making these doors ? Yes.
028. Gan you make one of these doors now ? Yes.
324. Can you make sashes ? Yes,
325. Have you made them ? Yes, for the new hospital.
157—C 326.
W. Morton.


306 Have yon made any panel doors since yon have been here ? Yes, for the now wing.
32§ ' IZ bet eZA" SofSS?Y. I -e been making stools,
t a confectioner ? I am a
- carjcDtori,sg ? No ’ 1 sball retom ,0
JhlTM*r : Have yon any objection to state what yon were tried for ? Horse-
m Was your sentence imprisonment in Darlinghnrst ? I had two sentences, three years
and two years.
334. One after the other ? Yes.
Ill’ anything in the way of privileges according to the work you do—any extra
No,
340 ° B™Mr'. ’whdeyer .• Where do yon come from originally ? Melbourne.
& JJT 1 in the Colony ? I wastanin the Colony.
343 In what part of it? Melbourne. I believe lam one of the oldest naUves.
344. By Mr. Windeyer.- What is your age? Twenty-tour
345. Bv Mr. Hart.- What do you do with your tools at night? they are
workshop. . , 9
346. Are you searched before you are locked up f sso.
John M'Mahon examined :
347. By the Chairman / How long have yon been here ? Seventeen months.
348. What is your sentence? Eighteen months. t
349. You will be out of this place then in a month ? In three weeks.
350. What was the charge against you ? Stealing a saddle and hri .
351 Who tried you ? Ido not know, I was tried at the I olice Ofiic .
il Part,, at keeping the articles
S^HaroyoTi' worked at your proper trade ? Part of the time I have. .
er r ' r, n Z Sutherland • Keeping the utensils in repair for the use of the prison . Yes.
II prison 1 ? The greater part of the articles
35K You articles ? No, I make articles for the turnkeys sometimes.
358. Buckets and things of that kind? Yes.
So’ When did you make the last articles of this kind ? A short time ago.
36?; Three mon thsT three weeks, or throe days? The last articles I made about three weeks
dia mean
t About three months ago.
lei mLre'*y a-lMhof a similar kind for any other officer of the establish-
es ‘ k/tthoffl ? One for Mr. Lee, and one for Mr Callaghan and articles for Mr. Wallis.
367 Who else ? Ido not well know. Mr. M'Coy has a list of all I made. _
368* By Mr Sutherland .• Who is Mr. M‘Coy ? The next officer to Mr. Harrison
369 By the Chairman: What hate you done in this particular workshop—have you assisted
the carpenters ? I have been sharpening the tools; Ido not do any particular work he .
370. You do not work at the trade of a carpenter ? ISa Tnm wme-
-371. By Mr. Hart: How many prisoners usually work in this workshop ? Two and some
times three. ~ , , 9 Voo
372. Was there any one in charge this morning before we came . *es.
373. Was any one present here in charge of you ? Yes, Mr. Macpherson.
874. Was he here at the moment we came ? Not at the moment.
375. Were you by yourselves at that time ? Yes. ,
876. By the Chairman : At what time were you and the other men working P
unlocked ? About half-past six I might be , f e
377. Did you come direct to this workshop ? We had our breakfast partly nis b
came —some hominy,
378. Did you come after breakfast here . ies.
379. Have you been working here ever since ? Yes. _
380. Has Mr. Macpherson been in the workshop m the morning ? les.
381. Several times ? Yes. ? Yes
382. Have you been working here ever since you turned out after getting your •


Martin McMahon examined :
IS’ ■' H rS”S We you been here ? Four months.
384, Under what sentence ? Six months
|||- ? t SOme tools !n a basket.
SB6. Tha had been stolen ? I did not know that they had been stolen.
387. That was proved m Court ? Yes.
388. Are you a carpenter ? Yes.
389. Have you worked in the Colony as a carpenter ? Yes.
Ill' w 7 I s ymb , e 7 j u the Colmy ?S « ” seven years.
391. Where have you worked ? At different buildings in Sydney.
392. Have you a ways worked in Sydney ? All but three months.
393. Are you well known m the trade ? Yes.
394. Do you know this gentleman {referring ‘to Mr. Sutherland) ? Yes.
on«' 5? JOU kn ° W r ' Sutherland as a builder in Sydney ? Yes.
396. were you ever m this position before? No.
Ill' Wl! fu IIC “ for ', r,|ir ' 11 yo " ca “ e bore was yeur first offence ? The first in my life.
Sfwlw ! rT T em P oyed , at d “™g *he four months you have been lire ? For
the last few days I have been at work on these doors.
39,). How wei c you employed when yon first came, and, as far as your memory serves you,
how have you been employed since ? I was at work at the fence outside, putting it up, that
was my first job, then I made a gate for the fence; I then made a door for the yard Lide
I cannot exactly recollect what other work I had; I have had several small jobs
400. Surely you can recollect what you have done from then till now—it is not a very long-
time ? 1 was making pick handles part of my time J °
HshmentT generall -? *P on Joiners’ work for the new buildings in the estab-
-402. Are these doors for the new building ? Yes.
been employed?'' kuilding bas been the work u P on whicb y° u bave generally
404. Have you made any fancy articles during the time you have been here—writing-desks
or anything of that kind ? No. b
405. Is there any reason for three men being in this shop separate from the others ? I am
not aware.
406. You are not inferior or superior workmen ? Not that lam aware.
407. Eg Mr. Windeyer .* Have you always worked in this shop? I worked in the other
until some more men came, and then I was shifted into this.
Vas that nt your own wish? No. I was exempted for a few days,
and when I went back to work I found, during my absence, another man had been put to my
bench, and I was put in here.
409. Why were you exempted ? I was not well.
410. Is there any overseer over this and the next shop? Mr. Macpherson.
411. Does he instruct the men how to perform their work ? Yes.
412. Bythe Chairman .• Have you ever known any other overseers since you have been
here ? No.
413* Mr. Macpherson has had charge of this department ever since you have been here?
414. By Mr. Hart .* Are any lads instructed by the overseer ? Yes.
415. By Mr. Windeyer .* Who tried you ? I was tried by the Sydney Bench.
[The Committee next visited the blacksmith’s shop, a building about 20 feet
by 15, with & sloping roof varying in height from 7to 10 feet. Six men and an
overseer were in this shop at two forges.]
Mr. Shepherd Howarth examined:—
416. By the Chairman .* Are you an overseer ? Yes.
417. How long have you been so ? Since January, 1859.
418. Are there any other workshops of which you have charge besides this ? Yes, three
altogether.
419. How many men have you at work ? Eight.
420. Are they all at work now ? Yes.
[Of prisoners working in the blacksmith’s shop,—]
Francis Trindall examined: —
421. By the Chairman ; How long have you been here ? Between Hen and eleven months, ]
422. Under what sentence ? Under sentence of two years.
423. For what offence did you come here ? For uttering bad money.
424. What trade are you ? A blacksmith.
425. Were you apprenticed to that business ? I worked at that trade with my father at
"W est Maitland.
426. Are you a native of the Colony ? Yes, of Maitland.
427. Were you ever in this position before being convicted of this offence? No.
428. You were never before convicted? No.
429. How long have you to serve ? A little better than thirteen months.
430. What judge tried you ? Judge Dickinson.
431,
, Mr. S.
Howarth.
F. Trindall,


, t. _i Jnrine the time you have been in Darlinghurst ?
481. How have you been employed during urn j
Working at my trade.
' 482. All the time you have been here . cs ' making now ? lam making these
433. What have you generally made—what are you ma 6
I -not toll you.
UtLy 0? theftoSlt hanX”Ve ay you making now? I made, I think, two
Have forders how "many “mke-lhly are not ordered one at a time? No ;
with them if you were not told to stop ? Yes.
IS! ' I do not know; if I am told I will
™2 e | V Mr. Winder: When did you begin making these bucket handles? Yesterday.
% t. C S;:;.- T When ;tt;l y Th“ fore you told to do? Make bucket
S tic Chairman : How many were you told to make ? I eould not say now whether
I was told to make any particular number.
446. You do not know what they are to be used for. idono .
447 You do not know whether they are to be used in the ga° * ?
448, What was the last thing you made prevents to the bucket handles? That 1 could
449* Why it was only yesterday you commenced making these? Yes.
450 Surely you can recollect what you made yesterday ? No, I could no .
| 5 l What did you make the day before that? I eould perhaps in the course of a few hours
SS"mat did you make the day before that ? That I could not tell you unless I was left
ST T P-30UW1.1 make more
bave mlde in besides bucket handles ?
fcould nofsay afonee I ifave beef working at. If I had a little, time to consider I
dare say I could mind the most. There are so many things, sharpening tools, and such
485. g % S Mr^Mate: How long does it take to make one of these ? About an hour, or an
4b” What doyou do at night when you have done your work, do you leave the shop in this
state? As it is. , , . ,
457. Are you not searched? No, we are not searched in the evening.
458. By Mr. Hart: How often do you change your clothes here ? About once a week.
459. When did you put that shirt on ? Last Saturday.
460. And your trousers ? And my trousers.
461 And vou have not had any change since ? No. _ ~
462. How long have you been wearing that handkerchief round your neck . Almost ever
since I have been in gaol.
468. That is, between ten and eleven months ? xes. _
464. Did you wash yourself to-day ? Yes, in the morning.
465. How ? I washed myself in the tub.
466. Do you ever wash in a bath ? No, Ido not.
467. You never wash thoroughly in a bath ? No. _ .. . ,
468. Is that the case with the rest of the prisoners in this workshop ? I believe it is, we
do not know where to do it. j. ,
469. Is there no place for that purpose here ? I have never seen any place.
470. Is your skin in a dirty state now ? It is not in the cleanest state, still I wash my
Would you wish to have a bath ? Yes ; as this shop is a dirty place to woik in.
472. When was your hair cut last ? I could not say what day it was 5 it was on the last
day that we had hair-cutting here.
473. How long since was that ? It might be a month or better.
474. More than a month ? It might be, I would not be certain.
Darlinghurst
Gaol.
8 Feb., 1861.
F, Trindall.
James Smith (a man of colour) examined :
475. By the Chairman : How long have you been here ? A month.
476. For what time were you sentenced ? A month.
477. What was your offence ? Taking a pair of boots.
478. You were convicted of theft ? Yes. T ,
479. Have you been working here as assistant to the blacksmiths ? No ; i was brougnt
here this morning.
480. You never worked here before ? No.
James
James Smith,


J ames Cotton examined :
481. By the Chairman : Are you a blacksmith by trade ? No, a nailmaker ; but I can do :
other work.
482. How long have you been here ? Eleven weeks.
483. What was your sentence ? Three months.
484. For what offence ? Larceny.
Darlmghurst
8 Feb., 1861,
Cotton.
485. Were you sent here by the Sydney Police Bench ? Yes.
486. How long have you been in the Colony ? Ever since L 833.
487. Have you worked in Sydney ? Yes ; till my trade got that bad by so many nails
coming from home, that I could get no work.
488. What have you been doing in gaol ? Working as a blacksmith.
489. What have you been doing ? Sharpening chisels and picks, and anything the overseer
of the shop told me to do.
490. Have you ever made things of this kind (bucket handles ) ? No; in fact, I could not
work very much when I came here, but by the instructions of the overseer, I did as well as
I could.
491. At what time did you come here this morning ? Directly the bell rang, the first thing;
then we went to breakfast at eight, stopped half an hour, went to work again; we go to
dinner at twelve, stop an hour, come back again, and knock off at four.
492. Who is your overseer ? Mr. Howard.
493. Has he been overseer all the time you have been here ? Yes.
494. By Mr. Hart: When did you last change your clothes ? Last Saturday.
495. Is that the day on which the prisoners usually change their clothes ? Yes.
496. Have you washed yourself all over since you have been here ? Yes, I washed myself
up by the well in the tub. There is a great trough there, and if a man likes he can wash
himself there.
497. How often have you done that ? Oftentimes since I have been here.
498. Are the men searched when they leave here after work. Sometimes, I think ; at least
I have been searched once or twice, I think.
499. Is that all ? Yes.
500. Is it a rule to search the prisoners ? Yes, I believe it is,
501. Are you searched every day ? The overseer, when we go out, keeps a strict eye on us,
so that we cannot take anything out. When we get there, sometimes we are searched.
James Daly examined :
502. By the Chairman : How long have you been in this prison ? Nearly four months. <
503. What is the term of your sentence? Three years, with hard labour.
504. For what offence ? A market robbery.
505. Breaking into a stall? Yes.
506. Were any other persons sentenced with you? Yes, one to Parramatta, and the other
to Cockatoo.
507. What is the name of the man who was sent to Cockatoo ? John Owen.
508. Who tried you ? Judge Holroyd.
509. What have you been employed at during the time you have been here ? I have been
assisting at blacksmith’s work.
510. Did you take to it of your own choice ? I was put to it.
511. You were not at this trade before you came to prison ? No, I was never at any work.
512. What occupation were you before you came here ? A jockey.
513. Are you a native of the Colony ? Yes.
514. What is your age ? I was sixteen last anniversary day. _
515. By Mr. Windeyer: Can you read and write ? No; I never had the opportunity, i
lost my friends when I was very young.
516. Have you any opportunity of learning to read and write in the gaol. -No, not now.
517. Was there at one time ? Yes, when Mr. Callaghan was here.
518. What was he ? The schoolmaster.
519. There is no schoolmaster now ? No.
520. By Mr. Hart: Was he a prisoner ? No. . t T n a
521. By Mr. Windeyer: What clothes did you get when you came into the gaol. i had
my trousers when I came from Cockatoo, a jacket, and shirt. I wore t em or wo mon s,
and then I got another shirt the other day. m i .
522. By the Chairman : Were the articles you were charged with stealing out of the market
jewellery ? No.
523. What were they ? £l3, a pair of boots, and a basket.
524. By Mr. Windeyer : When did you last change your clothes ? On Saturday last.
525. By the Chairman : Have you ever washed all over your body since you have been in
the gaol ? Several times; I generally wash myself in the yar .
526. From head to foot ? Yes. , ... , . o
527. By Mr. Hart : Do other men wash in the same water, or is the water emptied . Some
of the men do not wash, they do not like stripping in tie yar ■ „ T anmo
528. When you wash, do other prisoners wash in the same tub after you . In the same
tub, but not with the same water,
529. By Mr. Windeyer : Are any combs allowed ? JNo.
580. Bu Mr Hart • What religion are you ? A Catholic.
531. How often do you receive religious instruction? No further than I go every Sunday
t 0 532
James Daly.


582. Does the clergyman visit the gaol every week ? I never see him.
533. What does he do on Sunday ? Just a mass in the morning, and sometimes in the
6V6HXDg.
534. Has he spoken to you individually at all ? When first I was committed Father
Sheehy spoke to me.
535. Do you know your catechism ? I know some of it.
536. Are there any other Catholic convicts ? Yes; lam about the smallest in the place.
587. Are the Catholics taught their catechism by any one? No, except by one of the
men in the yard. Some of the men study and learn it.
538. By Mr. Lucas : You say you change your clothes every Saturday? Yes._
539. How can you change if you have only one shirt ? Some of the men going out may
give you a shirt, or you may get a man to lend you one.
540. If you have only one you do not change your shirt at all? No, you cannot unless you
get some person to lend you one.
541. By the Chairman .• Where are you locked up ? In No. 19 cell, hard labour wing.
542. Is it a single cell ? No.
543. How many are there in the cell ? Four besides me.
544. Do you know their names ? One is Arabian, who came by the mail-boat; another is
George Stephens. Ido not know the others’ names.
545. Are they young or old ? Older than me —one is a middle-aged man.
546. By Mr. Hart .• Before you came here used you to attend church ? Yes, I used to go
of a night.
547. By the Chairman .* How many boys of your age are here ? Only one in our yard.
[The Committee next visited a small blacksmith’s shop adjoining, in which
three men were employed.]
John Carroll examined:—
, 548, By the Chairman : Are you a blacksmith by trade ? No, a tin and copper smith.
549. Did you ever work at smiths’ work before you came here ? Yes, I had a little insight
into it,
550. When did you come here ? On the Ist April I was tried.
551. What was your sentence ? Two years, with hard labour.
552. What was the charge ? Uttering a forged cheque.
553. By whom were you tried. By Judge Dickinson.
554. Where ? At the Court House.
555. During the time you have been here how have you been employed ? In working at
any trade, sometimes as a tinsmith, at other times working for the gaol as a blacksmith.
556. Can you state to us with any degree of (order the course of work upon which you have
been engaged from the time you came here ? You get such a variety of work that it would
puzzle you.
557. What was the first work you did ? I was working at my own business as a tinsmith.
558. What did you make ? Several things for the gaol, pots, pannicans, tin dishes, kettles.
559. How long did you continue to be employed in that manner? Three months.
560. Did you do any coppersmith’s work ? Yes, I made some copper tea-kettles.
561. The usual copper tea-kettles ? Yes.
562. Did you do any other coppersmith’s work ? No.
563. How many copper tea-kettles did you make ? I made one, and repaired several,
564. Then what work did you do ? Then I made some half-dozen baking dishes, cullenders,
and wash-hand basins.
565. Since you have been working at the forge what kind of work have you generally done ?
General work for the stonemasons in the gaol, sharpening and repairing their tools,
566. Have you ever made any articles complete in themselves, as bedsteads, children’s cots ?
Yes.
567. Any other articles of a portable character ? Yes, I have been assisting to make such
things.
568. Will you state what things in particular you have made ? A cot, I may mention, I
assisted to make.
569. Did you make any other articles for domestic use ? I assisted in making out-door
work.
5/0. What do you mean by out-door work ? Such as Government orders as we were told.
5/1, What articles were they? I assisted in making a branch to hold a lamp for the
Victoria Military Barracks.
572. Has there been much work done for the Military Barracks ? Yes; there has not been
so much done lately as there was six months ago.
573. Are you a native of the Colony ? Yes, a native of Sydney.
574. What is your age ? Twenty-four.
575. Are your parents in Sydney? My mother and sisters are, but, unfortunately, my
father is in a similar place to myself.
5 /6. Were you ever in a similar position to this before you were convicted of this offence ?
No, I was here once before for an assault on my wife, that is all.
577. You are married then ? Yes, and have one child.
578. How long have you been married ? Six years.
579. You married then at the age of 18? Yes.
580. Does your wife ever visit you here ? Yes, every visiting Sunday, every opportunity
when she can she comes to see me.
581.


581. What regulations are you subjected to in the gaol as to cleanliness—are you required to
wash at any particular period ? No, we have to wash our own clothes, and clean our own
cells.
582. If you had not chosen to wash to-day, would you have been allowed to neglect ? I
never saw an instance of a person having been punished for not doing it.
583. You are never directed to wash yourself from head to foot? We are never asked.
584. How often have you a change of linen ? We get half a day a week j on Saturday we
knock off at twelve, and have the remainder of the day for washing.
585. Have you any clothing from the prison ? We are allowed only one shirt.
586. By Mr. Sutherland .* 'What is the class of work generally done for the Military
Barracks? We have made a stand to hold the lamp over the gate —we have also made
staples and bolts for the new building,
587. Is this the kind of shirt usually given ? Yes.
588. Have they all these words upon them ? Yes, “ Darlinghurst Gaol.”
Daiilugburst
Gaol.
8 Feb., 1861.
John Carroll.
Edward Tarlington examined:—
589. By the Chairman .' How long have you been here ? Going on for three months. !
590. What is your sentence ? Two years.
591. On what charge ? Horse stealing.
592. Where were you tried ? At Singleton.
593. By whom ? Judge Owen.
594. Are you a native of the Colony ? Yes.
595. What is your age ? 17 in May.
596. You were about 1G when you were tried ? I was tried in November—l was then
turned of 16.
597. Are your friends living at Singleton ? No j Ido not know where my friends are—the
last time I heard of them they were going to the Snowy Biver.
598. Where were you born ? At the Glebe, Sydney.
599. Did you go to Singleton with your parents ? No, I went up the country stock-keeping.
600. How long is it since you went up the country ? Getting on for two years.
601. Since you have been here how have you been employed ? Striking.
602. Have you been accustomed to this before? Yes, with my father 5 my father is a
blacksmith.
603. Can you read and write ? Yes.
604. You received some education in Sydney ? Yes.
605. What school did you go to ? I went to several schools; the first school I went to was
close to the Scots Church, Mr. Donald Macpherson’s.
606. Can you write pretty well ? Yes. (Y/te ivitness vjrote his name .)
607. How many boys are there in the gaol of your age? Ido not know.
608. Are there others ? Yes, there is one in the other shop.
609. Do you ever have conversation with them ? Tes.
610. Do you know whether they can read and write ? No.
611. Is there any public instruction in the gaol ? Not that lam aware of.
612. What regulations are you subjected to as to cleanliness —are you ever required to wash
yourself? I wash myself before my meals.
613. Suppose you neglected to do so would you be required —are you ever asked? No.
614. It is left to you as a matter of choice either to wash or to go unwashed ? Yes.
615. In point of fact when were you washed last ? This morning.
616. Do you wash every morning ? Yes.
617. That is, your hands and face ? Yes.
618. Do you ever wash your body all over from head to foot ? Yes, in the yard.
619. Do you often change your linen ? Once a week. .
620. Are you supplied with the necessary means 01 keeping your hair clean . 1 had a comb
when I came here, and I afterwards asked Mr. M f Coy for one, and he gave me one.
621. Do you who work in these shops get any extra rations, or any privileges. xea j besides
what we have at our dinner time we are allowed extra bread, and tea and sugar on Saturdays.
[The previous witness, John Carroll, said they had half a pound of bread daily,
a quarter of a pound of tea and a little sugar weekly.]
E. Tarlington,
[J. Carroll.]
John Hall examined: —
622. By the Chairman : Of what place are you a native? Liverpool, in England.
623. How long have you been here ? About a year and eleven months.
624. Under what sentence are you ? Three years.
625. For what offence? Horse stealing.
626. Who tried you ? Judge Dickinson.
627. Where? At Goulburn. „ T i •, i-# . .
628. How have you been employed since you have been here ? I have done different things
since I have been in gaol. When I first came into the gaol I was exempted by the doctor
from hard work. I have been piling stones and taking away the dirt from the yard, and
629. r What'are you doing in here at this moment ? I came here to take the dirt away.
630. You are not assigned to this workshop? iNo.
631. Can you read and write ? Yes, a little.
632. What is your age ? Twenty-two.
John Hall.


633. Have you any books to read daring your leisure time ? Yes.
684. What books have you been reading? Different books, Chambers’ Journal and History.
635. By Mr. Mate : Do you get any books you like on Sunday ? Yes.
636. What do you do on Sunday ? On Sunday there is church or chapel at the usual hours;
that is regular every Sunday, and is about the best point there is in the place.
637. By Mr. Hart: What religion are you ? A Homan Catholic.
638. How often do you see your clergyman ? Once a week, except sometimes he may come
to hear confessions on Saturday, or to visit the sick.
639. Have you had private conversation with him since you have been here ? Yes.
[The Comiftittee having left the blacksmiths’ shops, proceeded to the cooking-
house, where the cook was engaged in serving out dinner to the various messes in
kids.]
The Cook examined: —
640. The Chairman: For how many men is this the allowance ( pointing to one of the
kids ) ? For six men.
641. Of what is it supposed to consist? lbs. of meat when cooked,
642. What do you put into the soup ? Potatoes, carrots, and a few parsnips.
643. Always about the same ? Yes; we want a few more vegetables; there are too many
potatoes.
644. With what is it thickened —with rice ? No, with a little hominy.
645. Can you state what quantity of vegetables in proportion to the meat you have for the
entire mess ? The quantity of meat served out to-day was 256 lbs.; of potatoes, carrots, and
parsnips, 157 lbs. Of this there was used for the messes—put into the copper —140 lbs.
vegetables and 230 lbs. meat.
646. You think the quantity of potatoes, is disproportionate ? Yes.
647. How many men are to be supplied with that boiling of soup ? I have to supply to-day
193 males, 32 females, at hard labour, and 115 male and female confines.
648. By Mr. Hart: Is the diet always the same ? Yes.
Matthias Nolan, stating that he was the delegate appointed by the prisoners, and coming
forward —examined: —
649. By Mr. Sutherland: Is the bread similar to what is here ? Yes.
650. By Mr. Hart: Do you consider to-day’s bread wholesome or not ? Some I do.
651. And some of it do you think unwholesome ? Yes, some of it is very heavy.
652. Who has the duty of seeing whether the bread is wholesome or not ? There is a dele-
gate appointed every day. lam the delegate for to-day.
653. Did you approve of the bread to-day ? Yes, I did; it is better than it has been for
some time past.
654. Are the prisoners satisfied with what the delegate decides ? Sometimes they are, more
times they arc not, for it is very seldom we have good bread. If I had sent it back this
morning it would only have been sent back again.
655. By Mr. Sutherland: Then you do not keep it because it is good ? It is better this
morning than it has been for some time past.
[The Committee having examined the bread, &c., proceeded to the labour
wing, entering the ward of which they passed to the labour yard, where the prisoners
were crowded beneath a narrow shed, as a shelter from the rain, which was falling
heavily.]
John Lynch coming forward and requesting to be heard—examined : —■
656. By the Chairman: When did you come here ? I received a sentence for forgery, and
came here from Cockatoo Island nine months ago to serve a second sentence in this gaol.
657. When did you receive your sentence ? In February, 1858.
658. By whom were you tried ? By Judge Dickinson, in Sydney, at the Criminal Court.
659. You were sentenced to Cockatoo ? Yes, for five years.
660. How long have you been here ? Going on for ten months.
661. How have you been employed ? Gutting stones over there, earning at the rate of ten
shillings a day for the Government.
662. Did I understand you that you wished to make a complaint* to these gentlemen, who
are a Committee of the Legislative Assembly as to the usage you receive here ? Of the
bedding here.
663. You can state what you like ? I have only had one blanket from the time I came in
till now, it has never been changed, and the bedding is wretchedly dirty and filthy.
664. Do I understand you to say that there are vermin in the cells ? Yes; I have had to
clean myself several times, and throw my clothes away.
665. Are there any means of personal washing? TJiere are of washing these blankets
if they were taken out and washed.
066. Are there means of bathing ? There is a bath, but it is not for us, we never get it.
667. You have been here nearly ten months; supposing you had neglected to wash your-
self would you have been compelled to do so ? No.
668. Are there no regulations to compel persons here to wash ? No.
669. Lou must have some knowledge of what is going on herej are there any instances in
which persons have never washed during the time you have been here ? I believe there
are


are some who do not try to look after themselves properly—men can wash if like,
there is water to wash here in the yard.
670. Do you always get good bread ? Not always; sometimes it is very indifferent; and
when we refuse it it comes back again—we may take it or go without.
671. By Mr. Hart : How is the water supplied? From a tank, when there is a scarcity
in the pipes.
672. Is it from the water works ? Yes; I understand the pipes are from the water works
on Lachlan Swamps.
673. Is there anything cise you wi>h to state ? No ; only as to the way we have rations,
our rations are sometimes very inferior.
6/4. Is this your first offence? \es; I was a builder in Sydney for years. I got a
sentence of twelve years from Judge Dickinson ; he mitigated it down to two fives and two
ones. lam now earning at the rate of 10s a day for the Government.
676. By the Chairman: What are you doing? Cutting octagonal shafts for the
Telegraph Office in Sydney. Here is my clothing, one shirt.
676. How long have you had that hat ? It is the only thing I have had since I came here,
and I got that from a man who was going out. Niue months ago I asked the superintendent
for a hat, and I could not get one.
677. What is your cell ? No. 24.
John Galahan, having also expressed a wish to be heard, was examined :
678. Bi/ the Chairman : You wish to say something to the Committee—how long have you
been here ? Twenty months.
679. Under what sentence ? Two years.
680. What judge gave you that sentence ? Judge Stephens.
681 What was the charge against you ? Assault and attempt to commit a rape.
682. You can make what statement you wish ? It is with regard to the rations—we had
very bud bread one day at dinner, we objected to it, and s >me were locked up in consequence
during the dinner hour. I was afterwards sent down to the quarry, and in consequence of
the heat of the weather, drinking a quantity of water, and having no food from breakfast
until the evening, I had a bad attack in my inside.
683. Have you any complaint to make about the state of your cell ? No.
684. Are there vermin in your cell ? No ; unless bugs.
George Williams examined :
685. By the Chairman : How long have you been in the prison ? Six months.
686. Wh it was your offence ? Horse stealing.
687. Who tried you? Mr. Callaghan, at Albury.
688. W hat was your sentence? Three years, with hard labour.
689. What'have you been employed at during the three months you have been here? In
the stone yard, must of my time, assisting in cutting stone.
690. You are in irons now ? Yes.
691. When were yon put in irons ? When I went over to the Uand.
692. Are you one of the men who came from Cockatoo Island? Yes, and I have boon in
the other wing most of my time; I am now in a cell as lousy as a bandicoot, and I have no
means of keeping myself clean ; I am picking them off me every day.
William Collins examined:—
690. By Mr, Hart: What is your age? Eighteen.
694. How long have you been here ? Eleven mouths.
695. What is your offence ? Uttering.
696. Are you in a cell with other people ? Yes.
697. Have yon intercourse with the people who are here for hard labour can you speak
when you like ? Yes.
698. B/ Mr. Windeyer: How often do you change your clothes ? Once or twice a week.
699. By Mr. Morris: How many shirts have you? Some have three or four, others have
only one.
70(3. How many have you? Two or three.
701. How did you get them ? Asked Mr. Harrison for them.
[The Committee re-entered the labour ward.]
Thomas Harvey examined ;
[The prisoner’s throat was frightfully swollen, and he appeared to speak with extreme
difficulty.]
702. By the Chairman : How long have you been here ? Four years next month.
703. \\ hat is your sentence ? Twenty-two years.
704. What were you tried for ? Highway robbery.
705. Who tried you? Mr. Justice Therry, at Bathurst. ,
706. Had you one sentence ? There were two charges.
707. What was the other charge? They were both for highway robbery. My sentences
were fifteen years and seven. Since I have been in trouble here I have been very bad.
708. By Mr. Wilson.- What is the matter with you? My throat is very bad; I can
scarcely swallow anything. _
157—D <(JJ '


709 Wfcafc does the doctor say is the matter with you ? He says he can do nothing for me
(Mr. Wilson examined the prisoners throat.) The rations lam now getting I cannot make
use of; this brown bread I cannot swallow; I have asked the doctor to give me white bread,
and he has refused. , , ~ , T , j
710 Is there any of the other food you object to? Bread is the only food I can eat, and
sinc*e the doctor' stopped my white bread, which was allowed me for a short time, 1 have
scarcely been able to take anything.
711. Has that swelling in your throat become worse t les. _
712. May not the difficulty of swallowing arise rather from the increased swelling than iiom
the nature of the bread ? I think it is the bread. . , , . , ,
713 That brown bread is better for you than white ? I cannot get it down ; white bread
will crumble, but this will not. I was brought from Cockatoo to undergo an operation and
I was willing to bear it; Dr. Nathan, Dr. West, and I think Dr. Greenup, examined me,
and they thought it should not be performed. They said it would kill me, and I have been
here ever since.
[The Committee next visited the solitary cells, in which the insubordinate
prisoners from Cockatoo Island were confined, and remarked upon the ill ventilated
state of the corridor, the window at one end of which was closed with panes of glass.]
William Henry examined :
714. By the Chairman.- When were you tried? In September, 1800.
715. Where? At Bathurst.
716. For what offence ? Stealing.
717. Who tried you? Judge Wise.
718. What was your sentence ? Six years on the public works, with hard labour.
719. When were you sent to Cockatoo Island ? In December.
720. Did you not join in the insubordination which took place there ? _Yes.
721. Will you state what led you to do so? There were regulations existing by which each
prisoner could shorten his sentence more than half. In the first instance he had half his
time reduced by the ticket-of-leave system, and he could shorten it one-third less by the
mark system for extra work and good conduct. That was an inducement to good conduct
and hard labour. When I arrived on the island I found that system done away, and no
remuneration or reward held out for good conduct or hard labour. The full sentence was
carried out indiscriminately, no matter for what crime. Moreover, we were put to labour
with men sentenced under the old regulations, we were put to the labour and to the
same task, so that a casual observer would imagine we were all labouring under the same
system. About eighteen months ago I heard that the prisoners made a similar movement or
insurrection, and that some Members of the Legislative Assembly visited the island, and pro-
mised an amelioration of their condition. I am not aware whether tnose gentlemen paid their
visit officially, but under their promises the men went to their work. Now,finding that nothing
has been done, that no alteration has been made, we have determined to refuse to work till
we have some means of shortening our time, or some reward for good conduct. We are all
aware that in every prison under the British flag, every prisoner has some means of
mitigating his sentence, and we conceive that we are very hardly treated under the present
system, in being deprived of that privilege. We arranged together on the Ist of January
that we would refuse to work; we talked the matter over in our wards, and we carried out
our inteution on the following day.
[The Committee then proceeded to the trial wing, where was confined, —]
George Swan examined:—
,722. By the Chairman: When were, you sentenced? On the 12th September, 1860, on
' a charge of murder. Judge Milford tried me at Maitland, and sentenced me to death.
723. Your sentence was afterwards commuted? Yes, to life imprisonment, the first three
years in irons.
724. You were removed from Maitland to Cockatoo Island ? Yes, I arrived there the latter
part of November.
725. What kind of work were you set to do ? Drawing a hand cart, to assist in the quarries.
726. How long did you continue working? I was unwell wheu I first went there, under
the doctor’s hands. I then went to work to build a wharf for the steamer to come to, on
one side of the island. I was taken into the hospital by Dr. West;
727. What was the matter with you ? Rheumatism.
728. How long did you continue to work before the offence for which you were removed
here ? I was under the doctor’s hands some weeks.
729. You did refuse to work ? Yes, on the 2nd January.
730. Why did you refuse to work ? Because I had been up to the office to ask to be allowed
to write to the Government and was refused. I wanted to know if they would bring Mr.
Fitzgerald, the publican, face to face with me, that I might ask him some questions relative
to the occurrences that happened in his house on the morning of the 18th April.
731. What do you suppose he would prove? He might know the man’s name that was in
his house on that morning flf the murder, and if he knew that man’s name, and the man
could be produced, he could prove that I was at Lochinvar.
732. jßy Mr Wiudeyer .- You believe this man could prove that on the morning when this
man was killed you were at Lochinvar, and could not have been at Stoney Creek ? Yes, at
the time of the trial I wanted Mr. Fitzgerald to be brought forward, as I thought that as
this man was a carrier he might know his name, and he could prove that I was at Lochinvar.
[Four


[Four lads, named Alfred Young, aged 14 years 6 months, Edward Chalk, aged
15, George Tagg, aged 15, and John Mulholland, alias the “Cadger,” aged 9, ■were
brought from cell No. 7 in the same wing.]
Alfred Young examined:—
783. By Mr. Hart: What is your age ? Fourteen years, the 6th last June.
734. What was your offence? I was charged with horse stealing.
785. What was your sentence ? Twelve months.
736. How long have you been here ? Four months all but a week.
737. What part of the gaol are you usually put in ? This part, down in the committed yard.
738. Do you mix with the convicted prisoners ? No, lam kept separate.
739. Can you read and write? Yes.
740. Do you ever read ? Sometimes when we get books.
741. What hooks do you get ? Some out of the library —some novels.
742. Can you recollect the name of any novel you have read here ? I have read one of the
name of Margaret Catchpnle, Harry Mowbray, and Valentine Vox.
743. Who supplies you with these books? Mr. Ainsworth.
744. Is he one of the turnkeys? No, a prisoner.
745. Has be charge of the library ? Yes.
746. Do you ever write ? No, I have not been awriting, that was a privilege I had; I
have not got it now.
747. Have you any opportunity of practising writing if you wish to do so ? Yes, if Mr.
Beverley will let us.
748. What religion are you? A Protestant.
749. How often do you see the clergyman ? Twice a week sometimes.
750. What does he do when he comes ? Preaches.
751. On what days? Wednesdays and Sundays.
752. Does he give you any private instruction ? No.
753. What clergyman have you seen? I never heard his name; he is a one-armed
gentleman.
754. Has any other clergyman who you thought belonged to this gaol visited it ? No.
755. Have you seen the Protestant bishop here ? No, and I would not know him perhaps
if I did see him.
756. Have jou heard that he has been here? No.
757. Have you heard of any other clergyman hut Mr. Agnew being here ? I have heard of
the priest being here.
758. What do you do daring the day time ? W T e do nothing now, we used to write.
759. Would you be desirous of learning a trade ? Yes, lam sentenced to be bound out,
760. To what trade ? I was not told that.
761. Have you any parents? I have got a mother.
762. Where is she? In Sydney.
763. What is she ? Ido not know; I have nob seen her for a good while before.
764. How long was it before you came here that you saw your mother ? Ihree years.
765. Have you done any work in the gaol? No; Mr. Holroyd ordered that I was to be
kept separate from any other prisoners.
766. Are you kept separate? Yes; there are three other boys in the cell with me.
767. How often have any of the boys with you been sentenced before? The smallest one
has been twice during my time,
768. The other, Chalk? I have never seen him before.
769. Has Tagg ever been here before ? Once before.
770. What do you talk about when you are in the cells together? About various uttle
things.
771. About the novels you have been reading? Yes.
772. What did you think of Margaret Catchpole? I liked it very much
773. Have you been telling your companions what a nice book it was? Sometimes.
774. What did you during the three years in which you did not see your mother . 1 hare
been up the country with this man.
775. What man ? The man I took the horse from.
776. What were you encaged in ? He learned me to farm. ,
777. Have you had any religious hooks supplied to you to read? Yes, I had a Bible.
778 How often have you had the Bible ? I had it till the Cockatoo men eame here, amt
then I lost it. - .
779. What part of the Bible used you to read ? Almost any part ot it.
780. Has any particular part struck you ? Yes, about Joseph and his brethren,
781. Can you tell me iu a few words Joseph’s history-what occurred to Joseph ? He w*.
sold by his brethren, and bought by the Egyptians. - . t ■s
782. What did he become after? He got m prison, and then afterwards he interpreted
Pharoah’s dream; and then he became the governor of the country.
783. What inference do you draw from that? I thought a good deal of it.
784. Suppose you were to get out now what would you think of do.ng? I would go and
stop at home, stop with my mother, or go up the country again.
785. Would you know where to find your mother ( les.
786. Is she in service? She is living either with my brother or sister, I do not know
which.
Edward
Darlingburst
<Saol.
8, Pek, IS«1.
Alfred Young.


Edward Chalk examined :
787. By Mr. Hart: What is your age? Fifteen.
788. What were you sent here for? I was sent on suspicion of stealing.
789. What is your sentence? Three months.
790. Have you been here before? Once.
791. What for? On suspicion of taking an oil-skin coat.
792. Are your parents liv.ng? My stepfather and my mother are living in Sydney.
798. Are you a native of the Colony? I am.
794, Have you been engaged in any business? T was at shoemaking fur a month, and
I have been shepherding up the country, in New England.
George Tagg examined :
. 795. B>/ Mr. Hart: How old are you? Fifteen.
790. What is your sentence? Three months.
797. What were you sent here for ? On suspicion of stealing a watch.
798. Have you been engaged in any business ? I have been at sea for three years. I had
been on shore about six weeks when 1 was sent here.
799. Ho you get any books to read ? Yes.
800. When did you get the last ? Last Saturday.
801. What is the name of it? “ Woman’s Love,”
802. Have you that book ? No, I lent it to the man in the next cell.
John Mulholland, alias “The Cadger,” examined:—
, 808. By the Chairman : What is your age? Going on for ten.
804. What were you sent here for? A till.
805. For robbing a till ? Yes.
806. How many times have you been here before ? Twice; I was in for a till and for
hair oil.
807. Have you a father or mother ? Yes.
808. When you come out again will you keep away from these tills ? I don’t know.
[Of other prisoners in the trial wing,—]
James Wade examined :
, 809. By the Chairman: Under what sentence are you labouring ? Seven years.
810. For what ? Picking a lady’s pocket of 2s. 4|d.
811. Were you sentenced to Cockatoo Island? Yes, on the 4th June last. I was tried
before a Magistrate, and wished to have the case summarily dealt with; but having a
lawyer I left the matter in his hands, and he had it brought before a higher Court.
812. By whom were you tried ? By Mr. Justice and he gave me seven years. If
the case had been dealt with summarily I should not have had more than three or six
months. Certainly I had been in gaol i nee before.
813. What were you in gaol for before? A similar thing.
814. What sentence did you get then ? One month.
815. That was given you by a Magistrate ? Yes.
816. You were never tried before a Court until this occasion ? No. Another thing was
that a policeman swore that he knew me to be sent to Hobart Town, which I was never
nearer than at present. I have been in the Colony three years; I landed at Adelaide, and
could have proved that I was a hard-working man.
817. By Mr. Hart: Have you sent any petition to Government? No.
818. By Mr Wilson: Have you asked leave to send any petition to Government? No; if
I had it would have been all the same; for a good many asked and were not allowed, and I
did not think it was of any use asking. That was the reason of my falling out, I thought I
was very unjustly dea’t with. What is the good of my being there for seven years working
my life out? I might as well be here as go there for seven years, and have no hope of
anything.
John English examined :
, 819. By the Chairman: What country are you a native of? Ireland.
820. You were in the army ? Yes.
821. When did you enlist ? In January, 1851. I came out in the 11th regiment, and
deserted from it when it was going home. [ was afterwards taken and handed over to the
12th regiment. I was tried by a district court martial, and got three mouths’ imprisonment.
While I was doing the three months —I had done two out of the three—l complained to
Captain Miller of the cell being damp, and he called me a damned impertinent puppy, and
said I should not go on with my tricks in that regiment. I told him I was no puppy: he
ordered me to silence. I then raised my hand and struck him in the face, but 1 never
marked
822. You were tried by court martial ? Yes, and was sentenced to transportation for the
term of my natural life.
823. You were sent to Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
824. How long were you on the island before this insubordination took place ? Seventeen
months.
825. You refused to work ? Yes.
826.


807 />,. TT nrt . r f , lo n b - 80 that we mi s hfc shorten our time.
the prisoner s cell)? Yes* or y ou to pick {pointing to some pieces of old rope in
Sq n hy , 1S 11 I‘ 0t picke ‘[ ? Because lam bad in my inside.
829. How long have you been ,1, ? Since yesterday.
830. lias the doctor been to see you ? Yes.
Thomas Brown, alias Laniger, examined:
831 Bq the Chairman : What is your sentence ? Five years.
802. lor what offence ? Stealing from a dwelling
833. Who tried you? The Chief Justice °*
yoa on Cockato ° took , Ab «„ t
835. What is the statement you wish to make? Relative to the new Act. In the first
place, when men are sentenced and receive a sentence, as they did in former years when
transpoilation was in vogue ; and nt the time that Act was rencaled in June IX is ,i,„
was some provision made by the Uxeeutivo G vernment and the Judges that prisoner's’shou d
receive a commutation of sentence at the Bar; so that the sentences now and former v
should be proportionable to each o her, which I believe has never take,, D h ce f ,12
have made inquiries from many prisoners. J p ; to ' 1 rn y sel *
836 Will you slate simply the ground of complaint which has led the men to refuse to
work . This is one portion of it: men sent there are without hope; and, in the second
place, working under prisoners like themselves, placed in authority as sub-overseers—men
woo arc generally s lected from the worst class of men. The worst men are the best to suit
for Government purposes. Another ground of objection is the want of olassihcaiion A
he men arc I,add ed together w.tnout regard to their convictions, or their general conduct
l irst, second, and third sentenced men are ail huddled together, youth with the old veteran
in crime, and so forth The next is the very filthy slate of the wards they sleeo in The
“°™‘ tor,es are crowdcd Wlth »«“>». b«S»J J-ou could fill a harrow after the ward has been
837. Are there any other vermin besides bugs ? Yes, plenty.
838. Common lice ? Not many-fleas and bugs. The place is sieved twice a year, but the
blankets are never washed. J ’
83J Old you ever notice any obscenity in these dormitories ? Except in the conversation,
nothing unnatural ; but there might have been for aught I know to the contrary. Then also
they complain of the _ way in which the gratuity money is divided among the men, some
receiving a treble portion to others, without deserving it.
[The oakum in this cell was not picked : in reply to a question from Mr. Hart
the pnsoner said it was because he was suffering from diarrhoea.]]
Louis Sims (a man of colour), examined :
810. By the Chairman: Were you sentenced to Cockatoo ? Yes.
841. On what charge ? A charge of horse stealing.
842 By whom were you sentenced ? Judge Callaghan.
843. When ? The 19th October, 1859.
844 Up to what time did you work at Cockatoo ? The 2nd January.
845. Were you then removed with the insubordinate prisoners ? Yes. I am at a loss to
understand what lam here for. In the first instance I got fourteen days, but I never fell
out I got it, so they said, for saying I would fall oat and agitating the men.
846. Did you refuse to ? No.
847. Did you identify yourself with those who did ? I never did.
848. Are you willing to go back to work ? lam quite willing ; I never refused to do so. I
expected to go back when I had completed these fourteen days, and was completely astonished
when I was told I was to remain here
849. By Mr. Wilson : Of what country are you a native ? lam a native of New York.
850. Can you read and write ? Yes.
[The Committee next inspected the wall in rear of the blacksmiths’ sheds, and
then proceeded to the lumber-room, formerly devoted to the purpose of a surgery,
in which were a chest of drawers, a cabinet with twenty drawers and compartments,
the top .of a wardrobe, and two well-buckets. Having also visited the room
occupied by the shoemakers and tailors—a large airy room above the lumber-room—
they crossed the yard to the hospital, where, at his own desire, one of the patients—]
Charles Rogers, was examined :
By the Chairman: How long have you been in the Colony? Nine years. lam a
house painter by trade, and am known to Mr. Lucas, the Member of Assembly, for whom I
have completed several contracts in my own trade.
852. Bq Mr. Lucas : Where ? At Camperdown. I was partner of . In the
year 1860 I was tried at the Criminal Quarter Sessions, before Mr. Holroyd, for
obtaining money under false pretenc-s, the amount being five shillings. At the time of
the trial I made application to Justice Holroyd to get my trial postponed ; he asked me upon
what grounds; I told him that it was such a short time from my committal to the time of
trial
0. Rogers,


trial that the authorUies of
Mr. Holroyd overruled that, and placed me oumy - t, : 1 w Th / co „ tor in this case,
Iwldtyoawouldcall Mr. Hamsoo as “ Erwin , and
or the man that was the chief c. ' ,® k them to complete a certain portion of
besides him tvas Joseph N.M. ; I : a took /ace between me and the
house-painting and when ‘‘ ' . ~[ refused to pay me, and gave me m charge for
under J/e prete/s. This 6s. he had lent me during the time 1 was work.ng
the Chairman : Supposing the trial had been postponed ? I would have produced
witnesses who would have established my [, , ,|. e mo ney ? Yes, there were
*«• $ *'■ ** was lent
cWan/what was your sentence? Your years, and I was never t„ed
before in a Criminal Court.
856. Have yon a family ? No. Government ? I applied when I was on Cockatoo
th/haracter "sonlrtrilg incarceration * good
opportunity.
860. you applied to the Governor of the
came to me when I visited Cockatoo
862 n< How often does the Governor of the Gaol visit here ? Once a day.
QdO T. 7 /-ffnrv ( laoc I\T r AfftlPW C01D.6 hcTG ? OdCG 10 tWO OV tIITGG Q<iyS.
-. 864’ By Mr. Hart (to Patrick Murray) : How often are your bed-clothes change —your
sheets? Once a week,
[The Committee next visited the women’s ward, where a number of the
prisoners were engaged at needlework.]
Mrs. Mary Cullen, head female turnkey, examined
865. By the Chairman.- Is this hard labour/™/*™? to the needlework)? Yes.
8(16 What are these women making ? Articles of clothing.
86V What other kind of labour is there? Cleaning the wings, attending the hospital, and
prisoners’ clothing clean. There are now 26 under sentence for hard labour;
there otg SI in tlic prison to-doy* # n* i
868. By Mr. Hart) Who are the caps being made for? The prisoners—they are all ooliged
,86&. C HowTs it that some of the girls have not, their caps on ? They have washed them, and
this being a wet day they are obliged to dry them on the ranges.
Darlinghurst
Gaol.
S Feb., 1861.
O. Rogers.
P. Murray.
Mrs. M.
Cullen.
[Of prisoners in tlie female ward ]
Mary Bellamy examined :
870. By the Chairman ,* What is your sentence ? Sis months.
871. What was your offence? I was charged with theft.
872. Are you a married woman ? Yes. ~ ~
[The turnkey stated that the prisoner had had three children at a birth.J
873. You have a family ? Yes, I have two^alivo.
874. Two alive of these three children ? Not of them. ~ . ,
875. Are the dormitories—the places where you sleep here—sufficiently clean . Quite clean.
87G. Are there no vermin ? No vermin.
877. Are the hed-clothes clean ? Yes.
878. Are you quite satisfied with the general usage of the gaol. les.
879. Have you sufficient body clothes ? Yes.
880. What are you making? The collar of a shirt.
881. Who is that for? I do not know; we never make any inquiry.
Christina Watson examined :
882. How old are you? Seventy.
883. What is the charge against you? Stealing.
881, What is the sentence ? Six months, with hard labour.
885. Who sentenced you? I do not know.
880. Where were you tried ? At the Police Court.
887. Were you sent here by the Magistrates? Yes; lam a very industrious woman.
888. Have you ever been here before? Yes.
889. How often? Once or twice, I believe,
890. Not more? I do not know. g
M. Bellamy.
[Turnkey.]
C. Watson.


Sarah Neal examined :
891. What is your age? Sixteen.
892. What are you here for? I am committed for trial.
t ? hat are the other two here for? disorderly conduct; kicking up a row.
Ar bed Wltl Vemin in tLis Cell? YeS ’ there are bu^s.
w r malks , W< ; See on the ceilin g the marks of bugs ? Yes.
days; they have'^o^ten^take^Tu^ 611 t 0 ** ? 1 haVe been here three
° S^ m Zn^ n M ‘ lntJ,rey ' Are * he “ Fla “ S Clean “ d fMe from verm! " ?
Sarah Johnson examined ;
898. How long have you been here? Only one day
899. What was your sentence ? Two months the Magistrates gave me.
900. For what ? A drop of drink.
901. Was that all ? That was all.
902. Were you ever here before for that offence? Yes
903 How many times have you been hero before ? Indeed I do not know; for a drop
of drink two or three times. ; 1
Mary Riley examined
904. How long have you been here? Three weeks, and I have to stop another.
JOo. What were you sent here for? A drop of drink.
906. Are you married ? Yes.
nnl* S aVe y ° U a fami ty 1 ha d three boys; they are all dead.
908. Have you ever been here before for the same thing? Yes.
909. Do you not think it terrible for a young woman like you to be taken from her
home for indulgence in this ? Sometimes the constables take mo when lam no more
drunk than lam now. I merely stepped out of the rain in York-street, and the constable
said 1 was drunk and took me up.
910. By Mr. Hart: Where do you wash ? In that tub,
911. How many towels have you? Two for the three of 'ls; sometimes we get two, some-
times three, sometimes four.
Mary Ann Richards examined :
912. By Mr. Hart : What have you in your hand ? The share of meat I got for my dinner
1 heard you gentlemen were coming and thought proper to keep it to skew you.
9|o. Is that all your allowance of meat ? Yes, from day till to-morrow at twelve o’clock.
h[ ow rnan y meals a day have you? We have hominy in the morning and evening.
Jlo. How much bread have you ? We have a loaf cut up into three for three womenT
Jlv. By the Chairman : Is that your allowance of bread, and your allowance of meat for
the day ? Yes.
917. Is the bread good? It is sometimes—sometimes it is not.
918. You are a married woman, are you not ? Yes.
919. You have been accustomed to keep house ? Yes.
920. Have you ever made your own bread ? Yes, when I was up the country.
921. You know good bread then ? Yes.
922. Have you ever had bread that you believed was made of bad flour? Yes.
923. Bread that you could double up like putty ? Yes; I have tried it so, and have often
done that with it in my hand.
924. Where do you take meals ? Sometimes in the yard ; when it rains we eat our meals
in the cells.
925. You are supplied with plates, knives, and forks ? No, with spoons.
926. Are the cells cleaned ? Thoroughly cleaned, everything is kept thoroughly clean—
yesterday was a general cleaning.
927. Was there a general cleaning of the colls yesterday? Yes.
928. You knew we were coming here to-day ? 1 did not till you made your appearance.
929. When did you see us make our appearance ? Just as you came into the building.
930. You say you kept this from dinner time ? I kept it because I did not want it,
[The turnkey here remarked that the prisoners kept their meat to eat with [ r J
their tea.
There is no tea nor sugar allowed.]
[Turnkey.]
Hannah Nunn examined :
931. By the Chairman : What is your sentence? Three months.
932. For what offence ? I was charged with drunkenness, and have been in here a week
last Tuesday; I am subject to epileptic fits, and had two fits on the day I was taken up.
At about half-past eleven o’clock I tvas sitting at my door waiting for my husband, and that
was the last I recollect before I was taken by the constable; Ido not feel the fits coming
on. The last fit I had was a day or two ago.
933. Where were you sentenced ? At the Sydney Police Office.
934. Do you know the name of the constable who took you ? Ido not, and I should not
know the man again.
93 .


Darlinghurst
Gaol.
■8 Feb., 1861.
H. Nunn.
Mary Ann
Mulhern.
[Turnkey.]
035 What did he sav ? He said he took me from my door about half-past eleven o’clock.
936 1 Y Wilde ei-: Your husband keeps a shop in Elizabeth-street? Yes; there »
another woman lives in the same house with him, and 1 wanted him to put her away, because
it is hard to have another woman put over me. I had taken tlm pledge l ist year tor twelve
months and I had taken no drink from before Christmas to the time 1 was taken up._
937. By Mr. Hart: Is the bread pretty good ? Yes, it is pretty good, but there is very-
little of it. I have no complaint about that.
938. Have you ever been here before ? Yes, I have, and I deserved it then.
pThe Committee proceeded to a cell in which were three females, the eldest
between 30 and 40, the second about 20, and the third, Mary Ann Rutter, who stated
that she was eleven years of age, her parents live at Morpeth ; was sentenced for six
months’ imprisonment for robbing a till ; was going out on the following day, and
believed she was to be sent home.]
Mary Ann Mulhern examined :
939. By Mr. Morris : What is your sentence ? Two months.
940. For what offence ? Robbery.
941. Were you ever here before ? No; lam going out to-morrow; my master is coming
to meet me.
942. Who is your master ? Dr. M‘Kny, of Phillip-street. _ T
943. By Mr. Hart: Has this little girl been here the whole time you have been here . No,
she was removed from another cell.
944. Is she a well behaved girl ? Yes, very well.
945. By Mr. Sutherland: How long have you been in the Colony ? Not long, 1 came here
Morris: Did you come with your father and mother ? They are not alive.
947. What pait of Scotland do you come from ? Inverness.
948. Were you tried at the Police Court ? Yes. . . 9 T , , .
949. Were you living at Dr. M'Kay’s at the time you were convicted ? I had left three
days when 1 was put in here. I left there against their will.
[The whole of the cells in the upper portion of the women’s wards were
swarming with bugs; about the ceilings, the walls, the hinges of the doors, they
were in masses of an inch or more in diameter. _
The Committee having left the women’s ward, proceeded to inspect No. -4
cell, occupied by Lynch; this with the adjoining cells were undergoing the
process of whitewashing, and a large number of blankets were piled up in the centre
of the cell. _ . . ,
In reply to a question from a Member of the Committee
attendance said he could not point out Lynch s blanket, as it had no distinguishing
mark, but that the men knew their own from folding them up and putting them in a
particular place.]
H, Beverley,
Esq.
IIFeCIB6L
THURSDAY, 14 FEBRUARY, 1861.
lament
Mr. HART, Mr. PARKES,
Mr. LUCAS, Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. MATE. Mr. WALSH,
Mr. MORRIS, Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WINDEYER.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Henry Beverley, Esq., called in and examined:—
950. By the Chairman : You bold an office under Government in this Colony ? Yes,
951. Will you be good enough to state the proper designation of that office ? Principal
gaoler of Darlinghurst Gaol.
952. How long have you held that office ? Within two months of seven years.
953. Who was your immediate predecessor? Captain Webster.
954. I think he died? He died quite suddenly.
955. Was he the successor to Mr. Keck ? No, to Captain M'Lerie; he was there about
eleven months.
956. Captain Webster was there between Captain M'Lerie and yourself? Yes, I think
about four years.
957. What is the staff of officers, both male and female, at the present time—wull you be
good enough to state the name and grade of office of each? With the exception of Mr.
Harrison, the chaplains, the surgeon, the dispenser, the clerk, and messenger, they are all
of the same grade —{Vide Appendix A, subsequently furnished ) —they are called warders;
formerly they were called turnkeys. Mr. Harrison is the principal turnkey.


958. How long has Mr. Harrison been there ? He took charge on the same day as Captain
M'Lerie —about twelve years ago.
959. Was he not a turnkey under Mr. Keck ? No.
960. He first entered the service in that establishment when Mr. M'Lerie did ? Yes, on
the same day.
961. What are the other officers under Mr. Harrison ? They are all warders.
962. All of the same rank, receiving the same pay, and having to perform the same duties ?
Yes, with the exception of the gatekeeper.
963. How many are there ? Fifteen.
964. I suppose these warders are distributed over different periods of the twenty-four hours,
—that some are night and some are day warders ? Yes.
965. Do they take these services turn and turn about, —first one set of men taking the
night service and then another ? Yes ; there is a circular form, and on this is the name of
each warder, and each warder as his name comes round has to perform the duty of the man
whose name precedes his; so that we can always tell the name of a warder on duty upon a
particular date, in case of anything happening.
966. You say there is a gatekeeper ? Yes. He receives pay as a turnkey.
967. Is there only one ? Yes.
968. Then there are sixteen, exclusive of yourself? Yes, and the surgeon, the dispenser,
three chaplains, and a clerk.
969. Are there not some overseers ? There are four overseers.
970. What are the three chaplains? The Rev. Mr. Forde is the Roman Catholic chaplain
now, we have had the Rev. Mr. Sheehy; the Rev. Mr. Agnew is the Protestant, and the
Rev. Robert Stewart the Presbyterian minister.
971. What are the names of the overseers? Mr. Macpherson, over the carpenters; Mr.
Howarth, over the blacksmiths; Mr. Peters, over the stonemasons; Mr. Bryers, overseer at
the quarry; and Mr. Ryan over the tailoring department, who ranks as a turnkey.
972. How are they remunerated ? They get ten shillings a day.
973. Have they any extras of any description ? Nothing whatever.
974. They have no interest in the work of the prisoners over and above their salaries ? Not
the slightest,
975. What are their hours of attendance? From six in the morning till about half-past
four ; the warders from eight to six.
976. Can you state with any kind of precision when these gentlemen respectively took
charge ? Twelve months on the Ist of last month.
977. Did they all take charge about the same time ? Yes, when the new arrangement took
place.
978. What instructions did they receive at the time of taking charge of this industrial
department ? I think they received instructions from the Colonial Architect’s Department,
under whose department they work; he has charge of them.
979. Do you know whether they received any written instructions ? I do not think they
did.
980. Was their position this—that they had charge of the labour of the prisoners, and
directed them in the prosecution of that labour, without in any way interfering with the
penal discipline—the prisoners for all penal purposes being still under you ? Under me.
The intention was, when this alteration was made, that these four men, although overseers,
should also act as turnkeys during the day, and watch the prisoners.
981. Do they so act? Yes, of course, they exercise a proper vigilance over the men.
982. Can you state how many men were turned out this morning respectively to the four
industrial departments of the prison ? I could not positively without reference to my books.
983. HoW many do you suppose are in the carpenters’ shop, for instance? Eight.
984. How many in the blacksmiths’ ? Five.
985. Tailors’ ? At present I think only five.
986. Shoemakers’ ? Three.
987. How many at the stone yard ? About thirty.
988. Are the shoemakers under any overseers ? They are in the same building with the
tailors.
989. There is no shoemaking overseer ? No.
990. Do you know whether the overseers are competent tradesmen in their respective call-
ings ? Yes, they bear a very high character, I believe.
991. They produced high testimonials to obtain these appointments? Yes; Mr. Dawson
was very particular about it, . .
992. Will you explain as clearly as you cannn evidence the plan of the gaol ? _ The original
intention of the gaol was that there was to be a tower in the centre of seven wings.
993. Wings radiating from a tower ? Yes, and between the wings the yards for exercise,
classification, and so forth. The tower was intended to communicate with each of these
wings. There was to be a balcony from each wing to the tower. One was to have been a
schoolroom, another a chapel, and so forth. I believe at the top was to be a sort of observa-
tory for the principal gaoler, and when there he could see every individual in every yard.
994. Were all the wings to be uniform ? All the wings were to be uniform.
995. How many wings have been completed out of the seven originally designed. Four.
996. How are those situated ? Ais what is called the committed wing -that is, where
prisoners for trial are put; the next is the hard labour wing; on the opposite side is the
new wing of single cells; next to that is one occupied by females. The workshop occupied
by tailors is square at present, but is to be extended the same as the other wings when
complete. nft)7
157—E
H, Beverley,
Esq.
s
1861.


997. Daring the last two years a good deal of stonework has been carried out by the prisoners
in enlarging the wings ? Yes.
998. In carrying out those works has the original design been to some extent departed from?
The only departure from it is in the alteration of the new wing which is now all single cells.
Originally it was intended that they were to he of the same size as the other cells. That
was°altered before the building was proceeded with.
999. Are there not some separate buildings in the yard,—are they included in the plan of
the gaol ? The bath-house is, but not the dead-house.
1000. How many prisoners were there in the gaol this morning ? 400.
1001. How many of these are males? 318 males and 87 females.
1002. Of this 313 how many are committed for trial, and how many are under sentence ?
12 for trial.
1003. Can you state how many of the men under sentence are under summary sentences
from the Police Office? I have them down in the memorandum before me as confines, but
they would not all be under summary sentence, —I should say, 40,
1004. Then there will be about 270 under sentence from the higher Courts? Yes; 137
labour men.
1005. What are the longest sentences of any of those men ? The longest I have ever had
has been four years.
1006. Are there not some there for life ? At present, but not what we consider as our own
prisoners.
1007. But the longest sentence, according to the usual commitment to Darlinghurst, is four
years? Yes; there is one here for five years, the man who spoke to the Committee the
■other day and said he considered his sentence illegal.
1008. How many sentences are accompanied by labour ? 137.
1009. Do these include the Cockatoo Island men ? Without them.
1010. How many Cockatoo Island insubordinates are there ? 99.
1011. How long have they been in Darlinghurst Gaol ? 83 came in on the 2nd January,
and the others on the 4th.
1012. Can you tell us how many of the 87 women are under committal, and how many are
under sentence ? There are 52 confines, and 25 labour, sentenced to labour from Courts of
Quarter Sessions and Police Offices.
1013. What are the offences against the female prisoners chiefly ? The mass of them for
using obscene language; they are women who are so frequently brought before the Police
Office that the magistrates sentence them for sis months, twelve months, and even two
years.
1014. For obscene language and drunkenness ? Yes, that is the principal offence, —nine-
tenths of those you saw the other day were sentenced for that.
1015. You were present when this Committee visited the gaol last week ? Yes.
1016. It was noticed that a large number of the prisoners were women advanced in years ?
Yes.
1017. Can you state with any degree of certainty whether these represent a class repeatedly
in prison for drunkenness ? Yes, with great certainty.
1018. What are the regulations of the gaol with regard to the safe keeping, cleanliness,
moral discipline, and industrial operations of the prison,—will you be good enough to give
us by way of example what would be done by a prisoner arriving at the gaol under a sen-
tence of four years’ imprisonment,—what would be done with him as soon as he had received
his sentence ? As soon as he had received his sentence he would come into the gaol, his
hair would be cut, he would be shaved, cleaned, and have clean clothes put upon him. If
his sentence were labour he would be put into the labour yard.
1019. Will you give us these particulars minutely,—suppose he were received at five in the
evening what would be done to him that night ? He would merely be locked up in the hard
labour yard.
1020. Would this shaving go on that night? No; he would have the prison dress, and be
washed and shaved the next morning. I mean by that that he would have to wash himself,
and that the barber would shave him and cut his hair, and he would have a clean suit of
prison dress, according to the season, either the summer or the winter dress.
1021. Would any bedding be furnished to him ? Yes.
1022. Would he be told how long that was to last, and whether he was to keep it clean?
Yes, they are obliged to do so.
1023. Would be be told that? Yes, by the warder who takes him in charge,
1024. Then what would be done with him when he was caused to wash, and to put on this
dress ? According to his trade, if he were a oarpenter he would be put into the carpenter’s
shop.
1025. They would ascertain his trade? Yes; all these particulars are ascertained in the
office, into which they arc taken when they are brought into the gaol;—the height, descrip-
tion, religion, and trade or calling are all taken down, and then they are passed through.
1026. Then if he were a blacksmith or a carpenter he would be sent to one of those depart-
ments of the gaol? Yes.
1027. Suppose he were a labourer ? He would be put to cut stone in the rough, or sent to
the quarry.
1028. At what time would he go to work on the second day ? He would be sent out with
the other prisoners.
1029. Will you describe the daily routine of the gaol ? In the morning at a quarter to six
the bell rings ; that, of course, is done by the warder who leaves his post at six o’clock. As
soon as the prison is opened, at six o’clock, the prisoners are let out of their cells, and have
to


to bring down and empty their night-tubs; between that and seven they get their breakfast,
and they are then rung out to work—their work being either at one of the four trades
already alluded to, or such labour as is required in the gaol. At twelve the bell rings and
the men come into the wing, where a table is got ready by the wardsmen, and they sit down
to dinner.
1030. What is their dinner, generally ? Boiled beef, bread, and soup.
1031. Were you present when the Committee were in the cooking-house last week ? Yes.
1032. Was that, which they then saw, the ordinary fare ? Yes, the very same invariably.
1033. Week-day and Sunday? Yes, every day.
1034. The year round ? Yes.
1085. Both as to kind and quantity ? Yes.
1036. Then what is the next step ? At one o’clock they go to work again till the ring of
the bell about half-past four.
1037. You say, “ about half-past four,” —do they not always leave off work at exactly the
same time ? We cannot always be exact if a number of fresh prisoners come in. The great
object is to get the men in, so as to have the muster properly conducted at five.
1038. What should you suppose is the variation in the time of leaving off work —five
minutes, or half-an-hour ? Not more than five or ten minutes.
1039. At all events they are mustered at five ? 1 must remark that they are mustered at
five if there are not three van loads from the Police Offices. If we have a van load from
the Water Police Office, another with men from the Central Police Office, and another with
women, that delays the muster, as we cannot muster until we have the complete number
that have come in. It has happened that, in consequence of this, the muster has been as
late as half-past six.
1040. Has it ever been dark when the muster has taken place ? Not exactly very dark,
except in winter time.
1041. How is this ceremony of mustering performed ? The men are brought into the yard,
through the small side door, in the presence of the turnkeys on each landing where the cells
are; the names are then called over from the muster book, and every prisoner must come
in, in his turn, one by one, and he is then taken up to whatever range he belongs to, and is
locked up.
1042. Are you ever present at the mustering ? Frequently.
1043. Not uniformly ? Not uniformly.
1044. You do not consider it to be your duty? No; for the first three years I never
missed a muster; but I have not attended so regularly since that time, for reasons I have
explained.
1045. The accommodation of the cells consists chiefly of cells built for three prisoners to
sleep in ? Yes.
1046. Can you give us the dimensions of those cells? The larger cells about ten or twelve
feet. There are only two kinds of cells, those and the cells in the new wing.
1047. Are they square ? As nearly as possible, the smaller are eight feet.
1048. What does the bedding consist of? Two blankets, a bed-tick filled with straw for a
mattrass, and a pillow of the same kind.
1049. Is this bed placed upon anything —does it rest upon the stone floor, or upon a board ?
It is placed on a board raised about five inches from the flags.
1050. Is there any regulation by which the blankets are washed, and the bedding examined
and cleaned at any stated period ? When the bedding is dirty it is taken away and other
bedding is supplied as fast as it can be obtained from the storekeeper’s department.
1051. Is there no regulation by which the blankets are washed ? No.
1052. Do you think it may be the case that blankets in some instances have been used by
prisoners for more than twelve months without washing ? Ices, I think it may.
1053. What steps are adopted to keep the walls clean and free them from vermin ? The
walls are whitewashed.
1054. How often are they whitewashed ? Whenever the cells are dirty.
1055. When the Committee were in the gaol last week there was some whitewashing going
on in one of the wings; do you recollect that ? I did not see it.
1056. You did not know about the whitewashing that was going on in one of the wings?
No, I did not see it.
1057. What regulations are there for enforcing personal cleanliness —suppose a dirty person
comes into the gaol, who does not wash himself trom one mouth s end to another, what a,
done in such a case ? The prisoners have half a holiday on Saturday for the purpose of
washing. ,
1058. Are they compelled to do it? I think they always wish to do it.
1059. Do you think it possible there are prisoners in the cells who have not been washed
for a week ? I think not.
1060. You think it would be surprising if prisoners were found who had not been washed
for a month ? Yes, I should. , . i ■ n 9
1061. By Mr. Morris: What do you mean by washing—do you mean washing all ovei .
I suppose the Chairman means washing all over. ~, ,
1062. F By the Chairman: The Committee were told that it was very probable tnere were
prisoners in the gaol who had not been washed for a year . 0 not e leve 1
1063. There is no regulation for enforcing personal cleanliness? No.
1064. If a person chose to neglect himself he might do so for a very long time ? Ido not
think the other prisoners would themselves allow it. , . , . , ,
1065. But is there a regulation by which, whether the other prisoners wish it or not, he
would be compelled to wash himself ? No. . , , , . . 1 .
1066 With regard to the prisoners who are working in the shops, what care is taken to
6 prevent


prevent their secreting their tools when they retire to their cells at night ? My instructions
are that they shall be all searched. Every thing is taken from them before they come in.
1067. Do you think these instructions are uniformly acted upon, and not only acted upon,
but with such strict scrutiny that there can be no concealment ? I think so.
1068. Have you ever seen this search carried out ? Frequently.
1069. Were you satisfied that it was effective ? Yes.
1070. What kind of work is done in these shops ? The principal part of the blacksmith’s
work is for the balustrades and iron doors for the new wings. The carpenter’s work is for
the Colonial Architect, or for any person who wishes to have any thing made, and for which
they send all the materials.
1071. Have you had much custom of that kind —have many persons sent in materials for
articles to be made ? Very little.
1072. Not much either in the blacksmiths’ carpenters’, or tailors’ ? More in the tailors’
room than in the other shops.
1073. What class of persons send in tailoring to be done ? Principally tailors send in the
work cut out, and we make it up in the gaol.
1074. When the Committee were at the gaol last week, there were several articles of
cabinet furniture in one of the vacant rooms, which you said were for Mr. Agnew, the
Church of England chaplain ? Yes.
1075. Could you state on what terms these articles are made? All the materials are sent
in by Mr. Agnew, even to the varnish and spirits of wine, locks, hinges, and so forth, and he
will have to pay £3 for the making of the cabinet.
1076. What would he pay for making the chest of drawers? The chest of drawers will be
charged 175., he finding all the materials. We have no materials at the gaol.
1077. There was also a cornice, which you stated was for a wardrobe ? It was for Mr. Coles,
of the Colonial Architect’s Department. It was evidently intended for the top of a wardrobe,
but the work was stopped. I asked the carpenter about it, and he said he had got instruc-
tions, for some reason, not to go on with it. Whether the work was for Mr. Coles himself, or
for the Colonial Architect’s Department, I could not say. We have done a great deal of
work for Government House.
1078. In what kind of work are the female prisoners employed? There are very few
needlewomen.
1079. What kind of work are they employed upon ? Whatever work is sent to be done.
1080. Some ladies send different articles to be made ? Yes.
1081. We saw some half-dozen women working at a table—were these all the needlewomen
you had ? These were all the women who could hold a needle. They all have a shake in
the hand after they have been at the gaol a few times, and unless they have long sentences
they do not, while they are there, come round sufficiently to work with the needle; they
are, therefore, employed in picking oakum.
1082. Do the books of the gaol represent accurately all the work executed in the stone yard,
blacksmiths’, carpenters’, tailors’, and shoemakers’ departments ? Every item.
1083. Do the books represent for whom the work is executed ? Yes.
1084. W T hether for the gaol or for private persons? Yes; for the military barracks or
otherwise.
1085. Is there a valuation made of the work executed for the gaol, so as to shew what
amount is earned by the prisoners when so engaged ? Yes.
1086. Then the Committee can see what amount of work has been executed in a year ? Yes.
Every Monday morning I furnish a return to the Sheriff of all the work performed by the
different trades.
1087. Is there not a good deal of work done for the military barracks ? Yes.
1088. What does that consist of? What are called punishment buckets; they are very
heavy buckets, and I suppose the soldiers are kept working with them as a punishment, and
hence they are called “ punishment buckets.” They wear them out very fust.
1089. Do you make any thing else for the military barracks? Very few things, except
ironwork.
1090. Is any account opened for the military barracks ? No; we do not charge them.
1091. All this work is done without charge ? Yes.
1092. W 7 ith regard to the Sheriff —how often does the Sheriff visit Darlinghurst Gaol—how
often has he visited it since the Ist January ? I dare say twenty times.
1093. About what hour of the twenty-four does he make his appearance there ? At all hours.
1094. Did you ever see him there at 12 at night? No. I have seen him come at 3
or 4 o’clock in the afternoon; at 10 in the morning ; but more frequently at about
11 o’clock.
1095. Is he ever there before 9 o’clock in the morning or after 4 in the afternoon ? Rarely,
unless the Court happens to be on.
1096. Do you recollect his ever being there either before or after these hours ? Yes.
1097. Does he remain there long when he attends? About an hour.
1098. Does he personally examine the cells and the various departments of the gaol ? Yes.
1099. Does he see the prisoners ? Yes.
1100. Does he make it a point at all in any manner to make himself acquainted with the
characters of the prisoners after the sitting of the Criminial Court—does he see specially the
new prisoners who have been added to the gaol by the result of the sitting? Ido not think
he does.
1101. They are mustered for his inspection, I suppose ? Yes.
1002. By Mr. Morris : Does he not go to the cells? Yes.
1103, By the Chairman : There are some confined to the cells for insanity ? Yes.
1104.


1104 Under what circumstances are they confined ? The usual way is, that, for some act
they have committed, some one complains at the Police Office, and they are sent to gaol, for
want of sureties, for a fortnight, in order that the doctor of the gaol may have an opportu-
deciding whether they are insane from drink, or fit subjects for Tarban Creek.
1105. How long are they detained there ? If a man were found to be insane from drunken-
ness and were sentenced for fourteen days, he would remain for fourteen days and would
then be discharged. J
1106. Who has charge of him ? The warder of the wing.
1107. Does the party in charge of these people ever complain of not haying sufficient pro-
*ec^on • . ■r wo are locked up at night in the cell with these prisoners.
. eit^er the keeper of the male or female prisoners suffering from insanity complain of
C mi D * : means °* P rote ction ? Once or twice there have been some complaints.
1109. There was a person in the female cells last week when the Committee were there?
Yes, she has gone to Tarban Creek.
1110. How long had she been there? Only from the previous Tuesday.
1111. You have never had any serious complaint ? No.
1112. There is a female prisoner in the cell, named Catherine Read, under a sentence of
fifteen years: Yes.
1113. What has been this woman s conduct during the time she has been in gaol ? She is
the best behaved woman X have ever seen since I have been there.
1114. Generally ? Yes.
1115. Have you no exception ? None whatever; she has never undergone the slightest
punishment since I have been there.
1116. How is she employed ? As one of the nurses in the female hospital.
1117. She has some responsibility then ? Yes.
1118. And is thoroughly trustworthy ? Yes.
1119. Is she well-regulated, and kind as a nurse? Yes.
H2O. Have the prisoners ever complained to you of a want of protection from the weather
in the yard ? Yes.
1121. In the men’s yard, for instance, there is only one very small and insufficient shed to
protect them in wet weather ? Yes; but they suffer more particularly from the heat in
summer, and I have often had to strike them off from working in the middle of the day,
having in fact seen them fainting from the heat,
1122. Have the women any protection from the sun and rain when in the yard? No; we
were to have had sheds, but the plans were withdrawn.
1123. Will you have the goodness to state the routine of your duties as principal gaoler—
when do you first go through the gaol ? In the morning at daylight I generally get up and
see all the men come on duty to their posts.
1124. Are you out before any of the prisoners are unlocked ? Yes.
1125. Generally you see them all turned out? Yes. After the men have gone to work I
go round the prison—go among the men and see what they are doing.
1126. Do you see them locked up —I think you said you are not always at the muster ? I
wait till the keys are handed up. I walk up and down while they are mustering the
prisoners.
1127. Do you ever endeavour to make yourself acquainted with the history, and, from the
history, with the character of the prisoner, with a view to classification ? No ; I have no
means of classifying them.
1128. You do not make many inquiries of that kind—you do not consider it within your
duty ? I often speak to them.
1129. What kind of library have you —you have some few books? (The witness handed
in a list. Vide Appendix B.)
1130. How have these books been accumulated? The larger number has been sent by
persons outside without any name being given.
1131. By Mr. Hart: Are there any books in your library not down in your list ? No.
1132. By the Chairman: Do many private persons, ladies or gentlemen, visit the gaol from
motives of philanthropy? Very rarely.
1133. You are aware no doubt from reading, if not from personal knowledge, that, in the
mother and other countries, it is a common thing for benevolent persons to visit gaols ? Yes;
I may almost say it is a rare occurrence.
1134. Has Darlinghurst Gaol during the last year been visited by any person with that
object ? No.
1135. Persons sometimes visit it from curiosity, I presume? Yes.
1136. You have never seen a Mrs. Fry or a Howard there ? No, Ido not think the public
take much interest in them.
1137. Will you be good enough to state to the Committee the particulars of the escape of
prisoners a short time ago from the gaol ? Last morning week about four o’clock I was
awoke by the warder on duty knocking violently at the door. I immediately ran down
into the stockade with a revolver, and there saw from No. 4 cell, in the top range
of the new wing, a piece of blanket rope. On going round the gaol, I found a plank with
another portion of a blanket rope attached to it, in the north-east corner, by which evidently the
prisoners had escaped from the gaol over the outer wall. I immediately reported the case to
the Sheriff.
1138. What were these prisoners’ names? Clarke and Cavanagh.
1139. What were their respective sentences ? Clarke was sentenced for life, for highway
robbery with fire-arms, and Cavanagh was a prisoner who had only six months of his sentence
to serve.
1140.


1140 What is the height from the window to the ground ? Thirty feet. . .
1141. Did you measure the space through which they forced their bodies ? Yes; it is seven
inches and a half. , „ . . 9 . r
1142 I believe nothing has since been heard of those prisoners ? This morning a police-
man came with the shirt of one of them—at least, I presume it was. It was found at
Newtown. . „ _
1143. In what condition was the shirt ? It was not torn in any way.
1144. Not stained with blood ? No, there was not much blood came from them.
1145. Ought not the warder, who was in charge that night, to have seen them after they
got into the yard, and before they scaled the wall ? Yes. .
1146 There must have been remissness on the part of the warder on duty that night. ihe
warders I allude to are those who had charge of locking them up, neither of whom would
have been on duty when the men escaped.
1147. Some warder was on duty, was there not? Yes, one.
1148. Ought he not to have seen them when they were in the yard ? He was very atten-
tive, for 1 heard him call “ Three o’clock” a short time before, and my instructions are, as
soon as they call the hour, to go round every part and see that all is safe.
1149. Will you state at what time the respective chaplains attend the gaol ? On Sunday
morning, at half-past eight.
1150. Do they preach ? Yes.
1151. Do they attend at any other time ? Yes; the Homan Catholic chaplain comes at two
o’clock in the afternoon.
1152. Do they make personal inquiries amongst the prisoners ? Yes, both of them.
1153. Do the chaplains manifest any solicitude for the instruction of the prisoners? Yes;
they are very much among them. The chaplain of the Church of England attends of a
Wednesday morning also. _ > . „
1154. Do you mean that they take a good deal of interest in the discharge of their auties .
Yes.
1155. That remark applies to all of them ? Yes.
1156. By Mr. Morris : What is the nature of the ablutions required when a man is first
received; you say he is washed —how is he washed ? In the bath-house.
1157. There is a house, then, containing baths? Yes, hot and cold baths, and a shower-
bath ten feet high. _ .....
1158. Are the men required to bathe in this regularly ? They do bathe in them very
frequently.
1159. By Mr. Wilson: They always have access to them ? Yes.
1160. By the Chairman: I may inform you, at this stage, that the prisoners stated to us
that they never used the bath-house, that there was a bath in the gaol, but that it was not
used by the prisoners ? They should have it.
1161. By Mr. Morris : Are the men required to wash every morning ? No.
1162. Not even their faces? No; Saturday afternoon is the only time that has ever been
the rule, they then get a half-holiday, and the other prisoners wash the clothes in one of
these baths.
1163. Is there sufficient employment for the carpenters in the public service ? Yes, plenty.
1164. Therefore it would not be necessary in order to give them employment to take in
private work ? Certainly not; and it is the same with the blacksmiths —we have plenty
of work for twenty of them.
1165. Does the Sheriff, at any time, visit the whole of the cells ? Yes, every cell.
1166. What was the reason that the cells in the women’s ward, those particularly on the
eastern side, were in the condition in which we saw them with regard to vermin ? Probably
there was no lime at the time sufficient to whitewash them. We generally get a cart load
of lime, but it is sometimes difficult to get. When it is whitewashed the men come in, and
we first have one side whitewashed and then the other.
1167. How often is that done ? Not very frequently.
1168. Once a year? Yes, I should say twice a year.
1169. Are the yards lighted in all parts at night? No.
1170. It is, therefore, easy for a prisoner who has made his way into the yard to elude the
warder and get over the wall ? Yes, and Ido not think it is high enough.
1171. After the five o’clock muster how do the prisoners employ themselves? They are
confined to their cells after five o’clock, and the hard labour men are generally tired enough,
and soon go to sleep. A little later they are so quiet you might hear a pin drop.
1172. By Mr. Lucas: Have you any control over the industrial department at all with
reference to the quantity or description of work ? No.
1173. The Colonial Architect appoints the overseers? Yes, and the overseers, being the
practical men, are the valuers.
1174. Taking the number of prisoners at present in the gaol, can you give the number of old
and new offenders? I should say three-fourths are old offenders.
1175. Do you find that is the usual proportion ? Yes, they come in and out till they die.
1176. After they have come in a second time, you expect to have them frequent inmates of
the gaol ? Yes; unless by chance they go up the country, they are in and out till they die.
One woman, who is now in the Refuge, has been in the gaol seventeen times in one year.
1177. Why do you find it difficult to obtain lime ? At times we have found it difficult;
the Colonial Architect has sent word that he has not got any.
1178. Are you particular in searching the blacksmiths? Yes. One of the prisoners, who
built a boat at Cockatoo, was near manufacturing an iron ladder, which I have in my office.
1179. By the Chairman : When you say he was near doing so, what do you mean? I mean
to


to say that it was discovered before it was completed. It was made of a bar of iron, with
notches in it, and a shirting step to fit into the notches. If yon went into the shop, you saw
nothing but a bar of iron lying on the ground.
1180. By Mr. Lucas :By what scale is the value of the work fixed ? The order is that it
shall be charged at halt the price it would be done for outside.
1181. By Mr . Walsh : In the event of any of the men becoming ill, when they are confined
in the cells during the night, what means of communication have they? They call out, or
knock at the iron door, which makes a great noise; the warder asks what cell it is, and, if
he finds a prisoner is ill, he sends for the dispenser, who lives near the gaol.
1182. Are there any night-tubs in the cells ? Yes, in every one.
1183. This weekly washing, does it take place in the bath-room ? Yes, and some outside
the bath-room, there are such a number.
1184. What^ vessels have they to wash themselves in outside ? Buckets and tubs.
1185. I see in the list of books you have handed in, the books are classified as Protestant
and Catholic libiaiy; in the list of books under the head of Protestant library, I see neither
Prayer Looks nor Bibles ? Libles and Prayer Books they get regularly at prayers on Sunday.
1186. By Mr. Windeyer : Have they Bibles at any other times ? No.
1187. Is there not a Bible in every cell ? No.
1188. By Mr. Walsh : Under the head of Catholic library, there are Bibles and Prayer Books
—are those only used at the time of service ? Yes.
1189. They are not for circulation ? No ; many of the prisoners are fond of reading, and
the clergymen give them any of the books they choose.
1190. Does the chaplain act as librarian ? He is the person who has them under his charge.
1191. By Mr. Wilson: Which chaplain? The Rev. Mr. Agnew.
1192. By Mr. Walsh : He has the Protestant library under Ids charge ? Yes ; and the
Rev. Mr. Forde has the other.
1193. By the Chairman : A prisoner has died since we were at the gaol the other day ; I
saw a notice of that. Will you state the circumstances under which the death occurred ?
She was a woman of about forty years of age, and absolutely died of inanition ; her palate was
gone, and she could swallow nothing, and gradually died of starvation ; I suppose I could
have taken her up in my hand.
1194. In that case was a change of diet made ? They got every thing they call medical
comforts.
1195. What do medical comforts consist of in Darlinghurst Gaol ? Wine, if necessary, and
brandy; these are under the doctor’s charge.
1196. What is the food—the nutriment they get in place of bread ? Eggs and butter, and
raw meat cooked—arrowroot, and every thing; the dispensary is nicely fitted up.
1197. How often does Dr. West visit the gaol ? Every day.
1198. How long has he been Medical Visitor to the gaol ? He was there just before I went;
he has been there seven years.
1199. Can you state of your own knowledge whether he is kind and considerate to the
prisoners when sick ? He has been most attentive.
1200. You have never seen any reason to infer that he has in any way neglected them ?
On the contrary, I think he manifests great anxiety, and particularly if they are seriously
ill.
1201. Is the dispenser equally attentive to his duties ? He is the best I have ever seen.
1202. By Mr. Hart: Before you were appointed to your present office had you any
experience either as to prisons or prison discipline ? None whatever; I had never been in a
gaol in my life, before my appointment.
1203. Do you consider that your duty now is principally the safe custody of the prisoners,
or their reformation ? Their safe custody simply.
1204. By the Chairman: Are you supplied, as the head officer of the gaol, with any works
on prison discipline, any reports upon the improved prisons of Europe, or any of the many
works that have been printed on the general subject of prison management ? No, I have
not been supplied with any, but 1 have read a great many—the Brothers Mayhew on
Prisons I got from Mr. MacDonald, and also the Adventures of a Gaol Chaplain.
1205. Have you read Recorder Hill’s Charges ? No.
1206. Lord Brougham’s Papers on the subject of Prisons and Prison Discipline ? No.
1207. Any Reports of the National Association for the promotion of Social Science ? No.
1208. You have then neither in your private possession, nor have you been supplied by
Government with any of these works ? No.
1209. Have you any books of that description ? No.
1210. By Mr. Hart: Is there a matron of the gaol? Yes.
1211. Who is the matron ? Mrs. Beverley.
1212. Does she exercise any personal superintendence over the female prisoners? Yes, she
goes round the cells and looks after them.
1213. Have you any rules provided by the Government as to the custody and management
of prisoners in gaol ? Yes.
1214. What are the rules ? I think they were framed in 1848.
1215. By Mr. Walsh : Is it not an Act of Council ? Yes, a Gaol Act.
1216. By Mr. Hart: Do you allude to the rules promulgated from the Colonial Secretary
in 1841, which were produced before a former Committee of the Legislative Assembly ?
Yes.
1217. Have any subsequent rules been made ? No; but from time to time, as circumstances
have arisen in the gaol, I have issued written orders, which have been posted up.
1218. Do you keep a journal ? Yes. 1219


1219. What does it contain ? The number of people that go in and out of the gaol every
day, and what has been done,
1220. Do you ever inflict any punishment on your own authority ? Yes.
1221. Does that journal contain a record of the punishments inflicted ? Yes.
1222. And of the punishments inflicted by the Visiting Justices? Yes; it is kept in a
separate book.
1223. Are there any other occurrences mentioned ? Yes.
1224. What are the occurrences you principally note in your journal ? Every thing that
occurs that is not an every day occurrence.
1225. For instance, if a prisoner proves insubordinate, do you enter that in your journal ?
Yes.
1226. Have you made any entries of that kind, or had any cause to do so lately ? Yes, I
think about every second or third day. 1 find by punishing them on the instant it has the
most beneficial effect.
1227. Do you visit each cell yourself daily ? Not each cell; at one time the new wing, at
another time one of the other wings.
1228. When you omit to do so do you enter that in your journal ? No.
1229. You keep a record of the visits of the Visiting Magistrates, and of the surgeon and
chaplain? Yes; every one that comes into the gaol, whenever he comes, enters his name
in the book.
1230. Will you be good enough to state what course you pursue with respect to the
prisoners’ clothing when the prisoners are first admitted ? When first admitted the clothing
is taken off, and made into a bundle, ticketed, and put away in a cell which has shelves built
round for the pui-pose.
1231. Do you fumigate or purify the clothing before it is put away ? No; we have but very
recently had a fumigating place erected; it is the last building put up.
1232. Then the clothing is delivered to the prisoners when they go out in the same state as
when it is received? No; it is constantly opened, for it would of course be destroyed if the
prisoner had a long sentence, unless that were done.
1233. Who has the charge of that particular department? There is a man on the wing who
has charge of it—his name is Lee—or whatever warder happens to be there; he comes on
from time to time.
1234. Is the room in which the clothing is contained under the charge of any particular
warder who may be there ? They are under the charge of the warder who is there at the
time. The things are put into a stone cell, for in the building they used to be kept in I
found that a quantity of the clothing was eaten by the rats; then I had shelves put into
the cell.
1235. Who regulates the clothing of the prisoners? I do.
1236. Do you send requisitions to the Government for the clothing that is required ? Yes.
1237. Do you make any distinction in the clothing of those prisoners who are committed for
misdemeanour and those for felony ? Yes ; those who are committed for misdemeanour in
the confine yards wear their own clothes, and the hard labour men get the prison dress.
1238. Will you describe the prison dress to the Committee—in respect to what it consists
of? The summer prison dress consists of a wide jacket, branded trousers of the same
texture, a check shirt, and a handkerchief about the neck.
1239. By Mr. Windeyer; What is their head-dress? The head-dress which ought to be
worn, as best suited to the climate, is a straw hat; but, unfortunately, we cannot get half the
number required.
1240. Is there any hat prescribed ? Yes.
1241. Is there a prescribed time to get them ? No; we get them whenever we can.
1242. A prisoner shewed the Committee a Jim Crow hat, filthy and greasy, and said he had
had it for upwards of twelve months, and that it was given to him by a prisoner who was leaving
the prison—can you state why he was not supplied with a proper head-dress ? From the
difficulty of getting it.
1243. Have you made a requisition for hats ? Yes ; to the Storekeeper.
1244. When did you make the last ? At the beginning of the year.
1245. When before that ? Six months.
1246. What was the answer to your requisition made six months ago ? They had not got
them, but would send them as soon as they could.
1247. Have you communicated the fact to the Sheriff ? The Sheriff is aware of the fact.
1248. Have yOu officially communicated it ? I have frequently spoken of it.
1249. Are you aware whether he has taken any steps to remedy it ? Ido not think he has
taken any.
1250. As to boots or shoes, in what way are you supplied with them ? In the same way *
we make a requisition for them. ;
1251. Have the requisitions been complied with for these articles? Yes, pretty well • by
degrees we got them. ; J
1252. When you make a requisition do you find that it is generally complied with ? I have
made many private communications; I have written repeatedly private notes to the Store-
keeper begging shoes—some of the men were in bare feet—and then perhaps a few would
come in. Ido not believe there is a proper supply in the store.
1253. What is the winter dress of the prisoners ? A grey jacket, waistcoat, and trousers.
1254. Is there any distinction made in the dresses of prisoners who are sentenced to hard
labour for long periods, and those who are confined for lighter offences ? No.
1255. Is there any party-coloured dress used in the prison ? No.
1256. Is there any dress of yellow and grey combined ? No, that is peculiar to Cockatoo
Island, and to the men being in irons there.
1257.


1207. If you look at (lie 18th regulation of the gaol you will find this direction—" No
" prisoner who has not been convicted of felony shall be liable to be clothed in a mrtv
“ coloured dross, but if it be deemod pTnpdiont „ ■ i « . d P ar v’
“ victed of felony the same «holl u i ; P i» v* to j iave a P nson dress for prisoners not con-
. VlCtea , Q T J ’ sa ™ e shail be P lairi - Now do you state to the Committee that there
is no party-coloured dress for men convicted of felony ? Certainly not.
' „ Is ,"° ‘ faCt , Y llat , dress formerly used in Darlingimrst Gaol ? Never since
at CocLr ’ ° 7 W^n tllC mC ° ' VCTe S ™ te “ Ced ! *„s-.o be worked 1
W Wo’tttf f ‘° bC
dress since I have been there. ' "* SaW a P nsMler m Party-coloured
1200. What steps are taken to keep the eells properly cleaned and ventilated each day »
The doors arc opened, and then there is a draught of <2ol air through the door 7 ’
r° •. A h y“ any sk P s tak en for ventilation ? No; the bed clothes are rolled up
is th e cT “ 4 i * «ig*. a can of wal P r'
1262, Is the bedding taken out daily ? No.
1263. Or weekly ? No; except that it is aired in the cells.
goe^round 3117 m ° de promotin S cleanliness? Or on the balcony that
every day! ? Ey6IT ’ there are two men on dut Y for the Purpose
1266. Are the cells washed ? No.
1267. The floors are not washed ? No.
1268. Do you observe any distinction as to cleanliness between the win- in which the
women are confined, and the wings in which the men are confined ? I think our wines are
much nicer and more cleanly; I think the women are naturally more diny-tho, have got
things hanging about which gives their wing a dirty appearance. Still, whenever there^s
Ihe pTstm of y tbe w e alb ™ Wh “ eW " , “ a ’ ta <* the great number of bugs in
1269. Is there any disinfecting fluid used ? Yes.
1270 What fluid ? Whatever the doctor called disinfecting fluid ; we have had to use it
very largely since so many Cockatoo prisoners have been in twenty-eight days. Some of
them are giving way—their heads are becoming affected.
}V~\' I s t , here an y classification in the female ward ? No ; there is but the one building.
. ls there not a distinction made b tween debtors and others confined for contemnUm
civil process, prisoners committed on charge of felony, and prisoners convicted of felony—
-1 speak generally now ? les. J
12^ ■>. Is tliat classification observed in the women’s wim?? No.
12,4 By Mr. Walsh: Suppose you bad a female debtor, would the female debtor have to
go into the convicted wing? Yes.
127 a °- B '{ Mr : Hart f a female prisoner is committed on charge of felony or misdemeanour
and another is convicted of felony, is there no distinction made in the confinement of these
prisoners ? None ; they are all the same.
1270. By the Chairman: Are any of the prisoners allowed to have their food—those who
can pay for it brought in ? Yes —that is the confinees not sentenced to hard labour if a
woman has any friends outside. But then the rule is they must maintain them altogether -
they have hominy for breakfast, and a piece of roast beef from outside for dinner.
1-t 7. We visited a cell in which were two old women undergoing sentences far drunkenness
according to their own account, and another young, robust woman, who, according to her
own statement, was committed to trial f,r robbery; the latter stated that she was supported
by a gentleman who lived outside ? Then she is supported in into.
1278. By Mr. Walsh : If convicted and sentenced to hard labour, would she he allowed to
receive her fond from outside ? Yes,* that has ever been the rule of the gaol, that persons
may have their food sent in to them. The reason I always understood was’ that it saves the
expense of their maintenance.
1279. By Mr. Hart : Do you know who made the rule—is it a written rule ? Yes.
1280. Where do you find it ? It was one of the written rules when I went into gaol, as
regards debtors and persons confined without hard labour.
1281. By Mr. Walsh: A poison convicted for a term of imprisonment without hard labour,
if fed by the gaol, has a different ration from one sentenced with hard labour ? Yes.
1282. Who has the most ? The hard labour man, of course ; he gets half a pound of bread
more.f
By Mr. Hart: Can you state the extent of ground upon which the present gaol is
built ? Three acres three r ods.
1284. By the Chairman : Can you hand in a plan of the gaol ? I will get a plan and send
it; there was one made by Mr. Wells.
1285. Will you then hand that in ? I will. (Wo/ furnished .J)
1286. Bj Mr. Hart: Considering the number of prisoners you now have under your charge,
and the classification you think it is desirable to make, can you say whether that extcnt°of
ground is sufficient ? Ido not consider it anything like sufficient.
1287.
* Note ( correction by witness on revision) No ;if sentenced to hard labour they arc not allowed
to support themselves.
t Note ( correction by witness on revision ) ; —Jib. bread and | lb. meat more. Scale annexed ( Vide
Appendix C.)
+ Note.—Stated to have been mislaid.
157—F


1287., Is there any room for proper workshops to he constructed ? Yes; they are in course
128 e 8 eC in of the gaol? The old building, where the blacksmiths’ shop is left
standing; the foundation of the new one is just adjoining that, and it will go completely
1989 S If e any°further buildings are erected there, will it not seriously interfere with the
ventilation of the whole place? No ; on the new plans Ido not think it will be yearly so
bad as with the old stone buildings that are there, when they are cleared away The new
*heds are all to be open, that one man walking up and down can see all the men at work
1990 As to the site of the gaol, what is your opinion as to the advisability of retain!
dangerous and long-sentenced prisoners in the present building ? lam very much averse to
it. °I do not think it is a fit gaol to have persons of that kind, situated as it is now in the
1291. When that gaol was first erected, are you aware if there were many buildings in that
locality ? lam aware there were not any buildings to be seen.
1292. Vhat is the case now ? It is surrounded by terraces and public-houses, which k p
me in a great ferment for fear they should throw rum in ginger-beer bottles over the wall,
and if the men were all armed with tools something serious might happen. • •
1298. Has that occurred in any instance ? Never but on two occasions have P
thrown over the wall ; but I have had spirits brought in clandestinely by the turnkeys, w ,
of course, were dismissed on the instant. , -to y,.
1291. Can persons see the interior of the prison from private houses erecued aiou . ,
from the terrace along the side of the gaol. , i-, ? y P(! .
1295. Is it your opinion that the gaol should be removed to a more remote locality ? Yes
I have often and often spoken of it. I think if it were knocked down, and the same stone
were used in the gaol towards Bandwick, you might sell far more than would pay the
expense. I think the site of Darlinghurst is beautiful for building.
1296. Who did you make these suggestions to? To many peisons who, when speaking
the gaol casually, had complained of the gaol being where it now is.
1297. Have your complaints been in writing? No.
1298. Considering that prisoners have frequently escaped from gaol, is it not rather dange o »
to citizens who reside in that locality, if they come in contact with them . _ ie P ri3^
now in gaol chose to rush at the wall, they might easily escape—there is nothing to prevent
1299. By Mr. Windeyer : What is there to prevent the outbreak ? There is nothing worth
Hart: You mean that if a simultaneous rush were made upon the men, they
midit escape? I am certain that if forty men took one of the building poles, and used
it against the wall, it would go down, as it is badly built, weak and quite rotten in parts;
but I have heard the prisoners make the same remark, and that keeps me anxious. _ i have
heard the Cockatoo men say, “ If we are to be here, what is to prevent our knocking the
1301 Have you made any arrangement with the police authorities to aid you in the event
of such a rush taking place. We have them close by, but not in any number We called
in a few the other day, and we were under arms for the first time. Captain M Lene sent
some of his men, when the Cockatoo men refused to come forward.
1302. Have you any persons in gaol accustomed to the use of arms . Yes ; neaily all the
turnkeys have been soldiers. , T
1303. Are they provided with firearms and ammunition ? les we never shew them, as i
do not think it advisable for a few men to walk about the gaol with arms loaded.^
1304. Where do you keep the ammunition ? In the gateway ; there is a lodge in the gate-
way, where they are all kept clean, in the same way as in an armoury.
1305. By Mr. Windeyer : Have you any revolvers ? Yes ; we have lately been supplied
with revolvers, and have got sixty rounds of ball cartridges.
1306. By Mr. Hart : Sixty for each man ? No ; sixty altogether. It is dangerous to
show firearms.
1307. By Mr. Win'deyer : Suppose an attack to be made on any warder or turnkey, what
would you do ? They would overpower us in a moment. What could we do ?
1308. By Mr. Hart: Do you consider your force sufficient for the safe custody of the pri-
soners ? No. .
1309. Have you made any representations to Government ? Yes ; very recently.
1310. By Mr Wilson : Suppose there were watch-towers or turrets at each corner of the
prison, and a warder placed there with firearms, do you think it would add to the security
of the place ? Ido not approve of firearms except in numbers, for it leads the prisoners to
look with distrust at the warders.
1311. Are the warders who are on duty at night supplied with firearms or any other means
of defence ? I have, since this escape, given a musket to each.
1312. Are they supplied with hangers? They have half a dozen of what are called hangers
or swords. There ought to be a chevaux-de-frize all over that top wall.
1313. By Mr. Lucas: Would not broken bottle-glass on the top be better ? Better than at
present; but I should think that one of those large bars would be much better.
1314. Would it not be easy to throw a rope over for them to haul themselves up with—
would not glass be better ? They would not have the same means of making a rope fast if
it were covered with glass.
1315. By Mr. Hart: Have you had any complaints from the inhabitants of Darlinghurst as
to the cesspools in the gaol, and the matter flowing from them ? Yes.
loio.


1316. Are you not aware there is a dreadful stench occasionally in the locality ? Yes, from
the front of the gaol.
1317. How is that occasioned ? From the sewers throughout the gaol.
1318. Where are your principal cesspools, or how many are there in the gaol ? There are
none in the gaol ; there is a grating here and there in the gaol, and underneath runs the
sewer. The sewers came out under the front gate, and that was the place complained of.
We had it opened about two years ago; we had the whole thing opened in consequence
of the complaint that was the only time I ever saw them.
1319. Then the matter is emptied upon the persons in the lower part of Woolloomooloo—
where are the night-buckets emptied ? Some in the ashpit, others in the privies.
1320. 5\ here are the night-buckets emptied ? Into the privies; that goes into the sewers.
1321. Into the same sewers ? Yes.
1322. What accommodation have the men during the day time ? They have the stone
places in the yard at the end of the hard labour shed—on the off side there are a set of
privies.
1323. These also, I presume, run into the sewers? Yes.
1324. lias the officer for the health of the city paid you any visits ? He did some time
ag°-_
1325. Hid he take notice of these facts ? Ido not think he did ;he merely walked in, and
asked some questions.
1320. By Mr. Sutherland: Are you aware that he has reported upon the matter several
times ? Yes.
1327. By Mr. Hart: Who has the supervision as to the food supplied to the prisoners ? I
have, and the turnkey with the prisoner as a delegate. The turnkey has the daily supervi-
sion, he being deputed with a prisoner, on the arrival of the food every morning, to satisfy
himself that it is good. The prisoners have an opportunity of refusing the food, which was
done this morning.
1328. Have you many complaints of the food? Not many; more so with regard to the
vegetables. Sometimes we have letters from the contractor saying he can’t get particular
vegetables. If the prisoners choose to be rusty they say they should have carrots or
turnips.
1329. Prisoners, when the Committee visited the gaol, complained that there was a greater
proportion of potatoes than of other vegetables? It is a fact that it is so; but lat once
wrote to the contractor asking him to substitute leeks for onions ; his answer is that it is
impossible to get them, and that, therefore, he had sent a greater quantity of potatoes.
1330. By Mr. Wilson : Could he not substitute barley or rice? 1 asked him to do so.
1331. By Mr. Hart: When the contractor refused did you purchase articles at his risk?
No.
1332. Ho you think you would have been justified in doing that? No; I could not under
his note purchase what he said he could nut get.
1333. That was his statement—did you satisfy yourself that his statement was correct?
I presume, as he has been contractor so great a number uf years, that it was correct.
1334. Hid you take any steps to ascertain whether his statement was correct ? No further
than that I have bought bread.
1335. I bebeve there have been constant complaints as to the quality of the bread? But
they will complain, they say themselves, for nothing but wickedness.
1336. By Mr.. Lucas : With regard to the bread, is the bread we saw when we were at the
gaol a fair specimen ? Sometimes it is better, sometimes worse.
1337. By Mr. Hart: Is there any reception room for the prisoners when they are first
brought to gaol ? None but the office.
1338. What office ? The office below stairs ; as they come in they enter an under-ground
passage, and the first room is an office where all particulars are taken, and then they are
passed away into the yard.
1339. After that is done what is the next step ? They are then taken up, cleaned, and
fresh clothes put on them.
1340. Can you state to the Committee the particular mode in which that is performed?
When the prisoner comes in his warrant is read; all the particulars are taken down in a
book. If he is a man for trial he is taken to the trial wing.
1341. Hoes he undergo a thorough cleaning ? Yes.
1342. Is he put into a bath and washed ? Yes.
1343. Is that done in each case ? I will not say in each case.
1344. You don’t consider it your duty to see that done ? I could not see it done
1345. Ho you give directions that it should be done ? Yes, that is the direction,
1346. Is the same course pursued with the women ? The women have great objection to the
bath, as Mrs. Cullen will tell you. They are all washed and cleaned; Ido not mean to
say all go into the bath.
1347. You do not compel them to do so—there is no compulsory regulation on the prisoners,
as to washing themselves daily ? No.
1348. Nor as to changing their clothing ? No.
1349. Is the ventilation of the gaol good ? I think so—l never heard it complained of. I
think the health of the prisoners, taking the number in gaol, is wonderful.
1350. Is there any provision for warming the cells in winter? None.
1351. Is it not excessively cold ? Yes, the building being all stonework.
1352. Have the prisoners complained of the cold? No.
1358. How do you promote the warmth in winter ? In no way at all, except by an addi-
tional blanket.
1354.


1354. Or by increasing the number of prisoners in each cell ? We never do that if we can
avoid it. We have sometimes seven in a cell ; they do not complain of cold.
1355 What is the average amount of sickness you have in the gaol ? Taking one year with
another Ido not think I have ever known a larger number than eight. I have on occasions
entered’in my journal, not a single male or female sick in the whole establishment. _
1856 What is the sickn* ss to which they are generally liable ? Such as people bung in
with them—such as sore legs, which take a long time to cure; but, as regards a prisoners
health in gaol, it is seldom a man is sick at all. _ a
1357. The sickness is principally that arising from intemperance ? les; chiefly arising
from sore iegs. . , . . „ -in T d' 1. _
1358. What is the average of insane patients you have ini the gaol ? i think we have on
the average from two to three in a week sent in from outside.
1359. By Mr. Walsh: Lunatics, or for good behaviour ? A large number for drunkenness,
and they co out again in a few days. .
1360. By Mr Hart: Are any of the female prisoners employed as servants to yourself or
any of the turnkeys ? There'is only one turnkey besides myself living in the gaol.
1361. Are fi male servants employed in your house as domestic servants? Yes.
1362. How many at the present time ? The housemaid, making up the bed-rooms, the
pantry-woman, and cook.
1363. What are they confined for ? Generally sentenced women, for three months.
1364. Are any male prisoners employed in the domestic arrangements of the gaol ? No.
1365. Is there any mode of communication between the male prisoners and those females
employed as domestic servants ? No ; whenever a prisoner has occasion to come to the house,
he is attended by a turnkey. For instance, if he comes from the cook-house with the
women’s food, he is attended by a turnkey. ?
1366. Has that always been the case ? Yes; it always takes a great deal of the turnkey s
time. . ....
1367. Was it not a source of complaint some time ago, that there were irregularities
respecting the female prisoners in the gaol, attributed to the male prisoners? Yes; in the
case of Dr. Lang’s servant; at that time there was a pantry-man. .
1368. Then the rule you alluded to has not always been in existence ? No, it has been
altered from that time.
1369 Have you made any application to the Government for books to supply your library ?
Application was made by the Sheriff, I think, some time ago, and £2O for each library, the
Protestant and Catholic, was granted; I think it was last session.
1370. Has that money been expended? I think it has; the Rev. Mr. Sheehy bought the
books for his library.
1371. In the ILt you have handed in, I observe in the department of the Catholic library a
large number of Ribles and Prayer Rooks, and none in the Protestant library how 7 do you
account for that? There are plenty of Ribles and Prayer Rooks, they are not put down in
that list; I presume because it was supposed that a list of them was not required by the
Committee. I received a large number of Ribles and Prayer Books, and maikcd them all
myself “ Darlinghurst Gaol.”
1372. Is there any Sunday school in the gaol ? No.
1373. Is there any means taken to promote morality or education among the prisoners by
instructing them in reading and writing? We had for a short time ; but the man who acted
as schoolmaster was sent away to Rerrima; since that there has been no school.
1374. You have nothing of that kind in the gaol at present? No.
1375. When we were visiting the gaol the other day, we were told by one of the prisoners
that he had been reading Valentine Vox, Margaret Catchpole, and Woman .s Love —can you
state whether those books are in the library ? I can state that Woman’s Love is in my
possession, for I got it immediately after the Committee left.
1376. Do you know any thing of the other two books ? They are all books furnished from
outside.
1377. I do not observe the books I allude to —Margaret Catchpole and Valentine Vox—in
the list you have handed in ? Then they are books that have been smuggled in by the
friends of the prisoners.
1378. You do not doubt the correctness of the statement made by the prisoner? No.
1379. By the Chairman : Have you read this book, “ Woman’s Love ” ? No ; I just looked
into it ; I have it in my drawer.
1380. Is it a book of a moral tendency ? Yes; but no book should be given to the prisoners
except by the clergyman; he should have an opportunity of judging whether the book was
or was not a fit one for the particular prisoner.
1381. By Mr. Hart: How often does the Catholic chaplain visit the gaol for the purpose of
instruction? He comes to prayers on Sunday at half-past 8 and at 2 o’clock. Mr. Sheehy
used always to go over the gaol on Saturday afternoon.
1382. By Mr. Wilson : Does he do so now ? He is promoted in the church, and there is
another chaplain.
1383. Does the present chaplain do the same? He will do the same.
1384. By Mr. Hart: Then he does not visit the prison daily for the purpose of instruction ?
No, neither of the chaplains do so.
1385. If he were willing to do so, would you afford him facilities for that purpose ?
Certainly.
1386. Is the prison visited by any other Catholic clergyman ? Yes, I dare say by a dozen
different clergymen ; for instance, our Catholic chaplain has often been away, and then
other clergymen have taken it in turn.
1387.


1387. Then their visits are on Sunday ? Yes.
n oon' f T whet ; he y t^ie P rison is visited on week days hy other clergymen ? No.
1089 Uaveyou had v.sus from the Archbishop? 1 never recollect "seeing him but twice ;
icon ih'nh the Archbrsbop came specially to see a particular prisoner then.
Joq , ’ ,/ \r, j J } mvman : Does tbe bishop of Sydney ever visit you ? I have never seen him.
loJ y ilr Mart: Is the gaol visited by Episcopalian clergymen, or by clergymen of
dissenting congregations, besides the chaplain ? No; the Rev. Mr. Stewart, a Presbyterian
minister has lately been appointed one of the chaplains at £5O a vear. *
JqQo* p® n 7 the cl ® r ?7 who Visit your gaol are persons who are paid for that purpose ? Yes.
1393. By the Chairman: During the time that Goodsir, the last who was executed, was
lying under sentence was be visited by any one except the chaplain? There were two
persons who came and sang with him, preached to him, and read prayers to him; they came
frequen y. icy did aso in the previous case when a man was under sentence. There was
also a lady, a Mrs. Forster, who attended the young sailor, Moyes, who was hanged ; but it
carrl * d to such an extent at last that it seemed to be objected to, and on going to the
Sheriff & Office one day, I said she must bring an order from the Sheriff or I could not admit
her, and it was stopped. Ihe rule in such cases being that a prisoner is entitled to see any
clergyman or other religious person he wishes or asks for; so when it was found that the
prisoner did not want the services of Mrs. Forster, the minister of our church did not con-
sider it right she should come.
1391. Then Moyes did not wish for Mrs. Forster’s attendance? He used to laugh as soon
l oir P J aS rr rned^ r , ld 1 was much horrified to see a man in his condition act as he did.
1395 By Mr. Hart: \\ hat denomination did he belong to ? He was a Protestant, or in
tact he was nothing. It was a most horrible sight to see that man brushing up his hair as
he was ascending the scaffold. When he was in gaol he used, as soon as Mrs Forster had left
him, to begin to whistle a jig. He had been a sailor, had run away from homo, and said he
had never been to church. He stabbed a man on board ship.
1396. Is there a desire manifested on the part of the public, or of any portion of it, to
witness capital punishment? Very little; there are not, generally, above half a dozen
applications for admission on such occasions. When the last man was executed there were
very few present—some of the jury and a few policemen.
1397. What do you do with the bodies of prisoners who die in the gaol? They are sent
away in a cart to be buried. A requisition is sent in for a coffin fur so-and-so, giving his
length, and mentioning what church he belongs to. After the inquest, if he has any friends,
they are allowed to take him away.
1398. Is there any record of what is done with the body ? There is a printed form furnished
which has to be filled up.
Lj99. By Mr. Wilson : How is the jury selected for an inquest on a patient who dies in
gaol. If it is any particular case a jury is summoned from outside of twelve people ;if not,
one or two of the prisoners, one or two debtors, who are intelligent men, and one or two of
the warders, form a jury.
1400. What medical witnesses are examined ? The dispenser and surgeon of the gaol.
1401. No others? No others.
1402. These are the medical officers who have been attending the patient ? Who have been
attending the patient throughout; and there is also the coroner, who is pretty nearlv a
doctor himself. J
1403. So that, if a prisoner should die from negligence, the dispenser and medical officer
would be the only persons to give evidence? You can have no better evidence than the
evidence of people who are in daily attendance. If any person dies in gaol the fact is known
to four hundred people.
1404. These four hundred people are not aware of what medicine has been administered, or
how the patient has been attended ? No.
1405. If a patient were to die through the negligence of the dispenser, or of the medical
officer, there would be no means of discovering it ? No; the administration of the medicine
is confined to them.
1406. By Mr. Hart: You stated, in a previous part of your evidence, that the dispenser
lived out of the gaol ? Yes ; he should live in it though.
1407. Who is the dispenser ? A young man named Walsh ; he was on Cockatoo Island in
that capacity, and was transferred to me; my dispenser being sent there.
1408. Is he a chemist by profession—has he been brought up to it? Yes.
1409. Does he prescribe for the patients? I think not, except under Dr. West.
1410. He is not allowed to administer any medicine except under the direction of Dr. West ?
No.
1411. How far does he live from the gaol ? It is no distance; a little further than the end
of the terrace. He is sent for almost every night.
1412. What is the object of sending for him ? If a man knocks and says he is ill, he is
sent for.
1413. Is he entitled to prescribe without the authority of Dr. West? No; but if he saw
the man was really ill he would send for Dr. West.
1414. Then it is left to his judgment to decide whether a man is ill or not ? Yes.
1415. If he decides that he is well there is nothing done for him ? Yes.
1416. By Mr. Walsh : You say the last man who was executed was attended by two persons
who sang and prayed with him ? Yes.
1417. Do you know who they were ? Ido not know, but I can easily find out; they were
two common looking men, and they became so obstreperous at last that I would not let
them in.
14 LB.


1418. Did they attend at bis execution ? No ; I would not allow them in.
1419 Who did attend them ? The Rev. Mr. Agnew.
142 o! You say you would not allow these men m-did you ask the convict if he desired
their attendance ? Yes. _ „ v
1421. Did he say he desired their attendance . Yes.
1422. Was it after that you prevented their visiting him? Yes ; but there was a
particular reason. It was on account of the clergyman who conceived that he had got the
man into a state of mind that would be interrupted if they interfered
?423! Are you aware whether those persons represented themselves to be Primitive
Methodists ? Ido not know —in my country they are called Ranteis.
1421. By Mr. Hart : Are their names entered in your visitor s book ? I think they are;
By Mr Walsh : Their proceedings, you thought, were characterized by a great deal of
fanaticism and enthusiasm ? Yes; I did not say anything till I found it necessary to apply
to Mr. Agnew, and Mr. Agnew said he had administered the sacrament to him, and did no
wish to have him interfered with. . . , . , .1 ?
1426. Had not the prisoner told you, on a former occasion, that he wished to see them .
1427. On a previous occasion you say a man was visited by the same persons ? Tes.
1428 What was the convict’s name ? Moyes ; it was on account of their conduct at t e
execution of Moyes that I would not allow them to see the prisoner on this occ«slon-
-1429. Did these men attend Moyes at his execution? Yes; and they made a dreadful
1430. °What occurred that was so dreadful at that execution ? They threw up their hands,
and began bawling out just as the man was about to drop.
1431. What was the subject of their cry ? Ido not know; I thought it very unseem y.
1432. What was the subject of their cry? I suppose it was to pray for him.
1433. You did not think they were praying in the right way ? I did not think it was a
proper scene for a private execution. ~ , , . , ~ ~ „ r
1434. On account of their conduct on that occasion you wished to exclude them from subse-
-1435. Had Moyes expressed any desire to see those men ? Yes; he was asked if he would
like to see them.
1436. He had seen them while under sentence ? Yes.
1437. By the Chairman : Will you ascertain the names of those men, and send them to the
Committee ? Yes. (Not furnished.')
1438 By Mr Walsh: Do you recollect a man of the name of Baxter being executed about
five years ago—two men were executed at the same time? Rogers was one of the two men;
he was executed for murdering a man, with a fruit-cart, at Parramatta.*
1439. Do you remember the name of the other ? No, Ido not.
1440. Do you remember what denomination Rogers belonged to? I think the two men
belonged to different denominations. . . 1 1 , tit vxr 1. e a
1441. Do you remember the man who was executed having been attended by Mr. Watsrord,
the Wesleyan Minister ? Yes, I think so; that is a good while ago. .
1442. Hud you any opportunity of observing Mr. Watsfurds intercourse with the prisoner .
No; when a prisoner is under sentence of death I never go with the clergyman, but go by
myself at night. . „ _ XT ,
1443. Did you hear Mr. Watsford pray with that prisoner at all? No; he would pray
alone with him in his cell. T e +
1444. Did you hear him exhort him to prayer as they approached the scaffold i i torget.
1445. Is the gaol visited by the Sisters of Charity ? Yes.
1446. How frequently? Ido not see them so frequently now as formerly—l think about
once a week. There was a lady, who has now gone home, a Mrs. de Lacy, who often visited
the gaol.
1447. Do they visit all the prisoners ? No; only on the female side.
1448. Do they visit all the female prisoners ? All the prisoners who wish come forward to
speak to them. .
1449. Are they admitted to the gaol under any order ? No; they have free ingress.
1450. Have you ever had any direction from the Sheriff to admit them? No; they are
never refused admission.
1451. Have they ever seen the male prisoners ? They went to see one, but not under the
circumstance of being condemned.
1452. What was the prisoner’s name ? Butler.
1453. They can see any prisoner upon asking for him particularly ? Yes; if they come to
the male side it is for the purpose of seeing some particular prisoner.
1454. Did I understand you to say you are a member of the Church of England ? 1 am,
1455'. By the Chairman: What situation did you fill under Government prior to your
appointment to the one you now hold ? I was fifteen years in the Attorney General a Office.
1456. Did you fill the situation now occupied by Mr. W, E. Plunkett? Yes.
1457. By Mr. Hart: Are any steps now being taken to complete the gaol according to the
original design ? Yes, as fast as we can go on with the number of men we have.
1458. By the Chairman: Have you anything further to communicate to the Committee?
APPENDIX.
* Note {by witness on revision) Samuel Wilcox was the other.


1 Principal Gaoler,
1 Visiting Surgeon,
3 Chaplains,
1 Clerk,
1 Dispenser,
1 Principal Warder,
15 Warders,
1 Messenger.
24 Male Officers.
APPENDIX.
A.
DARLINGHURST GAOL.
Establishment.
1 Matron,'
3 Female Warders.
4 Female Officers.
B.
LIST OF BOOKS FOR USE OP PRISONERS IN DARLINGHURST GAOL.
1 The Christian Miscellany, Ist vol.
2 Ditto 3rd „
3 Ditto 4th „
4 Ditto sth „
5 Ditto 7th „
6 Chambers’ Papers for the People, 4th vol.
7 Ditto sth „
8 Ditto 6th „
9 French Revolution, Ist vol.
10 Ditto 2nd „
11 Ditto 3rd „
12 Tales from Blackwood, Ist vol.
13 Ditto 2nd „
14 Ditto 3rd „
15 The Illustrated Family Novelist
16 Tower of London
17 Roman Antiquities
18 Memoir of Sir Hemy Havelock
19 Sunny Memories of Foreign Lands
20 Nearer and Dearer ; a Tale out of School
21 Hcle’s Private Devotion
22 Curse of Gold
23 Nellie of Truro
24 Wild Sports of the West
25 The Chancellor’s Chaplain
26 My Brother's Keeper
27 Lectures on Gold
28 Lives of Public Characters
29 Henry Masterton
30 Ditto
31 Crohoore of the Bill Hook
32 Chambers’ Miscellany, vol. 2
33 Ditto „ 4
34 Ditto „ 5
35 The Bachelor of the Albany
36 Christmas Evening Legends
37 The Flitch of Bacon
38 Matilda, or the Memoirs of a Young Woman
39 The Cottager’s Monthly Visitor
40 A Series of Tales and Sketches
41 The Clarionet, &c.
42 John Marston Hall, or Little Ball of Fire
43 The Military and Political Life of Wellington
44 Uncle Tom’s Cabin
45 Lives of British Physicians
46 Selections from British Poets
47 The Parent’s Poetical Anthology
48 A Tour through South Holland
49 Scottish Art and National Encouragement
50 Roscoe’s London and Birmingham Railway
51 Walkinghame’s Arithmetic
52 Memoir of the Life of Earl Mornington
53 The Leisure Hour for 1857
54 The Saturday Magazine
55 Sunday at Home for 1856
56 Agincourt: A Romance
57 Anti-Scepticism, or an Inquiry
58 Uncle Tom’s Cabin
59 Bates on the Divine Attributes
60 Smith on Presbytery-
-61 Statutes of the Order of St. Patrick
62 Watts on the Mind.
63 Sense and Sensibility
64 The Book of the Church
65 Woman’s Love ; or Smiles and Tears
66 Memoir of a Physician, vol. 1
67 Ditto 2
68 Supplement to the Fourth Book of Lessons
69 Life’s last Hours
70 Life of John Bunyan
71 The Evidence of Prophecy
72 A Guide to acquaintance with God
73 Life of the Rev. John Newton
74 The Miracles of Christ
75 The Two Cottagers
76 Life of Mrs. Magdclane Althans
77 Life of John Howard, Esquire
78 Life of Archbishop Leighton
79 Gertrude of Wyoming—Poems
80 Sermons and Homilies
81 Evelyn ; or a Heart Unmasked
82 Margaret Maitland of Sunny side
83 The Farmer of Inglewood Forest
84 My Novel
85 Louisa Egerton
86 Monthly Series
87 Life of Napoleon Bonaparte
88 Life of John Kaspar Lavator
89 Life and Times of John de Wicliffe
90 Eminent Medic il Men
91 Ca ves of the Earth
92 Blights of the Wheat, and Remedies
93 Glimpses of the Dark Ages
94 Volcanoes and their History
95 Life of Cranmer
96 The Atmosphere
97 James Watt and the Steam Engine
98 Switzerland, Historical and Descriptive
99 Life of Alfred the Great
100 Life of Martin Boos
101 Life and Times of Charlemagne
102 Life of Lady Russell
103 Life of Sir Isaac Newton
104 Idmea.
CATHOLIC BOOKS.
Prayer Books 10
Reeve’s History 10
Holy Bibles 16
Think well on’t 23
Poor Man’s Catechism 34
Lives of the Saints 12 vols,
Douay Bibles 3
Hymn Books 5
Peach’s Practical Reflections,. 1
Reeve’s History of the Church 1
c.


Summer daily
Winter daily
Allowance.
Allowance.
T3 .•
i
P cS
Z2 —*
P a
:z; rz
P o
o ZJ
P
do
pa
P
o°
o
o
Jfthly
Mthly
Transportation Ward
3
3
7iibs.
1
32
7^'ibs.
i y.
y,
%
Apartments in which there
are fire-places, (5, each
32lbs.)
160
Lights in Apartments, to
burn 2 hours each, when
occupied (4, each J4 sill)
i
i
Large I’assase La ■ p
i
1 /d
For Prisoners sentenced to
death, and other contin-
2
2
32
Female Turnkeys
32
32
For the use of the Hospital
79
41bs.
79
libs.
For Debtors
73
11b.
id
73
51 bs
c.
DAELINGHUEST GAOL.
Eations and Allowances.
Ration No. 2, authorized to he issued to Wardsmen
in Gaol, to Prisoners detained as witnesses, or
for want of bail, is composed of the following
articles, viz.:—
20 ounces Wheat Bread
8 „ Maize Meal
16 „ Fresh Meat
h „ Salt
1 „ Sugar
\ „ Soap
Ration No. 4, authorized to he issued to Prisoners
sentenced to imprisonment, and hard labour in
Gaol, is composed of the following articles,
viz.:—
16 ounces Wheat Bread
10 „ Maize Meal
16 „ Fresh Meat
£ „ Salt
1 „ Sugar
i „ Soap
Ration No. 5, authorized to be issued to other
Prisoners not in Cells, is composed of the follow-
ing articles, viz. :
12 ounces Wheat Bread
10 „ Maize ' eal
4 „ Fresh Meat
8 „ Vegetables
„ Salt
i » Soap
Ration No. 6, authorized to be issued to Children
of Female Prisoners, is composed of the follow-
ing articles, viz.:— .
8 ounces best Wheat Bread
4 „ Fresh Meat
1 pint Milk
I ounce Soap
Ration No. 7, authorized to he issued to Female
Turnkeys, consists of, —
24 ounces Flour
16 „ Fresh Meat
i „ Salt
| „ Tea
24 „ Sugar
| „ Soap
Ration No. 8, authorized to he issued to Prisoners
confined in solitary cells, consists of, —
24 ounces Wheat Bread, or
20 ~ Flour.
The following are the authorized allowances of
Fuel and Light for the Sydney Gaol, viz.: —
*The allowance of coals for cooking is 21hs. for each prisoner,
and for each of the children of female prisoners confined in
gaol.
The winter months are June, July, August, and
September.
In addition every Prisoner actually at hard labour is allowed £ lb. bread ; and 100 lbs. of vegetables
supplied daily for the whole number of prisoners.
FRIDAY, ; 15 FEBRUARY, 18G1.
Urgent
Mr. HART,
Mr. LUTAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr MORRIS,
Mr. PA TIKES,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WINDEYER.
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., Chairman.
[The Committee having met at 6 45 A M,, at the Railway Terminus, Sydney, proceeded
to the Station at Parramatta, and thence to the Gaol, arriving there as a gang of twenty-one
men, who had been employed outside the prison, entered the gate.]
Thomas Harrison examined:—
[Engaged in searching the prisoners.]
1459. By the Chairman: Ho those men work outside under guard? Yes, they have just
come in to breakfast.
1460. What sentences are they under? They are men whose sentences have nearly expired.
1461. Do you take only men of that description out.-ide ? Yes.
1462. How many men are there? Twenty-one in this party.
1463. What is the longest period of the unexpired term these men have to serve? lam
not aware —that is the person in charge.
[The witness pointed out Mr. M'Cormick, and proceeded with the searching of the
road party.]
Mr. Patrick M'Cormick examined ;
1464. By the Chairman : The men who arc mustered here are a road party ? They work in
the quarry, and sometimes on the road.
1465. Under what regulations? Under escort —they quarry stones.
1466. Who directs their.work? The overseer of the hard labour.
1467.


1467. At what time do the men turn out ? At eight o’clock, except when they arc engaged
in taking stones out of the yard. 1
-m,*q Under what guard do they work? Four men form an escort.
1469. How is the selection of prisoners made for these road parties . T e men wi i
mo! Tho“se sentoTs arc nearly expired ? The men who have the shortest time to
IdrT' Thev may be men with long sentences. There are no long-sentenced men.
U-)i Wlmt areVhe sentences of fhe prisoners ? They may be ten or twelve months. It a
__ n bn S a three years sentence, and he remains here two, he then goes away.
U 73 I saw several men searching the prisoners just now ? Yes that ts thetr duty.
4474 J. that the usual practice ? Yes; they are searched when they go out and when they
come in.
[The Committee visited the stone-cutting yard. They next entere o.
wing, on each side of which were ranged the prisoners. One of the turnkeys called
over their names from a muster-roll, and they then dispersed to the cells on
ground fl Committee inspected the several cells. In No. 9 was a man s^nng
from a W leg, of whom the Chairman inquired whether he had the same food as
fhe other prisoners. He replied in the affirmative, but added that bis general health
was good.]
John Wilkes examined :
1475 B'/ the Chairman: Flow long have you been here ? Two years and eight months.
111?: pains in keeping it so as well as I can.
Parramatta
Gaol.
15 Feb., 1861.
! Mr. Patrick
M‘Cormick.
John Wilkes,
John Driscoll examined ; —
[Having expressed a wish to make a statement.]
1478. Bii tie Chairman :How long have you been here ? Nine months.
1479. Tinder what sentence ? Twelve months.
1480. For what offence ? Embezzlement.
1481. By whom were you tried ? By Justice Holroyd.
1482. Hard labour ? Yes. _ . . t oer tain facts to state which
1483. You say you have. . ff ° oo-upJ™ Pr „ t „ stants are , ockc d up immediately
I should wish to mention to jou. U J f together where three men sleep,
after breakfast in these cells, as many as eight or mne o us together wbe midd | e
1484. What are these cells called ? Bleeping cells. They ]anguage
landing. We were locked up there, and t ere w ’ • , have C ome down here there has
going on ; it was disgusting to a man to icar i . me . ce H with a num-
heeuno closet to go to, hut a place six or feet long the , ifc
her of night-tubs ; I have seen as many as iU S( P do my and other crimes, it is
is known that many of the men w o conn ' he cannot even make water without
disgusting for a man to have to go to eaae himself, he even there . g ft
thrusting his penis in a man s nose or mo , tbat 0 f t p e rune months I have
man sitting on a tub. In the nex_ p a<y rnon ths been under the doctor’s hands ever
been here I have, with the exception of two months been to last three
*>«• 1 "H-wS. r'taoc iTJ L nlZstZt when you to walk over the
X" il ibequaovy, aud I have not bo™ .«•***. ™ fte women in
1485. mis f, rtune , aud it is not
Sydney; but we are h able to that, at gWd be s0 treated. In the
because a man is m puson, a • Jells ■ e gitice p have been here for being too
next place, although I have only beeni in. the cells tw t , fonr hours .
candid to the visiting magistrate I w p p h d also my tea and sugar stopped
1486. Who is the visiting magistrate ? txreenup.
for a month, and my extra balf 'P° a "' ° p t old him that as we were going out I looked
1487. What did you say to Dr. Green p. do(TS ’than anything else, and he said,
at Mr. M'Cormick, who treats the men ra U afc = othi . p f p had s-.id what suggested
« What are you looking at ? 1 said was „ K h ld have been insolent, for that was
itself to my mind —“ A cat may look at a king
in my mind. • .i d ' ld you say anything more in his hearing ?
1488. Was it for that you wore put. u A ceH For that I was
Yes ; I told Dr. Greenup I was low n g 1 ed my tea aud sugar and extra bread,
put in the cells fur four and twee* W* «* ~'H?*, aid I was at hard labour.
1489. B,, Mr. Windy,n Are tea and s g • tw0 ou „ oe s of tea, and two pinto of tea
1490. What food do you get ? One Ponna o
the same as this (producing atm P ot V j be bospita l rations ? Yes; I get two pieces
*■“ a'-lowanoe of tcafor the — and
1492°is that what you have hadfor XZdfn (alluding to a guantiig
1493. Bg Mr. Hart: No° that belongs to the other men.
of hominy contained m a kid in the eel) . 1494.
157—G
John Driscoll,
ON THE PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND CUMBERLAND.


Parramatta
Gaol.
15 Feb., 1861.
John Driscoll.
Mr. Patrick
M'Cormick,
T, Chow.
J. Collins,
1494. By the Chairman^: Have you anything to complain of with regard to the general
1. “ ann | em e«t of the prison—you have complained of being locked up in the cells, and
lltQ - TT deCeDCy ? Y . es > 1 com P lain of the closet more especially.
' 149 °- Have! you anything else to complain of ? Perhaps I should not be able to substantiate
any other charges; and it is of no use making a complaint without I could do so, as I should
only be punished,
1496. Have you ever noticed any improper conduct on the part of the prisoners ? No,
\ instead Bailing the Sabbath as a day of rest it is anything but that.
• ' s JG . re ntd serv i° e on Sundays ? Yes, and those who are Protestants are locked up
in the morning. *
i ioq' bere D 0 Hrofostant service ? In the afternoon.
1 -nn v Mr% - LuCa * ; 4 nd then . the others are locked U P ? Yes.
, ou sa id that during the time you were locked up eight or nine were in one cell—
a tubS T °l one remains the whole time,
re not the tubs taken out in the morning? Yes, they are emptied; but one tub
remains the whole day. j r )
. T °; referred to by the preceding witness, was an ordinary cell, and
contained three night-tubs. The Committee having proceeded thither, —J
Mr. M'Cormick further examined :
150-. By the Chairman : Is that the place where all the prisoners go ? It is, when the men
are locked in. ° '
P n " eav] y tke ce^s on the ground floor were three or four men, seated
i koq rr IGr ° n a * oim or on the stones, with a kid before them containing hominy]
(No - 19)? only 0M ' tho “>•
1504. Whose bed is that ? Peter Ileenan’s
1505. Is he in the cell ? No.
1506. Do the men go into any of the cells ? Wherever the breakfast is laid out.
Thomas Chew examined :
1507. What is the food you have for breakfast ? Hominy.
1508. Have you eaten any ? Yes.
1509 Have you eaten all you intend to eat? {More than half the quantity provided had
been left in the kid.) Yes.
1510, Are you satisfied with the food ? Yes.
L s r lfc £ ood ? Yes; this is very good. Sometimes it is bad.
15H. W hat do you get for dinner ? Beef and potatoes we are supposed to get.
How long have you been in this prison ? Three years within a month.
1014. \\ hat is the period of your sentence ? That is the period—three years.
1515. jl ou will soon be out ? Yes.
1516. What were you sent here for ? An assault on my wife.
1517. Where were you tried ? At Bathurst.
1518. By whom ? Judge Dickinson.
1519. Have you been in Parramatta all the time ? Yes.
1520. How have you been employed during the time ? Sometimes in the hospital, and for
iSf 11 * 111011 “ S 1 haVe been ? ent on . a road P art J> t 0 which I was not sentenced.
Are you generally satisfied with the food you have—is it good uniformly ? I have
no reason to complain of the food, only once now and then.
1522. Have you ever noticed obscenity in the conduct of the prisoners, anything offensive
to you ? I have no complaint in that way. > J b
James Collins examined :
[Having stated that he wished to make a complaint.]
lb23 ' the Chairman: How long have you been here, who sentenced you, and for what
offence? I was tried by Mr. Justice Dickinson, now Chief Justice in Sydney; I got a
sentence of two years with hard labour, for felony.
When did you receive that sentence ? On the Bth June, 1860.
15-5. You have some statement you wish to make to the Committee ? Yes, it is concerninrr
the people having to wash their linen.
1526. State as clearly and as fully as you can the nature of your complaint ? The tubs
taati you see in the cells, and likewise that are used throughout the night by men that are
taking medicine, and are under the doctor’s hands, are fetched down, and we have to wash
our flannels and other clothes in them. s
1527. Anything else ? Yes; I was sent here, I believe, for reformation. I was put in the
yard stone-cutting, and was stone-cutting there for some eight months. I was taken out of
that and sent out to the roads I was working here at the back, at the cesspool whTch is
made to take the drainage from the gaol. I was working from morning till night in the
water and refuse of the gaol, and Mr. Flinders, one of the turnkeys over usf as I was
finishing the flagging, told me to put the flag over the top; as I was putting it on, the water was
working the ground into mud. While I was doing this the bell rang, and I stonned bpbinrt
the other men to finish setting it. He afterwards reported me to Mr. M'Cormick for not
setting it properly, and Mr. McCormick’s answer was, “Put him in the cells.” I was kent
in the cells six days, till the magistrate came, and then I got forty-eight hours. He did
not
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE SELECT COMMITTEE


not find fault when I was setting it, though he saw me at work, but went and reported it; 3
and yet these men are pat here to see that the prisoners reform. _ _
1528. What magistrate were you brought before ? Dr. Grieenup ; he likewise stopped my
tea and sugar for two months.
1529. When was this? About three months ago.
1530. You do not know in what month it occurred? No; between three and four
months ago.
1531. By Mr. Windeyer: During the six days before the magistrate came were you in
solitary confinement? Not on solitary rations.
1532. But before the magistrate came you were in solitary confinement ? Yes.
1533. Were you deprived of your tea and sugar as part of your sentence ? Yes.
1534. Did you hear the statement made by Driscoll as to obscene conduct in the closets ?
Yes’ of course everybody is aware that the refuse of the world comes into places of this
description; but there are some who are not altogether discarded by society who are obliged
to mix with the others.
1535. Have you observed anything of this kind? As regards obscene language, you can hear
it every minute of the day.
1536. Have you witnessed obscene exposure? You cannot help it.
1537. As a man, have your feelings been shocked in any way by what you have seen . I
have turned my head and walked away.
1538. Were you ever in a place of this kind before ? Yes.
1539. Are you a married man ? Yes.
1540. What were you tried for? Felony—robbing the post office at Kempsey, Macleay
1541. Of the four men now in this cell does either sleep in it at night? No, neither of us.
1542. Are your rations generally good ? Sometimes for weeks, I can say on my oath, the
bread has been like vinegar.
1543. That seems pretty good ? That is first-class bread; that is hospital breach
1544. B) Mr. Wilson : When you get bad bread cannot you complain and have it changed?
Sometimes it is changed, sometimes it is not. I have sometimes been out all day without
tasting a mouthful, it has been so bad. . , .or
1545 Are you aware who decides whether it shall be changed or whether it shall not. i
believe Mr. Allen. . ~ „ m 1 ~ , . ,i
1546. By the Chairman : Are you all locked up separately at night: Those that are in the
lower tier cells are locked up singly, but in the upper cells there are three in a cell, in the
other wing I have slept with as many as five in a cell.
1547. Who sleeps in this cell ? James Pearce. c . T , ,
1548. By Mr. Wilson : Will you state how you wash your body here ? Since I nave been
in gaol all I have been able to wash has been my feet and legs, and sometimes I have
got another man to wash my back.
1549. Is there any bath here ? No.
1550. By Mr. Windeyer : Are you made to wash every day ? No.
1551. By the Chairman : Is there any regulation by which, if you were disposed to be dirty,
you would be compelled to wash ? As far as clean shirts aie concerne
1552. But with regard to your persons, have you ever been required to wash your persons ?
Never, since I have been in gaol. i, „„„„„
1553. Suppose this case,—that there were a person here of very dirty habits, who
wash himself from one month to another ? He would remain dirty, so far as the authorities
1554. By Mr. Windeyer; Have you ever seen a man washed? I have seen people washed
who have been deranged.
James Pearce brought forward and examined :
1555. By the Chairman : Did you sleep in this cell last night ? Yes.
1556. How long have you been in the gaol ? Eighteen months.
1557. What sentence are you under ? Five years.
1558. For what offence? Bobbing a publican. rwiratnn
1559. AVho tried you ? Justice Callaghan. I was sentenced to Cockatoo.
1560. For what reason were you removed here ? For the benefit of my ea .
1561 Were you removed under the direction of the medical office! . c .
1562] How 6 long have you slept in this particular cell ? I think about five months.
1563, How are you employed during the day HaUna i .
1564. Will you bring out your bedding, and let us iook V
bedding, blankets, &c.,from his cell.) 1? . , , rnnntbq since
1565 When did you receive these blankets ? Eight or nine months since.
1566 When were they last washed ? They have never been washed since I had them.
IS A rug •)
1569. Did you receive that at the same time Xes. to Tuttillg
your oeU right 7 up my mattrass, and folded my blankets and rug up, m accordance
—' in which we saw them just now ? Yes.
1572. They are not aired in any way • °- ~ , ? y es
1573. Is the folding up of your bed-clothes the first thin c yo . • 1574#
15 Feb., 1861.
J* Collins.
James Pearce,


1574. Does it remain so all day ? Yes.
L> 1575. All the prisoners sleep on a board of that kind ( pointing to a deal board, about six
feet by two, raised three or four inches from the f, >or by battens) ? Yes.
;. 1576. When was that cell last whitewashed ? Two mouths ago.
1577. Can you state when it was whitewashed on the occasion previous to that? Not since
I have been in the cell.
1578. Are there any vermin ? There are a few bugs, but it is swarming with fleas.
1579. Any other kind of vermin ? No.
1580. By Mr. Wilson : Did you get the straw for that bed new when you came here ? Yes,
it is generally altered every three or four months. 1
1581. Has it been altered since you have been here? Yes.
1582. You are an invalid now ? Yes.
1583. Have you hospital rations ? 1 lb. bread, 2 oz. rice.
1584. What is your complaint? Diseased liver, and palpitation of the heart.
1585. Is that the complaint for which you were sent from Cockatoo here ? Yes.
1586. Do you find yourself getting better here ? No; worse.
William Williams examined :
[Having said he wished to make a complaint.]
1587. By Mr Hart : What are you here for ? At the time you were elected at Armidale I
received some money, and was tried at Maitland for receiving this money knowing it to be
stolen. I got two years fur it.
1588. By whom were you tried ? Judge Owen,
1589. How long have you been here? Twelve months; I was kept at Maitland Gaol
twelve months for the good of Government. As I am a tradesman I was kept there to do
some work, and after that was done I was sent to this gaol.
1590. What trade are you ? A bricklayer and plasterer, but I understand building
generally.
1591. You have some complaint to make respecting your treatment in this gaol? Yes;
about four months ago I was working outside at the palisading wall, and when I came in to
breakfast, I saw that our hominy was all covered over with dust, and was just like water.
We tasted it, aud.it was very bad. Some of the men put up a murmur, and I asked to see
Mr. Allen ; Mr. M'Curmick sent for him, and when ho came we asked him how it was the
breakfast was so bad, and said we could not work upon it; he gave us no satisfaction whatever.
1592. What was the immediate cause of complaint? Many mornings we are shoved out to
work without breaking our fast.
15 f, 3. Is that in consequence of the badness of your food ? Yes.
1594. By Mr. Wilson : Do you mean the badness of the way in which it is prepared ? No;
I mean that the meal is of bad quality, it comes here so that the men cannot eat it.
1595. Does that complaint refer to the hominy, or to the food served out for dinner ? To
the hominy, but the meat is sometimes disgusting, not fit for any man to eat. When I came
in from my work some of the men sent for a magistrate—at least I believe he was here—and
after the men spoke to Mr. Allen, I went into the cell and sat down, but I could not eat my
breakfast. I was afterwards fetched out and put into a cell.
1596. By order of the magistrate ? I cannot say, but twelve men and I were put in a cell.
1597. When was that? Four months ago.
1598. Was any investigation held by the magistrate ? There was, which was a dear one
to me.
1599. W hen that was held were the proceedings taken down in writing ? I cannot say
about that. J
1600. What did the magistrate do to you ? When Mr. Allen came round at night, I said
to him, “ Mr. Allen, what did you put me here for ?” “ 1 will shew you in the morning,”
said he. The next morning he fetched me out and charged me with mutiny, and 1 got
fourteen days solitary'-.
1601. Do you mean to say that you had fourteen days solitary confinement without any
evidence against you ? Just so; but there was evidence enough against me to speak falsely.
1602. Evidence was taken ? Yes; but the thing will shew that there was no attempt at
mutiny.
[The Committee inspected a cell in the first story, about twelve feet by seven,
and eleven feet high, lighted by two apertures guarded by iron rails. In the cell
were three mattresses, which, with the blankets and rugs, were folded and placed
against the wall. It being observed by the Chairman that one pair of blankets
appeared very dirty, one of the occupants of this cell, —]
Camille Yalenti, brought in and examined :
1603. By the Chairman: How long have you been here? Seventeen months.
1604. For what offence ? Fraudulent insolvency ; but I gave all my property to my creditors
and my wife robbed me.
1605. When were you tried ? In April, 1858.
1606. What was your sentence ? Three years.
1607. Who tried you? Judge Dickenson.
1608. How have you been been employed during this time ? I have been assisting as wards-
man in the hospital.
1609. That is your bed, is it not ? Yes.
1610.


1610. Will you open it? (T'Ae witness opened his led and blankets.")
1611. When did you receive these? ( Referring to the blankets) Sis months ago.
1612. When were they washed ? About five months ago, they have not been washed since.
1613. Have you good health ? Yes, very good health.
1614. Do you get good food ? Yes
1615. You have no complaint to make about the gaol? Not the slightest.
[The Chairman observing a Bible in this cell inquired of the turnkey whether [
there were Bibles in all the cells. The turnkey replied that there were not, in all.]
James Taylor examined :
[Coming forward and requesting to be allowed to make a statement.]
1616. By the Chairman : What is your sentence ? Two years.
1617. For what ? Forgery.
1618. How long have you to remain here ? Twelve months and three weeks, as nearly as I
can guess.
1619. You have been in the army, I believe? Yes, in the Xlth.
1620. You would be glad to volunteer to enlist to go to New Zealand? Yes.
1621. How did 31011 leave the army ? I deserted. I have been here ten months and I have
only got tea and sugar three times. They have got into the fashion of making the men
work, and not allowing them tea and sugar.
1622. By Mr. Morris : Have you had any sentence since you have been in prison ? I have
been in the cells.
1623. What for? Nothing at all that lam aware of—because one of the turnkeys said I
made some noise, which 1 never did; I got four days in the cell. I have been gagged and
put naked into my cell.
1624 What for ? Only for asking Mr. Allen for a book ; it was by his orders I was gagged,
and left with nothing on but my shirt, and all night it was raiuing. I had no blankets,
nothing but the stone walls.
1625. By Mr. Hart: Were you violent ? No; I never said a word improper that I am
aware of to Mr. Allen, or to any one else. I was seized by one of the wardsmen, Mr.
Williams and Mr. M'Cormick, and handcuffed and gagged.
1626. When was this ? Two or three months ago, I cannot tell the exact time.
1627. B j Mr. Sutherland: Were you not making a noise ? I never said a word, but asked
Mr. Allen for a book, and he said I was not conducting myself like another man; he told
me to mind myself, and I never made an improper reply. He said he would gag me, and
send me into a cell.
Thomas Nagle examined :
1628. By Mr. Windeyer : How old are you ? Eighteen.
1629. You are in here for an assault ? Yes.
1630. Who sentenced you ? Justice Holroyd.
1631. What is your sentence ? Eighteen months, with hard labour.
1632. Since you received that sentence, has it been mitigated ? Yes, to nine months.
1633. Do you sleep alone ? Yes.
1634. At other times have you to associate with men who have been in gaols before ( Yes.
1635. How often are your clothes washed ? Once a week.
1636. Where ? In the yard ; in the night-tubs, and sometimes in the other tubs.
1637. Sometimes they have no other tubs than the night-tubs to wash in ? No._
1638. By Mr. Morris : Do you wash yourself all over ? Yes ; every Saturday, in the shop
where I work. , , ,
1639. By Mr. Windeyer: Do you do that of your own accord, or are you made to doit:
Idoit of ray own accord. ~ . . . 9 , r
1640. Is there any regulation by which the people are obliged to wash themselves . Yes;
if they did not, they would be checked and put in the cells for being dirty.
1641. Have you ever seen that done ? Yes ; I have seen a man taken on Saturday morning
and put in the cells. , ni , T
1642 Do you refer to the washing of clothes or the washing of the person _ Clothes.
1643. Is there any regulation by which prisoners are compelled to keep their skins clean .
No, I do not know of any.
1644. What are you doing here ? Shoemaking.
1645. Was that your trade before you came here . I am no trade in particular ; I was with
iVirXwbasyourhTaith been since you hare been here? My health has been very well.
1647. Have you made any progress in shoemaking ? I can close a boot, and am getting on
1648 "Do you think the trade will be of any use to you when you get out ? Yes.
1649. By Mr. Morris :Is the food you get here pretty good - Yes.
1650. You have no cause to complain ? No, I have not niuch cause to complain,
1651. By Mr. Windeyer: Is the hominy good ? Yes; it has been since I have been here.
1652. The bread ? The bread has been bad once or twice.
1653. When did you come here ? In September, 186 U.
1654 By Mr. Hart: Can you read and write : Yes.
1655 Bv Mr Windeyer: Is there any teaching in gaol? Not that I know of.
1656. By Mr. Hart ; Have you had any visits from clergymen ? Yes; a clergyman comes
every Sunday. 1657.


1657. By Mr. Mo rris: Does he come on week-days ? Yes, sometimes on Saturdays.
1658. By Mr. Windeyer: Has he ever spoken to you privately ? No.
1659. What are you? A Catholic.
1660. By Mr. Hart: When the clergyman comes on Sunday I suppose he says mass ? Yes;
and when he comes on Saturday those who wish to see him can.
1661. Does he visit the cells? Not that I know, unless where a man is in solitary confine-
ment.
1662. By Mr. Morris: Have you had any solitary confinement? Yes, the first week every
six months.
1663. By Mr. Hart: Have you ever been to confession ? No ; I have never spoken to the
clergyman since I have been here.
1664. By Mr. Windeyer : What do you intend to do when you go out ? I think of going
to my brother, who is up the country; he is a shoemaker; it I cannot better myself I shall
go to him,
1665. By Mr. Hart: Have you any books ? Yes.
1666. Can you get what books you please, or are they supplied by the gaoler? There are
two libraries—catholic and other books.
1667. By Mr. Windeyer: ‘Have you had any books? Yes; I have got books from the
librarian, and bonks from Mr. Dalhunty.
1668. Who is Mr. Dalhunty ? He is clerk to the priest.
1669. How did you get them ? I asked for them.
1670. By Mr. Hart: What books have you read? The Leisure Hour, and the Home
Friend, and different other books.
1671. Have you read any religious books? Yes; 1 have read Butler’s Lives of the Saints.
1672. Have you a Prayer Book ? Yes.
1673. A Bible ? No ; I have my own Prayer Book ; I got my mother to fetch it.
1674. How often are you at liberty to read it ? Every night.
1675. Do you keep it in your cell ? Yes, in my bag; and I fetch it up every night.
1676. By Mr. Windeyer: Are there any vermin in the cell you sleep in ? No.
1677. By Mr. Morris: No bugs? I have not seen any. I believe turpentine is put on the
boards every week.
1678. Are combs supplied in the gaol ? I have got my own, but I believe they are supplied.
I never asked for one.
Patrick O’TTeir examined :
[Having come forward and requested to be heard.] •
1679. By the Chairman: What is your sentence ? Two years.
1680. For what offence? Perjury.
1681. By whom were you tried? Justice Holroyd.
1682. How long have you been here ? Four months this month. I wish to be removed to
Darlinghurst in consequence of my health being so bad. lam suffering from lumbago, and
sitting plaiting in this wing does not agree with me. In the winter here the cold goes
through me, and if I am not removed I do not think I can survive the next winter.
1683. By Mr. Wilson : What is the matter with you ? lam suffering from lumbago, and
being deformed I suffer much, and am afraid of the cold of winter.
1684. Do you feel generally a pain about the chest? lam very weak,
1685. You complain of the coldness of your cell in winter ? Yes.
1686. In summer you do not feel so much pain ? No.
1687. In Sydney did you enjoy better health ? Always.
[The Committee next visited the cook-house, a long narrow building, clean and
and well ventilated. Two sets of coppers were fitted up, one for the general use of
the prisoners and the other for hospital purposes. The cook and his assistants had
just cleaned out the coppers and was preparing to cook the dinner.]
John Passmore examined :
1688. By the Chairman : Have you charge of this place ? Yes.
1689. Will you state the course of one day’s proceedings ? The first thing done is to light
the fire about six o’clock; the contractor generally comes about half-an-hour after that, and
we receive the rations for the day. Meantime my mate is getting the hominy for the men.
We keep the liominy boiling over-night, and at eight o’clock it is served out.
1690. How much is served out for each man ? A kid holds the allowance for four.
1691. How many pounds do you suppose there are in a kid ? About 8 lbs. in each kid •
amply sufficient for all the men.
1692. Is there generally some of it left ? Yes, there is more than they eat at times.
1693. What is done with the refuse hominy? Ido not know.
1694. After the hominy is served out what do you do? My particular duty is to see after
those who are on hospital diet—that takes up all the muster-time at eight o’clock. After
that we cut up the bread for the men; 1 lb. of bread is a full ration, and lb. extra for indul-
gence. I speak of indulgence by hearsay, my instructions are to send out a certain quantity
of rations. J
1695. What do you do then ? Get the soup ready.
1696. What do you cook for dinner? Beef and soup.
1697. How ? In this copper.
1698.


do 0U receive P er 1163(5 ? I received this morning into the kitchen
168 4 lbs. of beef, 235 lbs. of bread, 89| lbs. meal, 94 lbs. potatoes, 10 4 lbs. sugar, 87 ozs. salt,
for the general rations of the establishment.
M, 'o son . : y° u receive no other vegetables but potatoes ? No.
1700. Never i Not since I have been here; when I first came into the gaol they used to
receive pumpkins. ° J
1701. By the Chairman : How many men will the quantity you have stated supply ? The
men who are rationed to day are 155 hard labour, that is to say, full ration of 1 lb.
of bread ; Id confines they have f lb. of bread each ; 7 solitary confines, entitled to 14 lbs.
bread; cooks and extra men in the establishment—7 of us altogether.
1702. How do }ou prepare the soup ? By boiling—directly the meat is cut up, which is
generally about half-past eleven, and we keep the soup boiling from a little after eight till
half-past eleven. °
170 b. How is it thickened ? Generally speaking there is some of the hominy remaining,
and we put that in.
1704. By Mr. Wilson : What do you do with the potatoes ? Serve them out at the rate of
three to one man.
1705. Are they put into the soup ? Yes.
1706. What means have you of dividing the quantity ? By weight, into messes of four,
except in certain cases.
1707. How often do you clean out the boilers ? Every day.
1708. Is there any cooking after dinner ? No, except putting on the hominy for the next
morning.
1709. How often do you clean the floor of this place ? Thoroughly once, and it is swept up
once or twice besides.
1710. What are you cooking now ? lam cooking for the officer on duty.
[The Committee then proceeded to the female yard, where a number of prisoners
were engaged at needlework, seated on forms protected from the weather by a shed
about 40 leet long by ten deep.]
Mrs. Ellen Freeman examined :
1711. By the Chairman : You are the principal turnkey ? Yes.
1712. How long have you held that situation ? Over two years.
1713. How many female prisoners are there in the gaol ? Forty-five.
1714. How are they classified as to their sentences ? Fifteen years is the longest sentence,
and there are some who have four years and three years.
1715. \\ ho is the prisoner who has fifteen years ? Mary Ann Perry, the woman who was tried
for the murder of her husband, Mary Ann Brady three years, and Mary Ann Burns four years.
1716. What are the lightest sentences ? From a month to three months.
1717. What were Brady and Burns convicted of? Brady of murder, and Barns of attempting
to poison her husband.
1718. And they are all associated together ? Yes.
li 19. How are they employed to-day ? Some at needlework, and some as servants.
1720. How many are employed at needlework ? Fourteen at fine needlework.
1721. What description of articles do you include under the term of fine needlework ? All
ladies’ and gentlemen’s wear.
1722. What is the second class of work ? Making clothing for the children in the orphan
school—pinafores, trousers, and articles of that kind.
1723. How many are employed in that kind of work ? Twelve or fourteen.
1724. How are the prisoners lodged ? Three in some cells, three and a child in some, four
in some, and two in some, according to the number we have in.
1725. By Mr. Windeyer : Is your husband employed in the gaol ? No,
1726. By Mr. Hart: How many women are usually here? I have had as high as sixty.
1727. By Mr. Windeyer: What is the smallest number you have had ? Forty.
1728. By Mr. Hart: What is the age of the youngest you have here ? Fifteen.
1729. What is she here for ? Stealing from her master —and we had quite a little girl
here before her.
1730. What was her age ? About fifteen.
1731. By Mr. Lucas: What is the number of those who have been convicted of their first
offence ? About four or five; all the rest have been convicted more than once.
1732. Is that the usual average ? It is more than I have had generally.
1733. By Mr. Windeyer: How do you manage with the young people who come here?
They have a cell for themselves, because they used to disagree with the others. Mary Ann
Brady sleeps in a separate cell, because she used to disagree with the others.
1734. By Mr. Lucas: How many cells have you? Eighteen.
1735. Which will hold four prisoners in each, and not be at all crowded ? There will be
quite enough in a cell, but not over-crowded.
1736. Have you any single cells ? Not any, but solitary cells.
1737. I suppose you have had some confines who have spent the principal part of their time
in the gaol ? Yes.
1738. By Mr. Windeyer : What is the name of that young woman with a child ? That is
not her child, Mary Fowler is the mother.
1739. What was her sentence? Eighteen months.
1740. Was the child born in the gaol ? Yes.
1741. How long has she been in ? Over twelve months.
1742. When was the child born ? Six months after she came in.
Elizabeth


Elizabeth Parker examined :
1743. By the Chairman : What is your sentence ? Twelve months.
1744. For what offence ? Bad conduct. _ _
[Mr. Allen stated that the prisoner was convicted of keeping a brothel.J
1745. What is your age ? Seventeen.
1746. How long have you been here ? Twelvemonths.
1747. Was any one sentenced at the same time? Yes, this person ( pointing to a prisoner
sitting with her ). •
Mary Ann Perry examined :
1748. By the Chairman: How long have you been here? A year and nine months.
1749. What discipline are you subject to here 3 for instance, at what time do you turn out.
At six o’clock.
1750. What have you to do then ? I am employed to keep the hall clean, to see that the
benches are right. I was at the fine needlework table once.
1751. How long have you filled your present situation ? I think about four months.
1752. Have you had pretty good health since you have been here ? Aly health is failing me
greatly 3 it is not half so good as it was when I first came here.
1753. By Mr. Wilson : What do you complain of? Severe pains in my back, rheumatic
pains, with sitting a long timej I was ten months at needlework.
1754. Were you subject to rheumatism before you came here ? No.
1755. Have you a sufficiency of bedding ? Yes.
1756. You never complain of being cold at night ? No.
1757. Do you eat your food pretty well ? No, I cannot 3 I have been a good bit in prison
now.
1758. Your principal complaint is rheumatism in your back? Yes, and in my head.
[The Committee next inspected the female cells on the first floor, —]
Mrs. Freeman further examined : —•
1759. By the Chairman : Have you noticed any failure in Mrs. Perry’s health ? No, she is
pretty quiet.
1760. Does she appear to have any tendency to despondency ? No, I have not noticed
anything particular.
1761. By Mr. Windeyer : Is the bedding-taken out of the cells? Yes, once a fortnight,
1762. By the Chairman : When are the cells unlocked in the morning? At six o’cluck.
1763. What do the women then do ? They wash and go down into the yard.
1764. They have some time to themselves? Yes.
1765. When do they go to work ? About half-past six.
1766. When do they breakfast ? At 3 they have an hour from eight to nine.
1767. They then go on with their work? Yes, until the dinner-hour 3 the dinner-hour is
from one to two.
1768. Then they work until about four ? Yes, or five 3 they then come up here and walk
about till they are mustered, and then, when the roll is called over, they turn into the cells
and are looked up.
1769. When is the roll called? At half-past five.
1770. So that they are out about eleven hours and a half? Yes.
1771. By Mr. Hart : Is there any light in the wings? No 3 there is no light.
1772. By the Chairman :Is there no watch kept here ? No, we sleep in the end cell.
1773. What regulation have you for enforcing personal cleanliness? They wash every
Saturday, if they choose, themselves.
1774. I mean as to their personal cleanliness ? They are all very clean.
1775. What regulation is there for enforcing personal cleanliness 3 suppose a woman is
dirty in her habits ? Of course I see to it.
1776. It is left to your discretion ? Yes 3 if a woman is not able to clean herself I see
another do it.
1777. I wish to know whether, at a certain hour or day in the week, a woman is compelled
to wash herself? Every morning every woman is supposed to wash herself.
1778. By Mr. Hart: Is there any bath-room? No.
1779. By the Chairman : Have you any prisoners in the hospital? Yes.
1780. Who is the medical visitor of the gaol? Dr. Greenup.
1781. Has he visited the young girl who is in fits in the yard? Yes.
1782. Has he prescribed for her? Yes, several times.
1783. Can you state whether the medical visitor has given any opinion as to the cause of
that girl’s fits? From what the girl has told the doctor, she was born with fits.
1784. They do not arise from an ill course of conduct? Not at all 3 she was quite quiet
at her work when she was taken so.
1785. Is she generally well-behaved ? Yes, in the prison.
1786. Have you much insubordination ? Not much 3 sometimes they are rough.
1787. What has been Elizabeth Parker’s conduct ? Latterly since she has been here it has
been better j at fiist her conduct was very lightsome and troublesome. She was very
troublesome when she came here at first, and was put into a cell by herself. They upbraid
one another with the crimes they have done outside.
1788. You have been here two years? Yes.
1789.


JpotEf"i?i^\ h te\”rbU^tw !ad!e3 about Pa “ ™“ «* *—
i/ 90. Persons often visit gaols, as I dare say you are aware, from motives of curiositv • I do
? to TSt' si:: a **r? * ■.
ITe of Mr - nan: 13 tlWre -/-ord kep t d of
prisoners have never been"visited*by'ladies" v.ii..' 1d ° 1 " niJerst “ d t,lat . tlle female
their habits and character ? Not that I am’awaro of g ° De am °° S th ™ t 0 in<lulre into
clLie 7a P p“nd si: t it aP Pa7n ? *7 7 W , = S the E «“”
1794. Do they come hero often ? Yes 8 6S ' SOme,I!MS Pai ' son L » ms <laine.
1795. Is divine service performed on Sunday? Yes
SS the mafc-
17QS \r, +1 l ‘ U v 1 (r 0 18 f woman here whose husband is also in the gaol? Ye®
i ™ - •«-' -«
and fandlies ? Chat, man : I snpposo you have a number of women here, who have husbands
1800. Do the husbands come to see their wives ? Yes.
eve°ry Can t 0 866 them ? come on the first Sunda J of
1802. Are the cells free from vermin, other than fleas? There may be fleas—anything else
Ss g 7dl„r^^h^j£“ any pris<raer «**• - of £
1800. By Mr Hart: As a general rule, do the women shew any shame or regret at their
cimies : Some do—some do not; some seem to say they are better off here than any where
1804. Do they appear to be careless as to their condition ? Some do—others do not.
i r D 0 }° u allud ® t 0 tllose w} 10 come here as vagrants, or to those who are sent here for
■“ ’° g , and ot f le s offen ° es . Tliere are a few who seem to rather regret it when they come
at first, but not those who come frequently. w
1800. Do young persons, or those who are more advanced in years, appear to suffer the most
from regret ? The young persons do not like to be confined.
1 B U Mr W%adeyer: During the two years you have been here, have you found youno-
people come here more than once ? Some of the young ones have been here four times since
1 nave been here.
1808. For what kind of crime—bad conduct or stealing ? Both.
1809 By Mr. Sutherland: What kind of work is done here ? It goes to the school—what
is called slop work; the other, the fine work, goes to the party who sends it; we make a
bill out for it.
1810. Who values the work ? Mrs. Allen.
1811. Is there any valuation put upon the work that goes to the Orphan School ? No.
[Proceeding to the solitary cells beneath the women’s wing,—]
Caleb George examined :
[A prisoner in one of the cells.]
1812. By the Chairman : What is your sentence ? Two years with hard labour. Cal
1813. How long have you been in gaol ? Four months.
1814. How do you come to be in irons? I had a row the other morning with one of the
turnkeys. He is a new hand, is a great tyrant, and treats the men very badly. He <r o t my
temper up, and I made a rush at him ; I did not strike at him, but caught hold of his shirt.
For that I was sentenced to 28 days solitary, and three months in irons.
1815. Who did you receive the sentence from ? From two magistrates in the gaol—one
was Dr. Greenup, and the other was a little man—l do not know the other gentleman’s
name. I have a very poor prospect before me, for there is now a warrant in the Detective
Office to have me tried for bigamy when I leave this. I should have gone on quietly if it
had not been for this—but I am innocent of the charge.
1816. Are you innocent of the charge of bigamy? No; but lam quite innocent of the
charge for which I got this two years.
1817. You say you made a rush at the officer ? Yes.
1818. W r hat induced you to do that ? The bad treatment I received.
1819. What did the bad treatment consist of.? The refusal of any little indulgence.
1820. You have no bed here ? No.
1821. Have you had any bed since you have been here? No, lam doing solitary now.
1822. How many days have you been here ? Since Sunday.
1823. And you have no bed nor anything else except what we see here ? No, but two bits
of blankets.
1824. What is this ? A kid of water.
1825. What is underneath ? The night-tub.
1826. When is that emptied ? Every morning.
1827. Do you undress at night? No, lam not able to get my trousers off till I get them
altered, on account of my irons.
157—11 1828.
Caleb George,


1828, Have you been washed since you have been in the cell? Tee, I get a wash every
Sire you allowed hooks ? Tes, any book in the library.
1830. What countryman arc ? ®“ S r '' S ? Be ' twe en eight and nine years.
1831. How long have you been in the count y . , Q poun ,j and a half of
1832. What food are yon allowed daily in solitary confinement u P
imlnTtbingelse? No. («. witness produced I,is tread.) That is better than we
have had; we have had very had bread.
1834. You have water I suppose ( les.
mm! HolrftenTsTour uTg'hi-tnb emptied ? Ever, morning.
1837, Once in twenty-four hours? Tes. . the first t ; me I have been in the
I"he tnhTs ;td“duiy°thtly!dt e s°fre r main till the following
morning ? Yes.
Edward Power examined
1840. By the Chairman : What is your sentence ? Five years.
1841 For what offence ? Burglary.
1111; By wboir works of the Colony.
Hit 1858 -
IWT »» I was then
1848. °Howio r n°g ;j. ? Nine months.
I 860; You*were m at the time of the;™f ”\“Stive Assembly appointed
1851. It is right to inform yon that we are a of 1 you state to us
1852. °Did n you ever consult with others as to the best means to take to remedy the evils
“8l la Hotlnlny T persons were there in any consultations in which yon took a part? I
a consultation at which it was
at th S ese consultations ? Sometimes three or tour,
sometimes ten or a dozen used to meet altoget ier refuge tQ work ? Yes.
1856. When they came to the conclusion that they o hiection ? Yes j the feeling
1867. Wore the probable results of such aefim to tiem . We
=
1859. You are sure of that? Yes, beard tkem talk 0 f making their escape ;
1860. What have you heard them &a> ? 1 term Qf tkeir natura l life,
they said, they might as well bo snot at onceas re rtaill of tlie prisoners, who arrived
1801. The complaint arose out of the ie D ula . ko ove rtime as much as nine days a
at the island before a certain date, were 11 d‘ theJ wor ked as bard as the others,
£| wLt°Sir s t“d? The way they carried on their obscenity 5
K; ha^fa S wtL°ri a bave er „ot been a witness;
olllimehter time, and it has always been cloaked; it has
during the night? Tes.
“g; other's , ** I am positive of it, and often.
1869. Have you heard obscene language ? Yes, constant y.
1870 Are you a married man ? Yes.
1871. Have you any oMltamT as a huflband and fatlier j Yes; the
while of Ihe language from 8 once they got in till they got out in the morning was drsgnstrng.


1878. In hot weather were not these places very oppressive? Most oppressive; in the p
morning you can’t breathe, and almost faint when you come into the open air.
1874. You have said that unnatural crime was committed, what led you to think that was
the case if you never saw it ? The conversation that went on between one and another when ]
they got into the bunks.
1875. What age are you? Thirty-four.
1876. How long have you been in the Colony ? I came here in 1850.
1877. Have you been all your life mixing with working men ? Yes.
1878. What part of the world are you a native of? America.
1879. You arrived here before'the gold discovery? No, I came from California in 1850.
1880. Were you induced to come here in consequence of the discovery of gold ? Yes.
1881. When you said you judged unnatural crime to have been committed, I understood you
to say that it had often been committed in Cockatoo Island —did you infer this from con-
versation and inuendoes among the men just as you would infer other facts from inuendoes
and indirect expressions among men of the same class ? Yes; but on one occasion in the mess-
shed I saw it with my own eyes.
1882. Will you state what you did see? It was on Sunday, in the mess-shed, just after
dinner, and I was, I suppose, about a dozen feet away from two men, and was reading a
book, and I saw one of these two sitting on the other, and the other loosing him with
his hands; I was disgusted and walked out. I reported it at the time, but never heard
anything of it afterwards.
1888, Was one sitting down on the other’s lap?. No; one was working the other with
his hands.
1884. In fact, one was indecently fingering the other ? Yes.
1885. With regard to these sleeping apartments at Cockatoo Island, what state have they
been in as to the night-tubs in the morning? Very bad; they are lying under our nose
all night; of course every man when it comes to his turn must use them.
1886. Were you always able to sleep ? No.
1887. Could you sleep generally ? No.
1888. What prevented you? The foul atmosphere, and the tremendous noise all night.
1889. Imprecations and singing? Yes; the language is frightful.
1890. And you say the men were going in and out of each other’s berths ? Yes, it was as
common as anything in the world.
1891. They did so almost regularly ? Yes.
1892. Without any limit or any hindrance ? Yes.
1893. Were they shifting about in a state of nakedness ? Yes.
1894. At the time you were there were the berths full ? Yes.
1895. Have you seen them sleeping on the top of the berths? There may have been one
or two sleeping on the top of the berths. _ ...
1896. Since you have been here what have you been doing ? I have been in solitary
confinement all the time.
1897. Are you willing to go back ? Not to go back to Cockatoo Island ; I would sooner
work here or anywhere.
1898. Where is your wife ? At Bathurst.
1899. Has she ever visited you? I receive letters monthly from her, or nearly so. Ihose
worst men who are on Cockatoo Island are receiving indulgences, while those who have, never
been convicted before have no indulgence. . . ,
1900. When you told us just now that you had no doubt that unnatural crime took place
in the dormitories on Cockatoo Island, did you mean what you saw in the mess-room, or did
you mean the act of sodomy ? Sodomy in these dormitories.
1901. Have you beard it acknowledged ? Time after time.
1902. There has been something more than mere inuendoes ? Yes.
1903. Were you ever punished during the time you were on the island ? Never.
1904. Till this act of insubordination ? No. „
1905. Suppose all the prisoners were treated alike, would you be willing to go back . in
fact I would not like to go back; lam disgusted with the place; there is no place to get by
yourself, you are all huddled up like sheep in a pen, and you can t close your eyes and your
ears to what goes on.
1906. Hid you marry in this country ? Yes.
1907. Is your wife a native ? Yes. ~ ,
1908. You have no bed here, I suppose ? No, only a blanket.
1909. What food do you get ? A bit of bread and water.
1910. How often is your night-tub emptied ? As often as I like.
John Corner examined :
[Having complained of his treatment when on Cockatoo Island.]
1911. By the Chairman :■ What is your sentence ? Five years.
1912. What is your offence ? I was accused of highway robbery.
1913. Who tried you ? Judge Callaghan.
IQI4 Were vou sentenced to Cockatoo island r les.
1915 When did you enter upon the island ? On the Bth September, 1858.
1916 Were you Jver punished for bad conduct during the time you were on the island
lefore S llt act of ? No; I fell out once before, and got 14 days-that
on the island f Always at work.


Parramatta
Gaol.
15 Feb., 1861.
John Corner.
Mr.R.Godscn,
John Kelly.
Alfred Baker.
1 1918. At what work? With the building gang.
;1 1919. You complain of the state of the sleeping apartments there, and of your general treat-
’ ment ? The berths we slept in—the dirt under them was never cleaned out from one year’s
r. end to another. The boards—you can scrape off the filth.
1920. Do you mean bugs ? Bugs and filth both. The rats run about the place in dozens.
1921. Had you any body vermin there ? No, I never did.
1922. Are you a married man ? lam.
1923. Have you a wife and children ? I have one son alive.
1924. Did you ever witness conduct in that place shocking to your feelings as a husband
and a father ? I never did.
1925. You never witnessed obscene conduct? The discourse of the men sometimes is
disgusting.
1926. Is not disgusting conduct shocking to your feelings ? Yes.
1927. What am Ito understand from your previous answer ? I understood you in a different
light; I thought you meant unnatural crimes; but the language of the men I did not like
to hear.
1928. Did you ever hear language that led you to think unnatural crime had been committed
there? Yes.
1929. What is your opinion as to whether the crime of sodomy has been committed there—
do you think it has or has not been committed there ? From what I have heard, my humble
opinion is, that it has been, but not lately.
1930. Were the prisoners in the habit of going from one sleeping berth to another at night ?
Not to my knowledge.
1931. You had'to creep into your berth on your hands and knees ? Yes.
1932. Did you ever experience any ill effects from the state of the atmosphere, in consequence
of the dormitories being overcrowded ? Yes.
1933. Were those berths full during the time you were there ? Yes; I have known them
to be so full that they have been three deep.
1934. Was there much noise there during the night? Yes; if I had my choice I would
rather here in this cell than go back to the island. I have no one here to trouble me;
I am here in peace and quietness.
1935. Have you any books here ? I have. I would sooner do the remainder of my time
here than go back to the island again.
[Visiting the yard where the joiners’ and blacksmiths’ shops are situated, —]
Mr. Richard Godson examined:—
. 1936. By the Chairman : You are appointed as overseer of the carpenters ? Yes.
1937. When did you receive that appointment? On the 9th November, 1859.
1938. From whom ? The Sheriff, on the recommendation of the Colonial Architect.
1939. How many men are under you? I have thirteen just now.
1940. Are any of them carpenters by trade ? Only one.
1941. V hat work are they generally employed upon ? Making wheelbarrows, handcarts,
and some of them clog soles.
1942. What are the clog soles ? They have leather uppers put on them by the shoemakers,
and the magistrates think they will last longer, and be cheaper and better than the shoes
they wear at present.
1943. Is any work done for persons outside ? No, it is all public work; we have now some
handcarts making for Darlinghurst Gaol, and a dozen barrows went down to the Architect’s
Office.
1944. I observe one of the men working in irons ? Yes, that is one of the men first sent
from Cockatoo Island. There is also work done for the Lunatic Asylum.
John Kelly examined :
[A prisoner working in the blacksmiths’ shop ]
1945. By the Chairman : What do you work at generally? Anything that has been to be
made. Since I have been here I have done all the work.
1946. What have you been making ? Palisading for the front of the Government House.
1947. Do you ever make any articles to go outside? No, only the iron-work for wheel-
barrows, that is all; there have been axles made for three go-carts.
_ [The Committee having resolved to hear certain prisoners in the absence of
the prison authorities, —]
Alfred Baker examined :
1948. By the Chairman : How long have you been in this prison ?. Nine months.
1849. For what term was your sentence? Twelve months.
1950. For what offence? An assault was sworn against me.
1951. Who sentenced you? Mr. Justice Holroyd.
1952. You wish to make some statement to this Committee ? Yes.
1953. Will you proceed to dojso —you may speak quite unreservedly here, only adhere strictlv
to facts ? The fact is, that, since I have been here, I have witnessed the treatment of the
people here—our victuals, when it is cooked in the sort of way it is, is more fit for pio- s
When it is put down for you it is in a tub, which four or five have to eat out of, and "you
have


arTpufintoa where T"? “t * W " fire . of 7™
that the men who are working hero li, 1 ias u s e P , ni Another thing is,
clean water to wash their face- thee* em pamahed for getting a drop of
eight hours. ’ tbe ? baTe bcen sel “ to ‘be cells for twenty-four or forty-.
m^ny* sent have°two f'T an /. pension, but I have seen
seen over the lime ■ these I have seen taken 065 ° f J la , nk . et wblcb 1 have ofteQ
to lie on the stone. Very often the k em , ; t^ e ‘ r and tbe J h ad
Three or four were punished the other day for
they could not eat it. S so > though the bread was that sour
ill * io-day? l‘hbr n oShtt meB '
enough yesterday 1101 T°hey tre 1 7^
as r es; “
cooked and the potatoes with their skins on are put into the s’oup P ° tat ° eS are
1959. Are you allowed spoons ? Horn spoons. P
and o two S Wank^ts dmS g °°“ ? Y ° 3 ' beddm S 1 haTe S ot is good enough; a straw mattress
IZle ‘° aU ? Y ° S< th ° y ar ° “* *° ™ h
unless t Qhoose!‘ 7mn '* C ° mpeUed to do tbat ? are not compelled
1963. By Mr Windeyer : Are you in a cell by yourself? No ; I asked for one and had if
for sometime, but I was taken out the other day to let a man go in that was in Sons lam
sorls of crimes* 1 ' ° erS ’ ° U We ‘° ““ bere witb P eo P le wh » ba «> committed all
1964 Do you know whether the men complain at all of not beum able to shorten their
SV7 VpfrS ? N °’. l neTer '- eard COm P hi " ts io “hat way
and Sen 50m ° timeS ’ ““ ”f‘ int ° the “”»• a “ d tbeir badd i°g
who has been so treated? *«•*»■™
token zl7j° f? k °r f-A *!f W n d T ! ? his oase - did you see the board and bedding
taken away . I saw it outside the cell when I went to take the lime from the coll beyond
Tone was tWe from Sunda ? tiU T «®lay before ho was tried. 7
dfnner-tim*tilf Tuesday^ 00 * “* th ° te WaS “ the Cell ? No; he ™ in from Sunda y a ‘
W 69. He was put in on Sunday, and you saw the bedding outside on Monday morning ?
1970. Is he still in the gaol ? Yes.
smUhsf h^raslValZty-eighi^ 11 ““ oarpentera ’ WOTkin = With ““ bkck '
Matthew Britton brought in and examined :
1972. By the Chairman : How long have you been in this gaol ? Twelve months the 7th of M
next month.
1973. What is your sentence ? Two years.
1974. For what offence did you receive that sentence ? I was charged with robbing Mr.
1975. Who tried you? Judge Dowling.
1976. How have you been employed during the time you have been here ? About six
months out of that I was at the stone-cutting.
1977. Are you a mason ? No.
1978. Are you a labourer ? Yes.
1979. You are in irons now ? Yes.
1980. How came you to be in irons ? I received a sentence of six months here.
1981. What for ? Striking an officer.
1982. When did that occur ? Six months on the 24th March next.
1983. Have you ever been punished before during the time you have been here ? Nine or
ten times.
1984. What were you punished for those different times ? I cannot speak to you in that way
you are speaking to (The witness here appeared to he confused.) I could explain myself
if I were allowed to speak out straight, Sir. (The witness here handed a slate to Mr. Hart,
who read the following :—y “ Sir, —I would wish to make various complaints to you now, but
“ m J inability renders me incapable of doing so. I wish to bring under your notice, that, if
“ a man makes a complaint, he incurs the displeasure of Mr. Allen, and if Mr. Allen does not
‘ annoy you in a direct way he does so in an indirect manner. I know that although you
promise me your protection that any order you may leave here concerning my future treat-
-1 ment will be violated in your absence. There are plenty of men would be glad to make
(t complaints were they not frightened of the after-claps. lam aware that what lam doing
‘ now will cause me to lead the life of a dog during the remainder of my sentence, if I have
“to finish it in Parramatta. Were I able to explain to you the manner in which the officers
“ of
Parramatta
Gaol.
15 Feb., 1861.
Alfred Baker.
M. Britton,


" of this establishment carry out their duty, you wouldscarce but plenty of
the after-punishment while in th.s
“ gaol.” , . , tA pvn u; n ? That is how it was wrote.
1985. What do you mean by your inability to ? recently .
1986. You say you have been punished mn J w ;n stat e the reason.
1987. What were you punished for ? H you will allow me p reserve?
1988. So long as you adhere strictly to the facts, you can spcan
I have a complaint to make against Mr. Allen ms ■ th(J3e B ; ne or ten times? Yes,
\Zi. towS for coming hero 'and' speaking about the bread, when the
men in No. 2 said it was sour. _ , ~
SSS- you received before you were put
r 9 rwhat T w: s " Battast - 1 wo,iia not go to load a
cart with stones with no shoes on. . q nrniktmpnt for ? No.
iPod, m %% g
111 ? Yes.
lilt iz7* 7 z;:z*
a disease of the heart, and I woula no go m 0 • an( j j ie came where I was lying
I would not he sent to Mr. M'Cornnc e n _/< What is the matter with you —
on the hunk berth with two blankets over . > I said "If nothing is the
you are a damned liar, there is nothing the-matter with
g :L^f/int
a^attja“ ;*i- —
1997°° You said you wished to make a charge against Mr. t^thc'bread -* H was
are you going to work ? 1 said, „ Let us g 0 up an d speak to Mr. M'Cormick
to say that I will no . sai d y « what do all you men want—l shall only let half-
in a proper manner Mr. Crawtord said, vv nat y M < Cormick « I was the first man
a*dozen men go up.” They said about my ratious for myself.”
With that e ’the' gate was opened, and balf-a-teeu men were let out, and the two delegates
and cook camemwith the^ re f f d "with"that he* caught hold of me in a violent
Is thls ba T d read - * a nd He sa Td - Take him to the cells like a dog,” and gave
rtwo r -sho“ and abused Mr. Allen in a violent manner.
Ido not deny that I did. That is the complaint I have to make. ?
1998. And what became of all that bread? It went to Mr. Allen spg . officer?
1999. Bn Mr. Hart: Who sentenced you to six months in irons for striking the othce .
The old gentleman that comes here, and another magistrate. - t : njy ?
2000. Were regular proceedings taken against you, and the evidence taken dow g •
2001. B S tie Chairman ; What evidence? Mr M‘Williamsf T^ L^oo^rnTweStog
said anything of the kind, calling me a damned liar, _ln fact, d«“2 m J g?" nd
when Mr. M'Cormick and the other officer swore against me. I had nothing “ »
Sy pleaded guilty. I said it was no good my speaking. Just before that, I had another
20“2 la ArVthere k pirsTepl in this gaol? No; but pigs are kept outside, and fed upon
loners 1 rations, aid fowls also fed Ipon hominy. I have a few words to speak against Mr.
M'Williams. One Saturday nearly six months ago, Mr, M'Williams came into the yar
ii i • ii «vnrl wptp pmmted nictii Idv msn % Mr. CorinicK
we were all range up in ( men are t H erc ?” and the officer said, “ Thirty-three
men ” ° There were forty-seven men before breakfast, and forty-eight after breakfast. Mr.
M'Cormick said, " Well, bow many men have you got ? “ Thirty-three. 5i ou ought to
have more than that” said Mr. M'Cormick. The officer went and counted them again.
Mr. M'Cormick said, " Have you made them correct now ?’ _ There was 13 marked on
the wall, and he said, " The men must be correct, for this is the number of them. M .
M'Cormick had then to call the men into the yard, and Mr. Armstrong found the men
correct * and Mr. M'Cormick had to report the officer for being drunk. I got forty-eight
hours for telling him he was drunk. On Monday morning he was fetched before the magis-
trate, and fined 10s. or was reprimanded for being drunk in the gaol. _ . . x _ XT
2003. Has your hunk berth been taken away from you at any time during the night. Ao.
2004. By Mr. Wilson : Why are you without shoes ? I asked Mr, M'Cormick for a pair
of shoes, and he said, " When you are due for them you shall get them.”
2005. Have you no shoes? It is just the same as if I had none; the bottoms are all gone,
and they hurt me more than if I had none. .
2006 By Mr. Hart: Are those the heaviest irons worn in the gaol ? I had a heavier pair
on


on, but when the Sheriff came he ordered another pair for me, and mine were given to one I
of the Cockatoo men. T was a long time before I could get a belt to support the irons. 1 15
have done twelve months here, and I would rather do two years at Darlinghurst than another
twelve months here. j
2007. Can you take your trousers off? Yes. What I have been punished the Lord only
knows. I have a very bad disease, and I have been put in the cells.
2008. What is your disease? Palpitation and pain at the heart. I have been very bad.
The magistrates ordered my irons to be taken off on the first of last month, and I spoke to
Mr. Allen in the wing, and said, the magistrates had been so good as to knock my irons off.
He said he had received no orders, but that if he had been present my irons should have
come off. He said, “On account of your committing yourself the way you have, you shall
“ wear your irons, but if your conduct is good you shall not do the seven days solitary.”
2009. When was the order given by the magistrate? Either on the Wednesday or Thurs-
day preceding the Ist February.
Nicholas Burns brought in and examined.
2010. By Mr. Walsh : How long have you been here ? About five months.
2011. Under what sentence ? Three years.
2012. For what crime ? Robbery.
2018. Have you been punished here lately? No, I have not.
2014. Were you in the cells lately? Yes, I was in the cells five days.
2015. When was that? Since last Sunday.
2016. When were you first put in ? On Sunday.
2017. At what time of the night ? About nine o’clock in the morning.
2018. Did you remain in the cells during the night? Yes.
2019. Had you a bed there 1 No.
2020. Had you first of all bed clothing or blankets ? Two old blankets during the night.
2021. Had you a board ? No.
2022. You had to lie on the stones? Yes.
2023. When you went into the cell at first, was there a board there? Yes.
2024. Was it removed upon your going into the cell ? Yes, it was removed when I went
into the cell.
2025. Who removed it ? One of the turnkeys,
2026. What is his name? Armstrong.
2027. Were you obliged to lie upon the flag-stones during the time you were there? Yes,
all the time.
2028. By Mr. Wilson : Have you been tried—were you sentenced to the cells by the
magistrates? Yes, I had forty-eight hours. I was there three days before I was brought
before them.
2029. Are those the best boots you have ? Yes.
2030. By Mr. Walsh : At the time this board was removed from the cell, did the turnkey
say why he took it away ? No ; he never told me why he took it.
2031. Had you had any misunderstanding with that turnkey before ? No; I never had any.
2032. Was that the only time you, had been punished ? _ Yes.
2033. What were you punished for ? The blade of a knife I had on me.
2034. By Mr. Hart : How did you get it ? I made it.
2035. By Mr. Lucas : What did you make it for ? To cut my meatwith. _ We have no
knives in this place, but have to take the meat in our hands and tear it in pieces.
2036. You have a spoon ? Yes.
Hugh Downing brought in and examined; —
2037. By Mr. Lucas : How long have you been here ? Two years and eight months.
2038. What is your sentence? Three years.
2039. What did you come here for ? Robbery.
2040. Have you been punished since you have been here ? Yes.
2041. How many times ? Two. ,
2042. For what period ? Once I was in for between two and three months.
2043. Was that solitary confinement ? Part of it.
2044. How often were you let out of the cells ? Not at all.
2045 What bedding had you ? Part of the time two blankets. #
2046. The rest of the time ? Nothing else; I had no board at one time, and no blanket,
“o" wlm "Ttho turnkeys. I was in handcuffs part of the time-I had no
2048° f WhiTwte you put in there for ? Not giving information that two men were going
to escape.
2049. Did the men make their escape ? Sio.
2050 How have you been treated since that ? Very well. . , ~ , ,
205 L Have you not been punished since that ? No; I have been tried smce, but d.scharged,
2052. You have only once been punished . Y es.
2053 Have vou any other complaint to make ? Of bad rations.
205 i: Just slate the whole of your complaint as briefly as you can? The arbrtrary manner
the officers of the establishment exercise authority over the prisoners.
2055 Have you asked at any time to see the magistrates ? No, never; because I knew rt
was of no use, for it is all out and dried before you come in.


2056. Have you known any men, who have asked to see the magistrates, punished ? Yes.
2057. When was that? At the time the men were tried here for mutiny.
*2058. When was that? The men felt aggrieved, and they complained to Mr. Allen, and
said they wanted to see the magistrates, and he went and took their names down, and they
received from fourteen to thirty days solitary.
2059. You did not wish to give this evidence ? No ; for I know that if a man gives evidence
here, he will lead the life of a dog after —I know it from experience. I have been so treated
that I have not the use of either of my arms. I was in the cells six weeks before I was tried.
John Rowan brought in and examined :
i. 2060. By Mr. Lucas : How long have you been here ? Five months.
2061. What for ? Horsestealing.
2062. Where were you tried ? At Yass.
2063. What was your sentence ? Two years.
2064. Have you any complaint to make of the treatment you have received ? When these
gentlemen leave the gaol severity will fall upon me. I had not been in the gaol ten days
before I was taken up. I did not know the regulations of the gaol, and some of the men
said it would be best to see the magistrates about them, and they said they would do so.
Mr. M'Corraick came in, and one of the men fell out, and said, “ I beg pardon, we want to
see Mr. Allen.” “ What do you want to make a complaint about ?” “ The rations.” Mr.
Allen came and said the men who complained were to send in their names; about ten sent
in their names, and we were all locked up. We were fetched from the cells next day one by
one and tried for mutiny —some had a month and some fourteen days. I did not know it
was against the rules of the gaol, it was the first time ever I was in the gaol for any crime.
If there is a knife, or a bit of tin, or iron to cut the meat with —which is sometimes brought
up half-cooked—found upon a prisoner, he gets twenty-four or forty-eight hours, and his
tea and sugar and extra bread is stopped.
2065. Is your tea and sugar stopped ? Yes, my tea and sugar and extra bread is stopped
for two months.
2066. What for ? One of the officers swearing falsely against me. He said he was sitting
alongside me in the necessary, and saw me throw a note down the necessary. I had a witness
that I wanted to bring forward, who saw me there, but the magistrate would not allow me.
The same officer was pulling at me again; I had a stone on the banker ready for the dray-
man to put on, and this man came to me, began to domineer over me, and said, why had I
not got a stone ready ? I said, I had got one. He said, “ You had better not give me a chance.”
I said, “ I will not leave myself in any man’s power, I will do my duty, and I intend to
prosecute you before the Sheriff for perjury.” I got four days in the cells for that, where
I had two dirty bits of blanket.
2067. You do not have the blankets which belong to your cell ? No.
2068. Are the blankets you have in your cell washed ? No; I have heard men who have
been here two years say that there blankets have not been washed all the time.
FRIDAY, 22 FEBRUARY, 1861.
Urgent
Mr. COWPER,
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WINDEYER.
H. PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Thomas Harrison called in and examined :
2069. By the Chairman : You are principal turnkey at Darlinghurst Gaol ? Yes.
2070. Did you petition the Legislative Assembly ? I did.
2071. Will you look at that petition ( handing a paper to witness') —is that your petition ?
That is my petition.
2072. In that petition you state you have been dismissed from the service ? Yes.
2073. When was that ? Some eight days ago.
2074. Do you know on what day you were dismissed ? I really forget the date.
2075. Did anything take place before your dismissal ? There was an inquiry by Captain
M'Lerie.
2076. Were any steps taken with reference to yourself? None whatever; I was told of
no charge whatever.
2077. Were you suspended first ? Yes.
2078. How many days after your suspension were you dismissed ? That inquiry took place
on Saturday, and X expected to be called up on Monday. X was told there was no charge
against me —the Sheriff then suspended me. °
2079. When did this suspension take place ? On the Monday following the inquiry.
2080. Do you mean that the inquiry concluded on the Saturday ? No ; Captain M'Lerie
stated that he should adjourn to Monday; and on Monday, when he came he went
on with the case of the Cockatoo prisoners who escaped.
2081.


fast memorand 7T W? Dded ’ was ifc a fortnight or a week ago
2082. When did your dismal f i thl ? k was last Monday week.
time the Sheriff was suspended abou^T* 06 w, ? . The dismissal took place at the
2088. Was any letter vmx wP ° V TaeB 4-
2084. Was any letter addressed to J! Z J ° U Wei ’ 6 ? USpended ? No ’
2085. How long have you been in fho n W'“ J ° U dl " missed ? No-
-2086. You have not been all thnf H , Twenty-three years last September.
208? W WhTs ? t° d t ! Wh r’; Ca P‘ ai " M‘L”ie went".e“rf J 1 W “‘ *** W,MW Ut '
1 « ‘PPoi-W by Sheriff Young, and
Si WhaTwe™' you '‘hire" VorwCkpXTedTD T“ h“ P t TT’ ? Yes '
prL°n walls 6 ? y Yes haVe 1,6611 apP ° inted prine! P al ‘““W have you resided within the
andwhri'ai b f n ?<>” as principal turnkey,
Durins
2092. He was the first gaoler after you went thero? M n . m/ PY - f , , T
was principal turnkey. My duties at that timo w ‘ + ; - G W3S P rinci P a l S acder when I
to muster the men—-to see Ihe Tee w g e re f>™ “d discharge prisoners-
i SIX m h m , orni ” g - Aftor «■<= whole of the turnkeys on^uty— -some
of the at6 ’ , a ” d tlj , e " my lnstl “ otioI1 s were not to unlock the outer gate
p non till such time as such turnkey was on his post. After doino- that I rot ,nv
breakfast, and then t used to visit Captain Webster at his office, at eight°o’cloek ~reel self
the pdslnereook nlael T, 8 ?* ‘m lla PP“ ed dnr . in 8 tk ° After that the discharge of
nn tL r took place, at ten o clock—those prisoners whose time had expired. Directly
on the discharge of the prisoners Captain Webster and I used to visit every cell in the
whole establishment, and also the yards. J
“if* an ? female ? Not ‘to female. The matron did that duty. Then wo used to
four or fii 6 Cad ” 6re “l the ‘ r , WOrk ’ a " d Very fr oq«ently we used t/yirit the prisoners-
r , ' times a day, perhaps oftener—as occasion might require. The next duty would
be o receive prisoners from the police offices, or perhaps during the day anf night from
cut and sTh liL th° nS; and Uie priS ° nerS had beon received, and their hair had been
cWk fnr ; then came on the muster-the ration return being made out first, as a
+ p , general muster; and then Captain Webster used invariably to go with me to
thp m tQV ’ ?T d dir( : Ctl J the mcn were caUed oufc and Put in the cells, the turnkeys locked
em up and I examined to see that they were properly locked up. I then took away the
xeys with me to my bed-room, where they remained.
■ Paca y° u would not be called out at night unless there were some unusual occurrence ?
Invariably I was called out. There was hardly a night that I was not, either on account of
receiving prisoners from country stations, or on account of sickness. In case of sickness the
tillheretur ® ° Ut ‘ 1 Send him fc ° the dispenser > and 1 take the turnkey’s post
It all , went on uninterruptedly, you would not be disturbed during the night ? No
2U98. How long was Captain Webster gaoler ? I think about four years.
2099. Do you remember in what year he died ? 1853, I think.
2100. Did your office as principal turnkey extend over the female department ? No ; I had
nothing whatever to do with the female department,
2101. In no way ? In no way.
i lo2 \r WaS the next S aoler? Mr - Beverley. I was acting about seventeen days, and
then Mr. Beverley was appointed.
2103. I think you said, in the earlier part of your evidence, that your duties have not been
properly defined since Captain Webster’s death? No; they have been so mixed up I really
cannot properly understand them.
2104 ; Can you give us a specimen of your day’s duty since that time ? My day’s duty has
certainly been a great deal heavier; but, with respect to orders being issued, I have frequently
seen orders stuck up about the boxes—l presume by order of the Sheriff—of which I have not
known anything about until a day or two after they have been issued. W 7 hen I have issued
orders, carrying out Captain Webster’s principles of gaol management, those orders have been
contradicted.
2105. What do you mean by Captain Webster’s principles of gaol management ? Every-
thing with reference to the discipline and management of the gaol passed through my hands
at that time, but since then the turnkeys have invariably known the orders before I have
known them myself.
2106. I suppose you have stated and definite duties now ? The truth is I have to do the
whole of it; everything lies upon my shoulders, and has done for a considerable time.
2107. Do you mean that you have to do the whole of the work of the principal gaoler ?
I There


There is no use mineiug the matter : I have to do everything with the exception of signing
documents. These, of course, I reserve for Mr. Beverley s ? Nq therc
2108. Were any works carried on in the gaol during a P ‘ ’
was a little stone-cutting for building the bath-house.
2109. Have the workshops been opened since then? Ihey have Deen opeueu s
2110. The tailoring, blacksmiths’, and carpenters shops . es.
2111. None of these shops existed during his time ? There were shops,
systematically came out of them for private indmdua s. fc ; Qe vearf! ago or
2112. Do you remember about what time they were introduced ? About nine year,, ago,
shortly after Mr. O’Neill Brenan was appointed Sheriff. , f
SIS.Vd you, as principal turnkey, anything to do with the works ? 1
works for eight years, independently of my ordinary duties as p P 1 of
superintendence the new wing, part of bath-house, the debtors prison, comp
front entrance, and dead-house, were built, besides severa nn ’ n it wag handed over
2114. When did this charge cease ? On the Ist January, ic ,
iIU. maTt"he character of the work that has keen executed in your shops ?
There has been a great deal of ironwork done for the Government Offi • |
conductor at the Military Barracks was manufactured under my superintendence, and m y
other kinds of ironwork. . A
2116. Is any work done inside the gaol for private families. xes.
Ins! l l s\tVe'auy h la P rge proportion of work of that kind? No; the larger proportion is for
21l"w“at are the articles made in the blacksmiths’ shop for persons outside ? Chiefly
repairs of bedsteads and other articles axles made.
fm. instance ? There was a great deal of work done for
account has been standing over some four years ? I
am not aware whether it is settled or not yet. , , ?
9123 Are all the articles made for private persons entered in the docks . x es.
2 <24. On 6 what calculation is the wo P rk prich ? The general charge has not been so much
for the work as tradesmen would have charged outside; there is no laid down
2125. You have no data upon which you calculate the price ? It appears mH •
2126 How do you arrive at the price you fix? For some time past I inquired of one or
two tradesmen what would be the cost, and then fixed an average price with the sanction of
2127 8 WhiT P articular articles have you made for Mr. Brenan ? Harrows, ploughs, and
2128^Were'the ploughs made throughout, woodwork and all ? I think they were all made
any cabinetwork been made for any body ? Some cabinet was ™ ade
day for the Rev. Mr. Agnew, and a handsome chest of drawers was made for one of
turnkeys. I suppose it is the overseer’s province to charge for them.
2180. These things are all entered in the book? They are all entered in t ,
21 < 31. d D0 persons having work done in these shops send in the material ? They send in the
material \ Government will not find it. , . « r
2182. When articles are made by the blacksmiths, the material must be sent in . xes.
2133. You only charge for the work ? Yes. . ,
2134. Whose duty was it to keep this book ? Mr. Wickham, the clerk of the gao ,
charge, and still has charge.
oil- accurately what work
has been done ? X think every item is down there, up to the time rt was under my charge-
-2137 for private parties has been entered in these books?
it? No; for when a turnkey has made a return at the end
2139 B Sphere much'work done at the tailors’ shop? No; that is not a paying establish-
ment and I have repeatedly spoken to the Sheriff about it. _ , , , .
2140*. Is there much work done there for people outside. There is a good deal done, bu
not enough to pay the man for overlooking the prisoners. .
2141 Is there much done for the prisoners there ? Yes, in making up slops.
2142. Do the officers of the gaol frequently employ the prisoners ? Through the overseers,
thev have to gain permission. . ,
°143 Have they had many articles manufactured in that way? I think not ) they have
had tubs and buckets, and perhaps they might get some things done that no one would
know anything about. I have frequently gone to the carpenters shop and seen little boxes
about, and have broken them up. . . . , .
2144 Are you aware that there was a large article of domestic furniture being made when
the Committee visited the gaol, which was afterwards stopped ? There was a wardrobe,
2145*. made for some gentleman in the Colonial Architect s Office ? Yes.


2 IM' TM S st °PP ed W following day ?I do not know ; that is entirely in the hands
° f i V^ 0 0 f ~r clutect s Department. I have never interfered since the Colonial Architect
took charge oi the work.
2147. In describing the manner in which you have performed your duties as principal
turnkey, you have not told us in what way you came in contact with the Sheriff—in what
way does the Sheriff appear in the management of the gaol ? Since, what I must call the
bad system of introducing work for private individuals—the mixing of Government work
with private work—there has been a bad tendency.
2148. I want to know when the Sheriff appears at the gaol, at what hours, and in what
degree he has an influence upon the management of the gaol ? It was his own proposal to
hand the whole of the works to the Colonial Architect.
2149. Does he ever come to the gaol ? Sometimes.
2150. Dow often ? Sometimes twice a week ; sometimes it may be a month before he
comes, and have known him to be there three times a week. His visits all appear in the book,
office ha dO6S h<3 d ° W ien b ° COm6S t 0 the gaDl ? He invaria % g° es into Mr. Beverley’s
2152. Does ho go through the gaol ? Yes.
2158 What do you mean when you say he goes through it ? The plan I have taken upon
mysc f to adopt is, when the Sheriff comes into the gaol, to allow him to go through the
stockade and puson by himself before I go to him, so that he may see what is going on.
2154. Does he ever go into the cells ? He has been into some of the cells.
2155. Frequently? No.
2156. You say he has sometimes been in the gaol only once a month—how lono- has he
remained in the gaol when he has visited it ? Sometimes two or three hours—sometimes
one hour.
2157. Did he make any inquiries ? No, not particularly.
2158. Are we to understand that he just simply walked through the yard where the men
nave been at work, and has then walked back? Yes; he may sometimes speak to the
overseers about what work they were doing, or what they were going to do with the stone
they were cutting, or he may ask the overseer of the blacksmiths’ shop what work the men
are about.
2159. Are you speaking of the practice of any lengthened period, or only of last week ? I
am speaking from the time he was first appointed Sheriff, before and after the overseers were
appointed.
2160. Did he not appear at the gaol more frequently before the work was handed over to
the Colonial Architect ? No, he did not.
2161. Then the visits you have now been describing to the Committee are his visits as they
have been made during the whole period that he has been Sheriff ? Yes.
2162. W hat regulations have you had during the time you have been principal turnkey, and
how have they been enforced ? They have been so numerous that I could not tell you unless
I had them here. They were one on the top of another, so that I hardly understood what
was my duty.
2163. Gan you tell us what regulations were enforced with regard to the daily routine of
the gaol, with respect to the management of the prisoners ? They are released from their
cells at six in the morning and get their breakfast; at seven they are turned out to work;
at twelve they come in to get their dinner, and go out again at one. When I had the
management of the works I never used to allow the men from their work till a quarter-past
five, but now they leave their work at four.
2164. How do you enforce cleanliness among the prisoners? On many occasions when I
have found that men have been dirty, that they would not keep themselves clean, I have
ordered them to be put in a large stone cistern, and have had them scrubbed. That is chiefly
among the men sentenced to imprisonment without hard labour.
2165. Are they required to wash at any period of the week ? They are.
2166. When are they required to wash ? Every day; and any man that does not wash
himself the turnkey reports to me, and I report him to the principal gaoler.
2167. Do you recollect any case where a man was punished for not keeping himself clean ?
I know a great many; only three weeks ago, a man of the name of Parker
2168. Were you present when some of the prisoners spoke to this Committee about the
want of any regulations to enforce cleanliness ? No.
2169. It was stated to us, when we were in the gaol, that, if a prisoner chose to neglect
himself for a twelvemonth, he would not be forced to keep his person clean ? That is wrong;
there is a bath-room with a good supply of water there, and a tank overhead.
2170. Is that bath ever used by the prisoners ? It is.
2171. By the prisoners in a state of health ? Yes.
2172. Can the prisoners, after they have done their work, avail themselves of that bath?
They can,
2173. And, in fact, do they? Some do; some wash in the yard; there is a large stone
cistern in the yard where they wash.
2174. During the last week you were there acting as turnkey did any prisoners wash in
that bath ? Yes.
2175. Any prisoners in a state of health ? Yes.
2176. More than one? I think four or five.
2177. There has never been any obstacle to their using the bath ? Decidedly not.
2178. Then, if the prisoners have stated that the bath was of no use to them, they have
stated what is not true ? It could not be true; for the instructions to the turnkeys in each
wing are, that the prisoners can go and have a bath or a shower-bath when they wish it.
2179.


2179. They are not required to use it? Not so long as they have this stone cistern in the
yard to wash in on Saturdays.
2180. Are they required on Saturdays to shave and have a wash ? Yes, to shave and
have a wash.
2181. That has always been done ? Yes; the turnkey in charge of the wing sees that it
is done.
2182. On what day in the week, at what hour, would all the prisoners in the gaol be in a
perfectly clean state ? On Sunday morning they should be.
2183. They would he or should he? They would be.
2184. On any Sunday morning during the time you have been turnkey have all the prisoners
been perfectly washed ? Yes.
2185. By Mr. Morris : All over ? I would not say all over.
2186. By the Chairman : In speaking of washing have you had reference to the face and
hands only ? To the face and hands.
2187. Referring to the question I put just now, supposing a prisoner chose to leave his
person dirty, could he do it ? No, he could not do it, for one prisoner would tell upon
another.
2188. Suppose one prisoner did not tell of another? The turnkey would report it, as he
has done on several occasions.
2189. There is not any way in which they are compelled to thoroughly cleanse themselves ?
They are not compelled, but they have the opportunity.
2190. How often is the bedding cleaned ? The blankets are sometimes washed ; and if it is
found necessary, through so many dirty men coming in, we have had to stove the blankets;
at other times to wash them, and fresh straw is supplied every time a bed is required.
2191. At the time this Committee visited the gaol were there any of the blankets that had
been in use more than twelve months without being washed ? No.
2192. You say positively there were not ? Yes.
2193. If it has been represented to us that such has been the case, we have been misin-
formed ? Ido not think it possible. I have myself seen the blankets washed repeatedly.
2194. Do you recollect that a man named John Lynch slept in cell No. 24, in the hard
labour wing ? Yes.
2195. If that man represented that his blankets had not been washed for thirteen months
did he state the truth? No; to my certain knowledge he could not, for we had to change
that man from one cell to another.
2196. Were you notin the cell with the Committee, and did you not notice that the blankets
looked very dirty ? The blankets looked dark.
2197. At the time the complaint was made the men were under the shed, at the back of the
hard labour wing, and the Committee then went to the female department; at the expiration
of about two hours they returned to the hard labour wing, and visited cell No. 24, of which
the complaint had been made, and found persons whitewashing it ? Yes.
2198. Had these men been employed during the time we were in the gaol? They were at
work before you came in.
2199. It was an accident then that they were employed in whitewashing that cell at that par-
ticular time ? Yes. I have all the cells gone through every three months, regularly. They
were whitewashing the cells at 7 o’clock in the morning.
2200 ; If this prisoner Lynch represented to us that he could not keep himself free from
vermin, did he represent the truth ? It is false; Lynch is as clean as any man in the gaol.
2201. How often do you say the cells are whitewashed ? Every three months.
2202. Have you men regularly employed to whitewash the cells ? Yes.
2203. Have you men always employed in whitewashing one part or other of the gaol ?
Continually, more especially in the cells of the men sentenced to imprisonment without
hard labour, for they are the dirtiest, and it takes one man continually to keep all those
cells clean.
2204. Is there any kind of vermin in the cells ? There are a few bugs.
2205. Are they there to any extent? Not in the male; in the female department I believe
there are ; some cells are worse than others, but generally they are pretty clean, and as we
see little holes in the wall we have them stopped up.
2206. In the hard labour wing are there any persons confined for debt? No.
2207. There is no one confined in the hard labour wing except men under hard labour sen-
tence ? Yes; there are some who are sentenced, without hard labour, to fine or imprison-
ment.
2208. Where were the Cockatoo Island prisoners kept—the insubordinate prisoners ? In
the new wing; there are 78 there, and I think 14 or 15 in the single cells in the trial wing.
2209. Are any of those men confined in the same story with prisoners confined for debt ? No.
2210. Are there any men confined for disobeying orders of magistrates to make certain
payments ? Yes.
2211. Confined where the men under long sentences are confined ? No, with men sentenced
to imprisonment without labour, in the confine wing.
2212. In what you call the hard labour wing, when you get to the second story <min<*
upstairs, the first cell on the left-hand side, were there not two men confined • one for
disobeying an order to pay wages, and the other for disobeying an order to support an
illegitimate child ? I think these men were under remand for these offences. 11
2210. They were there ? They were there, and all remanded men are put upon that
landing. Upon that landing all men in transit to Cockatoo are put.
2214. On both sides? On both sides.
2215. Was not a man from Cockatoo there ? Yes.
2216.


2 2 J6. Was not Swan, who was convicted of murder, there ? Yes.
22 ' l i 7 i’/iw he °P po % te ., slde . of ‘Jo landing, so that when the doors were open they
could talk together if they chose ? Yes, they could. P y
2218. Do you remember two young men being in one of those cells, either in that wins: or *
m the adjoining wing, who were runaway sailors from the “ Iris”? Yes. g
2w!9. Do you remember how long those men had been there under remand ? I think
nearly if not quite three months. *
nE°‘ JI ad °. D , e been th ® re Slx months? One had been six months nearly, if not quite.
22 , L avc those men been confined with prisoners charged with felony ?No were
with men awaiting trial for felony, at their own request. y J J WCie
4 ?’ °I tltt Ea °'' 4 ma ” ” the Cell with the ”> wl >° was
9001 ? a ln per 1 S I °J s char ged with felony been with them at any time ? In the yard ?
In the cell. I could not be certain without I saw the muster book. I rather think
not, but I could not be positive. minx
2225. How many turnkeys are there in the gaol ? Thirteen.
2226. Is that the number that has been there for some time past? Yes: we had that
number m Captain W eb S er’s time; after that wo bad an increase, and then a reduction took
place, from Ist January, 1860, of six men.
222 1 . W hen did these prisoners come to Darlinghurst Gaol from Cockatoo Island ? I think
somewhere in January ; I have a memorandum of the date
Cockatoo™ maDy ° f thGm arethere? 98 men altogether—the insubordinate men from
2229. Was there any change made in the arrangement of the turnkeys on their arrival ?
2 f 3 °; I Was . thenum I ber J of . tu ™keys employed at the time of their arrival sufficient to look
after the prisoners already m the gaol ? I think not-I should have expected an increase.
2261 In what way did their arrival increase the work of the gaol ?In this way—that the
number being greater, a greater number of men were required to guard them
*J 0W ‘W tbpoaed of? They were searched and drafted off, each man to his cell.
How did they behave themselves ? They behaved very quietly. Of course they
used to get up to the windows, and shout to the people outside, but they were very submis-
sive to the officers in charge. J
2234. Was the same _ arrangement of turnkeys preserved without any alteration whatever?
No; we had to appoint a second turnkey over what we call the new wing- to assist the
turnkey then in charge.
2235. Were they confined to separate cells ? Yes, they were.
2236. All of them ? All of them.
2237. Had you sufficient room for the separate confinement of that large number without
interfering with the prisoners already in the gaol ? No.
2238. How did you make room for them ? We had to put five in a cell.
2239. Five of the others ? Yes.
2240. For how many were the cells made ? I think all in the labour wing will contain five.
Were they built to contain five ? No, three.
2242. Are the Cockatoo Island prisoners there now? Yes.
2243. Two escaped? Yes.
2244. Will you describe how those two escaped? They got out through the window of the
cell, by means of the bed-boards. There are three bed-boards go on two stretchers, and they
made this a sort of landing to stand on, while they worked away at the window-sill.
2245. What had you, as principal turnkey, to do with the safe custody of these prisoners on
the night they escaped ? The men in solitary confinement were locked up before, and one
of these men who escaped was one of thirty-two whose sentence of solitary confinement had
expired. About ten minutes or a quarter to four it came on dark and began to rain, and I
ordered the turnkey to take them into the yard, to count them into the wing and see that
all was correct. He counted thirty-two and one was taken from that thirty-two to go over
to the trial wing with the other men as there was not sufficient room in the wing for that
man. Then I shut the door, and while the locking up was going on I stood outside for the
safety of the entrance gate. After they were locked up, I went round and saw the locks
and bolts all shut, and the outer door also locked.
2246. Was there any change of turnkeys that night ? No, there was a change of turnkeys
a day or two previous to that.
2247. Was a turnkey named Whiddon in the gaol ? Yes.
2248. And another named Fallon ? Yes.
2249. Were either of these men on duty that night ? Fallon was on duty, but not at
night—he leaves directly the muster is over,
2250. Was Whiddon in any way replaced by Fallon that night? No; when the Cockatoo
Islanders came there first I wished to put the sharpest man I could to assist the turnkey in
charge of the wing, and I placed Whiddon there. He was there some days, and the Sheriff
told me he wished Fallon to be placed on day duty; as I had no other post I removed
Whiddon, and put Fallon in his place.
2251. Did you consider this man Whiddon to be superior to Fallon ? Yes, decidedly,
2252. Has he had more experience? Considerably more. Fallon had only just come from
Mr. Brenan’s place a few days before.
2253. What do you mean by Mr. Brenan’s place ? He was a servant to Mr. Brenan.
2254. What was the precise duty he was performing that night ? To lobk after these
thirty-one prisoners when they came in, that was his duty.
2255.
Mr. T.
Harrison.
22 Feb., 1861.


2255. Do you consider that he was a fit man for that dutj ? No, Ido not by an means ;
neither is he fit to be there now. , .
2956 Do you think the escape of the prisoners is in any way attributable to the circum-
stance that this inexperienced man was employed as a turnkey ? That, and allowing the
bed-boards to be in the cell; if it had not been for the bed-boards they could not have got
2257° How°did the inexperience of this turnkey contribute to their getting out ? Only in
allowing one man to get to the cell of the other in the way they did.
2258. ITow do you suppose one man got from his cell to the other ? One man going up the
staircase might have run right up, and instead of going to his own cell might have gone to
the cell of the other without being noticed. < .
2259. That is to say, this inexperienced man, Fallon, did not keep a sufficiently strict watch
over the prisoners while they were being locked up, so that one escaped his observation and
<r o t into the other’s cell, and he locked them up without noticing the second man in the cell?
Yes; in going round one side of the wing the doors all open to you, but by going the other
from you; and he must have gone round so as to shut the door and never
look in to see who were in the cells. I have often warned him of that.
2260. If this man Whiddon had been discharging this duty, do you think the same thing
would have occurred ? Certainly not, for he took tne course I pointed out. I gave him
repeated orders not to allow one of the prisoners to have any of the keys.
2261. Whiddon had been in the gaol some time ? He was there before Fallon came.
2262. Was he a vigilant man ? Yes.
2263. Do you consider him a sharper man than Fallon ? I consider him a very sharp man
indeed.
2264. If you had carried out your wish Whiddon would have been there ? Yes.
2265. Fallon was there by the interference of the Sheriff? Yes; the Sheriff said I was to
put him on day duty, and that he was* to escort the prisoners to Darlinghurst.
2266. There were some turnkeys discharged about twelve months ago, —six during the time
that Mr. Forster was Colonial Secretary? Yes.
2267. Do you recollect why these men were discharged ? For the purpose of appointing four
overseers to take charge of the works.
2268. Were those the turnkeys latest employed who were discharged ? No.
2269. Were some of them old servants, who had been there a long time ? Yes.
2270. Was any reason given for their discharge ? No.
2271. Some of the men were discharged with very high characters? Yes; every one had a
good character.
2272. It has been stated as a fact that the men who were discharged were all Protestants,
and that the men who were retained were all Catholics ? I believe that is the case.
2273. Do you state that that is the case ? With the exception of one; I believe five out of
the six were.
2274. Were the men Pegg and Johnson good men ? Yes, two as good men as I ever wish
to have in the establishment.
2275. Do you know what Johnson is doing now—is he office-keeper to Mr, Darvall? Yes;
it was very much against my wish that Johnson was ever discharged,
2276. Is he a very respectable man ? He is.
2277. Had he been in the gaol a long time ? Yes.
2278. Did you see the character given to him by Mr. Beverley when he was discharged ? I
did ; it was a very high character.
2279. Were some of the turnkeys who were retained very young hands compared with those
who were discharged? Yes; and very old men, too, some of them.
2280. Some of the oldest were discharged, and men who had been there but a short time
were retained ? Yes.
2281. And yet the men who were discharged had very high characters from the very persons
who discharged them ? Yes.
2282. You say they were all Protestants ? One I am doubtful about, but I think he also
was a Protestant.
2283. Are you aware that the men believe they were discharged because they were Pro-
testants ? They all told me so, and taxed the Sheriff with it.
2284. By Mr. Walsh: Did you hear them say so to the Sheriff? I did not, but lam aware
they did so, for Mr. Beverley told me so himself.
2285. By tie Chairman: With regard to the prisoner Polack, has he received different
treatment from the other prisoners—you state in one of the paragraphs of your petition to
the Assembly that, “ With regard to the treatment of the prisoner Polack your petitioner
11 is prepared to prove, on the evidence of eight or nine different witnesses, that the said
“ prisoner has not been indulged in any way contrary to the discipline of the prison, and
“ that he has not been treated in a manner different from other prisoners”—do you maintain
that ? Yes; not only the free officers, but gentlemen from outside who have visited Polack
in prison, can state that they have invariably seen him in the dress that has been ordered by
the Sheriff.
2286. By Mr. Mate: Is that the ordinary prison dress, the same as that worn by other
prisoners ? Yes.
2287. By the Chairman : You are prepared to prove that allegation if you are allowed the
opportunity ? Yes.
2288. Was the charge against you, and upon which you were dismissed, as far as you under-
stand
Mr. T.
Harrison.
22 Feb., 1861.
* Note (Correction by witness on revision ) ;—To be escort constable.


stand it I put the matter so, because you say you do not clearly understand the charge—
was it because you had treated Polack in a manner different from the other prisoners? I
believe so, and something the Sheriff said about the escape of the prisoners.
2289. You have never been told the ground of your dismissal ? Not directly. I was down
town at the time Mr. Uhr was there, and he left the message with Mr. Read, who was in
charge, that I was dismissed.
2290. You said just now that these Cockatoo Island prisoners escaped through the men
being allowed to get together at night, in the manner you have described, from want of
vigilance on the part ot the turnkey, and from being allowed bed-boards—did you caution
Mr. Brenan against the men from Cockatoo Island being allowed bed-boards? On one
occasion the turnkey in charge of the wing, Whiddon, expressed a wish to have the bed-
boards removed, and the Sheriff said he would not have them removed. When Whiddon told
me I said he was quite right, and I thought it was necessary to have them removed ; but
before I could speak to the Sheriff he had passed out of the gaol.
2291. Was Fallon dismissed after the escape ? He was suspended and afterwards reinstated.
2292. Is it within your knowledge that any one interceded with Captain M’Lerie on his
behalf ? I believe Mr. Ryan Brenan did.
2293. He has been reinstated ? Yes.
2294. Are any of the turnkeys given to habits of intemperance ? I have reported them on
different occasions.
2295. You have seen them drunk ? In liquor ; I will not say drunk. I have reported it to
Mr. Beverley. They have been reprimanded three or four times, and in some cases, when I
have insisted upon their being dismissed, they have been dismissed.
2296. Will you state whether any complaints have ever been made against yourself, of
intemperance ? Never.
2297. No report has been made to Mr. Beverley ? Not that I am aware of. If there had
been he would have reported it to me.
2298. Have you any objection to state to the Committee at what time Mr. Beverley appears
in the prison in the morning ? He sometimes goes round the prison.
2299. At what time is he first seen ? Some mornings at sis, some mornings at seven, and
some mornings at eight.
2300. Have you frequently seen him at six? Yes; I have seen him.
2301. By Mr. Walsh : You say the cells were systematically whitewashed every three
months ? Yes.
2302. Had you ever any difficulty about carrying out that arrangement ? No ; the regula-
tion is to whitewash every three months, and that is invariably done, but the whitewash gets
so thick upon the walls that sometimes we simply wash them with water, and that answers
all purposes, and cleanses the cells as well.
2303. You have a regulation for whitewashing the gaol once in three months ? Yes; and
when these dirty men come we have to keep a man continually at work.
2304. During the time you have been in the gaol has that regulation been carried out ? Yes.
2305. Have you had any difficulty in procuring material ? We have sometimes had to wait
for lime.
2306. Has that occurred frequently ? Not more than three or four times.
2307. Within what period ? Within the last two years; it may have occurred oftener than
that.
2308. If these bed-boards had been removed from the cells would the prisoners have been
obliged to sleep on the stone floor ? They would still have had their straw mattresses.
2309. During the time that the men from Cockatoo Island were in the prison were any
charges of insubordination preferred against any of them ? No.
2310. Do you remember any charge being preferred against some twenty-five of them, by
the turnkey, of their all refusing to leave the dinner table at a particular time ? Those
were never reported to me ; I never heard of it.
2811. Nor of any inquiry in reference to it ? No.
2312. You have a prisoner of the name of Landells in the gaol ? Yes.
2313. He belonged to Cockatoo Island? Yes.
2314. Was he employed at any work at the gaol ? He was before he was sent to Cockatoo
Island. The Colonial Architect wished to keep him there as being a clever tradesman._ He
was almost clever enough to make an iron ladder in the gaol, but he did not complete it.
2315. Who detected that ? One of the prisoners gave information of it, and I requested
Mr. Beverley to send him to Cockatoo. # .
2316. By Mr. Lucas: Are the tradesmen searched before they go into their cells at night ?
No ; but the overseers muster all the tools and lock them up.
2317. But they are not searched after they leave the workshops? We would not have
time to search every man. „ ~ , , „ „ .
2318. Are you aware that it is done in Parramatta Gaol? They have not the fluctuation
of prisoners we have here. W r e would not have the opportunity before dark of carrying that
regulation into effect. , . , , . 9
2319. Do you not think a blacksmith may make tools and secrete them about his person ?
He may do so, and has done so. . TT . . c ,,
2320. Under whose charge are these men—the mechanics? Under the charge of three
overseers, stonemasons, carpenters, and blacksmiths. „ ~ , . ~
2321. Have the other officers of the gaol anything to do with them ? No; not since the
work has been under the Colonial Architect. # n , . , .
2322. What department are they under ? They are nominated by the Colonial Architect,
and are appointed by the Sheriff. 2323


2323. B\J the Chairman : Has the Sheriff ever given any orders affecting the general
discipline of the gaol ? No, nothing definite ; one order tumbled over on the top of another.
There are some printed regulations, but they have been so altered and varied that no one
knows what they are.
2324. Has he ever, from first to last, in his visits, caused any alteration to be made in the
discipline of the gaol? He has made no alteration I beg pardon with respect
to the change of the duties of turnkeys, and, of course, that is discipline. When Captain
M'Lerie firs! took charge, there was a rule carried out that three turnkeys should be on night
duty, and that each turnkey should alternately take his night duty. That was carried out
strictly by Captain M'Lerie and Captain Webster until, I think, about twelve months ago,
and then it was changed by the Sheriff from that, that the men should take night duty
fortnight about; from that again it was altered, and the men were to take night duty
alternately ; but only two men were to go on duty at night, one at the gate and the other at
the stockade and north wing. Now, if there had been, as there was atfirst, three men on
duty at night, the two men would not have escaped the other night.
2325. Do you recollect a turnkey named llispen ? Yes.
2326. Has he been dismissed? Yes.
2327. When was he dismissed ? I think the day before yesterday.
2328. Was a charge ever made against him of stealing anything out of the gaol? The
overseer gave him a piece of waste iron plate, and he took it out of the gaol. It was reported
to the Sheriff, who investigated the matter and censured him.
2329. It was given him by an overseer ? Yes, that is what -was stated.
2330. Do you remember an attempt to escape from Darlinghurst Gaol being made about a
year ago by three prisoners? There was no attempt made; from the situation of the
ladder it was impossible; the ladder was 32 feet in length, and it was in front of the new
hospital; and they must have got it round the corner of the building to let it fall upon the
wall, which they could not do without being observed. There was an old man on the post
at the time.
2331. Were not the men punished for trying to escape? That was a different case entirely;
that was an attempt made to break the padlock off the trial gate.
2332. Do you remember my putting a question in the House to Mr. Forster, when he was
Colonial Secretary, about the attempt to escape from Darlinghurst Gaol ? That was an
attempt at the trial gate, and the men were punished.
2333. Was there any attempt to escape about twelve months ago, for which the prisoners
were removed, and one was sent to Maitland Gaol ? 1 remember that circumstance; the
man was not sent to Maitland Gaol for that purpose; he was sent there because they
required a mason to put up some buildings.
2334. Who was the turnkey you alluded to who was on duty at the hospital? John
Donald. That was the report, that Mr. Beverley had given Bowen permission to go home to
his breakfast, and Donald took his post while he was away; Mr. Beverley stated that to the
Sheriff.
2335. Was not Bowen often away on leave ? No ; Mr. Beverley gave him leave sometimes.
2336. Is it not the fact that he was often away on leave ? No ; he has had leave for a day,
half-a-day, or a few hours.
2337. You wished to say something about a man named Banks; this man has given evidence
before Capt. M'Lerie, in the late investigation ? Yes. Banks stated in his evidence that
Polack had a dressing-case and a lot of jewellery in his cell, which I am prepared to con-
tradict and say is false. If such things were in the gaol they must be there now. With
respect to the deed-box, that was allowed in for Polack to take out some deeds for Messrs.
Johnson & Johnson, and for Dr. O’Brien, and, after that was done, the box was locked and
sent away. I was present at the time, but the box was never in the cell; it was in my own
office.
2838. Do you wish to say anything more about Banks ? I can state his general character;
he is a runaway from Yan Diemen’s Land, and has been twice convicted of perjury.
2339. Is he at large? No, at Cockatoo; his ticket — (The witness landed in a number of
statements. Vide Appendix A .)
2340. What are those statements ? They are the statements of a number of the prisoners
in the gaol with reference to Polack and this man Banks, and I can bring free officers, and
different solicitors in the town, to contradict the statements of Banks.
2341. The memoranda you hand in have been made by prisoners in Darlinghurst Gaol ? Yes.
2342. With respect to this allegation that Polack was treated like the other prisoners, do
you mean that he was secured in the same manner, that he wore the same kind of dress, and
lived upon the same kind of food ? Yes.
2343. Do you state, as an officer of the gaol, that such was the case ? Yes, such was the
case, and I am prepared to prove it.
2344. Do you mean that you will prove it by the persons signing these papers ? Yes, and
by some of the free officers.
2345. Would the testimony of any officers of the gaol be in opposition to yours ? lam not
aware.
2346. If it has been represented to the Government at any time that you were in the habit
of drinking with the other turnkeys at public-houses in the neighbourhood of the gaol, is
there any truth in such statement ? I have occasionally gone in, but I have not exactly
been drinking with them; I may have had a glass of ginger-beer.
2347. When you say you have occasionally gone in, do you mean that you have just taken a
glass of liquor and gone out again ? Yes.
2348. You have not been in the habit of drinking for a long period together—of sitting in
one


one of these bouses for hours ? I remember on one occasion when a turnkey wa= leaving
“1™ l°eK Wlth M "'“ d the exception ofthos^wlfo
“ gaotis W“ 7 ““ y °"’
S(fen°' fo r a lh e y re\ eV fi^ I t ieard °! “ cha^ e ? No ’ in hct > 1 could not be without being
vising the "gaol clergyman and then another, besides other parties, constantly
“ y r f e -r s fc atlon has . boou.made from the same quarter that you have a con-
siderable quantity of house which has been made in the gaol of Govern-
ment material, is that true ? That is grossly false. U(nern
2352. You can disprove any such statement'? Of course I can.
APPENDIX.
A.
i 1 ’ E ' Ju : arr ' ! ' Gusser l am a wardsman in the committed wing; for sometime Polack was con-
fined here; he was employed picking oakum, and I have frequently taken him the material and
returned it when finished; there was nothing in his cell different to another prisoner; I We repeated ly
supplied him with a broom to clean his cell; his clothing was the same as other prisoners and sirnK
wear when he left the w ing; I have daily «*., him since, and never ibsLVed any
Darlinghurst Gaol,
llth February, 1861.
EDWD. CUSSER.
Fijian of the committed wing; for some time Polack was con-
fined then e, and I had regularly to enter his cell for the purpose of seeing it had been cleaned and
when he was sick I cleaned it myself: I never saw anything there different to the cell of any other
prisoner; I have repeatedly taken him his rations, and on some occasions, when he was unable to
eat them at the time, I have taken them to the cook-house and warmed them, and at the same time
procured him hot water for his tea; he was always dressed as other prisoners; and since he left the
wing I have observed no change in him.
his
EDWD. x CHEETUM.
mark.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
llth February, 1861.
3. William, Tanner l have been employed for the past few months over the men picking
oakum ; dunng this period I have regularly supplied Polack with oakum, the usual material for the
iY’ a t 1 f been returned to me finished; the quantity has been the same as that given to
been 1 in fUe SaW wY 'T- ne T er ° hsei T? him 111 an y other tban P rison clothing ; I have repeatedly
been in the cell myself for his oakum, and I never saw anything there different from the cell of other
pusoneis.
WILLIAM TANNER.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
llth February, 1861.
4 •Thomas Smith: lam a barber to the gaol, and have regularly shaved Polack- fortius
purpose I have visited him in his cell, where I have repeatedly found him sick ; his cell was in no wise
dinerent from my own ; and he was invariably in prison clothing.
THOMAS SMITH.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
11 th February, 1861.
5. Henry Samuels :—l was for some time assisting James McDonald with the ironwork of the
new wing, and in doing this had every opportunity of seeing and conversing with Polack ■ I always
observed him dressed in prison clothing; I have frequently been in his cell; lam a Jew, and durinw
Polack’s repeated sickness I have been allowed to visit him and read to him, and never saw anything
in his cell different to that of any other prisoner; I know the man Banks, who has been brought from
Cockatoo Island; I was partial to this man; and on the morning of his departure from this place
I remarked to him, I was sorry he was going; he replied. Yes, this is Mr. Harrison’s doings and
111 crush him yet.
MON. H. SAMUELS.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
llth February, 1861.
6. James M l Donald: —For some months past I was employed completing the ironwork in the
new wing—of course I was obliged both to see and speak to Polack, as also to see into his cell; I never
saw anything about his cell different to the other prisoners ; and, as to himself, I always observed him
in prison clothing ; I frequently conversed with’him, and had full opportunity of observing all about
him.
JAMES M'DONALD.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
1 1th February, 1861.
7. William Smith :—l am a ward sin an in the wing where Polack is confined; I have been in the
habit of taking him his work, and taking it from him when completed, viz., picking oakum ; I take it
to him in his cell, and, in doing so, have never seen any difference there from my own ; I have also
taken him his rations ; and here and elsewhere, whenever I have seen him, he has always appeared in
prison clothing.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
llth February, 1861.
157—K
his
WM. x SMITH,
mark.
8.


Mr. T.
Harrison.
22 Feh„ 1861.
, j.i q j w .,» netiiiff in the capacity of overseer on Cockatoo Island,
8. John Lynch : For fifteen months IJW t( f thc taskwork clerk ;he was there about two
and well knew Banks; he was employed as s ® . . k e mischief by false statements, he was
months, when, in consequence of his Vmppo tod camj constable ;he pursued the
discharged, and returned to his woik ,su . q J he was dismissed, and again returned to work ;
ready for any purpose in the shape of conspiracy, hut none would t . * J> LYNCH.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
11 th February, 1861.
J. LYNCH.
9. Tkonas the man Banka and was tot f^wis
Island; lam aware he was there punished on ac < g supported this, and the man was punished ;
»o“got CO eS hd £ chief constable wits dtaataed; I have since known tan,
and his character is well understood as one not to he believed on oa . £ O BT. T. HARVEY.
ROBT. T. HARVEY.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
1 1th February, 1861.
10. Bug* O’Donnell:-! well know the man . known «
him in 1842, in England, in Preston Gaol, he was then in the 72nd r, ’ gaw j n 1846, at
in the Millbank Penitentiary, he was then under orders for NoiMk lsl d, I sentence ; to
the Probation Establishment, Impression Bay, Y. D. Land, lam positive ne nan a
the best of my belief it has not yet expiied.
his
H. x O’DONNELL.
mark.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
11 th February, 1861.
Mr. Ball’s employ; and secondly, from being 'previous to his removal to Cockatoo,
if required.
JOHN GRAHAM.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
11th February, 1861.
Mr. Frederick Pegg called in and examined :
2358. By the Chairman : Have you resided long in Sydney ? I have been in Sydney about
2854 7 What occupation do you follow now ? lam carter now to Luker’s steam-mill.
' 2855! Where do you reside ? Behind the steam-mill on the South Head Boad.
2357’ Ware you the Government in any capacity ? The first time, I was
in January, 1861 , and
in February, I joined the Sydney Police. 1 stayed in three years and two months-the greater
** ** a m onth ß
So«n W hat ao YOU mean ? I was appointed turnkey in the gaol in August, 1855.
Md ‘o„ aprfv for the appointment ? Yes ; to the principal gaoler, Mr. Beverley.
How long d P id you remain there ? Four years, four months, and twelve days. .
Iset When were yon discharged ? _ Last New Year's Day twelve months, I had to retrre m
conseauence of four overseers going in.
2364 Did any others retire besides yon ? Five more besides me.
2865 Mr Forster was Colonial Secretary then . xes.
9366 Can von recollect whether any attention was paid to the length of time that the
turnkeys had served, in discharging you ? There was none.
2367. The newest men were not those who were discharged . No.
2368 Hid you receive any testimonial from the gaoler . i did.
2370 WiU /o°u hand^iUn 1 ? Vide copy, Appendix A.')
2371 At the time of this discharge, how many turnkeys were retained ? Eighteen turnkeys,
I believe, were employed.
2372 So that twelve were retained . les. . , . , , . .
2373 Ho you recollect how many of these twelve who were retained, received their appoint-
ments at dates subsequent to your appointment ? Three.
9874 Three younger officers than you . xes.
9875 Were they younger men than you? Two of them were old enough to be my father;
they are sent now to Berrima Gaol—Smith and O’Callaghan j one was a young man.
Mr. F. Pegg.
22FeK1861-


2376. Can you say whether there was any feeling generally entertained among the men
that were discharged at that time, that they had been discharged on religious grounds ?
Yes, there was.
2377. Were they in fact all Protestants ? Yes, every one.
2378. What were the three younger officers who were retained ? One Protestant and two
Roman Catholics were retained—the youngest turnkeys.
2379. Is Johnson one of the discharged Protestants? Yes, an older turnkey than me, who
had been there about six years.
2380. Did you ever see the testimonial he received from Mr. Beverley? Yes.
2381. Is it similar to yours ? Much the same wording.
2382. During the time you were turnkey, did one of the female prisoners have a child ?
Yes.
2383. Can you remember about the time this woman was delivered of a child ? In about
fifteen months, as near as I can state, from the time of her reception into the gaol.
2384. How was this woman employed ? As laundress to Mr. Beverley.
2385. Is the woman in the gaol now ? I cannot say ; she was a long sentenced woman.
2386. Do you remember her name ? Harriet Stephenson.
2387. Do you remember what her sentence was? Somewhere from four to five years.
2388. Who was the alleged father of the child ? It was reported by Mr. Beverley that it was
Chambers, one of his servants.
2389. Was he also a prisoner ? Yes.
2390. How was he employed ? As house servant; a sort of butler I should call him.
2391. Was the child in the gaol at the time you left ? Yes.
2392. How old was it then ? About two years.
2393. You do not know whether it is there now ? No.
2394. What number of prisoners were employed in Mr. Beverley’s house as domestic servants
at the time this interesting event took place ? Two men —a cook, and Chambers the
butler; a black man was the cook, but I cannot say he was there always; and about four
women servants.
2395. Had Mr. Beverley any free servants ? No; he has never had a free servant, I believe,
since he has been in the gaol.
2B96. Had you anything to do with the female department of the gaol while you were
there ? Nothing more than going across with a prisoner when anything was going to them,
to see them there and back.
2397. Thomas Harrison was the principal turnkey all the time you were in the gaol, was
he not ? Yes.
2398. How was he brought into relation with you in the discharge of your duties—how did
you come in contact with him during the day ? I never got any instructions from him at
all. I did not see that he had any influence over the prisoners, for sometimes we would not
see him for a day ; he would never go among them ; the first time we saw his face would be
about nine o’clock in the morning.
2399. Did he not appear at six o’clock every morning, to deliver the keys up to the turn-
keys? Not one morning I was there. *
2400. Who did you get your keys from ? I was not in charge of a wing; I very seldom
had keys to lay hold of, except when I was in charge of a wing, that would be once in
eight days.
2401 When you were did you receive the keys from Harrison when you unlocked the
doors ? I used to fetch them from Harrison’s house, the door was left undone for the pur-
pose; the keys were hanging on a hook at the back, on purpose that any one could fetch
them, so that he should not be disturbed.
2402. Was that the way you got possession of the keys when you unlocked the cells ? Yes.
2403. W T here was Harrison ? In bed; he never used to turn out till about eight, and the
first thing he did was to send me or one of the other turnkeys for two glasses of rum for
him; that was the first salute we got regularly every morning.
2404. Then you had to give him the keys ? Yes. That was his regular dose every morn-
ing—either a glass of gin or two glasses of rum.
2405. Do you mean to say you ever brought spirits into the gaol for him ? Yes, I have
been sent many times.
2406. When you say many, how many do you mean ? Half a score of times and more. The
first thing was —“ fetch me so-and-so,” and he would give me a little flask. I have fetched
two glasses of rum and seen him drink the whole of it at once.
2407. Did you ever take rum yourself of a morning ? Yery seldom.
2408. And still Harrison would appear perfectly sober throughout the day ? No, he would
not; he would frequently go out with the turnkeys to a public-house and drink, or send
turnkeys out for it and drink it at the box—at least I have seen him do it dozens of times.
2409. You have never seen him incapacitated from drink? I have seen him under the
influence of drink several times.
2410. By Mr. Morris: Not so that he could not do his duty ? Yes, I have on one or two
occasions, which I shall mention before I go away.
2411. By the Chairman: If his duty was confined to lying in bed he could lie in bed and
drink ? Yes he could, for there was no one to call him to order.
2412. Do you say you have seen Harrison, during the time you have been there, drunk ?
Yes, on one occasion.
2413. Will you state the circumstances under which you saw him drunk ? One night when
I was on duty at the gate, between twelve and one 0 clock, his wife and he had been out, and
when they came in he was so far under the influence of drink that his wife had to hold him
J up


•up coming in at the gate. Previous to that a turnkey of the name of Horton, who was on
duty at the wing—l was at the gate —goes to the box and catches Smith with a female
prisoner ; he came and told me what he had done, and be said, “If I tell Mr. Beverley,
Smith will be dismissed;” he then took my place and I went and fetched Mr. Beverley,who
was just going in. The turnkey was found in one of the boxes with the female
prisoner, Mary Bellamy. Some time after Mr. Beverley called Horton to him, and he
said it was the case, he did catch them there. Well, Mr. Harrison went over
to the gaoler, and they had some warm words —I could hear at the gate. Next
morning both men were suspended ; he got Horton suspended for telling an untruth ; that
never was brought to light again. I met the female prisoner, Mary Bellamy, and she told
me it was the case —Smith was with her, and Horton caught them.
2414. This woman told you after you left the gaol ? Yes.
2415. You mean cohabiting together ? Yes.
2416. How did the female prisoner get there ? Through being employed as Mr. Harrison’s
servant.
2417. She had permission to go out ? She was not locked up at all.
2418. Except that she was locked within the gaol walls? That was all. It was between
ten and eleven o’clock.
2419. Could the servants employed by Mr. Beverley and Mr. Harrison walk about where
the shrubbery is ? They could in the dark; there was no turnkey on the front to see them,
only the two.
2420. Then they were pretty much like free persons ? Just the same. They would even
come out and smoke before your face and defy you to take the pipe from them; they would
say they got leave from Mr. Harrison.
2421. Have they ever demeaned themselves that way before you? Yes, and I have gone
and taken the pipe out of their mouth and broken it before them.
2422. They braved you to do it? Yes, because they were Mr. Harrison’s servants.
2423. You said when you went for the keys of the different wards in the morning, you
could go and open Mr. Harrison’s door and take them off the peg ? Yes, the door was left
undone on purpose.
2424. Could these persons, who were almost as free as free persons, get the keys ? Yes, at
any time from six at night till six in the morning.
2425 Could they in fact have unlocked the wings? Yes, wben a man’s back was turned.
2426. Suppose one of these ladies had entertained the turnkey on guard, could the other
have gone in the mean time and unlocked the wing? Yes, the key was at their disposal at
any time.
2427. Have jou ever seen any of the turnkeys drunk? Yes, I have, many times;
Mr. Beverley even found them drunk one Sunday himself, and sent them home, and he has
never reported them at all.
2428. Speaking with reference to the eighteen turnkeys who were there while you were
there, were any of the men retained given to habits of intoxication ? Yes, three.
2429. As far as you recollect were the six who were discharged intemperate men ? Not
one. •
2430. Putting yourself out of the question, were the other five men some of the best turn-
keys ? The best and soberest. There is a man of the name of Lee there now who has been
fetched up many times for being drunk in the box, and drunk in the gaol in the middle of
the day. Armstrong is another drunkard who has been sent home three or four times for
drunkenness; and Milligan I have known three or four different times drunk on duty.
2431. These men are all there now ? Yes. Thomas Lee was even accused by a prisoner
of stealing rations, and he shewed it in Lee’s basket to Mr. Harrison, and he would not take
notice of it; it was then reported to Mr. Beverley, and he said he would not believe it. I
have seen 30 lbs, of beef stowed away at a time, salted in the cook-house and the bones
taken out; and 60 loaves of bread, and 30 loaves of bread, and onions, stowed away to be
carried away.
2482. By the free people who lived outside ? Yes.
2433. Was it carried out? Lee was reported by a prisoner.
2434. Do you believe that rations have been carried away? I firmly believe it; I know
Lee myself. I have seen him have prisoners’ rations cooked and taken to the wing to make
his meals of; —the same man that is now in charge of the hard labour wing. Since I left the
gaol I have seen him two or three days drunk in a public-house.
2435. Did you ever see Harrison drink in public-houses ? Scores of times.
2436. Have you seen him standing any length of time with persons drinking? Yes, 1 saw
him drink with a discharged prisoner.
2437. You have seen Mr. Harrison do that while principal turnkey ? Yes, with a man named
Campbell, formerly the clerk; I saw him drinking at the Queen’s Arms after the man was
discharged.
2438. Have you ever heard that turnkeys borrowed money from prisoners ? Yes, a man
named Carthy was accused of it.
2439. Was there any investigation ? None that I have seen. Prisoners, when discharged
from gaol, go and visit his house. I have seen him at night smoking in the box with the
prisoner clerk. The prisoner clerk had the indulgence of smoking, and, I have seen him
smoking in the box with Christopher Carthy. It was of no use for a man to make a report,
for the less reports he made the better he was liked. There have been all sorts of imple-
ments made and taken out by the turnkeys. I reported it at first to the gaoler, and it was
stopped afterwards by the Colonial Architect, to whom I reported it also.
2440. With regard to the workshops in the gaol, have you known turnkeys to have articles
made


made there which were not paid for ? I have known them to have them made of Govern-
ment material; I could not ascertain whether they were paid for.
2441. Which of the turnkeys had articles made in that way ? Rispen, a man wdio is sus-
pended lately.
2442. Who else ? M'Coy, Harrison, Lee—he used to have wood and iron the same as if it
were his own ; he had a cheffonier that was made of Government cedar that was sent, for
the gates at the bottom of Palmer-street going into the Domain, by the Colonial Ai’chitect,
A man named Walter Raleigh made a cheffonier to fit in his fire-place.
2443. Out ot the wood sent in for constructing the Domain gates he contrived to have a
cheffonier made for himself? Yes.
2444. By Mr. Morris: Is that prisoner in Darlinghurst now? No. I x’ecognised the
wood, and saw it being done day after day —some days a good deal, other days not much;
it was done piece by piece; the boards covered it, and the man would go and work under
these boards to prevent its being seen.
2445. By the Chairman: It was made to a great extent secretly ? Yes, it was.
2446. Were many articles made secretly ? Yes, he had a child’s carriage made in the gaol,
and made it away outside to some one; I could not say whether it w r as given or sold—a
child’s carriage, I daresay, worth £3.
2447. With regard to the tailoring shop, was there much work done there ? Yes, they
smuggled away a good deal.
2448. Did any of the officers of the gaol have work done there ? Yes, they had the work
made, but it was in the wing where this clandestine work between Rispen and Lee took
place; no other man had anything to do with them but these two men, and I have known them
to have prisoners at work on Sunday—trousersmaking, shoemaking, watchmaking.
2449. Have you ever known shoes carried out for the family of any turnkey ? I have
seen Rispen with a pair of Government shoes on his feet wearing them, and I have seen a
great many females’ shoes cut to waste to golosh shoes that were made. Milligan and I went
there, and found ten pairs of shoes that were cut all to waste, soles and everything, to be
worked up afresh. Turnkeys used to get cloth boots goloshed.
2450. Did you ever report these things ? I did frequently report them to the gaoler till I
saw it was no use.
2451. It does not appear very clearly what you mean by cutting to waste ? I went into the
shoemakers’ shops along with the principal turnkey and Milligan, and we found ten pairs of
Government shoes, males’ and females’ shoes, the uppers all unstitched and the soles cut,
everything cut to bits, on purpose to be worked up afresh in a more decent manner.
2452. That is, that by working them up anew they might not appear as prisoners’ shoes?
They would not.
2453. Do you suppose that these were worked up anew by prisoners for some of the officers
of the gaol ? I believe they were worked up for officers of the gaol: several of them were
cloth boots.
2454. During the time that you were turnkey in Darlinghurst Gaol had you any knowledge
whether luxuries w'ere at any time brought in to prisoners through the connivance of
officers of the gaol ? lam well aware of it.
2455. You have no doubt that was the case ? lam sure of it, for I found them ; there was
a man named Tessimond, a prisoner in the gaol, he was worth money, and his wife kept
a shop outside in the town; he was put into what is called the bath-house, and while he had
charge of that —what charge he had I could not say—nearly nothing or next to nothing—l
went there one day, and saw some luxuries on a shelf —vinegar, pickles, bacon, cheese, some
eggs; I saw that the stock was pretty nearly run out, and I did not say anything at that time,
but waited a little bit longer—l knew the turnkey at the gate, Burke, did get bamboozled,
and that things were taken in unknown to him, so I waited, and when I thought he had got
a fresh supply, I told Burke to go there; accordingly, he went and found there had been a
fresh supply brought in, and took them up to Mr. Beverley.
2456. By Mr. Coivper: In what month was this? In 1859, while Tessimond was in prison;
he brought them up. The Sheriff knew of it, and Mr, Beverley knew of it. There was
nothing more about it. Soon after that, the principal turnkey wanted to know from Burke
who gave him the information; Burke would not tell him, and then there was a down upon
one man for telling.
2457. By the Chairman: Then, in fact, the persons who were considered the chief offenders
were those who attempted to correct these improper practices? Yes; they were the persons
that were blamed.
2458. Was any attempt ever made with you to induce you to connive at the introduction of
articles of this kind ? Prisoners have done it till they found it was no use.
2459. Did you ever see any other instances of it ? Yes; I have known a man of the name
of Rispen, who is outside this morning, to go on errands for prisoners.
2460. You mean to purchase articles for them ? Yes. There was some prisoners going to
be shifted to Cockatoo Island or Parramatta; he goes to Woolloomooloo for these same
prisoners, and tells a person to bring up a bundle of clothes for him—that was for a man
confined in Rispen’s wing. A man that has money, whether inside or out, can get whatever
he likes.
2461. By Mr. Lucas: That is, a man, if confined in the gaol, can get anything he likes?
I have known them to take bladders of rum from men in the debtors prison.
2462. How do you suppose it got in ? I believe it went through the gates.
2463. Are articles of this kind thrown over the wall ?
2464. By Mr. Cowper: How could the man at the gate be bamboozled, as you term it ?
There are turnkeys in there that he could not stop; for instance, a man of the name of
Rispen


Rispen carries in a basket every morning, and be does not search him; if he has any
suspicion he has to report it, and then the principal turnkey will stop him.
2465. How do you know Rispen does what you assert ? Ido not know whether he does it,
I say he carries in a basket every morning. I have seen prisoners’ hominy taken by him
regularly for breakfast. In fact X have seen that man take half a side of leather in, sole
and kip, and have prisoners to work for him week after week, unknown to the authorities
at least, I do not know whether it was unknown, he never’ paid anything for it; and I saw
him carry boots out —more than he could wear during his life.
2466. Was he supposed to be much in the confidence of Harrison? Yes 5 he was one of the
foremost men in the gaol—that is, a man in charge of a wing. Rispen had more boots made
there on the sly than he could wear during his life. He kept prisoners at work for him, in
the wing, week after week, and month after month.
2467. By the Chairman : During the time you were there, how often did you see the Sheriff
there ? Sometimes he would come up once a week; sometimes he would go to Mr. Leverley
and no further; sometimes he would take a walk round the yards into the workshops, and
take no note of the prisoners.
2468. Did he ever examine into the condition of the cells ? No.
2469. Or give orders as to the treatment of the prisoners ? No ; I have seen him go a time
or two into Rispen’s wing, or into Mr. Beverley’s house, or, perhaps, into two or three cells,
out and away.
2470. Were the cells kept perfectly clean ? Some of them —in fact, pretty well.
2471. Have the prisoners ever been in a state of personal filth ? Yes.
2472. Was there any regulation by which they were compelled to wash themselves from head
to foot ? There was no regulation ; they could wash themselves or leave it alone.
2473. If it has been stated by Mr. Harrison that the prisoners are compelled to wash and
shave at the end of the week, and to appear perfectly clean on Sunday —is that true ?It
is not.
2474. Have you seen men in a state of filth on Sunday ? They have never shaved nor washed,
and, in the confine yard, I have seen vermin crawling on them as large almost as rice
disgraceful.
2475. Suppose a man of filthy habits were sent to the gaol, and did not wash from year to
year, would he be interfered with ? No. In the confine yard the dirtiest and filthiest men
are here, and you see vermin creeping over their shirts. I saw one shirt hanging on the
wall that was all alive; if it had been on the road they could have dragged it after them.
I made a report of it, and that shirt was fetched away and burned.
2476. You cannot give any information to the Committee respecting the female department
of the gaol ? What I can say about that is that two of the female turnkeys used to wear
prisoners’ underclothing and shoes.
2477. How did you get the chance of seeing their underclothing ? I saw it plain enough ;
I could see the skirts and shoes month after month; they never wore their own shoes.
2478. What turnkeys were these? Mrs. Hanlon and Mrs. Cullen,
2479. By Mr. Cowper : Are they there now? They are there now. The other turnkeys
noticed it as well as I did. There is not a turnkey that was in the gaol when I left but
knows what I say to be correct.
2480. By the Chairman: Had you the opportunity of observing the conduct of the female
prisoners ? Yes, I had; I have heard them go on with all manner of blackguard language
—filthy language,
2481. In the presence of the female turnkeys ? Yes.
2482. In the presence of the male prisoners who were there for some of the purposes of the
gaol ? Yes. I have gone there to take hot water, and I have heard them going on in the
presence of the female turnkeys with the most filthy lauguage.
2483. Do you think any irregularities ever occurred in the gaol besides those in connection
with the houses of the officers ? I cannot say, for they were only certain days that I had
the opportunity of going across to the female gaol. Drunkenness was a prevalent thing in
the gaol —the turnkeys going out to get drink, as well as drinking in the box.
2484. By Mr. Morris: Do you remember some prisoners trying to escape from Woolloo-
mooloo Graol some time in 1859 ? Yes, it was while I was there.
2485. Did they try to escape ? Yes.
2486. In what way ? They were building the hospital on the south side of the gaol, and,
during the breakfast-time, the turnkey that should have been on duty never came; all the
prisoners were with the ladders and tools, and, during the breakfast-time, they got a ladder,
and two or three of them were creeping up it, when another turnkey came by accident and
discovered them,
2487. Was the ladder placed against the outer wall? Yes.
2488. How did they manage to get the ladder ? They were building the new hospital.
2489. Did they remove the ladder from the hospital to the wall ? Yes ; it was only a few
yards—they pushed it over.
2490. What became of the prisoners who attempted to escape ? One was sent to Maitland,
and the other to Parramatta; and the turnkey that should have been with them, came in
and out as he liked.
2491. Who was he ? Bowen; he was a pal of the principal turnkey’s (Harrison). He has
been away two or three days together.
2492. Is Bowen at the gaol now ? Yes, he is up at Yass; he was one of the men who had
to leave, so they got him this appointment.
2493. When he was absent for two or three days, was it by permission of the governor of the
gaol ? No, by no permission at all.
2494.


2494. By Mr. Mate: How do you know lie had no permission from the governor of the
gaol ? He used to stop away without,
2495. Might he not get permission from the gaoler unknown to you ? He might have done 2:
it, but I fully believe he never did, on account of the intimacy between him and the principal
turnkey.
2496. Were any complaints made against you yourself to the gaoler, or principal turnkey, at
any time ? No.
2497. Have you never been censured at all ? No.
2498. Have you and Mr. Harrison ever had any quarrel ? We never used to have any
quarrel, but I reported him several times to the gaoler for misconduct.
2499. Was any investigation made by the gaoler in consequence of these reports ? No ; he
had that influence that it was all settled.
2500. You said you thought that the reason why the six turnkeys who were discharged,
were selected, was, that they were Protestants ? Yes.
2501. Were the greater part of the turnkeys who remained, Catholics? Yes, the majority
of them. I reported a man named Thomas Lee for some stuff that went in for the Botanic
Gardens, to make seats. The wood went in to make eleven, but there were only nine made;
Lee had one made for his own purposes, and the Government battens were planed and cut,
and nailed on it, which I saw with my own eyes. I reported that to the gaoler, and I never
heard any more of it, except that Mr. Beverley said he paid for the making of it.
2502. By Mr. Morris : What time in the morning did Mr. Beverley appear in the gaol ?
We might see his face about ten o’clock, when the prisoners were being discharged.
2503. It was not his habit to appear at six or seven o’clock ? Neither of them.
2504. If Mr. Harrison says his general habit was to appear not later than eight o’clock—six,
seven, or eight—is that statement incorrect ? Quite incorrect. Unless there was some
special cause we never saw his face till half-past nine.
2505. What time did Mr. Beverley generally shew himself ? At ten o’clock, as the principal
turnkey was about to discharge the prisoners he would stand by.
2506. Did he not generally attend at the muster of the prisoners at seven ? Never.
2507. Or at half-past four ? Never; not one time in a month. I have seen the prisoners
mustered when they have both been absent. Mr. Beverley’s face was not seen round the
.gaol once in a month, nor through, —I mean in the workshops. I have been on duty in the
gaol seven days, and have never seen his face until the seventh morning, and that was going
out of his own door.
2508. By Mr, Gowper: Did you ever see the Sheriff make a general inspection in all the
wards and cells ? I cannot say I ever did. The Sheriff did not call so long as he got what
he wanted done in the gaol himself; he used to send carts and drays
2509. Are you aware whether any work was done in the workshops for persons out of the
gaol other than the Government ? Yes ; a good deal.
2510. Can you state any particulars of these cases? The Sheriff had two drays made.
2511. The whole of them? The frame came in and the shafts, and they were made there
and painted.
2512. Was the timber sent in ? Yes.
2513. And the iron ? Yes.
2514. Was anything else made for him ? There was a water-truck made.
2515. Any farming implements ? Yes.
2516. What were they? Both harrows and scuffles were made—new ones; at the time I
am speaking of there were two or three old ploughs to be made up afresh, and the Colonial
Architect said he would be very glad if he would take them out, and they were taken out.
And a water cistern he had lined.
2517. Has the Sheriff had any work done since the workshops were placed under the
Colonial Architect ? No.
2518. Do you know any other persons who have had work done besides the Sheriff . Yes,
a man named Kidman, a contractor on the South Head Road, had gates and posts made-
while Government work, the roofing of the hospital, would stand still to take to own
place at Randwick ; the men at work at the new wing let the roof stand still while they
were doing this work. .
2519. Was there not an officer of the Colonial Architect s department specially authorized
to see that these men did the work of the gaol? Yes; Mr. Sharkey. .
2520. This work could not have been done without his knowledge t He was in frequently
and saw them; I never heard him tell the men to stop from doing them. _
2521. Although the roof of the building was standing still while this private work was
2522* By Mr. Morris : What was the name of the publican from whom you used to get the
rum and gin for Mr. Harrison of a morning ? I used to fetch it from O Neil s.
2523. By Mr. Gowper: Did you ever remonstrate with Mr. Beverley, or the Sheriff upon
anything you saw that you considered a breach of the regulations . Not with the Sheriff,
but I have gone in to Mr. Beverley. . , , . c ■
2524. By Mr. Lucas : Have you ever heard any complaints made by the prisoners of the
bread rations ? I have, frequently. , ~ , ,
2525. What has been done? I have sent it back several times to the contractor and got
fresh ; but at the same time the principal turnkey, Harrison, was veyy thick with him
2526. By Mr. Gowper: Was Mr. Kidman the contractor then . Yes, I sent it back to
Mr. Kidman on several occasions, and took the responsibility on myself. A turnkey goes
every morning to see that it is of proper weight an goo qua iy.
2527. Do the” turnkeys take regular days, so that the contractor may know what turnkey^


• likely to be on duty on a particular day —is there a regular roster ? There is a roster; he
could ascertain that very easily.
. 2528. Have you ever known a board to be called to survey the bread ? Ido not think
there was while I was there. I know the potatoes, bread, and everything of that kind was
bad.
2529. When you sent it back was there always a good article sent in return ? Yes.
2580. With reference to correspondence, is there any way in which prisoners can get paper
and writing materials? Yes, anything they want; but the prisoner clerk does all the
writing in that gaol; I have known Mr. Wickham not to be there for three or four days.
2581. Who is Mr. Wickham ? The free clerk.
2532. You have known him to be absent three or four days ? Yes, and a prisoner doing
his duty, making out ration returns.
2533. Can any prisoner in the gaol, if he has money, obtain writing materials, and get any
correspondence out of the gaol without being examined by a turnkey ? Yes, he can ; and I
can state why he can do it; there is a prisoner clerk, and that office is very nearly, you may
say, always left to himself; he has pens, ink, paper, envelopes—anything he likes to take
with him, and he can associate with any prisoner in the gaol.
2534. Can this man go over the gaol and have correspondence with all the prisoners in the
gaol ? Yes.
2535. Is he locked up with the other prisoners or left to roam where he likes ? Left to roam
about. I have known him to be locked up drunk when I was in ; I reported it to Mr.
Harrison.
2536. What happened ? There was no notice taken of it. It was a man named Peters.
2537. When you have a report to make to whom is it your duty to report ? Chiefly to the
principal tuimkey.
2538. Of course it is his duty to report to the gaoler ? Yes.
2539. Did you ever make any report to the gaoler ? Yes, frequently.
2540. Will you tell us any one occasion ? When the principal turnkey would not tell him
the truth of it then I had occasion to go to the gaoler.
2541. Will you give us instances of the offences that you reported to the gaoler ? One occasion
was with reference to Swan, a man who was sentenced; I had to put him in a cell for black-
guard language; he would not go, and dared me to try my hand, and I called upon Rispen
to assist me, and he would not; I reported him to the principal turnkey, and it was not taken
notice of; then I had to go to the gaoler; the man did go in at last, but instead of locking
him up in a cell, he put him in the wing to roam about in the corridor at large.
2542. He was locked up in consequence of your making a complaint to the principal gaoler ?
Yes. The turnkey at the gate often did it; he would not make a report to the principal
turnkey because he would not tell the truth to Mr. Beverley. The clerk, Mr. Wickham,
would come in at twelve in the day, and sometimes never come at all; this prisoner Wilson
did all the work. Mr. Beverley would sign the ration return in blank, and it was made up
between the prisoner cook and this prisoner clerk what rations were to come in; he would
put in what he thought fit, and it would be sent off by the messenger without Mr. Beverley
seeing what it was.
2543. By Mr. Lucas : Then Mr. Beverley signed in blank and allowed these people to make
it up ? Yes, the prisoner cook and the prisoner clerk would fill in the quantities, and neither
Mr. Beverley nor the free clerk would know what cam#in; everything was trusted to these
prisoners.
Addendum.
I caught Bispen stealing Government iron ; he was reported ; I appeared before the
Sheriff against him, but the Sheriff overlooked it.— Frederick Pegg.
APPENDIX.
A.
Frederick Pegg,
Having been directed by the Sheriff to inform you that your services as an officer of this
gaol will not be required after the 31st day of December next, I now give you due notice of the same,
and, whilst expressing my regret at your losing your situation, I have to add that I shall be glad to
assist you in any way in my power to procure other employment.
It appears that this notice to you is in consequence of some proposed alterations, to take effect
from the Ist of January next, over which I have no control whatever, I take the opportunity of
expressing my regret that your services should be done away with here, because I can bear testimony
to your uniform good conduct and vigilance during the time you have been in this gaol.
(Signed) H. 0. BEVERLEY.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
Sydney, 1-5 November, 1859.
THURSDAY,


ON THE PUBLIC PRISONS IN SYDNEY AND CUMBERLAND.
THURSDAY , 28 FEBRUARY, 1861.
present
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. HART,
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. WILSON.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Samuel Whiddon called in and examined :
2544. By the Chairman: You have been employed as turnkey in Darlinghurst Gaol ? I w
2545. How long have you been so employed ? Just upon six months. 28 r
25«; Do you remember when you were Bret engaged ? I think it was somewhere in the
month of September.
2547. How long have you been in the Colony ? About six years.
2548 What were your previous occupations? lam a builder by trade. ,
2549. Have you followed that employment in this Colony ? I have. I have erected J
buildings here, among others the row of houses on Church Hill bu.lt for Mr. 6. A. Lloyd
Have also built part of Belgrave Terrace and many other buddings. Previous to that I
nine vears in Messrs. Peto’s firm, as chief overseer.
2550. In what part of England ? In London. My father was there twenty-five years before
me, in the time of Messrs. Grissell and Peto. p ? -n Sheriff
under whL you had s^ea?
schoolmaster. 1 UnZCu some to *.
Chairman .) . r , . n nn i ? When I first commenced the duties
2553. What were your duties in Darlinghurst Gaol. \\ nen i.
they were the same as the other turnkeys’—night and day. instance if I was on
2554. Cannot you describe them to us-give us a day s routine ? if
the gate, which is considered the first post, I was in company wit t k p
there were any message I had to convey it. any Vi Of course my duty con-
accompanied them, either to the gaoler or to the depuiby I S> Ofcourse my >
tinned at night-to open and shut the gates, and so forth. You go on y
morning and keep on duty till six to-morrow morning, if you 8 “ “ s you call it,
2555. Do,the Committee understand that you wcre cmp ojcd p « S ■ Y Th t
regularly ? No. You asked me to give you a day s routine, and 1 have uouo
post I had to go to was, perhaps, upon the north wall supposed to do there
5556. What would be the nature of your dutie tWe ? A 1 jou , P
is to see that no prisoners come round that way, that tnere
prisoners in the yard. „ i 9 \Tm hours • from six to six.
2557. Would that be twenty-four hours also No,, twe > locked up i n the
2558. By Mr. Wilson: You are not on duty there when the prisoners v
cells? No, until after muster is over. , ii the saol? Yes, except
2559. By the Chairman: Is there a warderr onu y a another man takes the front
the front wall; and there is a man on duty at the east wail, ana auo
of the workshops, called the stockade. nrisoners 20 in at meal times.
S: ar-s tsu:-=ikvsifcw —* *
down.
2562. Is he armed ? No. , j riTO i,„4. u likes? Almost what he likes.
2663. Is he required to parade* e . ft’ prisoner? That has heeu done very frequently
2564. Can he sit down and talk wit P ?Th next duty WO uld be on the
2565. You have stated two days duty—what is the tnira
Se’That would he similar ? Yes, that would he similar, with the exception that on that
Where the prisoners cut stones 7 Yes. The night duty has
been commenced since the escape took place.
2568. Which escape ? The escape 0 the g the Cockat oo me n have come it would
2569. What would be the fourth day s duty .
be to go on the wing. . „ dn vou mea n to say at the door of the wing ? When
2670. When you say on the wing d y ;t f ed and the hard labour wing, to go
on duty you have to be at the two wing ,
from door to door. d > duty ? That, as at present constituted, would be in
2571. What wonld he ft ftei from kst time, called east wall.
the garden, where the LocKa . , A. ? m 0 for twelve hours.
2672. Would that be tor twenty-four, ho ■ wouia p, e there twenty-four hours 7 Yes.
2574 “tC Z°y M 7 Yes; previous to that the man at.
| h s7f"e a : :;td"ht% &e escape took place they have been,
157—L
Mr. S.
Whiddon.
28 Feb., 1861.


2576. How are they armed ? With carbines.
2577. Then do we understand that all the turnkeys who are employed have the same rotation
of duties at regular stated times—that the same duties come to all of them? No* there
* has been an exception made with some of the men ; there was an exception made with*a man
named Fallon some time since.
2578. By the general system maintained in the gaol, did the turnkeys go in regular rotation
upon the same class of duties in their turn ? Unless there were a special order from the
Sheriff to the contrary.
2579. Were you not the turnkey appointed to the wing which the two men escaped from ?
I was the first man in charge of it, in conjunction with M'Coy.
2580. When was that? 1 do not remember the date. I remember the morning when it
occurred.
2581. Did it come to your turn in the order of this rotation to be on this wing ? No, I was
specially appointed there.
2582. Why were you specially appointed there ? Ido not know. Mr. Harrison put me
there, and gave me special instructions, and said he should hold me responsible if they were
not carried out. J
2583. At what time of the twenty-four hours was it you received these orders ? I think it
was in the morning alter the Cockatoo Bland prisoners arrived in the evening.
2584. On the first morning after their arrival there ? Yes.
2585. At what time did you receive the order ? About seven o’clock in the morning.
2586. How long did you continue to discharge that duty ? Eight or nine days. °
258/. Every day ? Every day.
2588. Till they were locked up ? I saw to their being locked up, and that closed my duty
for the day. J
258 J, 5. hat occurred then ? After that, Mr. Harrison came to me one morning early, and
said, “ W hiddon, lam very sorry lam obliged to shift you from this post.” I said, “T am
“ ot at . sorry, for I consider it a very responsible one, and I shall be glad to be released
“ from lfc *” -^ e sai d> “ I should not shift you from it, but the Sheriff wants to put another
“ man on day duty, and this is the only post I have for him.”
2590 Were you then shifted ? I was then shifted to my usual duties as before, and Fallon
was placed in my place.
a^on een oll g i n the gaol ? No, he had come there very recently.
2592. Do you know what situation he had held before ? He told me he had been a lobbing
man for the Sheriff and his father. °
2593 ; What do you mean by a “ jobbing man” ? He had done jobs of bricklaying and white-
washing about his estate.
2594. You say that when you were placed in the wing with the Cockatoo Island prisoners
you received special instructions from Mr. Harrison, will you state what they were ? The
instructions chiefly were that I -was to allow no prisoners to touch the keys or locks unless I
was present. I had two men to go round with buckets in order that they might wash every
morning, and I went round with them on every occasion; Mr. M‘Coy took one floor, and I
the other. In the same way when the men went round with the bread, they called me to
oro^ d vtr 1 ’ 80 ™ at w^'e I was them no prisoners were allowed to touch the keys
2595. \\ ere they all searched when they were locked up at night ? They were in solitary
confinement at that time. ° J y
2596. Did the prisoners escape on the first night that Fallon had charge ? No. I think two
or three nights after.
w-n y ° U es P lain tow effected their escape ? Two men got into one cell.
-sjB Will you explain how one of the prisoners got into the cell of the other ? I believe
that they arranged it in the exercise yard.
2599. They had been released from solitary confinement, then ? Yes; I believe that when
the prisoners were admitted into the wing two of them rushed up stairs into one cell, and
that the man m the next cell to the empty one, as he passed by the empty cell, closed the
2600. It has been stated to the Committee that if you go round the wing in one direction
the doors open from you, while if you go in the opposite direction they open to you; so that
i closing the doors when going in one direction you would not see the inside of the cell ?
open i ln front a g e ain ranCe d °° rWay th ° d °° rS °P en in front ’> if -f ou g° the other way, the doors
260!. Will you state positively that your instructions were, that you were to go round the
wing so as to close the doors to you, in order that you might see the inside of the cells ?
{hat was of my positive instructions; and another was, that I was never to shut the
door unless I saw the man in the cell.
ounS' Y ° U aete d upon this instruction ? Yes.
duty.* Can JOU SaJ Whether 0,1 this occasion the turnkey went the other way ? I was not on
2604. Have you heard so ? I think he must,
2605. Have you had any conversation with Fallon as to this escape f Yes* at the time
Mandin. by acWsedt'S'l ’"‘l ‘ he CaSe > seTeral of'the turnkeys who were
SHSS3 F? ? pat “ -
shut then. ? if they W, I 3d °J 3“ ~the
attempted,


attempted, but on account of the annoyance, for I found that some of the men were hallooing
and hooting out of the windows. I found out the cell that the sounds came from, and found
that the men had formed a sort of scaffold by means of their bed-boards, by means of which
they reached the windows. I spoke to Mr. Harrison about it, and he said, “I know it is :
wrong, but I cannot help it, for the Sheriff will have them there.”
2607. Hid you suggest that they should be removed ? Yes, a dozen times. I spoke to each
party who had the control.
2608. Was it your suggestion that they should lie on the stones ? They had straw
mattresses.
2609. The mattresses would be on the stones? Yes; but the stones in that wing are
perfectly dry.
2610. Ho you suppose that the prisoners had possession of implements to assist them in
making their escape ? 1 furnished a report on that subject. On Friday last, I went on duty
with a prisoner to Tarban Creek, a man named Sharp, who had been a prisoner at Darling-
hurst, but was removed to the Lunatic Asylum, in consequence of insanity ; he was insane
only on one point —religion. He informed me, that some time previous to the escape taking
place, he had seen three men, whom he named, who were wardsrnen in the hospital,
constantly in communication with the Cockatoo Islanders; that he had seen one of these
wardsrnen bring up a hammer similar to the one found, and also a large bundle of tarred
twine, and several small pieces of iron. He told me that these were wrapped in a gaol towel,
and placed in the washing place of the hospital for two or three days previous to the escape;
that these Cockatoo men in the hospital were constantly in communication with prisoners in
the exercise yard outside, underneath. He described to me how they had communication;
he said the Cockatoo Island prisoner in the hospital lowered a piece of thread down to the
men in the exercise yard, who fastened on a piece of paper, and then it was pulled up to the
hospital, and that the man above would then write something on a piece of paper and throw
it out into the yard. I think that was the chief substance of the conversation.
2611. When you returned to the gaol, what did you do? I reported it to Mr. Callaghan,
who was then acting chief turnkey, and after that I went to Mr. Inspector Head, who is now
acting as principal gaoler. Mr. Callaghan told me I had better make a written report of it
and give it to Mr. Read, and I did so.
2612. When did you do so ? On the same evening that I came back from Tarban Creek,
on Friday last. Mr. Read took the report from me, and said, “ It’s all right.”
2616. By Mr. Hart: Did this man Sharp state where the prisoners had got their writing
materials ? They are kept in the hospital for the use of the wardsrnen.
2614. Would the prisoners have the means of writing? They had pencils; and the
prisoners in the hospital can lower anything into the yard below —pens, ink, and paper are
in the hospital.
2615. By the Chairman: Did you ever see any of the turnkeys in a state of intoxication ?
No, I have not; I have seen one man the worse for liquor —only one.
2616. More than once ? Yes.
2617. Have you any objection to state who that was ? A man named Elliott.
2618. Have you ever seen any of the turnkeys asleep when on duty ? I have seen this man
asleep on one occasion.
2619. What duty was he on when asleep? In charge of the Cockatoo Island men, in the
exercise yard.
2620. In this very yard where a system of signals with the men in the hospital was kept
up ? In the same yard.
2621. Will you state under what circumstances you saw him asleep ? I was on duty at the
stockade, and the prisoner who acts as clerk in the gaol said, “Mr. Whiddon, come up in
the hospital, and I will shew you something.” I went up, got on a bedstead, and looked out
of the window into the yard, and tlmre I saw this man asleep, and the prisoners pelting him
with pieces of potato. I said to the men, “ Don't do that;” and then I went round to the
yard, which is a long way round from the hospital, and by the time I got there he had been
waked up, I suppose by a piece of potato hitting him, and was walking about.
2622. Did you report him ? Yes.
2623. When did this occur ? On the Bth February. I must state that the next morning a
prisoner, John Connor, a Cockatoo man, came to me while I was on duty at the same post
that Elliott had had on the previous day. He said, “ You will excuse me, sir, but what I
am going to tell I hope you will not let my mates know, otherwise they will murder me.”
I promised him I would not. He then went on to say that an escape was contemplated. “If
“ they get away,” he said, “ it only makes it a damned sight worse for us who are left behind;
“ and if we go we are almost sure to get caught; but I have overheard some of my mates say
“ just now that if they catch that cove,” to use his own words, “ asleep again, they will try it
“ on.” I went to Mr. Beverley, and made a full report of the circumstance to him, and in
consequence he wrote out a notice, which was posted in the stockade sentry-box, cautioning
all the turnkeys on the post to be more vigilant for the future, as the Cockatoo Island pri-
soners had been overheard contemplating an escape.
2624. You have been suspended from duty yourself? Yes.
2625. Will you state under what circumstances you were suspended, and when it occurred ?
Ever since Mr. Read has been there, from what motive I do not know, whenever I have made
a report to him of any irregularity, he has always appeared to treat it with the greatest con-
tempt. In fact, he has made a point of watching me, to endeavour to find some fault with
me. On Saturday morning last I was on duty at the gate
2626. This would be the morning after you had made the report to which you have referred ?
Yes. I was on duty all day, and had a good deal of running about, and the day was exces-
sively


sively close. At night I stayed on duty, and it was raining heavily the greater part of the
night, so that it was impossible to walk in the gateway without being drenched. About ten
o’clock Mr. Read came down to the gate, walked into the lodge, and put the gas up to its full
height, in addition to which there was a fire which is kept constantly burning at all times.
The room is only about ten feet square and the ceiling is very low. It is the duty of the
night-watchman to call the half-hours from nine o’clock, and I called every half-hour up to
half-past two. About a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes after that I sat and read the
paper
2627. That would be on Sunday morning ? That would be on Sunday morning, I then
thought I would have a lounge on the seat a bit and wait till the clock struck three, for I
felt excessively fatigued. While lying waiting there I must have dozed off, because I did
not hear the clock strike three. About three minutes after this Inspector Read came down,
called me, and told me he would dismiss me. I told him I could not have been asleep two
moments as he must have been aware. He told me he did not want any damned explanation,
go I should. He afterwards came back again and told me, “ I will suspend you only till I
see the Sheriff.” That was all that occurred on that occasion,
2628. Is this lodge within gates ? Yes, it is between the outer and the inner gates. In fact
the turnkeys call it an indifferent post ; there is a bar to go across the gates, which is pad-
locked ; I put the bar across the gates about ten o’clock, and fastened the back and front
gates, and took all the keys inside with me.
2629. How is that post regarded—is it regarded as a post where great vigilance is required ?
No, there is scarcely a man on duty there who may not fall into a doze in the twenty-four
hours. It is very different when you are on the stockade, there you are obliged to be very
vigilant.
2630. If there had been any one approaching the gate would you, sleeping or waking, have
heard them ? Yes, the slightest noise I should have heard.
2631. By Mr. Hart: Could you have been approached without the gates being unlocked by
yourself? No.
2632. By the Chairman: Would you have heard any attempt to force the gates ? Yes, the
slightest noise is heard there in a moment.
2633. Is this the distinction between that and any other post in the gaol, that here the
officer can only be approached through an iron gate, which is locked, while in all other places
he is open to attack? Yes. In fact since the escape of Cavanagh and Clark the officers
never think of sitting down at night, except at the gate.
2634. Did you continue on the post that night, or did some other person relieve you ? Mr.
Read would not allow me to stop a moment.
2635. Were you sent away then ? Yes, at three o’clock in the morning.
2636. Did you return to the gaol on Sunday morning ? No, I was not there.
2637. Did you return to the gaol on Monday morning ? Yes.
2638. When did you get to the gaol on Monday morning ? About ten o’clock.
2639. Did you remain there ? Yes; first of all I went to see the Sheriff.
2640. Were you there when the seventeen prisoners escaped on Monday ? Yes; I was in
the gate waiting for the Sheriff.
2641. Can you state to the Committee what occurred, as far as you have any knowledge, of
the escape ? I was sitting in the gate two or three hours, and while I was there, Mr. Read
went out to O’Neil’s public-house. About an hour or an hour and a quarter after that, Mr.
Read came rushing back to the gaol, with both hands up, —“ My God !my God ! all the
prisoners are gone.” I immediately started off to see what it was was the matter.
2642. Do you mean that you started off outside the gaol ? I started out to the Court House.
I came back and found no firearms except the guns, I then went up to Mr. Harrison to get
his revolver.
2643. By Mr. Hart: Where was that ? In the gaol. I got the revolver, but there were no
bullets that would fit it, so I immediately went off without it, and succeeded in capturing
one of the prisoners at the back of Mr. Roberts’, in Botany-street. I then went on further
across the Sand Hills, by the cottages, and materially assisted the police in capturing a second.
2644. By the Chairman : You were present among those who captured him when he was
captured ? I was the first to lay hold of him. After that, I got information that prisoners
had been seen round Rushcutter’s Bay ; I started in pursuit, and learned that two men had
been seen going into a shed opposite the White Conduit House. I went over to the place,
and when the men saw me, as they knew me perfectly well, they started off. They had
turned their trousers inside out, and were changing their shirts. One had got his shirt off,
and in his fright, left both it and his shoes behind ; the shirt I brought back to the gaol.
2645. By Mr. Windeyer : Did you follow them up any further ? No ; after that I went to
Inspector Harrison, at the police station, and gave him the information.
2646. By the Chairman : Had you any communication with Mr. Read during these
occurrences on Monday ? After I came back from the Surry Hills, I wenton to the stockade,
and he was in the midst of the prisoners who were left ; I called him on one side, and he
said, “Do you want me particularly ?” I said, “If it was not particular, I would not have
troubled you at this moment.” He then came on one side, and I told him I had just got
information that some of the prisoners had gone down Rushcutter Bay way, should I go in
pursuit of them with Callaghan. Callaghan was the man who was waiting at the gate to
see the Sheriff. “ Oh,” he said, “ Callaghan, go to the devil, and you can use your dis-
cretion in the matter • let the police look after them.”
2647. These particular expressions you have given at different times—are you quite certain
that they are exactly what he used ? Yes, quite certain ; if I were to speak strictly to the
fact, they would be worse.
2648.


2648. Had you any further intercourse with Mr. Read ? Not on that occasion.
2649. Hid he know that you had actually captured one of the prisoners and brought him
hack ? Ido not know. #
2650. Was it after you had captured one of the prisoners you saw him r xes.
2651. You said just now that you made a report of what you were told at Tarban Creek to
Mr. Read ? Yes.
2652. Have you a copy of that ? Mr. Read has. _ , .
2658. Could you get it from him ? I have applied to him twice for it, the first time
verbally. I asked him if he would be kind enough to furnish a copy of the report I gave
him last Friday, that I wanted to present it to a Committee of the Legislative Assembly.
He said, “ Damn the Committee; I have nothing to do with the Committee, or the Com-
mittee with me.” . . ~ T j
2654. Are you sure he said, “Damn the Committee” ? lam quite positive. ido
not know anything about it at all,” he said, “ where it is now.”
2655. You did not get it ? No. He seemed very much annoyed, followed me up to the
gate, and gave the man at the gate instructions not to permit me inside the gates again.
2656. Did he say anything more than this? Not to me. . , .
2657. You said you applied in writing for it? Yes; on the following (Wednesday)
morning, fearing he might deny a verbal statement, I sent in a written application, {ihe
witness produced a paper.)
2658. Is that a copy of it ? This is the one I sent him.
2659. How did you get it ? He sent it back again. He said he did not know where it was,
and not to bother him again. {Witness read the letter. Vide Appendix A.)
2660. At this time, I infer from what you have already said, and also from the language or
this letter, that you intended to apply to be examined before this Committee . i did.
2661. Do you suppose that this last escape was in any way facilitated by this system ot
signalizing, which you have previously described ? Yes. There are several gentlemen, an
I believe there is one here now, who saw the signalizing going on on Monday when he was
waiting on the South Head Road for a bus. ~
2662. I asked you whether you supposed this to be the case—l now ask you, whether y
have any positive evidence of it? I have positive evidence that communication took
place. This gentleman will tell you, that while he was waiting he saw what resembled a
piece of iron or dark wood pass from the window of the hospital down below.
2663. You refer to Mr. Olson, who has been summoned . Yes.
2664 During the time you were turnkey at the gaol, it would, I presume, be your duty
sometimes to § unlock the wings? That was the special duty of the man who was on the
2665 Did you not perform that special duty in the rotation of your duties ? No.
2666* I have understood from you, and from previous witnesses, that every turnkey had
the same kind of duty to perform in rotation ? What we term the ordinary turnkeys have
toJS! when it is IL turn, on the wing, but there are regular turnkeys for that special
2667 6 You have been present when the wings have been unlocked ? Yes. were
2668 Do you know where the keys were obtained to unlock the wi g ■ >7
M'Coy, who lived with Mr. Harris, generally used
267 b 5! n flavryotT™ person go into Mr. Harrison’s house-the door being open-
-267ItalDi1 tal Did h you e ever ff Bel b ffi Syshang”on'»“£ ShooktehindVc'door ? Yes frequently;
but I* when Mr. Harrison was engaged, and the warder hung then, up tail
bee " engagei
whitewashing. . . before ? Yes; I never saw it so
2676. There has been more whitewashing done since tnan nerore ;
“67 C 7.She gaol been .ore vigilantly
2678. singing or loud noises in the yard t In the confine yard,
sometimes they will hum to themselves. ? j^o.
2679. You have never heard any disor y from gharp; and repo rted to Inspector
Read, AS " imP “
26 a h by Ce W^ut e er b b?e"r Srrison’s house after the prisoners have been locked up
in the evening ? Yes, frequently. the keys ? He generally


locked up at half-past seven, and then the lamplighter wanted them to go into the wings.
So that the keys were in constant request till after eight o’clock.
2683. After eight o’clock have you seen the keys ? They were removed after that where
I do not know. *
2684. Have you been to Mr. Harrison’s house early in the morning ? Yes.
2685. Have you observed where they were then ? No, because Mr. M'Coy would bring them
down to the cells with him ; if he were not well Mr, Harrison would bring them down
himself.
2686. They were not on the peg ? No.
2687. By the Chairman: Was Pegg in the gaol during the time you were there ? No.
2688. By Mr. Walsh: When you were upon this gate duty on the night you were suspended
you say you were obliged to call the half-hours? Every half-hour after nine o’clock.
2689. You were expected to do that throughout the night ? Yes.
2690. Was that practice observed before Mr. Read had charge of the gaol ? Yes, with this
difference, that after twelve o’clock we used to call the hours only, instead of the half-hours.
2691. In the course of the week how often were you on night duty ? Every third night.
2692. That would be two nights in the week ? Yes.
2693. Would you be on duty the entire day before as well? Yes.
2694. That is, you would have twenty-four hours’ duty without intermission ? Without the
slightest intermis-don—we were not even allowed to go to our meals.
2695. By Mr. Wmdeyer: Suppose you had been on duty all day did you remain on duty
all that night ? Yes. J
2696. When did you go on duty next day ? We were then off duty till five the next
evening, when we were expected to attend muster. After that we went home till the next
morning.
2697. By Mr. Lucas: You had twenty-four hours on and twenty-four hours off, with the
a S * lol fc me a^out ' Te °’cJ°ck when you were expected to attend muster ? Yes.
2698 Mr. Mate ; I did not understand you properly about taking round the buckets to
the cells—did the prisoners wash in the buckets ? Yes; a bucket was taken round to each
cell tor the prisoners to wash in.
2699. By Mr. Lucas: Is each prisoner compelled to wash in the bucket? He is supposed
to do so.
2/00. Is there a bucket taken to each man ? No; one bucket has to do for about three
cells, and then we change the water.
2701. What buckets are used ? Large horse-buckets.
2702 Are the buckets used for any other purpose? No, only for fetching hot water, or
anything of that kind. ° ,
2703 By Mr Mate: Are you aware whether Mr. Harrison has any servant to attend on
nim ! iwo temale prisoners have been there to attend on the house.
2704. By Mr. Wmdeyer : He is a married man is he not ? Yes.
2705. By Mr. Mate: Are the servants allowed any liberty to roam about the place ? No I
never saw them away from the house. ;
2706. Can they get away from his house? Not without being observed, I think, A male
P^ nG p ls never allowed to approach there unless in company with a turnkey
2707. By Mr Hart: Do you consider that the official staff in the gaol is sufficient to secure
the safe custody and management of the prisoners ? No, not now, and much less so when
the escape of Clarke and Cavanagh took place. There have been four or five turnkeys
T C a th !, n ' At that time there WHS only one raan in the whole establishment inside
r* esides mau g a,e > and that one was unarmed.
2708. Is there a sufficient supply of firearms to arm all the warders ? There may be, but I
have not seen them. J }
97?n‘ n' 3r i7T, ally furnished with firearms ? Not until that escape took place.
2/iU. By Mr. Wmdeyer : Suppose there were a rising up of the prisoners, are the firearms
and ammunition in such a place as to be ready at once for the arming of the turnkeys ?
I here are only six carbines in the lodge.* ° J
for i only\h^L a j amUniti ° n ? b&ng beside the guns > but there is ammu nition
2712, Are you supplied with hangers ? No.
2713. Then, supposing a rising of the prisoners to take place, you could get arms for only
three persons ? Yes ; and on the side of the north wall it is so dark that you cannot see
your hand before you, so that in passing by the dead-house a number of prisoners might be
concealed behind, spring upon you and take away your arms.
orns , ; Are tlie turnkeys accustomed to the use of firearms ? No I think
not. I believe some have never fired a gun. ' minx
& Mr ' Wlnde y ev; There no drill of any kind for the men ?No
W hen y°u are in this lodge are you there alone ? No.|
2/17. Then no one from the inside can get the keys and open the gates? No* Mr
071 Q° b z? ed ir° rr lfc tiU 1 fetclled the ke J s and unlocked the gate. ’ '
. By Mr. Hart: Can you state whether any muster of the prisoners takes place before
their meals? There is no muster before meals. P DetoTe
2719. With respect to the gangs who work outside, are they mustered every evening ? They
are
are thirteen carbines locked up in thTlodge, by turnkeyl e 81006 teen mforrnetl tbat there
t Note { Added by witness on revision) So far as I have observed
} Note (Correction by witness on revision) Yes.


are mustered every evening; and, more tlian that, they are counted when they are let into the
gate from the hard labour yard.
2720. Are they searched each time they come in to their meals? No.
2721. Are they searched before they retire to their cells ? Not the ordinary prisoners.
2722. lam speaking of the gangs ? No, they are not searched.
2723. By Mr. Windeyer : Are not the hard labour men searched when they come in ? When
they were at work at the quarries they were.
2724. Are not these blacksmiths and carpenters searched? No.
2725. By Mr. Hart: Have you heard any conversation among the prisoners as to the condi-
tion of the wall that surrounds the gaol ? I have heard the Cockatoo men say they would
damned soon get out of that if they could get over the other part; in fact, they looked upon
the outer wall as nothing to accomplish.
2726. Did they mean that they would'scale the wall or knock it down ? Scale it.
2727. Have you heard any of the prisoners say it would be easy to knock it down ?
No, I never heard that.
2728. Do you consider that that could be done? In some portions of it, if a stone or two
were to be taken out, and it were to be undermined, the wall would fall in.
2729. By Mr. Windeyer : Do you not think, if the prisoners got a piece of scantling, or
scaffolding, such as is lying about, and were to use it, as a ram, they might easily knock the
wall down? Since this escape I find that the wall is built of ashlar; the stones on the
inner and outer side are, many of them, not more than three inches thick, and the space
between is filled with rubble and mortar. Now, it would'be easy to get out a piece of this
stone on the inner side, and then to force out the other.
2730. By Mr. Lucas: Is not ashlar generally at least one-third the thickness of the wall?
Yes.
2731. Was not this wall composed of stones more like flag than ashlar ? Yes.
2732. And the whole of the inside is filled up with mortar and small stones? Yes.
2733. The headers are —how many feet apart ? I suppose about every five feet.
2734. I suppose there are about two ashlars and one header ? Yes.
2735. By Mr Hart: Did you observe that any part of the wall was in a tumbling condition?
The front wall is ; in fact, the whole wall.
2736. Do you mean the eastern wall? No; the western wall overhangs very much, and,
more than that, the wall is crippled; there appears to have been a settlement at one time or
other, although it has been stopped.
2737. You have stated that whenever you have made reports of irregularities to Mr. Read he
has treated them with contempt —can you give any other im-tances of having made reports
to him other than that you made to him on your return from Tarban Creek ? Yes. I have
spoken to him several times about the hospital windows. I pointed out to him that that was
the moans by which the prisoners communicated before Clarke and Cavanagh escaped. He
said, “ Attend to your own duty; I will attend to mine.”
2738. Can you mention any other instances? There were several others, but i cannot call
them to mind at this moment. In fact, from what motives Ido not know, but any suggestions
I made he treated with the most profound contempt.
2739. I want to know what suggestions.you have made? _ With respect to the prisoner m
the front I suggested that there ought to be a turnkey in the front, for the box of the
prisoner is in close proximity to Mr. Harrison’s house, and the male and female prisoners
have thus the means of constant communication. ...
2740. Are there any female prisoners occupied as servants to the principal gaoler . Yes.
2741. Is there any guard outside the walls of the gaol ? None whatever.
2742. Was there not a guard placed there, some time since, after the men escaped? There
was, on the northern wall. .
2743. Why was he removed —have you heard any cause assigned ? I believe the fehentt
thought it more beneficial to have the man inside than outside, consequently the box, which
was outside, is now inside the wall. . .
2744. By Mr. Lucas: You said an exception was made in to ballon s duty as a
turnkey ? Yes; when he first came, instead of taking duty as an ordinary turnkey, he was
put to convey the prisoners from the gaol to different parts. ,
2745. Previous to his coming there how was that duty performed ? By another man, named
Donald ; he was employed whenever this duty occurred.
2746. Then this man Fallon was put in Donald’s place ? Yes.
2747. Was Donald looked upon, originally, as one of the turnkeys ? No. .
2748 Then Fallon was not a turnkey ? He was a turnkey when there were no prisoners to
other turnkey had been exempted ? He
2mtet«:trtt’^;ri ß oner», opened by any one? They are generally
supposed to be opened by the gaoler or deputy gao er.
2751. Bv Mr. Hart: And initialed by them ? Yes.
2752. By Mr. Lucas :Do you know whether that is always done . I believe it is.
2753. Have you known any other officer of the gaol to open letters• 10 • M
2754. You said, at the time these seventeen prisoners escaped, Mr. Read was up
Zit^lr P e"rof Yes; for he went away about au hour or au hour and a
quarter before the prisoners escaped. 2756
* Note {Added by witness on revision )-When an escort was not required.


2756 Did you see him at O’Neil’s publrc-hofisd yourself ? He said he had been there,
5g- Veil’s puUic-house-—whether he lodged there
while he was at the gaol ? I think hot) he is a married man and lives at home. _
2759. Both Mr. Harrison and Mr. Beverley have several servants there . les, Mr. Har
risen has two, I think, and Mr. Beverley four.
2761* irwttk™ r'ltut tevenf when I have’heen on night duty I have seen them go
2762. How far are these women allowed to go from Mr. Harrison’s or Mr.
I have never seen them further than the trees hy the house, playing with the eh, , 1
2763. Are any of the male prisoners allowed to go near these trees . No, - y
2761' \fZ've always a turnkey on that part of the prison, so that it a prisoner does go
there he can see ? No prisoner can come there except through the opening of the wing.
The turnkey immediately he sees a prisoner going that way stops him. y
2765 What duty does the prisoner perform who is stationed nearer. Harrisons
He attends upon the gatekeeper in case any provisions come in - ? m, , n _ where h
2766. Is that near where you say the women play with the children . The b
sits is near the garden where they play. \
2767. Is there any fence between this box and where the women are. JNo.
2768. The women can go up to the box ? Yes ; only last Friday Mr. Uhr found the man
stationed there in conversation with a female, and complained of it. ,
2769. What has been done since ? A free man has been stationed on the front, but t
prisoner still remains. . , , , , . r , . I
2770. Then actually a free man has been stationed there to look after a prisoner . les.
may state that Elliott, the man I have spoken of, was on duty at the exercise yard last
Monday when the prisoners escaped. . , ,
2771. By the Chairman: Elliott, the man whom you say you have seen drunk, and who was
asleep in the exercise yard ? Yes. . . • An ..
2772 By Mr. Hart: Do you believe there was any communication with persons outside to
facilitate their escape ? It is quite possible there might have been.
2773. Have you reason to think such was the case ? Tobacco, hats, and all manner of tin gs
come over the wall; in fact, I have myself picked up bundles, generally tied to a stone,
which have been flung into the labour yard. . . ...
2774. By Mr. Lucas : Any prisoner when let out of the gaol can thus communicate w
those he'has left ? Yes, that has occurred several times.
2775. By the Chairman : When you were in pursuit of these escaped prisoners last Monday,
did you meet with any manifestation on the part of any portion of the public in favour of their
escape ? There was only one man who did so to my knowledge j that was the man who
assaulted the publican who guarded the hole to prevent the prisoners escaping. 1 would
state that, on the night Cavanagh and Clarke escaped, they took planks from the back ot the
cook-house to facilitate their escapef.
Mr. S.
Whiddon.
28 Feb., 1861.
APPENDIX.
A.
To Mr. Inspector Eead, Acting Gaoler, Darlinghurst Gaol.
SU ’ In consequence of the ungentlemanly and insulting answer given me by you last evening,
on my respectfully asking you for a copy of my written report to you on Friday last, relating to the
escape of the prisoners Cavanagh and Clarke, I now again most respectfully ask you for a copj of the
above-mentioned report. I may also state that I require the same for presentation (on my examination)
to the Committee of the Honorable House of Assembly.
I have, &c.,
SAML. WHIDDON.
Fehy. 27/61.
Mr. William Olson called in and examined :
2776. By the Chairman: What situation do you occupy ? lam out of situation at present.
I have been with Messrs. Levicks and Piper the last four years, until the first of last month,
as assistant ironmonger.
2777. Where do you reside? In Short-street, Surry Hills.
2778. Have you resided there any length of time ? About eight months.
2779. Do you frequently pass Darlinghurst Gaol? Yes.
2780. You are aware that on Monday last a number of prisoners escaped from that gaol r xes.
2781. It has been represented to this Committee that you have a knowledge of some facts in
relation to that escape —if you have will you have the goodness to state them ? On Monday
morning, between nine and ten o’clock, I was waiting for the omnibus to go to town. I was
on the South Head Road, near the Happy Yale Hotel, when I saw something from a building
in the yard, like some one from inside letting down papers and drawing them up again witn
a cord. 2782.
Mr. W. Olson.
281vC1861-
* Note ( Correction by witness on revision ): —Lodged at the gaol,
t Note (Added by witness on revision) ;—And within a few yards of M‘Carty, the naan on duty.


2782. Will you describe the situation of the building from which you saw J thisrString'Work-4
ing ? I saw it from the building inside, let down inside. G ■ ; i:
2783. You were standing near the Happy Yale public-house? Yes. i
2784. Will you describe the situation of the building where you noticed this bcfcurrence ?
About the centre, at the back of the Court House —the building with large* windoivs-M-I saw
some one at the window throw out some paper, and then I saw some drawn?up with a cord B
to the window. After that I saw what I took to be a piece of iron, it might l havd been a
piece of dark wood, let down. g t„ a on 7 ~rp
2785. How long and how thick was it? I cannot say—it was some distance off.;' i-n'tf ,028
2786. How thick do you suppose it was —two inches? I suppose something' like that, atid
about two feet six inches long. .., . !,, , Si .
2787. It was not a board ? No, it was something like an iron bar} it was let’ down and
drawn up again—it was drawn up again faster than it was let down. -m > 1J..7 -- ’ I 78:
2788. Did you see anything else? No. y/na -fov. ■ vcY .PVV
2789. Did you take the omnibus and proceed to Sydney ? Yes.
2790. Did this strike your mind as something remarkable ? Yes; I mentioned it the-same-
evening, after the escape. 0 rg
2791. Did it strike your mind before you heard of the escape? Yes} I- intended to have>i
mentioned it to Mr. Whiddon. '.<• , . ]■■■['!! [::g;
2792. Where were you when you heard of this escape? At home} I had just arrived home.
2793. I suppose you immediately recollected this occurrence which you had ndticed in the
morning ? Immediately I heard of the escape. When I came out of Short-street I Saw a
man taken prisoner, and I saw three men afterwards on the Sand Hills.lt ion .?• J n
2794. You know nothing further than you have stated? No. m ••u’fto 08 1 h;<]
2795. By Mr. Mate: Do you know Mr. Whiddon? Yes, lam acquainted with him } Hive
close by him.'
2796. By the Chairman: How long have you known Mr. Whiddon? Only since I have
resided in Short-street.
2797. Six months ? About that time. ! ; ■ M i : ■ ->•
2798. When you say you are acquainted with him, do you mean that you are on friendly
terras with him ? Yes, I visit his house frequently.
2799. Is he a sober man ? What I have seen of him. \■' -"d .-.V \77 8. ■;
2800. You never saw him otherwise? No. 8 ’
2801. By Mr. Hart: To whom did you mention this occurrence? To Mr. Whiddon, in the
course of conversation about the escape in the afternoon.
2802. Did you mention it to any one else? Yes; I mentioned it to one of the Farises, who
keep the Queen’s Anns Inn, and I mentioned it to Mr. Ironside, senior;
2803. Can you state whether the bar was being let down from the 1 hbspital; window, or
whether it was being raised to that window ? After I saw the paper or letter drawn up, I
saw this bar let down from the window, and I saw it drawn back quicker than it was let
down.
2804. What was the last you saw of it ? The last I saw was its being drawn back to the
window. .';orr ■ ’?
2805. Was it taken in at the window ? I think it was, I lost sight of it then.
2806. What time was it when you saw it ? Twenty minutes to ten, or half-past nine.
2807. By Mr. Windeyer: When did you mention it to Mr. Ironside? Yesterday, I think.
2808. By Mr. Morris: After you mentioned it to Mr. Whiddon? Yes.
Mr. William Macpherson called in and examined
2809. By the Chairman : You are overseer of the carpenters’ shop in Darlinghurst Gaol-?
Yes. v.:,. i;..v ’AI übB£
2810. How long have you filled that situation ? Fourteen months, since the Ist January,
1860. . _ ,:I - v \ iA ; y
2811. How many men have you had under your direction generally during that time ? The
average number has been nine or ten —sometimes I have had twelve. • o 7;■ ■ c>B‘:
2812. What are the men employed upon ? Upon finishing that new hospital most part of.
the last year.
2813. What other work ? Upon general repairs through the UMely, Within ,i t'h&-
last two or three months, there was some furniture made there for private parties.
2814. Who has the furniture been made for chiefly ? All for parties confaceted with the
establishment, except in one instance, and that was only three verandah posts. V
2815. What kind of furniture has been made? Two or three cheats'of drawers.' I have
here a list of all the furniture made since I took possession there. 3 * 7; ; V U'. J
2816. The list you produce gives the particulars of the furniture whick'has’beeft nradefiluririj|
the time you have been overseer, the names of the parties for whoih thby have beet* made,
and the prices charged ? Yes. - fou
2817. The prices charged are simply for labour } the parties in every case haVe supplied' the
material? Yes. ( The witness handed in the list. Vide Appendix' oJ howuili! ■ i\i
2818. How do you come in contact with the management of the ifireM'km to 'tlte'
prisoners } have you any power over them, or any control over theih> nffirO'llhan yo.tt would'
have as an ordinary employer over the men under you ? All the
is, when they are counted out in the morning to the stockade, to putJhoseiift
to their work ; to keep them at work all day } and to instruct those who ate not vcty proficient
2819 If any of them were refractory, you would call in the officers- dftfhePgfaol 2/rYbs.pdl di
157—M 2820.


Mf.W.
Macphcrsou.
r—^ —“Sl
28 Feb., 1861.
2820. You have nothing to do with that ? No, . . , ,
2821. Is there any plan by which they are regularly searched on leaving the workshops I
No
2822. Could they carry away tools in their pockets or concealed in their clothes? I believe
they could if they were dbposed to do so. , , „ -
2828. Do they leave the workshop just as ordinary workmen, without any interference T
No • they have to clear up all the tools, and I sec them locked up.
2824. They are not searched before they go out of your workshop ? No.
2825. What hours do the men attend the workshop ? From seven to four. _
2826. Have you had any opportunity since you have been in the gaol of noticing the general
management of the gaol—the control exercised over the prisoners ? My business very seldom
led me out of the stockade, unless I were called by some officer of the gaol.
2827. Have you ever been to the gaol a« early as six o’clock ? No.
2828. You never saw the cells unlocked? JNo.
2829. You have never been in the wings ? No, unless on business, to see repairs done, or
anything like that. . . . 9 v
2830. When the Sheriff has visited the gaol has he generally visited your workshop ? les,
he. has always done so. „ XT ~
2831. What took place on the occasion of those visits —what did he do or say r Nothing
particular; he asked how we got on. If he wanted any particular work done in connection
with the gaol he would request me to see it done.
2832. Did Mr. Beverley frequently visit the woikshop ? Yes, he went through the yard
very often—not into the workshops.
2833. Did the officers of the gaol visit the workshop during the hours the men were employed
there ? None, unless Mr. Beverley or the Sheriff.
2834. You are a carpenter by trade? Yes.
2835. And served an apprenticeship to it ? Yes.
2836. How were you engaged in Sydney before you accepted this situation ? I was fifteen
years in the employment of Mr. Spence, the builder, in Sydney.
2837. By Mr. Sutherland: You were foreman fur Mr. Spence, I believe, most of that time.
Yes.
2838. By Mr. Windeyer: How often did Mr. Beverley visit the workshop? It might be
once or twice a week that he would visit the workshops. He would pass through the yard
oftener than that. He would see me outside the shop, but he would not go into it. He
would speak to me as he went by, because the directions that the overseers have are, that
they are to fake instructions for the work from the Colonial Architect’s Department, so that
if the Sheriff, or Mr. Beverley, had given me any orders I should have first consulted the
Colonial Architect before performing the work.
2839. Did the Colonial Architect ever come there? Yes.
2846. How often ? Sometimes two or three times a week ; sometimes not once a fortnight;
but Mr. Sharkey, Mr. Cole, and other officers were often there.
2841. How often did the Sheriff come and see the work going on ? Sometimes once a week,
sometimes oftener.
2842. How do the men generally seem to work ? They have been very willing to work
indeed, all that have come under me. I have had no occasion to punish them once since I
have been there.
2843. You went to the gaol before the system of shortening time by labour was abolished?
No, it was done away with before I was there.
2844. By Mr. Mate i Who has the fixing the price of this work ? I have.
2845. How do you come at the price ? My instructions were from the Sheriff when he
authorized me to do those articles, to charge half the price that would be paid outside for
free labour,
2846. Do you ascertain from cabinetmakers what the prices are for these works ? Yes, and
I can judge df these matters myself.
2847. By. Mr. Hart : Do y u consider the workshops are in an efficient state as regards their
construction and size? No, they are not.
2848. What do you consider necessary to render them so ? We have a row of new work-
shops in progress, almost from one side of the yard to the other; the foundation part is in,
and the doors and sashes are making for these workshops.
2849. Arfe these works in progress ? Yes.
2850. Who has the superintendence of them ? Mr. Dawson.
2851. They are being carried out under his direction ? Yes.
2852. What provision is it intended to make in them for carpenters and joiners? A large
shed is to be appropriated to them ; a large open shed, open in front.
2858. Is there any provision in them for the men working separately? No.
2854. They will still be all together? Yes.
2855. Do you consider that it is desirable they should be all placed together ? That I could
not answer.
2856. By Mr. Windeyer : Do the men converse much together when they are at work ? If
they were allowed to dp so they would do it.
2857. Is talking at work forbidden ? Yes.
2858. By Mr. Hart: Who has the immediate control of the prisoners while they are at
work ? The overseer.
2859. Are you aware whether he places any limit upon discussion between the prisoners ? I
know none of the overseers will allow the prisoners to be conversing together; if they see
it they always put a stop to it.
* 2860.


2860. Have you made any representation to the gaoler or any other person as to the con-
dition of this present workshop ? No. h—-
286 L. Have any lads who have been convicted of larceny or felony been apprenticed from
gaol during the time you have been there? No, none that lam aware oft. j u [\j, <
2862. You are aware, 1 suppose, that under the provision of an Act of Parliament, lads under
a certain age may be apprenticed ? No, lam not aware of it.
2863 By Mr. Lucas: I see in the list of work you have handed in, large boxes:”
what sort of boxes were they ? Rough boxes that were made for the Sheriff, to hold some
manure that he contracted to take from the Abattoir—some blood he wanted for his garden :
they were about three feet wide and six feet long; they were rough boxes. 1
2864. By the Chairman : Have you noticed whether the men working in your shed, during
the time you have been overseer, have been dirty—unwashed from day to day ? ' No; there
were one or two there once that I did require to keep themselves clean : but I consider it
was their own neglect.
2860. \V hen this Committee visited the gaol, there was the top of some large piece of fur-
niture in course of being made we understand from a witness who was examined before the
Committee that that piece of furniture was afterwards abandoned that jkrsxn does net
appear in this list? No, it has been abandoned.
2866. What was it ? The top of a wardrobe.
2867. How far did you proceed with it ? Only the cornice was made, and the gentleman
for whom it was made has paid for the work.
2868. By Mr. Walsh: That article does not appear in this list? No, but the .book .will
shew it.
2869. By the Chairman : How are the entries made in the book ? They are caused to he
made by the overseers. They send a daily report to the architect.
2870. By Mr. Lucas : Is it usual to commence the cornice of a piece of furniture first ? It
might be. I have seen a cornice done first. ; ; / ; :;,-q
2871. It is your duty to be in constant attendance upon the work? Yes.
2872. Ry Mr. Windeyer: Who was this wardrobe for? Mr. Coles, of the Colonial
Architect s Department. He sent me a note to discontinue the work.
2873. By Mr. Mate : Had you the timber for the whole at the time ? Very nearly.
2874. That was taken away ? That was taken away.
noy oCI ,0061:
kc.'jS ;.,u
APPENDIX.
7 0 'UK; i .URL
A. 0 ci :: , s
£ s. d..! 1 .omia jOj
/I bedstead 010 0 , T , /
I 1 washstand,, .. ~ .. .. 040
Mr. Wallace < 1 writing desk .. .. .. 0 2 0
I 1 table 060
\ 2 hand stools .. .. .. 020
Mr. O’Neil— 3 verandah posts .. .. .. .. 010 0
Mr. Brenan (Sheriff) —3 large boxes .. ~ .. 015 0
Mr. Ryan— 1 chest drawers .. ~ .. .. 017 0
Mr. Rispen 1 chest drawers .. .. .. .. 017 0
Mr. Agnew—l cabinet .. .. .. .. .. 300
oi
v im
M .1102
Mr. Shepherd Howarth called in and examined :
2875. By the Chairman: You are overseer of the blacksmiths’ shop at Darlinghurst Gaol 1
Yes. giibd Ji ! o
2876. How long have you filled that situation ? I was appointed there I think, op the 3rd
January, 1860 ; but during that time I have been eighty days suspended. 2
2877. How did that occur ? Mr. Dawson dismissed me on a charge of insolence, because,
on one occasion, when he said that he and me should part, I said I thought we had parted
a long time ago, believing at the time that I was under the orders of the Sheriff, having
received my appointment from him. j ’flu uomst ol
2878. Was that all you said ? Yes. .2292
2879. That was the insolence for which you were suspended ? That was the cause for which
I was dismissed. ■; -7 - .22
2880. Rut eventually you were suspended for eighty days ? Yes. : . , ..d
2881. Who performed your duties during the time you were suspended? I believe it was
Mr. Macpherson. ! .v
2882. The carpenter ? Yes. : : ouo
2883. What does he know about blacksmithing ? Ido not think he knows anything
about it. ji , ■ r ayoo
2884. There was no blacksmith in your stead ? No.
2885. How many prisoners are employed under you —what is the average number? I: have
generally got eight. - ; - -
2886. How are they employed? In jobbing work j in different kinds of work, .r«uaqma ym
2887. Cannot you tell more definitely ? Sometimes they have worked for the Victoria
Barracks—mounting buckets, repairing tools, chisels, picks, and stonemasons’ tool*,
thing that may be required for the barracks. Sometimes they work for Tarban Crebfci Thes
also did some work for the guard-house, where the soldiers’ guard is. : dJC't
2888.
Mr. S.
Howarth,
28FeCl86X,


, .viyiAS. -a
villowarth.
Feb., 1861.
2888. Tile Commissariat Stores do you mean ? The guard-house at the bottom of Heorge-
street —the Commissariat Stores.
2889. Is the \york done in your shop entered in any book ? Yes.
2890. All of it ?• Yes.
2891'.' IXvds the account shew what work is done for the barracks for the Commissariat
Stores —for the Government generally —and what is done for private persons ? As I get
orders from the ; Colonial Architect for the different departments, they are entered daily in
the book.ox t nm
2992. The orders are entered ? The work is performed and forwai'ded according to the
orders I receive.
2893. By Mr. Windeyer: Then the book does not shew for what place the work is done, or
for whom ? . Yes it does.
2891. By the Chairman : Do you keep the book ? No; a prisoner acts as clerk.
2895. Do you give him the material from which he makes the entry ? I make the entry on
a slate y take it into the office; and see that he enters it. I sign my report daily.
2899. In the book ? No; my report, which is forwarded to the Colonial Architect daily, is
signed by me.
2897. Do you do any work for private persons? Not without an order.
2898. Do you do work for private persons ? No ; I have had many jobs sent to me, but in
consequence of not getting an order I have refused to do them.
2899. From whom have they come? I believe Mr. Harrison sent a stove, but he never said
anything to me about it.
2900. To be repaired ? To have a new grate put into it, but I got no instructions about it.
2901. What else was there sent to you? A bedstead was sent in by a man of the name of Tyne.
2902. What was wanted to be done to the bedstead ? It wanted some repairs and alterations.
2908. At what time do the prisoners come to the workshops ? At seven o’clock.
2904. At what time do they leave ? At four.
2905. Are they searched before they leave ? No, they arc never searched.
i29OG. Docs any officer of the gaol search them ? Ido not know.
2907. Did you ever see them searched ? No.
2908. Dfiuld they carry pieces of iron or tools in their clothing ? Ido not think they could.
I stand at the door as they come out.
2909. Do you not think a person could carry away a chisel or a piece of iron in his clothing
unless he was searched ? Ido not think he could.
2910. Why not ? Because lam in the shop and see them at work.
2911. Your eyes cannot be everywhere —you have three shops to attend to ? Yes, but I keep
the iron in the principal shop. I have a store to keep the iron, except what lam using at
the time. I never had any orders to search them.
2912. You really have nothing to do with them except to direct their work ? Nothing in
the discipline way —nothing more than to see that the work is done properly.
2913. Did the Sheriff, Mr, Beverley, or any one else visit your shop ? Yes.
2914. Often ? Yes, frequently ; the Sheriff seldom came to the yard that he did not visit it.
2915. Have you ever noticed any of the men in your shop in a dirty, filthy condition ? They
could not be in my shop without being dirty.
2916. You must know what I mean —have you seen them in a filthy condition otherwise than
from the dirt contracted while engaged in their labour during the day ? I have no orders as
to cleanliness, but if I saw a man have a dirty shirt on I have often allowed him time to go
and wash it.
2917. By Mr. Windeyer : W T ere they dirty in their persons ? I have always seen them with
their faces and hands clean in the morning.
2918. Do you know, as a fact, that a little time ago some of these men partially succeeded
in manufacturing an iron ladder ? I think that was previously to my going there —I heard
of it being made in the workshop.
2919. By Mr. Hart: What is the condition of the shops under your charge as regards clean-
liness, ventilation, and other matters ? There is very poor ventilation ; for the work that is
done the shops are large enough, but I do not approve of the plan of having three separate
shops. 1 think if the shops were all in one it would be much better.
2920.. Are they not in a very dilapidated condition ? Yes; a portion of the roof has had to
be taken off to let in a little air, and when it rains the rain comes through.
2921. When it rains where do the men go? It does not come through sufficiently to prevent
the men .working. The men outside go into the labour yard, under the shed.
2922. What persons are usually placed at the forges under your charge—are they men who
have been previously brought up to the same business ? If they can be got; if there are
smiths in the gaol we get them, but if not we get men and teach them. I have two boys
who are learning the trade. I have one tinplate worker, one watchmaker, one fitting-smith,
one general-smith, and two hammermen.
292:3; Do you teach any boys who are sent into the gaol that business? Yes, I have two
boys now, teaching them.
2924. How many have you taught during the time you have been there ? These two are
the fidly fines I have had.
2925. How long have you had them ? One of them was in the shop when I went back after
my suspension, and the other, I think, I have had about two months.
292fiviHow do they happen to be placed under your charge? That I cannot account for—
the men to me.
29,27. Did. you apply for them ? No.
2’928. Have you ever suggested to any officer of the gaol that it would be desirable to place
.8882 prisoners
3 alff
•iSiiaiaoH
JL1.S 8S


prisoners with you, whom you could instruct and make useful after they left the gaol ? I
do not know that I have.
2929. Has the gaoler ever spoken to you on the subject ? The gaoler was in company with
the Sheriff when the Sheriff spoke to me about these boys I have now in charge.
2930. Have they ever conferred with you as to the desirableness of instructing the prisoners
who are sent there ? Yes, when visiting the shop.
2931. What was the result arrived at? I had instructions to give them every instruction,
and to see and get them on as well as I could, so that they might be able to get a living
when they got out. 6
2932. Have you known any prisoners discharged whom you have taught ? Yes.
2933. How many ? One man went out yesterday, of the name of Cotton, who had been
under my instructions three months. When he came in he could make only a poor hand of
sharpening tools, but before he went out he made six dozen of stonemason’s tools.
2934. As he only went out yesterday, of course you cannot say what was the result of your
instructions ? No.
2935. Have you known the men to make chisels and knife blades ? No, except chisels for
the use of the establishment.
2936. By Mr. Morris : Did you, in the course of your duty, come in communication with
Mr. Harrison, the principal turnkey, in the morning ? Yes.
2937. Early in the morning ? No, not early in the°morning.
2938. Did you always find him out of bed when you wanted him ? I never wanted him
early.
2939. Were you ever at the gaol at six o’clock ? Ido not think I was ; seven is my hour.
2940. By Mr. Sutherland: Do the prisoners who have been in the gaol some time get any
money when they leave it ? They used till lately. I recommended this man Cotton to Mr.
Dead for something • but it appears there was no money, and he got nothing from the gaol.
2941. Has any one got any money on your recommendation ? I believe so, from what I
have heard. I have never heard from the parties going out that they got it.
2942. You have recommended that certain parties should get money on going out of the
gaol ? Yes.
2943. Can you state the amount you have recommended ? I never recommended any amount.
2944. What have you recommended ? I have recommended them for anything that Mr.
Beverley might think they deserved for their services.
2945. When you have recommended them to Mr. Beverley have you not recommended what
they should get ? No.
2946. What has been the recommendation you have given them? According as they
behaved. I have recommended them as behaving well; if they have been industrious, I
have recommended them as industrious } if they have improved, as improved under my charge.
2947. It has been the practice in the gaol to give those parties who have been industrious
while there an amount of money on leaving? I believe so.
2948. How many parties have you recommended since you have been there? I could not
state.
2949. Are there any records to shew the number ? I think not.
2950. Bij Mr. Hart: Where does the money go that is received for the articles made in the
gaol ? Ido not know. Any work Ido is for the Government departments.
2951. Are you aware whether the money is kept apart as a fund to be distributed among the
prisoners? No.
2952. Have you inspected the new works in course of erection ? The foundation only is laid.
2953. Have you seen the plans of them ? Yes.
2954. What are the main features of the workshop for your department, according to the
plan? A double hob at each end of the shop, with two fires each, an open front, and the
back closed, with a ventilator at the top.
2955. How many anvils ? Four.
2956. Will that be sufficient ? That is one more than I have at present.
2957. Do you think the provisions of the new workshops will be sufficient for the men likely
to be placed under your charge ? I think so.
2958. For eight prisoners ? I could employ eight at the fire and two or three vicem'en,
according to the way that the bench might be fitted up.
2959. Is the yard likely to be cramped for room by reason of the erection of these work-
shops ? I think not.
2960. Are they near the outer wall of the gaol ? Not so near as the present workshops.
2961. What will be the space between the back of the workshops and the outer wall? That
I have never measured, but I think about eighteen or twenty feet.
2962. Would it not be comparatively easy for prisoners to escape by placing a plank from
the back of the present workshops to the coping of the wall ? X believe it would be, for
they have effected an escape in that way from what was formerly used as a dead-house.
2963. What is the space between the present workshops and the wall ? Ido not think it
is more than six or eight feet.
2964. What is the distance from one of the chimneys to the top of the wall Not more
than a couple of feet more ) but the chimney is made of oil drums, it is not a brick chimney.
2965. From the rubble part what would be the distance ? The rubble part does not come
as high as the roof. ( Vide Addendum .)
2966. By placing a plank from the top of the workshop to the wall it would bo easy to
escape ? I think so. # _ ,
2967. Is any warder on duty at night there ? There is one man, I think ; there used to be
one man.
ADDENDUM.


ADDENDUM.
(Answer No. 296.5.)
Since giving the above evidence I have examined the workshop, and find there is a portion of
rubble work above the roof; but this would in no way facilitate the escape of prisoners, as it rises
perpendicularly from the wall of the building.
, Mrs. Margaret Cullen called in and examined:—
2968. By the Chairman: You are principal female turnkey in Darlinghurst Gaol? Yes.
2969. How long have you held that situation ? About six years last December.
2970. Have you held the situation of principal female turnkey all that time? No, I have
' bad that five years.
2971. You filled some other situation in the first instance? Yes, I had charge of the top
ranges which the other turnkey has now.
2972. Are you married ? Yes.
2973. Is your husband living? Yes.
2974. Do you live outside of the gaol? No, I live in the prison; I have not been living
with my husband the last eight years.
2975. Have you a family ? Yes, three children,
2976. Are your children living with you in the prison ? Yes.
2977. What are their ages? The youngest going on of nine, my little boy going on twelve,
and another girl going on fifteen ; she is not quite right in her intellect.
2978. Is she living with you ? Yes.
2979. What are your duties as principal female turnkey ? The principal duty is to look
after the work of the female prisoners. The work that is not cut out I have to cut out and
prepare for the female prisoners to work; I have to keep an account of that, and give a
return to the clerk of what they do, and the prices charged for the work. I have also all
the prisoners’ clothing to cut out, and get made for them.
2980. Are not you responsible for the general supervision of the female ward? No; there
are-two free turnkeys who have charge of keeping the place clean, attending the prison, of
locking up the prisoners, and unlocking them in the morning.
2981. There are two female turnkeys? Yes; they have charge of each range, and of
keeping the wards clean.
2982. As principal turnkey, are not these other turnkeys under you ? No, not with regard
to that duty.
2983. Do I understand then that you have nothing to do with the safe custody of the
prisoners? Yes, lam bound to see them all locked up, and the other turnkeys give me the
keys.
2984. But the female department is under you as chief turnkey, is it not ? No, I have no
charge of the other two turnkeys. Mrs. Beverley sees that they do their duty in the upper
ranges; I have charge of the female clothing, and charge of the stores,
2985. Is Mrs. Beverley the matron of the gaol ? Yes.
2986. But do not you occupy in the female department a corresponding position to that of
Mr. Harrison in the male department? No, Ido not; I have no more salary than the
other turnkeys. That is my charge—the work of the prisoners, cutting out for them, and
keeping them employed. The other two turnkeys have charge of keeping the place clean,
and also of seeing that the women are quiet, and walking among them during the day.
2987. Then you are moi’e forewoman of work than principal turnkey ? Yes. •
2988. What have you to do with the prisoners—have you anything more to do with them
than receiving the key in the evening? That is all; if I saw the others not doing their
duty, I should report them to Mrs. Beverley.
2989. Are you responsible for the cleanliness of the cells ? No.
2990. Have you anything to do with locating female prisoners in particular cells? No; I
might be six months without going to the top range, unless a person were violent, and then
we should all assist.
2991. Then what you are virtually is forewoman of the work ? Yes, that is what I have to do,
2992. Just the same as a forewoman in any other work-room ? Yes; I have to cut out the
female clothing, or any of the public work I have to prepare for them.
2993. Is there much work done in the prison ? Yes.
2994. What kind of work is it? I have brought ray book that the Committee may see it.
I keep this book, and make a return of the work to the clerk every Saturday. (The witness
handed in the same )
2995. This ( 'referring to a week’s entries ) does not appear to be initialed ? No; that is kept
by myself, and is given to Mr. Wickham every Saturday, and he enters it in his book from
mine.
2996. Are not these charges very low—two shillings to make a muslin dress ? Yes • that is
a little girl’s dress—they are charged according to the work on them.
2997. By Mr. Mate: What is the charge for making a gentleman’s shirt ? We made one
set, for which we charged Is. 6d. each.
2998. By the Chairman: Is this your handwriting ? Yes.
2999. The work is entered by you, and you take this book to Mr. Wickham, who enters these
items in his book, and then strikes them out in yours? Yes.
3000. He does not initial it in any way ? No.
3001. All the work done is entered in that book ? Yes.
3002. How many women have you got in your department working now at needlework ?
Seven.
3003.


?° W ? iany P'* isoners are altogether ? About eighty-four to-day.
3004. Are there only seven out of eighty-four able to do needlework ? Yes.
8005. You have nothing to do, then, with any but the seven ? Yes, I have all the clothing
to give out, and to take in. Before I came out this morning I had to give out clothes to
fourteen. I have to take an account of these, and see that I have them all back when they
go out. J
3006. You have charge of the stores? Yes; I have charge of all the prison clothes, and
when they run out, I have to make out a requisition, and shew it to Mrs. Beverley, to get
materials to be made up. J °
3007. What are the names of the other two turnkeys ? Mary Barry and Mrs. Hanlon, who
has charge ot the top ranges.
3008 Are there many of tlie female prisoners drafted off as servants to the officers of the
gaol ? Not at present. Mr Harrison and Mr. Beverley used to have servants, four and five
at a time, until he left—until abmit a fortnight before he left.
3009. Bo you remember one of the female prisoners having a child in the caol ? Yes
3010. Was that woman’s name Harriet Stephenson ? Yes '
3011. Is she in gaol now ? No.
3012. When did she leave ? I forget the day.
3013. Not very long ago—six months ? More than that—she left on Good Friday morning.
3014. How old was the child when she left? I think about eighteen months.
3015. Buiing the time you have been in the gaol have any other similar irregularities
occurred, to your knowledge ? Never, to my knowledge, in any part of the establishment.
3016. This woman was servant in Mr. Beverley’s house at the time ? Yes.
3017. By Mr. Mate: Are any-women employed at laundrywork? No, unless for the
females in the prison. All the women do their own washing in the yard every Saturday.
They have no work to do and are allowed Saturday to wash their clothes.
3018. Those women who cannot use the needle have then no work to do ? Yes, the women
who can do so pick oakum.
3019. Do you not think they might do laundrywork? If we had a convenient place those
who could not do needlework might do laundrywork.
8020. By Mr. Hart: Who receives the female prisoners when they first enter the gaol ?
The principal turnkey.
3021. What does he do with them ? He takes down their names and he sends up a return.
Ido not know what he does, for lam not in the office; but he sends up a return, with the
names of each person, and then we find whether she is for fourteen days, three months, or
whatever it is.
3022. I want to know what is done with a female prisoner when she enters the prison ? She
is searched by the other two turnkeys.
3023. What is the first step taken after she leaves the charge of Mr. Harrison ? She is
searched by the two female turnkeys,
3024. Where is she taken to? To one of the solitary cells on the lower range.
3025. Are you present there ? No.
3026. That is not part of your duty ? No, lam perhaps below receiving work.
8027. What is done with her afterwards ? She is put into her class, whatever her class may
be, whether labour or confine.
3028. Is she not washed or subjected to any other mode of cleansing ? Not unless she is a
person we see is not in a fit state to go in among the others; if she is such a person she is
put into a bath and has clean clothing.
3029. As a general rule there is no ablution of the prisoners when they are admitted ? No,
unless the person coming in is so dirty as to need it.
3030. Generally speaking, are the female prisoners clean ? Yes, except a few of the older
creatures; some of these we are obliged to put in a bath, have their heads shaved, and clean
clothes put on.
3031. Where is the bath-house ? There is a large bath in such cases which we send for
from the male hospital, and we get hot water.
3032. It is a tin bath ? Yes; we have no convenience in our department for it.
3083. You have no convenience for washing the female prisoners in the yard ? No, except
what w r e get from the male hospital.
3034. What do you do with the clothing that prisoners have on when they enter the gaol?
We keep them.
8035. Is the clothing taken by any particular warder or turnkey ? By me ; I take their
clothes and put them into the store, and I give them prison clothes, except the women are
allowed to wear their own clothes.
3036. Do you do anything to the clothes before you put them away ? The women wash
them, and have them clean for me to put into the store. I put their names on them, and
give them to them when they go out.
3037. Is the laundry sufficient for all the purposes you have ? We have no laundry for the
female prisoners; they are obliged to wash their clothes in tubs in the yard.
3038. What kind of tubs ? Washing-tubs which we have for the women.
3039. How many have you? Only four at present; but some of these women are going
out of the gaol every day, and some of them wash one day, and some another, to get their
things ready when they go out. Saturday is the regular day for the washing of the women
who remain in. .
3040. While the prisoners remain in the gaol, what convenience have they for washing
their persons ? They have a large trough in the yard, and they wash there if they please;
they have also kids in their cells, two towels, a comb, and brush.
30^1-


3041. How often are the towels exchanged ? Every week they have clean towels..
3042. How many prisoners are there in each cell ? Generally three.
3048. Then they have two towels for three persons ? Yes. .
3044. As a rale, do you compel female prisoners to wash themselv riS from head to foot?
Never.
3015. Do you think it necessary ? I have spoken of it sometr ine an q the women have
refused; they said they would clean themselves when it was necessary. We only compel
them when we see that they are in a dirty state.
3040. How do you know whether they are dirty. contse we would see them, and the
other women would report them ii they saw anyt,uing dirty or improper.
8047. Have you any complaints? No,
to keep in separate cells. One of them |3oen ia Tarhan Creek three or four times.
3048. Are you a needlewoman by + -rade 9
3049. Have you always ha duty since you have been in the gaol, of cutting out for,
and of inspecting ’ W nee ai e woTnen ? No; I was not quite twelve months there when the
woman ' that place left., and then I took hcr’s. „
°^ s o ; What do you do with the female prisoners who are unable to do any needlework.
Ssi Tfthey complied to do anything ? No, with the exception of cleaning the place j
IS. a Sir^ ed £ottthl? g 4e e t°aie prisoners fluently return to the gaol? Yes,
tleiyslern of confinement they are subjected to seem to have any moral influence
and we are obliged to keep other women to clean their cells and clothes. It J
to for aionver t'me they would have an interest in keeping their cells and clean
3054 You'think women should he sent there only for long sentences? Ido think so, -
you blieYtlnit the establishment of a separate House of Correction to which
younger offenders could be sent would be beneficial? I do; Ido not think a lot of little
girls 'should be sent in to mix with these old creatures.
qAPifi jo thpro anv classification ? No; we are only allowed one yard. _
3057' For instance, women who are sent there for crimes—revolting crimes—have an
oppor'tuly^of Sg with young girls who are in for short sentences ? Yes; we have no
3058 morals are corrupted by means of that communication ? I could
not exactly say that,-sometimes an innocent good girl comes there who has never been m
a orison hfforJ and when she has gone to Court she has been discharged from puson, and I
haVoften thought it was not right to have these mixed up with the other prisoners. These
women all sit at the needle-table together. # . ~ nthpr than the
8059 Is there any system of religious instruction given to these women other than tne
ordinary services performed on the Sunday? Yes; the clergyman, Mr. Agnew, comes there
eieJy Sunday and P Wednesday; and the Catholic clergyman comes there every Sunday,
3060.’ Are The femakprTsoners visited by any clergyman individually ? No ; they come into
Die class amongst them, both Mr. Agnew and Father Sheehy, the Catholic clergyman, and
there they see any one who wants to see them separately. ,
8061. Is the catechism taught to the younger girls? When the school was theie it was,
hut not at present, except when the Sisteis come. . . , , i • a
3362. Is there any school at present? No; when there was school the catechism w
taught, hut that has dropped off.
3063. How long since? . Three months. , ln eo _
3064 How did it happen that that was abandoned? I could not exactly say.
3065! Had you any official intimation made to you? *No; only I heard that Mr. Beverley,
or the Sheriff thought it a very inconvenient thing, having a number of little children
girls at school. When they had no other work to do,* they used to be taught two hours a
day, but Mr. Callaghan the schoolmaster was sent to Bernina, and since that time there has
been no teacher, either for male or female. „ . „ t> i i
3066. Have you a library ? Yes. I have books given me by Mr. Agnew for the Protestants,
and by Father Sheehy for the Catholics. . T i + i r rVnV tPp
3067. Is there not a Yote of Parliament for buying hooks? Ido not know. I think the
clergymen got them themselves. I cannot exactly say to that.
3068 Do you find that ladies visit the gaol from motives of philanthropy ? Iso.
3069 By the Chairman : During the six years you have been in the gaol has any lady ever
visited the female department of the gaol from solicitude for the welfare of the prisoners f
Yes. I remember Mrs. Alexander and another lady came there to see and take away
three girls that were in. . ,
3070. They came specially to see some particular prisoners ? Yes, who had been in
the Refuge, I believe.
3071. Do yon recollect any case of ladies visiting the gaol with the view to the promotion
of the general welfare of the whole body of prisoners ? Not one, except the Sisters of
Charity. 80 72.
* Note {By witness on revision) :—My answer was, “ The authorities might have had, hut we
“ thought it a very inconvenient thing to have the schoolmaster removed, having a number of girls at
“ school when they had no other work to do.” (They) &c.


welt Z“:: : HW ° ft “ ‘ he ** ? Once a week, unless it is very
8073. Have they visited it lately ? Yes.
!l,'ldreri VLat theJ Wl,en they *» there ? all the women and all the
format* of t‘he m plaCe ? In ' he Wr ba " There is a chair placed
them for half-ao-hon^anVgWe^b^sTr^. W ° men * They “
unless someof dta poor women hem^lo'tfi, o'’A 0 '’A 4 r"!“ Uo *j[ . N ° L > only th *“-
AAc, n „ 1 , . re quire tnem to go to the Asylum to see their children
30/8 By He Chairman: That observation does not apply indiscriminately-all the women
at the poor-house- m ® ' ’ eXCept th " P °° r °“ KOmen ' who P refa b ™B ‘ h “e to being
SO/9. By Mr. Bart: Generally speaking are the women careless of being there? No
°l ‘ h « w , omen f C these, Ido not think, ever return. g ’ °'
3°B°. What class of persons arc they? People who have never been committed before-
same of these, when they have served their time, never return again. ’
fbad hnuse 6 ? J iD - th ? ga °' at preSent wbo has been seat tbere *»■ keeping
a bad house ! Ido not think there is in our prison. They generally get their sentences
“igi on of “ oa ::;
FRIDAY, 1 MARCH, 1861.
I3rtofnt
Mr. HART,
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WINDEYER.
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., Chairman
[The Committee having assembled at Darlinghurst at 6G5 a.m., proceeded to
the gaol, when, the gatekeeper opening the gate, they visited the hard labour and
confine wings, and yards, in company with Mr. Read, the acting principal gaoler
borne of the prisoners were in the act of leaving their cells, and removing their night-
tubs to the privies connected with the several yards, while a portion at the tap, in
the confine yard, and others at a stone trough, in the hard labour yard, were washing
their faces and hands.] °
[The Committee having entered the office, the Chairman took the Chair ]
Inspector J ohn Cecil Read examined :
oaqo‘ tlie airman * You are at present Acting Gaoler at Darlinghurst Gaol ? I am.
on When dl< * y° u talce char g e of the gaol, and by whose orders? On the 15th of
February at half-past five in the evening, by order of Captain M'Lerie, which was confirmed
by Mr. Übr, the Acting Sheriff.
3084. You have been in that situation since that period ? I have.
8085. Without any further instruction that would in any way modify your position, you
have still been acting gaoler in a temporary capacity ? Yes.
8086. In what condition did you find the gaol when you took charge ? I found it almost
in its present condition.
3087. As to its general appearance ? I have done but little or nothing since I have been
here.
8088. The same rules are observed now as were when you took charge with respect to the
management of prisoners and the general discipline of the gaol? Yes.
8089. There has been an escape of several prisoners since you have been here—perhaps you
will state to the Committee when that escape took place, on what date, and at what hour of
the day ? On the 25th February, about ten minutes before two o’clock.
8090. Perhaps it would be most convenient if you would go on and detail the circumstances
under which you were apprised of that escape ? Being here without my family, I boarded
at O’Neil’s public-house, opposite the Court House. I was there that day as usual to dinner
and on my way back to the gaol, I saw a number of prisoners running across the Court
House green, and jump over the fence into the road. I gave them immediate pursuit, know-
ing them to be prisoners, but at that time having no idea of the means by which they had
escaped.
3091.
* Note (By witness on revision ) :—I made a mistake in my answer to the last question. There is a
■woman in gaol for the offence alluded to in the question; she came from Maitland, and I did not think
her at the time.
167— N


3091. The pursuit of the prisoners was your first act? Yes.
3092. At what particular distance between O’Neil s public-housesand tbe gate of the gaol
were you then ? I was not more than three or four yards from 0 iNeil s public-house.
8093. And you instantly started in pursuit? Yes.
3094. Did you catch any of the prisoners ? I caught one at the Sand Hills, a man amed
Lacey, nea/where the old turnpike was. I saw eight of them ; they turned to the right
there 7 I followed, and as soon as they got on the heavy ground, I closed on them, caught
3095 Then I presume you returned? I did not wait to handcuff him, but returned
immediately towards the gaol. I met a policeman round the corner of the gaol, gave the
prisoner into his charge, came into the gaol, and gave the alarm. It was unknown at this
time to any of the turnkeys. ~L . . . , .
3096. The first time you came to the gaol was after you had caught this prisoner, brought
him back, and delivered him into the charge of a policeman ? It was.
3097. What time elapsed from your first seeing the prisoners escaping till you reached the
gaol ? Ido not think it could have been more than seven or eight minutes trom the rate at
which we went. .
3098. What took place then? I confined the whole of the prisoners to the ce.ls.
3099. That was the instant order when you came in ? Yes, from the stockade yard; that
was done as the most direct means of stopping any further escape. I also called the roll ot
these particular men from Cockatoo Island, who were confined here. I managed to get them
inside the new wing, but they refused to go to the cells for me, and I had to arm the urn-
keys and myself, and force them in at the point of the bayonet.
3100. Had you any difficulty then ? Yes; they tried to get close to me, I suppose to get
hold of the arms.
3101. They still resisted? Yes. , ,
3102. What was the next step ? As the prisoners were coming in, in order to_ get a descrip-
tion of the men who had escaped, I mustered the men, sent to the Convict Office and
obtained the minutest description, which was forwarded to the police stations.
3103. You had ascertained who had actually escaped, by the names being absent trom the
muster ? Yes.
3104. The absent ones being the escapes ? Yes. . . ~ ,
3105. A few minutes ago you shewed the Committee the place in the wall through w ic
the prisoners escaped ? Yes. , 9
3106. Is that the yard which is called by some of the officers of the gaol the exercise yard .
It IS
3107. It is called so in consequence of prisoners being sent there for exercise ? From the
3108. State how many prisoners were in that yard when you went to dinner ? Eighty-two.
3109. Were they placed there by your orders? By my orders; but they were put there
before I came to the gaol. _ i 19 v
3110. You were carrying out a regulation which existed before you came to the gaol. es.
3111. Who was the turnkey in charge ? Elliott and Graham.
8112. At what time in the morning were they placed there ? Before seven in the morning.
3113. And, up to the time you speak of, these two men had been in charge of them . Yes;
these men are never relieved for twelve hours.
3114. You would, of course, require an explanation from the turnkeys, how the men had
succeeded in getting these stones out ? I did.
3115. What did they say ? They could give no explanation; they said they knew nothing
3116. Did you find any implements which might have assisted their escape? I beg to call
your attention to those lying on the floor. (T/ie witness here directed the attention of the
Committee to two iron stays, about two feet and a half long by an inch square, two
pieces of iron hoop, and a knife.')
3117. Have you since ascertained how these men carried on their work to excavate this
stone ? From observation, I have no doubt in my mind it was taken out with these
implements. ,
3118. Have you succeeded since in satisfying yourself how they did all this without being
observed by the turnkeys ? Yes; there being eighty-two of them in the yaid, the greater
part of them stood before the hole so as completely to screen it from the observation of
the turnkeys. When I came into the yard, .knowing there was a breach in the wall, I had
to look along twenty or thirty yards before I found the exact spot, they had it so well concealed.
3119. You had this difficulty inconsequence of the manner in which the prisoners were
disposed ? Yes ; and they had several pounds of oakum which they were picking, in order
to put down before this place.
3120. The breach made in the wall communicates with the yard immediately at the back of
the Court House ? By the side.
3121. From which they have no difficulty in getting to the green in front ? No; there is
only a small wooden railing outside.
3122. What class of prisoners did the eighty-two men consist of who were in this yard ?
They were convicted of almost every offence in the shape of highway robbery, cattle stealing,
housebreaking. There is little difference as regards 'Cockatoo Island prisoners, they are
either sentenced to hard labour or to solitary confinement.
3123. Did these eighty-two men consist of drafts from all these classes ? Yes; they were
from Cockatoo Island ; they were men who had been let out of solitary confinement, and
were willing to pick oakum.
D 3124.


fromCockat was \h ta" ? all
communication with the other prisoners io\he gaol J W ” e "°* t 0 * al ‘° Wed t 0 ha?e :
sm. Then Tie ll^RurgeTyT* '“* ke, ‘ ? F »”‘^
next;' FoUrte ° a Were take “ tbe “ rst daJ ? Th!rtcen were tak <» tke day. and one the
8128. Who are the three who have succeeded in effecting their escape so far Nicholas
Hand, Henry Robson and George Williams, are still at large. P
££. ° ym 0W the se “ te “ ces of any of these men ?No ; not without referring to the
Nr, 3o '^ tre a ” y Ste f take "."' Ul ' regard to the turnkeys in charge of the yard that day 7
No; they were merely questioned about it. J *
om. You considered that there was no very great blame attached to them ? Yes : from
the Suit? °I t K <? ya !’ d ’ f DoWing tbat there WaS a breach in the wall > and
the difficulty i had to find the breach, I was not inclined to attach much blame to them
tTeLITT - tbe easy manner in which the
was effected. I have heard from the conversations of the prisoners that they did not
expect to do it for two hours, and I am satisfied that there were among the ekhty-two
prisoners themselves some who did not know anything of it. S J
31.02. Ha\e you been able to satisfy yourself what time they were engaged in this operation ?
I was after one o clock they commenced-not more than ten minutes. P
O}q?’ Sj™. any of them ® tated ? The y have stated that they were a very few minutes.
3134. \vhat appearance did this hole present when it was examined at first? It appeared
inserted * d ° Ue fr ° m mSlde ‘ There Were marks inside where the iron bars were
and morto? insM^ 0 ' ° f ? sound * ifc was filled U P with rubble
B U M f- Sutherland: Was the wall hollow inside ? I could not say.
7 6 ‘l tbat 7 tbe st°ue that came out (referring to a stone about one foot by and
about three inches thick ) ? Yes. J
3138 Is that the outside stone ? That is the stone that was knocked out last. I should
say the inside—the centre—of the wall was quite rotten. I found it crumbled in my fingers;
oio£ P6 w be 6 led up > in a S reat mea sure, with what is called rubble and mortar,
finders ' St ° ne Came ° Ut ° f bard ? <luite soft > ifc cram bled in my
3140. By the Chairman : Since you have bad charge of the gaol, have you bad any occasion
to complain or the conduct of any of the turnkeys acting under you ? I have.
o-mo' w°, r f tban ° De * nstance ■ dn two instances; two or three I have had to check.
_ Will you state in what instances you have had to find fault ? One I found sitting
down in friendly conversation with two prisoners.
3143. Who was this ? A man named Whiddon.
what part of the gaol was he situated ? In the stockade.
3145. Sitting on a bench ? On a form, and a prisoner named Garsed sitting beside him,
and a prisoner named Mayne standing before them, apparently in friendly conversation. I
mentioned the circumstance to the Sheriff; but no steps were taken for a few days, until I
caught him asleep on his post at three o’clock on Sunday morning.
3146. What post was he on ? On the gate.
3147. Will you describe in what position you found this man Whiddon when he was asleep ?
I noticed at first, about nine or ten at night, that he seemed very dilatory. He had the gas
turned down, and was lying down at that early hour. I said that was not a fit position for
him to be in, that I should expect him to be very much on the alert, and I turned the gas
on. He had pieviously turned the gas nearly off, as, I believe, so that he might not be seen *
by me lying down.
3148. That was at nine o’clock ? Between nine and ten. I also noticed tbat tbe gate was
not properly bolted.
3149. Describe in what way it was improperly bolted ? The gate was locked, but the cross-
holt was not drawn, and also the cross-bolt of the outer gate was not fastened, but the door
was locked. I had them bolted immediately. I took no more notice of him till three o’clock
in the morning, when I missed him calling the hour. I heard the other two sentries, but I
could not hear him call three o’clock. I went down immediately, and through the window
saw the man lying asleep. I could not waken him, and called the sentry off his post to assist
me. In attempting to awake him the gatekeeper, Burke, who sleeps in the lodge, was
awakened.
3150. Then you had these two persons present besides yourself? Yes, and Mr. Beverley
has told me since that he was looking from his window at the time.
3151. Whiddon was fast asleep ? He was fast asleep.
3152. What did you do in this case? I suspended him, put another man in his place, and
told him to go, as I would not trust him with the charge of the place.
3153. Is the lodge of Burke, the gatekeeper, between the outer and inner gate ? He sleeps
over the gate—his lodge looks into the gate. He looked out of the window and said, “Is
anything wrong, Sir.” I said, “ Yes, Burke; dress immediately and come down.”
3154. Did any altercation take place between you and this man at the time? No, only I
said, “ I wonder after all the caution I have given you —if you had done this in the army
you would have been shot for it.” When he wanted to excuse himself, I said, “It is of no
use trying to excuse yourself, if you had done this in the army you would have been shot.”
3155.


8155. Do you recollect whether you swore at him—whether you used any oaths ? No, lam
not in the habit of doing so. « -n « i. i ji> i
31 56 You say there were some other officers ? Yes; Fallon, the turnkey, and Burke _
3157 You say there were some other officers against whom you had had cause of complaint t
Rispen ; the complaint was not from me. There was a letter brought to me by Burke, and
he said “ I think I know this writing —I think I have seen it frequently come to Mr.
« Harrison, and it is now directed to Rispen, as Harrison is gone ; I believe it is intended tor
«a prisoner named Polack.” I enclosed the letter directly and sent it to the Inspector
General of Police, and have since been informed by him that it was for the prisoner 1 olack.
3158. But you have not seen the letter since you sent it? No. .
3159. By Mr. Bart: Is it not the practice to open letters coming to the prison . io
prisoners: not to free officers. . . . ~ •
3160. This then was addressed to Rispen, but Burke had a suspicion that it was really in-
tended for Polack ? Yes , „ a i v
3161. He thought letters in a similar handwriting had come, through Harrison, tor i olack
formerly? Yes. I have since heard Rispen spoken to by the Under Sheriff upon the
subject: and he acknowledged that he had previously received a letter from Polack s wite
intended for the prisoner, and that he went to her house to ask her why she wrote to him.
I consider the excuse made to the Under Sheriff a very bad one; the going to her house
shews duplicity. . , , . , , ,
3162. With regard to the other turnkeys, are you satisfied with their general character,
judging from the conduct of the officers since you have been here? From the short time
they have been under my charge I should not like to give any positive opinion. .
3163. Have you seen any traces of insobriety? No. I consider Mr. Callaghan, who is
acting as principal turnkey, a very good man ; and also Burke, the gatekeeper, I thmK a good
man. These two I have bad a great deal of assistance from. The other men lam not so
well able to speak of.
3164. Are they men of fair intelligence and activity ? Yes. . ,
3165. Men in the prime of life, or advanced in years ? Yes, I should say Burke is under
forty years of age. . .
3166. Speaking of the whole of the turnkeys ? Some of them are rather elderly men.
There is one named Armstrong. , . .
3167. My former question —whether they were men of fair intelligence and activity
applied to all ? I cannot say anything against them. In fact, my observation has been so
little that I should not like to express an opinion of them.
3168. Are they men not likely to be deceived by artifices ? I should not like to give an
opinion. I should confide a great deal io two of them; bat the others I should not like to
give an opinion of at present.
3169. Have you caused any new regulations whatever to be enforced since you have been
here ? Yery little, with the exception of keeping the turnkeys more on the alert.
3170. You have not attempted to introduce any new arrangements ? I have not.
3171. In consequence of being under the impression that you are here only from day to
dny? That is it precisely. _
3172. Have you any reason to believe that the prisoner Polack was treated differently irom
the other prisoners, previous to your arrival here ? I have heard he was. _ .
3173. He does not get any different treatment now ? Not the slightest; he is kept in the
hard labour yard, and has got his oakum to pick the same as the other prisoners.
3174. You say you have heard that he was differently treated before you came here have
you any objection to say from whom you heard that? From Mr. Callaghan.
3175. By Mr. Hart: Have you had any changes in the turnkeys or warders since you have
been here ? Yes; I have had two or three new turnkeys since I have been here, and I have
had an additional one. _ .
3176. Do you consider that the present staff of the gaol is sufficient to take care of the pri-
soners? Not with the Cockatoo Island prisoners; and I believe the present staff is, under
any circumstances, under that they would have in Europe:
3177. Do you observe any laxity in the conduct of the warders —anything in the conduct of
the warders different from what you have observed in European piisons? I think the
warders are not so smart; they are rather slovenly.
3178. By Mr. Windeyer : Were you ever in the large prisons in England ? I used to visit
all the gaols in London. I was inspector of police for seventeen years.
3179. By the Chairman: What capacity did you fill prior to being appointed here?
Inspector of the Sydney Police, in charge of the B division.
3180. How long have you filled that situation ? Going on for six years. Ever since 1
have been in the Colony.
3181. Were you engaged for the police service here? Yes, I was appointed in London an
Inspector of Police for New South Wales.
3182. Prior to that what situation had you filled? Inspector of the London Police for
upwards of fifteen years, for which I receive a pension.
3183. By Mr. Hart: Do you consider that the practice of the warders being compelled to
mix with the prisoners, on the same floor, has a demoralizing effect upon the officers ? Cer-
tainly not, if the warders do their duty—if the warders keep their proper place.
3184. Would it not be better if they had a raised platform on which to patrol ? They might
watch the prisoners better by that means, and it would also be a means of safety if they
were armed; but at present I should be timid of giving the warders arms, lest a number of
the prisoners should close round them and disarm them. If they were on a raised platform
they could not do that.
J '3185.


'. / Suppose a platform were made to run round the wall outside, would that be an
impijovement._ Ido not think it would ;it might possibly be made a means of escape. I
better 6 raiSed watch ' Ws in the which would answer the purpose
01 ot’ w th ff. Wa^ cb kept outside ? None by the gaol authorities.
° .j e e des | ra ble that there should be? I have known at the gaols in Ireland a
guaic o >ers to be kept, and sentries to be placed outside to prevent escapes, or any com-
munication being made with the prisoners. I may mention that at Darlinghurst three men
lGnded tbe police for throwing things into the gaol.
I 1 C ° UrSe ? at h - aS an in J urious effect on the prisoners ? Certainly ; I have no doubt
they throw over these implements which are found upon the prisoners daily after being
continually searched. This {producing a small parcel ) was thrown over the wall last Sunday,
and contains a pipe tobacco, a reel of cotton, and some paper for writing. ( The witness
produced various tools.) o \
0189. By d/r. It indeyer: \V hat is this little article ? A saw ;*it was found on a man
named Lee, a Cockatoo Isiand prisoner. He was searched, and these two saws and a part of
Si no We J e a 6 lt ' He 18 one of tbe most desperate men here.
dIJO. Mr. Hart: When was he searched? About half-past nine in the morning,
yesterday. r
H9l. Do you make a practice of searching the prisoners before they go to their meals?
Sometimes they are searched in the morning, but more frequently at night when they are
being locked up. ° j
3192. How do you describe these instruments which were found upon Lee ? Portion of a
frame saw and part of a file.
3193 By Mr. Windeyer: Where did he keep such an article as this large saw? It was
found in his cell in a corner. He has been in solitary confinement.
3 10 4- How long do you suppose he might have had that saw with him ? I think he got it
the day before.
3195. From some other prisoner ? My impression is that he got it in his soup. I noticed
some wardsmen carrying up soup to this prisoner, and I cautioned the warder, Armstrong,
to be very careful of this prisoner. Yesterday I had his cell searched and found these.
3196. By Mr. Hart: Are the cells searched periodically ? Yes.
3197. Are the prisoners searched each day? When there is time—sometimes there is not
time.
3198. Would you recommend that a sentry or patrol should be employed outside ? If these
prisoners were removed I think there might be a couple of policemen outside.
3199. On the north and south sides? On all sides it would be desirable j but I suppose
they could not afford four men to watch these walls, as these four would mount up to twelve,
having three reliefs. I have here the leg-irons which were worn by Barnett Levi {the witness
produced the same), they are partly sawn through. The prisoners are allowed to wear a
strap to keep the irons from the ground, and be managed to put the strap so as to conceal
the part that was sawn through. I had his irons very carefully examined and found
out this.
3200. What is he in here for? For repeated acts of robbery.
3201. By Mr. Windeyer : What do you suppose he effected that with? With a saw file.
3202. Have you found that since ? No ) this has been done some time. I think his reason
for doing this has been to enable him to take off his irons at night. Many of the prisoners
slip off their leg-irons. One of the prisoners who escaped was in irons, which he left
behind.
Mr. James Callaghan called in and examined :
3203. By the Chairman : You are a turnkey in this prison ? Yes.
3204. How long have you been so occupied ? About ten or eleven days.
3205. Who appointed you ? Mr. Uhr.
3206. On the 25th February what duty were you upon ? My post was the south wall in
the garden.
3207. Is that in the yard at the back of the hospital ? Yes.
3208. How many prisoners were there in the yard at that time ? I think there was ninety
some odd.
3209. Hid anything take place that day ? I did not know until the men—they shouted out.
3210. Did anything take place that day ? They were dancing, some picking this rope-yarn,
some singing, some reading, some lying down.
3211. Nothing else took place ? Not at that time.
3212. And at night I suppose you locked up all your prisoners as you received them in the
morning ? No, not as I received them in the morning,
3213. Were there any short ? Yes, there was, but I forget the number.
3214. If nothing took place during the day, what became of them? They made their
escape.
3215. Surely that was something remarkable—will you tell us how this escape was effected
in your own way, as briefly as you can ? Between the hours of two and three, or twelve
and two,
3216. Did they scale the wall, or how did they escape ? They made a hole at the bottom
and got out ] they did not go over the wall.
3217. Who told you they were making this hole —how did you, as the turnkey, become
aware


aware that they were escaping through a hole in the bottom of the wall ? Mr. Read came
in and ordered the prisoners all to be locked up. , ,
8218. And you knew nothing about it until Mr. Read came into the yard ? Not a ha p orth ;
there was such a load of men in the yard that we could not see what they were doing.
3219. By Mr. Windcyer: Were you in the yard? I was in the sentry-box at the big end
of the wing.
[Jfr. Read said, One thing I did not state, when I was examined just now,—
that I visited these men at one o’clock, and that I also looked from the window of
the wing overlooking the yard, and that everything seemed then correct, and in the
usual state.]
Mr. Alexander Elliott examined :
8220. By the Chairman : You are a turnkey in this gaol ? Yes.
3221. How long have you been engaged as a turnkey ? Between three and four months.
8222. Who engaged you ? The Sheriff.
3223. Mr. Brenan? Yes.,
3224. What situation did you fill before you came into the gaol ? I was a shoemaker.
3225. Working as a journeyman shoemaker? No ; working for myself on the Botany Road.
3226. Were you on duty on the 25th February ? Yes.
3227. What duty were you charged with ? With the men in the yard at the back of the
hospital, on the south side of the wall.
3228. How many men were in the yard on that day ? Eighty-two.
3229. Do you count them when you take charge of them, or have you some return of the
number ? The men who have charge of them in the wing count them out.
3230. Do you get the numbers by word of mouth, or in writing ? By word of mouth.
3231. How were the men employed during that day ? In picking oakum.
3232. Were you in charge during the day till four o’clock in the afternoon ? Yes.
3233. Did you return eighty-two men ? No, seventeen short.
3234. Did any thing remarkable occur during the day ? Yes, the same as every other day,
singing and whistling and all like this.
3235. What did you do with the seventeen men ? The men all escaped, as I believe, through
a hole at the bottom of the wall.
3236. How did you become aware that they had made this hole and were escaping ? By
Mr. Read.
3237. You knew nothing about these men escaping till Mr. Read came in and told you ?
No.
3238. At that time their number was lessened by seventeen ? Yes.
3239. You had not noticed these men escaping? No.
3240. Was this hole on a level with the ground ? Yes.
3241. Would not the men have to lie down to creep through it ? I believe they would very
near have to do it.
3242. Would it be possible for any man to creep through that hole without lying at his full
length on the ground ? No.
3243. Does it not seem singular that without your seeing it these men could lie at their
full length on the ground, and project themselves through this hole ? I will explain that.
I was at a distance away from these men at the bottom end of the yard, at the east end,
and it is a fashion these men have got when they come into the yard at first to put their
bags at the top of this little fence, there may be an inch or not an inch between the battens
of this fence; and then the men have a fashion of getting their backs against this fence,
and they will commence talking and playing marbles, and more picking oakum; and then
another lot got in the middle of the yard between the fence and where this hole was made,
and then a lot was sitting round by the hole, and more was on a form, and a whole lot were
standing up and a man was standing out reading to them—and this was the way I was taken
in by them.
8244. hy Mr. Windeyer : You were outside the fence ? Yes.
3245. By Mr. Hart: Are you on duty at night ? Yes.
8246. Are you supplied with firearms, or any means of defence? Yes, with firearms; a
carbine and bayonet.
3247. Did you ever fire it off? Never.
3248. By Mr. Morris : Do you know how to use firearms ? Yes.
3249. By Mr. Hart: Have you ever tried them ? I never tried any of the firelocks here.
[The Committee visiting the stockade yard,—]
John Williams examined :
[Having desired to make a statement.]
3250. By Mr. Windeyer : You are one of the men who were sent here from Cockatoo? Yes,
seven months ago. Me and six men came here in the month of August.
3251. You are not one of the men who were sent here for the late general disturbance? No.
3252. What was your original sentence to Cockatoo ? Fifteen years with hard labour, and
three years in irons.
3253. You wish to make some statement? For the time I have been on Cockatoo I have
been very unfoitunate, I have received a deal of punishment—this has all originated from
oppression. I have been on Cockatoo seven years, and I have received some six years
addition,


Kwvt \ + - enS l? n i t T original sentence. This prejudices my position in two ways,
fi s. by the probation that I have to do for it, and then it acts in extension to the judge’s
.?! ' bel . lev ® 1 have been represented as a bad character, and one who could not keep
° U °lf , r °^ le; bu J ft , )r tbe ime 1 have been in this establishment, I believe, I have conducted
myself to the satisfaction of the authorities. I have been now eight years in bondage, and
qokV 6 f S° m tbe wa i y tbe ? Wlll brin g these charges against me, seven years to do.
mj° yOU WaS l l y° urself ? 1 generally steal a wash in the cell in a kid.
, , ? you wash in that way ? As a preventive against vermin. One day I was
was mg m this yard after another man, and I felt an itching in my neck, and caught two
system they\ C a l ve tomary thmg ' * S a dan S erous tbin g for a man to wash according to the
325?; wdS 7 '’High&U^ 6 Stephe ”’ °" th ° 6th Eebruary ’ 18 “> in Sydney-
-3258. With violence ? & Yes.
. Cockatoo Island prisoners having chosen two of their number to represent
their alleged grievances,—]
James Arnott examined ;
[Brought from his cell in the new wing,]
3259. By the Chairman : I may state that this Committee is appointed by the Legislative
Assembly to inquire into the state and management of gaols, and not into the justice of
sentences. We understand that you have been selected by your fellow prisoners as a dele-
gate to make some representations to us; if you have, therefore, any statement to make, with
reference to the discipline and management of the gaol, we are willing to hear you? I wish
to know nist if a statement forwarded from here were received or suppressed. It was sent to
the Sheriff; one communication was addressed to Mr. Lucas, and the other to Capt. Scott.
When we had completed our fourteen days solitary, we received permission from Mr. Lucas
to write to him, and we did so, and the principal of our grievances were contained in that
statement.
3260. That was addressed to Mr. Lucas, but was received by him only yesterday, and has
not been communicated to us ? Would it not be possible for that statement to be forwarded
to the Committee ?
3261. Does that include all you have to say ? Nearly all.
3262. You do not wish to add anything now ? Any more than that I hope the Committee
will try and do something for us. This system is a most oppressive system.
3263. Is there anything else you wish to say ? No; I think I will not encroach upon your
time, when you are going to get the written statement from Mr. Lucas.
3264. It does not appear to have come into Mr. Lucas’ hands till yesterday ? It was about
the 20th January when it was sent to Capt. Scott, in one statement, for his perusal.
3265. By Mr. Hart: Have you any objection to go to work ? No; I think the generality
of the men would have no further objection. As the Committee have taken up the thing,
we think something will be done.
3266. By Mr. Lucas : You think they will not object to go back to the island? No; we
have been put under a piece of oppression for the last three days, in consequence of some of
the men trying to get away.
3267. By Mr. Hart ; Do you consider it to be a greater punishment to be at Cockatoo
Island than here ? There is no difference in either place.
3268. Is there more discipline here than at Cockatoo? I think not.
Henry Clarke examined :
[Also brought from his cell.]
3269. By the Chairman : Are you one of the men who came from Cockatoo Island? Yes.
3270. The gentlemen who are here constitute a Committee of the Legislative Assembly,
appointed to inquire into the state and management of the gaols, and they understand that
you wish to make some statement? Yes. Ido not know whether you received some papers
from me last week; I wrote a statement and handed it to the Sheriff, to be forwarded to
you.
3271. To be forwarded to the Committee or to me? To the Chairman of the Committee.
3272. I have not received any such statement? Will you call the gaoler, I handed it to
him.
[The Chairman retired a short distance, and after speaking to the acting
gaoler, returned.]
3273. The gaoler has forwarded the statement to the Sheriff’s Office, but we have not received
it yet ? I sent these papers about ten or eleven days ago.
3274. We will obtain the statement if it be in the Sheriff’s Office—does that contain all you
wish to say ? Yes.
3275. Have you anything you wish to state now ? I have been on the island four years the
15th of this month, and of all the grievances we have there, the greatest thing is the par-
tiality shewn to one class of individuals more than others. There were two hundred men
employed for a period of ten months at the building of a house on the island. Not one
man was at work at the dock; only about thirty—that was one day in June, there was a
Committee on the island that day; and about thirty men were put to work at the dock that
day. The moment the Committee left the island, both men and tools were ordered up to
the


the Superintendent’s house- This house was commenced in August 1859, and was not
completed for the Superintendent to go into until the 4th October, 1860. „
8276 By Mr. Hart: Was the fact of the Committee going over to the island signalled t
It was known on Saturday evening that the Committee was to he there on Monday. :
8277. What is the substance of your complaint? The partiality shewn to the prisoners on
the island, principally by the chief warder and the Clerk of Petty Sessions.
8278 Is it to certain individuals or to individuals of a certain class . To certain individuals.
One man came to the island—Handcock—in 1857 ; he was not long there before he was
placed as a servant to Mr. Keilor; while he was there one of the children falls into the river,
and he of course, as any other man would have done, saved the child, and claims the reward,
which he gets. He is then sent on the public works for a fortnight, and is transferred to
the clerk—to Mr. Taylor —he is there for a few months, gets beastly drunk, makes use of
the most filthy and obscene language, and is placed in the cell for one night; next morning
he is released from the cell, sent back to Mr. Taylor, and is never brought under the I olice
Magistrate’s notice; he remains with Mr. Taylor four or five months, till they are sick of
him, and can keep him no longer, and he is then sent to the works ; he is then sent to the
dispenser, and remains with Mr. Macdonald till he obtains his ticket-of-leave. He abuses
his ticket-of-leave, is sent back, and Mr. Macdonald tabes him again. That is one ot the
instances. Another man, of the name of Alexander Gribson
3379. Are these things in your written statement ? Yes. . .
3280. By Mr. Hart: Have you made any complaint in your statement of the remission of
sentences and non-remission of sentences ? lam not under that system; I am under the
old system ; I ought to have obtained a ticket-of-leave before this.
3281. By the Chairman : You have been on the island some time ? Pour years.
3282. State, without reserve—without any suppression of the truth —what is the conduct
of the prisoners in the dormitories, where they sleep at night? I never saw an instance of
immorality. I have heard several little rumours concerning the like.
3288. Have you ever heard obscene language ? I have, repeatedly.
3284. Are not the men, more or less, kept awake in the night through the crowded state of
the place ? Yes. The bugs are a great nuisance—a most terrible nuisance ; in fact, the
ward has to be stoved four, five, and six times, and whitewashed, during the summer.
3285. What is the state of the atmosphere in the ward at night—how have you experienced
it ? I have been lying with nothing but my shirt on, and all of a muck sweat.
3286. Have you felt oppressively bad smells? Dreadful, especially the first thing in the
morning.
3287. Do the men ever get out of their berths ? Yes, to walk about.
3288. Naked? Naked; nothing, only their shirts on.
Edward Power examined :
[Brought from his cell, having expressed a wish to speak to the Committee. 3
3289. By the Chairman : What is it you wish to see us about ? About the irons, and being
confined in the cell. Last Tuesday week I was brought down from Parramatta, and was
picking oakum in the yard until last Monday, and since that time I have been ironed, and
kept in a cell. I know no reason for it, unless because I saw other men going through the
hole, and I could not prevent that without having my head broke, or being killed perhaps.
3290. You were one of the prisoners in the yard at the time ? Yes.
3291. You did not attempt to escape ? No, it would not answer my purpose. I have a wife
and family to see after.
[Certain prisoners desiring to give information of a very serious character.
Committee proceeded to the lower hospital.]
Frederick M'Gregor, alias Lawry, called in and examined: —
• 3292. By the Chairman: You are one of the prisoners who came from Cockatoo Island ?
Yes.
3293. The Committee understand that you wish to make some statement to them ? Yes, I
want to make a complaint about the men on the island.
3294. When did you go to the island ? Two years and six months ago.
3295. For what offence ? Horse stealing.
3296. Who tried you ? Judge Callaghan.
3297. At what place ? Bathurst.
3298. How were you employed during the time you were on the island ? In the building
gang.
3299. Doing what ? Drawing stone and winding the windlass.
3300. You mean you were employed in getting the stone ready for building ? Yes.
3301. Where did you sleep ? In No. 1 ward.
3302. How many persons slept in that ward during the time you were there ? Sixty or
seventy.
3303. You have stated that you do not wish to go back to the island—on what account is
that ? Vice—sleeping with one another like man and wife, and all sorts of beastliness.
3304. Do you state unhesitatingly, and of your own knowledge, that the men have slept
together ? lam confident of it. I have seen it too often ; it has made my blood run cold.
I have never been used to such things. I have been in the bush all my life.
8305. Do you mean that you have seen acts of sodomy committed? Yes; there are only a
few battens between us, and men around us ; and I could not help seeing it.
3306.


«c 3 cumrieVCirif e ,r hat {P a . bm . seen on f n y one ocoasion-describe what particular
• i + 7 T a t an y Particular time, or what you have witnessed during the whole
rff uilht aTd rh? Sma V 0r r eight ™»‘hs on the island, and I was stop up
their Lths and goTnto otters. tU ™ ** t 0 g ° dC>WD the W ° U ' d get out ° f
down' between 3 ™ aS WardS “ all ?T ° Si ‘ U P all ni « ht > and P arade «P "O' l
hunks Id 8 ! eoTd f during the time ? They hare been running into one another’s
if 1 attempted to stop them,I 5 to r'JporT CDCd l ° in ° Ck h™” B ° U ‘ With Uie b ° ards
so 3 r'nf'L h d at l, haVe y ° U Tu them , do - s Peak ? Go into one another’s berths-and all
oo in d ,r f,r a , g 0— ■ l i ,a ''o ,al:en a ll « ht and caught them in the act of sodomy.
iii ?■ J? fj^ dson : Yo " ha 7 e yourself caught them in the act of sodomy ? Yes.
16 Cha J rm “ n : You have take * a light to the berth and seen men in the act of
unnatural connection ? Yes.
sf!o’ Jr have 110 doubt about lt ? No > not the least.
fj ave y° u seen on more occasions than one ? Yes.
’ W ff* hav , e y° u said ? 1 have said I would report them, and they have said if I did
they would knock out my brains with a board. J
c s )nduc t of an unseemly nature be going on all night—l do not mean such
night aVG bu t talking about such things ? Yes ; talking about it all
ooj y 5 e , r ? the men exposing their persons ? Yes, and going about stark naked in the wards,
doll. Making obscene displays of their persons ? Yes.
3318. Do you recollect what particular prisoners they were who did those things? Yes, I
remember several: was one, and a man who has gone away:
was another. ° J ’
3319. You say that when you were wardsman you have gone with a light to a berth, and
seen prisoners in the act of unnatural connection ? Yes, I have.
them Yes'* remember wbo tbese P risoDers were on any occasion when you have caught
oooo* ? ou f tate wbo the y were • and a young fellow named .
oozZ. Is he in the gaol just now ? Yes.
ooo?’ long lias been on tbe island ? Twelve or thirteen months.
Who was the aggressor in any act of that kind—which was the passive and which was
the active party ? is a filthy beast of a man ; perhaps three or four men go
into his berth in a night. 6
v° U understand my question—which was the active and which the passive party? Yes.
d , • You say • is_ “ a filthy beast of a man ” —what do you mean by that ?
iue men are going with him all night; as one man gets up another goes.
3327. You are thinking of the serious import of what you say ? Yes.
3o*jB. Have you known others besides who have gone with as
if he were a woman ? Ido not know his proper name, but he is nicknamed .
His nose is all on one side of his face.
3329. Any one else ? Yes; one man who has gone away, . I believe he
is away.
3330. Any one else ? a man of the name of ; he has lost two fingers
on one hand.
3331. Is he here ? No ; he has gone with his ticket.
3832. Have you seen these men with ? Yes.
3333. Have you seen them committing acts of sodomy with ? Yes.
3334. Have you seen any one else? Yes; there are others, but I forget their names at
present.
3335. Have you seen the same kind of criminality between other men where
was not concerned—where some one else was the submitting party ? Yes; plenty.
3336. Can you mention any names ? A man of the name of .
3337. This person, , also submits himself to the improper liberties of these
men in the same way ? Yes.
3338. Prostitutes himself to them ? Yes.
3339. Are both these men, and , young ? Yes, very young.
3340. How old is ? One or two and twenty.
8341. How old is ? About nineteen.
3342. I should gather from what you say, that is a complete prostitute in
the hands of these people ? Yes, he is.
3343. in the same way, but to a less extent ? Yes.
3344. Do you know of any other cases ? Yes ; a man of the name of , who
was brought over here some time ago.
3345. Who also submitted in the same manner as , who acted as a common
instrument for the bestial gratification of the other prisoners ? Yes.
3346. Is he here now ? I think he is in Parramatta, he came over with eight men who
were brought from the island some months ago.
3347. Have you yourself seen men having connection with or ?
Yes ; I have seen a man named frequently with , even on the
works in the daytime. I have seen them on the works in the daytime, with their clothes
down, and one having connection with the other.
S34S. In that ward was the conduct of the prisoners generally very obscene and repulsive ?
157—0 • Yes,


Yes very much so I took some of them to the office at one time-four of them for obscene
conduct-hut before I got to the office they threatened th.at, to tS
would knock my brains out. So that when I got to the office I was afraid to make
qoiu When was that ? Fifteen or sixteen months ago, perhaps more. .
3350. I suppole these enormities you have just mentioned are limited to a certain number,
only a few comparatively indulge in these beastly practices*. Yes.
3352 tpeatogTthr whole 1 of them, are obscene language and obscene displays of the
SST Y„u“°; y?uTL th r n \hem r’r7bo“d in the place between the berths ? Yes.
3354. Is that done by many ? I have seen four or five different men at a time.
3855 By Mr. Hart: Were any overtures ever made to yourself? No, they kept all at a
distance from me; none of the men like me; they threatened to knock my head off.
3356 How did it happen that the men did not see you when you were coming up with the
light ? They would not move; they did not care whether I came or not; they knew they
3357. Hid you ever report any of these circumstances to the authorities? No, I was
Sisals 6 this the first time you have made any statement ? Yes, and I would not do so now
only I do not want to go with them or to associate with them.
3359. You would sooner be in this gaol ? I would sooner be anywhere.
3360. Hid you ever see any clergyman at the island ? Yes.
3361. What clergyman ? Mr. Agnew. . t , . i •
3362. Hid you state any of these circumstances to him ? No, I never spoke to him on the
island ; I was afraid to speak to him, or to any free man, for fear they should think I would
speak about them. . 9 v
3363. By Mr. Wahl: Were you on the island before came there . les.
3364. How soon after * came there did you observe anything ? About a week
or ten days. v
3365. By tie Chairman : Are you a native of the Colony ( Yes.
3366. Where do your parents reside ? They have both died since I came to Cockatoo.
3367. What occupation were you following at the time you were apprehended. Horse-
breaking.
3368. You are not any trade ? No ; my proper name is Lawry.
3369. You have been brought up to horse-breaking? Yes; I have been among horses and
cattle all my life.
3370. Were you ever in a place of this kind before? No.
3371. Were you ever arrested on any charge ? No; and my prosecutor told me that when
I had done my twelve mouths he would come and try to get me off.
3372. Who w*as your prosecutor ? Mr. John Linton, of Murrumbidgee.
3373. You had five years sentence ? Yes.
George Jones examined :
1. 3374, By tie Cl airman : You came here from Cockatoo Island with the insubordinate
prisoners ? Yes.
3375. Under what sentence are you suffering ? Five years.
3376. For what? Forgery.
3377. Who tried you ? Judge Callaghan.
3378. When were you tried, and where ? On the Bth November, 1859, at Albury.
3379! You wish to make some statement to this Committee ? _ Yes; I wish to know if they
will allow me to remain in tins gaol; Ido not want to be mixed up with the people on the
island any more, for I have had to see things there that it is not fit for anybody to see.
[The Chairman requested the witness to be specific in his statement—the
witness proceeded.] ,
I have seen go into a man named bunk, in No. 1 ward, and
there commit sodomy—it is about seven months ago now.
3380. Hid you ever see that crime committed more than once by those two persons? Yes,
once or twice. . . , ,
3381. Hid you ever see that crime committed by any other prisoners ? No, not on the island.
3382! You have no doubt that you saw commit that crime on the person of
? No ;I am ready to swear to that.
3883, You would swear to that on oath in a Court of Justice ? Yes.
3384. How long ago was that ? About seven months ago.
3385. You are aware of all the consequences if you swear falsely—you know the penalty of
the crime of perjury ? Yes.
3386. Have you ever seen immoralities in the ward which have fallen short of sodomy, such
as obscene exposure of the person —obscene talking ? Yes; there is always obscene talking
in the wards at night.
3387. Have you ever seen the men running up and down the ward naked ? Yes.
3388. Obscenely displaying their persons? Yes; just before we came here I have seen the
men running about the ward naked.
3389. If it has been stated to the Committee that the men are confined to their berths
during the night, and never come out in the space between the berths, that statement is
not true ? No.
3390.


0390. They do frequently come out of their own and go into other berths ? Yes.
3391. Have you frequently seen the men go into other berths ? Yes.
You have no doubt of that ? No; I have seen it every night in the ward.
8393. It wouM be impossible for men to go into each other’s berth naked without their
persons coming into close contact, in consequence of the smallness of the space ? It would.
3094. Ihe one entering the berth would, in fact, have to pass over the other ? Yes. There
is one man in the gaol now, who was removed from the island because it was reported
people went into his berth. ’
0095_ W hat is his name ? I do not not know his name. The lad had an uncle on the
0000 /; i/ 6 fc r ie( * t 0 St °9 k ut could not ; and he was removed over here in consequence.
ooat tt UCaS : as . remove( l from the island some five or six months ago? Yes.
qqoq /, V i^°^ een s * nye y° u have been here ? No; but I believe he is in the gaol.
33J0. hy Mr. Mate : He had an uncle on the island ? Yes; an old man of the name of
* j he was sent for horse stealing.
3399. Has he not a father on the island ? A father-in-law.
3400. By Mr. Windeyer: Have you seen any others besides - and this young
fellow whose name you do not know ? I have not myself, but plenty have seen it besides me.
3401. By Mr. Sutherland: They have told you so ? Yes.
8402. Can you name those who have told you? Whitaker is one.
3403. By Mr. Hart: Were you on good terms with ? Yes.
3404. AA ere you in the habit of speaking to him? Yes, I was on friendly terms with him,
3405. Hid he ever make any overtures to you ? No ; but wanted me to comply
with his wishes, and I repulsed him.
0406. By thC' Chairman : What did you say to him ? When we fell out about the bread,
we were put into No o ward, and there were so many of us that there was not room for all
the men in the bunks; the consequence was, that some of us had to lie on the top. I had to
lie alongside or - , not knowing his character, and he wanted to come into my
bed, and I repulsed him.
8407. By Mr. Windeyer: Is the man Whitaker you mentioned here now ? Yes.
3408. By the Chairman: Is there anything else you wish to state? No, only that I wish
to remain in the gaol.
James Scope, alias Williams, examined :
8409. By the Chairman : You were at Cockatoo Island, were you not? Yes.
3410. AYhat sentence were you undergoing there ? Five years.
3411. For what offence ? Housebreaking.
3412. Where were you tried, and by what judge? At Quarter Sessions, by Mr. Holroyd.
3413. When did your sentence commence? On the 25th May last.
3414. AA ere you removed to this gaol among the insubordinate prisoners in January last ?
Yes.
3415. AA r e understand that you wish to make a statement to this Committee ? Not a state-
ment. I wish simply to stay here, and to state my reason for doing so. The reason that I
fell out with the mob of insubordinates was the bestiality that was carried on among the
men assembled in the wards at night. ( The Chairman requested ihe witness to be explicit in
his statement .) The only statement I can make, as the reason why I should not like to go
back again among the men, is, because I have seen some acts of bestiality at night —acts of
unnatural connection.
3416. Have you seen that ? Of course I could not swear that the thing was going on ; I
can mention the name of one—it was ; and the name of the otter was .
3417. Are those both here ? Yes; after we got our first sentence for fourteen days, this
and had gone back again, and were sleeping on the top of the bunks.
These men were a short distance from me ; we were allowed to smoke there, and there was a
light at the end of the place. I went down to get a light; I looked down; I saw this man
pretend to be asleep, and this other ore shook himself. I stooped down and pulled the
blanket off’ them, and saw this man with his posteriors in the other man’s fork.
3418. Have you seen other acts of a similar character ? 1 have seen others.
3419. About what date was this ? About the 23rd of January this year. I had only been
about two months in the gaol, for I was kept a portion of my time here, as my friends had
petitioned that I might be allowed to stay in this place, and I do not know many of the
men’s names.
8420. Did you see any other similar act ? I never saw an act like that; I have seen other
acts, but I do not know half or a third of the men’s names.
3421. As to the general conduct of prisoners in the wards at Cockatoo Island, is it obscene
and repulsive ? It is beastly.
3422. Do men go about the ward naked ? Yes. Of course people of our class are not much
given to religion, but if you take up a Bible, or any other book, you cannot read with any
degree of pleasure ; you are annoyed by three or four men in the other bunks. These things
1 have spoken of I have seen through my bunk. All sorts of obscene conduct in one bunk,
and in another bunk another nice scene going on.
3423. By Mr. Walsh : Have you observed, when you have been shut in your wards during
the day ? No, I have never seen any of those acts in the day.
3424. Have you never been shut up in the wards in the day during wet weather? No.
3425. By the Chairman : Have you heard it mentioned among the prisoners that this boy
■ was in the habit of submitting himself to the beastly use of the prisoners ?
Yes.
3426.


3426. Have you ever seen prisoners pointed out who submitted themselves *n this mann*.*, ?
I have, but these are ones I could not prove. There is one by the name* of -
or •• _ . , ,
3427. By Mr. Morris: Is he an old or a young man? A ladder a young man, two or
three and twenty years of age. Another one—this is an affair I did not see, but it was related
to me by three or four of the men, when I was in the hospital last week ——
and a young man were standing together. Ido not exactly know how to express myself, but
he was working the other j he had hold of his person, and worked it so as to cause his seed
to flow forth, and there was a mob of people round him. In fact, one of the men up-stairs
in the hospital saw it, and one of the men has been down to me and told me about it.
3428. Are you a married man ? No. It is quite a common thing to hear these people called
Judy This, and Lady That, and Miss So-and-so, It is quite a common thing to see the men
called “dustmen” catching hold and kissing them before the men publicly.
3429. That you have seen ? That I have seen.
3430. What is called ? He goes by the name of “ Spot.”
3431. Has he any feminine name ? No.
3432. Can you state what is the name of ? Lady Godiva.
3433. Have you ever seen any prisoner kiss ? Yes, I have seen two or three.
3434. What prisoners ? I have seen and —•
3435. Is this who was appointed as a sort of delegate? Yes, the delegate
for the old Act men they term it. .
3436. Have you ever noticed that the men who are supposed to be in habits of unnatural
association with these treat them more kindly? Yes, they give them everything they require.
3437. Treat them the same as they would girls ? The same as if they were women; in fact,
they will almost go without anything themselves to let them have it. The names these
people are called are only used by those they associate with —they only are allowed to call
them. For instance, if I or any other man were to call them so we would most likely be
mobbed —so that it is not exactly public. This C is called Miss C •
3438. By Mr. Walsh : Do the other prisoners know them by these names ? Yes j I have
been there only two months, and when I, who have been there only two months, know, they
must know them. The principal reason for my having anything to do with this tailing out
affair was chiefly that I might get away from the island, for my friends have a promise of
mitigation of sentence.
3439. Were you ever in a position of this kind before ? Yes, but not in a place of that
description.
3440. By Mr. Hart: Are you fond of reading ? Yes.
3441. What do you usually read ? Almost any book that comes to hand.
3442. The Bible ? Yes, occasionally.
3443. Are you given to the study of religion ? No.
3444. By the Chairman: Are Bibles common on the island ? If you take them or your
friends send them to you. I had not a Bible for a month till I had a Bible sent from Sydney
by my friends.
William Thomas M'Gregor examined :
3445. By the Chairman: You came from Cockatoo Island here in January, along with the
insubordinate prisoners ? Yes.
3446. How long have you been upon the island ? Two years and four months.
3447. Under what sentence ? Six years.
3448. Who tried you ? Judge Stephens.
3449. Where ? At Goulburn.
3450. Of what offence ? Obtaining money under false pretences,
3451. During the time you were on the island how were you occupied ? As a shipwright
and boatman. I had charge of the dock.
3452. What ward were you in ? No. 5.
3453. How many slept there ? Forty to fifty.
3454. The Committee understand that you wish to make some statements with regard to
immoral conduct on the island —you are in no way connected with another prisoner in the
hospital named M'Gregor ? No, I have not spoken to him three times since I have been
here.
3455. Are you a married man ? Yes.
3456. Have you a wife and family ? Yes.
3457. How many children have you ? One.
3458. Have you had more ? No.
3459. Were you living with your family at the time of your apprehension ? Yes. The
statement I have to make is, in the first place, the obscene language and bestiality carried
on on the island —the acts I have seen on Cockatoo have been more generally by the
“ Derwenters,” the old hands. As soon as a good-looking young man comes on the island
they are all after him —they will do this for him, and they will do that for him, so-and-so.
I have seen them run into their berths naked in the night time in No. 5 ward.
3460. You have seen one man go into the berth with another naked? Yes.
3461. Have you seen anything more than that? No.
3462. Have you frequently seen the men go into one another’s berths? Yes, at night-time.
3463. As a man somewhat advanced in years, and a man with a family, just state to us what
was your experience on a given night, after you were locked up ; try and describe—so that
we may realize, as well as people can who have not been in the ward—what was the conduct
.of the prisoners, the state of the atmosphere, whether there were bad smells that were
oppressive


oppressive to you, state whether you could sleep, or, if you could not sleep, state what
noises you heard, or if you witnessed unseemly exhibitions on the part of the prisoners—
give us, as exactly as you can, the history of one night? I cannot state the day of the
month, but previous to our coming here, I should think it must have been three nights
before, , a young man, and , commonly called Curly, and ,
were sleeping on the top part of the bunks—the ward being so warm, there being so many in
it. I slept very little, and this says to ,“ We will see by and by, I think
he will stand it.” I said, “ This is disgustiog language ; I see what you mean, what you are
up to; I shall shift from here.” I did so, and about twelve, or between eleven and twelve, I
saw these two men go to this man’s bed, and there they were naked the whole three
of them. What was carried on I cannot say, you may judge for yourself what the result
was. I went away with disgust to the other side of the ward.
3464. Did you ever see any similar occurrence on any other occasion ? I heard of them,
and it was known to be the fact that a man named had connection with a
man named •, on the island.
3465. By Mr. Walsh : Was —— a young man ? Yes.
3466. By the Chairman: Was the conduct of the prisoners in the ward, without going to
the extent you have just spoken of, vei'y obscene—characterized by obscene displays of the
person ? In general, I think most of these men were third or fourth convicted men. There
is no classification—if a man wishes to become a good member of society afterwards, he goes
there and his morals are corrupted by the manner they go on.
3467. Are you aware whether there are any young men on the island, prisoners, who are
known by feminine names, such as Miss So-and-so ? Yes, there is one here, Lady Thursting.
8468. Are you aware whether some of the prisoners display an unnatural kindness towards
others —whether they try to get little delicacies for them, and treat them as women ? Yes,
I have actually seen it, even in this yard.
3469. By Mr. Windeyer : Do you remember any other cases of men being called by feminine
names ? Yes, this .
3470. What is his name ? He has some other name, but is called “Long Sal.”
3471. By the Chairman : What have you noticed with regard to their conduct to these
prisoners ? I have known them to give them tea and sugar, and handkerchiefs, anything
they could provide for them.
3472. Have you seen anything in their personal demeanour—have you seen any of the
prisoners kiss them ? No, I have not; if I sajd so, I should not tell the truth.
3173. You do not want to go back to the island ? No, Ido not.
FRIDAY, 8 MARCH, 1861.
present
Mr. HART,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. MORRIS,
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
John Callaghan called in and examined:—
3474. By the Chairman : You have been employed for some years in Darlinghurst Gaol ?,
Yes.
3475. How long ? Nine years and ten months. ;
3476. Who was gaoler when you were first employed there ? Capt. Webster.
3477. What situation did you fill when you were first employed in Darlinghurst Gaol? I
was employed as turnkey day and night.
3478. As ordinary turnkey ? Yes.
3479. How long did you act as ordinary turnkey ? For three years.
3480. Without any variation or change ? Yes.
3481. After the expiration of these three years or thereabouts, how were you employed ? I
was sent to take charge of the working men in the stockade masons, stone-cutters, and
labourers.
3482. You were, in fact, overseer of the stockade. Yes.
3483. That describes you correctly ? Yes, so far as relates to the masons and stone-cutters;
not to carpenters and smiths.
8484. But in the place called the stockade? Yes.
8485. How long did you continue in that capacity . Four years and a hal .
3486. That is seven years and a half out of the nine years and ten months; what did you
do then ? As soon as the works were given over at the Colonial Architect s Department I
was sent to the south wall, when Mr. barley was sent there. M „
3487. You were removed from the situation of overseer of the stockade when Mr. larley
took charge ? Yes. , , , , 0
3488. Did this person—Mr. Farley—take the same charge as you had previously ? Yes.
3489. He was in just the same position as you were? Yes. _ .
3490. Were his duties in any way distinguished from the duties you had been discharging ?
No ’ 3491.


J, Callaghan.
(
8 Maxv 1861.
3491. He seemed to be doing just the same ? No j I had charge of the work.
3492. Was any reason given for your being removed ? No reason. He was sent from the
, Colonial Architect’s to take charge of the works.
3498. Are you sure that this Mr. Farley took charge under the orders of the Colonial
Architect ? Yes. . „
3494. Can you rocollcct any circumstance that would, fix the time when he took the charge .
I could not exactly say how many months he was there previously to the other three men
3495. g Do you feel pretty sure that it was about seven years and a half after you first went
into the gaol ? Yes, I should say between seven and eight years.
3496. Where is this person—Mr. Farley—now ;ishe in the gaol now ? Not in the gaol.
3497. Where is he ? After he was removed from the charge —sometime after the three
overseers came —he was overseer of the quarry, over the prisoners.
3498. However, when this Mr. Farley came to take charge of the stockade, you were
removed to some other duty—what was that ? I was removed to the south wall, convenient
to where the prisoners escaped.
3499. How long did you remain stationed at the south wall without any interruption to
your duty ? May be eight or nine months ; between seven and nine months.
3500. From seven to nine months ? Somewhere about that.
3501. What did you do then? I received an order to relieve these men alternately every
fourteen days —Mr. Fee and Mr. Rispen —on the wing, and fourteen days on the south wall.
3502. Your next duty was of this character, —that you were a fortnight on the two wings,
and then a fortnight on the south wall ? Yes.
3503. How long did you continue employed in that manner ? About three months.
3504. What followed upon that? I was ordered to take charge of the new wing from that.
3505. You then left the south wall altogether? Yes.
3506. You left the hard labour and committal wing altogether? Yes.
3507. And you took charge of the new wing ? Yes.
3508. Is that where the Cockatoo Island prisoners have been confined lately ? Yes.
3509. How long did you continue in charge of the new wing ? About three weeks, I think.
3510. What followed upon that? I received an order when Mr. Harrison was suspended.
3511. We have not got to that by a year—we have a year to account for yet ? lam sorry
I have not the dates; that is particularly the way I was employed, only I am at a loss to
give the exact time.
3512. You say you have been in the gaol nine years and ten months —about three years a
turnkey, and then four years and a half overseer of the stockade, which is seven and a half
years out of the nine years and ten months, leaving two years and four months to be accounted
for —the duties you have described did not take up a year of the remaining time—when you
can tell us so exactly that you were three weeks on one duty and three months on another,
how is it that you cannot speak more precisely as to this longer period ? I did not keep
the dates.
3513. Is it possible that you were more than three years overseer in one place—you might
have been four years ? I might have been four years.
3514. You cannot remember exactly ? No.
3515. You are sure of these facts:—that first you were turnkey, then overseer, then stationed
for a time exclusively on the south prison, then alternately on the hard labour and committal
wings, and the south wall, and then on the new wing, and were performing that duty when
Mr. Harrison was suspended? Yes, I was performing it. ( Vide Appendix Ai)
3516. What took place on Mr. Harrison’s suspension? Since then I have done duty as
principal turnkey.
3517. You are now acting as principal turnkey ? Yes.
3518. You performed that duty this morning? Yes.
3519. Will you describe to the Committee what you did prior to coming here ? In the
first place, this morning at six o’clock I had the keys from the office—Mr. Read’s office;
I came from the office to the wing; I saw the warders were present; I gave the keys of the
committal wing to the warder in charge of that wing; I gave the keys of the hard labour
wing to the warder in charge of that wing; I gave the keys of the new wing to the warder
in charge of that wing; and then went round the gaol to see that each man was on his post.
When I had performed that duty
3520. Who were the men on the several posts round the gaol when you went round ?
Graham was on the gate, Biekham on the wing, Elliott on the stockade, Gregory on the
south wall, Agnew on the north wall, Callaghan on the front, and Carthy on the east fence.
8521. By Mr. Hart: Is that the memorandum in which you record each man’s daily
attendance? This is the memorandum I keep of the duty, I make my entries in the
evening of the duties to be performed on the following day. ( Witness handed a small
mnnorandum-book , without cover, to Mr. Hart.')
3522. When did you make this entry? Yesterday evening.
3528. Is there any other book kept by you, as principal turnkey, in which you record the
daily duties of each man—your entries in that book are made in pencil ? Yes, at present.
3524. You keep that for your own private information? Yes; and I copy that, when I
get time to do so, into another book.
3525. I asked you whether there is any record in the gaol of each man’s daily attendance fo
his duty ? No record at present,
3526. Are you sure there is no book ? No book.
8527, Where is the book kept now ? I will have a book for my own information.
3528, That is a private book ? Yes.
3529.


8529. Bij the Chairman: Will you state to the Committee whether the arrangement which
you have just stated is the same as has existed for the last twelve months in the gaol—the
arrangement of these men at their various posts for the night ? No.
3530. Some new arrangement, is it ? Yes.
3531. Made when ? Since I have been appointed, and Mr. Read came there.
3532. Made in consequence of the attempted escape, I suppose ? Yes.
3533. W ill you proceed to explain the rest of your duties to-day ? After that the next duty
was —there were fifty men slept in the new wing last night—l mustered fifty men yesterday
evening for the new wing, this morning I mustered the same number, calling the names,
and I mustered them into the hard labour yard from the new wing—that was the next duty
I did. Then was the next —the prisoners for discharge at nine o’clock. I discharged the
prisoners—at least Mr. Read discharged the prisoners—previously to my coming here at ten
o’clock this morning.
3531. During the time you have been in the prison, have you ever had any opportunity of
observing bow the keys of the gaol were kept, prior to your taking charge as principal
turnkey, at night? The keys were kept in the charge of the principal turnkey at night.
3535. Was it ever your duty to get the keys in the morning ? No.
3536. You never applied for the keys in the morning ? Never.
3537. Do you know where the keys were kept? No.
3538. You did not know whether the keys were kept up stairs, or below stairs, during all
these nine years ? No, during the nine years I never did.
3539. Did you ever hear they were kept on a peg behind the door at Mr. Harrison’s ? No.
3540. Did you ever see any of the turnkeys drunk ? Yes.
3541. Which of them ? I have seen Lee drunk.
3542. Any others—did you ever see Harrison drunk? I have seen him very stupid looking.
3543. You mean stupid looking from the effects of drink ? Yes.
3544. You have no doubt about it? No.
3545. Did you e’ver know him drink with prisoners outside the gaol ? No, I have not.
3546. Had you ever anything to do with a prisoner named Polack in the gaol —did your
duties bring you into contact with him—was he under your charge ? He was four days
under my charge, when I was in charge of the committal wing.
3547. Is it within your knowledge that he received different treatment from other prisoners?
Not when he came under my charge; he received treatment the same as the other prisoners.
3548. Was his dress the same ? Yes.
3549. Did he eat the same ? Yes.
3550. Was his cell in the same order ? Yes.
3551. Did you ever hear of any distinction made in his case ? I did not.
3552. Did you ever observe any signs of distinction recently ? Regarding clothing —I did
not see him till latterly.
3553. Did you see him in other clothes than the rest of the prisoners? Yes.
3554. What clothes have you seen him in? A plain coat and waistcoat.
3555. A black coat? A sort of blue coat. On another occasion I saw him in a suit of
plain clothes.
3556. Dressed in the usual manner? Yes.
3557. Did you know him before he was received as prisoner? No.
3558. You have seen him in a dress which would not distinguish him from any other foot-
passenger in (xcorge-street ? On one occasion I saw him in a dress that could not distinguish
him from a free person.
3559. Similar to your own ? Yes, plain clothes.
3560. There was nothing more in his dress to indicate that he was a prisoner than there is
in yours ? No.
3561. Where was he when you saw him next ? He was standing at the wing.
3562. When was it ? About four or five months ago I saw him standing at the wing in
plain clothes. . . .
3563. Do you think the Sheriff must have known this—the Sheriff visited the gaol some-
times, did he not ? Yes.
3564. And Dr. West, the medical attendant ? Yes.
3565. They must have known this ? I could not exactly say.
3566. Was it not their-duty to visit the part of the gaol where he was ? It was the duty of
the Sheriff to visit the gaol.
3567. Could he have been in the state you describe without the authorities ot the gaol
knowing ? He could not.
3568. Would it have been possible for him to have received that indulgence without the
principal turnkey or principal gaoler knowing it ? He could not have received the
indulgence without the knowledge of the principal turnkey. . i 9tt ■i.
3569 Might he have received it without the knowledge of the principal gaoler ? He might.
3570, Did you ever hear any complaints made of the treatment he received complaints
made to the head authorities of the gaol ? No. , , „ ,
3571 During the time you have been in the gaol, what steps have been taken for keeping
the wards clean-keeping the cells clean ? The prisoners in the cells are supplied with
rubbing stone, and thev rub the floor with that stone : and there are wardsmen appointed to
each whig, for the purpose of cleaning the passages railing and so forth.
3572 How often where the cells whitewashed ? W hitewashed ?—I believe that the labour
wing has not been whitewashed for some time. When I say some time, perhaps two months,
3573 P What regulation was there for cleansing the bedding, washing the blankets, keeping


the bedding of the prisoners clean ? No regulation that lam aware of, till these few days ;
the blankets are given to the women to wash now.
3574. That is very recently ? Very recently.
3575. Do you remember this Committee visiting the gaol first ? i do.
3576. Is it since then that the blankets have been given to the female prisoners to be
washed ? Yes. , , 9 ~
3577. You never saw them given to the prisoners before to be washed : JMo.
3575! Has there been much whitewashing going on lately ? We shall finish the new wing
Has there been much whitewashing going on since the Committee visited the gaol ?
Yes ; the female wing has been done since, and the labour wing will be done to-day.
3580. What regulation has there been to compel the prisoners to keep themselves clean ?
On Saturday now . .
3581. Formerly —I am speaking now with reference to your nine years experience ? in
Captain Webster’s time, the prisoners paraded every Sunday morning ; they were clean
shaved, had their hair properly cut, clean linen shirts on, trousers turned up above the
knees, and jackets above the elbows ; they held out their hands, and extended their arms
full length, and they had shoes on their feet. Captain Webster inspected them on Sunday
mornings.
3582. That regulation was in order to enforce personal cleanliness ? i es.
3583. Was that regulation allowed to be discontinued after Captain Webster’s death ? It
was discontinued after his death.
3584. After Captain Webster’s death, up to the recent change—of course I allude to the
suspension of Harrison and Beverley —was there any regulation to enforce personal clean-
liness ? No.
3585. Can you state to the Committee, having had so long an experience in the gaol,
whether there were cases where the prisoners allowed themselves to become quite filthy in
person ? I have heard of cases where prisoners were marked out as dirty vermin.
8586. Lousy you mean ? Lousy, I mean.
3587. I suppose you are the father of a family ? I have no family.
3588. Do you think that the prisoners were in a proper state of cleanliness all that time
that they were washed sufficiently frequently from head to foot ? Not properly.
3589. You must know how necessary it is, for the preservation of health and strength, that
persons should be kept clean ? I do.
3590. Do you consider that there were sufficient regulations in force to preserve health and
physical strength among the prisoners by cleanliness ? I think not.
3591. Was it the case that if men of filthy dispositions chose to neglect themselves from
one year’s end to another, there was no regulation to compel them to clean themselves ?
There was no regulation ; but it was the duty of the warder in charge of the wing to see if any
case of that sort came under his observation, and it was his duty to point the man out to the
principal turnkey —not even so —to have him removed and cleansed.
3592. Was there any such regulation as the one ordered by Captain Webster, by which
cleanliness would be enforced without its resting upon the discretion of a warder ? Yes.
3593. Without giving such an extreme case as that just now, suppose a prisoner chose to
neglect to wash himself for months—were not even to wash his hands and face ; if he com-
plied with the other rules of the gaol, would he be liable to punishment? No; unless the
warder chose to take notice of it; he could give a clean shirt and have him washed.
3594. Did it ever occur to you as a serious piece of neglect ? Yes.
3595. You who have seen this praiseworthy regulation of Captain Webster —did it not strike
you as a grave defect —did you ever mention it ? No, Mr. Harrison was principal turnkey —
he was well aware of this regulation. Cleanliness is the principal means of keeping health
in the prison.
3596. Could this state of things have existed without the knowledge of the Sheriff? It
may be possible ; the principal turnkey is the principal man in the gaol.
3597. Did not the Sheriff visit the gaol ? Yes.
3598. How often ? He was there once a week, sometimes oftener; he has recently been
oftener than once a week.
3599. What was the character of his visits—what did he do when he came in ? He visited
the different wings, when he came in at meal time, or would see them at their dinner, or
would go into the different workshops if in working hours, or go into the new wing, and all
round the gaol —the different parts of it where men were employed.
3600. By Mr. Hart: What is Polack confined for —what is his offence ? His offence was
something in the shape of a fraud.
3601. Is there any regulation by which prisoners, who are confined for matters that are not
felony are allowed indulgences, either in the shape of food or clothing, if their friends
outside can support them ? There is a regulation to that effect.
3602. What is the regulation ? If a man is in for trial, he can support himself; if sentenced
to imprisonment he can support himself, or his friends can. The exception is, if a man is
undergoing hard labour he is not allowed.
3603. Is Polack undergoing hard labour ? Yes, he is.
3604. Is there any other prisoner in the gaol at present who is not compelled to wear the
prison uniform ? There is a man named Garsed, he does not wear the prison uniform; he
is undergoing imprisonment.
3605. Without hard labour ? Yes.
3606. Is there any periodical examination of the prisoners from head to foot, denuded of
their clothing ? Not at present,
° r 3607.


8607. Do you consider that that would he a salutary course ? Yes, I do, very much so.
3608. W hen the prisoner is first admitted to the prison, is he examined by the surgeon from
head to foot ? He is examined by the dispenser —at least drunkards are—in case a man got
other punishment imprisonment or hard labour—if he has complained of anything they
doctor those persons.
3609. Is he denuded of his clothing? He is taken to the bath-house and washed. All
prisoners, with the exception of the drunkards, are removed to the bath-house, washed, and
then from that brought to the barber, shaved, and have their hair cut.
3610. Have you heard any complaints of there not being sufficient facility for using the bath
in gaol ? No; they come now on the Saturday afternoon ; they work till twelve; from one
o clock they are removed by sixes, commencing with the confine yard, till that is completed;
then the hard labour, and then the committed yard. So that each man is washed every
Saturday afternoon now.
3611. By Mr. Walsh : Is the entire body washed ? Yes ; the man strips, and goes into the
bath ; there are two baths there.
3612. By Mr. Hart ; Is there a plentiful supply of water ? Yes.
3613. How often is the water in the bath changed ? It can be changed after every six
men —after every two men.
3614. In point of fact, when is the water changed ? When six men have washed in it, the
bath
3615. As the principal turnkey, what is your opinion as to the propriety of changing it
ofteuer ? I would change it for every two men.
3618. Would you like to wash in a bath after five men had been in it ? Not in one; there
are two baths—three men.
3617. Is the water in each bath changed after the sixth man leaves it ? It can be changed
after each man.
3618. lam not speaking of what can be done ? I was not present —I am not able to answer
that question —I will tell you the number taken there, but I was not present at the washing.
3619. Is the duty of seeing these men washed confided to a certain warder ? To the warder
in charge of the hard labour prisoners.
3620. Is he permanently on that wing ? Yes.
3621. What is his name ? Thomas Lee.
3622. Do you consider that the warders or turnkeys, who are under you now, are fully
competent for their duties ? I consider there is an exception.
3623. Will you state it ? That exception is—there has been a man of the name of
Callaghan ; I consider him not sharp enough, because when our prisoners are in motion, their
action should call the attention of men who can form an opinion of their motives.
3624. By the Chairman : That one was on duty when the seventeen prisoners escaped ?
Yes ; prisoners’ movements should draw the attention of the turnkey, for they always have
some object in view by their actions.
3625. By Mr. Hart: Has it occurred to you that the warders and turnkeys appear, in some
instances, to be dressed very shabbily ? No.
3626. Have they the privilege, or is it their duty, to wear any particular dress, or can they
dress as they like ? They can dress as they like, so long as they are respectably dressed.
3627. What would you consider if they were compelled to wear a decent uniform, either
similar to the police, or similar to that of any other force ? I would consider it very good.
3628. Would it not give them an air of authority ? Yes; and they would be remarkable
—they would be known by the prisoners as such—that they were in authority over them.
3629. Do you know anything about the competency of the female turnkeys? No; nothing at all.
3630. You do not feel competent to speak on that subject ? No.
3631. By Mr. Walsh : Persons sent in for drunkenness, I understood you to say, were not
washed ? They are not ; they considered that it would not be safe to the health of a man
brought in for drunkenness to put him into cold water ; under that impression they are not
washed.
3632. They are generally confined for forty-eight hours ? Twenty-four hours and forty-
eight hours.
3633. Do you not find that they generally come into the gaol in a great state of filth ?
Very dirty.
3634. Are they sent out in the same way ? Yes; putting them into cold water it is thought
might endanger their health. • •
3635. After the lapse of forty-eight hours they are sent out as they came in ? Just as they
came in.
3636. By Mr. Hart : Could they not be washed in a warm bath ? There could be a warm
bath prepared there.
3637. Do you not think that a ducking would do them good before they went out ? I think
they would be all the better for it; but the feeling was that danger might follow it, the man
having been indulging in drink.
3638. -By the Chairman : Do you remember that on the occasion of the Colonial Architect
assuming the superintendence of works in the gaol, there were a number of turnkeys
discharged ? Yes.
3639. How many turnkeys were there left ? I think eighteen, including the six who left.
3640. Six were discharged, leaving twelve ? Yes.
3641. Can you tell the Committee upon what principle these men were discharged—whether
they were the men who had been there the shortest time, or whether they were peculiarly
incompetent men ? Among the men who were discharged there were some who were fully
competent to do duty, who were good turnkeys, and who had been longer in the gaol than
those who were retained —men who had carried out the discipline to its fullest extent.
157—P 8642 -


3642. On such an occasion we should generally presume that if it was found necessary to
discharge some of the officers, those who had been there the shortest time would have been
discharged, unless there were some reason of inefficiency foi the discharge of the others
that would be a general rule according to your understanding ? Yes.
3643. Is it a fact that some of the oldest turnkeys were discharged while some of those
recently appointed were retained ? Yes. ,
3644. And those men who were discharged were men against whom there was no complaint f
Not that I am aware of.
3645. Do you remember a man named Frederick Pegg ? Yes.
3646. He was discharged then, was he not ? Yes.
3647. Was he a man who generally conducted himself well ( lies; a most competent turnkey.
3648. A man in the vigour of life, able and strong ? Yes ; strict and regular in his habits
and attendance. .
3649. Were men retained who had been appointed much later than he had received Ins
appointment ? Yes.
3650. Do you remember another man named Thomas Johnson ? Yes.
3651. Had he been a turnkey several years ? Yes.
3652. Was he a man who conducted himself well? As far as I can recollect I never heard
a fault against him.
8653. You never saw him drunk ? No.
3654. You never saw anything in his conduct ? That I could be prepared to say
was faulty.
3655. Was there a feeling of dissatisfaction, as to the manner in which these people were
discharged, among those old turnkeys who remained ? Yes, that was the feeling.
3656. You, as turnkey—could you understand the principle on which they were dis-
charged—looking at it in this light, that it was necessary to discharge some in consequence
of their numbers being too great —could you understand the rule on which they were
discharged; some of them having been there many years, being men of good and
yet they being discharged, while others who had been there only a short time, and were in no
way more efficient, were retained ? I cannot understand why they were discharged
the principle; or, at least, what I heard' there was that they were discharged for the
purpose of their pay going to pay three overseers.
3657. That is not what we are driving at, but what was the reason for selecting these
particular men —you say you have been there nine years and ten months do not you
consider that if you behave yourself that should give you a title to preference over a man
who has been there only ten months ? I do.
3658. Suppose you were discharged to-morrow, and a person was retained no way better
than yourself, who had been there only ten months ? Yes, I should feel aggrieved.
3659. Was not that the case with some of the men, only not in so great a degree ? Yes.
3660. Was not this man Johnson discharged after he had been sis years there ? Yes.
3661. Did you hearAhat he had a high character from the gaoler ? I did not hear that;
but from my knowledge, I consider him a worthy man.
3662. Among the twelve turnkeys retained, were there not some in no way remarkably
efficient, who had been there only a short time ? Yes.
3663. While among those who were discharged, were several very efficient? Yes.
3664. Did not that appear very capricious on the part of the authorities? Yes.
3665. You never heard any reason assigned for selecting those six men? No.
3666. Do you recollect the names of any others besides Pegg and Johnson ? A man named
Donald.
3667. Can you state to the Committee whether among any of the men more recently
appointed, and who were retained, therj were those who were not so sober as they ought to be ?
1 cannot say.
3668. You are now principal turnkey ? Acting principal turnkey.
3669. Therefore you have’raore authority than usual —if you bad authority to discharge six
men out of eighteen, were there any of recent appointment retained, whom you would have
selected to discharge on account of their inefficiency ? I would have selected some of those
who were discharged as compared with those who were retained.
- APPENDIX.
A.
Memorandum shewing how Mr. Callaghan, Turnkey in H.M. Gaol, Darlinghurst, was employed
from the year 1851, to the present time.
T , ~r fxks ordinary turnkey; two (2) months of which was
From May, 18oi, to February, 1806 | over Insane men.
From February, 1856, to May. 1859 Over the works in Stockade.
("On South Wall. In August, 1860, I was shifted
from South Wall to do duty in the Wings, viz :
t? ht iqti * * . j 14 days on Committed Wing; 14 days on the
From May, 1809, to August, 1860 < Lah(n £ Wing . and H days the South Wall, al-
j ternately relieving Turnkeys Lee and Rispcn. I
was also employed 14 days on the Gate.
In the beginning, of February I took charge of the New Wing, in which was confined the
Cockatoo insubordinates, and remained in charge until the 12th February, 1861, when 1 was ordered by
the Under Sheriff to do Principal Turnkey’s duty.
_


Mr. William Walsh called in and examined :
By the Chairman: You hold some situation in the establishment of Darlinghurst
Gaol . lam dispenser there. ®
oG j 7l ' y ° U E Surseon ? lam not a memb er of a College, but I was educated for a
- U!
d 672 '. iU J ou state what experience you have bad ? I was apprenticed to a qualified sur-
geon m London, tor five years. I attended lectures. I never succeeded in passing a Coll e
l« ne m applled ' yet I have acted as surgeon to various ships and public institutions.
3670. What were the ships? Two ships-one a whaler and the other a merchant ship.
For five years I was apothecary to the Bath United Hospital. I was also dispenser on board
M. b. Defence, which had 700 prisoners.
0u74. Prior to receiving your present appointment what situation were you filling ? I was
two years dispenser on Cockatoo Island. ’
3675. Luring the time you must necessarily have had a good deal of intercourse with the
prisoners ? Yes, I had.
3676. Did you ever hear any allegations that unnatural crime was perpetrated among the
prisoners ? I have heard such a report.
3677. At different times ? Once or twice I have had men pointed out to me as given to
those crimes. ®
3678. Were these reports made to you under circumstances, or accompanied by corroborating
facts which led you to believe there was any truth in them ? I have received them with
doub;. Ino only case where I had reason to believe such a thing did exist, was this : About
two years ago a man named Collins stabbed a man in the head, of the name of Malloy : they
were both prisoners, and this occurred between eleven and twelve at night. Collins was
tried at the Central Criminal Court in January, I think two years ago, and in his defence
he stated that the reason he stabbed Malloy was to resist an attack made upon him There
were two men of the name of Malloy on the island—one named John, who escaped some
time ago ; that is not the man I refer to. That is the only case I know.
3679. This statement was made in Court ? Yes.
3680. Have any circumstances come to your knowledge, professionally, that would lead you
to the conclusion that unnatural crimes were committed? No. I have seen two men
pointed out to me in the yard as given to that practice; and ..
3681. Do you know a prisoner who was recently in the hospital at Darlinghurst Gaol, named
Frederick Macgregor ? I do.
3682. Has he ever made any revelations to you of this kind ? No, never.
0683. How long has he been in the hospital ? He came over with a gang of men for
punishment, and was in the hospital seven or eight days.
3584. Is he in the hospital now ? No, he went away to Cockatoo when the men were sent back.
3685. What was the general conduct of this prisoner when under your notice ? I have
seen him both at Darlinghurst and at Cockatoo, and he seemed quiet and well conducted—
I never heard of his being punished.
0680. Do you know a prisoner who was in the hospital about the same time, named George
Jones ? I do.
3687. Is he still in the gaol ? He is still in the gaol, but is not in the hospital.
3688. What is his general conduct ? I have no knowledge of the man, because he arrived
on the island after I left. I have only seen him while he has been in the hospital.
3689. From the little knowledge you have had of him while he has been in Darlinghurst
Gaol ? The man’s conduct is quiet.
3690. Has he ever made any statement to you of this character ? No.
3691. Do you know a prisoner who was in the hospital about the same time, named Scope,
or Williams ? I know a prisoner of the name of Williams, a native of the Colony.
3692. Have you bad any opportunity of observing his conduct? Yes, both at Cockatoo and
in the gaol.
3693. What do you think of him ? I believe the average of his conduct is good and quiet.
3694. Did he ever make any statement to you of the nature I have alluded to ? None.
3695. Was there another prisoner in the hospital at the same time, William Thomas
Macgregor, an older man ? Yes.
3696. Had you any opportunity of observing his conduct? Yes, both here and at Cockatoo.
3697. Have you had any opportunity of observing his conduct ? No, these men were quiet,
and remarkably well conducted men.
3698. With reference to all these four men I have named, have you any special reason for
doubting their truthfulness ? None, that lam aware of—but I should receive these reports
with caution.
3699. I wish to know whether there is any special reason to receive their statements with
more than ordinary caution ? Not that lam aware of, no special reason; but if I might
be permitted, 1 would suggest these men have an object to gain, namely, that they may not
be sent back to the island.
3700. Do you know a warder* named Mackie ? He is a warder* in the hospital at the
present moment.
3701. Is he a prisoner ? Yes.
3702. How long has he been a warder there? About fourteen months, I think.
3703. How long have you been there yourself ? About eighteen months.
3704. What has been the conduct of this warder, Mackie ? Yery correct, I consider, for a
prisoner.
3705.
* Query {By witness ): Wardsman.


3705. Do you think him a man of respectable character using the word in its application to
a prisoner ? I believe his conduct has been generally very good—his time will expire
. While you we re upon the island did you hear any cJ the men there
called by feminine names, as Lady So-and-so, Miss So and-so ? I have not neard it on the
island but on board H.M.S. “Defence,” and in London particularly so.
3707 Is the assumption of a name of that kind indicative of the person to whom it is
applied being addicted to those abominable practices ? I should consider so. I knowsue
practices do exist in London. I have known cases of persons assuming the female Or ess.
3708 Are you referring to a case in Beck’s Medical Jurisprudence ? No, to cases I have
known myself. While I was on the “Defence” a young man received seven years trans-
portation for the offence. _
3709. By Mr. Wilson: Do you prescribe medicines? les. ,
3710 Will you be kind enough to tell the Committee under what circumstances you ■ V lQ '
scribe ? In the morning when the men fell oat, or give their names as complam.ng of being
ill they are brought over to me, and if it is a case which requires it, I piescube or exe p
the party and leave him for the inspection of the visiting surgeon. Cockatoo
3711. How often does the visiting surgeon visit the gaol ? Every day, and Cockatoo
Island d ee h k g whQ are exemp ted by you are brought under the inspection of
the visiHng surgeon ? Yes. If it is a case which is not likely to involve anything serious
I exempt a ma/for a day or two, and give simple medicines; if he do not get better I then
place him under the surgeon. , , . • ?
3713. You do not in all cases where you exempt a man place him under his mspec
the medical attendant prescribe hospital diet, or do you ? If the case were left
for Dr. West he would prescribe the diet. , . ~. .
3715. In exempted cases? They are only on prison rations, they are not on hospital diet,
thev do not get hospital diet unless they are taken to the hospital.
3716. How often did the medical attendant visit Cockatoo Island when you were there.
Twice a week—Tuesdays and Saturdays are the days for Dr. West to attend.
3717. Is that left to the option of the medical attendant, or is the time specified by the
Government ? The time is specified by the Government; formerly it used to be Saturdays
and Wednesdays, but it was altered in consequence of some fresh arrangement about the boats.
3718 Do you not think it as necessary that he should visit Cockatoo Island every day, as
that he should visit Darlinghurst ? Sometimes accidents happen at Cockatoo, and ot course
in those events he goes immediately. . • • .
3719. lam alluding to the necessity of his daily attendance ? I scarcely think it is quite
so necessary, for in Darlinghurst there is a constant shifting of persons, and there are also
almost every day lunatics received who require immediate inspection and providing or.
3720. Are these lunatics taken into hospital ? In any case where there is the slightest
disposition to illness. . . ~ , ■.
3721 On the day when we visited Darlinghurst Gaol, we found a female prisoner said to be
labouring from epilepsy, lying in one of the cells in the wing, and not in the hospital.
That would be a case where the woman was extremely violent, and where it would have
been dangerous to have put her with other patients.
3722. Have you not a lunatic cell ? lam sorry to say we have not y
3728. Do you think such a cell as that highly necessary? Les, I think sen
3724. Are you aware whether this woman I allude to was violent ? I think I remember
the case, and that she came in extremely violent.
3725. By Mr. Hart: Was it not from the treatment she received rather than from any
defect in her constitution ? I believe she had been ill-treated outside by her friends.
3726. By Mr. Wilson : Do you inspect those lunatics who are unwell and confined in the
cells in the wing ? I inspect them immediately they come in; I get their names and
histories, so that I may give them to Dr. West. ,
3727. Is their general treatment under your superintendence ? Not at all; they are under
Dr. West, for the object is to get them certified and taken to the Lunatic Asylum as soon as
3728. They are left under the charge of a particular wardsman ? Under a wardswoman.
3729. Of course, in the case of a woman, but a man under .similar circumstances, would be
under the charge of a wardsman ? Yes. lam supposed to visit these people in the cells
every day at nine in the morning; if I see they are likely to be ill or dangerous, i some-
times, on my own responsibility, order them into the hospital. #
3730. You think it absolutely necessary that there should be a lunatic cell connected with
the hospital ? Yes. . , , .
3731. Have you any baths attached to the hospital? Not attached to the hospital, but so
•close that they can be made use of. , ,
3732. Are they in the same building? Within two or three yards of it, but not attached
'to it. t
3733. If you have a patient very sick who requires a warm bath, have you any means_ ot
giving him one? Yes, we have a shoe bath, and we have both shower and plunging
baths close to the hospital.
3734. You have only a shoe bath for the hospital ? Yes.
3735. B>J Mr. Walsh :In case a patient is not able to go to the bath ? We use the shoe
bath. . . ~
3736. By Mr. Wilson : Do you think, as a general thing, sufficient attention isjau^to


Lir s uch le a a So S 0 V n ? >rlin fr l «“>}?. Generall y Ido not; both men and women come
3787 f f r6me 6 tb ' that xt 18 difficult to get them clean for a period.
iUI V oes * hat an f e from an inherent love of filth ? I believe so.
,i ‘ VL 16 peculations sufficiently stringent to cause them to bathe themselves? Ido
goo/S rlstfwitVtffi* rUI6S h* stringent to enforce cleanliness. I believe a
8789 Th«tl 7 h m meD i b . Ut the y must undergo a certain ablution daily.
87i0 A ablution being the washing of the hands and face? Yes.
there ltfl °/ batbs alfco g ether in Gaol? I think
Beverfey ZZs fIX ’ ™ ™° f Mr ’
3/41 Then there would be only four for the use of the prisoners ? Yes.
Have prisoners access to these baths every day if they choose ? Ido not think
into use on^ccouut*of^h° r therG haS been a difficult y about the baths being brought
into use on account of the Government not allowing a sufficient quantity of coal to enable us
to heat water for the warm baths. No coals have been allowed for the use of the bath-housm
.8744 Bn/l * * it-° 0all 8 f ° r tbe ordinar y bath ? No, for warm baths only.
Gaol—do vonTh ° f - C ° M ba ? ing ~ tbe § eneral aW ution of the inmates of Darlinghurst
a d ° ?° U tbinb the P r ] sou . ers have sufficient facilities for that description of bathing ?
No there is not sufficient, for it takes a long time to wash all the men. g
8/40. ion state that there are only four of these baths ? Only four of common access.
' ,; n Y ° n ai , e not aware whe ther they are in general use among the prisoners ? They are
8717 ITT 1 UBe 1 wh ® n a man comes m particularly filthy he is taken to the bath.
fV Mr - Hart; Do you reside in the gaol ? Ido not.
. In the event of a prisoner being taken ill at night, is there not a danger of his
suffering very much by not being able to communicate with you ? lam in such close con-
tigmty to tbe gaol that I can be there in a few minutes.
8749 Have any cases occurred where it has been necessary to send to you? I am con-
tinually sent to, sometimes two or three times in a night. Ido not think a week passes
without some such cases. •
370 U. Are there greater facilities for the ablution of prisoners at Cockatoo Island than at Dar-
ingmrst Hao!. Yes, lately there have been, because they have been allowed the use of the dock
rfiot. With respect to the practices which have been alluded to at Cockatoo Island—do you
finow if any means were taken by the authorities to ascertain the truth of these allegations
by watching the prisoners, unobserved, from the roof, or some other portion of the wards?
Asthnwards are arranged at present I think it is almost impossible to do so.
oioL. buppose it is now alleged that there are persons there who are passive agents, could
the truth of that statement be ascertained by surgical examination ? No, I think not •
unless there were disease among them.
3753 - Then as the wards are constructed there are no means of ascertaining officially whether
these crimes are committed or not? No, for the wards are patrolled by prisoners who might
connive at such practices or be afraid to give information, and there is no possibility of the
officers seeing them.
8754. Why are not free warders employed in these passages instead of prisoners? Ido not
know ; it was always the case at Home. I think prisoners require more supervision in the
night than they do in the day time.
3755. Are the wards lighted up at night? There is a lantern at the end of the ward, but
very often the lamp is partially out. I have seen the place in total darkness when I have
been called at night.
• '756. Bid you report that to the authorities? I have made a complaint that there has not
been sufficient light.
3757. To whom did you make the representation ? I have merely told the head turnkey,
Mr. Brown, since dead. It did not come within the catalogue of my duties. I merely had*
to look after the light in the hospital. I have spoken to the warder of the dormitories.
3758. Is there any light communicated to the cells of Darlinghurst Gaol at night? Not
singly to the cells, but the corridors are lighted up.
3759. Are not the doors of each cell closed so as to exclude that light ? Yes.
3760. Have you seen any of the prisons at Home recently ? Not recently. I have been iu
this country about five years.
3761. Are you in a position to state whether the cells of prisons recently erected are lighted?
Yes, I believe each cell is lighted up.
3762. In winter at what hour are the prisoners locked up at Darlinghurst? About five in
the winter and six in the summer.
3763. At what hour are they let out in the morning? At half-past five in the summer and
half-past six in the winter.
3764. Then they are in total darkness the whole of that time? Yes.
3765. Might not that tend to depress the mind very much? I have no doubt that upon
many men it has an injurious effect.
3766. Is the same system pursued on Cockatoo Island ? No; they sleep in dormitories in
classes, and every man’s bed-place is partitioned from his neighbour’s by battens, and in the
centre is a passage lighted by lamps iu the way I have spoken of. There may be as many
as fifty or sixty men in a ward there.
3767. Have any of the prisoners who have been sentenced to solitary confinement shewn
symptoms of insanity iu consequence of their incarceration ? I never saw an instance of
that kind.
3768. Do you recollect a soldier imprisoned for life, and now in Darlinghurst Gaol, for
striking his officer ? No, Ido not remember the case.
3769.


Mr. W.Walsh.
8 Mar., 1861.
3769. Do you remember a prisoner named England or English . Yes.
3770. Was not he a soldier ? I believe he was._
3771. When did you see him last? This morning.
3772 Did he present any symptoms of insanity ? I did not notice it. .
3773’. Of fatufty rNo fldidiaot take any particular notice of the man. He complained
of constipatmn. CQnfinement ? He is separate the same as the others undergoing
punishment.
Tu idtcal treatment, an! y et under hard labour, have
they only tspM diet f They have hospital diet only when they are mto the hoepttah
3777 There is a man in the gaol at Parramatta who complains that, although he is per
?ormin" ard kbour yet he is compelled to exist on hospital diet-bread and teais that
aceordLtothe gaol regulations ? No; bread and tea is only a portion of the diet Ti e
full diet Is 12 ounces of meat, 12 ounces of bread, oatmeal, sago, arrowroot, nee, and 0 ounces
of Qnly bread and tea for his constant support, do you consider that fair
treatment ? No ; no man could do hard labour on bread and tea. . f
3779. By Mr. Walsh : Have you many malingerers ? Yes, many. The disposition ot y
plan among them to produce sickness? The most frequent
378” P of copper.? Yes ; sometimes by binding a piece of
coin on their legs. The simulation of fits ot epilepsy is also very common—some men do
STsTwoTuKe these malingerers are punished when they are detected ? There is no actual
to work. I have reported them for attempting to impose
tutor tug and tlio order Iras Itggii to send them to work. _ . . i
3788 Do they notget solitary confinement for that ? No; I do not thmk there is any law
Vstsfle Chairman: How many patients have you in the hospital this morning? I
3785° Have’ Uie men'‘So™.^WUliamrnnd the elder M'Gregor gone hack to Cockatoo
Island? Yes. . „
3786. Jones is the only man of these four still in prison ? Yes.
3787. By Mr. Hart: What is your salary ? £130 a year, of which I have to pay £40 for
rent —soYiat leaves me hut £90 a year to support a wife and family, and, of course, I cannot
maintain the appearance it is desirable I should to command respect.
3788. You consider that salary inadequate ? I do.
3789. Have you applied to the Government for an increase ? I have not-
3790. Do you devote the whole of your time to the duties of dispenser . I am tnere w
called upon, whether at day or night.
3791. Are you frequently called out at night? Yes. „ v
8792. You say you are unable to keep up a respectable appearance on your present salary. e .
3798. You, I presume, suppose it is necessary for you to keep up that appearance in ordei
to maintain the respect due to you ? Y'es. , ■, A pika
3794. What is the salary of the visiting surgeon ? £200 from the gaol, and £lo0 from
3795. Does he hold any other appointment under Government ? Not under Government,
hut he has a good private practice, I believe. , . A . • , .
3796. By the Chairman : At what time do you attend the gaol in the morning . At eigh.
3797. At what time do you leave ? At twelve ; 1 go again at half-past two, and keep there
till five, when the vans deliver their prisoners. I am also frequently callea out at all hours
of the night. , . , „, i
3798. By Mr. Hart: I presume you have to keep proper entries, such as are made iy
medical men, of all the cases that come under your notice ? Yes; I have also to keep books
shewing the expenditure of the stores, and to serve out the tea, sugar, soap, and candles.
3799. Is it the proper duty of a dispenser to serve out tea, soap, and candles . No; |jut f
appears to have found its way in among the duties there, although I cannot help saying I
think it is rather infra dig.
3800. Who assigned these duties to you ? They were there as part and parcel of the auty
when I came I have had no assigned duties since I first came, they have been left for me
to find out for myself. I do not know that any one can specify the exact duties of a dispenser.
3801 By Mr. Walsh: Do you know of your own knowledge what dispensers get in other
positions ? Yes, I believe the dispenser at Parramatta gets £150 a year, and at Tarban
Creek the same. _,
3802. Do you know what the dispenser gets at the Benevolent Asylum ? 1 beueve there
he lives in the house. .
3803. Do you know what salaries are paid to the principal assistants in chemists shops in
town ? I do not. I have never been in a chemist’s shop ; I have either been in a public
institution, or on board ship. I may state that the storekeeper at Cockatoo, who is a young
man, and whose duties consist chiefly of writing copies of official letters, serving out paint,
carpenters’ tools, &c., has a salary of £190, with house and rations, and I do not consider
that his berth involves the responsibility that mine does 3 for if a man, while under my care,
were to lose bis life through maltreatment I, perhaps, might lose my liberty.
TUESDAY,


TUESDAY, 12 MARCH, 1861.
ilment
Mp‘ Tifr l*
Mr MATF S;
Mr MORRIS
IJR ' MOERIS >
Mr. PARKE S,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WILSON.
HENRY PARKES, Esq, Chairman.
proceeded to the Water o J al Hotel, Sydney,
Griffiths.] " atch-house, the gate of which was opened by Lewis
Constable Lewis Griffiths examined
toiT Si th * C ?«' rBla » • Were you on duty when we came ? .Yes
watch rln a d 1L premiT. *** dnriB * the ni S bt ?We ba ™ hours each to
3807. By 1 "’ as -' | “ st , abou * toberelieTe<J ; 1 was now calling the watch.
3808. Howmafyprisjne™ areL-Tom i 0 ° h U »” “*4 ? It is.
a y prisoners are here ? Only one—a woman charged with drunkenness.
about te^tt o™t“ 0 ™t“d r t d wot S” ** V T™ ™ ™
two feet from the floor.] 1 S ' aCrOSS ° De end was a P latform about
Constable Samuel Haggerty examined :
[Having relieved Griffiths.]
3809. Are there different cells for males and females ? Yes.
oolU. How many females are usually confined here ? It is nnt oft™ i ,
SMifchf""' How the most you have had in hero intone night ? Not
L B lo' Y er , e , ? No, we have never had more than two.
0014 J ff V '^ art: Do ever confirie females indiscriminately with men ? No never
Whend,d tbC Pre “ nt About three o'clock
3816 11 , bC T kePt '‘T U ‘i' til Sh t »»“ before tlie BeMb ‘Ws morning ? Yes.
the person L 'iZJ. f t T* l of . slck " css ' las ,be P™ner any means of communicating with
YeS ’ the P ° rSOa Wh ° be “ his
00 jo- 4 re the P ersons confined here very noisy at times ? Sometimes,
them a bit G Stn^ent meaus to kee P th( ™ fluiet ? No more than bounce
3819. How do you act when you bounce them ■? Threaten to put them in a worse place if
they do not behave; I threaten them that I have got a place underground, where I will put
, , Committee then entered a second cell, about fourteen feet by twenty
and twelve high; the walls of both this and the cell previously visited were very
dirty, and covered with writing ] J
Inspector Edward Cowell examined :
[Having, here joined the Committee.]
?C4?' C u air T°,i!'' You have been . in the Water Police many years? Since April,
Hi] > ™. fc 1 ledt and then came back again. I have been in fifteen years the last time.
ooZi. VV hat situation in the police do you occupy now? Inspector.
oooo‘ !? 0W long , 1S since this watch-house was built ? About three years and a half
3o 16. Have you been here all the time ? Yes.
3824. Has this been whitewashed during the time ? Yes, they have been whitewashed
about three times.
00S S? 3 ,* ™ eans are ado Pted for cleansing the floors ? They are cleaned every morning
oo2b. Washed every morning ? Yes. °
8827. In a similar manner to a ship’s decks ? Yes.
3828. They are never holy-stoned, I suppose ? No, the floors are sanded; this place is
obliged to be whitewashed because the men write names on them.
3829. This cannot have been whitewashed within the last twelve months ? It has been.
3830. The woman who is now in confinement was brought here at three o’clock yesterday
afternoon—in such cases are prisoners ever visited—is any attention paid to them if sick
or are they allowed to have any food or nourishment ? Nothing is allowed but watch-house
rations—bread and water.
3831. What kind of bread is it ? Dark bread. ( The witness produced a loaf.) If a prisoner
is brought here in the afternoon, he is not entitled to receive bread till the following morning.
38:12. Has he water ? Yes, the man on duty is supposed to look in during his watch.
3833. Who apprehended her ? One of the men wlio is here.
[Constable Prince Francis Little came forward and said, I arrested her on the (
charge of being drunk, and Mr. Ebsworth at the wool stores opposite complained of P.
her conduct. I raised her up that she might go home, and not being able to home
I brought her here.]
3834.
Inspector
E. CowelL
Constable
P. F. Little.
Constable
S. Haggerty.


000, (Tn Constable Prince Francis Little):- Are femtea frequently confined here fo
Idem; Ido uotthiuk above four or five at the outs.de dur.ug the
lm. Was the woman making a disturbanoo at the time she was apprehended ? She fell
not recollect seeing the woman before in
383 T Inspector Cowell) .—Me prisoners are generally confined in this cell ? Yes;
ST Can persons who are confined hero have food supplied by their friends outside, if their
friends apply ? Yes; anything but drink.
3839. They can have coffee or anything ol that sort . xes.
[The Committee next visited the solitary cell.]
QftdO Ynn sometimes use this for desperate characters ? Yes. . , ■. , ■,
3841 Bn Mr. Bart: Have you any rules guiding you as to the kind of prisoners to be ta
in here, and as to the class of offences for which they are l.abile ft j be ,
3842. Then what have you to guide you as to the propriety of ta p
There is nothing to guide me further than my own judgment-to know what is
with them, whatever offences they commit. . hrinirs here ?
3843. By Mr. Walsh: You are bound to take any prisoners the constable brings here.
3844 No matter what the charge, you take them in ? On some charges Ido not take them
in because they have brought men in and said they were drunk when they were not.
3845! You decide are drunk or not ? We have in cases in the old Water
3846 G : Do you mean to say that if a man were brought here on a charge of
you would take him in if he "were not drunk ? No, I would not take him in
3847 party brought a man on a charge of any offence, would you take
for any offence? ? I would not take him in for drunkenness if he were not drunk.
3848. Would J you do so if it were for using obscene language in the street. W e are bound
a person brought another here and said, - This person said so-and-so” ?
Not unless it were a constable who brought him. . , a charge
3850 Do you not know that you are bound, under the Vagrant Act, to take such a eharge
even if brought by a private party ? lam not aware that the Act says so, and I often read
886 L Suppose a private person brought another here, and “
assault in the street, would you take him in ? No j we are not allowed to take a person in
on a charge of assault unless we see the assault committed—unless the person is taken upon
Suppose the assauited party were to come here with marks of
having been beaten-bleeding? We can if we saw the party bleeding, hut in other cases
he would have to take out a summons next morning.
3853 Bu Mr. Hart: Do you take bail for prisoners ? Yes.
3854. For what offences ? I only take bail for drunkenness. Ido not for assault, without
3855 gl Have you any rule as to what cases you should take bail in ? No, no further than I
apply to the magistrate during the night .0 see
whether you shall take bail for a particular prisoner ? I have done so.
3857. Does that often occur? Not often. . , n oc , ~
3858. In what position of life have these persons been respecting whom you havea ked
whether you should take bail ? If I know the person, Igo to the magistrate and ask it
shall take bail. . , , 9
3859. Bu Mr. Lucas : Would you take bail for using obscene language ? xes.
3860. Bail for anything but felony or assault ? Yes, that is magistrate s bail.
3861. By Mr. Hart: Have you a book in which the bail was last entered. xes. V ■
Hart referred to a book lying on the desk.)
3863. iVe^the 6 ksf bail Entered here is dated 16th February, for throwing stones in the
Domain ■ has bail been granted to anyone since that entry ? No.
3864. Bu the Chairman : Was that because the book was worn out. No, it the J
bail I send up to Cumberland-street watch-house for the bail-book till I get a new one.
3865. Has there been any bail for felony lately ? Ido not think there has.
1. 3866. {To Lewis Griffiths) .—How long have you been here? Two years this mo
last time, and I was here three years before. , •.
3867. During the time you have been here, have the cells at the back ever been
washed? Not to my recollection. 9 T tv-three
3868. How many have been confined in the largest cell at one time. \ .. I y
3869. {To Lnspector Cowell) .-—Does any one live in these premises with his family. >
■ there are four
3870. Where is the Water Police Barracks? Over-head.
3871. How many of the Water Police constables are married ? All but one.
3872. How many families live here ? FVur. 3873.


8873. Suppose any female prisoner is taken ill so as to require the attendance of women, Wai
can she get it? Yes, they used to have it from my wife before she died. ]
8874. If a female prisoner required the attendance which can only be rendered by a woman
could she get it ? Yes. *
3875. Are females searched by any female when they come here ? No, they are not; we E
have no female searcher ; we may feel their pocket to see if they have a knife about them.
3876. Has any suicide ever been committed here? Never since I have been here.
[The Committee left the Water Police Watch-house and proceeded to the p o i
Police Station in Cumberland-street.]
Sergeant Lee examined :
[Having admitted the Committee.]
3877. By the Chairman : How long have you been in the police force ? Nearly six years. Sei
3878. By Mr. Walsh : Did you expect a visit from us ? No, not so early. Indeed I did
not know you were coming. {The witness produced the charge book. )
3879. By the Chairman: There has been no entry made in this book since Saturday ?
Since before Saturday. The entries are made on a rough sheet, and afterwards copied into
this book. ‘
3880. Have you the rough sheet ? Yes. ( The witness produced the same.)
3881. There appears from this to be no prisoner in the watch-house ? There is only one,
who has been remanded since yesterday; there was one other, but she is bailed out.
3882. By Mr. Lucas : You say there is one who has been remanded since yesterday? ihe
one in now is a man of the name of Cullen, who has been in custody some time.
3883. By whom was he remanded? By the magistrate at the Water Police Office.
3884. I thought when they were remanded they went from the Central Police Office to the
gaol ? Yes : but this case we knew would be finished to-day, as we only wanted the doctor s
evidence. This is the first case of the sort we have had that has been remanded to the
3885. By Mr. Hart: What is the average number you have here of a night? Prom eighty
to a hundred a month ; latterly we have not had so many. _ ,
3886. By Mr. Walsh : How long has the man in custody been remanded ? from yesterday
morning ;he has been in custody about six weeks. , ,
3887. Has he been remanded during the six weeks to the lock-up? No, he was brought
from the gaol and remanded yesterday morning. ,
3888. Has he ever been more than three days in your custody? No, he has never been
more than a day, or from the time he was first locked up until he was sent to the magistrate
At a quarter to ten the prisoners are marched from here to the central Police Office, and
they are conveyed from the Police Office to the gaol in the van. . ..
3889. At what hour of the day are they sent by the van ? At two in the day sometimes.
3890. What is the average number of prisoners brought to this watch-house each night.
From eighty to a hundred a mouth. . .
3891. Is that independently of what come from the Water Police Office. They do no
come here: we take them there to be dealt with. , _
3892. Is this watch-house for males only ? No; if we have females we take them from
here to the female watch-house if they wish it or if they are refractory
3893. By the Chairman : You never confine them here against their wish. , J
qrp drunk, wc confine them until they sre ,1
3894 Is there any female to search them, or to attend to them? We send them to t e
female watch-house to be searched. In cases of felon, the, are sent to the female watch-
house, and are left there.
3895 I nre«ume you have charge of this watch-house . les. . .
589 6 ; C long have you had Charge ? Ten months; was prev.onsly tn the P d.v.ston,
QftQT Rti Walsh * Which is that ? Near Christ Church.
3898 Do you look upon this as promotion ? It was so to me-I was acting sergeant there.
3899 Bu J Mr Hart .? What division of the city is this prison used for The C division.
3900; By 1 Chairman: What part of the city does that embrace? The whole of the
Rocks, from the north side of Hunter-street.
Sol The watch-house tLie is not used ? No, the inspector in charge lives in that.
3903, Are there an, printed regulations for the watch ous .
TThe Committee visited a cell nine feet by eight and twelve feet high, with a
grated opening about three feet six b, twelve inches; a prisoner was lying on the
floor wrapped in a rug.]
Constable Phillip Sweeny examined
SS£ h" ?t ° ** Some
5906° r Did you ever see more than live here ? Yes, I have, six.
3907. All males, I suppose ? ~ prisoners confined indiscriminately in this watch-
-3908. Did you never see male and temaie prisoner
3909. ’ Where are females confined ? In the other cell. 3910.
157—Q


n, 3910. Have you ever known this cell to be whitewashed ? Yes.
3911 When? Six months ago.
1. [The Committee entered a cell similar to the preceding.]
3912. Is this where the females are confined ? Yes.
. 3913. Has it been whitewashed since you have been here ? No.
[A third cell was then visited, having a barred window about four feet by
three, and two grated openings about three feet six by about twelve inches.]
3914. This is not occupied by prisoners ? No. It is used as a lumber-room.
[The two front rooms were lighted by windows about three feet by four, and
well ventilated. The Committee next proceeded to the Erskine-street Female Watch-
house.]
Constable Levy examined:—
3915. By the Chairmans What situation do you hold ? lam in charge of the watch-house.
3916. You are the watch-house keeper ? I am.
391 i. How long have you been in charge ? Four years.
3918. Do you reside here with your family? I do.
3919. What family have you? I have no young ones at present.
3920. You have a wife ? Yes.
3921. Have you any persons confined in the watch-house to-night ? Yes.
3922. How many ? Two.
3923. Where is the charge book ? {The witness produced the same.')
3924. How many had you on Sunday night ? One, I think.
3925. Between Saturday night and Monday morning ? One, I think.
0926. How many have you had on any one occasion during the four years you have been in
charge ? Twenty-four.
3927. At once ? Yes.
3928. Is that the greatest number ? Yes.
3929. How long is that ago ? About a fortnight, I think, after I came here.
39b0. Have you subsequently had a number at all approaching to that ? No.
3931. What is the largest number you have had since the first of January ? I think about
five.
3932. Never more than five during this year ? No.
3933. During last year how many had you ? As near as I can recollect about five or six on
the average.
3934. Do you mean throughout the year—-every night ? Yes.
3935. What is the largest number you have had ? Six ; from five to six during the whole
year.
3936. You appear to have had a falling off—what do you attribute that to ? We have had
a falling off.
3937. Have the ladies in the neighbourhood been better behaved ? That I cannot say.
3938. What do you attribute the falling off to? Probably to the dying off of these
characters—a great number have died.
3939. By Mr. Morris : The same people were constantly here? Yes.
3940. By Mr. Lucas : Do you think, owing to the scarcity of money, there is not so much
drunkenness as formerly ? A good deal is attributable to that.
3941. j>y Mr. Walsh : Then, as I understand you, during the last year the same persons
were frequently here ? Pretty many of the same characters.
3942. The same individuals ? Yes.
3943. By Mr. Hart : On what occasion were these twenty-four all here—were they all for
one offence ? For different offences.
3944. By the Chairman : Y as there any particular occurrence at the time in the community
to account for this large number ? I cannot answer that question.
3945. By Mr. Lucas : Are the whole of the women taken up in the City of Sydney lodged
or * re confined in other watch-houses? They are confined in other watch-houses.
* s t^l ' s called, the females watch-house ? It is principally for this division.
3J47. Is there any male watch-house for this division ? Yes, the central. A great number
of fema-es are detained at the central station, and are not brought down here.
3948. By the Cnairman : Have you ever received these prisoners and
before? Yes, frequently; particularly .
3949. By Mr Hart: How many ‘persons have you here in charge of this establishment?
iwo; myself and wife.
3950. Is your wife the female searcher ? Yes.
3951. Has your wife a salary for that? £lO a year.
on-o' D° es she search every female who comes in ? ’Particularly all for felony.
o. . J>y he ian man. o you adopt means to see that they have no means of committing
suicide concealed upon them ? Yes. ' °
3954. You go through the same search with all of them ? Yes
ooK* & Mr - H r[ ■’ Ha ! e you f ™ nd iDBtr «mentB of destruction concealed ? Pocket knives.
39,.6. Has suicide been attempted by any of the prisoners since you have been here ? No.
# [Mrs, Levy, having been summoned, conducted the Committee to the cell in
which the two prisoners were confined. It was ten feet by nine and twelve high,
lighted by a barred window three by four feet, and ventilated by an opening abL
tluee feet six inches by twelve inches. The walls were damp and dfrty, and the
atmosphere


*
atmosphere close and foul. The floor was wet in various parts, although the cell was
furnished with a night-tub. Besides this there were two other cells of the same
dimensions, but supplied with air and light by means only of an aperture of the same
size as in the cell first visited.]
8957. By the Chairman: With reference to the cells we have just visited, when were they
last whitewashed ? About six months since.
3958. How many times have they been whitewashed since you have been here? About
twice a year.
at means are adopted for keeping the floors clean ? Soap and water.
3960. Every morning ? Every morning.
Mrs. Margaret Levy examined:—
3961. Do you act as female searcher in this watch-house ? Yes.
3962. Do you search every prisoner who enters this watch-house ? Yes, for felony.
3963. Do you adopt any kind of search to see whether prisoners have any instrument upon
them by which they might injure themselves ? No, except in the case of persons who are of
unsound mind.
\_Constahle Levy (to his wife ) —Understand Mr. Parkes’ question—do you
search every prisoner to see whether they have any instrument upon them to injure
themselves? Oh, yes.]
3964. By the Chairman: Have the women any bedding at all allowed—the females we have
just seen were sleeping upon something, is that allowed them by the gaol, or is it furnished
by you ? They have rugs.
3965. Were they sleeping upon the stones ? No, upon boards.
3966. Are their bed-clothes ever changed ? They have nothing but rugs.
[The Committee next visited the Central Watch-house.]
Matthew M'Clure examined :
3967. By the Chairman : Are you in charge of the watch-house ? Yes,
3968. How long have you had charge ? About twelve months ; there are two in charge.
3969. You have charge alternately for twenty-four hours? Yes.
3970. Who is the other person in charge ? Acting Inspector Bremner.
3971. Have you the charge book ? That is the rough charge book ( handing the same to the
Chairman ).
3972. I see you have four prisoners in the watch-house to-night ? Yes.
39/3. By Mr. Morris: Is Ann Flynn, who is here to-night, very often here ? Not very
often. Some come here two or three times a month, after they have been here that number
of times we bring them before the Court as vagrants, and they have three months.
3974. Were you on duty on Saturday night last ? Yes.
3975. You had nine prisoners here then I see? Yes, we generally have from nine to
fifteen or twenty, and sometimes five-and-twenty.
3976. By Mr. Morris: Has the number been less during the last few months than previously ?
We have had more during the month of January of the present year than during the
corresponding month of the past.
3977. By Mr. Wilson: What are the principal charges? Generally drunkenness and'
assault. We had forty-five charges more in January, 1861, than in January, 1860.
Generally our females are taken to the female watch-house.
3978. By Mr. Hart: Have you a list of the offences for the commission of which persons
are liable to be taken into custody ? No.
3979. Then you have nothing to guide you as to the propriety of receiving persons who are
brought here ? No.
3980. By Mr. Lucas: If any man were to come here, and give another into custody, would
you take him in ? Yes.
3981. Would you receive a person on a charge from anyone? Yes, if it were a proper
charge.
3982. For drunkenness ? Yes; if a man were drunk I would receive him from a citizen.
3983. If a man brought up another on a charge of using obscene language would you
receive him ? Yes, if the language were used in a public place.
[A loud rapping being heard the Chairman directed the cell, whence the
sound proceeded, to be opened, and entered with the Committee. It was occupied
by a female prisoner, Ann Flynn, and was about sixteen by twenty feet, and twelve
or thirteen feet high. Although there were two openings into the hall, and a
ventilator in the ceiling, the stench in this cell was sickening,]
Ann Flynn examined ;
3984. By the Chairman : Have you been locked up all night ? Yes; I was capable of &
going home if I was allowed.
3985. You were rapping at the door just now ? Yes.
3986. What for ? A drink of water.
3987. Had you no water in the cell ? No ] there was no water in the kid, and not even a
night-bucket. It was not the water I wanted, it was the night-bucket.
3988. You had neither water nor night-bucket until you knocked for them ? No.
[After
Female
Watch-house,
Erskine-st.
12 Mar., 1861.
Constable
Levy.
Mrs. M. Levy.
Central
Watch-house.
M. M'Clure.
Ann Flynn,


[After the cell for male prisoners, which was similar to that last described,
the Committee inspected a small cell about seven feet by four and a half. It was
lined with slabs, and in the floor was a large rat-hole. The atmosphere in this
cell was almost stifling, the only means of ventilation being two small plates of
perforated iron.]
3989. By Mr. Hart ( To Mr. M‘ Clure) .—Are those rats I hear ? Yes.
3990. Is that a rat-hole ? Yes.
3991. Do the prisoners complain of rats ? Yes, this place is swarming with rats.
3992. How long are prisoners confined here at any one time ? Sometimes they are confined
for twenty-four hours. If they come in on Saturday they are sometimes confined here till
Monday morning. _ .
3993. Do you consider this a fit place for the confinement of prisoners . I consider it very
unhealthy. _ _ ,
3994. Considering the annoyance prisoners must receive from vermin, do you think this a
fit place ? Ido not.
3995. Is there any ventilation here when the door is shut? Yes, there are these. ( The
witness pointed to the perforated plates above referred to.)
3996. Is there any space between that ventilator and the wall ? Merely six or nine inches.
3997. Where does the other ventilator lead to ( referring to a perforated plate at the top
of the cell) ? To the top.
3998. There appears to be a very bad smell here ? It is impossible there should be any
other.
3999. What does it arise from ? From the prisoners who are kept here.
4000. From any other cause ? Ido not know of any other cause.
[The Committee next visited Darlinghurst Watch-house. On the walls of this
lock-up were hung four placards, the first beaded, “ Hours on Duty” ; the second,
“ Instructions in case of Fire” j the third, “ Day Duty and Night Duty” j and the
fourth, “ Duty for Out Stations.”]
Constable William Cook examined :
4001. By the Chairman: Are you in charge of this watch-house ? Yes.
4002. How long have you had charge? Since January, 1860. I have it only alternately,
day about-
-4003. How many men have you had here ? One last night.
[The Committee inspected two cells, the first about ten by nine feet and
twelve feet high, having two barred openings, about three feet and a half by twelve
inches, and the second with similar openings and of the same height, eleven by sixteen
feet in extent.]
4004. What means of cleansing the cells do you adopt ? They are washed out every
morning.
4005. To what division does this watch-house belong ? To the D division.
4006. What does the division include ? It is bounded by the Woolloomooloo Bay, from
that round the Heads, thence to Botany Bay, and parallel with Bourke-street.
4007. By whose directions were these rules hung up ( referring to the rules on the wall)?
By the inspector in charge, Mr. Singleton.
4008. When were they hung up ? About March last year.
4009 Are you acquainted with the other watch-houses in the City of Sydney—do you
recollect any rules of a similar nature hanging in them ? I have seen the like.
Sergeant Nicholas Ryan examined :
4010. How long have you been in the police force ? G-oing on for seven years.
4011. Are you aware whether rules similar to these hang in other watch-houses ? There are
several rules.
4012. Have you seen rules as explicit as these in other watch-houses ? I think not.
4013. How do you account for that ? It is owing to the inspector in charge.
4014. How long has Inspector Singleton been in charge of this division ? About sixteen
months.
4015. Who is in charge of the A division ? Inspector George Read.
4016. Do you know how long he has been in charge of that division ? About the same
time.
4017. Who is in charge of B division ? Inspector John Cecil Read, now absent in charge
of the gaol. His duties are performed by Acting Inspector Foran.
4018. What portion of Sydney does that include ? The southern portion,
4019. Which is considered the head quarters? The central A division.
4020. Who has division C ? Mr. Ryland.
4021. Which is the head quarters of that ? Cumberland-street.
4022. {To Mr. Cook): —How many prisoners have you had at one time in this watch-house?
Six or seven • we have had ten, but not lately.
4023. Do you ever have women here ? Yes, more women than men.
4024. On charges of drunkenness? Yes.
4025. How long is it since this place has been whitewashed ? It has been whitewashed
three times within the last three years to my knowledge. It is generally whitewashed about
once a year.
[The


Parramatta-
street Watch-
house.
12 Mar., 1861.
[The Committee then proceeded to the watch-house in Parramatta-street, 3
and visited the cells ordinarily occupied by prisoners—one about twelve teet square, s
two smaller ones, respectively four and a half feet by seven or eight feet, and four
and a half feet by twelve. Besides these was a cell eighteen feet by twelve, having
three openings in the wall, well ventilated, occupied by a quantity ot hay and a chaff-
cutting machine. A man was engaged in washing the first cell, and the attention of
the Committee was called by Mr. Lucas to the offensive smell arising therefrom.J
4026. By Mr. Lucas : Whose hay is that ? It belongs to the inspector of this division.
4027. Who cuts that chaff? The inspector has two sons who come here to do that; his own
boy generally comes with his horse.
4028. By the Chairman : Has that cell been used lately (referring to the : largest cell ) . No.
4029. Is it not desirable to use the largest cells for the confinement of prisoners ? It is.
4030. By Mr. Lucas: How often does Capt. M'Lerie visit this watch-house ? Generally
once or twice a week.
4031. Does he go through the whole watch-house ? No.
4032. How long is it since he has been here ? Ido not know of my own knowledge.
4033. Who is the inspector of this division ? The inspector of this division is at present in
charge of the gaol. Mr. Foran is the acting inspector.
4034. Whose chaff-box is that —Inspector Foran’s ? No, Inspector Read s.
4035. By the Chairman : At what time of the twenty-four hours do you wash out the cells f
In the morning about this time ( six o’clock ) —after we get the prisoners away.
4036. I notice that there is a very strong stench in the cell just washed out . lhat is
where the men were last night, and the man has not finished washing it.
4037. Have they utensils for cleanliness in the cell ? Yes. _
4038. Do they ever dirt the floor ? Yes, frequently; there is seldom a morning that we do
not find the floors dirty.
4039. How do you wash the floor—just with a mop ? Just with a mop.
4040. Is it ever scrubbed ? It is often scrubbed too. .
4041. When were the cells whitewashed ? About twelve months since to the best ot my
4042. How many prisoners have you had at a time in your watch-house since you have been
in charge ? On Sunday mornings we may have as many as fifteen or sixteen. Between
Saturday and Monday we have had eighteen, but we do not keep them here; they are taken
on Sunday morning to the central watch-house. , . ,
4043. For what class of offences are these people chiefly confined ? Mostly for drunkenness.
4044. Where are the drunkards chiefly picked up ? Most of them in George or Parrama. a
4045 tS How far does the B division extend? That I cannot say exactly. Very near to
Parramatta—to Cook’s River and George’s River. In Sydney it extends to Liverpool-street.
4046. By Mr. Lucas : Do you take bail for drunkards ? Yes.
4047. For obscene language ? Yes.
4048. For anything but felony ? Yes, and warrant assaults.
4049. By the Chairman : In such cases as this do you ever apply to the magistrate to allow
bail ? No Ido not j but I allow the friends when they come here to do so if 1 know the
parties.
WEDNESDAY, 20 MARCH , 1861.
present
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WILSON.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. John Page called in and examined: —
4050. By the Chairman : Do you possess any trade ? I worked as a carpenter on the island.
4052. X never lived in Sydney above a week or so
before I went to Maitland— it was in Maitland I lived.
4053. How long did you live there ? About two years.
4054. You were convicted of an assault ? Yes.
4055. Upon whom ? A woman, with attempt.
4056. Who tried you ? Judge Milford.
S. rr^Tn%Cv":e t r o X”o ? I was tried on the 15. h of March, and on
«59 6t LleTorstrved C out k ;ou 0 r full sentence of imprisonment ? Yes. I was discharged
on the 15th of this present month.
4060. Are you a married man . Yes.
4061. Where is your wife ? At Melbourne.
4062. Have you any family ? Yes. 4068.
Mr. J. Page.
20Mar!ill861*


Me. J-, Page.
20 lB6l.
4063. How many children ? Three.
4064. Were your family living with you at the time of the assault ? No, I came here for
the good of my health.
4065. You have complained to the Committee of the loss of some clothes—will you state
the particulars of that complaint ? I came on to the island in March, 1859, and brought
two suits of clothing, one of cloth and the other of drill.
4066. What did the cloth suit consist of ? A shooting frock of black cloth, a black satin
waistcoat, and Parramatta tweed trousers.
4067. Do you remember how often you had used them ? I never wore them but two days
?nc^ 10U rru’° my ™ st b bad rec °vered my health and was preparing to go home.
T/i bbe y were in a manner new ? I have proof to shew that they were new.
u • u U i a , d S ° me otber clotbes > wbat were the y ? Drill trousers and a drill frock •
this is the drill frock or blouse that I have on. I delivered these clothes with a cabbage-
ree hat i had to the chief warder, Brown ; and I missed them previously to Brown’s leaving
the island. I reported it to Captain Mann, the superintendent, and he referred me to
Captain North, the visiting magistrate. Captain North after investigating the case requested
Captain Mann would see Mr. Brown and arrange with him about the clothes, as they were
pro ™ obe t° l Z’ and \°\ d him that if aot he wou^d hold him accountable, or words to
that effect. Mr. Brown left there about a week after, and Captain Mann never called me
in or spoke any further about the clothes to me. I again brought the subject before Captain
Mann and asked him, as my clothes were stolen, if I procured clothes would he allow
the Government tailor to alter them for me so as to fit me, that I might not have to go out
in Government clothes This he refused, and asked Mr. Taylor, the Clerk of Petty Sessions,
if there were any clothes in the store not claimed that he could make me out a rig of
6 USe ! d - Taylo / said there were clothes unclaimed ; but when
Lst way Hould 16t l FebrUary laSt; 1 was refused altogether, and was told I might go the
4070. You never did get your clothes then ? Not a ha’p’orth. I got the trousers I have
on from one of the prisoners. 6 x
nn D i url j g *r e time y° u ***** on the island > what ward did you sleep in ?In every ward
on the island. I was shifted from ward to ward, but I was principally in No. 4 ward. l
4072 How many slept in No. 4 generally ? Generally about 48 or 50. This is a very
small ward, there are only sixty berths in it. y
ln 7 f‘ 1)1(1 y ° U 6Ver Sleep in one of tbe lar S e wards ? 1 did
wrltnW thoSe WardS in when they were filled ~ as to the atmosphere ? Most
Zln tit ' * - h ! mgh Jf W f 6 f y Way . Warm ’ they were the most unwholesome places that ever
Sd 5$J." 10 twos ' one above the othCT - ab » ut
7 i‘? l) Vl. he when , the arrives, all turn in and go to sleep—do they make no
ose . They are supposed to turn in at eight o’clock, and then some of the bad characters
egin making noises and rioting, and using blackguard language unfit for any father or
husband to express, until ten or eleven o’clock at night. J
4077 iw t* to j nake f noise all Di g ht ? Several times they have done so.
SydMT-for kept . f T seeping ! > Repeatedly, since the men came back from
?A7C y rr * 1 nights successively they made a great noise.
4U/«. Have you ever seen any bestial conduct on the island ? I have not seen it mvsplf fnr
I never assocrated with the men ; I kept myself as mnch to myself I could” " ’ °
ten it STev wL aDJ 00OTers “ ti0 “ i‘ ? I have heard it of them that have
?aqa fc a j dth 7 ,7 ere men as respectable as any on the island.
4080. And you believe it ? Before my God I do.
/I AGO TA° U nev ® r saw yourself ? I never got in the way.
f v OU r kD — of y°ur own knowledge whether there were youn* lads on the island
who went by feminine names, such as Miss So-and-so-Judy So-and-so" Thev have been
regularly called the same as a woman or wife, So-and-so ‘ J been
4AG ’ r ° U haVe beard that ? Repeatedly.
_ C ° U , ld you mention any names of those who have been so designated ? Yes • there is
?n f S < has S° ne out this last time, named . b ? t 616 18
hut he g cneraVv a t e ith!t^7Z^ f MlSS ? ~ be was sometimes called,
charaeter, he seemed to be guilty of the same offence,' his namc .s M
lag? tt° U laVe heard blm called b y feminiue names ? Yes
4US /. Have you ever noticed whether any of the prisoners naid nnn «i fl l uHon+v *
such as are bestowed on women, such as getting choice things for them ? Yes ®'
there is quite a young chap in the carpenter’s shop, and I have heard ■ huSf u
there as a cooper talking to him. 1 d a black fellow who is
4088. What is the lad’s name ? -
«Q 0: He* wta gwT'That fr ° m ° thm ? Yes '
you in eggs, and butter, and everything, and tlu:,,’—“ l hale fomld
ar jou hOTe turMd rs:™rt
" e «gs, and butter, everything from me° tS sa trade ’” Lavin « J Oll
" awhore in Sydney,y/n now turnl sa d '-Oh
is short on the island I would not hear n aiCb • you beasfc; oc ly my time
more of it after that. J °“ Me Such M P r <=®.ons to a man," I heard no
4092.


on Cockatoo Island. 0 ''" U U P aaoa £ e ’ l om evidence that has been given by one of the prisoners
and con C «nned.] airm! “ re ° d e * traCtS fr ° m the evidelloe g ‘ Ten Frede ™ k M'Gregor,
Stet bf la,e J J °“ e ac \ of ' mnataral CTime »U»l> ie himself witnessed,
- jss 1 ha - heard * 1
Yesfhe the P erS0 ° wh » saidbabad -» «•« -'f this kind?
4094. Is he on the island now ? I think so; and several others.
““ nam ° d Murphy “ d he h * d *» “"*
4096. Is that man in Sydney ? No, he is up at Williams River.
I w reco ® ct an .y one . else ? There were others but Ido not recollect their names.
I kept myself away from the prisoners. I repeatedly heard conversation about it.
4098. Recollecting the serious character of what you are saying, and endeavouring to satisfy
your mind as to the truth, do you think the statement I have read is true ? I think it is
40V9 The C mnn a !- sleep [ n Z ™ ma ? and wife, from the slight sketches I heard of it.
4100 vJ! IV ? ply “;® ans that they had connection of that nature ? I believe that.
• o *r v i" ln g 0 sa J ie thing da unblushing terms, he made use of that form of expres-
sion ? I believe before my God, that it is acted in every ward on the island, from what
I have heard, and what I have known from conversation with men who were striving to offer
prayer for their misery and crime. It is no place for men that desire to reform.
0 . How Often were the wards whitewashed during the time you were there ? They were
never to say whitewashed, there was something of a dab of whitewash supposed to go over
4102. Did you suffer from vermin in those wards? They were repeatedly stoved, and then
we got a week or a fortnight s ease from fleas and bugs.
means were adopted to keep the places clean ? That was all.
4104. 1 suppose they were washed out every morning ? Yes, a little lime was used along
trie boards —a little whitewash was smeared over.
4105. The effluvia from the night-tubs, was not that very offensive ? Yes, and when they
began to smoke at night. I was touched in the lungs and could never sleep till eleven or
twelve at night. I had a bunk under a window, and I used to keep that open, as I was
almost suffocated; there was no ventilation in the ward.
4106. Was there not a wardsman whose duty it was to see that every thing was going on
correctly ? There were two prisoners.
4107. Did the prisoners go out of one berth into another, or walk about in the passages
between the berths ? Yes, they used to get to the night-tubs to evacuate, sometimes three
or four times.
4108. Did they go from one berth to another ? There was no hindrance in life.
4109. The wardsmen did not prevent them ? No, they could not, for they were generally
asleep. The sentry comes in twice or three times during the night, and the moment he goes
away the wardsman generally sits down and goes to sleep, and we never hear him stir, so
that the men can go where they like and rob one another. There have been plenty of
robberies in Nos. 1 and 2.
4110. Were you satisfied with the men who were appointed to petty offices about the
place—were the best men generally selected in your opinion ? Quite the reverse; the men
who had some little interest with the chief warder got billets.
4111. By Mr. Lucas: You say you missed your clothes before Mr. Brown left the island—
I understood you to say that you gave them over to Mr. Brown to keep—where did he put
them-r-in the store ? Yes.
4112. How could you have an opportunity of missing them before Mr. Brown left the island ?
I agreed to give a man named a shirt for nothing, as he was going away,
and I went with Mr. Brown to the store to my carpet bag; the first thing when I opened my
carpet bag I missed my coat; and as soon as I spoke of it, Mr. Brown made me shut it up.
There were some of the men going away the next morning, and Mr. Brown said that before
they went he would overhaul them, but he did not do so,
4113. If you gave your clothes into the charge of Mr. Brown, or any other person, how
could the men get to these clothes ? They could not unless when another prisoner is going
away to give him some article.
4114. By Mr. Sutherland : It was only when Mr. Brown permitted you that you could see
your clothes at all ? Yes.
4115. By Mr. Lucas: There-is a wardsman in each of these wards? Two.
4116. If it has been given in evidence that these people walk the passage in the ward all
night, it is not true ? It is not true ; they are supposed to do so.
4117. According to your evidence they go to sleep the same as the others ? They sit down,
and generally in the empty berths, and go to sleep. Not more than a week or two since
the policeman came in and called out for Waters and another man named Collins, and they
were both asleep in bed, and remained there for a long time.
4118. It is not even usual for them to walk the wards all night? No; they may walk for
an hour or so when the constable comes in.
4119. How many times during the night do the police in charge of the island visit the
wards, or do they visit them at all ? Ido not know. I have known the police come in there
nearly every hour to the door if the lamp was not kept in.
4120. Then the policeman do not come to the ward door and see the wardsman on duty ?
He


He is supposed to come to the passage perhaps once or twice in the night, or every hour or
Ssi of the prisoners complain of losing clothes ? No ; two or three
men who have been going away have brought forward therr cases. There was a man named
Doran lost £lO worth of clothes, and he bad £ll sewed up in them; all was gone.
4122 To whom did he give them ? The chief warder. They are obliged to give up every
• i p , .i . iv • uViirii tn him and he serves out the Government clothes.
4123 °ByMr * Wilson: Are the overseers, who are prisoners, treated like the other prisoners,
and locked up with them? They have not been for the last twelve months; they have a
1124 tO Bl h X Se SL: Do the prisoners generally object to their fellow prisoners being
selected to overffiok* them ? Generally; it is one of the greatest faults they have There
have been several instances where they have objected to it. One of the men, about
months since, struck the overseer and broke his nose.
4125 Was he a prisoner ? Yes, a man of the name ot otone.
You say itis not the best characters who are selected for petty officers . No; if ilr.
Taylor puts in a word for any man he is chosen. .
41*27 L the Chairman: Were you ever in prison before ? Never in my life.
4128. Were you ever arrested before ? No, nor any belonging to me. I never stood before
41^29 8 H^pur 6 wife ever blown that you have been on the island ? Not at all. I came
dm' wtt l m clothes you lost f At the very lowest, £8 15s.
Mr. J. Page.
20 Mar., 1861.
Cockatoo
Island Prison.
11 April,lB6l.
F. M‘Gregor.
THURSDAY, 11 APRIL, 1861.
iJrcecnt
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. PARKES,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. HART,
Mr. LUCAS,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. WINDEYER.
H. PARKE S, Esq., Chairman.
[The Committee having met at the Circular Quay, at 6'30 a.m., proceeded to
Cockatoo Island, and assembled in the office; the Chairman took the Chair.J
Frederick M'Gregor called in and further examined :
4131. By the Chairman: You were examined by this Committee in Darlmghurst Gaol?
Yes. {
4132. You were then in the hospital ? Yes.
4134* What°is you ? Disease of the heart-all of a shiver ; whenever the
least thing excites me my heart heats very heavy—l get all of a tremble.
4135 You gave certain evidence before this Committee in Darlmghurst Gaol, to effect
that gross immoralities were committed among the prisoners, and, if I remember right, that
you yourself on one occasion were witness to an act of sodomy between two ? Y^
4136 Do you adhere to that evidence now in every particular ? Yes, I told it to you tor
the truth, and it is nothing hut the truth. lam not the only man, if he liked to speak the
truth, that would say .o. yQU yourself tad gone with a light to one of the
berths in one of the wards on this island, and saw two men whom you named in the act ot
sodomy ? Yes.
4138. You still adhere to that statement ? Yes. . . , , OTT
4139. You said just now that you are not the only man on the island who can say so it
others would speak the truth? Yes.
4140. Could you mention the names of any ?It is hard to say; plenty of_men know it.
4141. Could you mention any of their names? They might afterwards blame me
fetching them into it at all. .. _
4142. There are men on the island who know the same thing, but you decline to mention
4143. Why do you decline ? Ido not like to bring any man into it; it is a disgraceful
fIM II av cly ou™ onrselUex per iln ced I n y ill effects from having made the statement you
did make before this Committee ? I hear the men railing against it. They saw something
in the papers, and threatened to find out who had done it. ... .
4145. They have not connected you by name with it ? No, they do not know who it •
4146. As far as you are concerned, you still believe the crime “ PJJJ
establishment? Commonly committed in the wards. I doubt, before'the
go away, there will be men come and speak about it. I wish to say that while3l.am here
the Government may protect me, but after I get out I do not know what the men may do
4147 e Afteryour liberation ? Yes. I cannot stop in the town but must go into the country.


41-it:. By Mr. Lucas: You say you have no doubt that before the Committee go away men
w-li come forward and make statoments-have you beard any of the men say so ? I believe
t..ioe ui foui men we.e brought up before the magistrate, and it was reported that they
l?nIT d fl ,0U th . lng \ and - there are othcr raen who said they would come up and
speak to tiie magistrates about it. F
I': si° tlloy % H °« an and Gland. I bear it rumoured among the men.
4100. Any other men ? No.
I 1 no' v aVG y ° U heard . th f m sa ? 80 ? No i I have heard other men say that they said so.
were here 1 ? "nq 110 t 0 ° ome UP aad give evidence before the magistrates when they
4150. By Mr. Win (ley er: Do you know how the men who came up were chosen ? By the
free overseers. They were most of them ward .men. Many of these men had the name of
being guilty of the same actions.
Alai. By the Chairman ; Most, of them were men in the condition of prisoners ? Yes.
W, • , o : Do you know a UJan named Gilbert Isaacs ? Yes.
4 1 Do. \\ hat is he ? An overseer.
4157. Is he free? No, a sub-overseer of the works.
4158. Suppose he says he knows nothing of these practices, is that true? He may not
havo seen it, but he must have heard it, for it is always talked of among the men.
41 Do you know a man named Samuel , a wardsman ? Yes.
f, 160 . 18 he acquainted with any irregularities, do you know yourself? It has been rumoured
that he is one or the same kind of men.
5 k ° lia r e y° u * ieard S;, y s 0? Not one, but several—it is the common talk.
4162. Do you know George May ? No.
4163 Do you know Robert M'Coy ? No.
41G4. Is the lad on the island, whom you spoke of when you were in the
hospital ? No, he is over in the gaol ; he is one of the men who got out of the wall.
41(35. Is there any means in the wards of detecting these immoral practices, if the free
overseers thought proper to do so ? Ido not know that there is.
4166. Is there any means, by supervision or tact, by which persons could be found guilty of
these acts ? Ido not know that there is. I was here six months before I saw anything of
the sort, but it was common talk among the men.
4167. Are there any persons on the island now who go by female names ? Yes, there is
young .
4168. By the Chairman : He is on the island now, John ? Yes,
4169. Is on the island now ? No.
4170. Is ? No.
4171. ? No.
4172. ? He is one of the men shifted away.
4173. ? No.
4174. Is on the island now ? No.
4175. Is a man named on the island ? Yes.
4176. Is a man of the name of on the island? Yes, ,
4177. Is a prisoner named on the island now ? Yes.
4178. Is on the island now ? No, he has got his ticket.
4179. By Mr. Hart : Do you know a man named , a wardsman? Yes.
4180 Is he a prisoner? Yes.
418 I. Has he the reputation of knowing anything of this matter ? He is blamed for being
one himself.
4182. Have you any ground yourself for believing that ? No; it is commonly spoken of
among the men.
4183. Have you been present at any time when he has been accused of it ? Never before his
face, but you must hear of it,
4184. How does this conversation arise ? They get talking of things, and then they call
those names.
4185. Is it not more for the purpose of annoying the men than with the view of accusing
them of any offence ? They have nothing else to talk about.
4186. By Mr. Windeyer : Do you think it is done without any foundation for the charge?
I have known the men to be on good terms, and talk in this way.
4187. By the Chairman : You have heard them talk behind the backs of each other of these
things, when there could be no object for annoying ? Yes.
4188. By Mr. Hart: When you became acquainted with these circumstances, why did you
not report them to the authorities ? For a good reason—l would have had a knife in me, or
a piece of wood about my head.
4189. Even if you had exposed yourself to danger, do you consider it was your duty to
expose such practices, instead of concealing them by your silence? I knew that; but still I
was not going to run into danger; I was ashamed to tell the truth or speak about it.
4190. To speak about it to whom ? To any person.
4191. Why have you spoken about it now ? I have thought better of it. I think a man
ought to tell, to put a stop to it as much as possible.
4192. Suppose you had evidence of the fact again, would you report it ? Yes ; but I would
not come into the yard among the men; and you do not know where you may meet men
again when you leave this island, and they may do you an injury.
4193. By Mr. Windeyer: How long have you to remain here ? Two years and five months.
4194. By Mr. Lucas : You took the first opportunity you had of reporting it to this Com-
mittee ? Yes ; if I had reported it to the authorities of this island it would never have been
157—R heard


heard of a*ain. On one occasion I reported to Mr Brown that a man had been to
_ 1361111 and was shifted. It got among the men that I had
reported it, and the man came in front of my bunk with a knife, threatened me, and called me
know the names of the persons who made the statements before the magistrates ?
1 know some of them—and others came up to make other statements.
4196. Do you think these men had an opportunity of knowing what took place. T ley
arem the wards. thiuk he> beißg a wardsman, the prisoners
would be afraid to say anything against him ? Yes.
Henry Carroll, alias James Hogan, called in and examined.
4198. By the Chairman : You are confined on this island for some offence against the laws
of the Colony ? Yes, a rape was sworn against me.
4199. What was your sentence ? I was cast for death, but I got fifteen years.
4200. Where were you tried ? At Bathurst,
4201 Bv whom ? Judge Dickinson. . ,
4202. When ? In 1856 ; the crime was committed in 1850, going on eleven years ago.
4203. How long have you been on the island? Seven years and a half yesterday.
4204. Were you among the insubordinate prisoners removed to Darlinghnrst in January.
I was removed from here to Darlinghurst. „ Tr . , T
4205 With that exception have you been on the island all the time . Yes, only when
went to Bathurst to be tried. I got five years for taking the law in my own hands.
4206. What do you mean by taking the law in your own hands? There was a horse stole
from my master, Major Innes, and I saw another man riding it and flung him oti i .
4207. While undergoing that sentence you were charged with this crime ot rape. xes.
4208. And you were then removed to Bathurst to be tried? Yes.
4209. Altogether you have been on the island seven years and a half. xes,
4210. We want to, know from you whether, during the time you have been on the island,
you have known any immoral practices, such as unnatural crimes between prisoners in tne
wards on the island ? Yes, I have seen it, and I intended to tell you of it.
4211. You are fully aware of the magnitude of a charge of this kind that it is a mos
serious offence not only in the eyes of God, but against the laws of the country . * es -.
4212. And that the consequences must be most serious to any one charged with the crime.
4213. You are also aware that we shall have taken down every word you say ? Yes.
4214. Being fully aware of the circumstances under which you are going to make the state-
ment, will you state —without any reserve, confining yourself strictly to the lact, and
without any fear of the consequences —what you know of these practices. i wifi speak the
truth, I have seen it more than once. T
4215. Will you detail what you have seen ? It is the general practice here ever since i
have come on the island—when I came here at first it was more carried on than it is now.
4216. By Mr. Hart: What ward did you sleep in ? No. 2, chiefly. _ T ~ ,
4217. By the Chairman: I suppose you have, at different times, slept in all. in all but
one on the island- I was in the overseer’s ward for many years ; and, in fact, if a man was
not one of the same sort he was not likely to get a billet. When I came at first they were
all Norfolk Island men, and if there was a boy came they used to manage some plan to get
him shifted into the overseer’s ward, and there they used to commit this crime they used
to get into the boy’s bunk. There was one instance of it tried in the office it was in the
bunk opposite mine. and a soldier chap, , but they did not fetch it out
in the right form ; they bubbled it up. They gave the man seven days for it.
4218. By Mr. Hart: Was that for getting into the bunk, or for the offence ? They bubbled
it up’ they did not want to fetch it up right, but I saw it with my own eyes; I saw him in
the young chap’s bunk. There have been several men brought up for something ot that
sort of crime; but they have always been slightly punished and let go.
4219. By the Chairman: Have you yourself witnessed this crime? I have, more than
once. I can mention a married man that has been in another man’s bunk.
4220. Can you mention the time you witnessed this ? I could not mention the time.
4221. Two years, or eighteen months ? It is more than eighteen months since
was tried. # i ,VM
4222. Can you mention the names of the parties ? and > and an oiu
man named • - , , t
4223. Did you see these men in the act of sodomy ? Yes } I was on the top ox the buna.
4224. Describe in language that we can understand what you saw ? I slept in the top bunk,
and there was a boy in the top bunk just opposite—in a line —and I saw this man get in o
the bunk of the other and use the lad the same as a woman.
4225. What did he do ? There was a blanket over them, and he was in the bunk the same
as if he was with a woman.
4226. Can you say what he did ? I believe, sodomy.
4227. Can you tell whether his body moved ? Yes. _
4228. And he worked it as if he were in the act of copulation with a woman . xes.
4229. You saw that with your eyes? Yes, with my own eyes.
4230. Was he on the top of the man ? No, sideways like. ,
4281. Did you ever see any other case while there of similar conduct ? I saw * an
a sailor boy, I forget his name> in the same ward; 4232


4232. How long was that ago ? I should say a couple of years ago or better—l could not
say to a few months. There is a servant who is over at Mr. Ball's, he had to be shifted ;
out of the ward for another blackguard affair.
4233. What is his name? John Smith; and there was another chap, now in the hospital,
a foreigner —I forget his name.
4234. Is he a Spaniard or a Portuguese ? A Portuguese, I think. There was a blackfellow
that he wanted to have connection with against his will; and the blackfellow got seven days
for an assault; he blackened his eyes and everything; and the injured party was never
brought up to prosecute the other.
4235. Bid you ever report these things to the authorities ? I have often told the free
overseers about such things, that it ought to be put a stop to ; but it was tolerated on several
occasions, and then we durst not report it for fear we would get punished, and there would
be a down upon you. There is Jem Neal, on the works now, who is a married man, and has
got a large family at Bathurst, saw it not many weeks ago, I believe.
4236. Do you know a prisoner on the island of the name of Power ? Yes.
4237. Have you ever heard that prisoner say anything about it? He knows it is carried
on; I do not know whether he ever saw it himself; I have often heard him speak of it.
4238. Do you know a prisoner of the name of Gilbert Isaacs ? Yes ; he is on the exempt
bank.
4239. He has given evidence before the police magistrate that nothing of the kind has
occurred ? Ido not know about that. I swear on my oath that it was so —I have seen it
with my own eyes.
4240. You mean that you would be prepared to make affidavit as to the truth of what you
state ? Yes. Ido not see why me or any other young man who is here should get classed
up and bear the blame of these things when we are not guilty of them, all for five or six
scoundrels. This going about the country is not very pleasant for us.
4241. By Mr. Hart: Has any attempt been made by the free overseers to detect and punish
this crime ? No ; it has been hushed up more than trying to keep it down.
4242. Do you think it is more prevalent here than in other prisons? I was never in such
a place before I came here. It is very bad here, more than I can tell you.
4243. Would there be any means of detecting this crime by watching the men ? Not
without you had proper honest men as wardsmen—they could stop it.
4244. That is not the question, I ask you if there were any means of detection ? Only by
the wardsmen at night; if the wardsmen did their duty it could not be committed. But
when the men can get up and rob their fellow prisoners, of course they can do other things.
4245. By Mr. Windeyer: Does that happen? Yes; 1 have been robbed myself in the
place, not many months ago, of my gratuity money —9s 2d. was taken out of my pocket.
4246. By Mr. Morris : What are you doing—you are not a wardsman ? No; I never had
a billet on the island, though 1 do not consider that I have committed a crime since I have
been on the island, and I have been here seven years and a half.
4247. By the Chairman : If you wish to make any farther statement you can do so ? I
had a statement written when I was at the gaol, and I wish to know if you have received it.
I presented it to the Sheriff, and he said he would see that it was delivered to you.
James Neal called in and examined :
4248. By the Chairman: You arc a prisoner upon this island? Yes,
4249. For what offence are you imprisoned ? I was found guilty for murder.
4250. Where were you tried ? At Bathurst.
4251. When ? About thirteen months ago.
4252. By whom? Mr. Justice Milford.
4253. What was your sentence? Fifteen years. I was cast for death.
4254. Your sentence was commuted ? Yes.
4255. Any portion of your sentence in irons ? Yes, three years.
4256. Have you a family? Yes, lam the father of eight children.
4257. You have a wife and eight children ? Yes.
4258. All children by the same mother? Yes,
4259. Was the crime of murder for which you were tried accompanied by robbery or any-
thing of that kind ? No, it was a neighbour came and ordered some bags
4260. Did it arise out of a quarrel? No, there was no quarrel. I knew nothing about it.
The woman was killed about fifty or sixty yards from my house, and I was passing the road
with some bags where she was found.
4261. Were you ever in prison before you were tried for this crime ? Yes.
4262. How often ? Only once.
4263. What was that for ? A dispute I had concerning a constable.
4264. Was it for an assault upon a constable t Yes.
4265. During the time you have been on the island have you ever become acquainted with
immoral practices in the wards, including unnatural crime between the prisoners? Yes, I
have seen a little of it.
4266. As a father of a family you must he aware that that is a horrible offence? Yes, I
believe it is; that is no new story at all at Cockatoo.
4267. No new story ? Not in the least.
4268. What do you mean by that? Because they generally make a practice of it—a
regular habit of it.
4269. Do you mean to say that it is common aiiioiig the prisoners. Yes.
4270 Have you ever been an eye-witness to a crime of this kind ? Never till I came here.
J 4271.
Cockatoo
Island Prison.
11 April, 1861,
H. Carroll.
James Neal,


4271. Have you been an eye-witness to the crime on this island ? Yes.
[•4272. You have seen the act committed with your own eyes? Yes, and shewn it to the
’ wardsman of the ward and asked him would he report it.
. 4273. State when it was? At furthest about eight months ago.
4ii74. What did you see ? I saw a man going into the bunk with him, and I saw another
man waiting at the bunk.
4275. What man was this ? Ido not know. I was a stranger at the time, and did not
know their names.
4276. Did you know either of the parties —there must be two parties to an act of this kind?
I do not know; one of them came from Maitland, and the other has been at W'oolloomooloo
since.
4277. What did you see ? A man going into the bunk of another man, and another man
waiting till one came out again. It was a most rascally affair.
4278. Will you state distinctly what you mean, as every word you say is being taken down.
You say you saw a man go into a bunk ? I saw a man going into a bunk to another man.
4279. Did you see one prisoner go into a berth where another prisoner was lying ?
Yes, and he had connection with the other the same as man and wife. I saw another man
waiting till he came out, and he went in and had connection with him, and then another
man went in and he would not stand it, and the man said he was in good order and would
not be long. I asked the wardsman did he hear that word passing, and he said he did not
care, and walked away.
4280. Who was that wardsman ? He got his ticket and went away.
4281. Did you know none of those four men ? I know the wardsman of No. 2
4282. You say there were four men, one the submitting party- —the one who acted as woman,
and then there were three men who went to this man —do you know none of the four ?
Yes, I know two of the four men —the four have gone with their tickets.
4288. What were their names ? lam blessed but I forget his name.
4284. Did you ever see a crime of this kind on any other occasion ? I would not say what
ward is most guilty of this crime—they counted No. 2 the most correct word.
4285. By Mr. Lucas : You were going to say something about one of the wardsraen ? Yes;
one of the No. 2 wardsmen, a man of the name of Yorkey—he was the wardsman at the
time; I asked him did he hear the conversation.
4286. Is he the wardsmen now ? Yes.
4287. By Mr. Windeyer: What did he say when you called attention to it ? He said he
did not care. I said it was a most sinful affair—it was a most rascally affair; and I went to bed.
4288. By the Chairman : Are there young men upon this island ? Old men are
worse than young men.
4289. Are there young men on the island who go by female names—are they called Miss
This, or Lady That ? Yes, some used to be called the Bleeding Nuns; they have gone away.
4290. Why used they to call them that ? Because the men used to be with them.
4291. You said just now that the old men were worse than the young ones ? Many of them
were called the “ Sprigs of Fashion.” They fought regular for them. If you say anything
to one of them their fancy-man takes their part.
4292. The men treat them as they would treat prostitutes ? The very same.
4293. Do they get choice things for them, little presents ? I believe so; they are very
little presents they can get here.
4294. If they could get delicacies for them would they give them to them ? Yes, if they
could.
4295. Fruit ? If they had the opportunity of getting it they would give it to them.
4296. You have seen them treat these men as if they were women ? Yes, and plenty besides
me.
4297. Who else ? Power.
4298. Who else ? Jem Hogan, George Hyland, and plenty more besides, only they are
frightened to tell of it for fear of the authorities of the island.
4299. By Mr. Hart: Are there any men at present on the island who prostitute themselves ?
Not our men, we have cleared out our ward from them, we would not have them.
4300. Does any improper conduct go on in the day time when the men have opportunity ?
I believe there was some time ago something about it in the mess-shed, but I did not pay
any attention to it.
4301. Did you report any of these things to the authorities ? No, I did not.
4302. Why did you not? I left it to the wardsman, I thought he was the fittest man to do
so.
4303. That was to the wardsman you reported it to two years ago ? No, it was not eight
months ago.
4304. By Mr Lucas: How long have you been on the island ? A little better than twelve
months.
4305. Did you not live near Orange ? Yes, I did.
4306. By Mr. Morris : Were you at Darlinghmst ? Yes, I think I saw you there.
4307. By the Chairman : Do you know a person named Bland ? Yes.
4308. Have you ever heard him speak of these things ? Yes.
4309. Do you know a person named Byrnes, a boy ? No.
4310. Do you know a person named Brennan ? No.
4011. By Mr. Morris :Do you know a man named ? Yes, he is a wardsman
now.
4312. Did you ever hear him speak of these things? No, I believe he was concerned in the
same thing:.
4313.


4514* ft, t, iO V' e WM^r 00ted? N »>’ *» H*hg »p a row about it.
;: r e was that? 1 did DOt P“y a »y to it.
, '.J 0 where be was wardsman ? Yes, in 4or No. 5
f 0,7 fV , Chairman ; Do you know a prisoner named 1 y es
, sbo here now? Yes, he is stone-cutting. '
4318. Did you ever hear that
believe IlogL was taxing him with it. *“ im P llCated m these thin g s ? Yes, I
4319. Do you know a man named Yes
43-20. Did you ever hear him spoken of? No
HiV hat is , he d ° iD £ now ? Stone-cutting."
Do you know a man named ? Y Pa , . . ,
bunk to me. ‘ * ’ " “ > 18 in the next
4323. Did you ever hear him spoken of ? No.
Gilbert Isaacs called in and examined:
\?J' fhe , C ' ha * rman • Are you a prisoner on this island ? Yes.
43-4). lor what offence are you here ? lam Karo * i, - i . . _
Office at Kempsey. ’ 1 am bere * or ta king some cheques in the Post
4320. What is the sentence you are suffering ? Four years.
4327. How much of that have you done? One year and ten months.
fooq "TV' 6 y ° U v en f'7 ed u P° n the ?As a sub-overseer at present.
hit ft are r e duties prescribed to you as sub-overseer? 1 have no work to do • I
thev donot S 7)n°S th T^ W, T k t 0 .866 that the J do their work, and report them if
5,™ , ° n aturday and Sunday I have to be on duty at the gate of the yard.
Kempsey ' Were you followui S a * the time of your arrest ? I was postmaster at
J? what P art of the isknd do you sleep? In ward No 3
oversee”™ mnj arG slee P in 8 in that Ward ? Sixteen at the present time, merely the sub-
-4333. They are all together ? Yes.
f 3^v,n f r lb be - e S ! Xte s , ‘.S Ub_o J erSeerS? ■ No ' tllere are twn warcli ™'» aud a servant besides,
J“" va , nt who 18 P'aeed there for protection from the other nn n
4305. Then there are thirteen sub-over.eers, two wardsmen, and a servant in that ward ?
SL^"t^£r n^ Tersoerssimilarlj ,o yourseif ’ and haw **
fo 3 n' The y are P lai ‘ ed over the men in the different gangs ? Yes.
4odB flow many men have you under you at the present moment? I have sixteen to-day,
out there are more in my gang. J
a’o’m' ien the y are ad at work how many have you? Twenty-four
4040. Where are the other eight? They are invalids.
4341. One-third of your gang arc exempt ? Yes.
ave these eight men been exempt many days ? Yes, some have.
. ' ero tdiey at work yesterday ? None of those who are exempt to-day.
4444. Ha've any been at work this week ? Yes.
4045. How long have you been sub-overseer? Seven months.
4346. Out of how many ? One year and ten months.
4347. For the first fifteen months were you employed as the other prisoners? Yes, at
stone-cutting.
4348. Were you berthed with the men in the same manner as the others? Yes.
4349. Did you ever notice any immoral conduct on the part of prisoners during the time
you were berthed with them in the night time ? I never witnessed any.
4300. Did you ever hear it talked of? I did, to a very great extent.
4351. Was there frequent conversation about unnatural crime? Not only frequent, but
daily, and hourly.
4352. I should infer from what you say that it was a common topic of conversation ? It
was a common topic among a certain class.
4353. What is the conclusion you arrived at from hearing this conversation—have you
arrived at the conclusion that the crime is committed ? I have arrived at the conclusion
I stated to the magistrate, that both from the association I see of certain men, and the
language I hear, I am convinced it is so. It was from what I have heard outside, that I
wished to be examined. It was stated to me that I had said before the magistrate I was
prepared to swear that such crimes were not committed. If that appears in the deposition
before you, it is quite in opposition to what I have stated.
[The Chairman read the statement made before the Police Magistrate.]
4354. I should not gather from what you have said here that the conversation to which you
have referred was in jest. What I should gather is, that the conversations in which
unnatural crime formed the subject, were so continuous, that you inferred the crime was
committed? That was what I sta ed to Capt.in Scott. He put the question, if I did not
think these conversations were in jest, and I said I did not think there could be such an
amount of it unless there were some earnest.
4355. Your evidence will now be taken down word for word ; the questions, as I ask them,
and the answers too, by the short-hand writer? Yes, lam aware.
4356. You said that on account of something that had been reported to you, you wished to
come before the Committee and make a statement ? Yes.
4357


4-W You are now at liberty to make what statement you think proper ? It was through
thfs man saying you had made this remark, which he mrsconstrued, that I wmhed to tell
4358 1 statement that men are called by women’s names on the island, and
treated as woLn ? Not exactly treated as women, they are spoken of as such among a par-
-4K9 ' 'tV* wZleycr :Do you mean a particular set of men ? A particular set Of
course "fere are men hove associating or joining m the conversation ; but bemg mixed up
as thev are in one yard, they cannot be deaf to it. , . . , T
4860 JL Mr. Mart: Do you tbiuk there are persons on the island now, who are passive
aneuts in this crime—upon whom this crime is committed ' Ido.
«61 Ba .he Chairman : Who are they ? One man whose name has been mentioned to
me is a lad of the name of , if be can be termed a lad, for I believe he
is a married man. . . ~ , ,
4362. A married man ? I believe ho is married, which makes it
4363. Who else have you heard of? No one else I should like to mention.
4364. Have you ever heard of ? Ycs t as j ll connection with - •
4866. Have yon heard of ? Yes, I have heard his name mentioned, bull
was speaking of those who submitted themselves to the act. , , . , ,
4366 Bu Mr Hart: Is there no means of stopping this practice by keeping watch and
detecting the guilty parties ? If you will allow me, before answering that question After
the examination took place before Captain Scott, the subject was spoken of among the men;
and among other things, it was said that men had been known to take the place of wardsmen,
appointed to keep watch, fur the purpose of committing this crime Therefore, so far as the
watchmen are concerned, they are of little use where the men are determined to commit it.
4367. Then it would be better, I presume, to have free men* as wardsmen . i can hardly be
supposed to judge. a , ~ _
4368 Do you suppose the wardsmen are afraid of the consequences if they were to make those
things known? Yes, I stated that before the Visiting Magistrate when he asked me it i
thought any respectable person seeing the crime would conceal it. I said, not only that, but
many persons were deterred from reporting these circumstances from fear of the prisoners.
About eight months ago I was supposed to have been concerned in giving information to the
authorities about the man who attempted to make bis escape from the island, and i was
beaten within an inch of my life. I had my bead split open with a stone.
4369 Do you know instances of undue favour, or of severity, on the part of the authorities
towards particular prisoners? I kuow T of none that I can bear testimony to myself since I
have been here. _ . , ’
4370. Are there any well grounded complaints by the prisoners generally . Ido not belong
to the men who fell out at the last meeting. I therefore do not know what they fell out for;
but I wish to bring under the notice of the Committee the manner in which the gratuity
money is distributed here. I have not to complain of it myself, for while I was at work I
was at stone-cutting, but it relates to the men who are employed at the hand-carts. I have
first and second class men in my gang, mixed up together, and they are placed on a task.
The first-class task is admitted by the free overseers to be more than the men can possibly
do, still it is imposed. There are not more than three or four men who can do if. The work
is returned in the number of feet they cart away in the day; this is sent up to the office.
The first-class have to cart 115 feet, and the second 64. This entitles the men to no gratuity;
it is called the Government task. They allow nine feet to a cart for a load; it is therefore
necessary for four men to cart fifty loads a day, and in order to get a gratuity of three-half-
pence, it would be necessary to put out seventy loads. Now it is possible for four men to do
it for one day, but to follow it up and work at it from year's end to year’s end is not possible.
The third-class man’s task is s> much reduced, that he can do the Government task by
eleven o’clock, and earn three-pence over.
4371. Who has the arrangement of this work ? The free overseer places h s men upon task-
work, and desires me, as a sub-overseer, to keep the tally of the number of carts put out in
the day, and which he enters in the office If you infer to Mr. .Fitzgerald, the overseer, he
will inform you that, the first-c'ass men, working in the hand-cart under me, received only
two-pence gratuity for a fortnight’s labour.
4372. B/j Mr. Sutherland : What did the second class men receive ? One second-class man
working at the same cart received nine-pence half-penny.
4373. Have you any thml-c’a-s men in your gang ? Not in my gang; they arc men
entirely by themselves, called the invalided men. _
4374. You say these third-class men could earn three-pence before eleven o clock ? Ics;
the stone-cuttcis have a system of banking, and the men are allowed so much tur all they
cut over their task ; and this, at the end of a fortnight, amounts sometimes to Is. 9d.,
sometimes to 2s. This is placed at the bank to the credit ot the party, and he receives it
when he leaves the island. Defoie I came here., when this duck was being made, men have
banked as much as 30s. or j£2 in the fortnight. Now the men came to this conclusion as to
where this banking money came from not that I entertain it myself —they say we cannot
get our gratuity, we think this money is retained for refunding to the bank, and they just
crawl along and have no heart to work. This money, paid for extra work, goes to supply
the men with tea and sugar for their evening meal ; but if they receive only two-police in a
fortnight, they can have only cold water to drink.
4375. You think this ought to be reformed ? Yes
4376. Who has the arrangement of that—is it the superintendent of the i land, or toe task-
work ovetsecr ? The task-work overseer is Mr. Dalis.
4377.


4377. Has he the arrangement of the payment to the first and second classmen? He is
supposed to have ; for the orders are, that every man, where practicable, shall be placed on
task-work, and then the duty of the free overseer is merely to return the quantity of work
done ; and, by a scale in the office, the task-work master returns the amount of gratuity tike
men have earned.
How are they divided into first and second classes ? According to their physical
capabilities.
4379. You complain that men of different classes are put upon the same cart ? Yes; on their
arrival here they are classed by the medical man. A man named Fahey, who had been here
before, and who was then a first-class man, on his arrival hereuuderafreshconviction,wasclassed
by the medical officers as a second-class man ; but when he was sent to the office to be assigned
to a gang he was asked by Mr. Fitzgerald to what class he belonged, and he said that he had
been on the first class. His register has, therefore, been allowed to stand good in the office,
and his work is returned as a first-class man though he is in the second-class gang.
4380. What is done with, the money placed to the prisoner’s credit? It is placed to his
credit and he receives it when he leaves; but there is only one class that can bank, and that
is the second.
4381. There is no reward for the others? No; in fact a man may as well be misbehaved
as good.
Edward Power called in and further examined :
4382 By the Chairman: You were examined before this Committee, at Parramatta Gaol
some time ago ? Yes.
4383. You were then in solitary confinement ? Yes.
4384. While you were under examination you stated that immoral practices, amounting to
sodomy in some cases, were carried on on Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
4385. The Committee desire to know whether you still adhere to this statement ? Yes;
since I have returned from the gaol these things have been carried on again.
4386. Have you been an eye-witness ? Not an eye-witness.
4387. Have you been an eye-witness to anything preliminary- to, or connected with, the
crime itself ? No.
4388. Will you state what has come within your own knowledge ? Since I returned from
Woolloomooloo there have been two or three instances in the ward where I sleep. My
attention was called one night by a man named Hogan. I was asleep at the time, and when
I got out of my bunk to witness the action, the party left the bunk and went to his own
again. Since then I have laid awake several nights to see if I could, catch the party. They
have got information that I intend, to put it down if possible, and they have got their eye on
me and 1 have got my eye on them.
4389. What were the names of these men ? and .
4390. Were these old or young men ? Both young men.
4391. I suppose, from what you say, that you have no doubt this crime does take place ? Not
the least doubt. This is a second Sodom and Gomorrah for any man of feeling to be here
and sleeping with men, whose chief subject of conversation, from the time they go into the
ward till they come out again, is nothing but sodomy.
4392.. This is the chief topic of conversation ? Yes, this is the home of many of them, and
a man who has never been here before his mind is never at ease with them. You cannot
rest or do anything with them. You c-mnot close your ears to them, for you are all
huddled together. There was a case brought before the magistrate yesterday or the day
before. Ido not know how it was got over. There was a man called a boy a “ bloody
Irish whore,” and then a “ bloody Pentridge whore ”; and it was brought before the
magistrate, but it was hushed' up.
4393. What magistrate ? Captain Scott. In fact, three or four instances have been fetched
to this office, but they have always been hushed up.
4394 You have never been an eye-witness to the crime itself? No; but a man on the
ground has seen it from time to time
4395. Who is that ? Michael Doran.
4393 Have you anything you wish to state to the Committee ? I wish to be shifted off
this ground. Ido not aare where it is so long as it is off this place. lam a man with a
family, and half my time is done, and 1 would sooner remain in a solitary cell than stop the
rest of my time here.
4397. I think you stated that when you were, at Parramatta? Yes. ihey are going to
break out here immediately, and a man is in danger of his life. They say they are only
waiting to see whether the Council will do any thing for them. Only the day before
yesterday there was a man stubbed in his arm.
4398. Who was he ? Patrick Byrnes.
4399 Who stabbed him ? This man, Michael Doran _ .
4400 Why. did he stab him ? He said Byrnes gave information against him.
4401 Is Byrnes hurt ? Yes; the knife went right through the muscle of his arm.
4402. Has Doran been tried ? Byrnes declined prosecuting when the magistrates were hero.
Michael Doran called in and examined :
4408. Bu the Chairman : You are a prisoner upon this island? Yes
4404. How long have you been hero ?' I came here the 28th day of May last two years.
4405. You have been here nearly three years ? Yes
4406. For what offence did you come here . For a horse.
4407.


4407. For stealing a horse? No, nub for stealing him.
4408. That was the charge ? That was the charge.
4409. Where w»re you tried ? At Maitland.
4410. By what Judge? By Judge Callaghan.
4411. During the time you have been confiued on this island have you ever seen acts of gross
immorality among the prisoners? I have.
4412. You have seen them yourself? I have been called in the middle of the night by a
man of the name of Neal.
4418. In what ward were you at that time ? No. 2 ward.
4414. How many prisoners were there sleeping in that ward? I dare say there may be such
a thing as sixty; there may he more or less.
4415. How long ago was that? Better than two years.
4416. You say that Neal called your attention to something? Yes; he called my attention
to look at such parties, naming them; not merely me, but a great deal more men as well as
me; and I have seen frequently two and three persons going into one bed; it was quite
usual in that place ; he got his liberty to Moreton Bay afterwards. There was another case,
quite similar to it, that was brought up for it.
4417. What did you see on that occasion ? I only saw two men in the bunk; it was night,
and that was all 1 could see —their nakedness —anything more I could not see.
4418. You did not see them in the act of sodomy? No, I would not go so close to them,
but they were both together under the blanket.
4419. Did you see them acting in any manner indecently towards each other? Yes.
4420. What have you seen —you must speak out in plain terms, fur your language is being
taken down as you speak ? 1 have seen one man on the top of another.
4421. Treating him as though he were a woman ? Yes, 1 have seen that.
4422. Have you seen that more than once ? Yes, and more than half-a dozen times.
4423. Will you state the names of any of the men thus acting? Yes, I will; a man of the
name of .
4424. Is he on the island now ? No, he was invalided from here to Parramatta.
4125. Who else ? He was with a man named ,he got his liberty from this
island by Dr. West, for the good of bis health.
4426. Anybody else? Yes, a man of the name of , and quite a young boy—a
growing up slip of a man—quite a youngster —had connection with him.
4427. Did you see that ? Yes; Neal called me to watch both these parties, and with that
I did.
4428. You have seen the men having connection with this boy ? Yes.
4429. Do you mean that you saw them in the act ? I see him lay on the top of him, that is
all I can say any further about it, in that uncertain time of the night.
4430. What was the boy’s name ? His name was Jemmy something. He was sent to
Moreton Bay to a ticket-of-leave better than two years ago now.
4431. How long is it ago since you saw the last act of this kind? I have not seen it since
I left No. 2. I left it about two years ago. I was in the mechanics since then, in the
blacksmiths’ shop.
4432. That ward is better conducted ? Yes ; lamin a small ward, No, 4, where there is a
proper wardsman —a man of the name of Macdonald ; he would not allow such a thing at all,
by no means. The greater run is among the old prisoners, aiding one another and increasing
such a thing; for if a man wanted to put it down, and exposed it, Ido not know what would
become of him. There is a youngster who is a servant of Mr. Balls at present, I was not in
No. 2 when he was shifted, but I know be was threatened by the wardsman what he would
do if he would not stand it, and the youngster was shifted out of his ward and the man was
left in his billet as wardsman, and this treatment is allowed. There are other people on this
island, if they were closely examined, would tell that they reported these circumstances to
free people, who took no notice of it. There is another man named Mason that lam in-
formed has reported these things to some free people on the ground.
4433. By Mr. Hart: Supposing the authorities had been desirous of repressing this crime,
and had kept the same watch as you did, would they not have been able to have detected this
crime ? people would bring these parties to justice it would not take place so often
as it does; but when men are pulled to this office, for justice, to be tried, they would not
try for such a case, they would try for a different light, and book it in a different light. I
went to Sydney Gaol in another case as a witness, in February two years, and for telling
the truth in Sydney I got punished. I got three months solitary confinement for it every
night; and another man when he saw the treatment I got for telling the truth would not
do it. The bigger the ruffian the more encouragement, the more fair play he gets. That is
the treatment I got, and every free man on the ground would shew me a cold reception.
4434. Was a court held on your conduct when you came back ? No ; but the superintendent
said he would bring me to trial, and he took it upon himself. Mr. Forbes was the Visiting
Magistrate at the time, and when he knew it he said he had no business to punish me for
giving evidence in a court of justice. On the Queen’s Birthday afterwards I got liberated,
after going on for three months solitary confinement,
4435. Would it not be a satisfaction to you to have solitary confinement instead of being in
the company of these men? Yes; but the vermin is eating a man in some seasons of the
year.
4436. Are the cells dirty ? Yes, for there is wood there that has been there for twenty
years, and it is eaten with all sorts of vermin, and on the wall you will see the vermin,
half-a-dozen in one spot, and when a man wants to lie down at night they swarm about him.
There are other parties I have seen taken to sleep in the cell for haying to do with a native
black


black of tbis Colony—a man of the name of . He was confined for some time to C
the cells, and was never fetched out to justice. They do not want these things under the
notice of the magistrates, and when they bring a case it is not as such they try it. From
what I have known of it it is more encouraged by the authorities than tried to be kept j
down. Ido not know this man Mason, but some one says that he reported to the free
people that he caught two men in the act and they told him to shut his eyes. What are
the prisoners to do if the free people w T ho are paid to put a stop to it will not look at it.
John Mason called in and examined :
4437. B\ / the Chairman : You are a prisoner on this island ? Yes.
4438. For what offence are you here ? Stealing a horse.
4439. How lung have you been here? Since August, 1858.
4440. During the time you have been here, have you ever had occasion to report to the
authorities immoral conduct on the part of the other prisoners? I have.
4441. You have made reports of this kind ? Yes, I have.
4442. The Committee wish to know the nature of the report, when you made it, and to
whom you made it? I believe it was in May, 1859, that a boy received some injury or
assault from a person in the ward, and in the morning when he came out he was crying.
Several of the men asked him what he was crying for, and I heard the boy tell Mr. Brown
that a man had made an attempt to beastly assault him ; in fact, the boy wept most of the
night, Mr. Brown said, “ Why can’t you men let one another alone? it is very odd you
men will not let each other alone”; and no m re was said about it. The boy was shifted
out of No. 2to No. 4 ; there was no more about it. The boy is here now.
4443. What is his name ? I believe, John Smith ; he is servant to Mr. Balls.
4444. Have you ever noticed acts of immorality ? I have never seen them.
4445. Have you ever heard of them ? Plenty.
4446. Are you yourself a married man ? I am.
4447. Have you a wife and children living ? Yes.
4448. Are you of opinion, from what you hear, that sodomy is committed on the island .
lam almost certain, although I have never seen ir, that it is very common.
4449. It has been represented to u-' that it is the chief topic of conversation among the
prisoners in some of the wards ? The conversation goes when they fall out; the first words
are “you whore,” or “you so-and-so,” something of that sort—in fact one will publicly
before the whole call others such names as these.
4450. Have you any other statement you wish to make? I have a little to say with regard
to myself. Some time since I wrote to Mr. Justice Callaghan, asking him if he would be
kind enough to look at the heavy sentence I had —I had a higher sentence than any other
man for the same offence; and I prayed that I might have the same sentence as another
prisoner. He answered me and said, he would recommend me to the Government tor a
commutation of sentence, and to make my sentence seven years. I came here to Captain
Mann, and he read the recommendation to me, and advised mo to write to the Colonial
Secretary and enclose this recommendation. I wrote, but I do not know whether tie
recommendation went or not, and received an answer that no part or portion of the sentence
would be remitted. Now I think this is unusual where a Judge makes such a recommen-
dation.
4451. Was this your first offence ? Yes.
4452 Where were you sentenced ? At Parramatta.
4453. You say Mr. Callaghan actually recommended a commutation of sentence ? les.
John Smith called in and examined: —
4454 Bit the Chairman : How long have you been on the island ? Nearly fifteen months. ,
4455. For what offence were you sent here ? On account of some jewellery.
4456. You mean on a charge of stealing jewellery ? Yes.
4457. What sentence did you receive? Two years.
4458. What Judge sentenced you ? Judge Milford. .
4459 Have you ever had occasion to complain of an indecent assault having been made
upon you by any prisoner ? I have; when I first came here, a man attempted to conic into
4460 U ’WiUyoustate to us what took place-make your own statement, adhere strictly to
the fad, disguising nothing, abating nothing—state where you were when the assault was
made in what manner it was made, who made it, what you d.d afterwards, and what was the
consequence ? The only thing that took place was this—after I had been on the island a
consotpue c •? No 2 came to my bunk about one o’clock in the morning.
4461 *’Bu Mr Win lajer : What was his name ? 1 forget his name ; but he had the name
of Snrinlheel Jack. While I was asleep he came to my_ bunk and began to feel m the
blanket ° I felt him feeling in the blanket, and accused him of it. I awoke all the men,
„ nrl told Mr Brown, the Assistant Superintendent, of it.
4462. By the Chairman : What did Mr. Brown do ? He removed me out of that ward into
4403 e Xhis person who interfered with you in the manner you have described was acting as
446 d t S ThL yml say ho commenced feeling about the blankets, did he place his hands in an
dlfi^^Under ° an indecent manner, as if you were a female ? Yes; and I
jumped up and accLd him of it before all the men. I disturbed all the men.
J r r 157—S


Cockatoo
Island Prison,
11 April, 1861.
John Smith.
G. K. Mann,
Esq.
4466. Have you heard of similar conduct on the part of others ? I have, several times.
l * 4467. Have you ever seen anything? I have not.
4468. Do you suppose from what you have seen that unnatural crime is committed on the
island ? That I could not say,
4469. I only want to know what your impression is ? My impression is that such things
are done. As soon as I came on the island I was told to be aware, and of course I took care
of myself.
4470. How old are you ? Just about twenty.
4471. By Mr. Hart: Have anv overtures been made to you since then ? No.
4472. By the C \airman: Did this man say anything to you when he attacked you in this
way ? He never spoke.
4473. Was he an old or a young man ? An elderly man.
4474. By Mr. Windeyer: Did you ever hear young men called by female names? No.
4475. By Mr. Sutherland: Was the man you speak of still kept on as wardsman ? Yes,
until he went to his liberty; that was some mouths afterwards.
Gother Kerr Mann, Esquire, called in and examined:—
4476. By the Chairman: Is there any general map of the island with which we can be
supplied ? Yes, there is; but it was made some time ago, and since that the general outline
of the island has changed by filling in, and by the progress of the works.
4477. Can you and the officers under you prepare a map shewing the outline of the island,
its features generally, and all the buildings upon it, which can be conveniently folded with
a foolscap publication ? I can. I will see that it is forthwith putin hand.
4478. This Committee has been appointed with unusual powers, such as the power of visiting
public prisons, and also of receiving any statements from prisoners, and we are anxious to
know whether statements from any prisoners addiessed to the Committee have been forwarded
to you, which have not reached us? I have some statements which have been forwarded
from prisoners. They have come up to me in the first instance, and asked permission to
write to the Committee, and I have given it. These statements should be in the office—but
I do not know that they are at this moment—in order to be handed in.
4479. Perhaps you will forward them to us to-morrow morning? I believe they are here at
this present moment. ( The witness referred to some papers lying on the table.') I know
these are some, but I am not quite sure whether these are the whole.
4480. W as there a prisoner on the island named David Clarke, recently tried before the
Chief Justice, whose case has attracted some attention ? There was.
4481. Do you recollect whether a letter was received on the island from Sir Alfred Stephen
with reference to the prisoner, as he himself alleged in the dock ? lam not aware of one.
4482. Did you read the statement published in the newspaper, where the Chief Justice,
Sir Alfred Stephen, acknowledged having sent a letter of that kind, and explained to the
prisoner why he sent, it ? I have no recollection—but so many letters come here of a similar
description. I think I can answer positively that no letter came in my time. There may
have been a remark on the warrant, but Clarke's character was well known at this establishment.
4483. Is it customary for you to receive letters from the Judges, relative to persons they
have sentenced ? No, it is not customary, nor do I believe a letter was written ; but in the
warrant there is a column for remarks, and the Judge’s remarks are generally entered in
that. I know of no instance of a letter having been written directly to the establishment
respecting any prisoner.
4484. Is this man David Clarke on the island ? He is not. After the disturbances that
were going on here, I recommended that a certain number of those who are urging the men
on to misbehave should be removed from this establishment, as there were no means of
separation, to some establishment where they could be placed by themselves, and among
them this same man, David Clarke.
4485. Then he will undergo his sentence in some other prison? lam not aware of that.
I reminded the Government, when [ heard he was sentenced, that he was one of the
twelve men who were included in the list to undergo his sentence at another establishment.
While here he made a desperate attempt to escape, but by keeping all the free officers on
guard night and day for some days we frustrated the intention.
4486. ihe greater number of the men who were sent from Cockatoo Island for insubor-
dination have been returned? Speaking from my memory nearly all; some two or three are
still at large. Another man who was tried in company with Clarke, a man named Cavanagh,
is not recommended to be removed.
4487. Is he here ? He has not returned to the island.
4488. Have the men behaved in a more orderly manner, or, in other words, have they shewed
any signs of insubordination since their return from Darlinghurst to the island ? There has
been only one instance of overt insubordination, but the men are in a very unsettled state—
their demeanour is not what I conceive the demeanour of prisoners ought to be’ still, I can-
not say they have committed any actual act of insubordination. On Sunday morning they
refused to receive their bread; I examined it, and was satisfied I should not be justified in
condemning it; I therefore ordered them to receive it. I heard that, although a great many
ate it, many did not receive it, or threw it about the yard. The next morning, at six o’clock,
when they were rung out, they said they could not go out of the yard to work as they were
hungry. I went down to the yard and ordered the men to fall in. I then ordered a man
from each gang to come forward and told him they might speak to me as to their cause of
complaint. I heard what they had to say about this bread, but still refused to condemn it.
I said if X had considered the bread bad I would have condemned it; but, as I considered
it good, I was bound to protect the interest of the contractor. The men then spoke to me
in


in a remarkably orderly manner, and, if I may use tbe term —the only one that will express
my meaning—there was no rowdyism about them; they were perfectly civil; t
demeanour was correct towards me. I said, on account of their demeanour being correct, i
would allow them to have their breakfast of hominy, and they must then turn out immediately. G.
They had their breakfast at seven o'clock, and they then turned to their wor^.
4489. All has gone on smoothly since ? All has gone on smoothly since.
4490. We understand that there was an assault committed yesterday, when a man named
Michael Doran stabbed another man named Byrnes ? I think it was on Monday the occur-
rence took place. #
4491. We are told that this man Byrnes was stabbed right through the fleshy part ox the
arm ? Yes. .
4492. The knife went in on one side and came out of the other ? Yes, I believe the intention
was to inflict a mortal stab, and that it was the man’s arm that saved his life.
4493 Were no steps taken in the matter ? It was brought before the magistrate yesterday.
The man Byrnes came up, but would not give evidence, and the case was dismissed. It was a
very serious stab indeed. I immediately reported the circumstance to the Visiting
Magistrate, and stated that I had placed the man in the cells, waiting his next visit.
4494. Is this man Byrnes in the hospital? Yes.
4495. Receiving treatment for his wound ? Yes.
4496. Is the wound going on all right? Yes, it is merely a flesh wound through the
muscles of the arm. .... , , , ,
4497. Have you held an inquiry on the island, in consequence of the inquiry conducted, by
this Committee, to ascertain whether the crime of sodomy existed on the island? The
Visiting Magistrate did so at his last visit.
4498. Did you sit? lam not a magistrate.
4499. Were you present ? I was present among others who were present; I was not aware
that it arose out of the visit of this Committee ; Captain Scott came with a list of names of
men on the island, and a large number were taken indiscriminately before him and examinee.
4500. Was Mr. Agnew examined on the island? Yes, he was present.
4501. Have you seen his deposition ? I think I was present when he made it; it has not
made any great impression upon my mind, for 1 was part of the time engaged on the
business of the island and was running in and out. _ ...
4502. You did not pay much attention to what he said? No, I could not speak positively
as to the facts he stated. j .
4508 Was there not some charge brought before the Visiting Magistrate a day or two ago
of immoral conduct ? Not of immoral conduct, one of the men accused another of using very
ob-cene and disgusting language to him. That citse was brought before the Police Magistrate.
4504 What was the result —was the case dismissed? I think the case was dismissed, i
think the man who had made use of it had never been punished on the island.
4505. By Mr. Hart: Do you apprehend an outbreak on the island ? lam very careful to
look out to prevent it. I cannot say that it amounts to an apprehension, but I should not
be at all surprised if the men did strike work again in the same way that they have done.
They have threatened violence to me, and say that the 'Only thing to do is to knock the
superintendent on the head in the same way that they did at Melbourne, and that then they
should set their rights. Ido not think anything of that circuinstance. .
4506. By the Chairman : Do your family live on the island? les; I have no fear in that
wav ; the only obiect of the men would be to gain their liberty.
4507. By Mr. Hart: Have you applied to Government for liberty to use other coercive
measures than at present you have power to use ? I have applied for additional sentries, an
have recommended in my general report that I should be allowed to infl.ot a certam punish-
ment upon the men. At present I have no power to punish the men at all , all i can do is
to put a man in the cells, awaiting the visit of the magistrate. I nave the power, as every
officer in my position should have, of taking summary steps in case of violence being shewn
to me and I have told the men dearly—and I believe on a former occasion 1 saved my
life bv it that if they shewed me any violence I would shoot them immediately. •
4508. Have you applied to the Government for permission to flog the men ? I have not.
4509. By Mr. Windier: How often are the sentries changed? I am speaking now from
hearsay for I have nothing to do with the police; I know nothing of the details. Since tie
nnlipe miard has been here I believe the police sentries are on four hours. Ido not know; it has
tern into tPe baud, of the inspector, «d he reports directly to the Visiting Magistrate.
4510 b By Mr Morris : That would have been just the same if the soldiers had been here.
But the soldiers never changed any sentries without my knowledge, and when the soldiei.
were here there was a portion of the police force, consisting of one sergeant and thirteen men,
r X belonging to the island. These men reported directly to me. They are now
placed under an inspector, who is under the control of the Superintendent of Police, and
placed unaei an i p , Magistrate; and unless I hear indirectly of some irregu-
hiYial kTpUute-oeof’what goes ou. It is a matter I have com-
plained of. Do mean irregularit ies on the part of the prisoners, or on
1 ’ ‘V+v.p noHce ? Of any irregularity that occurs in the course of the police duty. I
teLrete to e be g'uardAn island polioe-they were here formerly, even
funds? They are paid by this department. I pay
4513 ’X'jbTlthe old military guard ? An officer, two non-com-
missioned officers, and thirty or thirty-one men. Mr


Cockatoo
Island Prison.
11 April, 1861.
Mr. W. A.
Cahill.
Mr, William Augustine Cahill called in and further examined :
4514. By the Chairman: It has been alleged to us that there has been considerable misap-
propriation of material, especially in the construction of the dock, and we want to know from
you whether you have seen any kind of material which has come here for the dock applied
to another purpose ? It is difficult to tell whether there has been any misappropriation or
not, for timber is used indiscriminately for anything that may be wanted—if you allude to
timber.
4515. Or any other material—lime, or iron ? They are used indiscriminately, as they are
wanted; they are not laid by for any particular place.
4516. It has been alleged to us that a large quantity of material sent for the construction of the
dock, and buildings in connection with the dock, have been, in reality, applied to the erection
of private accommodation of the family of the superintendent? There has been a great
amount of timber used for it, no doubt; but I cannot say whether the timber was specially
ordered for it, I made out the calculations of the quantify that would be required, and
supplied Captain Mann with them; but whether more than that has been supplied I have
not the means of knowing.
45] i. You are overseer of the works? Yes, lam principal foreman of works.
4518. Have you served your time to any trade? Yes, to a carpenter and joiner; I was a
contractor in Sydney for many years.
J hen I suppose you can state what really has been done in the preparation of
accommodation for the superintendent ? A house has been built consisting of ten rooms.
4520. Since Mr. Ormsby left ? Yes, the house is 84 feet in length by 35 in width, and
consists of nine or ten rooms, I am not certain which—not less than nine—with two
kitchens under one roof, but detached from the main building. There has been a good deal
of work besides in connecting the new building with the old one, in breaking through the
walls for doors and windows, and making them good again.
40-H. The material and labour also, I suppose, have been used indiscriminately for this
private dwelling, and for public works on the island? Yes, for a period of twelve months.
4022. T hat is, the material has been used in common for all purposes on the island ? Yes.
4523. Has anything been done during this time for the accommodation of other officers
on the island ? There may have been some trifling repairs. Tim accommodation, in general,
of the other officers is very bad.
Mr. T.
Harrison.
12 April, 1861.
FRIDAY, 12 APRIL, 1861.
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MO KRIS, '
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WILSON.
HENRY PARKESj Esq., in the Chair.
Hr. Thomas Harrison again called in and farther examined :
4524. By the Chairman : lou desire to supplement your former evidence in some particulars ?
Yes, there are some matters I left out.
4525. Before you go more particularly into what you wish to state, I understand you have
• a diagram by which you desire to represent to the Committee how the turnkeys were placed
in Darlinghurst Gaol by you? Yes; that is one I made when I was first appointed principal
turnkey. (The witness produced the same. Vide Appendix A .)
4520. \\ ill you explain the intention of the diagram before you ? There were three posts
lor night duty ; one the gate, one the stockade, and one the wings. Three men were on
these posts every day and night for twenty-four hours. The man who was on day duty at
tiie kept the name and date that he was on that particular post; and by turning
that man s name to that pest you would at any number of years after tell who was on any
post, it anything occurred. Suppose a man was ou each of these posts; the following day,
when the centre of the circle was turned round, they were off duty, having been up day and
night tor the previous twenty-four hours. Then the following day they would come on to a
for day duty for tweive hours. 4 hat would leave them two nights in bed. On the
following night, after doing twelve hours day duty, they would come on to the wing, that is,
twelve hours day duty and twelve hours at night. I will commence with a man named
Aimstrong. He is on the wing; he is off duty the next day, in consequence of having been
on duty the previous night. The following day he goes to the north wall (a day post) for
tve vc hums; from that he goes on to the stockade, that is as a post for twenty-four hours;
tint m rug it duty again. After the stockade he gets off duty again ; then he gets on to the
e oi twe ve hours ; from the bell he goes on to the front of the gaol inside for twelve
hours, and then he comes back to the sate again; so that he has three nights in bed.
■HW. Were there any pnnted regulations issued to the turnkeys during your time ? Yes,
We A 'f w ' l * iten b J nie i f be y were revised, and were afterwards printed and posted up.
Y 9Q ‘ a 0U i W lat time was -^ s nearly as I can recollect, about two years ago,
' 10se su cgestion? I was asked by the Sheriff to make some regulations; I did
so, and they were modified by him.
4530. They were written by direction of the Sheriff? Yes.
4531.


Mr. T.
Harrison.
12ApriuSl.
4581. And were posted up in the gaol ? Yes.
4502. Do you hand in a copy of those regulations? Yes. ( The witness handed in the same.
Vids Appendix B.)
4533. v\ hen do you say those regulations were posted up ? As nearly as I can recollect
about two years ago or better.
4504. \ou cun now make what statement you wish to the Committee ? It is in consequence
of a question that was put to me when I was last bef >re the Committee, that I desire to
relieve myself of what would be considered a great dereliction of duty. It is in reference to
the statement that I have been on many occasions drunk in g;r 1. That wi>u!d have been
almost impossible, from the number of gentlemen who visited the gaol daily, hourly, and
almost bad-hourly. 1 beg to hand in some documents from various gentlemen, some of whom
have known me tor the last twenty-three years, and others from gentlemen who have known
me since I have been in Sydney, and who have visited the gaol at all hours and s asons, and
not one ot them will charge me with ever having been guilty of such a gross dereliction of
duty-
4535. lou wish to hand in these testimonials of character? Yes.
4533. I presume you will be satisfied if the names are enumerated —if they are admitted as
testimonials of good character ? Yes.
[ The witness then handed in testimonials from W. Y. Wild, barrister-at-law ;
D. IT. Deniehy, solicitor ; Jas. Greer, solicitor; Jas Carroll, solicitor; W. D. Dailey,
barrister-at-law; W. P. Moffatt, solicitor; Robt. Burdett Smith, E. J. Cory,
solicitor ; George Hill, M.L C. ; also from Frederick Becke, Clerk of the Bench,
Newcastle, 1845 ; Genrge Brooke, Newcastle, 1845 ; A. W. Scott, Newcastle, 1846 ;
J. Reid, Newcastle, 1845 ; Wm. Brooks, Lochead, 1845 ; Simon Kemp, Newcastle,
1845 ; J. Lawson, Newcastle, 1845 ]
4537. Do you wish to make any other statement ? With respect to the manner in which the
inquiry was conducted by Captain. M‘Lerie, at Darlinghurst Gaol. When the man Banks
gave evidence about IVdack’s case, he said another prisoner, named Chcatem or Chisholm,
would corroborate his statement. Captain M'Lerie bad this man brought to the office, and he
was then told to make his statement. He did so, and when his statement was opposed to Banks’
statement,* 1 asked Captain M‘Lerie to call some witnesses, some of the turnkeys, as evidence
for me, and he refused to do so. I was then prepared to disprove the charges.
4538. Do you say that you were not allowed to bring evidence which would have invalidated
this man’s testimony against you ? Yes; the clerk will prove that. I was repeatedly told
by Captain M‘Lerie that there was no charge against me. Dr. West said he made no charge
against any one.
4539. Is there anything else you wish to state ? There is another matter —I have heard
that it has been said I was too lenient towards the prisoners in the gaol, that I did not do
my duty in that respect. For that reason, I got a copy of the entries in the book in the
gaol, from which it will be seen that, from January, iB6O, to February, 1861, I pun shed
113 prisoners ; 50 of those prisoners the principal gaoler wished to have put on bread and
wafer, hut, as Captain M‘Lerie did not attend, they were released.
4540. When you say that you punished the prisoners, do you mean that they were punished
by your sole direction, or at your instance, in consequence of your having appl ed to the
principal gaoler—what I want to know is whether you bad power to punish without
reference to Mr. Beverley, the principal gaoler ? If I saw them committing a breach of the
regulations of the gaol, I locked them up, and reported them to the principal gaoler ; and it
was at his option whether he would release them or keep them in separate confinement till
he got the Visiting Magistrate’s authority to punish them.
4541. Do you wish to hand in that list? Yes. {The witness handed in the same. Vide
Appendix Ch)
4543. Have you any other statement you wish to make ? With reference to Polack, I believe
that a very different opinion was given by Dr. West of Polack’s health in 1854, from what
he has lately given. That is the affidavit which he then gave. {The witness produced a
paper h)
4543. Is this the original certificate? No, it is a copy from the Supreme Court.
4544. This is inconsistent with the last certificate Dr. West gave as to the state of Polack’s
health ? Yes. {The ivitness handed in the same. Vide Appendix D.) I was asked when I
was here before as to the duties of the turnkeys after the change took place. I got this
paper from the clerk, shewing how the duties were conducted. That is now replaced by my
own system.
4545. Does the paper you wish to hand in shew the alteration in the system as to the duties
of turnkeys explained in the first part of your evidence ? It does.
4546. Up to the period when this change took place the turnkeys were placed as you have
described to the Committee ? Yes.
4547. Then they were altered and were appointed according to the statement which you
now hand in ? Yes. {The witness handed in the same. Vide Appendix Eh)
APPENDIX.
• Note (Insertion by ivitness on revision ) ;—Mr. M'Lerie would not take it, and the Clerk tore it up.


APPENDIX.
A.
Mr. T,
Harrison,
12ApriU861,
EXPLANATION.
The names are supposed to revolve within the outer circles: the inner portion of the diagram being
attached at the centre.
B.
DUTIES OF THE TURNKEYS
AT
11. M. GAOL,
1. —They are to obey all the orders of the Principal Gaoler and the Deputy Gaoler.
2. —Thejr must not give to, or take anything from a prisoner, or allow any person coming into the Gaol
to communicate with the prisoners without the knowledge of the Principal Gaoler or Deputy
Gaoler; neither are they to employ any prisoner without the consent of the Principal Gaoler or
Deputy Gaoler being first had and obtained.
3. —They are to be regular in their attendance from 6 o’clock in the morning until 6 o’clock in the
evening daily—to keep a strict watch and due surveillance over the prisoners, and not hold any
communication with them further than duty requires ; they are to keep the hard labour prisoners
diligently at their work, and to report any prisoner who idles, or does his work in a careless or
slovenly manner, immediately to the Principal Gaoler or his Deputy, and they are not to allow
any prisoner into the cook-house or workshops excepting those employed there.
—They will not be allowed, when on duty, to read or employ themselves in any way likely to draw
their attention from their duty.
3-'—Whilst on duty, at night, they must call the hours and the half-hours from 9 o’clock p.m. to 6 o’clock
a.m. ; the Turnkey at the Gate is first to call, to be answered in succession by the Turnkey at
the Wing, and the Turnkey in charge of the Stockade ; should either neglect to call or answer
in his turn, one or other will proceed to ascertain the cause, and report such omission to the
Deputy Gaoler.
Pkc Turnkeys in charge of the Wings and Stockade are to walk round every half-hour, and should
they hear any unusual noise, or become acquainted with any case of sickness, or any other
unusual occurrence, they must report the same immediately to the Deputy Gaoler.
lhe y Tnust challenge all persons walking through or about the Gaol after dark.
watch-boxes are only to be used in rainy weather, and then in such a manner that the Turnkey
may have a view of the Wing Gates, the Stockade, and the Yards, respectively.
n -Y turnkey sleeping on his post will be reported to the Sheriff.
10.


No. 1
|
Name.
Offence.
Date of
Punishment.
Date of
Release.
j
January
5
January
9
1 I
,,
5
9
2 1
John Sullivan
Charles T. Winslow j
7
„
17
3 ;
9
Ten days.
4J
,,
18
January 23
5 |
Jonny !
William Mackey
John Clifford.. . ■ • • • j
25
„
O L
25
February 3
7 ;
8 I
„
81
„
3
John 4 itzgerald
,,
31
»
3
9
John Murphy
H 'nry Smith
John Sullivan j
Thomas Watson |
February 1
„
10
10
3
„
7
11
99
6
„
10
12
,,
7
„
9
13
Roderick M‘Gregor
,,
7
»
9
13
14
Tin 'mas Rice '
Alexander Boyd
,,
9
„
15
14
„
18
16
John Geary
16
„
18
17
William Thompson
16
,,
16
18
19
20
Moses Benson
Edward Dunn
”
18
20
21
”
19
23
Henry Heyman
)»
,,
25
21
Alexander Smith
„
23
>>
25
25
22
23
Charles Rodgei
Richard Overs
24
24
,,
24
25
W. Simmons
Thomas Knight
Thomas Fairbrother .. ..
James Baker ..
George Cummins
Henry Hughes
Timm ns Watson
Ditto ditto
”
24
24
”
25
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
XUttO tiiitu
Ditto ditto
March
24
5
6
9
11
March
25
10
20
16
13
John Burch
George. Cummins
iJohn Thomas
1 Thomas Watson
David King
'John Burtenshaw
Edward M‘Gee
Refusing work
Stealing hooks
Refusing work
April
15
15
16
21
27
27
2
April
20
16
31
22
29
31
6
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
Thomas Watson
i Charles Seymour
Joseph Bridle ..
'Patrick Brady
Charles Seymour
Leaving his work
! Obscene language
Refusing work
May
13
16
23
24
2
2
May
21
20
26
29
3
4
'Henry Hyman
William Dally
Refusing to go to Church
June
25
27
30
5
16
24
June
29
28
8
8
47
48
49
50
Jackey Weymouth
Disobedience of orders
26
26
Absent from his cell
28
July
1
51
William Mackey
(Jhscene language.
List
10. —The Turnkeys in charge of each Wing are to examine daily the Cells, Cell-doors, and A\ mdorv s, in
order to ascertain whether any attempt has been made to escape; and should any or them discover
such attempt, or any tool or implement likely to he used for that purpose, he must lepor i
immediately to the Deputy Gaoler. They are to make all the prisoners attend Drvme service j
on every Sunday, in a clean and becoming manner, and to report to the Principal Gaoler oi is
Deputy, any prisoner who absents himself, and who does not attend in clean attire. I hey ar ®
to carry out, to the fullest intent, the sth, 6th, 7th, Bth, 9th, 14th, and 24th clauses ot the Gencia
Rules for Gaols, which are to be hung up in each Wing.
11. —All the Turnkeys for the day duty are to be present when the prisoners are let out in the morning.
12. —When occasion requires that a Wing should be opened at night, two Turnkeys should always he
present, one is to go in and the other to remain outside to lock the Gate.
13. —The Turnkey on duty at the Gate must not open the wicket after 9 o’clock at night, without first
ascertaining who it is that seeks admission, and must report to the Principal Gamer any Turnkey
who is half-an-hour late in the mornings, and under no pretence to allow any Turnkey to enter
the Gaol upon duty Avhile under the influence of drink.
14. —Any Turnkey leaving his post of duty, either day or night, without leave of the Principal Gaoler
or his Deputy, will be reported to the Sheriff; and no Turnkey, under any pretence, is to absen
himself without sending word to the Principal Gaoler as to the cause of his absence.
1,5. —The Turnkey at the Gate is not to allow any Turnkey to pass through the Gate after going on
duty, without leave of the Principal Gaoler or Deputy Gaoler.
16.—The Turnkey on duty in the hard-labour yard is not to leave the yard, during the hours of work,
* without special permission from the Principal Gaoler or Deputy Gaoler.
17 —lt is the especial duty of every Turnkey to report any and every irregularity he may see or hear
of on the part of any prisoner or Turnkey, and should it be discovered by the Gaoler that a
Turnkey has neglected his duty, in this particular, he will be instantly suspended and reported
to the Sheriff.
By order of the Sheriff, Gaoler.
C.
List of Prisoners locked up fou offences committed in Tier Majesty’s Gaol, Darlingliurst,
from the Ist January, 186 ), to 11th February, 1861.


No
Name.
Offence,
Date of
Punishment
Date op
Release.
52
Thomas Thornton
> Drunkenness
53
54
July 9
„ 17
„ 24
„ 25
August 4
„ 6
g
„ 13
„ 19
24
„ 26
August 6
6
George Stevenson
)
Refusing work
55
Geo. Edwards
Ditto ditto
56
'Alexander Smith
Refusing to pick oakum
57
Patrick Kelly
Refusing work
58
James White
Knocking Mr. Beamish’s hat
59
! James Daley
Idling
60
William Thompson
Ditto
g
61
William Reilly
Striking a prisoner
Sept. 4
>> 5
Sept. 6
„ 11
62
William Almack
Fighting
63
Thomas Thornton
\ Ditto
64
65
„ 5
9
Alexander Smith
)
> Breaking out of gaol
66
„ c
67
Edward M‘Kenzie
J ° °
| Fighting
68
69
„ 11
James ,M‘Donaid
Insolence (Mr. Peters)
„ 13
„ IB
„ 18
„ 20
70
Robert Hunter
For being at the back of bath-house ....
Fighting
71
John Nichols
„ 18
„ 24
„ 26
October 2
2
72
Golph (Chinaman)
Stealing bread
73
Charles Seymour
Striking prisoner with stone
October 5
,, 8
„ 10
74
Thomas Coss
Refusing •work
75
John Pole
Ditto ditto
76
William Palmer
Absent from work
” 13
„ 23
Nov. 7
7
77
James Reilly
„ 27
Nov. 10
„ 10
,, 11
„ 19
78
Patrick Roach .. .
No religion
79
Chailes Seymour ....
Ides
80
William Holstein .. .
Having a light in his cell..
” 11
„ 15
„ 20
r
81
Henry Smith
Smoking
82
William Smith ....
Concealing tobacco
83
John Booth
Disobedience of orders •
84
John Jones
Ditto ditto
\ „ 25
„ 28
85
John Williams
Ditto ditto
86
Robert Hunter
Refusing work ......
Dec. 3
„ H
Dec. 10
87
Joseph Clarke
Ditto
88
Nicholas Swan
89
Richard Rutter
12
„ 14
90 j Patrick Ringwood
91 Edward Cooney ..
| Refusing to pick oakum
Cursing and improper conduct
92 Hope (Chinaman) ...
Refusing work
„ 14
„ 19
„ 19
„ 19
„ 27
„ 29
„ 29
1861.
J anuary 1
„ 8
„ 8
„ 10
93
Youch ditto
Refu ing to pick oakum ..
„ 24
„ 24
„ 24
1861.
February 1
p
94
Hugh O’Donnell ....
Refusing ditto
95
Joseph Clarke
Refusing work
96
Joseph Clarke
Ditto ditto
97
John Harrington
Noise in his cell
98
Patrick Ringwuod
Fighting, &c
99 1
Alexander Smith
Throwing his dinner away .
100
George Edwards
Refusing work
January 18
„ 16
101
John Jones
Ditto ditto
102
Hugh O’Donnell
Ditto ditto
103
Edward Farlington , . .
) Breaking garden fence and stealing
j fruit
104
John Cousins
17
„ 18
105 John Carroll
| Fighting
106 !
„ 21
» 24
107 '
riiomns Allen ...
) °
1 Ditto
108 L
„ 25
„ 25
„ 30
February 4
109 ]
Jrancis Press ..
;
Refusing to work
„ 30
February 2
5
no L
Ames Reilly
False representation
m L
ohn Reilley . .,
Abusive language
112 L
ohn Seymour ....
Striking prisoner wth a kid
„ 13
„ 15
ii3 h
Yilliam Almack ..
Refusing to pick oakum .
,T 9
1
—
Air. T.
Harrison.
12 April, 1861.
List of Prisoners— continued.
In the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Criminal Jurisdiction.
The Queen against Abraham Polack and William Henry Wells.
ctr i^® r ’ in the year one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, George West of
J'nth f in? 0 -° 't V" lf 6W .® ou . Wales, Doctor of Medicine, being duly sworn, maketh oath and
’ WS ;T, *? d t^ie situation of Surgeon to Her Majesty’s Gaol at Darlinghurst, in the said
within thn ’r< I 1 * I ' 6 seen ie ahoyenamed Abraham Polack, almost daily, since he has been confined
consulted v,-,. • Tao * |die conviction against him herein, and I have been on several occasions
and nlcr, fh ',t i' im> ’ an p < nd t l6 18 with lumbago, which lam informed is of long standing,
d chili tv T o\n IC f IS ° - av ®i y diathesis ;in consequence thereof, as well as from his age and general
ininrimy hi- i °i < ?f )1111<ln 18 an unfit person to undergo a sentence of hard labour without seriously
endanger his life ' und(il ° oin S such a sentence would, in all probability, materially
GEO. WEST.
Sworn by the Deponent, on the day first abovementioned,
at Sydney, aforesaid, before me—
Augustus Carter,
A Commissioner for Affidavits.
E.


E.
{November Ish)
Milligan Gate 1 Night
M'Oarthy Stockade I Sentry.
Whiddon., Quarry West
Smith North Wall
Keogh Gate
Wallace Stockade
Armstrong and) ~
Graham ...... | Q uari T
{November 7th.)
Rispen Trial Wing
Lee Labour Wing
Callaghan South Wall
{November 21st.)
Lee Trial Wing
Callaghan Labour Wing
Rispen South Wall
{December sth.)
Lee South Wall
Rispen Labour Wing
Callaghan Trial Wing
{December 18 th.)
Rispen Trial Wing
Lee Labour Wing
Callaghan South Wall
{January 2nd, 1861.)
Callaghan Trial Wing
Lee Labour Wing
Rispen South Wall
{January 15th, 1861.)
Callaghan Trial Wing
Rispen Labour Wing
Lee South Wall
(■August Ist, 1860.)
Rispen Gate
Bourke Front Wing
Lee Labour Wing
O’Callaghan Assisting at Wing
(August 1 5th.)
Lee Gate
Callaghan Front Wing
Rispen Labour Wing
Bourke South Wing
{August 2 9(h.)
Callaghan Gate
Rispen South Wall
Bourke Labour Wing
Lee Front Wing
{September 12th.)
Rispen Front Wing
Callaghan Labour Wing
Lee South Wall
{September 26 th.)
Lee Labour Wing
Rispen Front Wing
Callaghan South Wall
( October dth.)
Lee Labour Wing
Callaghan Front Wing
Rispen South Wall
( October 24 th.)
Callaghan Front Wing
Rispen Labour Wing
Lee South Wall
Mr, Christopher Rispen called in and examined:—
4548. By the Chairman : How long have you been in the Colony ? I came here in 1841.
4549. What employment have you followed since ? I was first in the Parramatta police
five years.
4550. Have you been in the Government service all the time ? Nearly.
4551. You were turnkey in the Darlinghurst Gaol lately ? Yes, I had been for twelve years.
4552. You were dismissed lately ? Yes.
4553. I believe you have petitioned the Legislative Assembly, have you not, for redress of
what you consider a grievance in your dismission ? Yes.
4554. And have also applied through me, as Chairman of this Committee, to be examined
respecting the same subject ? Respecting my own subject.
4555. You wish to hand in to the Committee some testimonials of character, do you not ?
Yes.
4556. Do you hand them in ? I hand them in to the Committee. These are some I brought
from home; others I have collected from time to time in this country.
4557. They represent your conduct over a long series of years? I may say from my
childhood. ( The witness handed in the following testimonials : —) From John Henry,
dated July, 1841, Richardstown Castle, Dunlear, County Louth, Ireland, stating that he had
known Rispen for many years to be a regular, well-conducted young man.” From Thomas
Parkinson, Vicar of the united parishes of Stabannon and Richardstown, dated July, 1841,
stating that “Rispen has always lived in my parish. I have known him from infancy, and
“ I can say he has always been a sober, quiet, well-conducted person, the son of respectable
“ parents.”
The Chairman stated that the other testimonials, which he had read through,
described general good conduct on the part of Rispen. They were as follow :—From Gilbert
Elliott, Police Magistrate, 1847; W. A. Miles, about the same date; George Langley, 1847 ;
John Ryan, Chief Constable, Parramatta, 1847 ; Gilbert Elliott, 1855; James Greer, no
date; Henry Beverley, Gaoler, Darlinghurst, 1855; Gilbert Elliott, Police Magistrate,
1846; Francis Macarthur, J.P., Goulburn, 1849; John ■ M'Lerie, 1850; William Forster,
Gaoler, Goulburn, 1849; and one from Henry Beverley, 14th February, 1861, stating that
“ Rispen as a turnkey has uniformly been attentive to his duty, and has given satisfaction
“to both the Sheriff and myself. He has been employed in various offices of trust, such as
u escort duty, taking prisoners on habeas to the Courts, and so, and he ever acquitted him-
“ self perfectly well.”
4558. You may make what statement you desire to the Committee, as to your dismissal ?
My dismissal was on account of a letter that a prisoner’s wife sent to her husband. Mr. Polack
was a prisoner in the gaol, and his wife was in the habit of sending letters regularly to her
husband while Mr. Beverley and Mr. Harrison were there. When they were suspended she
sent a letter to me. This letter, as her writing was known at the gate, was sent to Mr. Read,
and from him it was sent to Captain M'Lerie. I believe that was the course it took. The
first I heard of it was my dismissal from Mr. Cowper on account of this letter coming.
4559. Were you dismissed without any inquiry ? Without any inquiry.
4560. Has there been any inquiry ? There came a letter on Friday directed to my wife.
I got this letter at the gaol, and brought it to her. She said, “ This letter I will destroy,
and make no use of; there is enough got into trouble on account of this man and his wife.”
157—T That


That evening I was determined to go out to see her and to stop her writing; hut the evening
was so had that I could not go out. The next morning, Saturday, I went, and it appears
ftat before I went she sent another letter, and this letter was detained and stopped at the
fate I went to let her know the nature of the harm she would do to me If the Committee
would be pleased to hear her, I suppose she would give the same declaration hersel .
4561 Had she sent letters to you or your wife before i Never.'
4562! Had you any personal knowledge of her ? Yes, from seeing her come to the gaol.
4563 Except from her coming to the gaol ? No. . , , , , 9
4564. The o P nly knowledge you had of her was obtained from her coming to see her husband.
4565 How did you know where she lived ? From seeing letters coming out to her from her
husband. They would come to Mr. Beverley or Mr. Harrison, and would be given to me to
4566. Was it explained to you when you were dismissed that it was for allowing these letters
to be addressed to you clandestinely ? Yes. _ , , . , ,,■ ,
4567. As I understand you the letter was really intended for Polack, but was addressed to
vourself ? The first letter was addressed to my wife . ,
4568. And the other was addressed to your wife with the intention of its being conveyed to
Polack? Yes; the last letter I never saw at all. .
4569. You never saw the letter for which you have been dismissed { No.
4570. Do you deny distinctly that you ever communicated the substance of any letter to
Polack from his wife ? I deny distinctly that I ever conveyed any communication between
Polack and his wife. , ~ . .
4571. Do you deny that you ever in any way, directly or impliedly, gave permission to
Mrs. Polack to address this letter to you ? Yes. T j-j * u f
4572. You never had any communication with her upon tne subject i i aid not see her tor
4573. You knew nothing about it till you were dismissed? I knew nothing about it till
the Under Sheriff came and brought my dismission. , . n , .
4574. Have you represented this to the authorities? I have represented it to Captain
M‘Lerie ; I laid my statement before him. , , .
4575. What did Captain M'Lerie say? He said I had better see Mr. Cowper and explain.
I went to Mr, Cowper, and he said, “ Well, what do you want now ? I said, “ I have m,
« grievance of being dismissed on account of a letter, and I have a very large family, and
“ have been a very long time in the service—nineteen years.” I explained all this, and he
said “ Well, I can do nothing for you ; for, besides this, the Sheriff says you deceived him.
I said, “If you believe Banks’evidence, given in gaol”—Banks is a man who came from
Cockatoo to give evidence relative to Polack’s clothing—" If you believe Banks evidence
you must, of coarse, believe I have deceived him.” Because I gave evidence some three or
four months ago, when there was a talk of Polack’s wearing his own clothing, that I never
saw him, from the time of his leaving the debtors’ prison, wear any clothing but the prison
clothing, except an outside coat. It appears that Banks gave evidence that he wore his own
clothin°, so that if Mr. Cowper believed that evidence before mine, he might suppose that
I had deceived the Sheriff. As he had such confidence in me, had known me so long, and
as I had been recommended by Captain M’Lerie, Mr. Gilbert Elliott, and many more others,
if I deceived him it would be very strange. So, in the latter end, by explaining these
circumstances, Mr. Cowper said he would look into it, or give me a thought—he would
consider me. I was there twice previous to that, and could not see him. I managed to see
him this time, that was all. _ __ n .
4576. By Mr. Morris: Have you had no communication from Mr. Cowper, or from Captain
M'Lerie since ? No.
4577. You knew Mrs. Polack’s handwriting, I well ? Ido not know._ Inis man
on the gate knew her handwriting well, for she was sending letters two or three times a week.
I did not see the insides of the letters, I only saw the directions on the outside.
4578. Did Mrs, Polack send her letters addressed to her husband, or to Mr. Beverley, or to
Mr. Harrison ? She used to send direct to Mr. Beverley or Mr. Harrison; at times witnout
Mr. Polack’s name on the letter, and Mr. Harrison has sent the letter by me to Polack.
4579. Mr. Harrison would send these letters by you to Mr. Polack without sending them
first to Mr. Beverley ? He would if Mr. Beverley were out at the time, but if he were in
he would send them to him, .
4580. By tie Chairman: During the time you were turnkey was any complaint made against
you ? Yes, there was one.
4581. What was that for ? It was on account of a piece of sheet-iron.
4582. What was the circumstance? I wanted a piece of sheet-iron for the back of a fire-
place, and I spoke to the man who was in charge of the blacksmiths’ shop, and said, “could
you let me have a piece of sheet-iron for the back of a fire-place ?” and he said, “ Yes, there
are plenty of waste pieces, you can have any that will suit you.
4583. Was it old sheet-iron ? It was waste iron.
4584. Had it been used ? No j the part required for use had been cut off, and this was a
piece that remained. I carried this out when I was going to my dinner at twe ve oc oc ,
and when I came back the man at the gate said they had reported against me to the fcfienn.
The Sheriff came up in an hour or two, and I then explained to him that I had had tne
piece of iron given me by Mr. M'Coy. He said he did not see that I had any felonious *
* Note (Addition by witness on revision) -And the one letter sent addressed to my wife I report©
to the chief turnkey, as was my duty.


to me. n ° bus * ness to tabe away ; and that the other had no business to give it
4585. Were you punished? No.
4587' complaint that has been made against you ? Yes.
4588’ ?oi 6r fi ee .? T mpl£dnt 0f dr unkenness at any time ? No
4ASq’ A as if you were indignant at the suspicion ? Yes
ISn’ r / s ° berman ? Yes, exceedingly so. P '
of drink m S “ the a PP earaa “
that gaol with my family. d 1 haVe llVed for mne y ears within the walls of
w hat family have ? ou ? Six children.
mrried u? the C ° l0n ? ? Yes > in Paramatta,
from other '* No!™ 7 ° U aWare at Polack was treated differently
Sde^T" 0 * "“7 th 7. he r ? ce ‘ Ted comforts, and different kinds of food from the
I Suppose h!wL awlhreel'el 8 ***? 1 ° f ' Wb en became from the debtors'priln
ieTTndremot.T fa ? A” 17 charge ’ durin S tllis timo his Nothing was got
conie IsL hTm ° " ™ g ’ and tten ™"W Of
4505. You had no charge of the wing in which Polack was placed ? Not chieflr I had
459fi I v PP ? S i’, f ? r th r weeks after bo loft the debtors’ prison. 7
yonr haUn 6 ” ‘of iT? 'xl d “ 7 fr »“ tha »“'or prisoners without
a “ this letter to me ' dated tbe 9th
4599 £ ittlT ( ha f ” dwriti "g ? If is B »‘ “7 handwriting, it is writing I got done.
45J9. lhat letter states your complaint at some length :do you wish to have it annendprl tn
your evidence? [f you please. ( Vide Appendix JL) appended to
4. 0* # Paring the time you were turnkey, how did you obtain the keys to unlock the
.T rnmg f ? . times S ot them f rom Mr. Harrison; at other times when
keyl d not ° n 1 W ° U dg ° tohlS d °° r ' and he WOuld come down and hand me the
t\° h ™ l° U eYer take them off a pe S behind tHe door ? I did ; I took them off a peg
behind the door some few mornings that he was up, and had not the opportunity of handing
them to me; he told me to take them. J h
W ? W N S I n r ' garrison's house euer in this state that you could open the door and take the
keys i No, he always had the door fastened.
4603. Did he always unfasten the door himself? Yes.
4604. You never found the house in that state that any one could have gone in and taken the
keys of the wings off the peg behind the door ? Never.
APPENDIX.
A.
23, Denham-street, Surry Hills,
gj r Sydney, 9 March, 1861.
, , ... T T f e f eel in present predicament (being the father of a large and helpless
laimly) will, 1 hope, he a sufficient excuse for thus intruding myself on your notice. 1
I am now nineteen years in Government service, and have never been one single day off duty for
a fault, or under the displeasure of my superiors. On the contrary (as you may see by the accompanying
testimonials;, wherever I have been stationed I won the respect and esteem of those whose duty it was
to be intimately acquainted with my character and conduct. "
About six years ago I was appointed principal gaoler at Moreton Bay vice Sergeant-Major Feenv
dismissed—but who (through the intervention of the Governor General, then passing through Moreton
Bay) was reinstated. I was afterwards appointed principal turnkey in Darlinghurst, in room of Mr Har-
rison, who was appointed to Goulbum. In this I was also disappointed, and had to return to my former
position. J
I have frequently applied to the Sheriff for promotion, but the invariable reply was that, under
Responsible Government, the appointments lay entirely with the Prime Minister. Now, under ail these
disappointments, and this want of acknowledgement for past services performed with uprightness,
sobriety, and steadiness, I was still content as long as I could rear my family in respect; but, at the
eleventh hour, to be dismissed from a service in which I have spent the best years of my life is heart-
rending—is maddening.
Leaving myself entirely in your hands, and trusting to your generous consideration and advocacy,
and also hoping you will pardon the great liberty I have taken, —
I have, &c.,
Henry Parkes, Esq., M.P.
CHRISTOPHER RISPEN.
TUESDAY ;


TUESDAY, 16 APRIL, 1861.
present
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. WILSON.
Mr. COWPER,
Mr. MATE,
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
The Honorable Charles Cowper, Esq., M.P., examined in his place in the Committee:—
4605. Bu the Chairman : You are Colonial Secretary ? Yes. . „ ,
4606. And, with the exception of a short interval when you were out of office, you have
4607 s ' How man/ycarl? Vour years next September, with an interval of about five months.
4008'. Yon have been a Member of the Legislature for some seventeen or eighteen years?
Yes since the first introduction of representative institutions, with some short intervals.
4609. Previous to your taking office in the government of the country, you had paid con-
siderable attention to the subject of prison discipline ? I had.
4610 You have been Chairman, I think, of two Committees at different times to inquire
into the subject? Yes j besides investigating the state of the Darlmghurst Gaol and
Cockatoo Island with other Committees.
4611 Soon after your assumption of office, you issued certain regulations affecting the
treatment of prisoners at Cockatoo Island principally or exclusively—will you be good
enough to state to the Committee what those regulations were, under what circumstances
and from what considerations they were issued ? For some tune previous to my being called
to office, very general complaints were made as to the ill effect of the operation of the
regulations then in force for the remission of the sentences of the Judges 1 apers printed
bv order of the Legislature will shew that the Judges had thought it necessary to remonstrate
upon the subject to the Government, and had drawn attention to the unsatisfactory operation
of what were called the ticket-of-leave regulations. There were also other modes in which
public opinion was expressed as unfavourable to these regulations. Their working may be
forcibly put in this way:-An individual practically guilty of murder, but from some
technicality found guilty of manslaughter, or having judgment of death recorded against
him or if reprieved from the gallows, would be sentenced to Cockatoo for fifteen years.
But'by these regulations he would get a ticket-of-leave in four years; that again could be
reduced, by marks and other modes, to about three years and three months. It was felt
that this system of remission-of, in fact, sending back into the community these men who
had been convicted of such serious crimes, was having a most mischievous operation Ihe
subject was brought by me under the consideration of the Chief Justice, and of Captain M'Lene,
then Inspector General of Police. I also consulted Captain Mayne, who had been Inspector
General of Police, and whose opinion upon such matters was I thought entitled to weight.
The subject was also frequently matter of conference between His Excellency Sir A illiam
Denison, who himself was an authority upon the subject of prison discipline. The result
was that we arrived at the conclusion that it was desirable at once to put an end uo the
existing system. There did not appear to be in this course any injustice to any criminals,
because the notice expressly guarded any promises that might have been supposed to have
been conveyed by existing regulations to those convicts whose sentence had been subject to
remission previous to this date. The notice runs thus :
“ Colonial Secretary's Office,
“ Sydney, June, 1858.
“ Remission of Sentences.
“ His Excellency the Governor General, with the advice of the Executive Council, has been
« pleased to direct that the Regulations now in force for granting Tickets-of-Leave, and for
“ shortening the periods of servitude of Prisoners under sentences of Courts of Justice, by a
et system of Task Work, shall be cancelled from this date.
“ 2. Those Regulations will, however, be acted upon in the cases of all Prisoners
“ now undergoing sentences passed while they were in force.
“ 3. Visiting Magistrates, and Superintendents of Gaols, or other Penal Establish-
“ ments, will not in future forward to the Government Petitions or applications from
“ Prisoners in their charge, unless some fact is brought forward which was not produced at
“ t heir trials, or some special circumstances unconnected with their conduct in Gaol.”
It will be seen that the hopes of remission of sentence of these convicts sentenced previous to
that date were not in any way affected by these regulations. An intimation was also given,
before their publication, to their Honors the Judges, and to all others invested with the
power of passing sentences, in order that they might, if they thought it right, be affected by
the new system to come into operation from that date. The last clause of the regulations
had reference to what had become a very serious grievance. Persons either in the gaols, or in
the neighbourhood of gaols, were in the habit of writing petitions by the half dozen at
least, sometimes by the half score, and these, although refused, were constantly coming into
the Government, and were generally referred to the Judges. This not only kept up a bad
system among the prisoners, but caused great labour to the Judges, as well as a considerable
amount of additional labour among the public offices. A rule, therefore, was laid down,
that unless there were some new features in the history of the case these petitions should
not be forwarded. That rule has not been very rigidly adhered to, I believe, but it has had
so far a beneficial influence as in some degree it keeps down the immense number ot
petitions previously sent in. I might state, too, that while it has been objected to the new
regulations


The Hon.
0. Cowper,
Esq., M.P.
16 April, 1861.
regulations that no hope is held out to the convict, the exercise of the prerogative could
always step in, and it has done so whenever, either from the recommendation of the Judge,
or other consideration, the Governor thought a case was made out for such interference. Perhaps
I may also say that the regulations were not passed with the determination of their being
final, but more with the view of enabling the Executive to consider and determine whether
some modified system of remission might not afterwards be introduced. The question
was a very difficult one to decide, and there did not seem to be any serious hardship in
leaving those convicts who were sentenced by the Courts to such remissions of their sentences
■only as the Governor in the exercise of the Royal prerogative might, from time to time,
•determine. And when we consider that the very large proportion of these men are
sentenced for not longer than three or five years, and a comparatively small number only
for longer periods, and those only for the most serious crimes—committed too by hardened
offenders—it can hardly be objected that there was any great severity in introducing the
system even though no more lenient system were introduced.
4612. These regulations have been in force now nearly three years? Yes.
4613. Have you taken much trouble to ascertain the practical working of these regulations
by inquiry or otherwise—what I desire to get from you is, whether your opinion, at the time
of issuing these regulations, has been in any way modified by your experience since, or
whether you consider that these regulations have been completely successful ? I think the
principle laid down in these regulations is a correct one, and I have no ground for thinking
that the time for issuing them was inopportune. They, no doubt, as might have be expected,
have created a good deal of dissatisfaction, and one great evil was that the convicts under
the old system had to be kept in the same establishment with the convicts under the new ; but I
am not quite satisfied that the officers intrusted with the management of these convicts have
acted as faithfully as they ought to have done, in carrying out the views of the Government.
There seems to have been rather a leaning on the part of some of the chief officers to the
objections of the prisoners, and I think the prisoners have understood there was that leaning,
and this has perhaps increased the feeling of opposition which has given the Government,
more especially of late, a very considerable amount of trouble.
4614. I believe the mutiny, if it may be so called, on Cockatoo Island at the beginning of
this year, was avowedly in consequence of these regulations ? It was.
4615. Were there other reasons stated for the Insubordination of the prisoners in general ?
lam not aware of any, at least none were stated with any force. There have been occasional
suggestions that the officers themselves were capricious, and that partiality existed; but I
have never heard these complaints urged on the part of many.
4616. You say that the Judges remonstrated against the old state of things prior to the
issue of these regulations—can you state at about what time, and in what form, these remon-
strances were put forth ? You will find a letter from Sir Alfred Stephen, dated 24th May,
1855, addressed to the Board of Inquiry, in the Votes and Proceedings for 1856-7, vol. 1,
p. 1050.
4617. Can you find the passage in his letter which refers to this subject? lie says, “ One
“ of the objects in sentencing desperate or abandoned criminals for long terms is the ncces-
“ sity of keeping them for the stated period from repeating crimes. Another object is, the
“ inflicting of wholesome warning and dread on those who might otherwise (if tempted to
“ suppose that criminals of that character escaped with a slight or short punishment) follow
“ their example. Both these objects are defeated, exactly in proportion as you remit
“ part of the term awarded, and enable the criminals to return to their old residences among
“ their companions, and in the immediate neighbourhood of the persons whom they have
“ robbed or otherwise injured. Another mischief is, that the sentence of the Court itself is
“ brought into contempt, and regarded as an unmeaning threat. As things now stand it
does not express the truth to the criminal; he may nominally be sentenced to ten years,
“ but he knows that, unless he very much misconducts himself, he will be set free in five or six.”
4618. You also say that the Judges were notified of this change in the general discipline of
prisoners ? Yes.
4619. Are you aware whether the Judges took that into consideration sufficiently in awarding
sentences ? I have understood they did, although Captain Mann, the Superintendent
of the island, has written a communication to the Government, in which he considers, from
a calculation of the sentences passed before and since their publication, that that is not
manifest. 1 am not, however, prepared to admit the force of Mr. Mann’s reasoning, or the
conclusion at which he has arrived by his figures.
4620. Have you any objection to give the Committee this communication of Captain Mann?
No. I will furnish a copy to the Committee. {Vide Appendix A.)
4621. If the facts should shew that there were similar sentences for similar crimes after-
wards as before, that would go a long way towards establishing the fact that no difference
was made, would it not ? A great deal would depend upon the figures which may shew
different results from taking a series of years. lam not prepared to say that Captain Mann
does shew accurately the result. As far as 1 can see, there is little to complain of. The
return is only a comparison during a short period previous to the new regulations coming
into force. With regard to the number of sentences exceeding five or six years the number
is very small indeed. Ido not see much force in the objection that has been urged that the
insisting that sentences shall be carried out leaves no hope to the prisoner; because if the
judo-e considers that according to law a crime requires the punishment of three, four, or five
years, upon the principle laid down by the Chief Justice, that it is desirable such a criminal
should be kept away from the people he has been in the habit of associating with, and with
whom he has been in the practice of committing crimes—that for a serious crime the term is
not so long as to justify the objection that “ the door of hope is closed.”
4622.


4622. Do you not think the reason of the ill working of the mark system which existed at
Cockatoo Island, especially before the issue of your regulations might be attributed to the
inefficiency of the persons in charge of that penal establishment, and the consequent liability
to abuse of the system from persons being able by various sinister influences to awaken
interest on their behalf, apart altogether from the merits of their case-the inefficiency of
their gaolers assisting that abuse ? Ido not understand that the system of marks of itselt has
been so much objected to, but there was a regulation by which very long sentences sentences
of ten or fifteen years—could be practically put an end to by tickets-of-loave in four years
or less, and that that time could again be reduced by tne system of marks, which made the
objection to the system the more forcible; but the system of marks itself was not so much
With regard to the principle involved in your regulations, I think, so far as I am
acquainted with the subject, that the general opinion of persons in England is, that the measure
of the sentence is more properly labour than time-that opinion is the opinion of thoughtful
men, who have thought a great deal on this subject? Yes; but if you make it merely a
question of labour, a very clever convict of bad character, with physical capacity, may be
enabled to claim a remission sooner than a better man who does not possess las physical
strength—unless you attach the condition of good conduct.
4624. I was going on to say, taking labour as the main measure of the sentence, would it
not be necessary to combine with it some system of arriving at good conduct on the part; ot
the prisoner. The writers to whom I have referred argue thus : twomen might meet at the
same Assize, be indicted for the same offence in point of law ; they might be at the same pom
0 f acre—say forty; one of them might, up to that period, have never offended against the law,
but have been driven by a combination of circumstances to this offence ; while the other
mierht have been a violator of the law all his life—yet, they would stand on a level before
th e Judge who tried them on this occasion, for the same crime, with the same evidence against
them. And the persons who take this view go on to argue—if one had, up to that period,
been a good citizen, and shewed a desire to retrace his steps,, and shewed a desire of obedience
to those who were placed over him, and wished to redeem himself as early as possible, while
the other continued to manifest an ill frame of mind, it is evidently unjust to treat the two
alike if any means could be devised for opening the door for the reformation of the one, while
it was closed, for the protection of society, against the other; and they have arrived at the
conclusion that the most just and the safest mode is to measure the sentence mainly by
labour, taking conduct in connection with labour. I think this is the opinion of Mr. Hill,
of Lord Brougham, and a good many persons in England who have paid great attention to
this subject ? No doubt the whole question of secondary punishment in this Colony is in a
very unsatisfactory state, and it is, perhaps, one of the most important questions to which
any public man could devote his time and attention, but it is surrrounded by great difficulties.
Practically, I do not think so much injustice arises, as appears from the case you have put
of the position of two culprits; because, as a matter of fact, I know that in sentencing par-
ticular persons for the same offence the Judges endeavour to ascertain, and they generally
do learn with some accuracy, the previous history and character of the men who come before
them, so that while they would give one, two, or three years punishment only to a man of
previous good character, to the other person who had been convicted befoie, and who had
pursued a long course of crime, they would give the longest sentence the would allow,
and the law does generally allow a discretion to a Judge. There is another point to betaken
into consideration, that these unhappy men generally have friends, and they are unquestion-
ably, as I have reason to know, very active in their behalf. If there is any mitigating cir-
cumstance, the case is in a short period brought under the consideration of the Executive, and
the application goes to the Judge almost invariably. G-ood conduct is never lost sight of,
when these petitions are considered by the Executive, even though there is no particular
date fixed under the present system, when the prisoner can claim remission. The great
difficulty in the way of treating prisoners is no doubt the want of proper buildings, and the
peculiar circumstances of the Colony. For instance, if a Judge sentences a man to imprison-
ment, he is sent to the gaol; if to hard labour on the public works of the Colony, he is sent
to Cockatoo Island; and the Government of this Colony have always kept in view, in
addition to the punishment of the criminal, the completion of that great public work the
Fitz Roy Dock. So that men, instead of being sent to hard labour on the roads or other
public works, are sent to that island, which was never intended to be permanently used as a
prison, but has buildings of only a temporary character, and it was hardly desirable to go to
a large expense for prison buildings in a locality which it is intended to appropriate at no
distant period exclusively to another object. Therefore, while it is absolutely necessary, in
treating criminals, to have the means of classification, those who go to Cockatoo Island can
never be treated effectively, with a view to their reformation or their punishment.
4625. With regard to the discretion of the Judges, does it not strike you that it is manifestly
wrong, if it could be avoided, that the Judges should exercise this discretion; the crime being the
same in the eye of the law, as well as upon moral principle. Take the case of burglary, for
instance: two men break into a dwelling-house in the dead of night and rob the inmates, the evi-
dence is clear and conclusive. Is it right that the Judges should exercise a discretion in such a
case as that, even though it may be shewn that one man was a much worse character prior
to his conviction than the other ? Does it not seem more reasonable that the question of
character should be determined by the behaviour after, rather than by that before the trial,
that the proportion of punishment ought not to be measured at the time of the sentence,
when both prisoners are fresh from crime—when there has been no intermediate period to
test their character —when there is nothing to shew that although one may have borne a
good character up to that period, he may not for the future be better than the other —that
fact


fact can only be proved by subsequent conduct? I am hardly prepared to admit the
principle. As a close observer of the proceedings of Courts in different parts of the world,
with a view to make myself practically acquainted with their operation, I have remarked!
both in the smaller and larger Courts, that the previous history of the individual is taken
into consideration. You will find a Judge sentencing two criminals—as in the case
you have supposed, where one has been convicted for the first'time, having, perhaps, been
seduced into it by his more experienced and depraved companion—the one for a longer and
u *° r a s lorter tern b and ifc has never struck me that the principle is incorrect.
Have you never been struck, on referring to the annals of crime in this country, with
the amazing inequality in the sentences passed? I have, and that has been especially
manifest since the establishment of District Courts—l have observed that, since that period,
the difference in the sentences has been startling.
4027. I may say, that while making some inquiries, particularly at the gaol at Darlinghurst,
i think every member of the Committee was startled by what appeared to them to be the
shocking inequality in the sentences, and I think it was principally with regard to the
sentences of the District Courts Judges, as you have observed ? Yes ;at the same time, it is
difficult to determine such cases. To enable you to do so, you should know all the circum-
stances at the time in the mind of the Judge, you must almost be in a position to try
the case over again before you can do it.
4628. Going back to my former question : do you think it would be possible to determine
safely the history of a prisoner—whether he deserved a mitigation of sentence, or whether
he did not, by good conduct—unless we had a very different system of classification in the
gaol so as to enable every man to follow the bent of his own disposition ? Without
means of classification we can have no efficient prison discipline, or system of secondary
punishment. " J
4Gff9. Must not this entire absence of the means of classification, which I believe characterizes
all our gaols, greatly interfere with the prisoners behaving even as well as they otherwise
would do ? No doubt it is a great drawback to their pursuing what in their calmer and
more sober moments they would desire to do if they were cut off from their depraved companions.
4630. Supposing we had a large model prison, erected at great cost, even say £50,000, or
£70,000, with workshops and means of thorough classification, and an industrial system
were established, by which these persons, according to their physical strength and previous
habits and training, would be appointed to different kinds of labour—do not you think such
an establishment might be made, to a very great extent, self-supporting as well as reformatory
in its effects? I have no doubt it might; and I have thought of such a plan as the
following : —Supposing the present site of Darlinghurst Gaol were considered unobjectionable,
there is vacant ground where a prison building such as you speak of could be erected. It
was for some time under my consideration whether we might not remove all the females
from Darlinghurst to Parramatta, and put all the males at present at Parramatta into the
Darlinghurst Gaol, near which there is a large quarry. In this quarry the men might be
employed, as well as in other works necessary for the completion of the buildings on the
plan you have suggested. I believe in that way the labour of the prisoners might be turned
to as much account as if Government received money for what they do; and I have also
been of opinion tb it the best mode of employing the convicts would be in the completion
of this building. When you see the fine buildings erected within the walls of Darlinghurst
Gaol by convicts, it is a proof against the assertion that we do not get value from the
labour of these men. It is true that Government do not get money, but these
buildings have been erected in a very creditable manner, without any great cost, and
I think the men have been better employed than the convicts at Parramatta, who have been
engaged in making barrows and hats for sale. By the latter means a certain sum of money
has been produced which has been quoted in favour of this mode of employment; but I
believe if these men where employed in stone-cutting, building, in completing the gaols, you
would make them valuable mechanics, and that it would be a better mode of carrying into
effect their sentences than plaiting hats and making hand-barrows and articles for sale.
What we do want now is one gaol that could be used as a model gaol.
4681. You are aware, I presume, that there are loud complaints against this system of
making articles in the gaol to come into direct competition with the tradesmen of Parra-
matta ? Yes.
4632. These complaints you will think with me are just ? I have often thought, while so
much has been said in favour of the system at Parramatta, that the one adopted at Darling-
hurst is better, that the labour is more suitable to the sentences of convicts, although the
money earned did not tell as in the case of Parramatta.
4633. With regard to Cockatoo Island, I should think that a most eligible site for a gaol,
considering its isolation, and the additional means of security that isolation supplies, and also
the healthiness of the site, and that it might be carried on beneficially in connection with
the docking establishment for long future years ? I have always looked upon that as the
proper site for a naval arsenal, and should be sorry to see that appropriation interfered with;
and lam of opinion that a better site might be found for a model prison. lam not pre-
pared to say, except that the town has extended towards it, that you could have a better site
than Darlinghurst; a large sum of money has been laid out upon it, which would have been
uselessly expended if its present purpose were abandoned. It is certainly better than the
site of the Parramatta gaol, which is low, and I should think unhealthy.
4634. Has your attention been called to the fact, that very few persons in Sydney interest
themselves in the condition of the gaol and prisoners; that very few private ladies and gen-
tlemen visit them ? Yery few indeed. I ascribe it to the fact that almost every body is
occupied with some business which engrosses his time.
4635


4685 More especially as respects female prisoners, they do not appear to be visited by be V -
lent ladies? No ; I think the posi*‘ lon 0 f those females is very lamentable.
4636 By Mr. Wilson : You arc aware that other benevolent institutions are visited by
Ss? lam afraid not ex Tent. I believe the Benevolent Asylum and Infirma y
ave very HU,o visited. W tb ig.rt to fatSJ
I was passing by but it is only just re-oocupied. The gaol
itself is a fine building though some of in those gaols? I believe
4639. You are aware that there is no attempt at cl f ssl^^' on d i f ■ * Althoug h the
none whatever; I doubt whether the forma .on <**t prisoner f „ ay
gaol at Bernina is a large building, iei classification and then I believe it is the
from others. There are no yau sor me ences to send them down to Parramatta or
general system, where the attempting any system of reform except
YenteJeed m™; fnd when yon eome I tahe out the long sentenced men from the
others in this Colony, the number is ?ot very great. educating prisoners,
4640. Bn Mr. Wilson: Have you paid any atteDt the means of carrying on
nrinoinallv the juvenile portion of them, in gaols ! les,_ tnere j.
a school, but then again the number of be instructed and
4641. Do, you not think even aduU and every man
educated in gaols that a genera j* , that°would be very desirable indeed ;
who goes to gaol be made to go to school? I t that wouio D y of
but 1 would rather attract than force I may perhaps
conduct, that might entitle them o cons. ‘ , p w re-convictions in this
Committee. (The Colonial a toge central gaol, is it
4642. By the Chairman : Y lth .^S" d f the men nn dergoing sentence from all parts
your idea to have a gaol to contain t r t pjnk that would be desirable,
if the Colonv—all sentenced for a certain period ? Yes , 1 turns ™iwuu
sentences, to any industrial discipline? d some process of labour ?
4644. For that reason it seems desirable that all should unaergo » F ndi called
It has been suggested to me, that attached to Darhnghurst. Gac or six
Itmhtdtht hat' thertbyatoision of
necessary to
rrfrl;
hand where they are subject to more inspection and supervision. . T i mav
4646 By Mr. Wilson : When do the Government expect the dock at C^ kat °° k tiU J 0
be finished ? I should suppose the convicts may be removed in a couple of years , sti
long as Government think it desirable to employ them, there is a good Meal of work to b
done. I think, however, it is very desirable to remove them so soon as the dock is
completed as to be generally occupied by ships.
APPENDIX.
A.
The Eii qineer-in-Chief and Superintendent of Cockatoo Island to the Principal Under -
J Secrelanj , reporting on that Establishment.
Cockatoo Island, 10 September, 1860.
Sir ’ It is now twelve months since I assumed the entire control of this establishment, and the
• •n+ 4i,-nc afforded me of the detail of the penal department, coupled with the many years expenenc
““SS tZ' mv dutLs as Engineet-in-Chief of the important public works of this island, com-
prising the construction of a Dry Hock and the erection of extensive workshops and machinery by


fuggidoSf ° n WK "' i I>,aces me a position t 0 la - v «"*» «« Government the following Report ,„d
mf„„"if’ a ', ,y fTT 1 . *"{"* th ? Government of the late Si,
torily a probation at other penal settlements ■ . Pi* '’ 01 such as might have completed satisfac-
estahlishment of the ColonySfor™ me Tc s i ''“ ' ‘“T 0 «• penal
every grade of offences, have been sent here to sea ve sentences " 7 Character ’ and for
order of thingsfbut rach is fatfTOnrSn ckle^liese^ o9 !?” 1041 * I *^ ll * ""if Sn ® cient to meet tllis new
;S emain t 0 ; hiS da^Vith - material
fourth 4 si(te h Lln r “ctosed’ inutile mcss°room°and thre esides of a quadrangle, the
two wards, each 52 xl9 x “l 4 feet fitted witl, 0 n ’- 0n palisading; on the northern front there are
partitions, together capable of containing one hundred wi g f se P arated merely by open batten
tion of this face; on the east front there are t, V ni 7 K l ou *' h nsr,n( - - rrf : the cook-house forms a por-
capable of holding one hundredTnd f * ?M** ith b ™ ks fitted,
eight prisoners, and a hospital for fourteen nitW- sooth fiont there is a similar ward for forty-
forty-two prisoners. c ' ’ ma kmg in all, room for three hundred and
o<m« n eflKa f 6 ? 6 are ““b constructed that the
mess-room and one yard forall *" **""• « by oalli ”S »« There is one
necessarily mixed in the one common lm T 18 l a ? d °- the ,* l “ e of lus living it, he is
contrary, is subject to the full blast of demoralGnfn ' rn< ? mcnt to himself for reflection, hut, on the
pass from under Control, at the !eSrarion * TI f COUrS ? be exp ccted to
first apprehended. It is distressing- to rmiDni-iloto +i ’‘i m ? 1 - e debased and depraved man than when
second and repeated'convSions g COntemplate the ® vil ««mg out of this fact, a prolific source of
=;a:sa ; pMSSMffitPsqs.-ir-—s
5“ the mnj f fJ 0 <lei i was pr °? er] y looked after and kept up to the Government reflations
sentence g J ’ remamGd under complete control and surveillance during the whole period of his
10. By the Regulation of the Ist June, 1858, prisoners are required absolutely to serve their
ent.re sentences, the system of probation and ticket-of-leave being thereby rescinded 61
„ ’ t- he abolition of this indulgence has had a most marked effect on the general conduct of the
Kri T S ft argUe , amon S st themselves that it places those men who are disposed tL sa e
W? 1 el • l th t °- e Wh ° are n 0t ’ and that holds out no inducement to industry and good conduct Se
hitherto industrious man now only exerts himself to an extent that will alid punishment and the
™llt n r ieS i° f ct.kms appear bent upon devising means for effecting escape ; the result is an inordinate
thln VI and that work requiring care and skill cannot as heretofore be intrusted to
them it having become altogether impossible to perform some description of labour, such as drvino-
operations for instance, and the like, which cannot be coerced. g
hnvo Ju JVoe!! I,npre f sl ? n o f many, and the same has been stated in the public prints, that the Judges c
ave of late passed more lenient sentences in consideration of the existing regulations. An analysis of
the records of this department does not confirm this statement, the average duration of punishment fo
° M 5 ye ” S - 3 - 26 - -.ca s.
_ n 1d ; f have hitherto always found a proportion of the prisoners disposed to conduct themselves
ell, and desirous of performing their allotted task, and many others who might be induced to do so if
they could be separated from the contaminating influence of the more depraved. Amongst the former
class are generally to be found many anxious to be taught some trade as a means of obtaining a
livelihood on their discharge. I need hardly say that it is my invariable practice in this respect to afford
them every encouragement and assistance, and I have the satisfaction of knowing that these endeavours
tw°d n 0 , M 6!l f without beneficial results. I note this desire to learn as an important element, and one
that should be taken full advantage of in any penal regulations.
i ,i/i* b4 .' Vfu- 11 b f m aC l lly P® r ® eived that under these circumstances the inadequacy of the prison
buildings of tins establishment becomes pressingly more apparent. *
17 n /f’ 1 iorI 6rt my previous communications bearing on this subject, particularly to that of the 14
wi-j.i° b rT’ 18 ° 9, as * h ® opinions therein recorded were penned in perfect ignorance of those of Cantain 17
fv!i‘ tty i '. ov , eril > or °f Pembroke and Director of Public Works, expressed as follows, pages 5 and 6 13
Polonel Jebb s Report, o 4 and 55: °
„. “ Hitherto the moral influence of the system in force, by which reward for good conduct and
improvement has been combined with due punishment for the reverse, has enabled the prison authorities
„ t 0 employ the convicts on the public works with confidence and good effect; but if the fear of pnnish-
„ ment alone is to be the motive to obedience and exertion in the mind of the convicts so employed an
„ entirely new system of guarding and coercing the prisoners will become necessary, and it is much to
» !■? ~ . ed tliat any such s y stem , though necessarily expensive in its machinery, would be unnro-
ntable in all its results. 1
« a “; rh6 amount of labour performed by large bodies of convicts associated on public works must
t( . P. ei } d oa tke wfllingness with which they engage in it. It may not be very difficult to compel an
„ maividual prisoner at crank labour, or a certain number of prisoners on a treadwheel, to perform a fixed
„ amount of daily work without the motive of any reward ; but it would be next to impossible to carry
„ or ! me varied labour of many hundreds of associated criminals on public works on such a principle
„ . Wltll an y effective result, and it would be hopeless to expect to produce, by such means, habits of
„ mdustry, or individual moral improvement—each prisoner would rise from his hammock in the morning:
„ m an irritated state of mind, which would be kept alive throughout the day by the driving and ur<rin”
ti that would be inevitable under such circumstances, and at the end of four or five years (or more
„* according to his sentence) he would be discharged, in all probability, with a hatred of work and
regulmty. which he would regard as the characteristic of a prisoner, instead of being led (as under
~ me present system) to regard them as the means of obtaining an earlier liberation 0 and a future
respectable livelihood.”
157—Y is.
The Hon.
C. Cowper,
Esq., M.P.
16 April, 1861.
See Appendix A.
Sec Appendix B.
14 Sept., 1859.
17 October, 1859.
13 Dec,, 1859.


- - r
Number of Punishments.
Eemarks.
Nature of Offence.
1
[f rom 1st June, 1857,
to 31st May, 1858.
From 1st June, 1859,
to 31st May, I860.
Insubordinate and disorderly con-
Ill
24*
10
* In the column for
13
6
1859-60, only those
prisoners serving under
the new regulations are
taken into the accoun •
Attempts at escape
8
73
Total for tire 12 months
132
113
Average daily number of prisoners ..
308
143
1
16 The Tioket-ot-LeaTe and Task-Work wMiwintaS ‘ l, e^ i,!kß, ;
»■«»!?
to be allowed full liberty, withm certain subjecting the offender to be degraded to the
and indispensably so in particular for the fust class n P P ,
perfect separation and coercion. _ employed on works such as are m P™gress at ui
20. The second grade prison er niig I d e on the roads, bridges, and harbour imp
crank and other irksome em^rnen
steady conduct, and such employment might be .
useful trade. . . +Up+ this island is destined to become a dockyard anc 1 ’ t
23 Under the impression that this islanu recommending an expenditure on the present
it is so admirably adapted Ido not fed jus d effici for pr i SO ns, for which neither they no
buildings, sufficient to put them into a perfect st which prison labour could be profitably
the locality are adapted ; but as there ' s ™ C attention to my recommendation to provide a proper y
employed for many years to come, I again draw
fitted-up prison hulk. , &
i have, &c gother k M aNN.
The Hon.
0. Oowper,
Esq., M.P.
16 April, 1861.
GOTHER K. MANN.
pg_ A similar Report has been furnished to the Secretary tor Public Works.
AVVENDIX to Report, 10 th September, 1860.
A.
. , p „„i ■Rcfalvlisliment, Cockatoo Island, prior
C«— ««•
The ratio o{ increase of punishments since the Ist June, 1858, being as 1 is to
gother k. manr.
10 September, 1860.
B.


Number oe Prisoners Received.
Duration of Sentence.
From 1st June, 1857, to
31st May, 1858.
From 1st June, 1859, to
31st May, 1860.
Passed in Period 1857
and 1858.
Passed in Period 1859
and 1860.
”i*
5
29
6
30
3
16
1
6
1
1
3
1
1
"i*
5
25
5
32
1
11
2
4
"i
1
Years.
i’
"2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
13
14
15
Years.
”i*
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
15’
Life.*
Months.
3
6
**6*
B.
Comparative Return J* 1 ® Sentences of Prisoners received at the Penal Establishment, Cockatoo
Island, prior and subsequent to the Regulations of the Ist June, 1858.
* Taken as 20 years in his calculation.
Average duration of Punishment of each Prisoner, 1857-58=5-31 years; 1859-60=5-23 years •
the difference of period, -08 being no more than what may he attributable to ordinary fluctuation *
GOTHER K. MANN.
B.
Numerical Return of Prisoners on Cockatoo Island, under Sentence to the Roads or Public Works on
the 11th of October, 1860.
Colonial Prisoners.
Serving Sentences under Ist Convictions at this Establishment 213*
Serving Sentences under 2nd Convictions at this Establishment “39
Serving Sentences under 3rd Convictions at this Establishment .... . . . .
r . , „ . 249
Imperial Prisoners .
Serving Sentences under Ist Colonial Conviction 3
Serving Sentences under 2nd Colonial Conviction 8
ll
Total number of Prisoners on the island 260
Of those under Colonial Sentences, the following have been returned to the island with Tickets-
of-Leave cancelled :
Serving Sentences under Ist Conviction 16
Serving Sentences under 2nd Conviction 2
Serving Sentences under 3rd Conviction 1
l9
Imperial Prisoners serving Sentences under Ist Colonial Conviction 1
20
* Many of these men are known to have served sentences at other establishments, which of course the records of
this office do not shew.
GOTHEE K. MANN.
Cockatoo Island, 11 October, 1860.
Mr. John Matthews May called in and examined :
4647. By the Chairman : You fill some situation in connection with the Asylum for Destitute
Children ? lam at present Superintendent of that institution.
4648. What are your particular duties ? I have the immediate charge of the institution,
under the orders of the Directors.
4649. You have nothing to do with the education of the children ? Nothing whatever • I
merely exercise a general supervision.
4650. Do your duties as Superintendent extend to the complete care and management of
the children, with the exception of their education ? With the exception of their education ;
still I have a general supervision over the schoolroom ; the schoolmaster and teachers are
also under my orders.
4651. How long have you been in the Colony ? I have been in Sydney nearly six years.
4652. You arrived, I think, from Tasmania ? Yes.
4653. What situation did you fill there ? Superintendent of the convict establishments ;
that was my designation in Hobart Town.
4654. What were your duties in connection with that situation ? I resided at the Male
Penitentiary or Prisoners’ Barracks, which comprised also the House of Correction; and I
had the supervision of the female prisoners at the Cascades, about two miles from Hobart
Town; and also the Buckfields House of Correction for females.
4655.


4655 You liad the superintendence of those three institutions ? Yes.
4656. Were there any othor officers holding analogous positions to jours on other parts of
fesf you an the prisoners who were in confinement? I had charge of
within the citj? That is within the eitja The pe .
establishment at Tasman's Peninsula I had nothing to do with : that was under the Com-
mandant; nor had I with the gaol at Launceston or at Hobart lown.
4059. By the Chairman: How long did you hold that situation . Three years in I obart
4660. Was that the last situation you had previous to arriving hero ? Yes.
4661 What was the system of discipline observed under you when you were in tha
situation—state how the prisoners were accommodated, how employed, and then what
discipline they were subject to ? At this establishment a uniform system of classification
was adopted: the prisoners were employed upon the public works of the Colony, about
Hobart Town; and, as far as practicable, they were kept under separate treatment when not
4662 b °What do you moan by a uniform system of classification ? According to a P riso °® r s
sentence, when he came in, he was sent to a certain division of the prison and clothed in a
distinct dress. Each prisoner wore a dress which shewed (he class to which he belonged,
and you could distinguish by the dress whether he was under remand, or awaiting trial,
sentenced to solitary confinement, or to hard labour. , .
4663. Were the men worked together, and was there classification confined to then dre.s.
As far as practicable they were housed in separate apartments.
4664. Do you mean in separate cells ? In separate cells.
4665. Each man in a separate cell? Each man in a separate cell.
4666. By Mr. Cvwper: How many convicts had you in the establishment at the time.
Between seven and eight hundred. . , ,
4667. Had you 800 cells? No. They were not all in separate cells, beparate treatment
was only adopted as far as it could be carried out, but some were under association, but not
more than half.
4668. Had you 850 cells ? Yes, in Hobart Town.
4669. By the Chairman: You say some were under associated treatment, what do you mean
by that? We endeavoured as far as possible when the prisoners entered to bring them under
separate treatment when they were not at labour, and if their conduct was good they were
removed from separate treatment to association —that is, instead of taking their meals and
sleeping in separate apartments, they took their meals in the general day room, and slept in
wards with others. Each ward accommodated from 100 to 150 men. Each berth was sepa-
rated entirely from the others; it was battened off, and perfect silence was observed in the
wards, as if the men had occupied separate apartments.
4670. By Mr. Cowner : What sort of cells were these 350; describe them ? 1 here was a
front range, a cell at the front, and another at the back. They were not double cells, but
two tiers top and bottom, „ „ , „ „ ,
4671. Bij Mr. Morris : What was the size of these cells? Seven feet by four or five, and
about ten feet high, with arched ceilings. _ _
4672. By the Chairman : How were they situated in the building was the building more
than one story ? They were separate apartments ; there were two wings.
4673. Were all these cells on the ground floor ? No, they were in double ranges top and
bottom. .
4674. Bij Mr. Cowper: What was the building ; stone or brick ? Stone.
4675. Substantial ? Substantial; but much had been added to it. It had nevei been regu-
larly laid out as a prison, but from time to time it had been added to.
4676. By Mr. Morris : What was done with the cells under Trinity Church ? be seldom
made use of them ; they were recently broken into, and turned into washing apartments.
That was our reception room.
4677. Were not those cells extremely small ? Yes.
4678. Not more than three or four feet in height—some were not ? Some were not.
4679. By the Chairman : Since you have been in this Colony has your attention been turned
at all to the subject of prison discipline ? I may say I have always taken a deep interest ui
the subject. Before I had charge of the convict department at Hobart Town I was superin-
tendent of the convict establishment at Launceston.
4680. How long were you at Launceston ? About five years.
4681. Was your situation there similar to the one you held at Hohart Town ? Yes.
4682. Was the mode of treatment of the prisoners similar? Very similar; the separate
system of treatment was carried out as far as it could be.
4683. You say you have taken an interest in the subject—have you ever visited the gaols in
this Colony ? I yesterday visited Darlinghurst for the first time. Since I received the sum-
mons to attend this Committee I also applied for authority to visit Cockatoo, but had not
time to visit it.
4684. What is your opinion of Darlinghurst Graol ? What particularly struck me was seeing
the prisoners classed together; they were not individually classed, and the non-employment
of a great many I saw.
4685. You refer to their being together without classification—messed together? Yes,
messing together, and amalgamating in the different yards.
4686. You could not arrive at any definite conclusion as to the state of the gaol? I could
scarcely venture to do so from such a hurried visit.
4687.


4687. By Mr. Morris: Have you visited Tasman’s Peninsula? Yes, and am aware of the
perfect system of separate treatment there carried out.
4688. Is it found efficient as a reformatory establishment ? Yes.
4689. By the Chairman: What do you mean by “ separate treatment”? Prisoners on
admission would not be shut up in a yard, but removed to a separate apartment where he
would be locked in, and he would then be allowed an hour for exercise during the day, but
would take his meals and sleep in this apartment.
4690. The prisoner could not be employed in this apartment ? lam speaking of prisoners
sentenced to imprisonment, without employment ? It appeared in Darlinghurst that prisoners
sent to be imprisoned, without employment, were allowed to assemble in the yard.
4691. ]>y Mr. Morris: Have you ever had any opportunity of observing at Tasman’s
I eninsula the effect of imprisonment in the cell from which light is totally excluded ? That
is solitary confinement.
4692. I here is one cell from which the light is entirely excluded? That is used only for
very insubordinate and refractory prisoners. There is what are called “ dumb cells,” for the
; they are put in these dumb cells till their tempers are tamed down.
469 b. Have you been in this one peculiar cell ? Yes.
4694. W hat have been the effects produced by putting prisoners into that ? They have
been very glad to get removed from it. It was very seldom necessary to send a person to it;
they had a dread of it. F ’
4696. By Mr. Wilson : Were they kept there long? A few days, probably, if the prisoner
were a very violent man. At Darlinghurst Gaol, I may observe that the cells I visited were
only light cells, and not cells adapted for solitary confinement. If a man misbehaves there
he can only be shut up in one of these; there are no dark cells which are generally used
elsewhere as places for solitary confinement.
Mr. J. 51, May.
16 April, 1861.
FRIDAY, 19 APRIL, 1861.
ilmnit
Mr. HART,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WIMDEYER.
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., m the Chair.
The Honorable Edward Deas Thomson, Esq., C. 8., M.L.C., attending by permission of the
Legislative Council, examined :
4696. By the Chairman : You filled the office of Colonial Secretary for some years ? I did,
for a number of years. ]
4697. Do you recollect at this moment the number of years you filled that office ? Nearly
twenty, including a period of twenty-three months I was absent in England.
4698. Your attention would necessarily be a great deal directed to the subject of the
management of the criminal population of the Colony during that period ? Very constantly.
It was always a subject of great difficulty.
4699. Do you remember the circumstances and considerations which led to the establishment
of what is known, or what was known, as the mark system, on Cockatoo Island ? I do.
4700. I think the system was established in November, 1851, or about that time? Yes, I
have a tolerably distinct recollection of the circumstances under which that system was
introduced. I had occasion to make a visit to the neighbouring Colony of Tasmania for the
benefit of my health, and I took the opportunity of visiting several of the penal establish-
ments in that island. My attention was particularly directed by the then Governor of the
island, Sir William Denison, to a system that had been established there. It was formed
upon a scheme originally introduced, I believe, into Bermuda, and which had been found to
operate very beneficially there. I examined into the scheme, obtained the general regula-
tions, and on my return here the matter was submitted to the Governor, and by the Governor
to the Executive Council, and a code of regulations, founded upon the same principle, was
established and carried into effect at Cockatoo Island. I think myself that the principle of
those regulations was a sound one, if they had been perfectly carried out; but the great
difficulty we always experience in prison discipline is its due, and just, and complete admin-
istration. There was no question, during the whole period of my tenure of office as Colonial
Secretary, that I found more perplexing or difficult to place upon a satisfactory basis. To
establish a system of penal discipline which shall adapt itself to all the wide ramifications
into which the question extends in its effects upon the criminal population, as well as upon
society generally, is one of the most difficult problems that have engaged the attention of
statesmen, legislators, and philanthropists, in all countries, from a remote period to the
present time, and one which can scarcely be said to have been satisfactorily settled by any
of the numerous systems, so various in their principles, which have been introduced into
Great Britain, America, or any of the Continental States. One of the greatest difficulties
arises from the variety of human character to be dealt with. It may appear just to fix an
equal amount of punishment for each particular offence, but the effect may be very different
indeed upon different individuals. What may operate most severely on one class of prisoners
may not be felt as a punishment at all by others. The degradation consequent upon a con-
viction operates very differently upon an offender who for the first time has incurred the just
penalty
The Hon. E.
D. Thomson,
Esq., C. 8.,
M.L.C.
19 April, 1861.


The Hon. E.
X). Thomson,
Esq., C. 8.,
M.L.C.
19 April, 1861.
u f Q w from its effect unon the hardened criminal who has frequently been
penalty of the law, fro P out sentences, some consideration must be given to
convicted and punished -n n oX°to nlace criminals of different character upon an
U™. important. No .ore
degrading o/severe punishment can be inflicted upon a convict who has committed a first,
' and comparatively trivial, offence against society, than to associate him in undeigoing is
sentence with men of hardened character—whilst in many instances it may have the effect
f 7 r features of that syste.. I will explain
t vou if you will allow me, that my object is to get from you, in as few words as possible,
what the system was—we know generally, from the printed papers, what the features of the
system were ? The truth is, that the short period that has intervened since I was sum mo
to attend the Committee, and the important public business to which I have had to attend, have
nofleft me sufficient time to prepare myself so fully as I could have wished. I have had time
onlv to refer to certain documents connected with the subject, but not to read them over,
and in° a complicated matter of this kind, involving a great variety of details, I shou d
scarcely trust my own memory to give a correct account of it. But I can refer you t 0
nerts that win give you full information on the subject. They were all printed and laid
befoi-e the late Legislative Council, and will be found in a volume of the proceedings of that
w” the second 4ume of the Session of 1851 pp 443 to «1 I can state m
terms what was the object of the regulation. It has always been found in forcedl about
almost impossible to carry it out, unless some expectation was held out'to the pisone
himself, that he would benefit by it. You must operate upon his mind to induce him to
labour ; that being merely watched and supervised by an overseer has never been fou d
efficient for the purpose. The general principle of these regulations was, a t by means of
labour, and an overtask of labour, the prisoner was enabled to shorten the period of
sentence. The means adopted for that purpose was this: there was a Board appointed,
consisting of the Superintendent, of the Visiting Magistrate, and of the Medical Officer it
was their duty to classify the prisoners according to their physical strength, and according
to their skill in a particular species of labour; then a certain task was assigned to tbein
a fair day s labour-a note was taken of all the labour performed above that, and under
certain limits the excess beyond the regulated task was carried to their credit. At the e
of the month it was summed up, and according to their skill and industry t ey were a owe
credit for so many days in reduction of their sentence. The obvious operation ot that regu-
lation was beneficial, because, suppose a man had a period of eight years to serve before he
would be entitled to a ticket-of-leave, if he laboured most industriously during the whole ot
that period, so as to reduce his sentence perhaps by several months, he must have acquired
such a habit of labour that there would be a guarantee to society, when he should be thrown
loose upon it again, of two things : first, that he had learned to be industrious himself,
and would be able to acquire the means of subsistence without having recourse to habits ot
vice as he had done before; and secondly, that society would not again be exposed to a
repetition of the depredations committed by him. I believe that, on inquiry, it will be
found that the system of marks proved practically so efficient as a punishment, and so refor-
matory in its effects, that very few prisoners who passed their servitude under it were
reconvicted. The system would have been still more beneficial if it had been piopei y
administered and fairly carried out; but there were occasionally great abuses. Ihe licket-ot-
leave Board sometimes recommended a man for special services, and that upset the whole matter.
If it had been fairly, justly, and properly carried out from beginning to end, I am quite sure
the objections to it in the public mind, the objections made to it by the press, and by public
men, would not have arisen, and the system would not have been set aside. lam quite sure it is
necessary, in any system of prison discipline, that hope should be held out to the prisoner.
If you put him in a perfectly hopeless condition you make a wild beast of him. He recoils
against society and becomes perfectly reckless. Reformation under such circumstances is
impossible. We have seen the fruits of that in the recourse to the system now in operation,
and which has superseded the mode of discipline which I have now very briefly described.
I would by no means wish it to be understood by the Committee that I given a full
and perfect account of the whole of that system, and therefore I would call their attention to
the details which will be found in the documents I have mentioned.
4702. Did you experience much abuse in the administration of this system, arising from per-
sons of influence exercising that influence with Government, in the mitigation of sentences,
without reference to the merits of the individuals concerned ? lam not aware of any. Ido
not call to mind at any time any such influence being attempted to be exercised upon the
Government.
4708. I mean more particularly by way of memorial —where the memorial has arisen from
special knowledge of the prisoner and sympathy for his misfortune, rather than any desire
to promote his case on any ground of justice or merit in his case? I am not prepared to
say such cases may not have arisen, but I do not recall them to memory at the present time.
It is possible, or not improbable, there may have been such cases, but they cannot have been
numerous, because I should, in that case, have a recollection of some of them. Ido not
recollect one at the present time.
4704. By Mr. Windeyer: I thought you said just now that abuses arose in that way; that
the Government made exceptions in special cases ? No ; from the Board recommending men
who had made themselves exceedingly useful on particular occasions. I recollect a particular
case, that I consider rather a flagrant one. A man who had committed the awful crime of
murdering his wife was sent to Cockatoo Island. His life was just spared by one of those
considerations which can only be understood by those who have the painful duty to deter-
mine


“T. 6 . 1 j ca^ s ° f kind, on the condition that the next greatest punishment should be
inflicted ; that was fifteen years penal discipline, with the first three years in irons. I
torge he period, hut a very short one after that, he made himself very useful indeed upon
tie is and, by building some chimneys for the steam boilers, and other works of that kind
and he was recommended for a ticket-of-leave. I think perhaps scarcely caution enough was .
used in acting upon the recommendation of the Board, for I was as much shocked as
any one could be when I found that the man was liberated. The remission of the sentence
their principle of servitude was entirely contrary to the regulations, and subversive of
4705. By the Chairman : You are aware that regulations were issued by the Government,
dated Ist June, entirely abrogating this system? 1 understood there were, and I
reco ect seeing them in the newspapers. I anticipated from that measure an outbreak
amongst the prisoners to whom it would be made to apply, and, in fact, I publicly stated that
i believed that would be the effect.
470 b. Do you not recollect those regulations that came in force at that date ? No; I read
them at the tune. The truth is I know of no subject on which so many regulations have
been made, and so many views have been taken, both in England and in America. My
attention was first called to the subject in America, in the year 1826.
4707 In pursuance of the regulations all prisoners sent to Cockatoo Island since June, 1858,
have had no consideration whatever for good conduct or for labour ; their sentences are to be
strictly carried out, in the case of good and bad alike, strong and weak alike, and they are
lett to work alongside of, and intermix with, those who received sentence prior to that date,
and who are still under the mark system—what is your opinion of the state of things where
two sets of prisoners are working the samo kind of work, and the one who is the
best-benaved, in many cases, gets no mitigation of sentence, while the other, who, in some
cases, is not so well-behaved, makes eight or nine days in a week ? It must necessarily
create great discontent, and not only that, but a sense of injustice which makes them reckless.
As I said befoie, a system that holds out no hope—one in which neither good conduct, nor
industry, nor labour, can tend to mitigate the sentence, or mitigate the circumstances of their
position—must be an erroneous one, and lead to very unfavourable results. ( The Chairman
handed a copy of the regulations to the witness.')
4708. W ill you notice the last paragraph of that, in which you will see that persons in
authority are directed not to transmit petitions from prisoners to the Executive ? I think
that is scarcely consistent with the usual practice of the British Government, not to receive
a statement from every one, whether suffering from penal servitude or otherwise. I think it
is the duty of Government always to receive remonstrances, complaints, or petitions, and to
examine into them—it does not follow that they are to be acceded to.
4709. I should infer from what you have stated that you are in favour of what I believe is a
very prevalent opinion among persons who have attended to this subject in England, that
penal sentences should be measured more by labour and good conduct than by time ? Yes;
but there should always be sufficient time as a terror to evil doers, and an efficient manner
of carrying out the sentence for the protection of society.
4710. I find in a treatise on prison discipline in America, by Francis C. Gray, some
propositions which appear to me to be exceedingly correct, and well expressed, will you
have the goodness to read them and see if they have the sanction of your experience ?
“ That stinted food, constant confinement, total privation of social intercourse, should form
“ no part of any system ; that all systems should provide fur entire separation at night, and
“ for vigorous exercise and useful labour, instead of the fatiguing and unprofitable toil of the
“ treadmill, by day; and that no more nor greater punishments should be inflicted than are
“ necessary for the attainment of these objects, and for the preservation of order ; these and
“ other propositions, once doubted or even strenuously denied, are now admitted by all.” I
think the result of my experience enables me to give my entire adherence to these proposi-
tions —I am totally opposed to treadmills and punishments of that kind.
4711. You are decidedly of opinion, without any qualification, that the system of manage-
ment should admit that the prisoner might by good conduct and industry emancipate
himself in course of time ? Undoubtedly, I think it is the very essence of every good
system of penal discipline, and that without it none can be carried out with success.
4712. You will be acquainted with the locality of Cockatoo Island? Yes. I have not
visited it since my return from England, but lam very well acquainted with it. I first
suggested that the Dry Dock should be formed there.
4713. You have inspected the dormitories ? The dormitories were entirely altered on my
return from Yan Diemen’s Land, and put upon the system I saw established there.
Previously, the men were huddled together like pigs—l can compare it to nothing else —they
were lying on platforms all together without the slightest separation.
4714. By Mr. Windeyer: Like the places in soldiers’ guard-rooms? Yes, on platforms,
without the slightest separation,
4715. By Mr. Morris :As they are in the watch-houses ? I do not know whether they
have such platforms in watch-houses in the present day —I hope that is altered. I had the
system adopted which I had seen in Yan Diemen’s Land—a separate compartment for each
prisoner, so that he could not communicate with his neighbour, and of course it put an end
to all those frightful crimes which were said to exist —whether they did exist or not it is
difficult to say. At all events it was quite impossible, under the old system, that there could
be any feeling of penitence. Men cannot become penitent or pray in a position such as they
were placed in; it was perfectly impossible, if a man desired to fall back upon better thoughts,
by isolation from his bad associates, to do so. There were lights suspended in these dormi-
tories, and watchmen were stationed there, so that the men never could leave their particular
beds.
The Hon. E.
D. Thomson,
Esq., C. 8.,
M.L.C.
19ApdU861.


teds The discipline was maintained more perfectly in that way. But owing to the climate
a very considerable inconvenience arose, and I feared at one tunc I sho„U. be
abandon the arrangement. It was the creation of vermin to » <deg roe tlhall.t beeam,e r.l most
a plague; the men complained most bitterly that they could not sleep at night. 1-tried
chloride of lime, chloride of zinc, and various other remedies but m vam. It so Ihappened
that at the time there was a very intelligent surgeon resident on the island, and 1 ceo
mended him to try the fumes of sulphur. All the windows and doors were closed >p s
blankets, and a quantity of sulphur was burned. The result wa fj “V* “u tht dormi-
that buckets full of bugs and other insects were taken out from the bed places m the
tories. They were completely destroyed, and the men were so well pleased with this, that
they no longer made the slightest complaint against the separation; on the contrary, toy
foundl S advantage of it. Of course it was necessary, after a time, to have he process
repeated S astekeep L insects down, and now there is not the sig
so P lam quite certain that separation at night is necessary, of coarse I should desire a
more perfect separation if it could bo carried out-as separation « cells-that each man
should be locked up in a cell-in a perfectly solitary cell. I think ha would ta
calculated to lead men to reformation and repentance than any o J , •
could be devised ; but I see great difficulty in acting upon a suggestion o ’ a ;
the very heavy expense that it would entail upon the public treasu y. y ,J.
aWe in if proper, philosophical, humane. andCbnstmn m ~ust be a.iende
ffLS out P ™ \ l 1 ** m
doer's I S upon the subject of the solitary system, and thought a great discovery had
been made at last- but I believe from the accounts I have received subsequently that it was
a failure Men in solitude become reformed because they have no temptation but when
they return to the social world, and temptation is offered to them all they have learned in
solitude will not enable them to refrain from a return to those evil ways that have bring
4n6. 1 In deprived of their liberty, and punished for the commuted
against society, prisoners should still be treated as human beings and upon
nrincinles by which human beings are governed? Yes, and it is the duty ot e J
Government lo see that while they are punished means of reformation are to theuu
4717 It may be as well you should know that this Committee have visited Cockatoo Island
on two occasions since their appointment, and that we find, unfortunately, there has been a
Taut of administration in casing out what you intended in those dorm,tones i
effectual watch, nothing to interrupt promiscuous intercourse, and we have < y
amount of evidence before us to shew that crimes of the most enormous character-unnatuial
cdls-are still perpetrated on the island? That could not have been if the regula-
tions I established had been fairly and properly carried out. That leads me to recu
what I have said before, that the best regulations are useless unless you can have a proper
and efficient administration of them. . nut
4718, If you recollect the particulars of these dormitories—which possibly you do not, at
this distant.e of time-in some there are eighty berths, forty on eaeh side, the berths being m
double tiers, the ends of which only are exposed-something like coffins—so that.the
have to creep into them on their hands and knees; and it has been stated to the Committee
that, on some occasions, prisoners have had to sleep on the top, above this double tier of be. th
so that more than eighty men were crowded into one ward, and that the state ot the
atmosphere from such a number of human beings close together, and also from the disgus mg
effluvia arising from the night-tubs, is most painful and oppressive, especially in summer
time—and it can be easily imagined to be so. I think you will see, in such a state of
things as that, there could be no effective system of classification carried out? U.uite
impossible; and I think that is one of the first things that ought to be done
to classify the prisoners. Referring to that subject, there is one class ot prisoners most
difficult to deal with. They are persons who have been for a long period of
their lives forming part of the criminal population; they have gone tnougi a
great number of punishments, and are almost hopelessly irreclaimable. I allude more
particularly to those who commit robberies with violence, burglaries, and other crimes
dangerous to society, and who, from the violence of their characters, ought to be placed m a
position where they cannot again commit similar depredations. It is necessary that they
should be removed to some distance, far apart from society. Ido not think Cockatoo island
is suitable for them. When Cockatoo Island was first thought of, it was the desire to
establish a dock there for the benefit of the port, and of the shipping and commercial
interests, and it was thought a desirable mode of employing the prisoners. It was this that
induced the Government of that day to select Cockatoo Island as a penal establishment, but
I do not think it a proper place for men of desperate character, such as I have now described;
as already explained, I think they should be removed to a distance. The difficulty of
disposing of prisoners of hardened and incorrigible character was so strongly felt by
Government, that means were taken, about ten years ago, to ascertain whether a penal
establishment at a distance could not be formed, and a communication was made to the
neighbouring Governments to ascertain whether they would be willing to join in the
formation of such an establishment, to which incorrigible prisoners from all the Colonies
could be sent, so that there would be perfect security that they would not again be thrown
loose on society. Capt. Denham, who was then in command of H. M. S. “ Herald,” and
employed upon the hydrographical survey of the neighbouring seas, was requested to under-
take the examination of Howe Island, with a view to ascertain its fitness for a purpose of this
kind. He visited the island, made plans of it, and gave a most interesting and elaborate report
upon


153
upon its position, upon its capability, and its size—upon everything, in fact, that it was
desirable to know, in order to determine the question. The island is situated about 4dU j
miles E N E. from Port Jackson, and about 300 miles from the nearest land, which is at
Port Macquarie. It measures seven statute miles m length by one-third to one and three
quarter mile in width, and presents, independent of its mountain slopes, 2,500 acres of land jg
capable of culture. A portion of it is now under cultivation by settlers, who have gone
there without the authority of Government, but of course there was no intention, and I hope
there would not be now, so long as the island is not required for any purpose of Government,
to disturb them. The island is represented to be very fertile, to possess an abundant supply
of water, and to be otherwise remarkably well suited for the purposes of a penal establishment.
The papers relating to the subject, with full particulars, will be found in volume 2 of the
proceedings of the late Legislative Council of 1853, at page 715, to which I would beg to
refer the Committee. If that question should be again mooted, I think all the necessary
information could be found in the paper to which I refer. No proceedings were by
the Government at the time. I myself proceeded to England in the January following.
When I say no proceedings, I mean nothing further was done than to bring the matter
before the Executive Council, who recommended that the whole of the documents, relating
to the subject, should be laid before the Legislative Council on its re-assembling at the next
Session, with a view to the appointment “ of a Select Committee, to report on the expediency
“ of forming, at Howe Island, a penal settlement for the reception of such convicts as it may
“ be considered prudent to transport thither from this Colony, and from the neighbouring
“ Colonies of Victoria and South Australia.” lam not aware whether that Committee was
appointed, but I believe the matter was allowed to drop. I believe till measure
is established no perfect system of penal discipline can be carried out in this Colony for that
particular class. .
4719. You said, I think, in the course of your evidence this morning, that you had paid
attention to this subject as it is treated in America ? I did, a great many ycais ago.
It is now some thirty-four or thirty-five years since I was in America, but the subject
was then exciting a great deal of attention among the Quakers at Philadelphia, which place
I visited. The system of solitary confinement was then under discussion, and I believe very
much good has arisen from improvements in that system, although it has not been earned
out in its entirety. . .., 0 . c .
4720. Did you visit any prison in the State of New York . No, I did not visit king ,
but I visited the prison at Baltimore, where the silent system was in operation, and where the
prisoners had their heads half-shaved. It was a barbarous system, I consider, and could on y
result in failure, as it did.
4721. The system in Sing Sing, and Auburn, is mainly distinguished by its industrial
character, by appropriating the prison labour on economic principles, apportioning to those
of weak constitutions such labour as they can physically undertake, and to those who are
stronger, labour where greater physical strength is required; turning t icu a J ll . 0
account and advantage, and bestowing among the prisoners some means of earning their living
when liberated ? I think that very necessary in all systems of prison discipline.
4722. Here is a rough plan of Sing Sing, shewing the different industrial compartments,
from which you will see the great variety of labour carried out in that prison. You wi
perceive that there are the means of carrying on nearly all kinds of trade, including stone-
cutting, burning lime, &c. ? (Handing the same to witness.) I think it would be found
very difficult, it not impossible, to carry out such a system here; and it would be found
extremely expensive, because mechanical overseers must be found, who would require to be
paid at a very high rate to undertake a duty of this kind. I do not tinnk the number
in this Colony sufficient to enable you to carry out a system such as this. I would not
employ any man, as a mechanic, unless he had been bred up as a mechanic originally except,
for instance, at stone-cutting, and things of that kind, obviously useful, and paiticu ar y
within the means of being carried out in a penal establishment. At Cockatoo Island, many
men have been taught trades in that way, and also in the gaols. . .
4723 In Darlinghurst Gaol, at the present time, there is an attempt at a division of labour,
and there are overseers ; for instance, there is an overseer of the carpenters shop an overseer
of the blacksmiths’ shop, and an overseer at the stone-cutting stockade ? Generally speaking
they were to overlook the mechanics who were employed at those several tiades. i am not
aware that these trades were taught—they were not in my time. _ ,
4724 To some extent they have been taught j so far as stone-cutting is concerned, near y
the whole of the workmen are taught ? I made that an exception j I think they may be
472ol^KvetTin 1 th e blacksmith s’ shop, if I remember rightly, there are P™-
been reared to the business of the forge who are now following it? They might learn to
sharped and to do some other operate of that kind, but I think it would be very
difficult to teach them the real art of a blacksmith; they are seldom in pnson a sufficient y
i f with reject to the employment of persons in prisons, some useful suggestions
were given to'the ago byhlr David Jorbes, Police Magistrate
. P k Vmitinff Justice of Parramatta Gaol. He introduced a system there
wbfch' x‘be, ivewas a Swith considerable advantage. I would refer to the Votes and
Proceeding ofthe Legislative Assembly, volume 1,1856-7, where a number ol very valuable
documents® willbe found in reference to this subject, and particularly the reports of Mr.
-rt • i u 4. i■ i T limrta referred He lays down certain rules, in almost all of which
David Forbes to which! have an( j'founded on the mode of conducting prisons
I concur, for thei classheat,on H would be very desirable, with reference to
gaols,'’if some moans could be devised for Laving a gaol for women, where long sentences
157—X


■ passed upon women should be carried out. But I do not believe myself that a proper
system will ever be carried out in gaols unless you have a paid inspector; some person of
high character, and also of experience and knowledge in matters of the kind, whose duty it
should be to visit the gaols, to inspect them periodically and frequently, and to make reports
to the Government on the subject; to assure himself that the subordinate officers carried out
the instructions of the Government in all respects, and to see that no abuses occurred, such
as have recently, and no doubt formerly have occurred.
4726. Do you not think, if we had a large central prison in this country, sufficiently spacious
to accommodate all the prisoners of the Colony, and where workshops might be erected,
that, in the case of long sentenced men in particular, their industry might be turned to so
much better advantage than at present; that instead of being an expense, they would to a
large extent become self-supporting; and that while the Government would thus possess
better means of classification and of testing the character of the prisoners, they might, by
teaching these men some trade, give them the power of acquiring an honest livelihood when
they left the prison ? It would be most desirable if it could be carried out, but such a system
would be extremely expensive, and great jealousy would be created as to the productions of
the prisoners, as coming into competition with the productions of free labour. Even the
small amount of manufactured articles that were made at Parramatta created quite a sensation
in the town when offered for sale there.
4727. That is the case now, as we are aware that the tradesmen of Parramatta complain
loudly of articles being made in the gaol and sold at a much less price than that at which
they could be produced by free lab >ur, and it seems hardly just that such articles as shoes
and boots, for instance, should be made by prison labour, and sold at a price which a trades-
man, under ordinary circumstances, cannot meet ? I think it would create great dissatis-
faction, and is scarcely just.
4728. Might not many articles be made by prison labour which cannot be made in the
Colony otherwise, so as to obviate this ground of complaint ? No such articles at the present
moment occur to me.
4729. A great many articles are now imported because they cannot be produced here on
account of the wages which generally rule ? Some of these might.
4730. Domestic utensils which are now imported from America, and are made in their
prisons, might be produced in our gaols without coming into competition with our own
artizans ? I think they would come into competition rather with imported articles, and the
feeling would be against it. Ido not say that that would be a just and proper feeling—l
believe that feeling was shewn in America with respect to the productions of their prisons,
and exportation was therefore resorted to. Ido not say that it is an insuperable difficulty,
but I point it out as one likely to create discontent.
4731. Tiie present state of things is one that requires some alteration with reference to the
state of our gaols. No doubt of it; although I ought not to speak too confidently, as I have
not visited the gaols lately. I speak merely from general rumour.
4732. You are aware from public reports that there has been a riot, or something approaching
to it, at Cockatoo Island ? lam quite aware of that, but I said before that I attributed that
in a great measure to the regulations.
4733. There do not appear to be means of clasification in any of the country gaols; for
instance, at Bathurst and Goulburn, persons committed for grievous offences may be confined
with persons taken up for drunkenness, or some trifling offence? I think that creates grave
injustice. Men who commit trifling offences are put in gaol with men hardened in crime,
and I think it injurious to society, for when criminals meet together they are not likely to
reform each other. The man who is a bad and hardened character is more likely to corrupt
the other than to be improved by associating with one not so corrupt as himself.
4734. By Mr. Jlart: With respect to prisoners who have been sentenced to death for the
greatest crimes, would you afford them the opportunity of emancipating themselves under
any system of discipline ? I must answer that que.-tion somewhat cautiously. If I found
he belonged to the incorrigible and hardened class, I would not; but it sometimes happens
that the most serious crimes against society are committed by men who are by no means bad
characters, who give way to feelings of revenge, commit murder from some sudden impulse,
and who are, perhaps, as repentant of the crime as any man can be; they are not the most
hardened men, but feel as great a horror cf the crime, when they have time to fall back
upon their own consciences, as society itself does. I think such men as these ought to have
an opportunity of retrieving their position after sufficient punishment; but, at the same
time, the interests of society must not be disregarded in this matter. While humane to the
prisoner, we must not be cruel to society at large—we must see that it is duly protected ;
still we must temper justice with mercy in cases of that kind.
4735. Might not that view be carried out by granting them tickets-of-leave, so as to leave
them, during the terra of their natural life, under the surveillance of the police? I think
they might have tickets-of-leave for a long period before they were absolutely emancipated;
but I think there ought to be hope even then that a long period of good conduct, whilst
holding a ticket-of-leave, should entitle the man to consideration in acquiring a conditional
or absolute pardon.
4736. By Mr. Windeyer: From what you have said I should infer that you consider the
reformation of criminals the real and great object society should have in view in framing its
punishments? No. I think there is a double purpose to be kept in view. The severe
punishment of the criminal as a warning and terror to the evil-doer; and, combined with
that, it becomes the duty of the Government to see that there are proper means of information.
ioi. I presume you hold that that end ought to be kept in view at all times? Most
assuredly. I say it is one of the main features that ought to pervade every system of penal
discipline.
Tlie Hon. E,
D. Thomson,
Esq., C. 8.,
M.L.C.
19 April, 1861.


The Hon. E.
D. Thomson,
Esq., 0.8.,
M.L.C,
19 April, 1861.
discipline. It is the bounden duty of every Government to see to the reformation of
offenders, and I think it is also to the interest of society that they should do so
4738 By Mr. Hurl: With respect to your suggestion as to the appointment of an
Inspector of Prisons, do you think, in the event of Government obtaining the services of
a competent individual, the whole management of gaols might he placed in his hands irrespec-
tive of the Sheriff? I think the law is faulty at the present time. In a paper which I was
requested to draw up, on the subject of administrative arrangements, I suggested that the
Sheriff should be relieved from all duty connected with prisons. “ Resident in Sylney, he
“ can only exercise a nominal control over the establishments. It would be far preferable,
“ I think, that the Visiting Justiccs should be constituted the legal custodians of the prisoners,
“ and that the establishments should be placed entirely under their direction and control.”
I still think, in country districts where they have no Sheriff, and where a Sheriff is not likely
to be appointed for a number of years to come, and where it is necessary there should
be some resident Visiting Justice, it would be desirable to carry out that arrangement; but
I think that should be supplemented by the appointment of a General Inspector, whose duty
it should be to visit all the gaols periodically, to see that the rules were properly carried
out.
4739. The jurisdiction which the Sheriff exercises over gaols is, I believe, by virtue of a
provision in the Charter of Justice which was issued in the reipn of George the Fourth, and
I presume the custody and control of prisoners was committed to the Sheriff in this Colony
by reason of the analogy his position was supposed to hold to that of Sheriff in the mother
country ? No doubt that was the case.
4740. Do you see any reason for the analogy? None whatever. The analogy docs not
hold ; the position is totally different. There you have local Sheriffs, who reside in the
immediate vicinity of the gaols where the prisoners for whose custody they are responsible
are confined.
4741 Might not the duties of Sheriff be advantageously confined to the execution of
civil processes? lam scarcely competent to answer that question, as it involves so wide a
departure from the present practice; nor am I so well acquainted with all the duties of the
Sheriff as to say they should be confined simply to the matters you propose. Primd facie, 1
think it desirable; but I find a difficulty in answering the question.
4742. By the Chairman: A Committee of the Legislative Assembly, appointed last Session,
and that reported upon a very similar subject to the present, recommended that in the case
of all the country gaols the Government should appoint Visiting Committees consisting of
persons of known reputation in the localities, whose position should be honorary, to insure
the inspection of gaols ? lam not favourable to a proposition of that kind; 1 think it would
entirely fail. In the first place, I think it would be extremely difficult to find any number
of persons qualified and willing to undertake a duty of that kind ; and secondly, wherever
the system has been tried in other matters it has failed. For instance, the • supervision of
schools by local committees is not, I believe, so satisfactory as it ought to be, although there
are exceptions, no doubt. There is a great deal of technical knowledge necessary with
reference to prison discipline, and a great deal of experience necessary. I think you would
find a sort of interference with the regulations likely to occur from the establishment of
local Boards of that kind, of persons little qualified to understand or carry them out. I
think the system would not be found an advantageous one as regards the public interest.
4743. Are you aware of what appears to be the fact, that no persons in the Colony appear
to interest themselves in the condition of prisons—no one appears to visit the Sydney gaol ?
I believe very few.
4744. It is the case in England that benevolent ladies and gentlemen make it their business
to visit the various gaols in the country ? I think visits of that kind to the gaol are the
exception and not the rule.
4745. There appear not to have been any, as far as we can learn ? There were none in my
time, as far as lam aware. ■
4746. There wore none who took an interest in the welfare of the prisoners ? No.
4747. We have found even in the case of Darlinghurst Gaol that there were no regulations
to secure the cleanliness of prisoners since the death of Captain Webster if a prisoner
thought fit to go in a state of personal filth from one month’s end to another, or even from
one year to another, there was nothing to prevent, except the compiaint of bis fellow
prisoners—do you not think if there were such a Visiting Committee as I have
suggested, such a state of things would be prevented ? It is to be thej
would interfere in a matter of that kind. I think it is the duty or the "V isiting
Justice to see a regulation of that kind carried out, and certainly if there were an Inspector
of Prisons such a state of things could not last for a day. I lay great stress upon toe recom-
mendation that there should be an Inspector of Prisons. I have thought the matter over
very frequently, and I am satisfied we shall never have a proper system of prison discipline
until we have a properly qualified Inspector of Prisons. The great difficulty would be to get
a suitable man for that office.
4748. I was going to say it would be of little use without we got a properly qualified man ?
All depends upon that.
4749 By Mr. Hart: Would it not be possible to get a properly qualified man from the
mother country ? lam certain that, for a moderate salary, you might get a person of great
experience, and of character, who would be invaluable. . , ,
4750 One who would have had an opportunity of making himself acquainted with the
reforms which have been carried out in prisons in the mother country? No doubt that
would be another great advantage.
‘ Mr.


Mr. Thomas Allen called in and examined :
• 4751. By the Chairman : You are gaoler of Parramatta Gaol ? Yes, I am,
4752. How long have you filled that situation ? Nineteen years.
• 4758. You have been nineteen years over the same prison ? Yes ; this is my twentieth year.
4754. How many prisoners have you in the gaol at the present time —how many had you
this morning ? Two hundred and thirty-six.
4755. Of what classes do they principally consist, with regard to the sentences under which
they are suffering and to their criminal character? With regard to their sentences there
are only two classes, those who are sentenced to hard labour, and those who are confined
without labour.
4756. What length are their sentences? Prom twenty years downwards.
4757. You have prisoners of all classes? Yes.
4758. By Mr. Hart: You have some for life, have you not? *No; for twenty years, that
is the longest.
4759. Have you not a man named Macdonald ? Yes; he is for twenty years.
4760. By the Chairman: Have you a copy of any regulations? No.
4761. Have you any regulations for your prison ? fNo. There was a small blue book we
had containing about half-a-dozen leaves; but the regulations are so often changed.
4762. Is there at the present time any set of regulations posted up in the prison ? I have
those referred to posted up, but there are no standing regulations to go by. When the
Sheriff visits the prison and directs certain regulations to be observed, they are posted up;
but there are no specific prison regulations at all.
4768. Are there any regulations for the turnkeys ? Yes; the regulations made from time
to time by the Sheriff.
4764. At this time are there any ? Yes; written regulations which are posted in conspicuous
places.
4765. In what parts of the gaol ? In two or three parts—at the entrance gate and in the
office.
4766. What are those regulations ? As to the different duties of the turnkeys.
4767. By Mr. Hart: Are they not the regulations of 1853 ? They are| the same.
4768. By the Chairman: Will you explain to us the duties of the turnkeys—how they are
appointed, and how many are appointed ? They are appointed by the Sheriff.
4769. To what duties are they appointed ? To the regular routine duties; every turnkey
takes therti alternately. He commences at No. I and goes round the whole establishment;
taking a separate duty every day—'doing duty in a prison to day and in a yard to-morrow,
and so on.
4770. When does he come back so as to repeat any one duty ? Generally about once a week.
4771. How many turnkeys are there ? Thirteen.
4772. Then there must be about two upon every kind of duty every day to look to the same
duty once every week ? Yes.
4773. What means do you resort to in Parramatta Gaol in the treatment of prisoners
for the due suppression of turbulent or insubordinate prisoners—do you resort to physical
punishment ? To solitary, or separate confinement.
4774. Are the prisoners ever struck? On very rare occasions, unless in self-defence, or
something of that kind—it is very rare indeed.
4775. The means of punishment within the discretion of the persons in charge do not
extend beyond solitary confinement? Solitary, or separate.
4776. For what length of time do you ever confine prisoners for unruly conduct ? The
utmost I can confine, without the authority of the Visiting Magistrate, is three days.
4777. Who is the Visiting Magistrate ? Hr. Greenup.
4778. Any one else ? No.
4779. I suppose be is sometimes accompanied by other magistrates? Frequently.
4780. How often does he visit the gaol in the capacity of Visiting Magistrate ? Generally
twice a week; he is sent for if anything serious arises between his regular visits.
4781. How often have you to bring any prisoners before the Visiting Magistrate for im-
proper conduct ? There may be about a dozen refractory men who generally keep the
prison annoyed, some of which are, in consequence, generally undergoing punishment.
4782. What number of cases are brought before Hr. Greenup, as an average? Perhaps
from three to four per week.
4783. Are these cases confined to this dozen of refractory men ? Chiefly.
4784. Then I presume your books would shew these men’s names, and the number of times
they were brought up ? Yes, the books would shew everything, and by referring back it
could be seen how many times any man bad been punished—every punishment is entered.
4785. What is the order of treatment of the prisoners in the gaol—at what time are they
let out in the morning? At six in the morning the bell rings, the turnkeys all assemble,
their names are called out, and their various posts of duty assigned to them. The prisons are
then unlocked, and the prisoners allowed to wash themselves. After they have washed they
are sent to the separate work they are told off to ; at eight o’clock the bell rings for breakfast.
4756. What different kinds of work are carried on in the gaol ? Stone-cutting, wheel-
wrighting, carpentry work, blacksmiths’work, shoemaking, and hatmaking; and needle-
work for the female prisoners.
4787.
Mr. T. Allen.
19ApriU861.
* Note ( Correction by witness on revision) ;—Yes, one.
. t Note ( Revised thus ) : —There are regulations which have been framed from time to time as
occasions required such, hut these regulations are often changed,
j Note {Revised thus) :— Not (the same.)


4787. By Mr. Morris: Tailoring? I have no tailors now; when I had tailors they were
employed to make clothing for the Orphan Schools, and Lunatic Asylum. At eight o’clock
the hell rings for breakfast, for which the prisoners are allowed an hour, while the turnkeys
go home to their breakfasts. At nine the bell rings again to resume work ; they then work
till one. At one o’c 1 ock the bell rings again ; they then get an hour for dinner. At two the
bell again rings, when they resume their work, which is continued until 6 P.M. in summer,
and until 5 P.M. in winter.
4788. By the Chairman: How is the work of the prisoners, in excess of what is required
for the Orphan Schools and Lunatic Asylum, disposed of? There is no other needlework
done, except for private individuals, which is paid for according to a fixed scale, and of
which proper accounts are kept.
4789. Is not some of the work sold? Boots and shoes and hats are sold.
4790. How are they sold? By auction.
4791. In Parramatta? They are now sold in Parramatta; they were sold in Sydney until
the last few months, but the Visiting Magistrate made application to the Colonial Secretary,
and got an order to sell them in Parramatta. Formerly the Parramatta people objected to
their being sold there, and they were then sent to Sydney.
4792. Have the people of Parramatta withdrawn their objection to these articles being sold
in the town ? I have heard no objection lately.
4798. When the Committee visited Parramatta Gaol, a prisoner named Driscoll made com-
plaints of beastly conduct on the part of some of the prisoners, and also of not having proper
means of attending Divine Service on Sundays ? There are two services performed there
every Sunday: the Protestant portion is locked up in the morning, whilst the Catholic
Priest holds service ; and in the afternoon, at two o’clock, the Protestant Chaplain holds ser-
vice, the Catholics being locked up.
4794. I am speaking from memory, but if I recollect rightly, the prisoner’s statement was
that they were locked up, four or five men in, and that all kinds of noises were made during
the greater part of Sunday? Such is not the fact; there is the strictest silence observed,
not a word is heard ; and if any man made a noise, and it were noticed, he would be at once
put in the cells. The general behaviour of prisoners is strictly proper.
4795. With regard to the other part of the man’s statement that there was beastly conduct
in some part of the prison—beastly exposure —what have you to say with reference to that?
There was one case made known, and the man accused of the offence was kept in separate
confinement.
4796. What kind of character is this man Driscoll? He is very troublesome, and is fre-
quently punished for bad behaviour. He is a very fluent spoken presuming fellow, who has
put himself forward as spokesman for other prisoners who conceived they had cause for com-
plaint, or suffered under any grievance.
4797. By Mr. Windeyer: Do you attend either of the services yourself ? Yes.
4798. Which? The Protestant.
4799. There is no noise at that time ? Not the slightest.
4800. By the Chairman : What regulations have you for enforcing personal cleanliness
among such of the prisoners as arc not disposed to be cleanly ? They are brought before me
on a charge of neglect to keep their persons clean, when they are compelled to clean them-
selves, and warned that neglect to attend to cleanliness for the future will be followed by
puni-hment, with winch they are visited should occasion require. They have clean clothing
twice a week, and they have half of every Saturday for mending their clothes and cleaning
themselves. In the middle of the week a gang is told off to wash all the prisoners’ clothes,
so that the remainder shall not have to leave their ordinary work.
4801. Suppose a prisoner chose only to wash his face —to keep his face apparently clean—
but neglected to wash his body, from one year s end to another, until he w r as in such a state
of filth under his clothing as to be unhealthy, what regulations have you that would step in
and prevent his continuing this neglect? Personal examination. When a prisoner is
brought to the gaol he is deprived of his own clothing, is stripped naked, his hair is cut,
and he has to wash himself all over; he then has two suits of clothes given to him, one for
working days, and one for Sundays.
4802. Is he ever inspected afterwards? Every Sunday.
4808 Let us know wbat course of inspection you pursue on Sunday? The prisoners are
all ranged in the ward at eight o’clock A M., and I go round and inspect every man. I stop
short at each, examine him, and make him pull up his trousers.
4804. How far ? Above their knees.
4805. Have they to turn up their sleeves? Yes. ,
4806 Is that done every Sunday ? Every Sunday, except when I may have been unwell.
4807. And that regulation applies to all the prisoners without exception? To all the
4808 Is any similar means adopted with regard to the females ? Yes, the very same.
4809’ Generally speaking do you believe this is quite effective to preserve a pretty good
standard of personal cleanliness ? Yes ; unless I had means to stove the clothes I could no ,
make them more cleanly. There are large tubs for the prisoners to wash in.
4810. How often do you cause the floors of the cells to be cleansed? Two or three times
48 d U ’ How often are the walls whitewashed ? Once a month, perhaps oftener.
4812’ By Mr. Wilson: It was stated to the Committee that in some cases night-tubs were
the only'utensils in which the prisoners could wash their clothes ? It is quite falsethere
were upwards of fifty large wine hogsheads supplied some years ago, which were cut in two
and then bound and coopered newly, and they must wash in them and in nothing else.^
Mr. T. Allen.
19 April, 1861.


Mr. T. Allen.
19 April. 1861.
4813. Is it their bodies you allude to? To their bodies and clothes both.
4814. It has also been stated that they have had to wash not only their clothes but their
bodies in the night-tubs? I heard them state that, but I did not think it was my place to
contradict (hem then.
4815. Such is not the case ? Quite the contrary.
4816. You say that every Sunday morning you examine their persons to see that they are
in a state of cleanliness? Yes.
4817. Is there any regulation by which the men are obliged to wash their bodies whether
apparently clean or nut ? There is not.
4818. By Mr. Windeyer: When prisoners are in solitary confinement, is it ever, as a mode
of punishment, the practice to take away their beds from them ? Yes; if a man when he
is so confined shouts, curses, or swears, as prisoners frequently do, he is cautioned if he does
not conduct himself he will be deprived of his blanket.
4819. Sometimes they have a board to sleep on ? Yes.
4820. Is that also sometimes taken away ? Yes; because by means of it they climb up to
the window, and call out to the people in the yard. When they do so, they are cautioned
that if they do not desist their boards will be taken away.
4821. By Mr. Wilson : In cases such as these you have alluded to, have you known water
to he thrown over the floor of their cells by way of punishment ? Never.
4822. You do not think it can have taken place without your knowledge? No; they often
spill water for the purpose of annoyance ; in fact, they even upset their night-tubs, and
smear the filth over the walls from downright wickedness.
4823. How is Parramatta supplied with water ? There is a large tank, from which the
water is conveyed all over the gaol by pipes.
4824. Is that sufficient for the supply ? Not in dry weather.
4825. Then it must be a consideration with you to see that too much water is not used ?
Yes; Ido not let any go to waste if I can help it.
4826. By Mr. Morris : Could you collect more water if you had larger tanks ? Yes. There
have been so many buildings erected within the walls that the place is too confined —there
is not half sufficient room to carry out the labour system —the yards are altogether too small
for the purposes required.
4827. By Mr. Windeyer: Is there any stream in the neighbourhood of Parramatta from
which water could be laid on to the gaol? Yes; the river is close to the back —about 200
yards off.
4828. Is there a constant supply of water ? Yes. It was intended to supply the establish-
ment with water from the dam at the Rocks, but the work there is in abeyance.
4829. How far is the dam from the gaol ? Nearly a mile.
4830. By the Chairman: What do you think of the healthiness of that gaol ? I think it
one of the most wholesome places I ever heard of.
4831. Are all your family there ? Yes.
4832. Have they good health? Yes. 1 never saw prisoners kept in so small a place so
healthy.
4833. What is the sentence of the man Wilkes, who is confined there for murder ? Life.
4834. Is that the only life sentence there? Yes.
4835. By Mr. Windeyer: What is Mrs. Perry’s sentence ? Fifteen years,
4836. By the Chairman: Is your prison ever visited by ladies, who are induced to visit the
establishment from motives of benevolence? lam sorry to say very seldom. Formerly the
Sisters of Charity visited it regularly, and sometimes other ladies. Lately the Sisters of
Charity have only visited it a few times.
4837. If I recollect rightly, the female turnkey, Mrs. Freeman, stated that there had been
no visit paid by any lady during her time, with the exception of the Sisters of Charity ?
No, lately there has not.
4838. You have a number of female prisoners? Yes.
4839. Some very young —girls confined for prostitution, and such offences? Yes.
4840. Girls whose condition should naturally enlist the sympathies of benevolent ladies for
their reformation ? Yes.
4841. But they are never visited by any? Never, except by the Sisters of Charity.
Sir A. Stephen,
Knt., C.J.
20 April,lB6l.
SATURDAY, 20 APRIL, 1861.
Undent
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. WINDEYER.
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., in the Chair.
*
Sir Alfred Stephen, Knt., C. J., examined :
,4842. By the Chairman: How many years, Sir Alfred, have you been a Judge of the
Supreme Court ? Nearly twenty-two.
4848. A considerable period of that lime you have been Chief Justice ? Ever since 1844,
Chief Justice.
4844. Your attention must necessarily, from the nature of your duties, have been directed
to the general management of the criminal population during that time ? It has.


SlrA.Stephen,
Knt., C.J.
2(hlpriUB6l.
4845. Have you had occasion to consider the system known, I believe, as the mark system,
which prevailed principally on Cockatoo Island for a number of years —for about six years I
think —by which the prisoners, according to conduct and the amount of labour they got
through, were enabled to abridge their sentences? I have.
4846. Would you be kind enough to state to the Committee the conclusions at which you
arrived with respect to the working of that system ? My opinion was that it was a bad
system.
4847. The system arose, I think, in November, 1851; perhaps you do not recollect under
what circumstances it arose ? Ido not know the date of the initiation, nor its reasons. I
have no recollection on the subject.
4848. Could you state to the Committee in what way this system presented itself to you, to
lead you to the conclusion that it was bad in its working? My objection to the system was,
and is, that the main test and guide, in respect of remissions, was simply the convict’s success
in the performance of work, and that considerations of real or apparent reformation of
character became subordinate, if at all inquired into, which I doubt. If the convict had
been punished, then no doubt that circumstance operated adversely to him, but I mean that
the great question of reformation of character was lost sight of. Whereas lam of opinion
that the amount of work done by a man is no test whatever of good conduct, or of his fitness
to be let loose again on society. My further objection was, and is, that it brought all the
convicts under one general system and set of rules, whereas I am of opinion that no system
of convict discipline can be good which does not individualize, that is to say, distinguish man
from man, and case from case. I know the difficulties and expense of carrying out such a
system, but lam quite sure that no other can be depended upon. A further objection was,
that every sentence passed by the Courts became a mere nominal thing, the term of sentence
never being carried out; but all persons who had done the prescribed amount of work,
without extra punishment, were sent out among the community, however unsafe in
particular instances it might be. Thus, I have known a murderer, under the most barbarous
circumstances, released because of excessively useful workmanship as a bricklayer; and I
have repeatedly noticed, and have given in former times the instances, that men whose
sentences have been thus remitted have returned very speedily, and not unfrequently before
the terms of their original sentences have expired, to exactly the same cour S 3 of crime.
4849. I understood you to say, that you should consider no system good that did not
individualize, or, in other words, distinguish man from man, and case from case, in the
treatment of the person under punishment ? I do not think I said the treatment of the
man under punishment.
4850. I use. those words, as I think that is what you must have intended —do not you
think the system introduced by the regulations of Ist June, 1858, which abolished this
mark system, by which the time of sentence is indiscriminately and inexorably adhered to,
is more opposed to that which you indicate as the only good one than even the system
previously existing, because there is no discretion allowed, if these regulations are stiictly
adhered to without reference to reformation of character, goodness of conduct, or any
consideration? I did not know that the new system involved as a consequence the absolute
enforcement of every sentence without any exception whatever, and I should have hoped
that such was not the system. I think, that however hopeless the reformation of a convict
is in the vast majority of instances, hope should never be abandoned, and if there be good
reasons for belief that a man is really reformed,' the prerogative of mercy should generally
be exercised in his favour. I understand the system to lay down a general rule in exact
opposition to the former general rule, but I did not understand that it was one to be
rigorously adhered to under all circumstances, and I do not wish to be understood that 1
think a separate treatment of each man is practicable, fur there must always be some general
system ; but what I meant was, that every man’s case and character will be found to differ
more or less from that of another, and that there should be discrimination exercised.
4851 What I should understand from the general expression of your opinion, in your
answer last previous to this, was, that this discrimination should be carried out by a
judicious classification of prisoners, not that men should be treated individually, but that
they should be classified according to their general character? I think, no doubt, that there
should be minute classification, and that as a matter of course very many persons will be
classed together But I mean something even further than this, I mean that each man s
character “and habits, and hopefulness, or the like, will be found to differ from those of others,
and that as far as is possible there should be an individualization of cases. .
4852 Suppose a case, Sir Alfred, of two persons appearing in the dock at the same Assize
convicted of the same crime in the eye of the law, by evidence equally clear, ought not the
Judge to award the same sentence in each case, though it may appear that one of these men has
been habitually, from the cradle almost, an offender against the laws, and the other has never
been known to commit an offence before—still, as they appear there offenders against the law,
in the same particular, with the same degree of crime, with the same evidence against them
should not the Judge, having to attend to the evidence brought before him in the Court
and to nothing else, administer the law with strict inexorable justice in the same way in both
cases- and if that were so, and he were to administer the law m that manner, ought there
not to be some means by which the man who became, from some combination, an offender
against the law in this one case, and who afterwards manifested a desire to reform, who
evinced this by uniform good character—when this was proved m the only way in which it
could be proved, by his subsequent conduct, could abridge his sentence. If that were
necessary, would it not be an indispensable condition of any prison management that there
should be some means of remitting the sentence in such cases? There are two questions
here, the one as to the duty of the Judge, and the second as to the duty or jgwerrf Jibe


Executive. They are, of course, quite distinct. I say as to the first, that, as a general rule,
two men convicted of the selfsame crime in all its features should receive the same punish-
ment; but I think that the object of punishment would not be duly met by such a course,
and that it is not, and never has been, the practice of Judges to disregard the prisoner’s
previous character and habits. Quite the contrary. One principle may safely be laid down:
that each man is liable to the maximum punishment prescribed by the law, and where there
is a discretion left in the Judge, I think that his discretion should be exercised by
makino- a decided distinction between the hardened and desperate offender and the
man who may be shewn to have been probably led into crime, or whose character
up to that period has been uniformly good. I think that the exercise of a wise
discretion in that way has a beneficial operation upon the community. I think
further that it is almost a necessary discretion to be vested in a Court. 1 conceive the
difficulty to be, to be quite sure of the truth of the case as to the previous character. And
here is often the great practical difficulty. I endeavour, in my own case, to overcome it
by examining persons on oath.
4853. As to character ? As to character, which the Judge has clearly a right to do, before
proceeding to punishment; and I believe that Judges will be found generally to have a
remarkable faculty of discriminating aright in such cases. Secondly, as to the power ot the
Executive. I have already expressed ray opinion, by implication, that the power of pardoning
should be occasionally exercised by the Executive in such cases as this suggested. All that
I protest against is, a general rule of pardoning without any efficacious or sound test of
reformation. I could give illustrations easily of the kind of process which I refer to, in
ascertaining the truth on this point.
4854. In the case I supposed, it does not appear to me that the consideration that should be
paid to good character so much depends upon what the conduct had been previous, as to
what it shall be subsequent to the sentence, and that is a thing that can only be proved after
the sentence of the Court is awarded. Thus, there may be a person who has been a uniformly
good character up to a certain period, and he may have fallen away altogether, and become
an abandoned character. We know abundant instances of such cases, and it cannot be
proved whether a person has entered upon a course of crime which he will still pursue, or
whether he will retrace his steps, till after the period of sentence; and thus it seems
necessary that this prerogative of remitting a sentence should be exercised by some power
after the sentence of the law has been passed upon the prisoner. The Judge, it is certain,
cannot have the experience which can only be gained subsequently ; he can only be guided
by what the character of the prisoner has been up to that time, and therefore is not in a
position to consider the case. To illustrate farther what I mean, instead of two, I will
suppose that there are three prisoners, one who has been a hardened offender up to the time
of trial, and who continues a hardened offender ; the second, one who has been a good
artizan up to the time of trial, but who has fallen away into a state of crime, and who con-
tinues to follow an abandoned course ; the third, one who in like manner offended against
the law, but who is afterwards anxious to retrace his steps, and to retrieve his position in
society. I think those three cases illustrate actual occurrences which will be familiar to you
as a Judge. In the last case, the real character of the prisoner cannot be ascertained till
after the sentence, and therefore no Judge can consider his case properly; it is morally
impossible for him to do so ? The real character of an offender is much more
difficult to ascertain after punishment than before. The instances of pretended reformation
accompanied by hypocrisy are numerous; and it has often been found that the most hardened
offenders are those who impose readily upon the persons in charge of them. The men are
here in a state of coercion from which they wish to escape; but the same men when at
liberty follow the bent of their propensities, whatever they may be ; and I cannot admit
the principle that a Judge is to sentence three men exactly in the same manner, of whom he
can almost certainly predicate that one will continue a ruffian to the end of his days, while
another may probably be safely sent into society again in a short period. The hardened
offender, moreover, in point of justice, deserves a severer punishment, and the interests of
the community require that severer punishment. If the Judge is not to discriminate
between the cases of prisoners, I do not know why he should be allowed to discriminate at
all as to the extent of the term of punishment in any case. His discretion is always
exercised by reference to, first, the circumstances of the crime, and then by other circum-
stances attaching to the prisoner as an individual; although bis great object should be, in
every case, by adequate punishment, whatever the character of the prisoner, to deter other
men from committing the same crimes.
4855. My questions have not so much applied to whether the Judge should or should not
exercise a discrimination in awarding sentences, as to whether there should or should not
exist the power to mitigate those sentences afterwards, according to the conduct of the
prisoner; and I think I gather from your evidence that you think, in cases where they are
wisely and well considered, such power should exist. If I have not mistaken you, you are
of that opinion ? I think that, as a general rule, sentences should be carried out; but I
distinctly think, as you suppose, that there should be occasionally, though rarely, instances
of remission of punishment, founded upon real change of character; the great difficulty will
always be, to know when that change has taken place.
4856. Coming back to this regulation of the Ist of June, 1858, you will see, if you will be
good enough to read them, that they do two things of a tremendous character as affecting
prisoners; and, at the same time, they bring into existence an entirely new, and, as I think,
very anomalous consideration, khey do away at once with the system which previously
existed, without any qualification whatever, leaving in its place an inexorable adherence to the
time of sentences; and they then prohibit the Visiting Magistrate, the Superintendent, and
all
SirA.Stephen,
Knt., O.J.
20 April, 1861.


all persons in authority over the penal establishment, from forwarding petitions from prisoners, Si
so that they shut the gate to every statement, well founded or nut, that the prisoner may
make. We know that gaolers, in all cases, are not desirous to have more trouble than is <
necessary, and the Government, by these regulations, really prohibit persons placed in
authority like these from forwarding petitions to the Government. While these groat changes
are made the regulations continue the mark system to prisoners who have received sentences
previous to that date, and leave these men to work side by side with prisoners sentenced
after that date, whose sentences are inexorably carried out. This Committee found at
Cockatoo Island men working side by side excavating rock, and engaged in other work,
some of whom make nine days a week, while others could make only six—some of
those making nine days a week not so well-behaved as others who were making only six
days a week This, if, under any conceivable circumstances, we ourselves were placed in
such circumstances, would irritate us almost to insubordination ; and the result—and, as I
think, the natural result—has been insubordination on that island. I think, if you look over
these regulations, and see that they do these three things—that they make this change, revoke
the system which previously existed, without any qualification in any case—that they shut
the door of hope, stifle the voice of complaint, whether well founded or not, of every man in
the condition of a prisoner, and, at the same time, create two classes who work in the same
gangs in the manner I have stated, under such va-tly different circumstances —I think you
must be of opinion that it, is a most undesirable state of things ? I cannot, of course, tell
what may have been the cause of irritation in the prisoners’ minds; but, as a matter of
justice, nothing can be clearer than this, and it might have been explained to the prisoners,
that those men who were sentenced, and, probably, with additional severity, nominally because
this remission system was in force, and who were entitled by existing regulations to remissions
under certain conditions, could not be subjected without oppres.-ion to an ex post facto law.
They were sentenced on a system of indiscriminate remiss! n, the test of which was task-
work, and they wore entitled to have the benefit of that system continued to them. To
have acted otherwise would have been worse than to have repudiated a contract of an
ordinary kind. It was a contract with the men. The Courts sentenced prisoners
knowing that, after a certain period, they would probably obtain a ticket-of-ieave,
or the like, but the moment that that system was put an end to, the men who
came under the new system had no right to complain that justice was done to their
predecessors in crime. It was easy to tell them that they had been sentenced undir a
different state of things, known to the Judges, and that they could have no claim, merely
because others had a claim. If it be the fact that every sentence parsed under the new
system is carri d out inexorably, I unquestionably think it, bad, because it destroys hope in
every mind ; but I have always regarded it as merely establishing a general rule, admitting
of exceptions, though in rare cases, and I then understood that prisoners were not to be
allowed to send in petitions for remission unless there were new circumstances of some kind
to be represented worthy of inquiry, such as the discovery of new evidence, or of excessive
good conduct, and probable reformation in the prisoner; and, as a matter of fact, there are
now petitions before me from persons sentenced under the new regulations, which I have yet
to consider and report upon.
4857. The Colonial Secretary, who was examined before the Committee, has handed in a
return, carefully prepared by Captain Mann, shewing that sentences have been as severe
since the change as previously 5 he has carefully compared the sentences awarded to certain
classes of crimes, and shewn that the Judges have awarded as severe sentences since the date
of these new regulations as before ? I can of course only answer for myself individually,
and during the whole of the last year I have been absent from the Colony; but during the
time of my passing sentences, since the commencement of the new regulations, I have always
borne them in mind, and have endeavoured to pass sentences for less terms than formerly.
I may have departed from my intention unconsciously, in some instances, but it has been
unconsciously if at all; and it is possible that severer sentences have of late been passed,
because it has been found that former sentences have had no apparently beneficial effect,
and so the’ Judges may have been led to think that long terms—in other words, severe
punishments —are imperatively called for. It is a well known principle, that as the object
of punishment is the prevention of crime, severer punishments are always inflicted whenever
the offences to which they are applied are common in the community. In other words, if a
severe punUiment will not deter men from crime,’as experience has shewn, then the Judges
resort to a still severer one.
4858. During your recent residence in England, did you pay any attention to this subject,
as it is considered in the Mother Country—what 1 mean more particularly is, did you come
in contact with any of those public men who have paid attention to prison discipline in the
Mother Country so as to be led to discuss the question ? I did not. With the exception of
a short correspondence with Captain Maconochie 1 had no communication with any person
on the subject of prison discipline. _ .
4859 I believe, among men who have paid great attention to the subject for years past in
England, including Mr. Recorder Hill, who is quite an authority on the subject, and 1 think
also Lord Brougham—Mr. Thompson, a Scotch gentleman who has paid gnat attention to
prison management—they appear to have arrived'at the general conclusion that sentences
should not be measured by time, but by labour, combined with the consideration of conduct
under a wise and effective system of criminal administration. The conclusion which seems
to have been arrived at by public men in England who have paid the most attention to the
subject is clearly stated in the work I have before me in a number of simple propositions.
Perhaps you will have the kindness to read them, and see if you assent to them/ he
Chairman handed to the Chief Justice a treatise on prison discipline , by Francis C. Gray,
257 y ‘ referred


referred to in the evidence of the Honorable E. Dear Thomson. The Chief Justice read th
extract ) I do not receive as certain the statement that these general conclusions hav
commanded universal assent. That is the statement of the pamphlet here.
4860. Do you, yourself, generally concur in the propositions there laid down? I will take
them separately. I do not think that “ stinted food” should take part in any system, because
I regard that as simple cruelty; and, on the ether hand, full feeding, accompanied by the
concorai ant comfo.ts, will be higlvy prejudicial, as leading the struggling, and hard working,
and honest poor to envy the condition of the well fed convict; and I think there have leen
errors in this direction. There is a medium. As to “ constant confinement,” if that implies
the perpetual shutting up in a cell of a prisoner, without labour in the open air, that I con-
ceive to be equally injurious to mind and body, and to an.-wer no useful end, although as a
portion of Severe punishment and for short periods I do not think it could safely be
abandoned. “ The total privation of social intercourse,” I also think undesirable in any
system; but this social intercourse should be restricted to working in company wbh strict
silence, except at stated times. I believe that the conversation which takes place between
prisoners generally is more demoralizing to the less hardened individuals than any other
source of deterioration. Every writer on prison discipline I observe notices this: that
prisoners comparatively innocent, or disposed to reform, are demoralized, and often shamed
out of their repentant dispositions by more hardened criminals conversing with than. With
the test of the propositions I agree, qualifying my statement by this, that I acknowledge the
wisdom of no universal rule as applicable to all individuals, and insist upon this; that there
must be occasional deviations from a general system in particular instances, although those
instances may be rare.
4861. Have you visited Cockatoo Island at any time ? Yes.
4862. Frequently ? No.
4868. Is it long ago since you visited the island? I never was at Cockatoo Island more
than twice. I was there several years ago, when I had more leisure than I have had during
the last three or four years.
4864. Have you visited D irlinghurst or Parramatta Gaol ? It is also several years since
I have inspected, or visited for the purposes of observation, either of those gaols. I used to
visit them several years ago regularly and examine the prisoners, but my judicial duties of
late years have fully pi evented me from doing anything of the sort.
4865. I might mention one or two facts discovered by this Committee as to the state of our
prisons, with a view of getting your opinion upon the subject in evidence. It does not appear
that, for some years past, there has been any regulation which would compel the prisoners
to observe bodily cl anliness, nor docs it appear that there are any means of instruction
for adult or juvenile prisoners. With respect to the first allegation it would appear from
the evidence given before this Committee, that if a prisoner chose to neglect washing his
skin from one month’s end to another, or even for three or six months, he would not be
compelled to do it, unless it were from the complaints of his fellows? Few things can be
worse in any convict establishment, in my opinion, than permitting personal uncleanliness.
I look upon habitual cleanliness, in all classes, as of great importance, in every point of view.
I believe it has a moral effect.
4866. With respect to the absence of any means of instruction ? It is impossible to estimate
too highly the importance of instruction and the means of intellectual employment, in the
case ot every person. However hopeless the case of a man may be, I conceive that effort
should still be made to improve him, and that one great means of improvement will be
inspiring or encouraging a habit of reading, and not always, or, as a matter of course,
religious books. I think that one great evil in any system is short punishments. I think
it is far better not to punish at ad than to punish by a very inadequate short term of punish-
ment. And I think further, that no system ot convict discipline, or improvement in a convict
system, can be deemed complete, which leaves unprovided for the great want of having some
kind ol refuge for the prisoners when they come out of confinement, or sane means of imme-
diately resorting to honest employment. I have seen, with pain, in scores of instances, that
persons are discharged from gaol, who are almost driven into crime again, because they have
no means, when they come out of gaol, of getting honest employment.
486/. \ou will have noticed in these propositions, to which your attention was directed just
now, that stress was laid upon the entire separation of prisoners at night. In Cockatoo
Island the dormitories have no means of separating the prisoners at night; for instance, in
the largest dormitories there are berths fitted up for eighty persons; there is a kind of
passage down the middle of the dormitories, and on each side there are two tiers of berths,
one above the other ; ana the prisoners have literally to crawl on their hands and knees into
their bed-places ? The berths are like a hen-coop.
4b68. It has been given in evidence that these dormitories have sometimes been so full that
the prisoners have had to sleep on the top, above the second tier. The means of ventilation
are very inadequate; I think there are only four small windows to each dormitory, two on
each side; and it has been represented to us, that in the summer months the stench arising
from such a number of human beings, not over clean probably, crowded together, and from
the heated matter in the night-tubs, was so intolerable that sleep was quite impossible; and
that in consequence there were all kinds of noises, singing, and frequently the most disgusting
immoralities. You will, I presume, be of opinion that such a state of things is calculated to
prevent, almost to render impossible, reformation? Few things can be worse than the state
of things described, which certainly I know to have prevailed at Cockatoo Island, and also
in the gaols to some extent, within my own observation.
4869. Within the gaols the cells are built for three prisoners, and although it appears that
five are sometimes crowded into them, still, there are something like the means of decency,
which


■which absolutely do not exist at Cockatoo Island. Some of the prisoners whom this Com-
mittee have met with, and who have described themselves as having wives and children, and
who, although in that condition, as fathers of families, express themselves as greatly shocked
at the proceedings there ; and several have preferred only one prayer, to be removed to some
other prison on account of these indecencies; they do not complain of their sentences, or
seek for any other mitigation, than to be removed to some other place where they may escape
these enormities? I remember well the appearance of these places at C ck.too Island,
and the state of the gaol rooms both at Bathurst and Sydney before the recent improvements,
and nothing could bo more shocking. I conceive that the ribald conversation, and worse,
which goes on in these places, must be highly deteriorating, and that separate c< nfinement
at night, or of not more than thiee in each cell, would seem to bean almost indispensable
improvement. The frightful stench which must arise from such a congregation of many
persons in one room, not perfectly ventilated, is shocking to think of. I know that in one
of the long rooms at Cockatoo Island, theie are open gratings at each end, and a lantern or
two in the centre of each room, and forty or more men are confined within the same apart-
ment, with no restriction upon their intercourse beyond that of the palings between the
various berths, and it is quite possible for one man to enter his neighbour’s berth, or even a
berth two or three distant, without much chance of observation.
4870. I wish to state to you, Sir Alfred, the nature of some very startling evidence given
before this Committee, nearly the whole number of the Committee being present, eight or
nine out of the ten, and they were much impressed with its truthfulness—l state it not in
the form of a question, but to hear your opinion upon it as Chief Justice of the Colony.
This evidence, given with all the appearance of truth and concurred in by six or eight
different persons, who, as far as we can form an opinion, had no means of concocting the
story, goes to the effect that acts of sodomy are constantly committed. Some of these
persons stated that they were eye-witnesses of this act, that they saw men go into a berth
and act with other men just as man and wife; and they state that there are young men on
the island who are known among their fel'ow prisoners by female names, who are treated as
men treat prostitutes, anything they can get in the form of delicacies is carried‘to the m, and
they are treated as females with whom they have general intercourse, and that in the case
of two or three of these persons they would appear to be passive instruments almost in
common to those who choose to traffic with them. I may as well state that I have made
this statement to you after having obtained the concurrence of the other members of the
Committee? Then the question is whether I have ever heard of it.
4871. I state the information we have received to hear what you think of it, leaving you
perfectly free to say what you choose, or nothing ? My evidence on your fornnr question
has already intimated that I think these horrible acts of unnatural crime may he committed
without much chance of detection, and I have before heard that such things are said to be
not uncommon on the island. I certainly know that the same things were said, and I believe
were true, of Norfolk Inland. I was intimate with the chaplain of the latter place, and I
have heard from him that such cases as you speak of were undoubtedly well known and
authenticated at Norfolk Island. Such dreadful practices which can only send a man out in
society a demon in human shape can only be restrained by the constant presence of a sentinel
or by a system of separate confinement, either of one man in each cell or of neither
more nor le-s than three men in each cell. Now at Cockatoo Island, and at the stockades
in this Colony which I have visited in former days, observation by the one or two sentinels
in each apartment is quite out of the question ; a man cannot be, and is not expected
to be, always looking into the apertures leading to the apartments; and as a matter of fact,
the men pass out of and into the bed-places of others without the possibility of observation,
unless some fellow prisoners happen to be awake and observing, or unless the sentry
happens at the moment to be passing by.
4872. At Cockatoo Island there does not appear to be any sentry near the prisoners at
night; and it is the fact that the ward>raen of these large dormitories are prisoners;
prisoners also are appointed to act as sub-overseers ? The wardsmen of whom you speak are
not the same of whom I speak as sentries, I inquired, and was told one or two men were
appointed to these places, and that their business was, now and then, as officers in charge, to
peep into the dormitories, and that they would at all times go into them.
4878. By Mr. Wilson : At Cockatoo Island these ward.-men are locked up in the dormitories
with the prisoners? These are not the people I speak of; there used to be, at the time I
went over there, sentries.
4874. By the Chairman: At the present time the arrangement appears to be this: the
dormitories form three sides of a square, and I do not think there is any sentinel in the
square—within the dormitories there is a wardsman, who is supposed to pass up and down
this passage; but he is a prisoner; and the question I wish to ask you is, whether you
consider it right or safe, that prisoners should be appointed to a post of that kind, or to the
post of sub-overseer? Ido not think, under any circumstances whatever, a prisoner should
be appointed sub-overseer or wardsman ; and I think it impossible to expect good results
from a system of observation by a fellow prisoner within the sleeping apartment itself.
There should be the means of observation from without, and there should be few in each
apartment; but nothing will be effectual but the system I have already spoken of.
4875. Having glanced at the actual state of our prisons at the present moment, and keeping
in view the great importance of the proper management of the criminal population, are you
of opinion that it is necessary for the Government to go at once to a large expense, for the
purpose of having some great general prison, where the proper means of classification, where
the proper means of applying the labour of the prisoners to the best and most profitable ends,
could be secured, and where all other necessary steps in order to make the establishment
self-supporting
SirA.Stephcm,
Knt., O.J.
20 April, 1861.


self-supporting, at tlie same time to preserve morality, to carry out an effective punish-
ment, and if possible to restore the prisoner as a reformed man to society couid be provided.
If you look at the plan which I hold in my hand of the great prison at fe.ng bmg,
in the State of New York, you will see that there is m that prison provision made for
carrying on nearly every description of labour, so that persons physic.i y wea cou >e■ pu
to light employment, persons of greater physical strength to work for which they were fitted,
persons who had acquired some trade to follow that trade, and persons who shewed an apti-
tude for a particular trade to learn that trade, and thus have a means of earning an honest
livelihood on leaving the prison ? This is a question of policy, upon which Ido not know
that lam competent to give an opinion. Its solution will depend upon the estimate formed
of the enormous cost of a natural and efficient new system, as compared with the results to
be gained by it, contrasted with the present bad and incomplete system. On tins every man
will entertain his own opinion, but I will say that I think the question of tic pm ta eness
of labour in a prison which is, I know, one great end of economitts, and is one g r ,nf ca U! ®
in most of the American systems, is in my mind a matter of comparative unimportance, i
value not the profitableness of such an establishment at one straw as compared with the grand
end of benefit to the community, which might reasonably be hoped for in a really good
system. Hut a really good system, which would single outclasses and cases also, would cost
much more money than-any economical Government in these days will care to expend.
4876. Would you be in favour of the creation of a new office, such as that of an Inspector of
Prisons, with the view of securing some person well fitted for the business, to inspect the whole
of the prisons in the Colony, instead of having them as at present under the b her iff ( As to
the Sheriff, I conceive that he has so much to do in the civil department of his office, and in
executing writs, civil and criminal, that he cannot possibly exercise any more than a very
general and loose supervision over any gaol, even if one alone be intrusted to him, and 1 dare
say that much good might result from the appointment of a competent and highly energe ic
person as an Inspector of Prisons. Hut a vast number of useful reforms might be carried out
without any such officer at all; as for instance, labour might be provided in most ot
the gaols, whereas in some of them I certainly know there is no labour provided w lat
ever, so that the men remain in a state of idleness, which is the worst state next
to that of actual abomination which a prisoner can be left in. I think that much good
might result from the occasional visits and inspections of the Judges, either of the supreme
Court or of the District Court, or both, if they have time to devote to such a duty, because
they are the men who would be most likely to have formed a sound opinion on the subject
generally. „
4877. You desire, I think, to recur to the subject of the regulations issued by Mr. Cowper f
I perceive that the regulations of the Ist June, 1858, do not prevent the recommendation
of prisoners on grounds connected with conduct after conviction, but merely prevent petitions
from the prisoners themselves on that ground, and this strengthens my impression that it
never was intended that no conduct after sentence, however go d, should be considered. it
is one thing for a prisoner to apply, stating his good conduct, and a very different thing
indeed for the chaplain or superintendent to make such an application on his behalf, on
the ground of good conduct. What I mean here is good conduct, not tested by the old,
incorrect, and unsatisfactory mode, of so much labour done.
4878. By Mr. Wilson : It has been represented to this Committee that the prisoners on
Cockatoo Dbind receive, in some instances, pecuniary rewards for extra work done; this
money they are allowed to spend as they choose j and we find that it is generally expended
on tobacco, so that the unlimited use of tobacco is allowed on the island, more e>pecially in
the dormitories at night. It has been stated to this Committee that it is sometimes earned
to such an extent that the lamp hanging in the dormitory is not to be seen. Do think
such a state of things should be allowed, or that tobacco should be allowed to the piisoners
at all? 1 am b} 7 no means prepared to say that indulgence should not be allowed to the
prisoners for good conduct, and I suppose that the use ut tobacco, to some extent, is not a
vicious indulgence, but its excessive use in the way spoken of I should certainly think was
very undesirable; and I think, further, that if a prisoner has time, he should, as a general
rule, employ it in something better than mere work, with the object of getting indulgence
for it.
APPENDIX.
A.
Memorandum. Monday Evening, 22 April.
In reference to the evidence given by him before the Committee on Prisons, Sir Alfred Stephen
solicits permission to supplement what he said by the following paper : _
1. The sole object of all punishment by the law for crime is, as he conceives, the protection o e
community at large from similar outrages. And with that view, he thinks twothings are mc e er-
mining the sentence —to be aimed at in all cases. First, adequate terror to the ill-disposed ;soas o
•deter others from committing the like crime. Secondly, the prevention of any repetition o i
(absolutely, or for some considerable period) by, at all events, the same individual.
2. Bearing in mind the one principle here enunciated, the sentence in each case will depen on
various considerations. The nature of the crime, the aggravations (if any) attending it in the par icu ar
instance, the consequences of such a crime to society, if extensively prevalent, and the degree, t rere ore,
in which it is important to the general safety, or the general welfare, to prevent it ; the probafcu i y o
the recurrence of the crime, the temptations to it, and the facilities which exist for its commission.
Lastly, with respect to different individuals, convicted of the same species of crime, or of precisely e
same crime, regard should be had to the antecedents, and, so far as they can be ascertained, ie
tendencies of each prisoner ; since the probabilities of its recurrence, in each. instance, will vary
according to those circumstances. g


. .. '*• n( l °th er principle than the one announced, it is conceived, can the punishment of death be
justified. As the preservation of life, and the security of the person from gross and brutal outrage, are
the most important objects in every community, murder, rape, wounding with intent to murder, and
robbery on the highway, or burglary, accompanied by injury to the person, are subject to that punish-
ment, as. the one most likely to inspire terror—and therefore to deter other men from such crimes;
while it is the only known punishment, which can with certainty prevent their repetition, by the same
cnrainal. buch at least, we must infer, are the grounds on which this awful penalty is prescribed.
Hut, m any event, the considerations for the Judge, in determining whether its actual infliction ought
to ensue, in any given instance, will be those which have been indicated.
4. It by no means follows from what has been advanced in this paper, that the task of attempting
to reform the criminal (in every case, but especially in cases where it is contemplated, or is possible,
that he may one day again return to society) ought not to be undertaken, or that it is not a duty,
equally to the prisoner himself and to the public. All that the writer maintains is, that the object
neithei is nor can be one aimed at by, or connected with, any end or aim of legal.punishment. Nor, as
he apprehends, is that reformation properly the end or object (in any other than a very subordinate
degree) of convict discipline. If the object of punishment for crime be that which has been stated,
convict discipline winch is only the carrying out of the punishment—should be so regulated as best
to effect that object. And in whatever proportion you diminish the dread and terror of punishment,
as such, in the minds of those who may be tempted to crime, in that same proportion will you inflict
evil on the community.
5. Nevertheless, if the dicipline be such as continually to inspire that dread which is its object,
the refOi ination of each criminal will be of vast importance, even on the principle contended for.
Much will have been accomplished, in the way of protection from the recurrence of crime, by those
who become iclcased from the state of suffering’, if they return with changed tendencies and dispo-
sjtions no longer the violators, but the supporters of decency and the laws. The difficulty
lies, on the part of the authorities, in not being deceived; in having some safe test of this change;
and, above all, in l econciling the two objects, of rewarding a criminal for good conduct by indulgences,
and finally by remitting his punishment, and yet affording by that punishment the necessary warning
and dread, which, if endured, it was calculated to inspire.
Sir A. Stephen,
Knt., C.J.
20ApriU861.
MONDAY, 22 APRIL, 1861.
Urgent
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr. WILSON.
J. B. WILSON, Esquire, Chairman pro. temp.
[Tiie Committee having met at 8 - 30 a.m., on the Semi-circular Quay, proceeded to
Cockatoo Island, and assembling at the Superintendent’s Office, the Chairman (Mr. Wilson)
took the Chair.]
Gother Kerr Mann, Esq., called in and further examined ;
4879. By the Chairman: You received last Saturday a letter from this Committee in
reference to taking the evidence of certain persons selected from the body at Cockatoo
Island, as to any grievances of which they might consider they had cause to coni}.lain ? I
received a letter from the Committee here at nine o’clock, of their intention to examine and
hear any complaint? that any prisoner might wish to make, provided these complaints were
confined to their general treatment, their accommodation, and the quality of their provisions;
that the Committee would not entertain or enter into anything relative to their judicial
sentences. A paragraph of this letter I read to the body of men, in accordance with the
request of the Committee, this morning at six o’clock, when they were turning out to work.
4880. By Mr. Morris : Did the letter say it was to be read this morning? No; the letter
said to inform the prisoners if I considered it judicious to do so, or words to that effect.
4881. By the Chairman ; There was no mention in the letter that prisoners should select
certain individuals of their number to represent them? No, I think not. {The letter was
here p> oduced.')
4882. What followed the reading of that letter ? The men proceeded out to work quietly
and orderly, and at the usual hour of eight o’clock they were called in to breakfast. When
the bell rang at a quarter to nine, the principal warder came up to me and reported that the
men had refused to go out to work, because they wanted to see the Committee in a body. I
immediately went to the yard, and ordered them to fall in in their gangs, which they did. I
then addressed them, saying that they had committed an act of insubordination, and that it
rested entirely with the Committee how they would see them, and that if they persisted in
their insubordination I should know what steps to take, and that it was my impression that
when the Committee heard they had been guilty of such insubordination they would get into
their boat and go away without hearing one of them. Some of the men called out that they
wished to see the Committee in a body; but at length one or two spokesmen came forward
and said they wanted to see the Committee about this new Act, alluding to the recent regu-
lations of the island. I told them I would not stand parleying with them —that it was their
duty to fall in forthwith, and if they did not I should take other steps. I then ordered the
wardsmen to tell the men to go to work, which they did. I gave directions to the free
officers of the gangs to take notice of any men who wanted to see the Committee and to bring
the names up to me in order that I might lay them before them.
4883. A list has been handed to you of certain persons who wished to communicate with
the Committee? Yes. {The witness handed the list to the Chairman )
4884. I see there are about ninety names in this list ? Yes. If the Committee would
allow me to suggest, I think it would be well that I should muster the men in the yard and
order tjiem to fall in according to their ward muster. Perhaps the Committee would then
explain to them the utter impossibility of examining the whole of them, and direct them to
select two delegates from each dormitory for examination.
[The
Cockatoo
Island Prison.
22 April, 1861.
G. K, Mann,
Esq.


[The men having been assembled, the Committee proceeded to the yard,—
inviting the occupants of each dormitory to select two delegates. Having returned],—
James Arnott and Henry Clarke called in.
[Delegates from No. 1 Ward ]
Henry Clarke examined :
4885. By the Chairman : What we wish to get fmm you is any evidence you may have to
give with regard to the treatment you receive on the island, or as to f >od, or accommodation.
On the general subject we have as much information for our guidance as you can give us?
There is one observation 1 wish to make —one great complaint—the men being detained
on the island after the Judge’s warrant has expired ; and another complaint I have to make
of men receiving the indulgence of a ticket of-le .ve, and f r merely leaving their district to
go to see their wife or family, being sent back here under the new system, which it might
be only four months, or it might be four years; so that a man who is sent back for four
years is punished twelve times worse than the other. Here is another thing. Two men
receive a sentence from a Judge. They both receive a sentence from the same Judge. One
man will receive a sentence of fifteen years, with the-first three years in chains; the other
man will receive a sentence of fifteen years, without any chains. The man that received the
fifteen years—not considering the real period of wearing these chains for three yeais —his
probation is not allowed to commence until his chains are struck, which will take this man
two years and two months, with ten months credit for extra work ; which will cau.-e the
man to do eight years actual time, with three years credit for actual work. The other man
who received no punishment of chains, will get the indulgence of a ticket-of-leave at the
expiration of five years and eight months. There are some of these men who are allowed
by a little meritorious conduct, as it is termed here—that is, by giving up his fellow
prisoners; first, he is the man that gets up any little plot; then, he gives information to the
authorities of what is going on, and he may have the indulgence for this of having his chains
taken off, and get his ticket-of-leave; but the man who does not give information may stop
here till his whole sentence is expired. For instance, I received a sentence from Mr. Justice
Therry, in 1857, of eight years, the first three years to be served in irons. I came on the
island and completed two years and two months. My chain time was struck then, and I had
to commence a probation fur eight years, 'whereas, if a man had come on the island for eight
years without any irons, he would have to serve three years and three months, with fifteen
months ciedit for marks. I have got 569 days credit, making, in all, five years and nine
months, where a man would only have had probation for only four years and a half. I have
not committed the slightest offence on the island, and was never brought to the office previous
to the 2Brd January last, when I fell out with the mob to represent the old system, thinking
to see you if I was sent over to the gaol. I ought to have had my ticket-of-leave last June,
which they tell me in the office —which they even tell Capt. Scott. Capt. Scott says when
he was here, “What is the reason he has not. got his ticket”; they said, “Because he received
the punishment of chains.” Now the Government are not aware of this punishment of
chains higher than Capt. M'Lerie. When Capt. M'Lerie was here I complained to him, and
be said, “ Well, send a petition to me.” I did send a petith n, but 1 have no doubt the
petition did not go to him. I was the only plasterer then on the island, and I was plastering
the house of Capt. Mann.
4886. Try and make your statement as general as you can ; the Committee do not wish you
to go into these particulars ? 1 wish to shew you how many are detained on the island after
the Judge’s warrants are expired. There are several men kept in this way; there is one
man by the name of William Thomas; he receives a sentence of five years in the year 1848 ;
he obtains his ticket-of-leave; he receives a similar sentence of five years in 1851; he
obtains a ticket-of-leave for that sentence; he then receives a sentence of three years in
March, 1857 ; —the whole of these three sentences expired in March, 1860. The man comes
up here to know the reason he is detained on the island, and they tell him at this office that
he is not free till the 29th July, 1861, making him do seventeen months after his Judge’s
warrants are all expired. I can quote more cases of the same description There are several
more on the same system as mysedf, with respect to the iron time—twelve or fourteen —
who have selected me to represent them.
4887. By Mr. Suihtrland: Is a man named John Torpey on the island? He has gone;
he was kept here fourteen days after his sentence expired.
4888. Is there a man named Conolly ? Patrick Conolly ; he has left.
4889. How did Conolly get away before his time? He did not get away before his time,
he went away when the Judge’s warrant was expired. He received a sentence of fourteen
days solitary for the outbreak, similar to the rest. One man is allowed to leave the island,
Patrick Conolly, when his two years sentence has expired; the other’s two years expires in
about a fortnight afterwards—he comes up to the office, is taken into the store, and has
put on part of his clothes, when the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Mr. Taylor, says, “ You are
not a free man, you had fourteen days in the cells.” The man says, “ What is the reason
lam detained, and the other men let go ?” “ Oh, it is a mistake,” and he receives
fourteen days. Not only Conolly is let go, but an aboriginal that committed a rape at
Bathurst; he received six weeks solitary, and he was allowed to go when the time was
expired. They will let any man go that they like, and will keep any man from going they
think fit.
4890. By the Chairman: Have you any other grievance to complain of? Concerning the
sleeping apartments, they are very bad indeed. Such a night as last night several men had
to leave their sleeping bunks and get into any they could get into. The place is very bad.
4891. Is it leaky ? Yes, the rain comes through. Not only the sleeping apartments, but
the


the mess-shed; it looks very well such a day as this, but on a wet day you cannot stand in it
for the ram coming through. And the ration is very bad at times.
st le ration generally bad, or is it the bread of which you complain ? Generally the
aooQ No ® t le meat 18 bad ollce - y°« will had the bread bad four or five times.
489 d. Vho examines the bread ? The delegate who is appointed every Monday morning.
Sns recommendation generally acted upon by the authorities on the island ? It is
not. ih. re is a sort of what they term a Hoard—the superintendent, Mr. Taylor, and the
dispenser, they will sit upon u—and if the delegate say-, “I do not wish to take th s bread,”
Gapt. Mann will perhaps say, - I think it is fit for use,” and will make the man take it.
wo Oi iree times after it has been taken Capt. Scott has come and condemned it, and the
superintendent has written about it to the c mtractor; but what is the good of that if he
does not represent it to the Government. If he was to do so it wou.d soon be put a stop to.
ico- 'v ratloD causes a g'; od dea ' disturbance on this island.
48110. Do the men complun much of the manner in which the food is served to them—for
instance of the meat being placed on the boards ? There is a great rumour amongst them
of it, and it looks some way unnatural to see the meat taken out a M placed on the table
without plates, knives, and forks. If a man has not a pocket-knife, he must gnaw it like a
og, le is supplied with a spoon and dish for soup, hut the messmen will throw it down on
the table if they have not got a fork. At Darlinghurst, the men have plates, knives, and
forks. r ’
if’’ Ar ° the men allowed t 0 have pocket-knives ? If they have got them.
48J/. B 7 Mr. Morris :Is the bread good this morning? We do not see it till dinner time,
when it is served out. There is another thing—l do not km.w whether it is worth while
bringing it under your notice—the way the men are discharged; some of them arc sent out
dv>Si/i ute, with Government slops on them, branded with a felon’s brand, without a penny
in their pockets, just the way this man (pointing to Jus fellow prisoner ) is now branded.
Now I would ask you gentlemen, even if a man was reformed, w< uld you give a n an employ-
ment if he came to you in that suit —would you not sooner call a constable and give him
in charge, thinking he was coming to rob you If a man leaves in that state, will it not
cau>e him to commit a crime that he had not the least thought of doing, in order to supply
himself with other clothes. There are several men who have brought good clothes with
them to the island, and they have been abstracted from the stores.
4898. By Mr. Moots: Has that occurred since Captain Mann has been superintendent?
No ; because no prisoner could have recourse to the stores without a free officer being with
him—but it used to be so.
By Mr. Suthei land: You say you are the only plasterer on the island ? lam not at
the present moment; there is another man now, of the name of Knowles; he came here on
the 23rd of January last, but I had been the only one on the island for four years.
4900. You have been employed in pla-tering Captain Mann’s house? Yes.
4901. How did you get materials for that work—lime, laths, and so on ? It was forwarded
over here, the same as other stores that came to the island
4902. There was no difference between the materials that came for that and for any other
work? No; the lime was all shell-lime for the plaster. I think there was about sixty
weight of plaster, just enough to run the cornice. In fact, I did not have sufficient for it.
James Arnott examined :
4903. By the Chairman: Have you anything to add to what has just been stated by Clarke?
The bedding here is never washed ; a man receives his blankets when he comes here, and
they last the whole of the time without seeing any water; there are no facilities for cleanli-
ness in any way.
4904. What is the size of the utensils you have to wash in ? They are very small; I should
say about two feet six by fifteen inches.
4905. Are they of stone or of wood ? They are stone sinks; it is very probable that only
two or three times a week clean water goes into them. On Saturday afternoon we are kept
on the works till two o’clock, contrary to the Government regulations.
4906. By Mr. Sutherland: Without getting any dinner ? We have no dinner till we come
out; it is merely done to enable the men under the old system to get their half-mark.
4907. By the Chairman: Have the new-sentenced men no benefit from it whatever ? No
benefit whatever. Some of the men have not time, from two to five o’clock, to get shaved,
and they have to shave on Sunday morning.
4908. By Mr. Sutherland : What time have they to wash their clothes? There are washer-
men on purpose, who are supposed to wash their shirts.
4909. By the Chairman : How many of these washing basins are there ? Six, in the yard.
4910. And these six have to be used by all the prisoners? With the exception of the
servants.
4911. By Mr. Morris : Would the whole of the men in the dormitories have to use these
basins for their ablutions ? On Sunday morning they bring two or three tubs of dirty water
from the well at the back.
4912. On week days ? Some of the men wash on the works.
4913. By the Chairman: Is it fresh water or salt? It is fresh, but it is very dirty, being
taken from the old tank where they are extending the works. The troughs are filled on
Saturday night, and some of the men there wash their feet in it and it is left for the men to
wash in on Sunday morning.
4914. The water in these troughs is not renewed every day ? I can answer for Sunday, by
being all day in the yard and it is not renewed then.
4915.
Cockatoo
Island Prison.
22 April, 1861.
H. Clarke.
James Arnott,


4915. By Mr. Sutherland: These troughs are in the open yard ? Yes.
4916. There is no place for a bath? No, except the hospital
4917. By Mr. Morris: How have you to wash on a rainy day ? There is no place to wash
in when it is raining, there is no place under cover. In fact the yard is a fi -by place
altogether. The water-closets are close to the cook-house, and there are no doois to them or
anything else, and in hot weather the smell is filthy. Another matter is the distribution of
the gratuity money here. If a man gets severely injured here and is sent to the hospital,
from that he is sent to the exempt bank, and he may be kept there from six to twelve months.
All that time his gratuity money is stopped, and he has no means of getting tea, sugar, or
4918 Will you state what is the amount of the gratuity? I understand it is threepence a
day but there are only a few men on the island who receive threepence; there are men who
receive as low as a penny or a halfpenny, and what is curtailed from them goes to the bank
for the stone-cutters. They receive threepence a day for cutting twelve feet six niches, and
for any over they get a halfpenny a foot. So that a penny from one, and a halfpenny,
enables the stone-cutters to bank money, and they alone are allowed to do so. Again, icrc
is a great deal of partiality shewn on this island; the oftener a man has been on the i.land-
the greater scoundrel he is-the more fair play will they shew him. In fact these are the
only men who can do any good. . T . • „
4919. How do you account for it? I cannot account for it. Since I got my six weeks
addition for insubordination, since I came back here, there was an application made or me
to go as toolman to the gang to which I belonged and I was not allowed, for having one
six weeks. A few days after Mr. Broderick made an application for a man of the name ot
Johnson, and there was no objection made to him; he was allowed to go, although he had
done six weeks. . , , , , . , i
4920. By Mr. Mate: W r as he a mechanic? He is a painter by trade, but he was wanted in
the capacity of a servant. . r , .
4921. By Mr. Sutherland: Hoes he continue in that capacity ? He docs. I spoke to the
superintendent and requested to see the Visiting Magistrate about it. I saw Captain bcott,
and he said he had nothing to do with the internal management of the island. Ihe super-
intendent said he would use his own discretion as to whom he placed in billets. Hie only
reason I can as.-ign for it is my seeing the Committee at Harlmghurst Gaol; there is nothing
else against me in the office.
4922 Is that against you in the office ? 5 es. -ri
4928. By Mr. Morris: Were you applied for? I was, by Mr. Hasten. _
4924. By Mr. Mate: You say that was against you in the office-giving evidence before
this Committee ? That is my supposition, because there was nothing else against me in
the office, only my six weeks solitary confinement. The conduct of the free officers to le
prisoners generally is sarcastic and taunting; there is no incentive to industry or good
conduct. If you speak of good conduct you are only laughed at.
4925. By the Chairman: Do the prisoners generally object to prisoners being placed over
them as overseers ? They do.
4926. Are there many overseers prisoners now ? Aes, a great many.
Frank Somerville and Edward Power called in.
[Delegates from No. 2 Ward.]
Edward Power examined: —
. 4927 By the Chairman: Will you state what complaints you have to make against the
general management of the island, the nature of the food, or of the accommodation ? With
regard to the sleeping dormitories we have, they are very badly ventilated, and also the ram
comes in. The last shower a good many of us had to remove from our allotted posts, taking
our beds and blankets, and trying to get a dry place to lie down upon. Likewise, these roots,
you can see daylight through the whole of them. The bedding and blankets we get are very
dirty they are never washed ; and likewise the eating place. Yesterday, when the Catholics
were there at church, all the men had to stand outside in the rain when they came from prayers.
Likewise, about the way we get our grub served out to us. The provisions at present we
cannot complain of them ; they are served out in a very bad way—thrust on the table without
any knives, or forks, or plates. We have dishes to get our soup in, that is all.
4928. By Mr. Mate : A dish to each man ? Yes. . .
4929. By the Chairman: A soup dish only? A soup dish. And there is another affair
they have got up there lately. On the original system, I believe, at one time the men were
allowed to work till twelve o’clock on Saturdays; but, in regard of there being an alteration
some years back in the system, they have altered the time to two o’clock, so as to give these
old Act men overtime, which we have to work the same time and get no benefit at all by
this. Likewise, if a man gets accidentally hurt upon the works, he has to see the doctor
and is put upon the bank; perhaps he is kept there two months, and his pay is stopped a
that time, and he is obliged to drink water at .the water-cask at night. His gratuity money
is stopped. There is a gratuity served out here, and the men are not classified; they are
huddled all up together, the first, second, and third-class men ; and a second and third class
man is perhaps working with a first-class man, and they do not any of them get their pay.
Plenty of men do not get a farthing, while other men, stone-cutters, are allowed to ban
money here. Likewise the manner the men are discharged from this place they are
discharged destitute, without clothing or money; they are sent away in Government clothing,
branded —they have no way of getting away, some of them, but with convicts’ clothing on
them. At times here, we want to see the superintendent or the Visiting Magistrate, and w e
cannot
E. Power,


cannot get to see him without we put down our name to see him before Saturday, we cannot
see him till the Saturday following. If we want to see the Visiting Magistrate, we cannot
see him unless we tell the superintendent what we want to see him foi" then it is at the
superintendent’s option whether he will allow us to see the Visiting Magistrate or not ‘ The
general body of these new Act men object to act under prisoner overseers
4930. By Mr. Morris : Why do they object ? They seem to say they have no right to work
under the jurisdiction of another prisoner. It is not at all times the best characters are
appointed to be overseers; the biggest part get appointed by rascality and roguery, which
the records or this office will certify. - °
4931 Have you anything to complain against the fairness of these overseers, either as
regards the measuring of work, or the recording of good conduct ? A good many do not
know the nature of this work—they never worked a day in their lives; they want to <-et
unnecessary work out of the men, and they tantalize you to say something ; and then they
take you to the office and get you punished for it.
4932. By Mr Sutherland: They do not understand the work ? They do not understand
the work at all. Ihere may be one or two that do.
4933. Can you give any instances of men who have been punished, and then placed as an
overseer over the rest ? Yes ; there is an instance just lately, six weeks or two months ago.
Une ot the overseers had been broken by the magistrate for communicating with the
prisoners in confinement, and giving them provisions not allowed ; and a day or two after
he received his blue jacket. Another instance, there was a man in this office of the name of
Townsend, as a cierk or messenger, he commits a felony by taking some man’s clothing and
making away with them. Well, he is discharged from here, and then some time after he is
placed upon the work here. He is at present in a situation here.
4904. The piisoners believe that it is not good conduct that gets a prisoner into a billet ?
4935. And they object to working under them on that account ? Yes.
4936. By the Chairman : Have the prisoners any complaints to make with regard to the
means afforded them of keeping their persons clean ? Yes.
4937. Have they not proper facilities for washing their bodies ? There is no place at all
for keeping a person clean here.
4935. When you are allowed to wash, have you invariably clean water to wash in ? No ;it
is nasty, thick, scummy water.
4939. Arc two men allowed to wash in the same water? It is only a tub, and a hundred
men are all rushing to see who shall get the first to it and wash themselves.
4940. Have you anything else to state ? No, Ido not think of anything.
4941. (7o Frank Somerville .) Have you anything you wish to add to Power’s statement? F
No, I think not.
Gilbert Isaacs [Delegate from No. 3]; William Sampson and Henry Carroll [Dele-
gates from No. 4]; William Thomas Macgregor and Lawrence Cowan [Delegates from No. 5
Ward] called in.
Gilbert Isaacs examined :
4942. By the Chairman : What we wish to get from you is, any complaints you may have
to make as to the general accommodation, the food, and treatment you receive here. We
wish you to keep yourself to principles and general statements, without instancing any
particular cases; particular cases we cannot enter into? When I was before the gentlemen
on a previous occasion, I was speaking in reference to the appropriation of the gratuity
money, and though I gave some information upon that head, I did not enter into it so fully
as I would wish to do. I am now seven months an overseer, having had charge of men
and seen how they have been treated in the gang, and I am sure, if you will listen to
me, you will say the money is appropriated in a manner the Government never intended. In
the first place, when the cabbage-tree was taken away from the prisoners the pay money was
substituted, and the prisoners always understood they were to receive threepence a day—all
the men on the works. The men are all classed here when they arrive by Dr. West,
according to their physical strength, and not according to their character, in the first, second,
and third classes. In my gang I have first and second class men, men mixed indiscriminately.
Now there is a scale of task-work used here —mine is a hand-cart gang—by which the first-
class men are required to put out 115 cubic feet of stuff a day, 100 yards—for this no gratuity
is allowed; the second class have to put out 64 feet, and the third class 32 feet. These are
facts which can he corroborated by the free officers. I have two classes of men in my gang,
the first and second mixed together. The men of the second class have just about half the
work to do that the men of the first have, and the consequence is, that the second-class man
may earn 2d. a day, while the first-class man will not have completed his Government task ;
therefore, at the end of the fortnight, when the gratuity money is paid, the second-class man
receives in proportion to the work done, and the first-class man receives nothing. He is not
placed in a gang where he can work with men classed with himself, but in a gang where he
cannot do more than the men who are working in the same cart with him. The last pay
we received, a first-class man, working with my gang, for ten days’ labour received two-
pence, and a second-class man, working in the same cart, received Is. This first-class
man was under the old system, receiving marks, and his marks were stopped, in addition to
his pay being stopped, because he had not performed his Government task. This 115
feet of stuff, it is admitted by the free officers themselves, to be more than the men can do,
and yet it is imposed. There are a class of men who receive threepence a day ; these are the
cutters; they have to perform the Government task of seven feet a day, and five feet four
157—Z extra


extra entitles tie. a
=S* -
wsmmßsswmm
lw inincr a shorter road, before the men are done washing their hands and paces, ana yet
when a vessel is going out of dock, and the men are rung in for safety, they deduc
1 alfnennv for that although only ten minutes may be lost. So that it actually appears
t theTonersV.t tbf W»d authorities strive in every possible way to impose
upon them for these odd halfpence, which is their maintenance ; foi' they
r.nlv twice a day, and there is no provision made for suppei , this gratuity p v
them with it, and 7 unless they receive it they must take cold water for supper after a
dav’s work. If any man were to go to the yard in the evening, when they knock oil work,
find fifty or sixty men standing there with a piece of crust, the remnant o u
dinner in one hand, and a pint of cold water in the other. There is another subject I
should wish to speak upon We have the indulgence of writing to our friends once a
month, and we are made to pay for these letters ourselves. Now I have here mys If
two vears • and during the whole of that time I can safely Say with tiuth that i nave pa a
M fo7three letters, L each time cue peony each. My letters have a ways
and reached my wife in safety; other men have paid for their
think—finding that my letters go regularly, and having no difficulty abo t
not bound to pay for them. It is not so in Government establishments , it is not so m
the gaol • durino- the time of my committal, I was always supplied with stamps, ipw i
a Xhas to pay for his stamps here, and only has two-pence to receive for a fortnights
labour if be wants to send a letter to his friends in England, he has to wait six weeks before
he can send it. Not only that, but letters that are written on the Sunday do not go away
till the middle of the week following. Some time ago I wrote to my wife one Sand y,
and she was here to see me on the Sunday following, and my letter was oo rcceiv y
her till the following Monday. I have received letters three weeks
been posted in Sydney. The rations we receive are very inferior; in fact, during t e „
month there have been incessant complaints, and it has been a constant occurrence for
bad rations to come here and to be refused. _ ,
4943 Bu Mr. Mate (handing a loaf to the witness ) ; W hat do you call that .1
better than frequently comes here. If you bad not been here no such bread would have
come It is a common remark here that we can know when any one is coming,
mess-shed; I dare say some of the gentlemen have seen the line of tables there. One side
is used for dining off, and the men have only the table to place their meat on, a
they have finished, a couple of buckets of water are thrown over it to wash it down; but on
Wednesday, when we expect the Visiting Magistrate, the clean side of the table is turned
up and the dirty side is turned down. Then again, the boards in the dormitories are
particularly well-cleaned out on Wednesday morning, for thes magistrate s visit,. and this
cleanliness consists in rubbing over a coat of whitewash; if he took the trouble to look
underneath the bed-places he could find cart-loads of dirt. Washing convenience we have
none; there are about four or five stone troughs in the yard, about two feet long, a
eighteen inches wide, for a number of men to use. The water is not broug 10
tanks, but from the coppers in the cook-house, and sometimes the men turn up then trousers
and wash their legs there, and that water remains the remainder of the day.
4944. Have the men any towels? Twelve or eighteen months ago they were each supplied
with a towel, and having once been supplied, that towel may he supposed to last tor ever
the same with our frocks, the men are allowed only one duck frock, and all through the
summer they are never supposed to have that washed. We are allowed two pairs ot duck
trousers, which are supposed to be washed once a month, hut they are occasionally thrown.
Our shirts get a sort of wash twice a week, and come back as dirty as ever, as may pe
supposed when I state that the whole of the shirts for 250 men are washed by four men m
one day. If men who wear flannel shirts or flannel socks wish to have them washed, they
must pay the prisoners who do the washing a penny or two-pence for them. Then as regards
the beds, the straw we are supplied with is supposed to last for ever, and the ticks are never
washed, and during the two years I have been here I have had only one pair of blankets.
4945. Are they never washed ? No such thing is known, you must pay sixpence to a tellow
prisoner if you want them washed. . . , ?
4946. By the Chairman : With regard to the dormitories, are there many vermin in them .
Yes. In summer time to keep them properly clean they require to be stoved once a month.
4947. Are these dormitories ever fumigated ? Yes, once in the summer with brimstone,
and by the wards, if I may use the expression, torturing the chief warder with our com-
plaints, he will promise to see about their being stoved again. This “ seeing about i
occupies a mouth, and during the whole of that time we have sleepless nights. I myself have


taken my bed off ray bunk, and dragged it on to the flags, and then I have bad the bu*s drop
from the ceiling on me. If you could see the men when they come out of the wards in the
morning you would say that they were more like men who had been out drinking all night
than men who had had rest; they look more haggard coming out than they do in at
night from work. There is no ventilation; the men are confined in a ward constructed for
eighty-eight men sleeping on the top of one another, their breaths mingling, and the smell
from the conveniencies for nature, three or four of them in each ward, without any cover
and men performing the offices of nature, if in any way indisposed. Another complaint: in
wet weathei if it should lain for a week, as it has done for three days successively, we are
confined the whole of the time in the wards, which are as bad as the yard; the floor is worn
into holes, and the roof leaks like a sieve.
4948. These wards are also the dormitories ? These are the dormitories. The last wet
weather we had we were in a dreadful state; going into the mess-room we had to turn up
the bottoms of our trousers, the room was under water, the table and the forms we sat upon
were wet. The men wanted the superintendent to come down and look at them and to see
them while they were in that state for it is all very well for people to come down on a fine
day to see them when they are expected but the superintendent did not come down when
they wanted him. The next morning, when the rain had ceased, he came down and the
ward was shewn to him. Pie said, “I am sorry for you, but all the free officers are just as
bad. Shingles aie continually coming here, but they never go on our ward.
4949. By Mr. Sutherland : Where do they go ? Ido not know where they go. A long
time ago the state of the roof was spoken of, and shingles have everlastingly arrived, and
some little patching has been done from time to time, but the shingles have been on so loner
that patching is not the thing. A most flagrant act of injustice in my mind, and I think
it must be in yours, was committed here. I refer to the treatment of two prisoners who
lately left this place one man being sent away at the expiration of his warrant, and the
other having an addition of fourteen days. The men were Conolly and Torpy. In fact,
the men were inclined to refuse work till this thing was settled, for the men could not
but feel that it was unjust,
4950. Who was this man Conolly ? He was a sawyer, and the other man during the whole
time I have known him has never been punished once. He is a quiet, harmless, inoffensive
little fellow. When the men are sent away from here there is no provision made for them,
and if they have no friends to look after them, the only description of clothing
they can depend upon when they go is either a shirt or a coat, or something from the
prisoners arriving, or else they have to extort money from others to get a few articles of
clothing; men have been even refused a blue jacket belonging to the Government to go
away with. Another remark I wish to make. lam a sub-overseer, and have a gang under
me, and it is the custom of the free officers to throw the work as much as possible upon the
sub-overseers. One of them will come to me and say, “ Isaacs, get so-and-so done,” and then
go away to a little distance; if he sees one of the men idle, he does not complain to the men,
it is only the sub-overseer he looks to. During the time the large number of men were
at the gaol for insubordination, I was required to draw a number of stones from the quarry,
and, as I had not enough men in my own gang, I had to take fifteen men from different
overseers to perform the work. As it was a very hot day, the men worked very slowly ; my
overseer never came down to them, but I saw him at a distance looking on. At the end of
the day he called me to him, and said, “ These men have done very little to-day.” I said
the day had been very hot, and he replied, a man would be damned to enter anything for
these men—that was his expression—“ I will enter nothing, I will leave them for Mr.
Broderick.” Mr. Broderick might not have been there and have seen the men at work, and
therefore he might have decided against them, but, on the representation of the free
officer, he might have been disposed to enter the work. “ Mr. Fitzgerald,” I said, “if you
“ will not go down among the people, I will not abuse or bully them into work; I have only
<l to see that they do not leave off their work, and I shall not subject myself to the abuse of
“ the men. You see one man has been struck by another and mutilated for abusing him, and
“ I shall not expose myself to the same thing.” He said, “ I never heard you abused, and if
I heard you abused, it would only shew you were doing your duty.” So that a prisoner is
constantly placed between the other prisoners and the free officer, and he keeps on the safe
side. On Saturday the men have to work till two o’clock, to enable the men under the old
system to get half a mark, and it is very hard upon men, who have only had a few ounces of
hominy in the morning, to be kept working five hours without their dinner. Then again the men
employed in the lumber yard, in the carpentering sheds, and engine-house, have to work during
wet weather; they are under cover, and go out to work while the others are confined in the
wards the whole time. In fact the whole of the regulations want reforming, everything is done
in the most slovenly and careless manner. The officers shew a great amount of partiality.
Some men are allowed to do anything they like, and the officers will stick to him ; while if
another does not please a free officer he will say, “ Place him at the jumper,” and there he
will keep him. At one time they will joke and talk with you, at another you must not look
at them. If I may be allowed to judge, they hardly know their duty, or they would treat all
alike, and keep all the men at a distance. It is very hard if a man is playing at chess or
draughts, which are harmless games, to be ordered to put them away from him, and then for
him to see another allowed to play with them. One of the men spoke of the Clerk of
Petty Sessions as “ bloody Taylor,” the free officer in charge only said, “ Don’t talk in
that manner,” and took no further notice of it; if another man had said it he would have
been taken up and punished. Further than this,l do not know that I have anything to
complain of.
William


William Simpson examined :
4951. By the Chairman : Have you anything to add to what Isaacs lias stated ? One thing
I have to complain against. If the free officer has a down upon one man, he punishes the
whole gang; if he finds one man idle he stops the pay of the whole gang, and that is a
punishment for men who are getting only 2d. or 3d. a day.
4952. By Mr. Morris ; Are the whole of the men punished, although the rest of them are
all at work at the time ? The whole are punished. _ There is a great deal_ of class favour
among the officers; there are some five or six, or nine or ten men who receive favours from
the free officers, and become pets, because they run and tell all little tattling tales, and these
men get billets. Men who arrive on the island, and who it is known will tell all the little
occurrences, get billets directly. There is the case of White; he came heie the ot ici da},
and he had not been on the island twenty minutes before he got a billet as a painter. Other
painters have been on the island for years who have not got billets.
4953. By Mr. Sutherland: What is White doing now ? He is painting the police boat.
Another thing with regard to Captain Mann. If you have any complaints to lay befoic him
with regard to the free officers, Mr. Byron will ask you what you want to see Captain It ann
about, and unless he is satisfied with your statement he will not put your name down. There
is more difficulty in seeing Captain Mann, under general circumstances, than in seeing Queen
4954. Do you not see Captain Mann every day? You are not allowed to speak to him, if
you speak to him on the works you are punished. He is only to be seen on Saturday. If
you wish to see him on Saturday you have to place your name down on Friday, unless you
do that, however important it may be, you cannot see him till the following Saturday.
4955. By Mr. Morris : If the complaint is frivolous, is there any punishment for making a
frivolous complaint ? No, I never knew a man to be punished for making a frivolous com-
plaint. It is seldom a man gets redress here for making any complaint. In the case of
Cowan he complained to Captain Mann about Mr. Fitzgerald mot measuring his work properly,
and Captain Mann turned round to Cowan and said, “ I will not have complaints brought
against the free officers by the prisoners,” and he turned away without listening to the
grounds of the complaint.
[Laurence Cowan said: lam about the best stone-cutter on the island if lam
fairly dealt with, and when I made a complaint to Mr. Broderick about the free officer,
Mr. Fitzgerald, and said he did not bring out the work right, and Mr. Broderick
imposed silence and said, if I made a complaint he would have me sent to the cells.J
[William Simpson said : It is almost a moral impossibility to lay a complaint
at times unless you have the ear of the authorities.]
4956. By the Chairman (to Simpson ) ; If the gratuity is not given to a man foi a par-
ticular days work are his marks stopped ? He has to do the Government task independently
of the work for the gratuity; if he does only the Government task he has the mark but not
the gratuity.
4957. By Mr. Morris: How is it possible for the overseer to know whether a first-class man
has done the amount of work allotted to him if he is mixed up with second-class men, and
supposing the total amount of work done by the men when the average is struck is not
sufficient ? The overseers have been told by Captain Mann, in my presence, when complaints
have been brought here about the gratuity, when they have spoken about the quantity of
work done that they had nothing to do with the task or gratuity, that all they had to do was
to return the quantity of work done, and the task-work overseer was to make it up.
[Lawrence Cowan said: There is a lot of self-taught stone-cutters here, one
learns the other. There is one by the name of Mr. Fitzgerald, a free officer, he
never served an hour to the trade in his life; he was in the police boat before he
was placed over us, and he does not know whether a stone is cut right or wrong,
unless he is told by a prisoner in the gang. When an order is given for a stone for
the building, there is one or two spoiled by each man before he can get it right, or
fit for the building. When ho finds the stone is wrong, he gives an order for it to
be broken up and cast into the sea, so that no one shall see it. I wish to shew that
the labour of all hands on the island is lost on this stone. There is the quarryman,
he has to jump it and quarry it; the hand-cart mob have to drag it from the quarry
to the stone-cutter’s gang; then there is a man a day or two or three cutting this
stone; there is the blacksmith sharpening picks, jumpers, and crowbars; so that all
this work is destroyed. There is never one building put up on this island that has
not had the material for two buildings spoiled on it, and all this for want of a nee
man that understands the trade, to give the lines to the men. The men may leain to
draft, but take them off from ashlar or a header and they will spoil the stone. Inis
is the way the work has been carried on for years, and thousands and thousands o
feet of stone have been destroyed. There are thousands of mouldings now destioyc
not fit to put into the building, and condemned on the wharf, and all this destruction
for want of a free officer to shew the men how to do the work. If there was a man
like this, the prisoner would get his pay. This man gives orders to cut a stone
well, when he sees it on the bank he finds it will not do, and he gives orders to brea'
it up, and the man loses his pay.] , .
4958. By Mr Morris: Does he lose his marks as well as his pay ? No, he does not lose his
mark but his pay. When you go to him and ask him the reason, telling him it is un air,
he tells you to be off to your work. If you complain to Mr. Broderick, he says, “ Bring i
under Captain Mann’s notice.”
4959. By Mr. Sutherland : Have you no free officers to teach the men? No, there is not
a free officer on the island now that knows how to take the stone out of the windings,
and


and dozens of feet are broken every day. There nre wnvoc «e ,
island Who take a fancy to the and wbo would earn an honesU “veUhoo“X^hey
ymf oM^reguUdons 1 Yes.^ Ut never S et P a headefo^ashlarl
4961. Are you now ? No, lam under the new.
4962. You are serving a second sentence ? Yes T l-no W +w , ,
of the police boat, and if there had not been some men like me,
stone, he could never have got on at all. v miio aDout
1 d 11 ?™,T- homas ,^ ac S re S or said: Since I have been on the island I have
placed all the bedding and beam-work for the engine, and I have placed all the pulleys
brackets, shafts, &c. I have known Mr. Broderick to come into the room and sav
ir°l bes U " der ‘ l,is .p°%-” I have done so, and I have
had ei o ht bolts fatted for it, he has come and tried it, and it has been wrono- • I have
I have n known e n 'VS? Vf® T° ng ; then 1 llave P ufc half an inch plate in.
iave known upwaras of fifty bolts destroyed under one pulley. Then there is the
bedding of the new pump, which is not solid; the beamis wedged up with slips of
wnrfi'n do ? e while I was ill, by a man of the name of Scrimes. P While /was
o mg on the dock I have seen thousands of feet of shoreing cut up for Mr Mann’s
.
Jught tor ik at A noth er hin g /wisf to draw lentil l-Ttove^l tod Serving
for serving ships on blocks; it is for getting them on the blocks; it is a tell-tale and as soon
as ta. ship gets on the block it rings a bell. 1 shewed this to Mr. Broderick, asking him if
he would shew it to Mr Mann, and have it sent to the Government for their approval, but
he would not hear tell of it. I have also invented a patent block, which would save the
Gwernment from seven to hundred feet of planking every time a ship comes into fhe
coraino-1„ W ° U d b<3 a SaVmg t 0 tLe Government of 500 a year if ships were continually
Goof' WOCk t 0 S6en ? N ° ; 1 gave the desi S n to Mr - Br enan, at Woolloomooloo
4960. By Mr Sutherland: Were you working in the carpenters’ shop at the time the boat
was made ? No, I was sick at the time.
I'hnve lIaVB y ° U boen thC babit ° f repairin S boats for the officers of this island ?
4967. Will you state when, and how often, and what you have done to them ? I have
repaired a boat for Mr. Broderick.
4968. For any other officer ? Yes, for Captain Mann, four or five times.
4969. By the Chairman ; Where did you get the material ? In the boat-shed here : it was
boat planking belonging to the island. I put seventy feet in Mr. Broderick’s boat the last
time I repaired her. Likewise I built a punt in the dock, and I was given to understand
that a sum of money was granted for two punts for the island. She did not cost the
Government above £22, if she cost that.
4970. Including timber ? Including everything.
49 1 1. By Mr. Sutherland: Have you done any private work for the officers at their houses ?
I never go to their houses; I am not a joiner.
4972. When you say you have repaired Mr. Broderick’s private boat, does he keep any boat
now ? I have not seen any lately. I believe there is one moored off the landing-place • but
it used to be hanging on the davits. r ’
49/ 3. How many boats had he at any one time ? Only one that lam aware of.
4974. Had his son any ? His son had a small boat, which the prisoners got away with
4975. Bid prisoners get away more than once ? No, 1 think only once.
4976. Were boats allowed to come at any time to the island ? Mr. Broderick could come at
any time.
4977. Then I suppose it would have been easy for a prisoner to get away at ntoht ? At
that time.
4978. Is that regulation altered now ? Yes, the boats are all moored off at the buoy.
4979. Are you aware who altered the regulations ? No, lam not.
4980. Do you know anything of the punt belonging to the diving bell ? Yes • she was
wrecked here by the neglect of the officer. I broke her up.
4981. There was a punt and a small schooner called the “Bell”? Yes- she by
negligence, got ashore. The punt got adrift from the dock. I believe it ’was made
fast to the wharf by a piece of spun-yarn —a piece of an old brace. Mr. Kelleher made it
fast. A breeze of wind came from the south-west, and she broke away and went ashore by
the landing-place on the other side, and before they got to her she was on a rock. They got
her off, and moored her off here, and she then broke away again. Likewise the “Bell”
was brought up there and moored with her stern-post about two feet off the rocks • a
breeze of wind came from the southward, she heeled round, and struck upon a rock, knocked
a hole in her bottom, and settled down. They never troubled themselves about it and I
received an order to break the pair of them up.
4982. Without trying to raise them ? We tried to raise the “ Bell,” but we could do
nothing with her.
4983. Who had the charge of the “Bell,” and of this punt? Mr. Kelleher.
4984. What was he on the island ? A free overseer.
4985. Is he on the island now? Yes.
THURSDAY,


John M'Lerie,
Esq.
25Apri1, 1861,
THURSDAY, 25 APRIL, 1861.
present
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
Mr - WILSON.
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
HENRY PARKE S, Esq., in the Chair.
John M'Lerie, Esq., called in and examined :
4986. By the Chairman : You are Inspector General of Police ? I am.
4987. And have been for some time ? Yes, upwards of five years. . , .
4988. You have been connected with the police of the Colony for a longer period . Since
the beginning of 1847. , -* T . ■> -o r
4989. What was your first office ? Paymaster and Adjutant to the Military Mounted Police.
4990. Your next ? Governor of Darlinghurst Gaol. I was appointed after the investigation
by the Committee of the late Legislative Council.
4991. You succeeded Mr. Keck? Yes. # . , , M
4992. What was the next office you held ? I was appointed from the gaol to be the Metro-
politan Superintendent of Police. . r. . i 15 kp
4998. And then Inspector General ? Yes, which office I have held since October, 1-56.
4994 You were requested a short time ago to hold some inquiry at Darlinghurst Gaol
arising out of the dissatisfaction with the state of that prison entertained by Government ?
4995. Did any other gentleman act with you ? The Sheriff took a part in the investigation
to a certain extent. I was appointed by the Government, at his request, to hold an investi-
gation, and he was to be present and assist. . ,
4996. Did not that examination result in his dismissal ? been dismissed, but there
was nothing in the proceedings recommending his dismissal. ,
4997. Practically the examination was conducted by yourself, singly i By myselt, in tlie
presence of the Sheriff. .
4998. Can you state to the Committee what course you adopted in that examination—
whether the officers were permitted to be present while it was going on, whether they were
called upon for any explanation at any point of the examination, or in other words, whether
the officers had an opportunity of explaining anything that arose, or of adducing evidence to
disprove statements made against them ? The first witness I examined gave such evidence
as in my opinion, reflected yer} 7 much upon the conduct of the principal turnkey, lincing
that to he the case, I said to the Sheriff, “It is but fair to this officer that he should be
present, as these statements are prejudicial to his official character. The Sheriff concurred
with me, and Mr. Harrison was called in, and remained during the whole investigation.
4999. What witness was this—the first witness? I think Dr. West was the first witness.
5000. What was the nature of his evidence —of that part which reflected upon the principal
turnkey ? Relaxation of the discipline of the gaol, as regarded one of the prisoners confined
there —Polack.
5001. Favouritism towards the prisoner Polack ? Precisely. . .
5002. Did Dr. West say anything of Mr. Harrison’s general conduct, as to his sobriety or
punctuality in the discharge of his duties ? He said nothing relative to his sobriety, but in
the course of the statements made before me he said he had on more than one occasion called
the attention of the principal gaoler to the lax manner in which, in his opinion—from his
experience, having been surgeon in a gaol in Ireland many years—the discipline of the gaol
was conducted. He also said that he had cautioned Harrison himself.
5003. What other witnesses did you examine? I examined the gate-keeper, Burke ; I also
examined the principal gaoler, Mr. Beverley, the gaol dispenser, and also a prisoner of the
name of Banks, who had been confined in the goal.
5004. Was the evidence of this man Banks of an important character ? It was.
5005. What was the nature of the evidence he gave ? His evidence went to shew the undue
indulgence given to Polack, as to his dress, his having the use of two cells, one of which
cells was set apart for keeping his stores in, as he called them, as tea, sugar, pickles, and
other indulgences which the gaol regulations do not admit, and also as to Polack being
in possession of certain articles of valuable jewellery.
5006. Was your inquiry directed chiefly to the relaxation of discipline in the case of Polack .
No. I was also instructed to inquire into the escape of two prisoners, and in the course of
our inquiry as to their escape we examined other witnesses.
5007. Your inquiries were confined to those two heads? Entirely.
5008. Where is this man Banks now? On Cockatoo Island,
5009. Do you know his character as a prisoner—for what offence he is confined there ?At
present for cancellation of his ticket-of-leave.
5010. Do you know what character he bears? lam not aware that his character is of a
more atrocious kind than the characters of prisoners on Cockatoo Island generally are.
5011. 1 presume they are not all on a level there —that there are some much worse than
others ? He is an old English prisoner, and they are generally the worst; he is either a
Van Diemonian or an English prisoner. _
5012. You are supposed to have the police history of most of these men ? Yes, of all.
can furnish the police history of Banks to the Committee. ( Vide Separate Appendix,
11. E.)
5013. Do you not find from the police histories that some of these men are much better than
others? Yes; but I find from the police histories of those who are what I may call tie
sediment


sediment of the old convict population of men—from Van Diemen’s Land, from England
and fioin Pentridge that the lives of these men have been a constant career of crime.
5014. Was Banks a man of that kind? I would not go so far as to say that without
reference to his police history.
6015. He belongs to that class ? Yes.
oOIG. Did your report to the Colonial Secretary attribute blame to any particular persons
for the escape of the prisoners? It did, to a turnkey named M'Coy, and to the lax system
which prevailed in the prison generally. One of the principal duties of the principal turnkey
of the gaol was to see every cell locked. J
5017. Did you censure any person ? I simply reported the facts that came out during my
examination. ° J
5018. When you were principal gaoler at Darlinghurst, after Mr. Keck, can you at this
distance of time lecollect what system of discipline you established? I took charge of the
gaol under peculiar circumstances, and everything was in a state of disorganization.
5019. How long were you there ? Twelve months; and the nature of the duties I per-
formed there was of that kind, that during the whole period I was only three times out of
the gaol on my own business.
5020. I presume you found the gaol in a very bad condition ? Yery bad ; everything was
in a state of disorganization.
5021. Do you remember whether you established any regulation for enforcing personal
cleanliness among the prisoners? We did ; but we had not the same means of enforcing it
as there are now, there being no baths in the gaol at that time.
5022. What I mean is, had you any periodical muster to inspect prisoners, to gee whether
they were in a state of cleanliness ? During the whole twelve months I was in the gaol
I saw every prisoner daily. In giving that answer, I mean to shew that I had an opportunity
of seeing the state of cleanliness in which the prisoners were.
6023. Was there any regulation by which each prisoner would be compelled to cleanse
himself, if he were disposed to go in a state of filth ? Of course, if I found a prisoner did
not perform his ablutions like his fellow prisoners, I had him forcibly cleaned. There were
many instances of old crawling creatures who would not wash themselves unless they were
compelled by force.
5024. There was no periodical inspection of them all at once? Not at once; except on
Sunday morning, when I saw them before they were marched in to Divine service.
5025. In what manner were they inspected ? They were all paraded in a rank, and I saw
that they had clean shirts on.
5026. Were they required to turn up their trousers or sleeves, or had you any means of
inspecting them to see that their skins were clean ? They shewed their hands, necks, and
faces. I cannot at this distance of time recollect whether I made what is called the mili-
tary inspection and required them to turn up their trousers.
5027. Was there any system of prison labour at that time ? Merely stonework.
5028. Has it been any part of your duty since then to visit any of the prisoners ? Not to
visit the prisoners. lam at the present moment Visiting Magistrate of Darlinghurst Gaol,
but I have no control there. I have no right to go there except to punish refractory prisoners.
I am appointed merely to carry out two clauses of the Gaol Act.
5029. Have you in any way been called upon to visit Cockatoo Island or other prisons ? I
was Visiting Magistrate to Cockatoo Island for five years.
5030. Were your duties the same there as at Darlinghurst? No, they were more responsible.
I visited the island twice a week. All the accounts of the establishment passed through my
hands, and all the correspondence with the Government passed through me.
5031. Had you anything to do with the discipline of the prisoners at Cockatoo Island? I
received all complaints against the officers, and complaints against the prisoners, and if
necessary I punished them. I also made a monthly report to the Government of the state
of the establishment.
5032. That would be during the time that Mr. Ormsby was superintendent ? Yes, he was
there the whole time I filled the office.
5033. Did you ever inspect the prison buildings during that time ? Twice a week—every
time I went over.
5034. Was it not the fact that during that time a large number of the prisoners had no
beds to sleep upon ? No; at that time every prisoner on the island had a bed.
5035. When did your duties as Visiting Magistrate cease ? When I was appointed to my
present office.
5036. How long is that ago ? It was in 1856.
5037. You say all the prisoners had beds ? I can explain that. From the time when I
took charge of Cockatoo Island until a few months before I ceased to be Visiting Magistrate
the prisoners were allowed to make cabbage-tree hats, by the sale of which they made money,
and every prisoner was then in a position to provide himself with a mattress. I found so
many abuses arising from this hat-making that I suggested to the Government that it should
be discontinued, and my suggestion was acted upon. After it was discontinued the prisoners
had not the means of providing themselves with mattresses, and it was found after I had
ceased to be Visiting Magistrate that many of the prisoners had no mattresses. The Colonial
Secretary mentioned the circumstance to' me. I explained how it arose, and recommended
that they should be provided with them.
5038. It is only a few months since that that was done ? It is a considerable time
ago. .
5089. Not more than ten months ago ? It may be perhaps ten or twelve months ; it was
after a visit of the Committee.
5040.


5040. At all events, tie were in tie^island “ ? *" ’
It could scarcely escape Ur* notice of any one t 5 in a short time. Tlie
;*n;z j 2 as— * tL i *. **»«. M
Bott g watch-houses? Precisely; the present mode of fitting
of these dormitories and the
e!tent to which they were calculated to increase, unreasonably, the discomfort of the
prisoners? The Government were perfectly aware of it; the place was frecpieu yvisic
you of immoralities practised on the island ? During the
five wears? wm Visiting Magistrate, I had two complaints made of prisoners who were
snsnected of being addicted to disgusting practices ; but I can remember on y wo cases.
5045 What became of those cases ? There are three places as you enter the mam dormitory,
for tlie confinement and separation of those who are supposed to be addicted to disgus mg
and unnatural practises, and these men were kept in two ot those places.
5046 During the lour? period in which you have been connected with the po ice o i e J>
Ls L sX°ct ofpriso P a discipline generally attracted your attention-m the abstract I
SCMT. the system which prevails in this Colony ? Far| fro “ .
5048 Will you have any objection to state, at your own leisure, and with that deliberation
with which a man thinks when he sits down to write, what improvements> you sugg-t
in the prison discipline of the Colony, and what arrangements in |° bmldmgs, a d
otherwise, are necessary for carrying out such improvements ? I will do so. fiVof
6049 ™ h Morris: Were you satisfied by the evidence of Banks alone, as to the laxity
in the discipline exercised towards Polack ? Certainly not ; if his evidence had notjoeen
otherwise supported, I should not have relied upon it. I took his evidence in connection
with evidence derived from more reliable sources. ftovprnment
5050. By the Chairmen :Do you think it would be a prudent course for Govern m ent,
whatever the cost might he, to erect a large central prison, with sufficient buildings tor a
proper division of labour, so as to apply the labour of prisoners according to their previous
habits physical strength, and in which those who had previously had no trade niigh
taught trades, so as to be fitted to obtain a livelihood for themselves when they left the
prison ? lam quite satisfied, until such a building as you allude to has been constructed
the prison discipline of the Colony will never he carried out effectively either for reformatory
mean*a prison where the whole of the prisoners above three or six months’ sentences
should he assembled, where they should he classified according to their conditions in j
their reputed characters—their means of labour—and their _ physical strength and where
their labour could he turned to the best account towards their own support, and also icy
themselves he managed so as to secure the best means of reformation ? I think the election
of such a building most desirable. i
5052 By Mr. Sutherland: Cockatoo Island is under the charge of the police, properly
speaking, now, is it not? No, certainly not; it is under the charge of the \jsitmg Magis-
trate, and the superintendent of the island. The police are merely an auxiliary force to
carry out the discipline and security of the prisoners. , n . • q .. j
5053. They are under Captain Mann and Captain Scott ? They are under Captain Scott and
Captain Mann, for all purposes of the island; I do not interfere with them except m matters
affecting their own discipline. There is a code of instructions approved by the Governme t
for their guidance, by that they are hound to act. # , , , ,
5054. They are under your charge so far as their own discipline is concerned, but not as
relates to the discipline of the island ? Yes, there is a code of instructions, and these the
police are bound to see carried out. . . , r
5055. By Mr. Morris: Suppose the police observed any breach of the regulations, either py
the prisoners or by the officers, would they report these breaches to you or to the superin-
tendent ? Breaches of prison discipline they report to the superintendent direct, but i call
upon them for a periodical report, and all these incidents are mentioned in my report.
That report is merely a check upon the manner in which the duty is carried on by the
police. Ido not interfere at all in any infringement of the rules by the free officers.
5056. Is it or is it not the case that there is some difference between yourself and the
superintendent of the island, as to the management of the police? No difference at all that
lam aware of. The superintendent claims the right, or did claim the right of entire control
over the police; I of course reported the matter to the Government, and represented that as
long as they formed part of the body of police for whom I am responsible, they must he
under my control. _
5057. You exercise no greater control over them than the commander did over the soldiers
when they were there ? For all purposes of island duty they are under the surveillance or
the island authorities, Captain Scott and Captain Mann. Captain Mann, since his appoint-
ment, has assumed a control the previous superintendent never attempted to assume, it
appears to me, that Captain Mann tries to act to a certain extent independently of the
Visiting Magistrate. .
5058. By the Chairman : Since you held the inquiry at Darlinghurst Gaol, Mr. Beverley,


the principal gaoler, and Mr. Harrison, the principal turnkey, as well as Mr. O’Neill Brenan
who was then Sheriff, have been dismissed from office ? Yes.
5059. Who has been appointed principal gaoler ? Mr. John Cecil Read, formerly one of
my inspectors. At the time of the suspension of Mr. Beverley, I was called upon by the
Government to select some responsible person.
5060. And you recommended Mr. Read? I recommended Mr. Read.
5061. Before the final decision for his permanent appointment, were you again consulted as
to his fitness for the office ? I was asked by the Chief Secretary as to my opinion of Mr.
Read as a public officer, and as to his experience.
5062. With a view to his appointment? As principal gaoler; and Mr. Cowper told me
that, among all the applicants, he considered him to be the most eligible. I told him what
I knew of him as an officer of police.
5063. Did Mr. Cowper tell you how many applicants there were for the office ? He did not.
6064. And you never heard ? No.
5065. Will you state what experience you have had of Mr. Read ? He came out here in
the “ Exodus, six years ago, with the rank of inspector, having been appointed by the Colo-
nial Agent in London, and on the passage out he, with the other inspector, who has since
died at Queensland, had charge of a notorious offender from Melbourne, who was apprehended
in London ; and the manner in which he performed the duty on the passage out gave me
so high an opinion of him that I took the first opportunity of confirming his appointment as
inspector. Subsequently, when the charge of a division became vacant, I gave him that;
and during the whole time he has been connected with the Sydney Police, 1 have never on
one occasion had reason to find fault with him. I have found him a man in whom I could
place the most implicit confidence. I have given my orders to him, and no matter what
they have been they have been carried out.
5066. He obeys orders ? He obeys orders.
5067. That is a military virtue, at all events ? It is everything in discipline.
5068. Can you state what were the principal features in Mr. Read’s character that attracted
your attention, besides his obedience to orders and trustworthiness? His general intelli-
gence, his coolness, and firmness.
5069. Is he a man of good judgment ? I have always found him so.
5070. Has he ever been placed in difficult circumstances, where he has had to decide upon
one course out of several that have presented themselves? Yes, he has, in the course of his
police history in Sydney.
5071. Do you think he has acted wisely, discreetly, according to sound discretion and judg-
ment ? Yes.
5072. Has he ever exercised a responsibility apart from instructions from head-quarters ?
Yes ; at the time the rush took place to Rockhampton I was called upon to select one of the best
officers I could find, and he was sent down there, and was under the orders of Captain
O’Connell, who gave both officially and privately the most undeniable character as to every
thing that constitutes a good police officer.
5073. Are you aware whether he is a man who has seen much of the world ? I saw among
the despatches which accompanied the body of police from Loudon, one having particular
reference to Mr. Read, written by one of the Under Secretaries, giving him the highest
character as an inspector of the London Police, in which he had served fifteen years, and
from which he draws a pension ; and stating that he was a man of good family.
5074. By Mr. Sutherland: He is a married man and has a family ? Yes, he has a large
family; his eldest son commenced in the lowest grade at the railway, and he is now station-
master in Sydney, having had some previous experience in England.
5075. jßy the Chairman: You believe Mr. Read to be a man of high moral character?
None more so that I know.
5076. What was Rispen at the gaol ? A turnkey in charge of the wing—he was there when
1 was there. At the time Mr. Keck was dismissed he was brought up from a country gaol.
5077. Was it in consequence of evidence taken before you that he was dismissed ? I took
no evidence in relation to Rispen at all; I took action afterwards with respect to him.
5078. Was it what came out afterwards that caused you to take action ? Mr. Read sent one
evening to my house a letter addressed to Rispen, with a statement that it had been stopped
by the turnkey at the gate, who had informed Mr. Read that two nights before a letter
addressed in the same handwriting had been brought by a postman ; and that letters in the
same handwriting had previously been brought to the gaol, but addressed to Mr. Harrison,
who was then under suspension; that the turnkey at the gate had reason to believe that the
letter was intended for a prisoner, Polack. On looking at the letter I could see nothing of a
suspicious nature; but from the statement of the turnkey I took upon myself to open the
letter, and found it was intended for Rispen, but was written by the wife of Polack to her
husband. On looking at the envelope I saw that the handwriting was Polack’s; that he
had, in fact, addressed the envelope to Rispen, and had sent it out of the gaol for his wife to
enclose a letter in it to him. The next morning, as the Sheriff was under suspension, and
an officer had not been appointed in his place, I at once placed the letter with the report in
the hands of Mr. Cowper, who took action in the matter, and I believe dismissed Rispen. I
have reason to know he did.
5079. Have you heard anything of Rispen since ? I may state that Rispen called upon me
afterwards, denied most positively that he knew anything of this letter, and said that it was
sent to him without his knowledge. I said I was sorry he was in such a position, as I had
known him so many years, and had entertained a high opinion of him, but thao I could not
see how he could reconcile the fact of this envelope being addressed by the prisoner in the
gaol to his wife without his connivance. He had admitted previously that he had received
157—2 A a


a letter two nights before, and I asked him why he had not placed it in the hands of the
gaoler at once ; however, he still persisted in his denial. That is how the case stands, and
Mr Cowper thought the case so flagrant that he dismissed him. .
5080 Bu Mr Wilson : What did he do with the letter he had received two nights previously
—did he state ? He said he had taken it back to Mrs. Polack, but that I had no proof of.
He admitted that he had done wrong, and that he ought to have taken it to the gaoler.
5081 Bu the Chairman : He denied that he knew anything of either letter, and denied also
that he had communicated with Polack ? He could not deny that he had received the
5082. He denied that he had delivered it to Polack? Yes; but he did not do what he
ouMit to have done. He should have given it to the gaoler.
5083 There is no proof that he did deliver it to Polack? No. The Government are
inclined to reconsider his case as a man of large family. The proof is not strong again, and
I shall be Had if they again give him employment, and send him to a country gaol. I here
is another fact in connection with this case: the turnkey says that when Rispen saw the
letter he said, “ This should not have been delivered here; it should have been taken to my
5084. By Mr. Sutherland: Is it not likely that this man did not do this with any bad
intent that there had been lax discipline in the gaol, and that, therefore, he thought he
might do this ? I should scarcely admit that as an excuse for a man who had been so many
years in a gaol. Instead of allowing the laxity of discipline to influence him in that direc-
tion it should have made him more vigilant.
Mr. John Cecil Read called in and examined; —•
. 5085. By the Chairman ; You are at present principal gaoler of Darlinghurst Gaol ? I am.
5086. When did you receive this appointment ? • On Friday last I received the official notice
of if
’ 5087. You have been in charge of that establishment for some time ? Since the 15th
February last. , . , „
5088. Had you any intimation before Friday last that you would be permanently appointed?
A few days before I received the official communication I partly expected I should get it.
5089. Have you, during the time you have been in charge of Darlinghurst Gaol, taken upon
yourself to make any more than temporary alterations in the management of the gaol ? Yes,
I have, with the approbation of the Sheriff. _ ,
5090. Will you be good enough to explain to the Committee in what state you found the
gaol when you took charge, more especially in reference to the discipline of the establish-
ment, and also explain what alterations you have made, at what time these altciations were
made, and what is the present condition of the gaol ? Ido not know that 1 shall be able to
tell the exact duties of the various alterations, but they were made from day to day. When
I first took charge of the gaol I noticed that some of the officers of the gaol the warders
were rather slack in the performance of their duties, and I also found that two of them had
been in communication with the prisoners, bringing them different things that were contra-
band, and against the prison regulations. These men have since been dismissed from the
gaol. g
5091. What are their names ? One is Whiddon. I found he had got money and a coat from
a prisoner named Ma} r ne in the gaol, and I also caught him sitting down in familiar conver-
sation with a prisoner named Garsed. These things I brought under the notice of the
Sheriff. I afterwards found that man asleep on his post, for which I suspended him, until
he Sheriff gave him permission to resign. There was also a man named Rispen, who was
dismissed. A letter was brought to me by one of the turnkeys at the gate, who told me he
knew the writing, and that he believed the letter came for the prisoner Polack. I imme-
diately impounded the letter and sent it to the Visiting Justice, under cover. The letter
was opened, and I have understood since that this letter contained information for the
prisoner Polack. Rispen said, when he was brought before the Sheriff to answer for this,
that the letter was sent for him but that he had no knowledge previously of its contents.
He acknowledged at the same time that he had received a letter previously, from Mrs.
Polack, and said that although he did not report it to the authorities at the gaol, he went to
the house of Mrs. Polack to ask her why she had sent the letter in that manner to him for
her husband.
5092. Did he say what he did with the letter ? He said he gave it back to her.
5098. It has not been traced to Polack? No; but on his own acknowledgment he had
received the letter without reporting it.
5094. Still it does not appear that he need to have acknowledged it ? I should consider it
my duty to report any warder if I found he had received such a letter without reporting it
to me immediately.
5095. No doubt it was very wrong not to report such a circumstance to you, still it would
appear to tell in his favour, as to his innocence of complicity in the matter that he voluntarily
acknowledged receiving the letter —unless it can be proved that he was an assenting party ?
The reason he acknowledged it was, that Burke said that he noticed the last letter because a
similar letter had come to Rispen previously. Rispen then said, “ That letter I took to Mrs.
Polack.” The evasive manner in which he admitted that he had received the letter struck
me. v
5096. Have you heard anything about wine being conveyed to the gaol in which Rispen was
concerned ? There was a report that bottles of pickles had been brought in by Rispen in a
basket,


basket, but that was before I took charge. Ido not think he has done anything of the kind
since I have been there. I think tobacco has been brought in. I believe Gibson, a prisoner
from Cockatoo Island, received tobacco from turnkey Whiddon, because he offered money to
another turnkey to bring him more, and when Whiddon was spoken to about this he said
“ For God’s sake do not tell anything about it inside the gaol.” ' ' ’
5097. There is no material alteration in the general discipline of the gaol? I have altered
some of the duties. I have told the men off to particular posts in the gaol, and at nights in
particular; I have numbered the posts, and I intend after this to enter in a book each day
the name and number of each warder. ' ‘
5098. For better security ? Yes. I giye each man a particular post every night and make
him responsible for a certain distance. Formerly they walked indiscriminately about the
yard, and passed each other on their posts at night.
5099. My question had reference to the discipline of the prisoners—you understand it as
having reference to the discipline of the officers—have you made any alterations in the
treatment of the prisoners ? Yes, so far as cleanliness is concerned; there are now baths
for the whole of them, and every man gets fresh water.
5100. How often do they bathe ? Every week unless they are in delicate health, and are
exempted by the medical man.
5101. You see once a week that they are thoroughly and perfectly clean ? Yes. Every
Sunday morning I have their legs bared, and see that their breasts, necks, and arms, are
thoroughly washed and cleaned. In fact last Sunday I put a man in the cells for being
dirty after having told him to clean himself. He treated the matter lightly when I told
him he and as he did not clean himself I put him into the cells as a punishment.
5102. In wnat condition did you find the cells as to cleanliness ? I found some of the cells
very dirty, the female wing in particular; in fact they were swarming with bugs.
5100. What have you done in that respect ? I had them thoroughly cleansed and white-
washed, and I am now having a great deal of the whitewash removed; there had been so
many coats laid on that I believe it afforded a harbour for bugs.
5104. When the Committee visited the gaol we found a great want of discrimination in the
confinement of prisoners; for instance, in the hard labour wing we found some of the
insubordinate prisoners from Cockatoo Island confined opposite to prisoners confined simply
for debt, or men who had been taken up for running away from Her Majesty’s ships, and
who stated that they had been confined on repeated remands for six months—shut up in cells
with men charged with larceny or felony? That is not so much in the hard labour as in
the confine yard.
5105. lam talking now of the building—is there any better means of separation now ?
There is about to be, there is to be another yard in which the boys are to be kept.
5106. Are those sailors still in the gaol ? No; they went away sometime ago, about a
month, I think.
5107. Have you paid any attention, since you have taken charge, to the better classification
of the prisoners, so far as the accommodation afforded by the building will permit ? I keep
those who are committed for trial in the centre of the wing when the other prisoners are in
the yard, and I am obliged to allow them to take exercise in the yard for an hour or two.
5108. Are there any boys of tender years there now ? I have two boys at present who were
sentenced yesterday to six months each at Parramatta Gaol.
5109. Where have you confined them ? I have been obliged to keep them in the same place
in that instance. I regret that I have not another yard to put the men into, but in this
case the boys are as wicked as the men. I have often thought it was a great pity the boys
should be allowed to be in the same department with hardened criminals, but it is difficult,
as there are but three yards —the trial, the confine, and the hard labour yard—to make a
separation. The prisoners for trial I shut up two hours a day, while the Cockatoo Island
prisoners take exercise in that yard.
6110. Since you have been in gaol, have you found that the rations have been generally
wholesome and good ? I have returned a great deal to the contractor.
5111. Who is the contractor ? Mr. Kidman.
5112. What part of the rations have you returned? Bread in particular; I have also
latterly returned five chests of tea. e
5113. You inspect the bread ? Yes.
5114. You are, of course, aware, that bad bread is a very unwholesome thing? Yes, Mr.
Kidman does not now supply the bread, and the new contractor has given us excellent bread,
except on one occasion, and the men were then willing to make allowance; they sent their
delegate, who said, that the bread had been so invariably good since this man had had the
contract, that they would not require it to be changed. I had a great deal of trouble also
with Mr. Kidman about the vegetables. By his contract he has to supply half potatoes and
the remainder of other vegetables, as cabbages, onions, turnips, or carrots; but he sent
at one time potatoes only, and I bought mixed vegetables to the amount of 17s. 6d., and
afterwards stopped it from his account. I have also had the hominy bad on two mornings.
5115. Have you looked over the collection of books in the gaol ? Yes; they are a very poor
collection indeed.
5116. Does it embrace chiefly books that are suitable to prisoners ? No, they are not the
sort I should select.
5117. I suppose you would not confine their reading to religious books ? Certainly not; I
think books of a similar character to Chambers’s Educational Tracts would be very suitable;
they are moral, without being religious, and would be a very appropriate style of literature.
5118. How are the books distributed? Under the direction of the Kev. Mr. Agnew; a
prisoner named Ainsworth acts as librarian and as clerk on Sunday.
5119. Does the prisoner Ainsworth act as clerk ? Yes. 5120.


, 5120. Do you know anything of his police history? I have heard a great deal of it;; I
have heard he is a very bad man. I believe he has been in gaol the greater part of his life.
5121. Have you any means of instruction for the younger prisoners, or for those who desire
instruction? None whatever. . , . , ,
5122. Since you have been in charge have you tried to make yourself acquainted with the
characters of the various prisoners? I have known the greater number of them before they
came into the prison) the greater number of the lads. _ ,
5123 Do you think if there were any means of instruction the men would avail themselves
of it as well as the children ? I think they would ; I have known several instances where
they have attempted to instruct themselves by writing on a slate.
5124 Would it not be a means of employing their minds and thus keep them from con-
cocting mischief? I think a great deal of good might be done ; the chief difficulty would be
to cultivate a taste among the prisoners; I think thefirst difficulty overcome they would
Supposing there were any means of imparting instruction in the gaol, what hours
could be devoted to that purpose ? I think from half-past four to half-past five. _
5126 Could not a longer period be allowed ; would there be any objection to continue the
instruction up to the tune of locking up ? They are now generally locked up at half-past
five : it would be dangerous to leave it to the last minute.
5127. Suppose an hour were taken from their labour time, do you not think if that hour were
devoted to their mental improvement, they would do as much work in the shorter as they
now do in the longer period? Yes, and those who took a delight in it might be given to
understand that they would be expected to make up the timeby greater application to their work.
5128. I suppose there is room in the gaol for a school? The place where they go to church
would, I think, be very suitable for it. . _ ,
5129. How often is Divine service performed ? Once a week for the men, and twice tor the
women. * ..
5130. Have any private persons visited the gaol, while you have been in charge, from motives
of benevolence? lam not aware of any. I think those who have visited it have come from
motives of curiosity more than from anything else.
5131. Have any ladies visited the female department of the gaol ? No.
5132. Have you a visiting book? Yes.
5133. Do you inspect the visiting book ? Yes; daily. _
5134. Have you looked back for any period prior to your appointment. j.es. . ,
5135. Have you seen any ladies names down ? No. Two clergymen’s wives visited
the prison; one was a Presbyterian and the other of the Church of England ; they merely
walked round the gaol, but they did not appear to interfere in any way. Ido not Jiink
they looked into the? female wing.
5136. Did they go into the wings where the prisoners were? Yes.
5137. Had they any conversation with any of the prisoners? They merely passed two or
three words.
5138. Were they in charge of gentlemen? Yes; of their husbands.
5139 By Mr. Morris : You said that the prisoner named Ainsworth was a very bad cha-
racter ; I believe he has been in a great many prisons during a large portion of his life ? I
have heard so. .
5140. What is his character while he is in prison ? He is a most excellent person, and is,
I believe, a very clever man.
5141. He conducts himself in every way satisfactorily ? Yes. I have also noticed that many
female prisoners, who are excellent characters in gaol,are the most dreadful characters when out.
5142. By Mr. Wilson : Could the confines—those who are not at hard labour—be kept at
school the greater part of the day ? Nearly all day; those who are fed under the prison
regulations have only 2 lbs. of oakum to pick, and a great many of the hard labour prisoners
are exempt by the medical man from hard labour ; so that they have the whole day in the
yard. If religious people would not make any objection, a great deal might be done with
them on Sunday.
5143. Suppose a schoolmaster were appointed, his time might be occupied the whole of the
day ? I think if he were able to lecture it might tend to cultivate their taste. I remember
a person who used to lecture at Egyptian Hall, in London, and many boys from the Lagged
Schools went to hear him, and he exercised a good influence upon many wicked boys.
5144. Do you find among many of the prisoners a great desire for instruction ? \es, several
have applied to me for slates.
5145. And this desire might become more general ? Yes. It depends upon the skill of the
schoolmaster; the first thing is to cultivate their taste by amusing them.
Mr. J.C.Read.
25ApriU861.
APPENDIX.
A.
On the Ist of the month I caused a school to he established in the corridor of the new wing, undcituo
tuition of a German prisoner, named Holstein, alias Myers, who seems to he a man of some a 1 1 ' ’
and what is very desirable, he seems to have a fancy for this sort of employment. Ihc sc 10 ai
I allow one hour each from work; from (10) ten to (11) eleven o’clock every day; and nom [ )
one p.m., to (2) two p.m., their attendance is voluntary; and for the short time that it has been
established it seems to progress. Its numbers are increasing daily. _ _
I stated before the Committee that the gaol was not visited by ladies, except two. I shoiucl iai
made an exception to the Sisters of Charity, two of whom attend once a week, or once a fortmgh , an
remain for about half-an-hour, Yery few of the female prisoners attend them, and they ao so iciy
unwillingly,
JOHN C. READ, Principal Gaoler,
4 th May , 1861. H.M. Gaol, Darlinghurst.
(fl .


(//. Paries, Esq., here vacated the Chair, and J. B. Wilson, Esq., was moved thereto)
J. B. WILSON, Esq., in the Chair.
Gother Kerr Mann, Esq., called in and examined:—
5d4G By the Chairman: You are Superintendent of Cockatoo Island ? I am, and Engineer-
in-Chiet. °
• Hew long have you Held that situation ? Kot quite two years.
Vj oll S uoC * enough to state to the Committee what was the general condition
of tle island, with regard to its prison discipline, when you took charge? I had for some
time previously had charge of the engineering works there, which were carried on entirely
Ey pi is on labour, and it was only so far as the labour of the island was connected with the
woi.vs that I can speak of my own knowledge. The penal department I had what-
ever to do with. The establishment, if I may express an opinion, always appeared to me to
0 f v \ ci y 10com P et f one > arising from the accommodation that was required for such an
establisnment, and also from its having grown up from a mere stockade into, in fact, the
penal establishment of the Colony. Ido not think the improvements, or any attempts at
improvement, the buildings, or that the general arrangements of the island have kept pace
with the growing importance of it. When I first took charge of the works there was no
general system ot working the prisoners. I had to go down and shew what work was to be
done, and it was left to the authorities of the island to carry it out. Subsequently I was
appointed to take more immediate charge, and to direct the work of the prison labour, and
then i proposed a system of task-work, which was put into practice as a trial for a short
time. 1 afterwards prepared a general scale of work which was authorized, and the prisoners
have been working upon that scale to the present time.
514.3. lias any improvement taken place in the accommodation afforded to the prisoners
since you taken charge of the island ? There has—a slight improvement. When first
I went to the island the prisoners slept upon one large platform, similar to a military guard
room bed, there was no dining hall for them ; they all dined and took their other meals
in an open wing, which now forms one of the wings of the prison. Subsequently I drew a
pan by which each man might have a separate sleeping cell; that was submitted to the
Executive, and approved of; but, at the same time, I should remark that His Excellency
the Governor General, Sir Charles Fitz Roy, wished to try the plan which had been followed
out at Van Diemen s Land, and which I had obtained from that Colony, of having separate
bunks for the prisoners the old sleeping places were therefore taken down, and the arrange-
ment which the Committee have seen was adopted. These separate bunks were put up, t|ie
dining hall was built, and the old dining hall converted into a ward. The new arrangement
took up more room than was originally required, and an additional room was thus provided.
5150. Were there any improvements suggested by you with regard to prison discipline ? I
have mentioned about the task-work, that has remained in force up to the present time.
There were no other official suggestions of mine till lately. Shortly after I took the entire
of the island I wrote a report recommending that the system of task-work, of
remission of sentence, and of reward for good behaviour should be continued, and that at
the same time the scale should be reduced, so that a man should be required to perform a
larger amount of work than formerly.
5151. That he should be required to do a larger amount of work before he should be
entitled to consideration ? That he should do a larger amount of work, and get a less
allowance of time Gian was permitted under the regulations that were annulled by the order
of the Executive in 1858. By those regulations the men were enabled to shorten their
time, provided they did the work required by the scale, to the extent of half-a-day. I con-
sidered half-a-day, as a maximum, was too much, and proposed that it should be reduced to
a quarter of a day, as a maximum, although I recommended that they should still be paid
the gratuity in money for the full work they might perform over their task.
5152. Do you not think it would be an improvement to allow every prisoner on the island a
small sum of money dally, for good behaviour, which might be banked for him, so that when
he left the prison he might have a small sum to take him to any part of the Colony, and
not be turned loose upon the world without means—to become a thief and a vagabond'? I
think it is very desirable that prisoners should have some means when they leave the
establishment. Under the old system a large proportion of the men used to bank considerable
amounts. I have paid as much as £6 from the Savings’ Bank to prisoners on leaving. I
may explain what that system was. The prisoners were required to do a certain amount of
task-work per day that was set down as a penal task, and for all beyond that they were
entitled to be paid at a certain rate, so that if a man did, within a day, as much as two
days’ task he was paid for one day; if he gained two-quarters he got two-pence, if three-
quarters threepence. The men were not allowed to expend more than threepence per diem,
the remainder if any was banked for them. Many of the stone-cutters, setters, and
men who worked hard, at that time banked in a month as much as five or six shillings
after having received the small gratuity which they were allowed to expend in tea, sugar, and
tobacco. At the present time, the regulation with respect to the money allowance is still in
force, though that which refers to time is not; but the men do not work as they used to do.
5153. Are not some of the prisoners, on account of their poverty, obliged to leave the island
in their prison clothes ? I have never seen any instance since I have been there.
5154. If they had no plain clothes of their own, they would have to leave the island in the
prison clothes—there is no arrangement on the part of the Government to find them in other
clothes ? There is not; but I have never seen an instance of a man leaving in prison
clothes, excepting, perhaps the trousers, which have been given him. The clothes they have
on


on when they come in, are tied up in bundles and given to them when they go away ; and
sometimes, if a man has not a jacket, a comrade on his going away will give him one
5155. The buildings in which the prisoners are accommodated at Cockatoo Island are, I
believe, in a very bad stale, and admit the rain ? The roofs arc m a very bad of
repair. I pat on the estimates last year, or two years ago, a sum of S.J 0, for re-6 gmg
them. I have lately had authority to expend that £2OO, and part of the shingles for
repairing them are now on the island. In fact, if the men had not struck work, I believe
the buildings would have been re-shingled by this time. , , .
5156 If part of the labour of the island were applied to the extension and improvement
of the prison buildings, would it not have a beneficial effect upon the prison discipline ? I
think the buildings on the island are so defective in construction and arrangement, that i
would be throwing labour away to attempt to improve them. . ,
5157. Might not other buildings be erected, even of a temporary character, to improve the
accommodation ? Ido not think the island is properly situated for a penal establishment, and
therefore it becomes a question whether it is advisable to expend money in improving the
buildings. That question made me, in two or three reports I have sent in, suggest the
■propriety of fitting up a hulk to lay alongside the island. I was of opinion that one of the
old raen-of-war might have been got from the Home Government, brought out here perhaps
with immigrants, and be fitted up very efficiently for a prison. It would have been capable
then of being moved to any part of the harbour in the event of prison labour being required
for the erection of forts, or for other improvements.
5158. It has been stated to the Committee, that in all probability the on
Cockatoo Island will take several years to complete; is it not your opinion that something
should he done to improve the accommodation of prisoners during that length ot time.
Yes, but I think not the buildings; it was that opinion made me recommend the fatting
up of the hulk. . , .
5159. Do you think the present system of lodging prisoners, so many m_ one ward, is not
only demoralizing to them, but injurious to their physical health? 1 think it is exceed-
ingly wrono 1 in every way, and must demoralize the men. It is a decided bar to et cient
discipline, and, with regard to health, I believe that, were not the situation of Cockatoo
Island most healthy, serious illness among the prisoners would have shewn itself before this.
It is my firm opinion that no proper system of prison discipline can he carried out that does
not provide a separate sleeping place for every prisoner. I have always entertained the opinion
that each prisoner should be locked up by himself at night, and my experience confirms me
more on that point, .
5160. Are there any regulations on Cockatoo Island making personal bodily cleanliness
compulsory on the prisoners ? It is not mentioned in the general regulations; but it is
carried out, as far as possible, as a matter of course. The men s hair is kept cut close, and
the men are obliged to he properly shaved; there are barbers for the purpose of shaving
them twice a week.
5161. I was alluding more particularly to the washing of the body as a sanitary an ange-
ment ? The washing arrangements are very defective indeed; and since I have had chaige
I have on several occasions, when I could do it without risk, permitted the prisoners to
bathe in the dock ; hut there are really no proper arrangements for washing. The men are
allowed ten minutes to wash after they go out upon the works, five minutes are allowed when
the bell rings to dinner, and a quarter of an hour in the evening before leaving the
5162. Have they a plentiful supply of fresh water? On the works they have, but not in
the prison; there is a large supply there, hut not as I conceive sufficient. There is no proper
5163. Could not a plentiful supply of water he obtained upon Cockatoo Island for this large
number of prisoners ? Not at all times ; water has been scarce there at times ; and, in fact,
I remember some time ago seeing water brought from Sydney to the island.
5164. Still a great deal might be done to improve the present state of matters in that
respect? I think so; the establishment has not any modern appliances or arrangements;
in fact, the prison was originally a stockade, and it has remained a stockade.
5165. When the Committee were at Cockatoo Island a few days ago we examined several
prisoners—men who were sent as a deputation from the general body of prisoners -as to any
complaint they had to make as to their general treatment; and the first complaint made
was with regard to the chain system, or iron time; it was stated that a man sent for ten
years under the old regulations, the first three years to he worked in irons, did not com-
mence his probation time till he had worked out his three years in irons ? That 18
case, and that is the regulation. {The witness produced the same. Vide Appendix A.)
5166. Do you not think the additional punishment of causing a man to work three years in
irons is sufficiently severe, and that his probation time, if he is to have probation time, should
commence from the beginning of his sentence ? lam not prepared to say that, the P unis
ment of irons is one which is generally given only for some serious offence, and should carry
a very serious punishment with it. if the men know beforehand that it entails this extra
service with it, I think it more deterrant than it would be otherwise. Many of these men
get accustomed to the irons, and in a little time think very little of them.
5167. Another grievance of which the men complained was, that several men were kept on the
island after the Judge’s warrants committing them to the island had expired; they also com-
plain that favouritism was shewn to some of the prisoners—that supposing two men had been
sent to the cells for solitary confinement for fourteen days each, when the Judge s warrant
expired in one case the man was set free, while in the other he was retained on the is an un i
he had served out the additional time for which he had been confined ? Ido not think there
is
G, K. Mann,
Esq.
25 April,l 861.


is any ground for making that charge of favouritism. With resard to detonfinn fl i
P rcSenbe - an addition to the time toV ‘
For a sentence of 2S days, an additional probation of 60 day S P
” ,; 'b- vs , „ „ 45 days.
” ]t d / ys ’ » 30 days.
" ™ » „ 21 days.
" » „ 15 days.
)> 4 days, n j
1 C ! e f tl . 18 Class ’ fi cation Board have always acted upon that. When a prisoner is due for
a ticket-of-leave, the whole detail is forwarded to the Classification 'Board, of which Mr
M Bcr o, the Principal Superintendent of Convicts, is Chairman. The matter is then con-
sidered, and recommended to the Executive, as the case may be. If there have been instanee-
T hovel* 'h') we ver y 0 ne °i n s tan 1 e have ar ! sen out of some special recommendation.
this assertion A W wblch 1 may mentlon ' and which, perhaps, has given rise to
assertion. A short tune ago there were two men due to go away, they were neither of
them really bad behaved men on the island, but they had each received fourteen da V l
punishment for one of these recent outbreaks. The time of one of these men was up and
he was forwarded to Sydney to the Inspector General of Police; by some mistake tTe fourteen
ferestrthe ext ° D ? e bufc ifc bad booked S
ctcuir s tance to the P n T *7* * et ™ tlon - 1 fo ™ d out the mistake, reported the
circumstance to the Government, and asked for authority to send the other man away upon
days ll'irer CiL thp ye ri tbe aad the one man remained fourteen
days longer than the other. That is the only case of the kind I recollect. Torpy was
the man who remained fourteen days after he came up and claimed to be sent P away
When he came to me I said I did not feel justified, because I had made one error, in com-
mitting ano her without the authority of the Government.
the islfn c o n M^ne d of by the men was this-they stated (hat the prisoners on
three J *7 , the VlSlting Ma § istrate > the medical man, and yourself, into
“®® \ . that , the drst ‘ class men ln the hand-carts had to draw 115 feet a day ;in the
n , , ee } ai ? d in tlle third 32 feet; that it was customary to work men of the first and
second classes in the same gang, consequently, that the men of the first class could not do
imo than the second, for which amount of work the second class received indulgences, while
. e , f receiv ® d none ? It is not customary to put men of different classes together to work
in lat way in fact, my strict orders are to work the men of each class as much as possible
together, it does occur, nevertheless, sometimes, that men of different classes do work
together; but far from its militating against the advantage of the men, it very often turns out in
t icir favour. Jj or example, to take hand-cart labour, each man has to move a certain number
o cubic leet in a day to a certain distance; the aggregate labour required of a gang if
composed of men of the second and third classes is so much less than when composed
entirely of first or second class men ; and an average is struck of the labour of the whole
credit being given for the difference.
5169. It was stated that unless a first-class man moved his 115 feet of stuff, although working
with a second-class man, he got no indulgence? Not unless the men averaged the necessary
amount. J
5170. It was stated that it was impossible, from the circumstances in which he was placed,
for such a man to do his task ? That is not the case; the amount of work required at the hand-
cart can be done by any men if they choose to work; and men can and do earn a very good
gratuity at it. °
5171. Do you think any good results from putting prisoners upon a stinted allowance of food—•
by giving them only two meals a day, breakfast and dinner, and not giving them supper ?
think the men are exceedingly well fed at Cockatoo Island, and that they have no reason
t°. complain of the quantity of rations they have. Igo further on that point, and I
think if any system could be devised, making the amount of food depend upon the amount
of labour the man performed, it would be a correct one for prison discipline.
5172. It is stated that at Cockatoo Island the men receiving no supper are often obliged to
go from dinner-time of one day to breakfast the next without food—l am alluding to men
who receive no indulgences, and who can lay out no money in providing food for themselves ?
The rations* the men get is 1£ lbs. of bread, and, I believe, it is quite the exception where
men have not some of that left from their dinner. The men who are industrious, and who
earn a gratuity, have always the means of purchasing some little addition of tea, sugar, and
tobacco, and, in some instances, they purchase extra bread.
5173. If a man is supposed on the sick list, even though he is not confined to the hospital,
but is merely exempted from work, he is not allowed any gratuity whatever ? That is, he is
not in the way of earning any gratuity, and, I think, it would not be advisable to allow him
any gratuity; for there is, no doubt, a large amount of malingering, and this would tend to
increase them. It often happens that when a man is ordered to do a particular work he does
not like, he goes about it sulkily, and says, “ Take me to the doctor.” The doctor is, perhaps,
puzzled, and puts him on the exempt bank, when I am convinced the man is malingering.
If the men, in such cases, received gratuities, it would be an extra inducement to evade work.
5174. It was also stated to the Committee that the prisoners had very great difficulty in commu-
nicating with the authorities—that they were only allowed to see the superintendent, what-
ever the complaint might be, once a week; therefore, a case might arise on Monday, and on
the
* Note (by witness on revision) : —Daily ration for a prisoner on Cockatoo Island :—l£ lb. bread,
1 of meat, h lb. maize meal, 1 oz. sugar, i oz. salt, i oz. soap; vegetables, if ordered by the Medical
Officer, not to exceed £ lb. per man.


the Saturday, following, when they saw t^ ed St J^ 1 e n d ten 'The regulation I have established
statement is wrong, and very hi hly me ig to put down his
since I have been superintendent is that any “an who w p prepared
name, and that I will see him, as aiu , 1 a pr actice of taking down the names of
to take down all their complaints in o- name g t 0 se t down their complaints. I
all persons making complaints, and opp . emergency they are to he brought up to me
have also informed the do so in order to ?arr, out my
SoSTi of compiaintsat when
a pSr frivolous complaint .hid. might have stood over
untU the proper time for them. offered to make complaints against the
5170. The prisoners also state that even w Broderick they were threatened to be sent to
free officers, and they especia y a d ’ ? No m ! in b as ever made such a complaint
the cells —has any such complaint <■ J believe it lam sure Mr. Broderick never
to mo. I have never heard it before and Ido not believe U. Lam su
threatened to send a man to'the ce u J re d°is „ ive P „ to prisoners for lodging complaints?
SS fut;TsVlVve“Llr coTpWs to'tho free officers, and they are bound to scud them up
?TS return!
S T«« lT W if,'id, only 34
6178. From this return it would appear that out who haTe beeu returned
are fresh convictions under tickets-of-leave *es, exclusive
in consequence of the cancellation of then tic ic s o e that system must
ts. t.k Ss rSSSftcft —•“twjxttss
not those hardened offenders who are constantly m prisons ? It is 14, per cent.,
of those returned by cancellation of tickets-of-leave _ wVl ; ch you think will he of
6181. Are there any other papers »' *' J J I comparative sentences
service to the Committee? I been ked te.garter pr;or and
passed by the Supreme Court and 1 C them in . (Tlte wU aess landed in the
subsequent to the Ist ot dune K . g ently stated that the sentences passed
superintends the works in progress on the island, under my a ire
51°8tThe Whet ot the works are more immediately under his control, and being clerk of
IrnTy whonfare *.“pC W fcrto’wtaf ,He assists me in preparing plans, and
Yes. „ 7 raw G.O loiond ? T have four, one senior foreman and
5186 How many foremen have you on the island . ± nave iou ,
MS I wish to know is what P— h^^^
r„rTtrcLCf ‘i-piT“TecLn°ics,and hnildin g “arran g ements
** «*
■ flsT WhatT the name ot the foreman over the buildings you refer to ? Mr. CaWH.
5189. Is Mr. Cahill a practical man ? He is a carpenter by trade and was e
builder before he came to me. He has done his work very efficiently, and has been g
6190.'wh-it is the’narae'of the foreman over the masons and stone-cutters ? I think the
6 TTi hefn in 1 m/dcpar'tment, 1 think, about
6192.TToreman ot works? Yes. He was on the island before in some capacity-not
M9 d “ Are you aware what office ho hold on the island before ? I think he was a sergeant
5194 6 Its” hT practical mason or stone-cutter ? Ho understands it very well. He is a very
good man at keeping the record. . , r „„„ other men
6195. What I wish to know is, whether he is a practical man w o turns
how to do their work ? I think so ; he never takes any had work from the men,
out very good w 7 ork.


5196. The greater part of the men are those who have learned what they know on the
island —is there a tradesman among them ? There are some tradesmen ; but the majority
of the stone-cutters have been taught on the island.
5197. Do you think the foreman capable of teaching them ? Quite capable of teaching
stone-cutting; it is plain work. All his duty is to take charge of the men, to measure the
number of superficial feet of work done, to record it, to see that the stones are cut square
and not in wind, and not to accept them if they are.
5198. Is it his duty, if the men are not able to take lines, to shew them how to get the
lines ? Yes, he shews them.
5199. Is there not a quantity of wrought stone lying on the island now that is condemned
for the purpose for which it was prepared ? Ido not think there is a single stone. If the
stone is improperly cut, or cut into wind, the man who cuts it is not allowed measurement
for it. They know that, and they are very particular about it.
5200. Has it come to your knowledge that a quantity of stone has been improperly cut by
these men, and that they have not been paid for it ? There have been occasionally
complaints made to me on Saturdays that the foreman in charge of the stone-cutters
has not allowed for work done; but it is not always Mr. Fitzgerald’s duty. I have
gone down in those cases and examined the stones myself, and in some instances I
have refused to allow credit unless the men faced over the stone again, which they have done.
In other instances I have conceived that the work might have been passed, and have passed
them.
5201. What I wish to know is, whether it has not come to your knowledge that stones have
been cut wrong and broken up at various times ? No, it could not have taken place without
my knowledge, and I have never heard of it. I remember an instance of one particular bed
of stone which after it had laid a little while began to laminate, and that was condemned as
not being fit to go into the building, but that was not the fault of the cutter, and he had
been paid for it.
5202. What is the name of the third foreman, and what is his duty ? Mr. Easton, he is
superintendent of the quarry gang at this present moment; and there is Mr. Kelleher, who
superintends the gangs that are employed more generally in moving timber, moving stones,
and in other general work.
5203. How long has Mr. Easton been on the island ? He has been many years upon the island
as superintendent of the quarrymen. He was employed in former times under the lloyal
Engineer Department, He afterwards came to the island in the same capacity as an overseer,
and when I took charge he was transferred to my department as a foreman.
5204. Then he has practical knowledge of quarrying, or of whatever duty you require of
him? Of excavation and quarrying, a very good knowledge.
5205. By what means did the prisoners Johnson and Ferris escape from the island? A
man-of-war was in the dock, and they were employed at night at the engine, pumping the
dock dry ; about twelve o’clock they slipped away from the island. I was not on the island
at the time, but I understand that they went to tne police wharf, unhooked a boat that
happened to be there, and went away in it.
5206. To whom did the boat belong? To Mr. Broderick.
5207. Was Mr. Broderick or the officers of the island allowed to keep boats for their private
use ? Yes. There was nothing in the regulations against it.
5208. Do they keep boats now ? For the last eight years, since I have known the island,
boats have been kept there, but have lately been removed.
5209. You say the prisoners were pumping at night —is it usual for prisoners to be kept
working at night? This was a special case, and a special authority had been given to keep
out prisoners in cases of emergency of this sort. Since then no prisoners have been kept
out.
5210. Was it not frequently done before that time? Yes.
5211. Could not the dock be employed in the daytime? If we had time to do it, but in
this case I believe they were anxious to have the ship dry early in the morning.
5212. i4re the pumps you have in working order, and tit for the work they have to per-
form ? They [are double-action pumps, and they have been working unsatisfactorily, but I
have new pumps in course of erection; one set is already completed, and the other is nearly
ready to be erected. These I shall work in addition to the double-action pumps, and wc
shall then have very increased facilities for pumping the dock.
5213. When will the pumps now in course of erection be completed ? One sot is completed,
the other is in a forward state, and I should hope that in from two to three months it will
were the prisoners Landells and_ Hughes concealed at the time they were
missino- for two days or more ? We found them in the store for the engine work, over the
engineer’s office There is a door leading from the passage into the engineer’s office; this
had been locked, but the key had protruded a little way through, and Landells with a pair
of pincers had seized hold of the end of the key, unlocked it, and gone in. The pair of
pincers was found in the store over my office. , . , ■, 9 T f
6215. Where was the boat made in which they attempted to escape from the island. It
was made in the carpenters’ shop over the beams; it was a small boat-called a boat because
there is no other name to apply to it —formed of a number of half-inch planks which tne
sawyers were cutting at the time, and which were being stowed over the beams in the car-
penters’ shop. Landells was employed to stow it away, and he spread them out so as to hide
what he was doing from the view of anyone in the shop below, and there he constructed this
boat. At that time nearly all the carpenters were employed in putting the roof upon the
other wins of the large workshop, and Landells was in the shop by himself for some time.
° 157-2 B Mr -


G, K. Mann,
Esq.
25 April, 1861.
Mr. Cahill was also a good deal engaged about the roof, and only went into the shop from
time to time, and during this time Landells knocked this boat together in the way you saw.
5216. Who had charge of that shop when this boat was made? It was under Mr. Cahill’s
charge, but he was engaged among the mechanics who were putting on the roof.
5217. Was Landells in Mr. Cahill’s charge at the time? He was one of the mechanics
under Mr. Cahill’s charge. , .
5218. What has become of the vessel you had for your diving bell f She is partly broken
5219. And the punt belonging to her ? And the punt belonging to her is also
partly broken up. I had a vote to build a new vessel and some new punts, these being
entirely rotten and unsafe to be used, and I propose to use as much as I can of the old
material in the construction of the new punts.
5220. In whose charge was the vessel at the time it was broken up, or how came it to be
broken up ? She was in my charge.
5221. I mean the person under you? Mr. Kelleher.
5222. By whose negligence was she lost ? I can hardly say she was lost by negligence at all;
Ido not consider that the vessel is lost. The vessel was taken round there, and intended to
be hauled up as high as she could be, for the purpose of breaking her up. I think she might
have been got up higher. I think Mr. Kelleher had charge of her at the time. She went
down in deeper water than X intended ; she was a very rotten old vessel, not fit to be con-
tinued for a diving craft.
5228. Then I understand from your answer that you had decided previously to her being lost
or wrecked to take her there and break her up ? I had decided previously to break her up.
5221. Then she was not in working order or fit to be used? Not at all, she was unsafe; in
fact, I was afraid she would not have held out to let me complete the operations at the
entrance of the dock.
5225. Was there a vessel employed to lift her ? I tried to lift her, and to put her up on
higher ground.
5226. What did it cost, or about what did it cost to try to lift her ? Ido not think it cost
anything at all. The vessel with which I tried to lift her was one I borrowed for the
occasion.
5227. There was nothing paid for the vessel ? Nothing.
5228. Nor to the men working her? It was convict labour we used.
5229. Who has charge of the stores belonging to the engineer’s shop? I have a clerk there
in charge. Mr. Broderick superintends it principally ; and there is a clerk and storekeeper
there who issues the stores, and keeps an account of the details of the expenditure.
5230. Have not stores been often given out by prisoners without a free man having been
there? That was the case formerly; but I represented it, and I think for some years past
nothing has been given out by the prisoners.
5231. Upon whose recommendation was the old system altered ? I believe upon mine. I
do not remember at this present moment —at all events, I saw the necessity of having a free
officer as a storekeeper, and also as clerk to check the gratuity payments, instead of a prisoner
clerk as formerly. I have not employed a prisoner clerk since I have had the control of the
island. With regard to the issue of stores, I believe the stores are as carefully issued and
recorded as in any department of the Government. In issuing oil, no doubt the clerk
employs a prisoner, but I believe every item issued is recorded by him.
5232. Can you furnish a return of the number of prisoners now on the island? I beg to
hand in a statement of the number on the island this day. (The witness handed in the
same. Vide Appendix Ed)
5233. Have you not sent a number of men to Berrima lately—men who are not fit for hard
labour? There are nine now on the island who are to go, but they have not gone yet.
There were five or six sent to the Darlinghurst Gaol at the time of the insubordination, and
I understand to-day, from Mr. Read, that they have gone. I have had some correspondence
with the Inspector General lately, to learn when he will be prepared with an escort to
convey them, but it is not yet decided. There are nine under orders, but there is a larger
number who, in my opinion, ought to go.
5231. Will you furnish the Committee with a return shewing the number of men on the
island during the past month, how they have been employed, the quantity of work they
have done, the amount of gratuity they have earned, and the number of days they have
obtained credit for? I will. {Vide Appendix F. .)
5235. By the Chairman : Can you explain what appears to be a discrepancy in the paper
you have handed in (.Appendix E) —in the day description you say “ cells 1,” and in the
night muster “ cells 10”? In the night muster, the men referred to are those who sleep
over the cells, not for punishment.
6236. With regard to the supervision of the police —are the police of the island under your
supervision or control ? Not at all.
5237. Have you no authority over them ? None.
•5238. Have you no authority, as far as the discipline of the island is concerned, to see that
they do their duty ? I have not; they do not report to me in any way. Formerly there
was a police force which was considered an integral part of the establishment, consisting of
a sergeant and twelve men. Since the military guard has been replaced by a detachment of
the metropolitan police, I as superintendent have ceased to have any control whatever over
these police; they have been removed entirely from under me, excepting that I pay them;
they are nominally under the Visiting Magistrate according to the regulations, and are
ordered to report to the superintendent, and all orders to be issued to them by the Govern-
ment or Visiting Magistrate were to go through the superintendent only. That has not
been


n^e^opolitaiTpoliced “ m!litary gnard iaS leen repkced a of the
5239 You think it would he an advantage to the discipline of the island if that were the
case? lam thoroughly convinced it ought to be the ease, that is, the permanent island
guard of one sergeant and twelve men. My opinion is, (hat the establishment ought to be
p aced under one head ; under one officer who should be responsible for the due performance
:L^f;ra; f rt e ri; • that is done the estabHshment
52 40. By Mr. Mate .' Suppose anything occurred on the island, which, in your opinion
rendered it necessary that the police should be called upon to act, should you feel that you
had authon yto call upon them ? I should call upon them, and I have no doubt they would
act; but f they said, No we do not choose to act,” I could not order them. The regulations
of the military were, that I was to apply to the officer when I wanted their assistance and
they were bound tci give it I suppose they would have used their own judgment in such a
2 , p f ° Und the ” m ° St rea .S- In fact 1 ha ve no complaint to make against the
police , the men are apparently very willing to do their duty, but 1 think the inspector takes
more authority upon himself than he ought to do. I have had occasion the
inspector, who does acts which I consider exceedingly wrong, and without my knowledge
In fact lam kept in ignorance of what he is doing. Reports are made to the Visiting Magis-
trate, of which I know nothing until two or three days after, reports which ought to be made
to me at once that no time might be lost. In fact I consider that the superintendent ought
to be responsible for the entire establishment, and if he does not do his duty the Government
know what to do with him. At present the establishment is under the Visiting Magistrate
under the superintendent, under the Inspector General of Police, and I may say under the
inspector of police in charge. _ All appear to have something to say, though I must say that
the Inspector General has not interfered, beyond removing the permanent island guard from
under the control of the superintendent. b
524 L By Mr - Sutherland: What was the nature of the cases you had to report against the
pohce In one instance I ordered a sentry to be placed upon the prison yard gate, on
Saturday afternoon and Sunday, when the men were locked up, in order that they might be
some assistance to the free officers in charge, and also to prevent the prisoners comino- out
without due permission. That order has never been carried out. That was one of the
instances in which I reported them.
5242. Have you police regulations, or regulations for the general government of the island ?
Ihere are the regulations that were published I think in 1855, before the dock was com-
pleted, and which, in ray opinion, are quite inapplicable to the present state of the island.
5243. Are you working under those regulations at the present time? Yes; they are
obsolete, and there are consequently constant misunderstandings.
5244. By the regulations then the police are properly under your charge ? The regulations
say they—the island police, viz.: 1 sergeant and 12 men—are to be under
Magistrate and the superintendent, and that they are to report to the superintendent, but
the regulations are not distinct and clear. I have sent in two codes of regulations for the
sanction of Government.
5245. They have not been acted upon ? They have not been sanctioned.
5246. Did the inspector on the island give any reason why he did not accede to your order
with respect to the police being placed on the gate ? No, Ido not think he did; he wrote
me a peremptory note, of the tone of which I complained to the Government, that his
policemen were not to be put there to shut the gate when prisoners came out, and that if I
did not put a free man there he would remove the sentry. I wrote to him not to remove
the sentry without instructions, and then I reported the matter to the Government, and the
sentry has never been there since. There are two warders inside the yard whose attention
is taken up by the prisoners, and some of the prisoners were in the habit formerly of
slipping out of the gate and roaming over the island, and I placed a sentry there and gave
orders that no prisoner was to be allowed to pass without the permission of the principal
warder inside.
5247. The men, I believe, are now kept at work on the island until two o’clock on Saturday
afternoon ? Yes.
5248. Is that in accordance with the regulations of the island ? That, I believe, is the
general regulation of the island, as far as I can remember.
5249. Your instructions are, that they are to do so ? Yes, I think I have instructions; it
has been the custom, I think, for some years.
5250. By the Chairman : Did the men work until two o’clock on Saturday before the new
regulations were issued ? As well as I can remember for the last six or seven years they
have worked until two.
5251. It has been stated by the prisoners that before the new regulations were issued they
worked only until twelve o’clock, and that now they are kept at work until two o’clock to
enable the men under the old system to get half-a-day ? I think in former times they
did work till twelve o’clock, and that then, when the system was adopted of allowing them
to earn half-a-day’s remission, they were kept on until two o’clock to enable them to do so
much work as would entitle them to a mark.
5252. This is a grievance which the men under the new system say they labour under ? It
is a very recent idea, they never complained to me of it as a grievance, excepting one man
who, just before the last strike, said they had no right to work after twelve o’clock. I think
myself they are bound to work until two.
APPENDIX.


Term of Probation to be served.
Length of Sentence.
On the island, for a Ticket-of-leaye.
With a Tioket-of-leave
for a Conditional Pardon.
4 years.
7X „
3J »
7
3 „
„
2i „
6 ’’
2 „
r>h ”
2 „
”
2 „
4J "
2 „
\ ”
2 „
„
2 „
3~ „
\
2h ”
f The full unexpired term of the
2 ”
li „
1
j
6 ,
j
3 ”
> No reduced period of probation.
2
1 '*
appendix.
A.
Code of Regulations.
1 The periods of probation to be served by prisoners to entitle them, in the first instance, to
and subsequently to conditional pardons, will be proportionate to their sentences
according to the following scale : •
2. No portion of the time during which a prisoner may he worked in irons will he counted as part
of his period of probation, hut on his release from irons he will be required to serve the lull period ot
probation affixed to his sentence by the foregoing rule. , ,
3. The period of probation to be served for a ticket-of-leave can be shortened by extra work under
the task system, but not tire period of the original By extra work under the task system a
prisoner will be able to shorten the period of his servitude in irons, and also the period of his probation
for a ticket-of-leave, but the term of the sentence passed on a prisoner cannot be shortened otherwise
than by the pardon of the Governor General. .
4. Prisoners under cumulative sentences will be required to serve for their tickets-of-leave a
period of probation equal to the sum of the periods of probation fixed for each sentence according to the
above scale, and a similarly prolonged period of probation as ticket-of-leave holders to entitle them to
conditional pardons. Thus, a prisoner under two sentences, the one of fifteen and the other of ten years,
will have to serve a probation of thirteen and a half years for his ticket-of-leave, and a probation of six
years as a ticket-of-leave holder for his conditional pardon.
5. Prisoners received on the island under second sentences for felony or any transportable ottence
will have one-fourth added, and prisoners under a third or any subsequent sentence of the same nature
will have one-third added to the period of probation fixed for sentences of the same length by the above
6. A prisoner sentenced for a period not exceeding twelve months will only be able to shorten his
confinement on the island by extra work under the task system. On the completion of such extra work
of the time computed to be equal to that of his sentence, he will receive for the remainder of the actual
term of the sentence a ticket-of-leave. ...
7. In order to prevent the interruption which it has occasioned in the progress ot the works, the
prohibition to work under the task-work system shall no longer be imposed as a punishment under
magisterial sentences for offences committed on the island ; but, in lieu thereof, the Magistrates or
Yisiting Justice shall be empowered to add to the offenders’ period of probation for a ticket-of-leave,
according to the following scale:—
For a sentence of 28 days, an additional probation of 60 days.
„ 21 „ „ 45 „
„ 14 „ „ 30 „
„ 10 „ „ 21 „
7 „ 15 „
:: 4 „ „ 7 „
8. A. sentence passed upon a prisoner by the Supreme Court or Court of Quarter Sessions whilst
be holds a ticket-of-leave will be added to the unexpired portion of his original sentence, and the
probation which he will be required to serve will be in proportion to the duration of these sentences
combined. , n
9. The forfeiture of a ticket-of-leave for breach of regulations, without an additional sentence, will
subject the holder to serve a probationary period, for the renewal of his ticket, ot not less than six
nor more than twelve months; such period to be fixed by the Classification Board at their next meeting
after the prisoner’s admission on the island.
10. Prisoners serving under sentences passed in the Mother Country will have the benefit ot these
rules, as far as they can be applied to their cases without interference with Imperial regulations.
11. The periods of probation to be served by Home prisoners shall be fixed by the Classification
Board at their monthly meeting, in accordance with the recommendations of the Magistrates by whom
they shall have hccix SGTit*oiiCGcl»
12. The police history of every Home prisoner, from the date ot his arrival in the Colony, shall be
forwarded with him to the island from the office of the Principal Superintendent of Convicts, and shall
be placed on the records of the establishment as a guide to the Classification Board in fixing the
prisoners’ probation when not provided for by the regulations.
B.


Tickets-of-leave cancelled
24
34
Present strength cf the prisoners on the
58*
258
Supreme Court.
Courts of Quarter
Sessions.
YEARS OF SENTENCE.
YEARS
OF SENTENCE.
1*1
2
3
2
4
5 i
2
6
7
8
9
10
4
1
2
15
10
i
15
0
18
1
4
4
12
2
16
6
13
52
54
1
3
5
J
2
27
3
230
2
3
4
5 j
6
7 8
|
9
10
15
o3
O
H
■ ■ i
..
••
1
3
7
's
1
7
26
1
‘j
1
Assault with intent to commit
i
3
1
1
i
5
i
'1
Indecent assault
Attempt at unnatural crime ..
1
4
8
1
2
1
1
9
5
2
23
15
*2
9
1
2
2
"1
4
’4
3
8
39
27
2
14
1
2
*2
"2
..
i
1
1
i
••
5
2
1
j;
1
1
2
1
*6
*9
1
‘i
26
10
1
1
1
9
4
"2
2
2
••
Burglary
Assault and robbery •
Horse stealing, cattle steal-
ing, &c
Stealing and larceny
Mail robbery
Embezzlement
Fraud and false pretences
..
1
i
Receiving stolen property
Perjury
••
0
* * j ’ * i * ■*
*•
Forgery and uttering
Court Martial
1
i
13
3
8
f
i
,1£
2
*
jisjia
1"
1"
1"
69,2c
all ell
je
12
1
■ ..
1
3£
I 1
1
P
6
86
Courts op
District and
Supreme Court.
Quarter Sessions.
YEARS
OF SENTENCE.
YEARS
OF
sentence.
1
n'
2
3
4
5
G
7
8
9
1015
3
0
1
U
2
3
4
5 j
61
7
8
9
10
15
c5
O
EH
—
1
1
—
—
—
—
9!
3
7
—
“1
Murder and manslaughter.
Assault with intent to
4
1
commit a rape
1
'i
3
1
* *
* *
3
1
2
i
4
Indecent assault
. •
1
* *
* *
Attempt at unnatural
9
2
2
.. 2
crime
* •
# *<
I
7
3
2
2
.. 7
Violent assault, &c
1
4
• #
2
• . •*
Bigamy
••
1
1
1
6
1
1
*2
12
2
i
2
4
i
.. 10
Burglary
i
9
4
1
8
1
5
5
, ,
3
.. 14
Assault and robbery ....
# *
Horse stealing, cattle
o
5
5
3
16
12
27
7
1
• 0
3
.. 50
stealing, &c
Stealing and larceny
••
-[
2
2
6
11
5
13
i
12
1
..
..
32
1
1
2
1
1
, ,
, .
2
Fraud and false pre-
4
2
1
1
7
3
4
7
tences
1
1
Eeceivng stolen property
• •
••
••
1..
*1
, #
, #
Perjury
••
1
2
i
1
Forgery and uttering ....
i
i
6
_ 1
4
4
1
r
••
1
14
5
••
1
1
1
1
4
2
2
1C
26
27
7
6
1
1
5
5
104
2
1 l
8
37
3
55
••
2!
1
••
7
135
B.
A Numerical Return of Prisoners discharged under the Provisions of the Regulations prior to June
A \S who have been returned to this Establishment Re-convicted, or with Tickets-of-Leave
cancelled, to serve their Sentences under the subsequent Regulations now in foice.
* Being 22-5 per cent, of the present confines.
GOTHER K. MANN.
Cockatoo Island,
25 April, 1861.
c.
A Return of the Comparative Sentences passed upon Prisoners at Cockatoo Jslaml V the Suprcnie
Suit, and Courts of Quarter Sessions, from the Ist of June, 1850. to the olst of May, 18u8.
GOTHER K. MANN.
Cockatoo Island,
25 April, 1861.
GOTHER K. MANN.
Cockatoo Island,
25 April, 1861.
E.


Detail.
' Colonial.
Home.
Total.
Religious Denominations.
Under Sentence to the Roads ..,.
212
9
221
Protestants
133
Ditto
Transportation .,
Roman Catholics
111
Ditto
to Irons
10
10
Presbyterians r . ,.
Ditto
as Vagrants
Jews
2
Ditto
Tickets Cancelled
24
3
27
Pagans
7
Ditto
Farther Orders .,
....
246
12
258
258
—
—
1
Night Mustek, 24 April,
1861.
Distribution, 25 April, 1861.
1 Ward
65
M
Gateman 1, Messenger 1
2
1
Overseers
10
66
s<!
Labourers
87
* (
Light hand-carts
6
3 „
16
« I
Mechanics
41
4
41
i i
Hospital 13, Attendants 3
16
146
41
Ij
Cells
i
w
■J2
Cooks 4, Wardsmen 10, Servants 18, Watermen, &c 4
36
Hospital ....
12
Repairing Clothing, Shoes, &c.
6
9 •
Gardens
o
Cook-house .
3
cc
Sweeper and Shedmen
4
H
Washermen
5
Cells
10
o
Exempt by Surgeon
37
f>
Signal Staff and Barbers
3
Passage
4
_o
Constables
4
258
112
1
268
1 <1
3
1 ~
1
a
3
O
o5
a
Jo
S
r^3
O
C3 r*
£ g 5
1
I , Cj Ta
1 a O
| fS
ft
O
w
I g>
i s
i
O
5-g
■*“ £,q
CJ
j £
1 2
o
|
cS
§•=
M
o>
5
<v
o
°s-=
"8J2 S
c
H
Gross Number during this Period.
1,297
219
845
2,984
119
5,512
Daily Average „ „
59
ai.
SR 0
135^
250A
oo S2
lu
Total Amount of Gratuity paid during this
Period £
5 8 1
Nil
Nil
Nil
31 14 4£
Nil
Daily Average to each Man
Id. |
Nil
Nil
Nil
2*d.
Nil
E.
State of Cockatoo Island, 25 April, 1861.
There are also now in the Gaol 13 prisoners belonging to this establishment.
F.
A Eetuen shewing the number of Prisoners on Cockatoo Island during the month of March I«fii
work thcy haye the —-«-sns
Number of Prisoners earning time by Task-work 36
Average time earned by each man during this Period.....’ ’' ’‘**’ ’ * ‘ ’ * 10 i days .
Value


Value oe the Prison Labour.
Blacksmiths’ Work, §c.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Eepairing and re-steeling 2395 Picks, @ Id .. ..,
9
19
7
„ „ 924 Chisels, @ Id
3
17
0
,, „ 143 Jumpers, (ch 3d
1
15
9
„ „ 79 Wedges, @ 6d „....
1
19
6
Making 74 Screw Bolts, @ 6d
1
17
0
.. 38 Nuts, (o', 2d
0
6
4
.. 151 Spike Nails, (o', Id
0
12
7
35 Drills and Turning Tools. 6d
0
17
6
23 Linchpins and Keys, (o', 2d
0
3
10
„ 4 Spanners and Tap Wrenches, (a), 2s. 6d
0
10
0
12 Bars, Step Ladder, (a), 6d
0
6
0
„ 12 Washers, (a), Id
0
1
0
Eepairing and re-steeling 3 Malls, @ Is
0
3
0
,, Smiths’ Tools
0
10
0
Eivetting Buoys, 2 men
13
4
0
Heating Eivets, 1 man
4
8
0
Heating Irons for fumigating, 1 man, £ day
0
2
0
40
13
1
Carpenters’ Work, 8$c.
Making Gutter Bearers for New Workshop, 30 days, @ 6s
9
0
0
., Patterns for Machinery, 9 days, @ 6s
o
14
0
,, Pump Wedges and Boat-hook Handles, 2£ days, («) 6s
0
15
0
„ Pick and Maul Handles, 240 @ 6d
6
0
0
,, Water-buckets, 2 (S) 3s
0
6
0
Covering Eoof of Prison for fumigating, 33 men, @ 4s
6
12
0
Making Covers for New Pumps
0
10
0
„ Coal-box; repairing Bread-box, days, (a), 5s
1
7
6
„ Straight Edges and Squares, 3 days, (ct), 4s
0
12
0
Staying Pumps and fixing Girders, 11 days, 4s
2
4
0
Making Frame for Cupola—New Workshop, 42 i days, @ 5s
10
11
3
,, new Ladder, 6 days, (o', 5s
1
10
0
„ new Door for free Officers’ Quarters
1
5
0
Eepairing Eoof of Boiler-house and Coal-shed, 1 day, @ 5s
0
5
0
„ Wheelbarrows, Sentry-box, and Berths in Cells, 4 days, 5s..
1
0
0
,, Forge Bellows, 7 days, (a)j 5s
1
15
0
46
6
9
Painters, 30j days, @ 6s
9
1
6
9
1
6
Sawyers, 640 feet, @ 7s. 100
2
4
10
2
4
10
Plastering, 60 yai’ds, 3 coat, @ 7d
1
15
0
1
15
0
Quarrying, 693 cubic yards Eock and Earth removed 400 feet, (a) 5s
173
5
0
Stone sized up, 715 feet, (ch)
7
9
0
Ditto cut, 1041 feet, (cbj 9d
39
0
9
Ditto set, 7 perches, @ 6s
2
2
0
—
221
16
9
Engine Fitters, 3 men, 22 days, (a) 6s
19
16
0
Driver, 1 man, 22 days, 7s
7
14
0
Fireman, 1 man, 22 days, @ 5s
5
10
0
—
33
0
0
Docking H.M.S. “Cordelia”
5
0
0
—
5
0
0
Miscellaneous Labour, 1344 men for 1 day~61 1 \ for 22 days, @ 3s
201
12
0
201
12
0
Penal Department.
661
9
11
Fifty-nine men, for 22 days, @ 3s. each—(employed as wardsmen, cooks,
water-carriers, washermen, barbers, &c., &c.)
210 14
0
—
—
210 14
0
Gross Total earnings by 250 men, for 22 days
..£
772
3 11
Average daily earning per man, including Invalids and all classes
0
2
H
,, cost per man, with Military Guard
0
1
Ji
„ „ Police Guard
0
2
7
G. K. Mann,
Esq.
25 April, 1861.
GOTHER K. MANN,
Engineer-in-Chief.
SATURDAY,


SATURDAY, 27 APRIL, 1861.
Urgent
Mr. LUCAS, Mr. PARKES,
Mr. MATE, Mr. SUTHERLAND.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., Chairman.
[The Committee having met at the Railway Terminus, Sydney, proceeded vid Parra-
matta to Penrith, where they visited the Court House and Gaol. The latter is a log
building, faced with weather-boards, shingled, the ceiling being formed of logs, about forty-
two feet long by eighteen wide, and divided into four compartments, which are entered from
a passage about four feet and a half wide, lighted by an aperture over the gaol, protected by
iron bars. At each end are apartments about eighteen feet by eleven and eleven feet high;
running across these and let into the floor are iron bars, to each of which are attached three
rings; one of these rooms is at present occupied as a store. The two central apartments
are each about eight feet by ten, and eleven feet in height, and have also three iron bars
sunk into the floor with two rings attached to each. In neither of the divisions is there
any aperture for the admission of light and air.]
Mr. Henry Tubman examined : —■
5253. Ry the Chairman: You are in the police force? Yes.
5254. How long have you been in the force ? Nearly twenty years.
5255. You at present hold the appointment of lock-up keeper? Of lock-up keeper and
acting gaoler.
5256. How long have you held that office ? Since last October twelve months. I was not
appointed acting gaoler till the Ist of November, 1859.
5257. What class of prisoners is this building chiefly used for ? All prisoners tried at the
Courts at Bathurst on their way down to Darlinghurst Gaol, or Cockatoo Island, stop here
one night and sometimes two, if the weather is not favourable for sending them on.
5258. Sometimes more, I suppose ? They have not been detained more than two nights.
5259. What is the largest number you have received in transitu ? Seventeen.
5260. Do you remember whether they were detained one or two nights ? I can tell from
the book. (The witness referred to his book.) Only one night.
5261. Do you recollect how they were confined during the night, whether in one room or
two ? There were ten detained in the large room, and the remainder in the two smaller
ones.
5262. Were they at all refractory—had they to be chained ? They are brought down on
the chain, and the chain is left on one hand.
5263. Were they secured to these iron bars? That gang was not.
5264. Were they accommodated with blankets or any kind of bedding given to them? They
had a couple of dozen blankets given to them.
5265. And they had to sleep in the best way they could, covered with these blankets ? Yes.
5266. Had they any utensils during the night to make use of? Yes, tubs.
5267. Do you recollect whether the numbers that have been detained here, en route to
Sydney, on other occasions, have been at all approaching that number ? No, wo have
seldom had more than twelve.
5268. Have you ten or twelve often ? No, not very often. The next gang was ten.
5269. What system do you adopt on receiving these men —how are they committed to your
charge ? On a warrant signed by the Sheriff that accompanies them, directed to all gaolers
and lock-up keepers. As they come in here I search them, not taking them off the chain,
and I then supply them with tea and anything they require in that way —never with any
spirits, unless they are allowed by the doctor,
5270. How often do you receive prisoners in transitu? Very often; once every three
months we receive a chain gang, but other prisoners in transitu from Bathurst, Mudgee, and
other places almost every week. This day we had one from Bathurst and one from Mudgee,
lunatics.
5271. Have you had many who appeared turbulent refractory characters ? Not many.
5272. Do you chain them to'these rings ? Sometimes, when they are very bad characters.
5273. In cases where you have considered it necessary for their security ? For their security
only.
5274. How are they supplied with food when they are detained here ? They are allowed a
2-lb. loaf of the best bread, and 1 lb. of the best beef.
5275. Do they generally arrive by the mail ? No, they are marched down.
5276. Do they arrive here at all hours ? They generally arrive here about two or three
o’clock in the afternoon—they come on here from Eighteen-mile Hollow.
5277. They arrange their marches so as to be in in good time? Yes; it takes them seven
or eight days to come from Bathurst, and they arrange their stages so as to stop at the
various watch-houses on the road at night.
5278. I suppose prisoners are confined here who are sentenced by the Bench sitting here ?
Yes, for all sentences not exceeding a week; where a sentence exceeds a week, if for
fourteen days, the prisoner is sent to Parramatta.
5279. All sentences under seven days, whether passed upon males or females, are carried out
here ? Yes.
5280. Where do you confine your female prisoners ? If there are no male prisoners here
we confine them here; if there are male prisoners we confine the females in a cell in the
Court


conGne f“' ° f C ° Mt H ° USe wtere we sometimes
£•■}««. coll aid theUZ‘7, , "X BO ‘ P "“ y “ nOJ,WWe pat the mal “
female prisoners i’n this buildinoT iTave™ bC °° aCtIDS Sa °’ er at Penrit,1 < b.vl male and
too o' w, ten ? 1 bave > on several occasions.
sec r g , tbeEepiration ° f th ° -*
but there can be no other intercourse mg their speaking to each other,
Ztisl'rao'r d,™ MT" “ thega °’ iS therc » charge ail night ? Yes;
fart iSTSL.f “ - the
v ll6re 18 an outside sentinel in fact ? Yes
y ° Ur bMk e " trieS Shewi "S the »«“1« °f sentences awarded
sentenced by 7 'the f krad'senoh^to™the Ut^'fh” 1 "™ ?’ le “' in S the nilml > CT of prisoners
which they Le conan'dtl’^lt 6 1 f »‘'
beenin^ 3t Tns D mo 0 pP„1t Ptof “« P*- ■*» > number of prisoners hare
TZS&r****' ** W a ” 7 W I
of two
aatbT™™’ Tt l leß f ?‘ bj tWelv ° and ten * •«««», of the same height
as the rooms. The cells form wings on each side of the house, and are entered bv
t- opening into the front room; abundant light and air are admitted W + w ~
ventilators about nine inches feet, protected by iron bars.]
fb! 2; ( W r at if th!s centra ‘ front room intended for ? I have been told bv the contractor
size at ihe mr.' aOCOmm ° ° f ‘ h<> *"«•» tUs «“». and th/one of the same
5293. The intended cells are on each side of this ? Yes.
I: J 0 Jou think this building, when it is completed, will serve the purposes of the
would’ not UlldlDg WG haVe beCn 10 ' Fl ’° m mj es P erience since 1 have been Lie, I think it
5290. Do you think it a good arrangement for the lock-up keeper to live here with his
mdy, having prisoners in the cells on each side of him ? Ido not think it by any means
c goor arrangement; it may be a very good arrangement as far as the security l of the
prisoners is concerned. •> Ui lue
W 7 r like 1° lMre y° urse,f ? 1 sto “ U aot like to bring my family with me
,a D eaS^? PTr a number of drunkards in this neighbourhood, and
I have jled°tho°Xe m * ““ m ° St 1 W hea rd since
, Zr ,,,i6 “ d olMren if thcy were imt Zt m <gbt be
52 ? 9 + i Y °l* stated !° me jf fc “ ow that you believe this building was erected here by mistake
and that it was intended for St. Mary’s ? Only from what I heard. I heard Mr. Robert
Jamison say, it must have been a mistake to have put it here. *
-T 011 mean r ‘ ' yam,son > tbe late Member of the Legislative Assembly ? Yes
5301. Is a watch-house badly wanted at St. Mary’s? Yes.
6302. TJow many constables are stationed there ? Two.
5303. How long have they been there? Only a couple of months; they were stationed
there on account of the number of disorderly men at the railway, who caused a great deal
ot disturbance. °
630 L If a constable apprehended a prisoner there at night time, what could he do with
him ? Dnng him here.
5305. A distance of three miles ? Four miles.
5306. He would have to bring a drunken, disorderly man a distance of four miles ? In
some cases now they are marched here, in others they are brought in on a cart.
5307. Do you consider that a watch-house is required at St. Mary’s. I do.
5308. By Mr. Lucas: The only entry to these cells is through the living-room of thelock-un
keeper? Yes. r
5309. And when the cells are cleaned out all the filth from them must come through this
room ? Yes.
5310. And prisoners going from the cells to the yard in the rear must pass through the
bedroom of the lock-up keeper ? They must.
5311. There is no other way into the yard ? No.
[Leaving the new gaol, the Committee crossed over to the Court House, and
inspected the cells referred to by the witness. At the end of the Court House is a
small door pierced with fourteen one-inch auger holes; this opens into a passage
about three feet wide. On the left hand side are three cells, each about seven feet
by four, lined with slabs, having no openings for the admission of light and air
167 - 2 0 except


In transitu.
Taken into custody
at Penrith.
Total.
Sentenced at
Penrith.
Sentenced or com-
mitted to Parramatta.
Total.
24:
68
92
15
9
24
PIT A XT
Penrith Gaol.
27 April, 1861.
Mr. H.
Tubman.
except ten one-inch augei■ boles,. five o ° st Offensive, close, and musty
wbTttesTriCand when timers wore closed they were almost totally dart]
5312, That is where you have confined females ? Very seldom-only one or two during
ib open sometime.
gaoler ? I think I have had four altogether.
APPENDIX.
Return shewing the number * loners "
HENRY TUBMAN,
Acting Gaoler.
Penrith, 3 May, 1861.
FRIDAY, 8 MAY, 1861.
Present; — #
Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WINDEYER.
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLAND,
HENRY PARKBS, Esq., in the Chair.
John O’Neill Brenan, Esq., called in and examined
6316. 8,, the Chairman : Yon held the office of Sheriff of the Colony for some years . Yes,
and I consider that lam Sheriff now. t^e Committee do not wish to enter
5317. Something has taken place of c , Government with respect to your
into, hut there has been some action on the part ot me uove r
5818. You still consider yourself Sheriff? Ido to that office? No, T
5319. Are you still in the active discharge of the duties pcrtainiu D
am not. „ ~ ~ cn f office ? On the 15th February
5320. When did you cease to perform the active duties of the
partially, and, absolutely, on the 16th or Ilth ot April. appo inted on the 2nd
5321. How long is it since your appointment to that office . i was pp
January, 1854. . , pyqni ; n cd before this Committee? Y"es; I
5322. You have expressed a desire to be examined
expressed it to you. . , . • PV idence, but in consequence of
” d ' 700 were theu
examined ? Just so. • . T)nrlin(Thiirst during the time you
5324. It was part of your duty to inspect the prison at Darimgburst aun g
were Sheriff ? Yes ; it was part of my duty. Parramatta and to the establishment
5325. Did this inspection also extend to the P™ , r allv butnot to Cockatoo Island,
at Cockatoo Island? No; to Parramatta and ? 8 throughout the Colony?
5326. You considered it within your province to inspect the gao.s b
Yes, as Sheriff, of course. u • » inferior establishments, such as the
5327. Did you understand by the term prisons, “ bee ‘ on)y lately established.
country loch-ups and places oi that hint . , . ' ~ The lock-ups were pro-
I visited very few of them, and I exerc.sed no control over therm
claimed gaols for a particular object, as I understood it, and - S wou ,j have n 0
of prisoners awaiting trial at Quarter Sessions, otherwi , -, .■ Q OTe rument, and
Siority for their detention. I state t.hat of course knowing otherwise
in justice to the Government, because the idea of calling these look-ups gaols
5828. a Th“ r Committee think it best that you make whatever statement you
without the usual interrogations by which these “!® ? eral ter J, S; the result of
and it appears to them, as well, tnat I should state to y , 8 , q p arra matta,
their inquiries on the spot, as to the state ot the prisons at ?° 1 iuforma-
more especially ot Darlinghurst. Of course I cannot go into ’ detals J walls
tiou I give to you. I only state the general results of our inquiry muu o{
John O’Neill
Brenan, Esq.
3 May, 1861.


of the prison. The Committee have visited Darlinghurst Gaol twice, and they have
discovered, to their satisfaction as to the fact, that there has not existed any regulation
compelling personal cleanliness among the prisoners for years past; they found some of the
cells, especially in the female wing, very filthy with vermin; they also found that the
bedding used by the prisoners was, in their judgment, very far from clean, according to the
statements made by some of the prisoners, and corroborated by other statements ; the
blankets, in some instances, had not been washed for very long periods, more than twelve
months; they also found that, in their judgment, there were not sufficient regulations in the
conduct of the workshop to prevent the men from secreting tools to promote their own
escape ; there did not appear to be any means of search after the men left the workshops. The
Committee were also surprised to find that there was no attempt at a school, or any means of
instruction for the younger, or for any of the prisoners, and the general impression left upon our
minds —I use the term “general impression” because, as you are aware, the Committee
have not yet reported, and I believe I interpret the impression correctly—was, that there was
a great want of vigilance in the general management of the prison, in the disposition of the
wardsmen, in the regulations established for the good conduct of the prisoners, and for the
purposes of their health and safe custody. I have given you this information out of what
appeared to be fairness to you, so that you might be the better enabled to make any state-
ment you chose to the Committee? With regard to regulations for personal cleanliness,
there is no doubt no rule tor compelling prisoners to wash themselves, or to keep themselves
clean—no written rule ; but it is the especial duty of the warder in charge of the particular
wing to which the prisoner belongs, in the first place to see that the prisoners are not
objectionable to each other for want of personal cleanliness; it is also the duty of the
principal warder to see that the warders in charge of the wing, or of the wings, do their
duties in this respect; it is also the duty of the gaoler to see the prisoners once a day, and
if he perceived any want of cleanliness on the part of any prisoner that rendered him
objectionable to his fellow prisoners, it is his duty to remark it, and to see that it is remedied.
Therefore, as in a regiment, the corporal, the sergeant, the subaltern, and the captain, have
each their particular duties, so it is in the gaol, or ought to be. A person visiting, as I
could only do, occasionally, seeing the prisoners at a distance —not examining their persons—
could not ascertain whether they were personally clean or not, unless his attention was drawn
to it; and I may here inform the Committee that my attention was never drawn to it but
once, and that was by a Cockatoo Island prisoner. I remember now there were two. I
think the name of one was Williams; ho spoke to me about some men who were placed in
bis cell, whose persons were objectionable to him on account of want of cleanliness. They
were short sentenced people. I ordered their removal from the cell, and directed them to
be put in another cell by themselves. That is the only instance in which the matter was
brought under my particular notice. Therefore, if such a thing has existed —and I presume
it must have done from what the Committee say—all I can say is, that the warder in charge
of the wing to which the prisoner belonged neglected his duty in the first instance; the
principal warder, secondly; and the gaoler, thirdly. las visitor once in ten days or so, as
a general supervisor of the working of the establishment, could not be supposed to know all
these things, unless my attention was drawn to it. With respect to the cells :—ln the
women’s cells I certainly knew there were bugs, and I saw them also in the men’s cells.
The reason of their being in the state they were in when the Committee saw them was
this :—Early in January, or at the latter end of December, 105 Cockatoo Island prisoners
were sent to Darlinghurst Gaol for solitary confinement, and they were obliged to be placed
in the wing next to the female wing. Their confinement entailed a great deal of extra duty
upon the officers, and it was not safe or practicable to send—as I was informed when I spoke
to the matron and gaoler about it —the men to whitewash the female wing, as the warders
could not be spared from their duties, to watch the prisoners while they were engaged in
whitewashing the cells. That the cells were not in such a state some short time before, I
am personally aware, because I saw them; but the Committee will bear in mind, that the
influx of prisoners who cannot be clothed in the prison dress, who cannot be washed except
by the positive directions of the medical officer, who have not even the power, if they were
willing, to wash themselves, or even to comb their hair, —that such women coming in from
the dens of Sydney almost daily,—must bring in vermin in immense quantities into the
gaol; and therefore it is very difficult for prisoners of that class to be kept clean, or the
prison in which they are confined. To the immense number of that class who go into the
Sydney Gaol, I ascribe almost all the irregularities, and the deficiency in the general
management and cleanliness. In 1856 there were of this class 2,571 males and 2,484
females, making a total of 5,055, sent for 24 or 48 hours, and 3 days; women most filthy
in their persons, women that would not be washed, whom we dared not wash or put in the
bath without the doctor’s orders, who, when they come into gaol, are barely able to walk
into their cells from tremor, the effects of drink and dirt. These numbers include prisoners
for solitary confinement and imprisonment without labour, and are all short sentenced
prisoners generally speaking. In 1857 there were 1,998 males and 2,201 females, making a
total of 4,199. In 1858 there were 2,275 males and 2,079 females, making a total of 4,354.
So that this will, to a certain extent, excuse the officers for not keeping the women and
their cells so clean as they ought to be. (The ivitness handed in a return. Vide Appendix A .)
5329. I may here state to you that the vermin more particularly alluded to is the common
liouse-bug, which were noticed in some of the cells in nests consisting of hundreds, forming
dark patches of an inch or two inches on the walls and ceilings, and in the hinges of the
doors, and in all the cells they were noticed to be more or less numerous ? With regard to
the female wing it certainly did not come under my notice, because I had not visited that
branch of the prison on account of the Cockatoo men. My attention was more particularly
drawn


drawn at that time to the 105 men from Cockatoo Island, who were extremely troublesome,
extremely noisy ; their language was sometimes dreadful, and disgusting in the extreme, and it
was with the greatest difficulty ! could prevent their speaking to the women and gesticulating
to them from the windows of their cells. The women had previously occupied the yard next
to the wing occupied by these prisoners, and they were obliged to be removed and confined
in the wing. That was the reason the cells were in that state when _ the Committee saw
them. A short time before the Cockatoo Island prisoners came in I directed that a custom
which had been previously adopted should be discontinued, that of driving nails into the
walls, and making nail holes, as I considered that these boles formed receptacles for bugs and
vermin. I directed that the nails should be taken out, that the holes should be stopped up
with putty, and whitewashed over. I also directed the warder to get a particular kind of
nail or hook made, to be driven into the wall for hanging the prisoners’ clothes upon, and to
have the holes well stopped up with putty, so that no crevices might be left to enable the
bugs to squeeze themselves in. As to the hinges of the door, of course that was a thing I
might not notice in a casual visit, but it is the duty of the warder who has charge of the
wings, and who is bound to see that the cells are cleaned every day, to bring that under the
notice of the matron.
5830. We noticed that? lam quite aware of that, and those who go specially to look into
such matters may discover what others paying merely casual visits would not. It was, no
doubt, the duty of the warder to report it.
5331. By Mr. Morris: Would you expect persons who bad been extremely negligent to
report their negligence to their superior officers ? I had no reason to suppose they were
extremely negligent. The particular duty of the warder is to see that these cells are kept
clean; and, as I said before, I certainly did not visit the female wing for some fortnight or
three weeks before that, and that accounts for my not seeing it in the state in which the
Committee saw it. What drew my attention to them in the cells, both in the male and
female wings, was the practice of killing the bugs on the wall with the fingers.
5332. Bij the Chairman: Perhaps it is as well to state here, that it has been given in
evidence —though it is not before me to refer to —that the cells had not been cleaned for the
previous six months at the shortest ? That is whitewashed.
5333. Yes ? I was not aware that it was so long as that; the regulation is, that they shall
be whitewashed twice a year, and there is no necessity fur doing so oftener if the cells are
kept clean, still it is better to whitewash them every three months. In fact it is as well to
do them often, but the gaol regulation is, that it shall be done at least once or twice a year.
Now if the prisoner wardsmen were made to do their duty, and to keep the cells clean, it
would not be necessary to whitewash them so often. With reference to the bedding not being
clean, of course, the same remarks apply; but lam not aware, nor has it ever been reported
to me, nor have I ever heard that the blankets were so very dirty as that, or so long unwashed.
No doubt the prison was short of blankets, and my attention was drawn to it a short time
ago when the Cockatoo Island prisoners were sent there, for one of the prisoners—and only
one of them—spoke of his blankets being dirty. I examined his blankets, and they were no
doubt dirty, and I directed that the prisoners should have other blankets; the reply was that
they had no others.
5334. Some of the prisoners complained in very positive language of their bedding being lousy,
but the Committee did not notice any filth of that kind ? Such a state of things was never
brought under my notice, for if it bad been I should have directed the blankets to have been
removed and scalded. I may mention that I had a fumigating room put up for the purpose of
fumigating the clothes of the prisoners, and though I was constantly among the prisoners they
never made a complaint of the kind except in one instance. Had they done so I should have
given directions to have it remedied as far as the authorities could do so; certainly it was not
brought under my notice by my subordinates, as such a state of things ought to have been. The
gaoler should have told me of it, as it his particular duty, being resident in the establish-
ment, to see to these things himself personally. He should see each cell at least once a day,
or every second day; therefore, such a state of things could not have existed without his
having neglected his duty, I must say, most grossly. When I visited the gaol I saw the
blankets and bedding were folded up and piled upon the top of each other, and *1
was not in the habit of taking them down and examining them* ; and on the only
occasion when I saw vermin I gave the orders I have just alluded to. With regard to
the workshops and the searching of the men coming out of the workshops, it is the particular
duty of the trade overseers to see the tools counted out to the prisoners and to see them recounted
on their return, and particularly in the blacksmiths’ shop. The overseer of that shop is
supposed to be with the prisoners almost the whole day unless called away for some special
purpose. It is also the duty of the principal turnkey to see that the officers do their duty
in that respect when the prisoners are mustered, and to stand by as they pass into the wing.
Before the trade overseers were appointed, which was in 1860, that duty was allotted to
Mr. Harrison, the principal warder, and to the officers appointed to assist him ; but since
the appointment of the trade overseers, all the tools and all the materials are in their special
charge, and they are accountable to the Colonial Architect for them. Since January, 1860,
that branch has been entirely under the control of the Colonial Architect.
5335. By Mr. Morris: The workshops are not all under the same roof; for instance —the
carpenters’ shop is separate from the cabinetmakers, so that the overseer has to go from one
part of the establishment to another to inspect the work going on, and during his absence
men may secrete anything upon their persons, not the tools they work with, but tools they
may
* Note (Correction by witness on revision) :—I did not order them to he unfolded and examined,
because I had no reason for doing so.


may make themselves or pieces of old iron, which it is impossible for the overseer to observe
Such th.ngs have been taken away, and for that reason search is necessary ? T 0 remedv
that I pioposed that the workshops now in progress should be all under on/roof and that
proposal is now being carried out. I say it is impossible to carry out a nroper system and
so * Wh Te ' ’ ? .“if ac “ m “» dati ™, °f a gLI is such as to enable the
shortly ’ A qi U ff°r brancb of tbe subject, I may mention, that in 1854,
Solf and I ma?sarthaf iT ' re P resente d t 0 the Government the imperfect state of the
as fast as Ic 1 h “ v f. favoured to push on the improvements at Darlinghurst
upon th“ Estimates te ® over ? m f on several occasions, to put sums of money
necessarv to enable tb nt i ° -f 10 ° ® et tbese improvements made which were absolutely
Zcrlv lit n authorities to carryout a proper system, or to conduct the gaols
p pcily. i have, ovei and over again, spoken to those in power upon the subiect and it is
perhaps, a disadvantage to me now; but the Committee will, perhaps, take my statement as
as though it were a written one. I have, over and over again, wished every Min tTtha
Qt0 f power . and s P ecial, J his attention to the state of the gaol, and L the
;; uwJJ lty of ; ar :n g °i Ut a proper systera ' and 1 ba ve always been met by the Minister
e will consider that subject presently; it is one of the subjects we will take up Tmme-
Gov W 1 1 t Ib - iS V " y difficult aDd retimes very unpleasant for a
Government officer, after such an intimation, to continue to write to a Minister, reminding
ce“ai ll r e %m fe 8 ' SUCI “ i° ffi T r wT 0Uld; per >" in the end ’ be W- own frffind, but
3 Tl, a great pest to the Minister. In 1854 I wrote to the Government
shew tW hZ r Ml T er m P ° Wer tlien ? 1 know tbat > b * fc 1 mention it to
5T* • - J tbe V ccu P ied attention, and that I pointed out to the Govern-
T nec . es j lty ° f P uttin S the gaol into a proper state, to enable a tolerably
® J. f" y - t6m be car^ ied ou , t - 1 would also refer to one document on the subject of the
Cmm-n° ne \ n F°!\’ a f d i 1 may . her . e Say > tbat my ob J ect was not then to make money for the
WTr 1 J" 0 i P my cbicf was, to improve the gaol itself
h t, and tbe /; t 0 let t be fe ™en make money for the Government afterwards. In
one of my letters, dated loth October, 1856, addressed to the Colonial Secretary, I
say with reference to some comments that had been made by Mr. Forbes about the
working of the men in gaol, “At tlm same time denying, in toto, that Mr. Forbes
has introduced any new system of prison discipline into Parramatta Gaol; he has, no
„ d °ubt, got employment for the prisoners from the people of that town; but I have yet to
„ Jearn that a number of men cooped up in a small yard cutting stone, and fifty-four seated in
„ ? omdo l r lof 1 of on e° f tbe wings of the gaol, cabbagetree hatmaking, and sleeping four or
t( bv ®. lD a T ce lat ni S bt > 1S a new and improved system of prison discipline, for, as I regard the
„ sub J ec L I apprehend that employment is but one of the very many important branches of the
f system, viz. :—classification, separate confinement during the hours of rest, education
“ religious and secular, most of which are defectively carried out in the gaols of'the Colony'
“ °wing in a great measure to the establishments being wholly unfit for carrying out a proper
“ system ; therefore, I think it would have been much better had Mr. Forbes exerted the same
“ energies to get the Government to obtain funds to enable them to carry out the improve-
“ ments so much required in the establishment of which he is the Visiting Justice, and with-
“ out which improper system of prison discipline can be introduced, with good resuits in that
“ establishment.”
(At the Chairman's request witness temporarily retired .)
Alexander Dawson, Esq., called in and examined :
5337. By the Chairman : You are Colonial Architect? I am,
sooS. Can you inform this Committee the number of prison buildings in the Colony, their
extent, what state of repair they are in, and whether they are occupied or not ? I under-
stood from the note I received, that the Committee required the information only for the
gaols in the County of Cumberland ; but I will submit the additional information to the
Committee.
5339. We do not want plans, but merely particulars as to the means of accommodation
aiforded by these buildings, and the other details I have mentioned ? As far as Berrima
Bathurst, and Goulburn are concerned, I could simply say built of brick, consisting of so
many cells. I will, however, submit to the Committee the additional particulars required.
5340. Perhaps you will supply the Committee with a return shewing the number of the
principal gaols—l mean exclusive of common lock-ups—the areas they occupy, where you
can, the number of cells, the accommodation they are capable of affording prisoners, what
materials they are built of, the state of repair they are in, whether they are occupied or not
at the present time for prison or other purposes; and, where you cannot give us these
particulars, such particulars as you can give ? *1 will do so. ( Vide Appendix A.)
5341. Perhaps you had better send in two returns, one shewing the number of principal
gaols, and the other shewing the number of lock-ups proclaimed as gaols ? lam not aware
what lock-ups are proclaimed gaols.
5342. Can you state to us whether the new lock-ups erected under the District Courts Act,
for which there have been two grants voted by the Legislative Assembly of £25,000 each,
are on the same plan as the lock-up at Penrith now in course of erection ? Not at all, they
are varied in plan; in some of the districts I have to convert existing buildings and add
cells to them. There are a great many on the same plan.
5343. When you say a great many, how many do you mean ? I should say half-a-dozen
have been built; and there are some now being built.
5344.


5345' The" Sap '»o n ur S °““eteToD aT kn\it b h°i' d atri|Tuildi n g consisting of a
5346 ’'you TiTvou have built several on that plan-a dozen or more ? Quite that number.
5347! By Mr. Walsh : The twelve lock-ups you have spoken of are principally foi po ice
SrThe money vS for Ktffi gaols to meet the requirements of theDistnct
Courts Act, has any part of it been devoted to building these lock-ups ? No, the £25,000 has
s where District Courts have been proclaimed ?
let and aUWh not perhaps a competent authority in such matters in all probability
K; lui have to be 'erected if the present ones are to be considered or converted
5350 Sa For instance, the lock-up at Yass has been enlarged ? Yes, that is one; but it is
■nmnrwpfl to build another watch-house there for night casualties. . , ■,
5351, Eij the Chairman : Will you be good enough to state upon what plan 0 f
1 -u a ti ~ Diaiviraf rnnrts Act? *There are three rooms in front, two tor the use ot
tlm gaoler, r and one for stolen property, and a series of cells to form a quadrangle in the
rear.* The plans are designed to be capable of future extension.
(]l. Parke,, Esthers left tie Chair, was moved Hereto
pro. temp.')
J. B. WILSON, Esq., in the Chair.
5352 Bn Mr Mate : Is the plan you have just described that upon which the gaol at
Albury is erected ? t No > this is a third-class gaol, such as is erected at Y ollongong. f A
Albury there is a first-class gaol of two stories. , ? + y it j g a
5353. By Mr. Morris : What class gaol is the building at Penuth i + iou may say
5364' Cl b7 Sf Chairman : Have you received any specific instructions from the Government
as to the size of the cells? No, the Government have left that entirely to my discie ion.
I have erected a great number of gaols, I am sorry to say, and the capacity of t.ie cells is
chiefly guided by the climate in which they are built. There has been, of late, much con-
sideration about the capacity of cells, and since the Crimean war the capacity of cells
especially for military prisoners, has been much increased Of course it depends entn y
unon climate and proper ventilation of the cell. Here and in Tasmania I have genera
constructed cells containing 400§ cubic feet, and in military cells, upon recent instructions,
tbo Imperial Government have allowed each man about 600)1 cubic feet.
5355. I think the Government allows between eight and nine hundred feet. T
recently, and especially in hospitals it extends to 900 cubic feet. T ,
5356 Is there any reason why we should restrict them to a few feet; No, excep _
expense In England, where the climate is severe, it is necessary to keep away any excessive
draught, and they warm the cells with heated air; but here they have sufficient ventilation
and warmth without artificial heat. ~ ,• •
5357. Perhaps you will be kind enough to inform us the size of the cclls you are orccting
this Colony ? They are generally about nine feet by six, and ten feet high, xhat is upwards
5358 0 By* Mr. Mate: Will you describe the difference between the first, second, and third
class lock-ups generally I beg to state that I designed a series of Court. Houses and gaoxS,
which I estimated at £90,000. The Government, I believe, would not meet that expense
and these plans were all curtailed. It was thought by the Government of the day-that
£50,000 was sufficient, and this sum was again reduced to £25,000 by the
Government. I consider the means now voted much too small to erect proper gaols through-
out the Colony. lam not yet aware what the Government intend to do with the last vote
of £25,000. I presume I will receive instructions so soon as the Appropriation Act pa.se
for these services. I have not as yet received any instructions. i ?
5859. By Mr. Sutherland: Then the gaols are not carried out according to your-plan .
No, not upon the original designs I submitted to the Government, but upon plans suose-
quently prepared.
A. Dawson,
Esq.
3 May, 1861.
APPENDIX.
• Note (The above omitted and following substituted on revision) -There
gaols, which have been authorized hy the Government, the designs of which may be seen oy
reference to the plans.
t Note ( The above omitted on revision.) , is a lock-m r.ot
+ Note (The above omitted and following substituted on revision) That building is a loci I-,
a SaC % Note ( Corrected on revision) :-600. 11 Note ( Corrected on : -f^ ewn w
Note ( By witness on revision) ;—I presume you mean gaols, not lock-ups ,t y -
the plans submitted.


APPENDIX.
A.
Return shewing the accommodation of the principal Gaols in the Colony of New South Wales.
o
Darlinghuest Gaol.
Occupied by prisoners. Built of cut stone, and cells laid with flagging. The buildings are all in
a good state of repair, and consist of 4 cell ranges, 3 stories each, gaoler’s quarters, debtors’ prison,
turnkey’s quarters, hospital, bath-rooms, keeper’s quarters at gate, and dead-house. This gaol is
constructed to accommodate 432 prisoners, viz.:—
318 Male.
114 Female.
432
ft. in. ft. in.
Cells: No. 1 range contains 24 cells .. 8 oby 5 0
do. 24 do. .. 12 0 by 8 3
2 do. 42 do. .. 12 1 by 8 1
3 do. 36 do. ..12 2 by 8 1
do. 6 do. .. 8 Iby 5 0
4 do. 78 do. .. 8 Iby 5 1
Gaoler’s quarters:—consisting of 10 rooms, besides basement.
ft. in. ft. in.
Debtors’ prison contains: —6 cells .. 12 oby 8 6
1 store-room ..12 oby 8 6
1 room .. 23 oby 18 0
Turnkey’s quarters contain:—2 rooms ..16 6by 13 0 1 used as office.
2 do. .. 16 6by 15 6
Hospital contains ; 2 wards .. 25 3by 22 3 Male.
1 do. .. 25 3by 22 3 Female.
1 surgery .. 25 3by 12 0
1 nurse-room 13 3by 9 0
3 Bath-rooms.
Keeper’s quarters at Gate contains 4 rooms 10 oby 10 0
Dead-house, consisting of 1 room .. ,14 6by 12 6
Drying-room, do. do. .. .. 9 oby 5 0
Old hospital, now used as a store, 3 floors.. 31 Bby 31 8 each.
Parramatta Gaol.
Now occupied by prisoners. Built of stone, and in good repair; constructed to accommodate 156
male and 86 female prisoners, in 56 cells 12ft. 3in. by Bft. 4in„ three to each, and 74 cells Bft. by sft.,
one to each.
The detached buildings and offices consist of—
Gaoler’s quarters and office, 6 rooms in all.
ft. in. ft. in
Male hospital, consisting of—l ward • .. 31 3by 11 3
1 do. .. 15 11 by 11 3 and
Surgery .. ~ .. .. .. 14 oby 11 3
Female hospital, 2 wards ~ ~ .. 31 3by 11 3 each.
Turnkey’s quarters, consisting of 4 rooms 17 oby 13 0 at Entrance. Gate.
Berrima Gaol.
Now occupied by prisoners. Consisting of 3 cell ranges, 1 story high ; the outer walls built of
cut stone, and the internal walls, out-buildings, and boundary wall of brick. The buildings are all in
tolerable repair.
The prison is adapted for 65 male prisoners, in— _
14 cells .. .. ~ 8 oby 4 0 for 1 prisoner, each.
20 do.:: :: :: 1 7 oily 6 6} for3 prisoners, each.
The out-buildings consist of—
Cook-house .. .. .. .. .. 20 oby 15 0
Office 15 6by 15 0
Turnkeys’rooms (2) .. .. .. .. 12 oby 15 0
15 oby 15 0
10 oby 15 0
And 2 rooms in building at north-east angle, each 15 oby 15 0 the present appropriation not
known.
Bathurst Gaol.
Now occupied by prisoners. Built of brick, and in tolerable repair; consisting of 1 cell range,
3 stories high, and adapted for 104 male and 63 female prisoners. _
° ft. in. ft. in.
Ground floor .. 41 cells .. 8 oby 5 0 1 prisoner to each.
Second do. .. 21 do. ..11 6byB 0 3 do. . do
Third do. .. ~ 21 do. .. 11 6by 8 0 female prison, 3to each.
Hospital 1 ward .. 15 oby 12 0
2 do. .. 11 oby 8 0
Goulburn Goal.
Now occupied by prisoners. Built of brick, and in tolerable repair ; consisting of 1 cell range,
3 stories high, and adapted for 104 male and 63 female prisoners.
° ft. in. it. in.
• n o AT. K A/I prisoner to each; 3 of
Ground floor .. . • 41 cells .. 8 oby o these used as stores.
(3 prisoners to each; 1 of
Second do .. .. 21 do. .. 11 6by 8 0 these used as turnkey’s
f quarters, and las store.
{Female prison, 3 to each
cell; 1 cell used as female
turnkey’s quarters.
Hospital I ward .. 15 sbylo 10
2 do. .. 8 2bylo 10
Gaoler’s quarters and buildings, near Entrance.
Guard-room J 14 0
Office y 1
Stnrp .. • • • • .. 14 oby 13 0
&tore ” ABEND. DAWSON,
Colonial Architect.
{The


( The Chairman having returned, —)
HENRY PARSES, Esq., in the Chair.
John O’Neill Brenan,Esq., recalled and farther examined:—
( Witness resuming: Answer No. 5336 ?) I might refer to several letters addressed by me to
the Government upon this subject, but I do not wish to detain the Committee. I would,
however, beg to refer to one written on the 20th March, 1859, on account of some letters
that appeared in the public press about the working of the gaols. I say : “It is hardly
<< necessary for me to remind the Colonial Secretary that I never said, oi pietended, that
“ there was what could be called prison discipline carried out in any of the gaols of the
« Colony, and, as I stated in former communications to the Secretary, that my only reason for
“ opposing the employment of able-bodied prisoners at Darlinghurst for private individuals —
“to the obstruction of the building in course of erection, and so much required was my desire
“ to get the establishment built and remodelled as speedily as possibly, to enable the authorities
“to carry out the proper system of prison discipline. As lam not desirous of wearying the
(i Colonial Secretary by here entering into a comparison of the mode of working, or the amount
11 of work performed by the prisoners in Darlinghurst and Parramatta Gaols respectively, and
“ should not have troubled him thus much did I not feel bound to do so in justice to all
“ parties, on account of the letter written and published in the Herald, by Mr. Forbes. I
“ shall conclude by assuring the Colonial Secretary that I am quite alive to the defects, or
« rather want of prison discipline, in all the prisons, and that I should have long since
“ written to him on the subject had I not been assured by him, personally, as soon as
“ the Session (which has been a very harassing one) was over, he would enter with me into
“ the whole subject most fully and minutely, in order to ascertain the best and most expe-
“ ditious mode of dealing with this very difficult and complicated question.” Nothing, I
need hardly say, has been done since then. Now, to shew that I have turned the laboui to
account; and I admit that * I may have lost sight of many* things which, if the gaol had
been in a proper state, would have attracted my attention at once—my great anxiety was to
have the gaol remodelled and improved. When I took charge of Darlinghurst Gaol there
was the letter A wing built, called the committal wing, but in it are confined
prisoners awaiting trial, prisoners on remand, and prisoners sentenced to imprisonment only ;
letter B wing, in which, though styled the hard labour wing, are confined both hard labour
prisoners and confines. On reference to the return I have handed in, you will see that of
confines under six months, in 1856, there were 517 males ;jn 1857, 740 ; and in 1858,
631. Six months, and under twelve —in 1856, 56; in 1857, 37 ;in 1858, 33. Twelve
months, and under two years —in 1856, 30 ;in 1857, 15; in 1858, 7. Two years, and
under three years—in 1856, 34; in 1857, 22; and in 1858, 9. Three years and upwards
—in 1856, 9, of which there were several invalided Cockatoo men, 6 I think; in 1857, 6 ;
and in 1858, 5. Now I refer to this at this moment, to shew the Committee the material
with which I had to make these improvements. I had no prisoners there whose sentences
were sufficiently long to enable me to make tradesmen of them. They were all rough
hands, and short sentenced men, a class of men most difficult to manage, most difficult to
supply with work on account of many of them being sailors or vagabonds about town; men
sent in for drunkenness, dissipated characters. I suppose the majority of these prisoners
were confined for a month, a fortnight, ten days, and so on. Then when I took charge, the
third wing, E, was allotted to females of all descriptions, both bard labour, and those who
were sent in for imprisonment only, or for solitary confinement. Now, seeing the state of
the gaol when I took charge, my attention was most particularly drawn to the want of
accommodation, the want of means of classification—there were only three yards for the
male prisoners, and two yards for the females. The rest was an open stockade. There
were only these three wings erected, the fourth or D wing had only the ground floor built,
and it consisted of cells of the same size as those in the B wdng—large cells. I had these
divided into single cells, and the wing completed to contain 78 prisoners in separate cells.
The bath-house was partly finished; I got that completed. The foundation of the debtors’
prison was merely commenced
5360. Was that ever used as a debtor’s prison ? Yes; there have been several debtors there.
5361. Is not that the place where Mr. Harrison lived ? No; he had only the front portion
of the building; the back is the debtor’s prison. I also had the dead-house, fumigating
house, and hospital built, which the Committee no doubt saw. I may have overlooked
many little matters that would otherwise have attracted my attention; but as I
said before, my great anxiety when I visited the gaol was to see that the men were at
work at these buildings and improvements, which I pushed on as fast as possible.
When I took charge I found that the men were in the habit of taking their meals, some
sitting on the ground, and others under the hard labour shed, and as I wished to humanize
them a little, I introduced tables for them. At the same time they had but a few dishes, and
nothing but wooden or horn spoons supplied to them to eat their meals with; and I have
often seen the men obliged to tear the meat with their fingers. I sent in a requisition for
knives and forks, and it was sent back to the Auditor General with a minute from the
Colonial Storekeeper, stating, that it was a most unusual application, that knives and forks
were never allowed in gaols. From the Auditor General the letter was sent to the Colonial
Secretary, who made a minute upon it, and the application was refused. I then wrote the
following memorandum to the Colonial Secretary. {The witness read the some. \ ide
Appendix B.') The application was then granted, and that was the origin of the intro-
duction
■» Eote (Correction hy witness on revision) :—I may have lost sight of things which, &c.


duction of knives and forks. Now my opinion has been most fully confirmed, as the men
have ever since been most orderly at their meals. In one instance a fork was missed, and
the warders, by my direction, told the men that if it was not forthcoming the knives and
forks would be stopped for nine or ten days; that fork was returned the next day, shewing
that the prisoners appreciated the indulgence and confidence placed in them. I merely
instance this to shew my anxiety to improve the condition of the men, and also to shew
the difficulty of getting these things granted by the Government. With regard to the
trade overseers, I have not, unfortunately, with me here, the rules* I drew up for their
guidance, as they have been mislaid at Darlinghurst, but I have requested that a copy of
them may be sent from Parramatta, where they are pasted upon a board. When the trade
overseers were appointed, they were selected by the Colonial Architect and appointed by me *
and I may here mention to the Committee that I gave up six warders in order to get these
four trade overseers, to press on the buildings and improvements of the establishment.
These men were to be specially under the direction of the Colonial Architect. And while I
am upon this subject I may state, that I have heard some very unhandsome and deliberate
untruths have been told by some of the witnesses’ with respect to the discharge of these
six men. I was accused, first, of discharging them on religious grounds. I will take that
first, and in reply I assert that I did not know their religion.
5302. I may state that some evidence has been given before this Committee with respect
to the discharge of the six warders in January, 1860, to whom you have referred; and
according to that evidence, it would appear that the persons discharged were all of one
religion ; that the persons retained were of another ; and no evidence has been given before
us, that the discharge of those men was determined by any intelligible principle, as some of
the men were discharged who were unquestionably men of good character—for they have
the highest testimonials from the gaoler, Mr. Beverley, and they had been employed in the
gaol a length of time—while persons, for no obvious reason, who had been only a short time,
in comparison, were retained. Now, I have always understood it to be a principle universally
acknowledged in the public service, that length of service should be considered in any
capacity, unless there were some good reason countervailing that recommendation, and it does
appear to be unquestionable that some of the men, who were discharged, had filled
their situations for six or more years, while men were retained who had not been employed
one-sixth of the time. Ido not believe the Committee attach more weight to the circum-
stance stated by one of the witnesses, that the men who were retained were of one religion,
and the men who were discharged of another, it probably was the result of accident; but,
to say the least of it, it looks suspicious, and as it has been stated in evidence, I mention it
to give you an opportunity of making what explanation you please ? The principle I went
upon was the one which has just been stated by you ; and I may inform the Committee, in
the first place, that I did not select the men who were to leave, but directed my gaoler to
select them, and I particularly impressed upon him the necessity of discharging those who
had been most recently appointed, unless he had some special reason for discharging those
who were of longer standing.
5363. Did you give this instruction in writing ? lam not sure whether I did or did not,
but Mr. Beverley cannot deny it. I have not his note now, but I know he sent me the
names of those he wished to be discharged. It having been stated that these men were all of
one religion, and though, as the Chairman has said, that that might have been the result
of accident, yet it may have struck the mind of the Committee, that I selected to retain all my
own appointees, and that I discharged those appointed by my predecessors. Now, I was
appointed Sheriff in 1854; and, from the list of the warders which I have before me, I find
that every warder who was discharged was appointed during my time.
5364. Did you appoint a warder named Johnson who was discharged ? Mr. Beverley
appointed him.
5365. Was he appointed in your time ? The date of his appointment was 1855. I have
here a return, which I obtained from the gaol, shewing the names of the warders and the
dates of their appointments, and I will take the names in the order in which they occur.
The first is John Macdonald. That man was appointed in 1854; he was the oldest officer
discharged; he was a man advanced in years, but a man of the highest character, and one
whom I regretted to be obliged to discharge. He was recommended to me by Mr. Icely,
from whom he got the highest character; which character he sustained from the day he
entered the gaol till the day he left it. Nothing pained me more than to be obliged to
discharge that man, but it was solely on account of his advanced years. The next man is
Thomas Johnson ; the date of his appointment is May, 1855. Mr. Beverley selected that
man to be discharged on account of being deaf; ho was a very good man in other respects,
a man of very upright and very good character.
5366. Johnson is not very deaf? Mr. Beverley represented to me that it was on account of
his deafness, and I am aware that he is hard of hearing, as the term is.
5367. He is now office-keeper to Mr. Darvall ; I always speak to him in the tone of voice I
ordinarily use, and he has not any difficulty in hearing me ? He was selected by Mr.
Beverley on that ground ; he was not selected by me. After he had selected these men I
had a consultation with him, and that was the reason he assigned to me for wishing him to
go. The next man on the list I find is Frederick Pegg; now that man was appointed by
Mr. Beverley himself, and I must candidly admit to the Committee very much against my
wish and desire. He applied to me for a situation at Darlinghurst, and I refused him. I
was absent on circuit when a vacancy occurred, and Mr. Beverley gave it to Pegg. I asked
Mr. Beverley when I returned why he had appointed that man, and he said he ivas such a
very
* Note :—Subsequently furnished. Vide Appendix C.
157—2 D •


very respectable and smart-looking man that he thought he would make a very good officer.
I told him that I did not approve of the appointment. ~ . f ~
5308. Hid you know anything of him? Yes, I heard he had been dismissed from the
police force’ and that was my reason for refusing him when he applied to me , but as he had
got the situation I allowed him to remain. .
53(39. Do you know why Pegg was dismissed from the the polurn force ? No. Captain
M/Lerie can tell you the particulars; he knows the man, and can give you his character.
I know nothing more of him than that I heard he had been dismissed by the _
5370 By Mr Morris : Do you think that after having heard the man had been dismissed
from the police, you did your duty in allowing the man to remain without making some
inquiries ? I knew it was nothing very serious, and that was the reason I did not inquire.
5371. By the Chairman : Are you quite sure he was dismissed? I think so. I heard so
However, that was my impression at the time, and that was my reason for refusing him that
Captain M'Lerie would not give him a good character. His appointment was m 1850. _
5372. By Mr. Wilson : What was the man’s character as a warder in gaol ? 1 heard nothing
very much against him; he was a quarrelsome man, and an ill-tempered man.
5373 By the Chairman : Do you mean that he indulged in drink ? No, Ido not mean
that he drank: I mean to say that he was ill-tempered and quarrelsome.
5374. A cross-grained man ? Yes, and Mr. Beverley selected him to go on that account;
he was continually in hot water with the other officers of the gaol. The next man, Henry
Ellis, was appointed in 1856. He was discharged, hut has been appointed since. Every
one of those who were dismissed whom I considered well-conducted men, and fit foi officers,
as situations became vacant I offered them to them. I offered Johnson a situation at lass,
and he refused it; Henry Ellis accepted a situation at Wollongong—he is now warder there.
(The Chairman read from the evidence of Frederick Fegg to the witness.)
5375. With regard to Pegg, of whom you speak as a person who had been dismissed from the
police force, and against whom you had a prejudice in consequence of this dismissal, it would
appear from Pegg’s own evidence that, so far from that being the case, for the greater part of
his time he held the position of sergeant in the police, and left at his own request. Ail i can
say to that is, that I was under the impression that he was dismissed, or it not dismissed
that he had to resign, and that he was a person I would not select as an officer of the gaol.
I had no personal prejudice against the man ; I did not know him; and when Mr. Beverley
appointed him I did not feel 'justified to rescind that appointment, and so I left him in the
establishment. However, if there is any conflict between this man s testimony and mine,
Captain M'Lerie will be able to explain the matter. lam not sure whether Captain M'Lene
told me he was dismissed, but he told me he was a most troublesome cnaracter.
5376. By Mr. Windercr: When did he tell you that? Some time ago.
5377. Since Pegg has been dismissed? Yes. _ .
5378. Then the only conversation you recollect with Captain M Lenc is the one you have
had since Pegg was dismissed ? That is the only conversation I have had. No; I had a
conversation with Captain M'Lerie before Pegg was dismissed, hut it was not from Captain
M'Lerie I heard that fie was dismissed, or had to leave the police. However, he was semeted
by Mr Beverley, and not by me. With one exception none of the officers who were ap-
pointed by me were retained, a man of the name of Jeremiah O'Callaghan, now removed to
Berrima. That is the only officer I told Mr. Beverley to retain, and my reason for that was,
that he was the schoolmaster. At the same time I directed Mr. Beverley to offer the sta-
tion to any of the officers he was about to discharge who were capable of taking that office.
He was the only officer who could teach the prisoners reading, writing, and arithmetic, and
I had selected him at the time of his appointment on that account. I was not allowed by
the Government a salary for a schoolmaster, but being anxious to introduce a school into the
prison, I directed him to he raacle schoolmaster, and he was so from the day of his appoint-
ment until he left.
5379. Was it an adult school? Yes.
5380. Any prisoner who wished could learn ? Yes. It was merely a class, i wanted o
make a beginning. . n ,
5381. Did the prisoners shew any disposition to learn? Yes; particularly Germans and
foreigners. There were some Germans in prison who got on very well. He also taught the
females and young girls. I especially allude to him because he was appointed in 1857, and
he happened to bc°a Roman Catholic. Pegg and some others spoke to me about it, and i
said, “Very well, if you can take his situation he shall go; I cannot do fairer than
5382. By the Chairman : Before we leave the subject of the appointment of these turnkeys,
it has been stated to the Committee that several of the turnkeys have been appointed directly
from your own service, or from the service of your family ? There is but one.
5888. Do you remember who was the turnkey on duty in the exorcise yard when a number
of prisoners, seventeen I think, escaped through the wall? lhat was aftei my suspension,
and it was what I had prognosticated.
5384. Do you know a turnkey of the name of Callaghan ? Yes.
5385. Was he ever in your service ? No.
5386. Or in the service of your father ? No.
5387. Was he appointed on your special recommendation ? No.
5388. You know the man ? Yes. He was appointed in 1851.
5389. It is not John Callaghan who was temporarily appointed to act as head turnkey tuat
I mean, hut another person of the same or similar name, but younger ? Ido not remember
any man of that name being in my service. n ...
5390. I suppose this turnkey to whom I allude, and who, it appeared to the Committee,


was a very inefficient man, must have been appointed since you left, as you do not appear to
know anything of him ? Yes, unless you are mistaking the name.
5391. The person I allude to was on duty at the time these men escaped through the wall ? f
A man with reddish whiskers and hair. Ido not know his name. I know the man now from °
the fact of his being on guard when the prisoners’escaped. He was a discharged soldier from
the 12th regiment, and was highly recommended to me by the then Administrator of the
Government, Colonel Kempt, and I directed his name to be put upon the book, and called
the attention of the then Under Sheriff to him, and he was appointed by Mr. Uhr, the Acting
Sheriff, on the dismissal of one of the officers after I was suspended.
5392. I understood you to say that only one person was ever appointed to the office of
turnkey from your own service, or the service of your family ? Yes, John Fallon. He is a
stone-cutter by trade, and he was in the service of our family, or of my father, between five
and sis years. He is a very good tradesman, and a man of the strictest integrity. I should
not have appointed that man but that he was a man of such good character and a tradesman,
and I told the gaoler that he could be of groat assistance in teaching the prisoners stone-
cutting. He was our overseer for some time, and he is the only man I ever appointed who
was in my father’s service—he was not in my service, but in my father’s. Trevor Turner was
appointed in 1859 ; he afterwards got a situation at Yass. John Bowen was appointed in
1858 ; he got an appointment afterwards. So that the only juniors who were retained were
Smith, Macleay, and O’Callaghan; all the others who were retained were the seniors of those
who were discharged, with the exception of Ryan, who was kept because he w T as a master
tailor, and he was the overseer of the tailors. That disposes of this matter.^
5393. Is there anything else you would wish to say ? With respect to the disposition of the
warders, I presume you refer to the disposition of their duties. That was under the control
of Mr. Beverley and the principal warder, and was a matter with which I rarely interfered.
5394. Mr. Harrison has given direct evidence before this Committee that his arrangement
was interfered with by your instructions, and that if his arrangement had been carried out
the turnkey Fallon would not have been on duty where he was on the night when David
Clarke and another prisoner escaped. He has represented that they escaped principally from the
inexperience and negligence of the persons in charge of the wing—firstly, as I understood, by-
allowing the bed-boards to be in the cell contrary to his wish ; and secondly, by not being suffi-
ciently vigilant in locking up the prisoners, by going round the corridors the wrong way, by
which the doors shut out the apertures and enabled the prisoner concealed behind the door to
run into the cell devoted to a second prisoner ; whereas if they had gone round the corridor m
the other direction they would have had the open door before them, and would have been
enabled to see into the cells. He attributes that to the carelessness or inexperience of the
turnkey, and says he never should have appointed this person to the task or locking up
these desperate prisoners, and that his arrangements were interfered with by direct instruc-
tions from you, by which Fallon and another man were on duty that night? lhat is quite
untrue. Mr Harrison had the selection of the men himself. He appointed, or rather left in
charge of that wing, the officer who had been originally in charge of it, his own father-in-law,
M'Cov, an officer of thirteen years standing. He himself selected Fallon, not with my
concurrence, but rather the reverse; but he stated, when he mentioned the matter to me,
that as he was such an honest, decent man, he wished to have him to assist M Coy, and so
he selected him for that office. If my wish had been followed, or my opinion asked what
officer would be most fitted for it, I certainly should have selected another officer, because i
wished that particular officer, John Fallon, to be over the stone-cutters, being a stone-cutter
himself
5395 6 M'Coy is Harrison’s father you say? Yes, and an old officer; and Fallon was
appointed by Mr. Harrison to assist M'Coy. I had upon several occasions, upon going m,
seen the stone-cutters dawdling over their work, and I had directed Mr. Harrison to bring
them more particularly under the direction and notice of the warders, so that when the
working overseer was absent on special duty they might see that they kept steadily at then
work. That was the only change I made in the disposition of the warders. The night duty
was changed no doubt, but it was after consultation with Mr Beverley and Mr Harrison.
These are the rules drawn up for the guidance of the officers of thei establishment {producing
a copy of Rules. Vide Appendix Bto Mr. Harrison s further .Evidence at page 134) and I
wish'to'draw the particular attention of the Committee to No. 17 and a portion of the loth
rule, which I drew up personally. I added these words to the 13th rule and under no
“ pretence to allow any turnkey to enter the gaol, upon duty, while under the influence o
“ drink ” ladded that in consequence of some of the officers having come to the gaol under the
influence of drink. The 17th rule is as follows:-" It is the especial duty of every turnkey to
iSport any and every irregularity he may see or hear of on the part of any prisoner or turnkey;
“ and should it be discovered by the principal gaoler that a turnkey has neglected his du }, i
« this particular he will be instantly suspended, and reported to the Sheriff. Now the cause
this particular, mvself was this—l found that the officers were in the habit
in the gaol, and then when they
ot taking notes o J fficerg Qr the pri ncipal turnkey, or when the gaoler annoyed
Ihem'in any way, they went to Blembers of this House and reported to them any irregulan-
y t of n brothCT 6
reportingThTm to the* authorities, and storing them up to make use of after, perhaps, the
a*turnkey keeping a journal of all that took place?
No, I would not object to that; my objection was to their noting down every little wregn-


1 larity, and keeping these memoranda by them perhaps for years, without reporting them
hto me, or to the gaoler. If these things were reported to the gaoler, of course he would be
responsible, and would be bound to report to me.
’ 5398, I should gather, from your observations, that you consider the proper discipline of a
gaol almost wholly dependent upon the existence of certain buildings ? No, I do not say
wholly.
5399. I say almost wholly? Yes, because discipline cannot be carried out.
5400. You say that, so far back as 1854, you represented the state of the gaol to the
Government, and urged upon them the necessity of extending the buildings ? Yes.
5401. And in several parts of your evidence you have read from letters addressed to the
Colonial Secretary, in which you state that you cannot say there is anything like discipline
in the gaol? Not what I consider discipline—no regular system —in fact, the system that
has been carried out in all the gaols of this Colony has been merely to keep the prisoners
safely, to keep them employed, and to keep them clean.
5402. They do not appear to have been kept clean ? That appears to have been neglected,
certainly, to a certain extent.
5403. You have in your evidence attached great importance to the existence of proper
buildings? Yes.
5404. You consider that absolutely necessary to anything like a due discipline among pri-
soners —I should gather that from your evidence, and from the letters from which you have
quoted ? You cannot classify the prisoners
5405. Then, again, you have represented that the workshops in Darlinghurst Gaol are
under the Colonial Architect? Yes, they are.
5406. You made this representation in reply to some negligence pointed out by the Com-
mittee to you with regard to the tools ? Yes.
5407. Could not discipline be carried out, however imperfect the buildings, so far as instruc-
tion went, and so far as the establishment of proper regulations went; for instance, could not
the prisoners be mustered —let the buildings be what they might—periodically, every
Saturday night or every Sunday morning, and be compelled to expose part of their persons,
and, to shew that they were clean, to expose their arms, legs, and so on—could not that be
done whether there were proper buildings or not ? Of course.
5408. Could not the clothing be washed and kept clean—could not the walls and floors of
the cells be kept clean, whether there were proper buildings or not? No doubt.
5409. These arc matters not depending upon the completion of the prison buildings? No.
5410. Then again with regard to the workshops—though the labour of these prisoners is
under the direction of the Colonial Architect, is it not the fact that the management and
safe custody of them is just as much under you as that of any other prisoners? °lt is under
the gaoler.
5411. I mean under the gaol authorities ? Under the gaoler—by the gaol regulations he is
responsible for them.
5412. What I mean is, whether the prisoners are appointed to work under the Colonial
Architect or not —have not the gaol authorities control over them —are they not all in
the same manner subject to prison discipline ? Yes.
5413. So that they are just as amenable to any regulations that may exist for the proper
conduct of the discipline of the gaol, as if their labour were not directed by the Colonial
Architect? No; he has the charge of them during working hours, and I never interfere
with the trade overseers; for instance, they can direct a prisoner to go to a particular part
of the yard, to work in a particular manner, and at a particular time. The gaol authorities
have directions not to interfere with a trade overseer, unless he gives such an order as to
interfere with the safe custody of the prisoners. The safe custody and control of the prisoners
is given into the hands of the trade overseers while they are working, and they are respon-
sible for these men during working hours. The warders are put upon certain beats to see
that no prisoner makes his escape or secretes any tools or materials, but the direction of
these men is still in the hands of the overseer—he directs them, and, in fact, has the
the entire management of these men during working hours. They are handed over to the
overseer in the morning, and are counted back in his presence by one of the warders.
5414. I do not clearly understand what you mean, when you say that the working overseer
is responsible for the safe custody of the prisoner ? Not for the safe custody.
5415. Those are the words you used, and, at the same time, you say there are warders
appointed so as to see that none of them escape. Now the appointment of these warders
would appear to confirm my idea that the prisoners, though working under the trade
overseers, are still in the custody of the gaol authorities. That the trade overseer has the
po»yer of sending a prisoner to any part of the gaol I can readily understand, for unless he
urd, he could not direct his work ; but I cannot understand how he can be charged with the
safe custody. I apprehend that, if there were any attempt to escape, the prison authorities
would soon interfere; that, in fact, the prisoners are just as much subject to the ordinary
rules of the gaol, when they are working under the trade overseers, as they would be if they
weie kept doing nothing, though their labour is being directed by these overseers of the
Go onial Architect s Department ? “ Safe custody” is, perhaps, too general a word to use.
hat I mean by the expression is, that these men are counted over to the overseers in the
morning, and, if any of them absent themselves from work, or cannot be accounted for by the
trade overseer, he should immediately report it to the warder nearest to him on duty. We
lave not sufficient warders for each shop, therefore, if a prisoner slips out of a workshop,
un mown to the overseer, he is bound, the moment he discovers it, to give notice to the
nearest warder. So far, the overseer is responsible for the safe custody of the prisoners, and
only to that extent.
5416.


5416. hat I wanted to arrive at was, whether it was not exclusively your duty as inspector
of prisons, for only in that capacity I presume you visit them ? I visit them as Sheriff.
5417. Still you were practically inspector of prisons, you were not gaoler nor Visiting
Magistrate ? No.
5418. Your duty must have been the general inspection of prisons ? Yes.
5419. Was it not exclusively, or almost exclusively, your duty to see that these other
people did their duty—the gaoler and warders—by the issue of instructions and the
establishment of necessary regulations ? No; I had no power to make regulations. Certain
rules and regulations.were made by the Government for the rule and guidance of the gaol,
and these were printed.
5420. But your visits to the gaol were of no use except in so far as they had the effect of
keeping the officers in charge to their duty, and enforcing their efficiency? Yes, whenever
inefficiency was brought under my notice.
5421. This reminds me of the question put to you by Mr. Morris—do you think it likely
that men who were negligent of their duty would bring that negligence under your notice?
I could not presume that they were negligent from the gaoler downwards. How was I to
discover that unless I discovered some gross irregularity when I went to the gaol.
5422. Is not that the difference between one man and another, that one man will discover
what another will not —is it not that which distinguishes the qualities of men, that one will
easily discover a thing which another will not discover in a lifetime ? That may be.
5428. It must have been your particular duty to see that the Darlinghurst Gaol was properly
managed, that the prisoners there were subject to the most just and salutary discipline with
regard to due punishment, to due custody, and to the most beneficial and profitable employ-
ment? As far as I undertook it, but not as Sheriff.
5424, It must have been your duty to see that the gaol w r as well managed ? Not as Sheriff.
5425. Will you state what you conceived your duty to be as Sheriff in relation to these
gaols ? The Sheriff’s duties with regard to gaols are very limited, he is answerable only for
the safe custody of prisoners.
6426. How can he insure their safe custody except by vigilant and cautious management;
if he is answerable for their safe custody, does not that imply their proper custody ; not safe
custody by chaining them down to bolts, for instance, and delivering them up alive or dead;
it means their proper custody, their being kept in a state fit for human beings ? Of course.
6427. How is that to be done if the person responsible for the charge of prisoners does not
see that the persons immediately in authority over them do not discharge their duties
properly—is not that involved in safe custody if we understand safe to be proper custody?
Then comes the question, what is proper custody ?
5428. That is a large question, but I would ask is it proper custody to allow prisoners to
remain unhealthily unclean —is it proper custody to keep them without clean blankets or
bedding—is it proper custody to allow them to use tools of a formidable character, either
for the purposes of personal violence or for the purpose of prison-breaking, without any
examination from one night to another as to what becomes of those tools? With respect to
that question, if you will allow me, the gaoler is responsible, under the gaol regulations, for
the safe custody of prisoners; the Sheriff has only the general control over the prisoners,
but the Visiting Magistrates have the more immediate control over the gaols. It is the
duty of the Visiting Magistrate, no doubt, to see that the gaol regulations are carried out;
that is especially provided for by the Act of Council —the Gaol Act.
5429. What I wanted to arrive at was, the extent to which you are to blame for not dis-
covering a state of things such as you have described. Was it not your duty to examine the
state of things actually existing, and to enforce proper discipline by your powers of instruc-
tion ? As far as powers of instruction go, I conceive that I have given ample instructions to
enable a proper system of discipline to be carried out, if these instructions had been obeyed.
For instance, the bath-house was built purposely by me, to enable the prisoners to be
regularly washed; but, no doubt, there were no regulations compelling any particular prisoner
to wash himself often ; but as I said before, it was the particular duty of the warder in charge
of the wing to see that the prisoners kept themselves clean; and also, of course, it was the
gaoler’s duty, because he saw them every morning, or was supposed to see them every
morning and several times during the day.
5430. By Mr. Mate : Is not he responsible to you ? He is responsible to me for their safe
custody ; and he is generally responsible to me, no doubt.
5431. For the management of the gaol? No doubt.
5432. By Mr. Sutherland: Was it upon your recommendation that the bath-house was put
up ? No; when I took charge merely*the shell of a building was erected, and it was under
my supervision that the baths were constructed. The bath-house itself was partly erected
when I took office.
5433. Did you ever give instructions to the gaoler to see that the prisoners made use of that
bath ? Yes, on several occasions I did.
5434. And you believe your instructions were carried out? Yes, I directed that every
Saturday afternoon the prisoners should wash themselves, except those under the charge of
the doctor. There was a time when the baths were out of order and Dr. West spoke
to me about it; and I gave directions to the principal warder to see that they were
put in repair immediately. It was done, and I presume that the prisoners, or the
great body of them, washed themselves every Saturday. They were allowed half-a-day
on Saturday to enable them to wash their clothes. They always knocked off work,at a
quarter to twelve on Saturdays to enable them to do this, and it was a rule, that every
prisoner should be properly dressed and clean on Sundays, when he attended Divine service,
and that rule the eaoler was bound to see enforced. I may be permitted to mention, that on
b the


APPENDIX.
A.
Number of Persons sentenced to Harlinghurst and Parramatta Gaols, respectively, during the years
1856, 1857, and 1858,
DAELINGHURST GAOL.
1856.
1857.
1858.
Sentenced to
Male.
Fern.
Male.
Fern.
Male,
Fern.
Solitary Confinement
2,058
1,781
1,307
1,406
1,587
1,380
Imprisonment without labour
513
703
691
805
688
699
Hard labour, viz.: —
1836.
1857.
1858.
M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
Under 6 months*
517
171
740
110
631
97
6 months and under 12
56
33
37
20
33
8
12 months and under 2 years..
30
10
15
3
7
1
2 years and under 3 years .,
34
, .
22
2
9
2
3 years and upwards
9
1
6
1
5
646
215
820
136
685
108
Totals
3,217
2,699
2,818
2,347
2,960
2,187
PARRAMATTA GAOL.
Sentenced to
1856.
1857.
1858.
Male.
Fem. j
Male.
Fem.
.
Male.
Fem.
55
45
41
51
67
51
Imprisonment without labour
63
50
51
46
74
73
Hard labour, viz.:—
•
1856.
1857.
1858.
M.
f.
M.
F.
if.
F.
Under 6 months
49
21
40
30
62
30
6 months and under 12
29
15
28
14
32
13
12 months and under 2 years..
53
16
37
17
29
8
2 years and under 3 years .,
35
8
19
24
5
3 years and upwards
9
* *
15
i
8
1
175
60
139
62
155
57
Totals
293
155
231
159
296
181
the 9th July, 1860,1 wrote a letter to the Government, requesting they would allow me a
certain sum of money to enable me to put the officers in an uniform and the reply I received
was, that that subject of the management of prisons, and of prison discipline generally, would
come under the consideration of the Government almost immediately, and that therefore,
the matter should stand over. In sending the estimates for 1860 I put n sum of money for
this purpose, but it was disallowed. With the permission of the Committee, as I do not
desire longer to intrude upon their time, I will append to my evidence the particulars of my
removal from office. (Vide Appendix Di) _ . . _ .. ,
6435, We have some evidence before us that the keys of the various wings in Hariinghurst
Gaol were very loosely kept. Some witnesses state absolutely that they weie simply bung
up on a peg behind Mr. Harrison’s door, and that frequently the turnkeys who unlocked the
wings went, the door being open, and took them off the peg; that at one time, when
prisoners were employed as servants to Mr. Beverley, they could have gone to Mr. Harrison s
house, taken the keys off the peg, and unlocked the wings at night; hut it is only right to
say that other witnesses say that they always received the keys from Mr. Harrison hiniselr,
or from some one who lived with him—his father-in-law ? M Coy.
5436. Ho you know anything about the manner in which these keys were kept i Ihcy are
delivered over, after the wings are locked up, to the principal warder; he has the special
charge of them. , ,
5437. It appears that they were kept in a most loose manner ? No doubt, it that were the
case, it was not proper for Mr. Harrison to put the keys in that insecure place, hut it doe»
not follow that even the gaoler could know that, unless it were brought under his notice,
because they were supposed to he locked up. It was never reported to me. I wish to hand
in a letter, dated 9th March, 1859, containing some suggestions. (The witness handed m
the same. Vide Appendix Ed)
I? The majority of these are seamen, under the Mercantile Marine Act, whose sentences never exceed twelve weeks; they
seldom serve the whole of that period.
J. H. BEVERLEY,
Principal Gaoler.
B.


John O’Neill
Brenan, Esq.
S^MayTlSGl.
33.
Memo. . .
I am aware that this application is a novel one. Heretofore prisoners in gaol have, here and
elsewhere, in regard to the mode in serving them with their meals, been treated more like brutes than
human beings. As I understand the subject, there are two objections which have always been made
against such an allowance; first, the cost; secondly, the risk of placing dangerous weapons in the
hands of prisoners. To this objection, which I regard the more important of the two, I answer thus :
Do we not daily and hourly place in the hands of prisoners far more dangerous weapons than the
common dinner knife; viz., picks, axes, hammers, &c., whilst scattered in an open space, where, if
they were so disposed, they could much more easily injure each other or the officers, than they could
when locked up in a wing of the gaol whilst at dinner ?
Until I took charge of the gaols, the prisoners never had a table to take their meals at. In
Darlinghurst Gaol about 150 men sit down to dinner like soldiers, and are quite as orderly. In no
instance that I have heard of has any disturbance arisen during dinner ; and I take it, that if we wish
to direct the mind and reform prisoners, we must first shew them that we regard them as human beings,
and as such place some confidence in them. We do so when we want their labour, by trusting them
with tools, some of which are most deadly weapons, but are startled at the danger when expense is to
be incurred in ameliorating their condition.
I have heard them say, “ We have to tear our meat like beasts.”
The knives and forks might be chained to the table.
JOHN O’NEILL BRENAN.
Sheriff's Office, Sydney, 24 October, 1860.
C.
Rules for the guidance of the Working Overseers nominated hy the Colonial Architect to superintend
the Government Work being carried on in H. M. Gaol, Parramatta.
Ist. That in all matters appertaining to the discipline of the establishment each overseer must
be subject to and carry out the rules of the gaol, in the same manner as the officers of the establishment,
and he is so far to be regarded as an officer of the establishment.
2nd. That in all matters appertaining to the works over which the overseer may be placed, he is
to take his instructions from the Colonial Architect, or from some person appointed by that officer for
such purpose.
3rd. That all directions respecting the work are to be given by the overseer.
4th. That each overseer is to instruct the prisoners placed under him in the trade to which he
belongs. „ _ , ~ ~ , , ,
sth. That, whenever it may be necessary, from the want of prisoners understanding the trade to
which the overseer may belong, such overseer is to work himself, taking care to select the most intel-
ligent of the men under him to work with him, and thus prevent the work being retarded for the want
of mechanical labour. _ , . ,
6th. That the overseer is to furnish weekly returns of all work performed, shewing the number
of prisoners under his control each day, the number of feet of stone cut by each man, the number oi feet
of stone set during the week. . , , ,
7th. That the overseer is to receive the prisoners at bell-ring in the morning, and to count them.
Bth. That the overseer is to remain at the work until bell-ring in the evening. _
9th. That the overseer is to hold no conversation with the turnkeys during working hours, except
such as may relate to the work.
D.
On Saturday, the 9th of February, I met Captain M'Lerie at Darlinghurst Gaol, to inquire into the
escape of the prisoners Clarke and Oavanagh, when that gentleman produced to me a letter from the
Colonial Secretary’s Office directing him to inquire into the statements contained m Dr West s icpoit
upon Polack’s petition for a remission of sentence, in which Dr. AVest alleged, that although he had
given a certificate stating Polack was fit to undergo hard labour yet that he was not aware he had
been put to it, or, indeed, that he had ever been clad in prison dress —and to icpoit t.ic result of Ins
inquiry to the Government. , ~
Of this I had no official intimation, nor had I been called upon for any report thereon. .
Captain M'Lerie, instead of entering upon the inquiry for which we had met by previous appoint-
ment, at once commenced the investigation into Polack’s case. The statements of Dr AVest and those
called at his instance, as also Mr. Beverley, having been taken I suggested that m fairness to
Mr. Harrison, against whom the most serious charges were levelled, he ought to be affoided an oppor-
tunity of meeting them, and producing evidence to contradict the prisoner Banks, and such other of
the witnesses as he could: but CaptainMDeric refused, stating that his instructions were to.inquireinto
the allegations contained in Dr. AVest’s report, and not to inquire into the conduct of any of the officers
of the inquiry at the instance of Mr. Beverley, to explain some of his
former evidence, and upon again being asked, he refused to hear any evidence on pait of Mi. Harrison,
UP °’ 1 HVwT,r!rihek“ etln stood, I deemed it my duty to suspend Mr. Hanuson and shouid h.ve
taken the same step with Mr. Beverley but for the large number of Cockatoo men in the gaol. At the
same time I informed Mr. Harrison that he should have full opportunity afforded him to deal himself,
“IS tdr obTect: as well as of affording Mr. Beverley the same, I wrote the next morumg to the
Secretary $ .fte'S, ItolS'eas'iOT to call at the Secretary’s Office, when
1 was lettiw of
+1 Mrscowper, upon wasltbat’he felt
for taking that course was foi y S P u 1 t the official letter, he stated that no doubt he
my replying that I understood I was not to act untu g hurrv of business Mr. Elyard had forgotten
did intend I should have leceiyu i , M‘Lerie’s report, and after maturely considering that
it; however, since hen he hig tQ / ake that step .
reported my letter of t ustl trea tedby Mr. Cowper, I wrote the letter of the 16th-annexed.
I heard nothing more of the matter until the 2nd March, when I received a letter dated the Ist
enclosing ml a »nufc of the Executive, dated the 18th
should not be removed from the public service by reason of the matters charged against me therein^


I Up to this period the Committee will see that there was no opportunity afforded me cf testing
p the accuracy of the statements upon which Captain M'Lerie based his report.
The minute of the 18th, after setting forth the charges seriatim , the substance of each of which
is given below and answered, goes on to say—“ These facts disclose a state of things which tire Council
■* “ cannot hut regard as the result of incapacity or sheer neglect, and in either case equally discreditable
“ to the Sheriff and principal gaoler.
“ They are prepared to admit that in some of these matters both officers appear to have been
“ betrayed and deceived by their subordinates, although, with ordinary vigilance, this could not long
“ have escaped detection; but, in others (of which the confinement of Polack in a separate cell apart
“ from the other hard labour prisoners is a flagrant instance), the positive instructions of the Colonial
“ Secretary, supplemented by the Sheriff’s own order, has been departed from, certainly with the
“ knowledge and sanction of the principal gaoler, and, as far as the evidence goes, with that of the
“ Sheriff.” Now, the Committee will perceive, from the way in which this minute was drawn up, and
my being debarred of the benefit of shewing upon an inquiry that such portion of the irregularities as
might have existed were unknown to me, and that no vigilance on ray part would have discovered
them, I was compelled to take up the several charges and meet them by argument, and by analysing
the evidence given by Dr. West and his witnesses, and so took up the charges seriatim and answered
them. In fact, that my officers were denied that fair and impartial inquiry that every Government is
bound to afford the humblest of its officers, and although there may have been gross negligence on their
part, yet they were found guilty on one-sided evidence, and without a hearing ; and I have been, I submit,
most unjustly held responsible for their negligence or misconduct.
Although the fact of Polack’s being allowed to pick the oakum in the wing or cell would not, in
itself, be a breach of discipline unless done for some improper purpose, and particularly when done
occasionally, as I was informed, because he complained of the effect of the summer sun on his head in
the yard, yet I was not aware that he had been continuously worked so; and had I supposed for a moment
that he had been put to work there from any wish to extend undue leniency towards him I should have
put a stop to it.
Mr. Cowper refused to allow me to go before the Executive Council for examination upon all
these points, so I was obliged to meet the case as well as I could in writing.
In support of my statement, I appended the evidence of Harrison, Kispen, Callaghan, and Lee, by
declarations, copies of which are appended hereto, and the only link wanting was that of M'Koy’s, which
was sent to me too late, and not drawn up as a declaration—so it was not sent; but I add it as I got it,
and let it be taken for what it may be worth. However, it must be borne in mind that the evidence of
the prisoner Banks, which, in many respects, is uncorroborated, was a mere statement. I have been
informed that my statement was not deemed satisfactory by the Ministers, as it was too much in vindi-
cation of my officers. All I can say, I did not mean it as such ; but I was fully aware that if I had left
a point unanswered that Mr. Cowper would have laid hold of it, and commented on my omission,
and, perhaps, designate such as a most flagrant dereliction of duty. However, as I did not do this, I
am told “that it is unnecessary to comment on my explanation in detail,” and “that the Ministers did
“ not pause to consider whether the state of facts (as they designate them) arose from incapacity or
“ negligence.”
I feel, from the unjust decision arrived at, that they could have neither paused nor considered, and
that their comments would have been of little weight unless they refuted my arguments, and proved my
statements to be incorrect, and so they deemed it more prudent to abstain from giving reasons.
STATEMENT OF THE SHERIFF’S CASE.
I have the honor to request that my letters to the Honorable the Colonial Secretary of the 12th and 16th
instant may be first read, the better to understand‘the following case. [See Appendix for letters.]
As to the escape of Clarke and Cavanagh, I Can only say that Captain M'Lerie has taken an
entirely erroneous idea of what Mr. Beverley said. Mr. Beverley did not—nor could he, in truth—say
that he repeatedly represented to me the insecurity of the gaol at night, in consequence of the with-
drawal of the night watchman from the stockade, as it was after a consultation with himself and Mr.
Harrison that we all agreed that that night turnkey could be dispensed with, —being one and all of
opinion, that once the prisoners were locked up, it would be impossible for any one of them to get out;
and, to use Mr. Beverley’s own expression, “ his mind was at ease after the prisoners were locked up.”
But he did complain of the reduction of the six warders for the four trade overseers, which reduced his
staff for day duty. However, being well aware that if I proposed the trade overseers as an additional
charge for the establishment, it would catch the eyes of the economical members, create opposition, and
lessen the chance of getting them, and as the enlargement of the accommodation was my great object,
I thought it wiser to make a virtue of a necessity, and give up six for four, which did not increase the
cost of the establishment, and to trust to circumstances to enable me to get back such of the six as
should afterwards be found indispensable.
Ist Charge :
“ That Polack was confined in a separate cell, in a different wing of the gaol to the other hard
labour prisoners.”
In answer to this allegation I submit the following facts ;
Polack, on being removed from the debtors’prison, where he had been placed to act as wards-
man, was for three or four days confined in the committal wing, from thence removed to the old hard
labour wing, and afterwards drafted, with other hard labour prisoners, to the new hard labour
wing, w lie re he remained until removed with others, by my orders, and for no other reason than to
make room for the refractory Cockatoo prisoners, lie was then confined for a few days in the committal
until room could lie made in the old hard labour wing, which had been overcrowded by
bringing hack the prisoners from the new hard labour wing. He was then removed to the old hard
labour wing, where he now is.
It is not, therefore, the case that Polack was confined in a separate cell, in a different wing of the
gaol to the other hard labour prisoners, with the exception of the few days he had been confined in the
committal wing, inasmuch as the new wing, as it is styled, was expressly built for hard labour
prisoners, and has since its completion been occupied solely by that class. This wing is composed of
single cells, and every prisoner confined therein had a separate cell. Mr. Harrison had my directions to
thin the old hard labour wing, according as he got the cells in the new one fit for the reception of
prisoners.
It is not the case that I ever specially visited Polack in his cell in that wing; but I did sec him
there on several occasions. On one of these I recollect he was walking on the upper landing, and, it
being a little after three o’clock p.m., I asked Mr. Harrison (Mr. Beverley being present) why he was
not picking his oakum. Mr. Harrison replied, he had done his task ; whereupon I said it would be well
to give him a little more to keep him employed during the working hours. The fact of Polack’s being
in that labour wing, and picking his oakum there, was no relaxation of prison discipline, nor a breach of
any gaol rule or regulation, but, on the contrary, as I shall hereafter shew, it is regarded by the Gaol
Act in the light of a punishment; and separate classification is positively directed by the first of the
Gaol Rules in all cases where the buildings will admit of it. Moreover, his is only one of many
instances of hard labour prisoners picking oakum in the wing, there being at present no less than
twenty-six


twenty-six hard labour prisoners picking oakum in their cells and the wings ; and this has been the
case with respect to other prisoners both in Darlinghurst and Parramatta Gaols.
Now, in order to see it any undue relaxation of discipline has been made in favour of the prisoner
Polack m respect of separate classification,—for that is essentially the charge,—it will be necessary to
ascertain his lights as a hard labour prisoner, convicted of a misdemeanour, under the Gaol Regulations,
and then see if he has been favoured in violation of them in regard to separate classification.
General Rui.es for Gaols.
P In all cases where the building will allow of separate classification, the prisoners are to be
divided into three classes :
1. Debtors and others confined for contempt on civil processes.
. -■ Prisoners committed on charges of felony, or misdemeanor, or for want cf sureties, and
prisoners convicted of misdemeanors.
•3. Prisoners convicted of felony.
Now, under this rule, Polack, beyond all doubt, belongs to No. 2 class, and therefore was entitled
to be placed in the committal wing, and associated with prisoners of No. 2. But it may be said that
he is a hard labour prisoner. That does not alter his position or his rights, so long as the buildings
will allow of separate classification. As the rule says, “In all cases,” &c., the word convicted embraces
the verdict and sentence; and, moreover, misdemeanors arc punishable with or without hard labour.
Was he so classed or associated ? No ! But when he was associated, it was with felons, &c.; therefore,
instead of the rules of the gaol being relaxed in this respect in favour of Polack, it appears they have
been carried out to his prejudice.
Now, the fact of Polack having been for a portion of his time confined in the new hard labour
wing, does not shew a violation of any rule or section of the Gaol Act. By the latter it is treated more
in the light of a punishment than an indulgence.
4th Vie., No. 29, Sec. 10.—“ And be it enacted. That in order to prevent the contamination
“ arising from the association of prisoners, any prisoner may be, by order of the Sheriff or Visiting
“ Justice, separately confined during the whole or any part of his or her imprisonment, and such separate
“ imprisonment shall not be deemed solitary confinement within the meaning of any Act forbidding the
“ continuance of solitary confinement for more than a limited time.”
By this section such is regarded not as an indulgence, but rather as a punishment, as it provides
that it shall not be deemed solitary confinement.
It may possibly be said that some would regard it as a favour. Even so, would not such a prisoner
feel that by associating him with the lowest and worst class of prisoners that he was unjustly treated by
unnecessarily and unduly increasing his punishment, and particularly so when done in violation of the
Gaol Regulations ? Therefore, in truth, there has been no relaxation in this regard towards the prisoner
Polack.
2nd Charge :
“ That Polack had the use of two cells, in one of which he kept stores of tea, coffee, &c.”
If such a state of things existed, unless reported to me by my officers, I could not by any inspec-
tion have detected it, inasmuch as all unoccupied cells are kept locked ; and I must say I was astounded
on hearing the statement of the prisoner Banks on this subject; but it must be borne in mind he is
uncorroborated, and I am informed it is denied by all the officers, and Mr. Harrison states that Banks’
statement is wholly untrue.
3rd Charge:—
“ That Polack was allowed by the chief gaolor to wear an unbranded coat belonging to the
“ gaol, but not of the description usually supplied to other prisoners, and did not even wear this
“ except when visited by the Sheriff in his cell.”
I never saw the coat alluded to on Polack after he left the debtors’ prison, and such is borne out
by the evidence. Mr. Beverley stated that it was with his knowledge Polack wore the coat in question
early in the morning and late in the evening, because he complained of chronic lumbago, from which he
has been suffering for many years, but that he never saw him out of prison dress during the day, viz.,
white duck jumper and grey trousers, which he also stated, did not appear to have been branded, nor
did he consider it necessary that they should. It was in this dress I saw him, and I have been informed
by five of the warders that he always wore it except in the morning and evening, when he wore the
coat above alluded to, and which, as I am informed, was provided by the Government.
It will be seen by the dispenser’s evidence that ho does not consider a prisoner dressed as a
prisoner unless dressed all in grey or white, and the clothes branded with the broad arrow and Darling-
hurst Gao], and Warder Burke takes the same view. Now, let the 18th Rule be read, and see what it
says on this point;—
Prisoners’ Clothing.
18. No prisoner who has not been convicted of felony shall be liable to be clothed in a party-
coloured dress ; but if it be deemed expedient to have a prison dress for prisoners not convicted of
felony, the same shall be plain.
There is no rule directing what description of dress is to be worn by prisoners not convicted of
felony. The felons’ dress for summer wear is white duck jumper and trousers, branded with the broad
arrow, and the name of the prison or establishment in which he may bo confined in on the front and
back of each garment ; and for winter, a grey suit—jacket, waistcoat, and trousers —branded in a
similar way.
But it may be said that when a prisoner convicted of a misdemeanor is punished with hard
labour, he should be dressed as a felon. That is not so. The rule not only implies, but says, in sd
many words, you shall not dress any prisoner who has not been convicted of felony in a felon s dress,
thereby directing that there should be a marked distinction between the dress of those convicted of
felony and those convicted of other offences, and such is but justice. As to the signal stated by Banks
to have been given by Warder M‘Kay, I can only say I do not believe it, and the statement of others
confirms me in that belief.
4th Charge :
“ That on one occasion articles of ordinary clothing were introduced into the gaol tor Polack s
“ use, by the principal turnkey.” .
My answer to tliis is,—tlie principal gaoler communicntcd with me by memo., to know it
Polack was to be sent to the Police office under a writ of hcihccts in his prison dress, or to be allowed to
put on his own clothes. To this I answered by indorsement, ‘ Let the usual course bo puisued. I
subsequently heard that Mr. Beverley permitted him to wear his own clothes on this occasioned, to
enable him to do so, the clothes referred to by the warder gatekeeper, Buikc, were sent into the
gaol for that purpose ; and I am informed by Mr. Beverley, that they were only used on that occasion
by the prisoner.
01:11 with the knowledge of the principal gaoler, Polack was allowed to take exercise before
“ the usual hour of opening the gaol and in the company of Turnkey M‘Kay.” .
In answer to this I can only say, there was no permission given by me to exercise Polack m
• any exclusive way, so I could not be reasonably expected to know if such was the case, unless reported
to me ; and the hour it was alleged to have taken place js an additional reason for my not knowing it.
However, I presume Mr. Beverley will be able to explain this.
157—2 E 6th


No.
Name.
Offence.
Sentence. J
Employment.
1
George Kemp ....
Obtaining money on false pre-
2 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour .
2 years’ labour .
3 years’ labour.
3 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour .
3 years’ labour.
12 months’ labour
Clerk in office.
2
George G. Mayne .
Obtaining money on false pre-
Clerk, overseer’s office.
William Holstein .
John Mackie ....
Frederick Howard.
Letter writer.
) Hospital wardsmen
f dud
7
Edward Cousins ..
Obtaining money on false pre-
1 Wardsmen, commit-
8
9
Edward Chcetham.
Charles Turton ..
William Smith . ..
Patrick Ryan ....
Stealing from a dwelling-house ..
) tal wing.
) Wardsmen, labour
) wing.
3 years’ labour.
5 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
3 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
3 years’ labour.
2 years’ labour.
3 months’ labour
) Wardsmen, new
j wing.
13
James Everett.. ..
John Campbell
Thomas Smith.. ..
Stealing in a dwelling-house
| Cooks.
15
1 Barbers, and with
j lunatics at night.
Stephen Allen ....
Robert Hilliard ..
Thomas Brophy ..
1
12 months’labour
Yardsmen.
William Murphy..
Thomas Burns.. ..
Thomas Cartwright
Jenne Friend ....
2 years’ labour.
6 months’ impt.
23
9 i
2 years’ labour.
18 months’labour
J
Lamplighter.
25
Stealing from a dwelling-house ..
2 years’ labour.
Cleans lodge
20
27
28
29
Patrick Kellegher
Henry Smith
George Turner....
3 years’ labour .
2 years’ labour.
GmonthsTabom
Bath-house.
Weighs oakum, &c.
8 years’ labour
6th S ThSt Polack was not searched on being removed into the gaol, in conformity with the 18th
.. gaol rule; oi% if so, was allowed to retain in his possession money, watches, jewellery, and other
“ artiC TL 0 4Ttatem?nt 1 s e affect’the principal turnkey, Mr. Harrison, and nothing stated therein was
to me bythat or any other officer, nor did it at any time come to my knowledge until I heard
repoi tt d tomt by t „ r instant l y went to Polack’s cell, accompanied hy the principal gaoler,
t hc statement of Jink*, jewellery, money, or valuables were found. I then interrogated
IS to those things, and he denied ever having anything in his possession except a presentation
watcffi whLh he had ffif a short time, and returned it to his son. This was the first tune I ever heard
of this watch reason to complain of Doctor West’s conduct in this matter- for if he,
1 . rpsnonsible officer in the department of which I was the head, had reason to suspect
texfstence of the alleged relocation in the gaol discipline towards Polack, it was his duty to give me
the existenceJ? f u —more particularly when he must have seen hy my minute on his certificate
some mfoimation P degire t p at any undue leniency should he extended to this prisoner
(see Appendix) the a J f } conversations I have had with him, that, had he done so, it would
mceM hy me%nd that I was not so over-confident in my own management a» not to
take a suggestion, or respectfully put it to the Executive Council
whether the prisoner Polack has been more leniently dealt with, or the gaol regulations unduly relaxed
In tis favour taking into consideration that he is a man now about sixty-eight years of age, convicted of
a whom Dr. West certified in October 1854, to be then labouring under chronic
lumbago of avery gouty diathesis, and from his age and general debility to be unfit to undergo a
sentence'of hard labour-and, in fine, that the infliction of such a punishment would in all probability
endanger his life. This was not an ordinary or hasty certificate, but on oath, and after lon B and
c!aSexamination made for the purpose, and that, too, in the gentlemen’s official capacity, as appears
by the following affidavit : •
In the Supreme Court of New South Wales, 1
Criminal Jurisdiction. J
The Queen against Abraham Polack and William Henry Wells.
On this fifth day of October, in the year one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, George West,
of Svdnev in the Colony of New South Wales, Doctor of Medicine being duly sworn, maketh oath and
saith as follows I hold the situation of Surgeon to Her Majesty s Gaol, at Darhnghmst, in the said
Oitv of Svdnev. I have seen the above-named Abraham Polack almost daily since he has been confined
within the said'gaol, under thc conviction against him herein (convicted 9th August, 1854 ; sentenced
the 6th October 1854) ; and I have been on several occasions consulted by him, and find that he is
afflicted with lumbago, which I am informed is of long standing, and also that he is of a very gouty
diathesis ■ in consequence thereof, as well as from his age and general debility, I am of opinion that he is
aw unfit person to undergo a sentence of hard labour, 'without seriously injuring /us health, and that the
undergoing such a sentence would in all probability materially endanger his life. WEST
Sworn hy the deponent, on the day first above mentioned, \
at SVdney aforesaid, before me, f
Augustus Caetee, 1
A Commissioner for Affidavits. ’
Or whether his position has been better than, or equal to, that of any one of the following so-called
hilletted men, all of whom are his juniors by thirty years, and most of them felons ?
Prisoners employed otherwise than at Hard Labour in Darlinghurst Gaol, February, 1861.
Or has liis position been better than, or equal to, that of the hundreds of hard labour prisoners who
appear, by the following return, to have been employed cabbage-tree hat-makmg, and earning m jr
and indulgences of tea and sugar, and who hav.c been, while so employed, always placed rn e
of a wing ? Ekiubk


Employment.
1856.
1857.
1 To 31st July, 1858.
Number
employed.
Amount.
Number
employed.
Amount.
i Number
employed.
Amount.
Hat-mating
600
519
125
£ s. a.
1,047 1 10
680 3 11
226 19 1
f s. a.
755 15 3
312
206
66
£ s. a.
374 8 7
206 17 3
66 2 8
Stone-cutting
All other work
614 11 3
Total
1,244
1,954 4 10
1,650 12 9
584
681 8 6
Monthly Average ..
103
162 17 0
96
137 11 0
97
113 11 5
Return of all money earned by Prisoners in IT. M. Gaol at Parramatta during the years 1856-7, and
part of 1858,
n + w 1 ( J C -' + *° va^llc the reliance to be placed upon, the evidence and statements of
Doctor West, it will be necessary to analyze both On the sth of October, 1854, Doctor West, having-
almost daily seen the prisoner Polack from his conviction, viz., 9th August, up to that time, and having
been several times consulted by him, pronounced upon oath that Polack was subject to chronic lumbago
to be of a very gouty diathesis, and, from his age and general debility, that he was not only unfit to undergo
nmd labour, but that the undergoing such a sentence would in all probability materially endanger his:
life. Now, let us see what Doctor West certified in February, 1860. He pronounces Polack fit for hard
labour, notwithstanding what he swore upwards of five years previously, and knowing the very nature
diseases he then swore Polack was labouring under to he chronic, adding, in the said affidavit,
that at his age hard labour would “ endanger his life.” This certificate so surprised the gaoler, knowing,
as he did, from previous knowledge of the prisoner, that he was quite unfit for hard labour, that he sent
it to me for my directions. I wrote the following minute on the certificate, viz.—“ Unless Doctor West
sees reason to alter his opinion, Polack must be put to hard labour.’ - Then Mr. Beverley wrote the
memorandum in red ink, which drew from Doctor West the following amended certificate :—“I consider
“ Polack to be in good health/or a man of his age, and quite capable of picking oakum, scouring cells, or
“ any other labour not requiring to lift heavy weights.” It will be seen that even under this amended
certificate the gaoler might hare put the prisoner to cut stone in the stockade; and, had he done so,
looking at the affidavit of Doctor West, the result might have proved fatal to the prisoner ; but the
same humane motives that induced Mr. Beverley to press upon the attention of Doctor West the
unfitness prisoner to be put to hard labour, prompted him to adopt the less objectionable portion
of Doctor West’s certificate, and the prisoner was consequently appointed a wardsman in the committal
wing, and there the duty of scouring cells devolved upon him. But this light labour was found too
laborious for the prisoner, for the very causes assigned by Doctor West in his affidavit of 1854, viz.,
lumbago of many years standing; and it rvas reported to me by Mr. Beverley that he himself was
obliged to assist a wardsman to raise the prisoner Polack on his legs when he was endeavouring to
perform the work of scouring cells ; therefore, in carrying cut this modified form of Doctor West’s
certificate, if persisted in, might have produced serious consequences, if not shortened the life of the
prisoner—adopting Doctor West’s view of his case in 1854. In consequence of this report, I appointed
the prisoner to be one of the wardsraen in the debtors’ prison. When removed, in deference to the
Colonial Secretary’s decision, I ordered him to pick oakum, being the first description of labour men-
tioned in Doctor West’s certificate. I use the words “in deference to the Colonial Secretary’s decision,”
because the prisoner Polack was appointed to that billet, which was always, and is now, filled by hard
labour prisoners.
Now let us see how far Doctor West is correct in his statements. The first, though net of any
great importance in itself, is one of the many instances in which Doctor West has made ill-considered
and incorrect assertions. It is as follows : —“Polack was brought before me by order of the Judge, to
know if he was fit for hard labour.” This is not the case ; it was Mr. Beverley who called for the certi-
ficate. Doctor West states, —“ I saw very little of Polack until he was removed from the debtors’
prison back to the wing “on the 23rd of March Polack sent a message to me that he was very ill,
and wanted me to see him in his cell,” &c.; and, after describing the difficulty he had in getting the
prisoner to the hospital, he goes onto say, “He then had on black kerseymere trousers, black waistcoat,
his own hat, and a jumper, with a muffler round his neck.” Doctor West then states, —“J don't think
I saw Polack afterwards until his petition was referred to me in January , 1861.” The first portion of
Doctor West’s statement is as follows : —“I saw very little of Polack until he was removed from tire
debtors’ prison back to the wing.” If this statement be true, Doctor West must have seen the prisoner
Polack after the 28th of June, 1860, for that was the day he was removed from the debtors’ prison. Now
let us see what Dr, West further states. “On the 23rd of March, 1860, Polack sent a message to me to
say he was very ill, and wanted me to see him in his cell,” &c. In alluding to this circumstance, Doctor
West states he did not see the prisoner afterwards until he saw him in reference to his petition, in
January, 1861. As to this latter statement, lam informed it is quite correct; indeed it must be so, as,
doubtless, the Doctor referred to the hospital journal before making it. Now, with regard to the former-
portion of the foregoing statement, respecting the occurrence of the 23rd March, this must have been
before, and not after (as he states), the removal of Polack from the debtors’ prison, inasmuch as Polack
was not sent to the debtors’ prison for seven weeks after that date, viz., the 12th May, and not removed
from there until the 28th June. So much for the correctness of this statement. I should not be disposed
to take such notice of this statement, were it not manifest that, by the great particularity and circum-
stantial manner in which the Doctor related it, he wished to convey that, notwithstanding the decision
of the Colonial Secretary, which caused Polack’s removal from the debtors’ prison, he was still permitted
to wear his own clothes. Now, as to the clothes stated by Doctor West to have been worn by Polack
when he saw him in reference to his petition in January, 1861, is it not likely the Doctor is as incorrect
in this as he has shewn himself to be in his other statements, particularly when he speaks of the
prisoner as being better dressed than he was, admitting at the same time that the prisoner had on a gaol
jumper ! Besides, he is contradicted on this point by two or three warders.
Doctor West goes on to say, —“ I never gave any instructions that Polack was to be treated
differently to the other prisoners sentenced to hard labour.” How does Doctor West reconcile this with
the fact of his having given first a general certificate, consigning this prisoner to the hardest labour; then
giving an amended one, allotting him light labour, viz., picking oakum, &c. ? How well this accords
with Doctor West’s affidavit of October, 1854! and I would ask, was there ever such an order as the one
he gave the gaol dispenser, viz., that he should never prescribe for the prisoner, even though he should
be taken ill at night ? I venture to assert there never was such an order given with respect to any other
prisoner in Darlinghurst Gaol.
Now, with respect to Doctor West’s pronouncing the prisoner a malingerer, and consequently
giving the dispenser the order just alluded to —this, indeed, appears very unaccountable, when we look
at another portion of Doctor West’s statement, wherein he states he had only seen the prisoner fora few
times, which, by his own shewing, were during the first five weeks of his imprisonment, viz., from about
10th February to 23rd March, and admits not having seen him at all from the 23rd March, 1860, to
January, 1861—a period of ten months.
It appears by the records of the Darlinghurst Gaol, that, in 1854, Doctor West ordered the
prisoner Polack both wine and cigars, considering that a man of his years, habits, and constitution,
required


. 1 n T>nlneh wa=s thus treated from his conviction, viz., the 9th
required these extra and unusual allowances. transmitted to Parramatta Gaol,
of August, 1854, to Bth October following, when . . COU rsc of treatment and conduct towards
Again I would ash,, how can he carefully considered, I con-
this unfortunate prisoner m 1860 . It Docto contradictions and inconsistencies that
fidently submit that it will be found to be replete witn so many e
it cannot be considered as reliable evidence. . ]t attention to Polack, and as he
1 anl white c acting -*.
because he wore the grey trousers and white jurnpe , }it ]c j a s that, being of such a very
The reason of Polack’s not wearing• a»i entire> suit of whtodjck Yn addition to his being subject
rdlesTof Ih^havings °Polack had chronic lumbago, was of a very gouty diathesis, aged,
and labouring under general debility. +v,n 11th instant I considered it my duty, in con-
sequence°of inquirjq letter ot^the^fol^owing
officers of of the
On the next day, Wednesday, the 18th. I saw one of it) / expreßSe d an
12th instant, which, as well as I can recollect (having had but a cmgny glar»ceoi
opinion that I ought to have suspended Mr. Beverley as well * s ¥*l ’Mr Elyard said that he
2ve procured a locum tenen,, and, before I had read airy otbe.liter .j „to wait
would send me tbe official letter after seeing Mr. Cowper j “" d 1 »X’°e.™fiCde “tood tbe minute
until I received it, as it was to be sent to me immediaWy, momfug, and no letter;
»t.* * »x »**»■
than that it was his duty to suspend me as well as Mr. to mv charge wa& want of decision
It appeared then (as I supposed) that the principal AingUid to Harrison>
and of determination, as was said, m not at once siispendin -wi a , prudent course in
Let us see how far that charge is well founded, or whether I did not take tnc more I
writing the letter of the 12th, and writing for Cockatoo convicts, in addition to its
Here was an establishment with IUo ot the most acspeiaim wio aeu _ ,u m -. four of its
ordinary inmates, amounting to upwards of 300, the pnncipal I principal gaoler,
warders very recently appointed, and I hemg in possession of information, throu n P 1 arily at
Hiat 50 of the Cockatoo convicts, whose solitary confinement had expired, and who were “etJess*n iy
large diudiig the day time in the gaol yard, were planning an escape over the wall behind the woik
Sll ° PS ’ * Now with all these facts before me lam told I shewed want of moral courage because I d id not
suspend the two principal officers of the establishment Hjdmtr us;t it t .othec » these B despera-
Now let the converse he looked at. Suppose I had done so fives what. I would
does either escaped, or that in their attempt to escape some S sS consequences ?
ask, would he said of my taking such a course and dishonest or
Doubtless I would he told thus, and, I admit, rightly-” Mr Beverley and from your want
“ unfit to be intrusted with the charge of the establishment for a fc J daj s lon reagon
“of discretion those serious consequences have resulted. Then, indeed,
f „ t ™ ? m,aing -V aaid not tllint j possessed suffident Mscreti^
to manage such an establishment as Darlmgburst Gaol at the same tune spea.. „
fa ”* S! l'd„“fcel unwilling to trumpet my own praises, but tbe very serious
aS’pSSmls Ifti Sheriff) was about* explain^
fVSSVw
as to th Q bed-hoards being taken from them, and their being obliged to sleep on f he J , ,
they had to blame their fellow-prisoners, Clarke and Cavanagh, for the removal of v ordm
they used them to aid them in effecting their escape, and I told them they were re “°y® d I t hm with
I addressed those unfortunate and deluded men in my usual ft bITSCS
them, and assuring them that such violence and disorder would o y 0 . o k e dience to
suffering and privations, at the same time impressing on them the necessity of obedience to
my orders, and that I should, although very reluctantly, enforce them, “ueffis ?o such
their common sense and self-interest. I have found from CX P C VYYAl.edkfncfi l toniv Orders and in this
men before resorting to punishment rarely failed to produce at least ohed e "/officers reported to
instance it had the desired effect. Silence and perfect order were restoredandmyothems rep u<
me that those men from that day forth were most orderly and obedient up to the day o 7 4
Mr Isaacs the barrister, and Mr. Williams, the Crown Solicitor, were within hearing, ai
expressed’their astonishment at the effect produced by my address to these men, ant o isci
lecture had a talismanic effect on the men. „ , ■, . T r . rm + PTU i +w their respect
To refer to those unfortunate men would indeed he out of place, hut Ip e
for an officer and great deference to his orders prove that they a^®. j 3^, 18 t v V c inflicted when fairly
obliged to do in carrying out gaol discipline, and even punishments that may he mttieted ™ '
investigated and proved to be deserved, and of this I have had various instances, and my suboulma
officers can hear testimony to this. . ..... T .-m f i P to the Darling-
Mr. Cowper is aware of the extensive improvements and additions Iffiave m ' Y e -celled labour
hurst Gaol, and that solely by prison labour ; and that in the erection of the twenty thousand
wins:, it is admitted that I have effected a saving to the Government YV le mson and a
pounds (£20,000), and that in the short space of three years, a to contend with in
spacious hospital; and I heg to remind Mr. Cowper of the many ti r i oiqitions were not
procuring the materials to keep the men constantly at woik. , ‘ as until the year 1860
accomplished without the constant attention and exertions of myself and officeis, as until } therc
* This was written before the escape of the seventeen Cockatoo prisoners from Darlinghurst Gaol.


there were no overseers of works, and this duty was performed by Mr. Harrison without additional nay
and the style and durability of the works speak for themselves. pay ’
I am seven years in charge of that establishment; there have been no serious irregularities or
disturbances amongst the prisoners ; indeed, on the contrary, good order and attention to the work was
maintained throughout, notwithstanding the great influx and reflux of prisoners, and notwPlXndTn *
Em'hmh ° f “}f ° onfinees in the same establishment, which is not allowed in the
large piisons m En o land. Are all these exertions and attentions of mine and my officers to be over-
case of aTSS and aXg mS Pol" IT com l’ m ‘ ivel J •"*■>» has boon relaxed in the
„ , N n W i C a°, mjr antecedents justify Mr. Cowper in the opinion that Ido not possess sufficient moral
Imrst GaoT? determmatlon to S ra PP le Wltli the difficulties of managing an establishment like Darling-
„ 13 alwa J s painful for a man of right feeling to eulogize bis own capabilities, but in the present
ca s e it becomes necessary for me to prove that Mr. Cowper’s estimate of my official abilities 1 is not
well founded, as I shall now proceed to shew that in the discharge of my public duties as Water Police
Magistrate, so far back as ten years ago, I shewed myself to possess great moral courage and a deter-
mination to carry out the maritime laws, notwithstanding the powerful mercantile influence arrayed
cigcimsl me. **
, . . It ma y Cowper’s recollection, as it is a matter of record, that several of my
decisions as Water Police Magistrate were not only found fault with, but reprobated by a great portion
ot the meichants ot the city, and that they employed the ablest legal assistance to control my decisions
in my own Court, and that in several instances they appealed to the Supreme Court against them‘hut
m eveiy instance without success. Notwithstanding this justification of my conduct by the Supreme
Court, the most wealthy and leading merchants in the city combined together, and many of them, then
members ot Council, determined to get rid of me by an indirect and, I should say, unconstitutional
proceeding. J
A resolution was moved and carried in the then Council, supported by those mercantile members
aaci taose wh°m they had enlisted in their cause, recommending the Government to remove me as
Water 1 dice Magistrate and to appoint me to some other situation, as Mr. Wentworth was pleased to
say that there were many other situations which I was eminently fitted to fill. Mr, Donaldson, in his
place in the House, said that I exercised my authority and discretion most unwisely and unfairly ; and
lie then instanced the case of the ship “ Ranger,” at that time lying, as he said, rotting in the harbour,
because I would not compel her crew to take her to sea upon a mere assumption on my part that she
u as not seaworthy, when in fact it was no assumption of mine, as she was reported to me unsea worthy,
and a survey demanded by the men, which was refused by the ship’s agent. What were the
consequences?
The ship no doubt lay for several months in the harbour without a crew, when at length the ship’s
agent prevailed upon Captain Hunter and bis crew to volunteer to take her to London, aucf I felt bound
to permit them to do so, having first given them a full history of the case.
This ship, as I anticipated, never reached London ; she foundered at sea, and all hands were lost
but four seamen.
Notwithstanding the powerful interest brought to bear by the mercantile body in the Council,
the then Governor, Sir Charles Augustus Fitz Eoy, refused to act upon their recommendation, having
first satisfied himself by his Law Officers that my decisions were legal, aud that I shewed that I did
possess moral courage to carry out the law in its integrity against the most powerful body in the com-
munity; and His Excellency observed that be would not remove me from the Water Police Bench until
he had an opportunity of appointing me to something better, which led to my appointment as Sheriff.
Now, upon a review of the whole case, I respectfully but confidently submit that, regarding Doctor-
West’s affidavit to be true, as w-e are bound to do, and bis certificate of 1860 as untrue, it being in
direct contradiction to his oath; and having regard to the true position of the prisoner Polack under
the gaol regulations, and to bis right to be treated like any other prisoner of bis age, health, crime, and
sentence, and not to be dealt with in furtherance of carrying out any undue severity, which would, in
his case, have amounted to a positive cruelty and inhumanity on part of the gaoler; and, further,
regarding the proper discretion to be used by the gaoler in carrying out the sentences of the law, that
such shall not be made the instrument of torture by any one, who, having the power, may have the desire
to use or cause it to be so used; and Ido therefore most confidently but respectfully contend, that
whatever slight deviation from the general practice there may have been made, and for which I can at all
be accountable, in the case of Polack, it was on the side of, and induced by, humanity alone.
I am sure that the Honorable Colonial Secretary, on carefully looking at the facts of this case, will
see bow much be has been misled by Doctor West and the witnesses he produced in support of his
statements ; and I can well understand why the Honorable Colonial Secretary saw no reason to doubt
the correctness of those statements, coming as they did from a gentleman holding so high and important
an office in my department.
In conclusion, I have the honor to assure the Executive Council that I have every confidence in
their giving a fair and impartial consideration to my case, and that they will agree with me that
throughout the whole matter I have been blameless, and I trust that they will deal with this case on its
own merits.
[Appendix to foregoing Statement.']
No. 61-29. Sheriff's Office,
Sydney, 12 February, 1861.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that on Saturday last the Inspector General of Police
produced to me your letter of the Bth instant, directing him to inquire into certain statements commu-
nicated, as I understand, by Doctor West, Visiting Surgeon of the Gaol, in reference to the treatment of
and discipline enforced towards the prisoner Polack, and directing the Inspector General to inquire
into, and to report upon, the allegations contained in the statement of Doctor West.
2. I beg respectfully to observe that I thought this direction to the Inspector General of Police
was an unusual course, until I had been apprised of the nature of the statements made by Doctor West,
and called upon to inquire into, and report upon, the discipline or want of discipline enforced by my
subordinate officers in Darlinghnrst Gaol with respect to this prisoner. However, lam willing to
regard this proceeding as a mere oversight of the usual prior communnication with the head of the
department, it having probably arisen from_ the fact that Mr. M'Lerie was appointed at that time, at
my own suggestion, to assist me in an inquiry into the circumstances of the escape of the two prisoners
named David Clarke and Michael Cavanagh. I, therefore, permitted Mr. M‘Lerie to proceed with the
inquiry touching the allegations of Dr. West with reference to the prisoner Polack. I did so rather
than allow it to appear that I would interfere in the slightest degree to shield my subordinates in any
alleged neglect of duty on their parts.
3. I find, however, that the course which Mr. M‘Lerie felt himself compelled to take is such as
I cannot consider quite fair towards my officers, inasmuch as he has refused to hear evidence in contra-
diction to the allegations of Doctor West and the witnesses examined at his instance; and notwith-
standing this impression, as it appears to me, a prima facie case of neglect of duty and disregard of my
positive orders has been shewn on the part of the principal warder, I have deemed it expedient to
suspend that officer, with a distinct understanding that I would afford him every opportunity of relieving
himself


himself from the consequences of a disregard of my orders and neglect of duty, which the evidence, so
far taken, tends p have the honor to request that the Inspector General of Police
may be directed to assist me in entering into a full investigation of the treatment of Polack by my
subordinate officers, with a view of affording them every opportunity of explaining and accounting for
t i,yif.o’loct in carrying out my peremptory orders with reference to tins pusonei. _
tl i 1 j am particularly desirous that this course should be adopted, as it will be in your recollection
that on a former occasion complaints were made with reference to a lax discipline in favour of this
prisoner when I gave a positive order that he should be removed from the duties of wardsman in
the debtors’ prison to the hard labour yard, to be there dealt with as any other hard labour prisoners,
and which order has not been by me relaxed in the slightest degree. [See Memorandum annexed hereto.
No. 60 ' G 47^ iave the ]lonor fu rtber to state—[“ I have for the present abstained from suspending the
“principal gaoler, considering that it would be extremely inconvenient, under the present circumstances
“ of the prison, if not dangerous, to suspend both the principal officers of the establishment at the same
“ moment ”1— although so far as the evidence has been taken in reference to Mr. Beverley personally, I
will feel it my painful duty to suspend that_ officer, unless he can, upon the further inquiry, relieve
himself of the apparent neglect of his own duties.
I have, &c.,
JOHN O’NEILL BRENAN,
Sheriff,
To the Honorable
• The Colonial Secretary.
Memo. No. 60-472.
Let Polack be put to pick oakum in the hard labour yard.
Let Dr. Beamish be placed in the trial or confine wing, and have a cell to himself.
J. O N. 8., Sheriff.
2 July, 1860.
The Principal Gaoler, Darlinghurst.
Garryowen, 1G February, 1861.
Sir, # , T
I have the honor to draw your attention to my letter, as Sheriff, of the 12th inst., No. 61-29,
having reference to your letter of the Bth inst., directing the Inspector General of Police to inquire
into certain statements communicated to you by Doctor West, the Visiting Surgeon of Darlinghurst Gaol
in reference to the treatment and discipline enforced towards a prisoner named “ Polack, now confined
in that gaol, and directing him to report upon the allegations contained in Doctor *V\ cst s statement made
in reference to the treatment of that prisoner. . .
Not having received any official reply to this communication places me in a very einbaiiasslng
position, as I am°really at this moment in ignorance of your opinion and decision on my appeal to you,
contained in that letter, notwithstanding my having called at your on other business, on Wcd-
nesdav, the 13th inst., and Mr. Elyard having shewn me one of your minutes, being the last on my
letter"of the 12th, which, by the rvay, I found a difficulty in deciphering, and was assisted in so doing
by Mr. Elyard, when he then said he would communicate your official answer to me as soon as he
could speak to you on the subject. I understood him then to say (and am now undei the same
impression) that I was to hold my hand, and not act upon your minute, thus imperfectly understood by
me, until he should see vou on the subject, and then communicate officially to me your decision ; and
you will doubtless recollect that, on a subsequent interview with yourself, when you first intimated
to me your intention of suspending me as Sheriff, for not having taken action on the minute refened
to, I pledged my honour as a gentleman, in presence of Mr. Elyard, that 1 understood him to say that X
was to wait until X received your official answer to my said letter, which was, in fact, the cause of my
not having immediately carried into effect your opinion of what ought to have been done by me >\ith
reference to Mr. Beverley. .
Prior to my having received your official announcement of my suspension as fehentt, 1 made
several inquiries with reference to the subject contained in my letter of the 12th instant, and I am led
to the conclusion that, from the surrounding circumstances, it will be found on inquiry that a very
different state of facts existed in reference to the treatment and discipline adopted towards the prisoner
Polack than that reported by Doctor West.
Now, having reference to your letter of the Bth inst., addressed to the Inspector General of
Police, and his construction of his duties under that letter, it is quite clear he did not consider himself
justified in inquiring into the conduct of my subordinate officers,—as he himself said, and, in fact, as I
believe, it was intended that I should co-operate with the Inspector General in that inquiry, as well as
the inquiry into the circumstance and cause of the escape of Clarke and Cavanagh. At the close of the
inquiry touching the irregularities in the treatment of the prisoner Polack, which affected the conduct
of my subordinate officers, I suggested to the Inspector General the necessity of affording my officers an
opportunity of producing such evidence as they might see necessary in exculpation or explanation of
their conduct, or, as I am informed, to prove a very different state of facts from that shewn by Doctor-
West and his witnesses ; but I was immediately met by the Inspector General’s decision that he was not
inquiring into the misconduct of any of my officers, and he felt bound to strictly confine his inquiry
as to the correctness of the representations made by Doctor West in his report; consequently, my
officers have had no opportunity of proving those statements to be incorrect. I therefore respectfully
submit that my officers have been dealt with without a hearing, and consequently that I have been
visited with the consequences of their alleged misconduct, which may be yet proved to be without
foundation in a great degree, and, as I am informed, can be so proved; and I, too, am visited with
the severe treatment of a suspension upon an assumption that my officers have been guilty of some
gross dereliction of their duty, which, in point of fact, even if true, has been already proved was wholly
unknown to me.
In conclusion, I have the honor to submit that experience has shewn to me that the office and
duties of Visiting Justice are incompatible with my office as Sheriff, and the distinction is pointedly
drawn by the Gaol Act; they are, in fact, distinct offices ; and even supposing my subordinate officers,
as Sheriff, have been guilty of a breach of gaol discipline (and if known to me), I should be treated in
this instance as Visiting Justice, and not in my capacity of Sheriff, as it is clear that the duties and
liabilities are distinctly marked and provided for by law; and I therefore submit that the duties of
Visiting Justice should not have been put upon me as Sheriff.
tinder these circumstances, I very respectfully trust you will re-consider your suspension of
me as Sheriff; and, in reference to my subordinate officers, I presume they will take such a course as
will enable them to satisfy you that they are not guilty of any very grave dereliction of duty or departure
from the gaol regulations ; and I unhesitatingly assert I have not detected any of the irregulari-
ties complained of by Doctor West, and that there has been no want of vigilance on my part; and I
may say, in truth, that I have felt the most anxious desire to establish the most perfect system of prison
discipline at Darlinghurst Gaol that the building and accommodation enabled me to do.
I have, &c.,
JOHN O’NEILL BRENAN,
Sheriff.
In


In the Supreme Court of New South Wales, 1
Criminal Jurisdiction.
The Queen against Abraham Polack and William Henry Wells.
» „ , 0n the r ‘f t] V La i y ° f °„ ct ° ber ’ j, ll thc year one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, George West
of Sydney, in the Colony of New South AVales, Doctor of Medicine, being duly sworn makfth oath
and saith as fo»ows :-I hold the situation of Surgeon to Her Majesty’s Gaol at Darlinghurst in the
said city of Sydney. I have seen the above-named Abraham Poiack almost daily since he has been
confined within the said gaol under the conviction against him herein, and I have been on several
occasions consulted by him, and find that he is afflicted with lumbago, which I am informed s of W
standing, and also that he is of a very gouty diathesis; in consequence thereof, as well as from his aS
and general debility, I am of opinion that he is an unfit person to undergo a sentence of ha?d labofir
l,e ‘ lth> “ 4 tlm * thc imdergoi " £ mcU • “
at Sy4m,y aforeMii
GEO. WEST.
U. M. Gaol, Darlinghurst,
15 February, 1860.
. m. • L hav ® this carc £ ull y examined the prisoner Abraham Polack, and am of opinion his
health is sufficiently good to perform hard labour.
I have, &c.,
GEO. WEST,
To Beverley, Esq.,
Governor of H, M. Gaol, Darlinghurst.
Visiting Surgeon.
Unless Doctor West sees fit to alter his certificate, Polack must be put to hard labour. J. O’N. B.
As this is a particular case, I request Doctor West will state what description of hard labour
Polack is to be put to.—H. C. B.
_ I consider Polack in good health for a man of his age ; he is quite capable of picking oakum,
scouring the cells, or any other labour which does not require lifting heavy weights.
23 February, 1860.
GEO. WEST.
Darlinghurst Gaol, 19 January, 1861.
Sir,
I have the honor to report to you, for the information of His Excellency the Governor
General, that the prisoner named in the margin [A. Polack] is not, nor has been at any time since his
committal, in bad health, in fact he is stronger and looking better now than on his admission. Prisoner
has frequently attempted to deceive me by feigning illness, and by other unjustifiable means to impose
upon me ; and although (when called on by the Judge after his committal) I gave a certificate stating
that I considered him fit to undergo hard labour, I am not aware that up to the present moment he has
been put to it, or indeed that he has ever been clad in the prison dress.
These facts distinctly contradict his assertion in the third paragraph of his petition, relative
to the effect of hard labour on his health, and, if his statement was true, it would be a contradiction to
his fourth paragraph, because prisoners undergoing hard labour have no right to be kept in close con-
finement.
I consider Polack a determined malingerer, and his case one that ought not to receive any
mitigation of sentence on the plea of ill health.
I have, &c.,
GEO. WEST,
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary.
Visiting Surgeon.
In the Colony of New South Wales,!
Sydney, to wit. /
I, John Callaghan, of Sydney, in the Colony of New South Wales, acting principal warder at Dar-
linghurst Gaol, do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have been a warder in this gaol nearly ten
years ; the prisoner Abraham Polack was in my charge for some short time while I was in charge of the
committal wing; I was then relieved by Warder Eispen ; he was in prison clothes while he was in my
charge—that is, a white jumper and grey trousers, he picked his quantity of oakum while he was in my
charge ; from my own knowledge I am not aware of his receiving any luxuries ; on my handing over
charge of the wing to Eispen I read him the order from Mr. Beverley, that he was to pick oakum and wear
prison clothes ; while he was in my charge he was treated in a similar way to other prisoners, and
received no indulgences that I am aware of; and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously
believing the same to he true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act, &c.
Made before Andrew Lenehan, Esq., J.P.
JOHN CALLAGHAN.
In the Colony of New South Wales, 1
Sydney, to wit. j
I, Thomas Lee, of Sydney, in the Colony of New South Wales, warder at Darlinghurst Gaol, do
solemnly and sincerely declare that I shall have been a warder ten years on the 24th of May next; Abraham
Polack was in my charge, as warder of the old hard labour wing, after he was removed from the
debtors’ prison, for some time during which period he picked oakum in the hard labour yard, and wore
a jumper cut up the front, prisoners grey trousers and shoes ; I never knew, nor heard, of his getting
any additional diet in the way of indulgencies, and afterwards, when he was in the new hard labour
wing, I weighed out his quantity of oakum, sent it over to him, and got it back picked; lam not
aware of any favouritism or unfair leniency towards this prisoner, beyond any other, whilst in my charge;
I make this solemn declaration believing the same to be true, &c.
Made before Andrew Lenehan, Esq., J.P.
THOMAS LEE.
Donald


-> • -i-v t 1,,,..-.! Pnnl cintos - I have been a warder in the gaol for 11
Bonn Id M‘Koy, late warder 111 Darling * ’. nont hs •ho wore the same clothing as the hard
years; I had the prisoner Polack under-mycn. o _ f never j( aw anything in his cell more than was
labour prisoners wore; he always picked!. t ’ treat him differently from other prisoners; when
iSttStSS I-s told he was to pick oakum there, and which he did as
stated before. DONALD M‘KOY.
DONALD M'KOY.
In the Colony of New South Wales, |
r-ZT,LrlTo! Paddington, to aW
principal turnkey of Dariinghurst Gaol, <o s 3 (1 g .. Dl ? Q eol . ge West, Visiting Surgeon to
fourth day of March, one thousand ei > ■ p o ] ac k (who was then, and is still, undergoing a term
Darlinghurst Gaol aforesaid, requested me to hung; 1 ™ aforesaid,) from his cell to the
of imprisonment for three years with hard 1 n a fearful state of perspira-
surgery ; I went to Polack. who was ill m bed in hiscel. I found [ lum whether he
tion; 1 then went to Dr. West , Wgatf will^mve 1 him down ; I then went to
thought it advisable to bring him down , • - ' c in his cell and that he must come down
Pokdc and told him that Clr West <totasdto> * liflj it wo,“\ he tI W death ot him ; I said you
to the surgery ; 1 olacx said he could not - down with me to Dr. West, to the surgery,
had better put a blanket round you, which , » thence he was discharged on the twenty-sixth
and he was then ordered to go into the hospital aeid om thence he was cusc g trousers
there were none large enough for him ; they- werei «* • th h the different
without them on, and I was in the habit ot seeing him daily n ta y prisoner
prisons and cells; I never knew Polackto have uxuries of any kind in one
ssiia Si=“sSyS?r;i Si * --fes
as the prisoners once wore, and was furnished y worked in the wing ; the same as all other
SSSSS;
“of New South Wales and to substitute declarations in lieu thereof and for the suppression J J
“ and extra judicial oaths and affidavits,
Declared, &c,
In the Colony of New South Wales, )
Sydney, to wit. j
Christopher Rispen. of Denham-atrcet, Surry Hills in tip City of Sydney, inOolmiy of 1< w
South Wales late warder at Darlinghurst Gaol, do solemnly and sincerely declare, that Abiaiam
lolai a pHsomer undergoing the punishment of three years hard labour- in Darlinghurst Gaol,
wore the prison clothing shortly after he left the debtors’ prison, which was on the twenty-eighth Jun ,
one thousand eight hundred and sixty, and came under my charge m the trial wing of the gaol, up to
that time he wore his own trousers—there being neither trousers or shoes 111 the gaol store at that tune
tlrn prisoners; when the prison clothing was supplied, there were no trousers large enough foi
Polack 1 and I was ordered by Mr. Harrison, the then principal turnkey, to have two pairs of troiwe
uvide into one for him - I gave orders accordingly, and Polack never wore any other but prison clothing
from 3 that tiine until*! left the prison, to the list of my belief; I did see Polack occasionally with a
long coat on, which lam informed was a prison coat; Polack was about a month imdei g J
then removed to the new hard labour wing of the prison under the charge ot Mi. k }. , ,
SattTmeTturnkey in the gaol; I never knew him to have luxuries of any description _ while in the
gaol, nor did I ever convey any to him; when Polack came into the prison, I received
him, and took from him a penknife and a small sum of money-he had nothing else on him at that
time ; the money was as usual handed over to Mr. Harrison the penknife by n
the usual wav • I never gave any authority to any person whatever to address letters to me to y
wife for Polack or any other prisoner; and Ido not know anything about the contents 0 a e c
I am informed was intercepted by Burke, the gatekeeper at Darlmghmst Gaol and said to
addressed to my wife; I never passed any signal to Mr. Polack, or to any other prxsone p
arrival of the Sheriff at the gaol, nor did I know of any one else doing so, and I do no ttotejejum
was done; while Polack was under my charge he frequently complained of being t J e l jp eaied
consult Dr. West; Polack was employed picking oakum under my charge, on on . e , c^ s | 1 ' 1 - n f orm
to he so ill, that although he begged me not to report it to Dr. W est, I thought it my duty
Mr. Harrison, as I really thought he was going to die; he was then m a P r^ ts ® Jid not’visit
shivering all over; I never saw a man in such a state of illness before, and as Dr. Wes . tl]e
him in his cell, he was removed by Mr. Harrison’s order to the hospital, rolled up 1 declaration
prisoner said let me die here rather than be taken to Dr. West, And I mare n m ncle and
conscientiously believing the same to he true, and by virtue of the provisions Art of the
passed in the sixth yea?- of the reign of his late Majesty, intituled, “An Act to repeal an Actojtne
“present Session of Parliament intituled ‘An Act for the more effectual abolition of oa s •f j f or
“ 4 taken and made in various departments of the State and to substitute declarations in leu i J


“ ‘ the more entire suppression of voluntary and extra judicial oaths and affidavits and to make other vrovi-
“ slore * f° r f* ab ? l \ tl ™ of unnecessary oaths,’ ” and also by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the
Governor and Legislative Council of New South Wales, made and passed in the ninth year of the rchm
of Her present Majesty intituled, “An Act for the more effectual abolition of oaths and affirmations tak n
.. IZrorTnZ7 oUsde P artments °f * he Government of New South Wales and to substitute declarations in
Declar e ° r * l6 su PP ression °f voluntary and extra judicial oaths and affidavits .”
Sheriff’s Office,
g; r Sydney , 1 May, 1860.
i the receipt of your letter of the 25th ultimo, conveying to me the
decision of the Executive Council upon the Report of the Board appointed to inquire into certain irregu-
larities in the Parramatta Gaol, into the conduct of the gaoler, and other officers, and to report on the
general discipline carried out in that establishment; also upon certain correspondence relative to the
case of a female prisoner having been delivered of a child in the Sydney Gaol, she having been an
inmate thereof for more than twelve months; and referring to the undue detention of William Wallis
a lunatic,—l have the honor to submit as follows :
tlm Executive Council have, unintentionally no doubt, done me a great injustice bv
importing into their decision on the Report of the Board specially appointed to investigate into irregu-
larities in the Parramatta Gaol, two totally distinct matters, which, I respectfully submit, have been
already dealt with by the Government of the day. (See Colonial Secretary’s letters, dated 6th Decem-
ber, 1859, and 6th March, 1860.)
2. That the Executive Council have, unintentionally, done me an injustice by acting upon
a Report before giving me an opportunity of seeing it and the evidence upon which it was based. I
was the first witness examined, and was not afforded an opportunity of hearing the evidence of the
several witnesses subsequently examined; and I was, consequently, deprived of the right, as it is
called, of cross-examining those witnesses whose evidence tended to shew that it was the appointment
of persons of indifferent character which was in a measure, if not altogether, the cause of the alleged
irregularities; and I was thus deprived of the right of calling other witnesses to sustain my views
upon the subject, should I have felt called upon to do so.
3. That the Executive Council allege that I have committed a grave mistake in advancing
damaging imputations against a subordinate, which I did not sustain by clear and indisputable proof.
In answer to this poi tion of the censure of the Executive, I beg to observe, that I made no imputation
against Mr. Allen. The imputations, or charges, made against that officer, were made by third parties
wholly without my knowledge until they reached me officially; and that I only founded my opinion,’
and came to conclusions from the evidence taken upon the inquiry I held into the" cause of the alleged
irregularities ; and 1 was influenced in arriving at the conclusions I did from the evidence taken upon
that inquiry, strengthened by the failures of Mr. Allen in supporting counter-charges against other
subordinates, and his manifest zeal and exertion in supporting those counter-charges which obviously
tended to exonerate himself. I allude to John Bowen’s case, and the attempt to shew that Mr. Dudgeon
was an accessory, if not a principal, in the larceny of the cabbage-tree hats. I may here observe,That
evidence taken before the Boards of Inquiry into Mary Murphy’s and John Bowen’s cases was of’such
a character as to elicit from the Colonial Secretary the expressions in the annexed letter.
4. In reference to the observation that a great portion, if not all the irregularities were attri-
butable to the appointment of persons of indifferent character to the subordinate offices. I beo- to state
that, since the dismissal of Mr. Moxham, who was principal turnkey when I became Sheriff,'and who,
in 1857, brought charges of immorality against Mr. Allen—it appearing on that inquiry that the
subordinates were divided into two parties—l felt called upon to ajipoint strangers to all parties who
were represented to be of good character. Mr. Moxham’s successor was Mr. Phegan, who had strong
recommendations from Major Twist, R.E., Captain M‘Kay, 15th Regt., and Captain Kelso, Inspector of
Penal Establishments. Mr. Phegan had been an overseer over prisoners in Hobart Town. Mr. Phegan’s
successor was Mr. Magney, who had high testimonials from several gentlemen in Melbourne ; he was
unknown to myself, and only a short time in the Colony. Mr. Maguey’s successor, Mr. Dudgeon, was
selected for the office by Captain M‘Lerie, at my particular desire. Mr. Dudgeon’s successor, Mr.
M'Cormack, the present principal turnkey, was also appointed upon the recommendation of Captain
M‘Lerie.
In conclusion, I beg the Colonial Secretary will be pleased to lay this communication before the
Executive, with the view alone of shewing that the conclusions arrived at by the Board were not
confined to the evidence on which I formed my former opinion of the conduct of Mr. Allen ; and I beg
to assure the Government that, had I been present at the inquiry before them it would have afforded
me sincere pleasure to hear any evidence that would justify me in changing my opinion of the conduct
of that officer, and I am now glad that he has succeeded in placing before the Board such evidence as
induced them to come to so favourable a conclusion as to the conduct of Mr. Allen ; nor do I now desire
to disturb that conclusion, yet I most solemnly assure the Government I was solely actuated in the
view I had taken of the evidence before me, and the course taken by me thereon, by a sense of duty,
and to secure the efficient discharge of the public service in the establishment under Mr. Allen’s charge;
and I was fully aware that Mr. Allen was surrounded by highly respectable and influential relations and
friends, and that the recommendation I then felt bound to make would naturally bring upon me their
displeasure, and perhaps their censure ; even so I could not be turned aside from what I considered an
imperative duty.
Under ail the circumstances herein referred to, I do feel the view taken by the Executive of my
conduct in reference to Mr. Allen was not in accordance with the dictates my own conscience justified ;
and the censure of the Executive, and what I am to expect at their hands in future, leaves on my mind
a very painful impression.
I have, &c.,
To the Principal Under Secretary,
&c., &c.
JOHN O’NEILL BRENAN,
Sheriff.
Darlinghurst ,
26 February, 1860.*
My dear Sir,
I have the pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated the 25th instant, and
also copies of your letters to the Honorable the Colonial Secretary of the dates 12th, 16th, and 19th
February, 1861. I also acknowledge the receipt of a document headed—“ Statement of the Sheriff’s
case.”
I have attentively considered these several papers, and proceed, according to your request, to
make such observations as occur to my mind on the perusal of them.
Though I ever carefully abstain from intruding my opinions on the notice of Her Majesty’s
Ministers, I will, nevertheless, deviate on this occasion from my practice : —1 st. Because I have the same
confidence, as you express at the end of your statement, that Her Majesty’s Executive Council will give
a fair and impartial consideration to your case. 2nd. Because I have alwaj's considered, during the seven
years you have been Sheriff, that you have performed the duties of that arduous office in a highly satisfac •
tory manner. In volunteering this testimonial, you will be kind enough to understand that I refer to that
157—2 F portion


With respect to the mMgonco « visitation that you onght to have
blamablc m that matter. As fa < ‘ ’ doce i V e d by gaol officers. The indulgence imparted
S™^entaretoTop!TS on Consideration of this matter of AM, the Honorable the Executive
Council will hold you entirely blameless. T , i fi ie Question involves very delicate considera-
.. is far more likely to form a
Beverley, I am strongly mclmed t° P did not do so you only
stances, have done as you did. lofI of difficulty. If a gentleman should make a
committed a mistake in judgmen 1 ffi f 7j am a f ra id tiiat very few eligible persons
mistake upon such a point, and deprived of his office^ tor it, xja &g i gure * ouj .
would be desirous to entei into th P of Her Majesty’s Ministers, I conclude this letter by
J. N. DICKINSON.
John r ' geA letter to the Sheriff dated February 26th, IB6o* ; I have also
i + it litntpmpiJ of the Sheriff’s case.” Having- read the printed statement, I see no reason
read the f n I entertain still the same hope which I expressed
at the conclusion of my letter to the !>herift.
J. N. DICKINSON.
15 Marc*:, IS6I. Supreme Court ,
21 March, 1861.
“IpSg your I ‘lervlSs Is Sheriff, iu all things which have come under our judicial observation dimag
yom- long tenure of hwreas( , a s 0 overwhelmingly, I used periodically to visit and
• iii i f or come years past I have been unable to continue that practice. I cannot
inspect the gaoib, » } i prowled p*e as to your merits in that department. lean
you may speedily be I’cstoied to office. j am £ c^
ALFRED STEPHEN.
E.
Sheriff's Office,
Sydney , 9 march, 1859.
SU ’’ As it appears to me that no definite decision and recommendations are likely to emanate from
+lip qpippt Committee upon secondary punishments, at least for some very considerable time, I have the
honor to submit the following suggestions for the consideration of the Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
1. That the Act 11 Victoria, No. 34, be repealed and re-enacted, substituting the words penal
• f ” f Ol . n avd labour on the roads or public works. ~, ~,
2 That the female prisoners be removed from Parramatta and Darlinghurst Gaol, and that they,
excepting the old irreclaimable reprobates, be sent to the buildings m Parramatta known as the
Military Barracks, as already suggested by me, and that this establishment be styled “ The Female and
Juvenile Female Penitentiary,” and be placed under the management of two or three ladies belonging
to some rdgous gaol and House of Detention should be established in or near Sydney, where
all “prisoners (viz,, under one year) and the old female reprobates from the police
offices &c. should be sent, and thus relieve the Parramatta and Sydney gaols of such inmates. At this
place the prisoners might be employed breaking stones for the city. A hulk migh aso bo i t P»
and prisoners whose sentences exceeded six months and under two years be employed on Gaiden
Island, or elsewhere in the harbour, forming earth embankments in front of some of the pioposed
batteries. isonera p e sent to Cockatoo Island, and as soon as those there or a large
majority of them have served their sentences, that the remainder be sent to some prison m the country
districts, to enlarge and remodel Parramatta Gaol so as to make it
capable of accommodating sav two hundred prisoners in solitary confinement under ic sys
landing. DarlingliurBt Gaol should bc enlarged as a reformatory establishment, similar to those in
aU ths prisong p c emder the management of a Board of
Irish Act be adopted. This need not be done until the gaols at Darlinghurst and I airai s <■
the reception of prisoners under the new system, which they ought to be I think in two oi J »
according to the number of prisoners employed upon the works. _ Parramatta ought to be the Qrst as
there would not be any of the prisoners then confined under the Irish system eligible for ici
reformatory establishment at Darlinghurst until they had undergone nine monthssolitaiyconfmeni t
so that the improvements, &c., in Parramatta Gaol ought to be pushed on “
necessary, free labour should be employed to erect the wall for enclosing the addiHou g ! 1
and while the wall is being erected the Colonial Architect and myself can plan the now wings pioio
for that gaoh improvements with vigor and effect the Government ought to ask for, and
the House to place at its disposal, a sum not less than ten thousand pounds.
1 I have, &c.,
JOHN O’NEILL NRENAN,
Principal Under Secretary,
&c., &c., &c.
Sheriff.
TUESDAY,


TUESDAY , 7 1861.
preoent
Mr. HART,
Mr. MATE,
Mr. MORRIS,
Mr. SUTHERLANB,
Mr. WILSON,
Mr. WINBEFER.
HENRY PARKBS, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. William Augustine Caliill again called in and further examined: —
5438. By Mr. Sutherland : Are you clerk of works, or foreman of works, on Cockatoo
Island ? Principal foreman of works.
5489. Is there a clerk of works on the island ? There is a man under that designation there.
5440. Do you know by what means Johnson and Ferris escaped from the island ? There 7
were some men employed at night in the engine-house, for the purpose, I think, of pumping
out the dock, and these were two of the men who were employed. There was a boat moored
at the wharf, and which, it appears, they had cognizance of, and they slipped away from the
engine-house to the wharf, and got away by this boat, The boat belonged to the present
clerk of the works; he was then foreman of engineers.
5441. Was it left in such a manner that the prisoners could have access to it at any time .
It appears so ; on that occasion it was, for it was moored close to the landing wharf.
5442. How many boats were there belonging to the island at that time, or was every one
allowed to keep a boat ? No other person than Mr, Broderick was allowed to keep a beat.
5443. Then, if I have been informed that it was the practice to allow any or all of the
officers to keep as many boats as they liked, and as long as they liked, is that right No
officer of the island was allowed to have a boat except Mr. Broderick. He had permission
from the Government to have a boat for his use.
5444. Had he more boats than one ? Yes, two j one for his son’s, and one for his own use.
5445. Were these boats allowed to pass backwards and forwards, to and from the island at
any hour of the day or night ? I believe they did come at late hours as well as at earl}.
5446. Bo you remember the prisoners Landells and Hughes escaping from the island . i
recollect an attempt being made by them to escape from the island.
5447. Where were they concealed at the time they made that attempt. In the store w ieie
the Government supplies are kept, ironmongery, ropes, paint, canvas, and other things of
tliiit gort
5448. Who has charge of that store ? Mr. Buff, I think ; he is the Government storekeeper
there.
5449. Is Mr. Buff a prisoner or a free officer ? A free officer.
5450. Could they be concealed there without his knowledge ? Yes j I suppose they were—
that is #here they were found when they were detected. ,
5451. Where was the boat made by some of the prisoners ? It was made in a mtt over the
5452. Who made that boat ? A man of the name of Landells, I think, made it j he was
working in the carpenters’ shop. He was employed there in making patterns for fir.
Broderick’s purposes, for the fitting or engineers’ shop, and he therefore was not removed
when the other men were taken away to fix the roof of the new building con inua ion o
workshops. Although he was working in the carpenters’ shop, he never received any
directions from me, but always from Mr. Broderick, and as he was not working under my
instructions, I had not removed him to put the new roof up. Baring this time he contrived
to make this boat, and he had every facility, as he had the shop to himself, unless w ien a
free man went in or out, and there was scarcely half* an-h our in a day that some one was not
5453! Was'he under your charge at that time ? Yes, he was under my charge, but I could
not be accountable for him at that time, not being in the shop, unless occasionally when J.
went in and out, but at these times I always found him at his work—that is, the work ae
should have been at. ~ , • . ~0
5454. What has become of the vessel used for the diving-bell and the punt belonging to her
The vessel is lying a wreck opposite the prison, at the present time; the punt that belonged
to her has been taken to pieces, because she was useless.
5455. How was that vessel wrecked, can you tell ? _ I have some recollection of the mamici
in which she was lost, at’least of the manner in which the punt was lost. I think it is now
about two years, if not better, since she was lost. One day the sea was very roug 1, am no
mint beins lashed to her by a rope which was not sufficient to keep, she broke away mid
Sd ove S r to the opporitebmref to the west tide of Balmain. The po ice made an attempt
to come up with her before she went on the other side, but were not m time enough, for . t
thumped o P n a rock and went down. Then an attempt was made to raise her by this vessel
with Which the diving-bell was usually worked, and after some time the punt was raised and
taken towards the prison to beach the punt; they did so, but after beaching the pun ,
believe they did not moor the vessel sufficiently far from the land and she consequently
drifted in on the land, her sternpost got on a ledge of rock, where she remained till die tide
went down' There was a great quantity of loose ballast in the vessel, which ran forward as
she sank, and this plunged her immediately into deep water, wheie she l lay. _
5456 Was the vessel in good working order at the time ? She had been in goou woi ung
order un to that time /think Mr. Broderick and Mr. Kelleher were the persons principally
In charge of that diving-bell, and they could give the Committee better informat.ou respectmg
its loss than I could. 5457.


5457. Is it the fact that the prisoners have been allowed to issue the Government stores
without a free man being present ? Not lately.
5458. What I refer particularly to is the issue of the stores belonging to the Engineer's
’ Department—had the prisoners access to the stores where files, powder, and such things are
kept without having a free overseer with them ? They have had, on some occasions, but not
recently. Ido not think that has been the case within this year.
5459. Then that system is discontinued on the island ? Yes.
6460. Do the carpenters who are in your department work by piece-work the same as the
masons? They seldom work by piece-work; it is difficult to get them on piece-work, there
is such a variety of work that they are seldom kept any length of lime on the same job.
They are mostly paid according to their industry; where we can get anything done by
piece-work we do.
5461. Then if a man is industrious he gets so many marks for time and money ? Very few
men receive any benefit by time —they get money. None of those men who have been
sentenced since June, 1859, get any benefit by time.
6462. Is it principally those men you have in your department ? The greater number of
them are what are called long sentenced men —men who do not receive the indulgence of a
ticket-of-leave.
5463. Can you give the Committee the work done in the new buildings on the island—that
is, the number of perches of stonework, and the number of squares of roofing, joisting, &c. ?
I will furnish it to the Committee. {Vide Appendix Ai)
5464. Do you make the plans and specifications ? No, unless for the direction of the men
who work under me. I make the plans for my own use —for all that I superintend—my own
working plans.
APPENDIX.
A.
Quantity of Work performed in New Building.
Continuation of Workshops.
Excavations for foundations .. .. 9,740 cubic feet.
Foundations, rough hammered ’ 305 perches.
Cut work over suiface .. .. .. .. 1 025 nerches
Mould cornice l’oB6 superficial feet.
* rained truss roofing 80i squares.
Gutter hoarding and bearers .. .. .. .. .. 4-32 superficial square feet.
Mooring joist .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15 squares 12 feet.
Ceiling joist .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 15 squares 12 feet.
Circular head frames and sashes (9) .. 10 feet x 4 feet.
Boxed frames and sashes (3) ‘ 6 feet 8 inches X 3 feet 6 inches.
bohd frames and sashes on pivots (6) 4 feet x 3 feet 6 inches.
Ihe greater portion of foundations were set under water, as the tides would permit. *
WILLIAM A. CAHILL,
Principal Foreman of Works,
Mr. Henry Fitzgerald called in and examined ;
5405. By the Chairman : What are you on the island? Foreman of works.
o4Go. M hat is your particular duty ? I am generally occupied in measuring stone, and
sizing stone to he cut.
1 5467. M hat is the difference between your situation and the situation of Mr. Cahill, the
witness who has just left? He is a carpenter; he is a tradesman.
5468. M hat is the difference between the situation held by you and that held by him ? He
has blacksmiths and carpenters under his control.
5469. He is a foreman of works, and you are a foreman of works? Yes.
5470. Is this the difference: that you have charge of the stone-cutting gangs, and that he
has charge of the men working at other businesses? He has; but previously I had a gang
under me engaged in building.
I should understand that you have charge of the cutting of the stone, until it is
taken away to be used in building; and that Mr. Cahill has charge of the men working in
the blacksmiths and carpenters’ shops; and also, of the men engaged in the erection of any
building ? Yes, at present he has.
0472. \ou have charge, exclusively, of the men engaged in the cutting of the stone?
Yes.
547 b. By Mr. Sutherland: Mr. Cahill gives you the dimensions of the stones he requires,
and you see that your men cut the stone according to those dimensions? Yes.
s r ° u charge of the gang—that is, of the whole of the stone-cutters ? Yes.
( Vide Appendix A 1.)
5475. Are you a stonemason by trade ? No ; lam not a tradesman.
Jr° W ave y° u had charge of the masons? I have been on the island since the
year 1851, and I have been in the employment I am now engaged at since February, 1854.
0477. You have had charge of the stonemasons since 1854 ? Yes ; I have.
-0478. Can you direct the stonemasons, not being a tradesman ? Yes, as well as any man,
1 think.
5479. If the Committee have been informed that through your wrong directions a quantity
o stone has been destroyed on the island, is that correct? It is incorrect; there may have
een one or two instances, where a stone has been broken; such a thing may accidentally
happen, but such cases have been very trifling.
5480.


Do you give the lines to the men, or do they take their own lines from your
direction . i hey take my lines. I have a sub-overseer under me, and he gives them their
lines ; when moulding stones are required, they are cut to a certain length
5481. You have a working overseer under you ? He does not work more than to apply the
square to the stones, and I generally do so myself.
5482 Is he a free man? No; he does not work, but sees that the work is carried out as
you direct him; he assists me in carrying out the work.
o'?* kf a tradesman ? No ;he has learned the trade of stone-cutting while a prisoner.
5484. He has learned the trade from you on the island? Under my superintendence;
among fatty or sixty others, I should say.
5485. A quantity of stones are lying on the wharf which have been condemned as not fit
for the purposes for which they were cut ? Are they moulding stones ?
5486. Coinices? lam aware of that. If you will look over these papers it will explain
more than I can. ( The tvitness handed some papers to Mr. Sutherland.')
5487. I want to know whose fault it was that those stones were destroyed I generally
at the end of each month sent in a return to the Engineer’s Office of the lineal, superficial,
and cube measurement of the work done during the month, and those papers will explain
this matter, 1
5488. The men are paid then by the quantity of stone you return fortnightly ? Yes; the
quantity of voik performed during that number of days. The work is divided by the
number of days the men are employed in cutting it, and the task-work clerk makes up the
account for them. 1
5489. It has been given in evidence before this Committee, that a large quantity of stone,
not once or twice but very often, has been wasted through wrong lines having been given to
the men ? Such is not the case. ( Vide Appendix B. 2.)
5490. And that these stones are broken up and cast into the sea ? Such is not the case
only one stone was brought under my notice, it was only an insignificant matter, it
measured two feet five and a half, it was for the arch of the tank. There was no chiselling
whatever upon it.
5491. What reason do you give for the quantity of cornices and other stones lying on the
wharf without being used ? They were cut in the square by my men, and I was told there
was a sufficient compliment of them cut.
5492. By Mr. Morris : Why are these now wasted ? They are not required at present; if a
similar building were put up they would be used.
5493. Do the men themselves, notwithstanding the lines you give, spoil much stone ? They
do not; if they did they would be at the loss of them, and they take good care of that. I
have known stones to be broken up, that were not fit for another useful purpose, and to be
sold as ballast, years ago, but that has not been done lately.
5494. Jdy Mr. Sutherland: Sold as ballast? Yes, stone not adapted for any purpose on
the island.
5495. How was it sold ? At so much per ton, 2s. 6d. per ton.
5496. What quantity was sold at that time ? I did not keep any account, it was an officer
of the Penal Department generally attended the boat. I have seen from the papers that
the prisoners wished to injure me and my character, but if you read the paragraph here
(handing a document to Mr. Sutherland ) you will see the grounds upon which they wish to
do so. I have been very badly treated.
6497. By Mr. Hart: By whom have you been badly treated ? I could not bring it home
to my employers, but I have a shilling a day under men I think inferior to me in ability. I
have to attend to the unloading of the boats, and have a great responsibility.
5498. Do you make proper entries in a book of the amount of work done under your
direction? I enter entirely the complement of the workmen.
5499. Do you make the entry in any books kept for the purpose, or merely on scraps of
paper ? There was a time when I put down the unloading of boats on scraps of paper, but
afterwards an order was made that it should be entered in the day book.
5500. I wish to know if you enter the work in a book kept for that purpose ? I enter in my
day book every occurrence that is worth notice. I tally the number of loads in a memorandum
book, and then enter them in the register.
5501. By Mr. Sutherland: Then there is a register of the work done? Yes. In fact,
myself and the other foreman have nothing else to do than to keep an accurate return of the
■work performed by the labourers under our charge.
5502. By the Chairman : Are you in any way brought in contact with the prisoners except
while they are in the gangs ? No, I have nothing to do with the internal management of
the prisoners whatever, more than that I go with them to Divine service.
5503. Have you heard of any immoral conduct in the sleeping places ? I have heard the
men cursing, and have threatened to take them to the office if they did not discontinue it.
ADDENDUM.
I beg leave to state that Ido not line out every stone that is cut; there are gauges as to
width for that purpose, and I see they are cut exactly to the required sizes. But in cases where stones
of difficult workmanship are required, such as circle or angular, I always line them and mark them out
to the given scale, to which I see them properly prepared.
I also give directions to those learning to cut.
tt rrnvcrp »rri
H. FITZGERALD.
APPENDIX.
* Note (By witness on revision) :— No stones have been destroyed, (Vide Appendix A 1.)


Mr, Henry
Fitzgerald.
7 May, 1861.
Inspector
J. F. Lane.
7 May, 1861.
APPENDIX.
A.
1 Answers No 5474 and 5487 ;—I should have added—excepting mouldings and cornices, &c.
Every single stone of these were prepared by Taylor, Barry, and Norris, who belonged to Mr. Cahill,
nnd clone under his own superintendence. These stones are not 44 destroyed, but will answer in a similar
building intended to be erected contiguous to the one recently put up. They are perfectly sound, free
from injury, and are left in a safe condition when cut. .
2 Answer No 5489 -—This question, I think, has reference to some parapet stone which I had
prepared .according "to a “templet” with which I was furnished-12' by 12'-but was afterwards
given to understand there was an error in its dimensions —that it should have been lo by 1- . Ibis
I was accordingly supplied with, and to which I had the proper stones prepared.
Many of these although not answering the purpose for which they were at first intended, have
been used in the present building; others lie upon the wharf, and will be found to answer other purposes.
HENRY FITZGERALD,
Foreman of Works.
Inspector John Francis Lane called in and examined :
5504. By the Chairman : You are an Inspector of the Metropolitan Police ? I am.
5505. You have charge of the detachment of police stationed at Cockatoo Island ? les.
5506. How long have you held that charge? Since the Bth April, 1860.
, 5507. What number of police have you on the island ? Forty-one, including myself.
5508. What are your particular duties in charge of the penal establishment —I mean not
your own personal duties, but what is the routine of the police force? To do sentry duty,
to guard the prisoners, and to take charge of them during the night.
5509. Can you explain the duties for twenty-four hours ? At six o’clock in the morning
the sentries are posted round the island upon the main guard.
5510. At points in sight of each other ? Yes, each sentry can see two^ other men from his
own post. They are so situated that they can observe anything transpiring between them.
The men of the landing guard take the boat at six o’clock in the morning, and lay out at the
buoy till the} 7 are relieved. That is continued until six o’clock in the evening, and the
prisoners are then counted into the wards by the chief warder. The police are kept round
the water’s edge until the men are in the gaol, and they are then withdrawn. Previous to
that the night duty men take charge of the prison—there are five night duty men stationed
at the sentry-boxes round the prison.
5511. After the prisoners are locked up for the night, are there any sentinels on the beach ?
No, they are withdrawn at six o’clock.
5512. What guard is there round the prisoner’s barracks during the night? There are ten
men for night duty, five for each relief.
5513. How are these five men stationed ? One at the back of the prison, one on each side, one
at the front of the prison, and one in the yard, who is locked in. The duty of the last
named constable‘is occasionally to visit the dormitories.
5514. That is to say, to go to the gate ? To open the door —there are check doors, or iron
gates, on each side, and it is his duty to look through the inner door to see that the wards-
men are up and doing their duty—that is, the prisoner w T ardsman; the free officers have
nothing to do with the prisoners during the night.
5515. How are the police armed? With a rifle, The sentry who is inside I have armed
with a revolver, as I found it was very inconvenient for him to carry a rifle, because he had
to put it out of his hand whenever he had to unlock the door ; for instance, if the doctor or
dispenser were called to see any prisoner, the revolver would be more convenient if he had to
come to close quarters with the prisoners.
5516. By Mr. Sutherland: Will you inform the Committee the number of escapes, or
attempted escapes, from the island, that have been made since you have been in charge? I
think about ten attempts have been made since I have been on the island.
5517. State to the Committee the nature of those attempts, and make any observations you
may see fit on any of them? I may state that there have been about ten attempts to escape
since I have been there, but no prisoners have effectually carried out their design. A few
weeks previously to my arrival on the island two prisoners escaped from the island; but I
know nothing of the circumstances but what I have heard.
5518. We want to know the cases that have occurred since you have had charge ? The first
case that occurred was that of Robert Landells and John Hughes; they were missed from
the muster at one o’clock midday on the 11th April, and were found concealed in a store-
room at four o’clock p.m., on the 13th of April. Information was given by a prisoner that
they were secreted in a store-room near the engine-house; and it appears that at no time
during the search was this store-room thoroughly examined, as the storekeeper made it a
practice to carry the key of the room about in his pocket. I, with a number of the police,
was searching about for the prisoners, but the door of the store-room being locked, it was not
thought they were secreted there.
5519. By Mr. Morris : They were not able to get out of this store, being locked in ? Les,
they could have got out.
5520. By Mr. Windeyer: Upon what did they live during the time? Biscuits are some-
times supplied to the prisoners when the supply of soft bread is short, and these men when
they try to escape save their biscuits and get a bottle of water to take with them.
5521. By Mr. Sutherland : State how they were found in the store-room ? On the morning
of the 13th April I received information that it was likely the prisoners would turn up in
the


the course of the day. I made inquiries, hut I could find out no parties who could give me
any particulars. I was not informed by the superintendent as to how these prisoners were
to turn up,or where they were to be found; but about dinner time one of my sergeants came
to me and said one of the men had informed the superintendent that about four o’clock they
would be found, and at that time they were found, and we took them away.
5522. By Mr. Windeyer : How do you suppose they got into this store if it was kept locked ?
It was about one o’clock, at dinner time, that the men were mustered in the yards, but were
previously missed from their gangs, and by some neglect were allowed to get into the store-
room. At one o’clock the storekeeper may have turned the lock of the door and taken away
the key.
5528. Were they ironed ? I think not.
5524. By Mr. Sutherland: You have stated that the superintendent had information from
a prisoner some time in the day that they would turn up at four o’clock ? Yes.
5525. Did the superintendent give you any information upon this matter ? No j I received
no information from the superintendent.
5526. Did 34DU get any assistance in any of these cases from the superintendent or officers
upon the island in finding these prisoners ? No, I think not.
5527. By Mr. Windeyer : Did you see the superintendent when you got that information ?
I never saw him in the course of the day.
5528. Did you go and speak to him with reference to this matter ? No, I did not. TV hen
a prisoner is missed, the other prisoners are kept locked up, because some of them may
know the secret place where he is hidden, and convey provisions to him, and the only way
to secure him is to starve him out. They do that by keeping the prisoners locked in.
5529. If you heard that the superintendent had got information, why did you not ask him?
Ido not consider that it is my place to go to the superintendent. I have in some important
cases gone to give him information, and he has not received it.
5530. On this occasion do you know whether he had received information ? I am not
aware. . . „ T j-i
5531. Did he give you any reasons for declining to give you the information I 1 did not
ask him. I received the information from the sergeant. When I first went to the island
there was some misunderstanding about landing, and Mr. Mann contended that I had nothing
to do with the landing guard. He had a sergeant there whom he termed his own sergeant,
and any duty he wanted to have performed, instead of directing the orders to me, he gave
to the sergeant. . , „
5532. By Mr. Wilson: If any instructions were given by the superintendent, did you
consider yourself bound to attend to them ? Any instruction in wiiting.
5533. As to the disposal of your men ? In some measure; but perhaps I mignt not have
sufficient men to carry out his orders. . . . . ~
5534. If you do not act up to his wishes, do you consider that you are bound to give a satis-
factory reason for not doing so ? Yes, most decidedly. _
5535. Suppose his instructions, and those of Captain M'Lene, should clash with regard to
prison discipline, whose instructions should you consider yourself bound to obey . ne
orders of the Inspector General of Police; but, in fact, Captain M Lene has nothing
to do with the prison discipline on Cockatoo Island.
5536 You consider the Inspector General of Police your commanding offioc :D and would
obey his instructions in preference to those of the superintendent of the island ? I should,
553 t! Have you received written instructions from the Inspector General as to the conduct
' of vour duty on the island ? I have received some instructions. .
5538 In those instructions, has he stated that it is necessary for you to act up to any
request or instructions from Captain Mann ? The Inspector General has always wished me
to carry out the instructions of the superintendent as far as possible, _ consistently with the
number of men at ray disposal; at all times he has been most particular in making that
5539 11 Was there not some request made by Captain Mann, as to a sentry being placed at
the gate of the yard, which you either did not or could not accede to ? There was one
there some time.
5540. And you took that sentry away ? i did.
5542 Wbft ms you? Perhaps I may begin with the statement, that
when I went there I found no military sentry provided for the post in question. He
, 1 I would nlace a sentry at this gate; and I told him I could not do so unless I
application to the Inspector General of Police ; ho said, he did not want l a _sentry
there with arms, but merely as a civilian, to see that no more prisoners left the yard than
55 r 4°3 a Do"'wonU'have been unsafe for a constable to have been stationed there
without arms ? I did not consider it necessary for a sentry to be there. f
5544 Then you were acting upon your own judgment, and not upon the instructions of
Captain Mann ? I may state, that I allowed this sentry to remain for some considerable
5545 Tu'* b »er- a What was your real reason for not placing a man there-was it
0040. By Mi. \Un( y • there without arms? I had not sufficient men on the
because you objeoted.to h £ B this man was required at the gate, as there was a
island at the time, and lid d not conside i\ llowed a m an to be there at first
sentry mthm a to be there as a ch eck on the prisoners
and I hid, a sentry would be useless without arms. At first, th_ere


sub overseer, -named Garbutt, stationed at the gate, to open and shut it for tbe prisoners, and
then I allowed a sentry to be there occasionally; but when Garbutt left, the men complained
that they were subject to the taunts and insults of the prisoners, and that they were
performing the duty of gatekeeper rather than that of police. Captain Mann took no
notice of the matter, and I then made a written request to him to place some party there to
open and shut the gate, as I could not allow the sentry to be there as a porter, and that,
unless he did so, I should withdraw the constable.
5546. By Mr. Wilson : Did you report the matter to the Inspector General before you with-
drew the man ? lam not positive about that.
5547. By Mr. Sutherland ; Did you report the matter at all to him ? I think so,
5548. By Mr. Morris : Did you receive the approval of the Inspector General as to the
course you pursued in the withdrawal of the man ? I made a written report of the circum-
stance, informing him that I had no men there for the purpose. It was only on
Saturday afternoons and Sundays that the men were required, and sometimes I would
allow them to be there for two or three hours, but I had no men for the duty, and I did it
more out of respect to Captain Mann than from any other reason. ,
5549. By Mr. Sutherland: Do you consider that there is strict discipline carried out in the
penal department of the island ? No, Ido not.
5550. Can you state in what way it is not ? In many ways; for instance, I have reported
a number of warders, that is, prisoner overseers, for neglect of duty, who have not been
brought before the Visiting Magistrate.
5551. Neglect of duty on the part of the warders? Yes; such as being asleep instead of
up on their posts, and allowing lights in the wards after eight o’clock at night, contrary to
the regulations. A number of cases have been reported that have not been brought before
the Visiting Magistrate. In one case I reported a wardsman, and .he got seven days in the
cell ; and I reported another wardsman for a similar offence, two different times, yet he was
not brought up before the Visiting Magistrate.
0502. To whom did you make the report ? To Captain Mann. I will mention the cases I
have reported, if necessary. ( The witness referred to a memorandum and read as follows ;) —
“ Sergeant Lawlor reported the wardsman for having a light, contrary to the regulations,
burning o ward, at 9 o clock, p.m., on Sunday, /th July, 1860. This case was not
brought before the Visiting Magistrate. Sergeant Lawlor reported the wardsman for
" allowing two lights in No. 1 ward, at 9 o’clock, p.m., on Sunday, 7th July, 1860. This
“ case was not brought before the Visiting Magistrate. Constable Cochran reported the
“ wardsmen of Nos 4 and 5 wards for being asleep during their watch, Wednesday, 25th July,
“ 1860 - case was brought before the Visiting Magistrate, admonished, and dis-
“ charged. Constable Cochran reported that a prisoner made use of the most obscene
towards him when he was calling the wardsman wdro was asleep while on duty
“ 011 tl l6 n lgbt of the 25th July. The wardsman told the superintendent that prisoner’s
name was Booth, who made use of the obscene language, but he never was brought before
“ the Visiting Magistrate to answer the charge; and on the 28th of the same month he
attempted to escape by taking up some large flags from the floor of the dormitory.” I
suppose the wardsman was asleep at the time, but that is only my supposition. He made a
very large excavation, and had taken up a quantity of heavy stones to get to the mouth
of the drain.
5553. How was that found out ? It was found out in the morning—one of the prisoners
gave information when they were going out at six o’clock in the morning— 1 “ Inspector
“ card-playing in No. 2 ward, at 7 o’clock p.m., on Saturday, Bth September,
IboO. This was witnessed by a sergeant and myself; a number of prisoners were sitting
round a stool, in the centre of the dormitory, playing at cards. It was reported by me, but
was not brought before the Visiting Magistrate. “ Constable Lynch reported the wardsman
“ 4 '! ard > Daly, for being asleep while on duty, at 3-45 a.m., on the 25th September,
• 1866, I his case was not brought before the Visiting Magistrate, as I heard that the wards-
“man working at Mr. Taylor’s garden the day previous.” Mr. Taylor is Clerk of Petty
Sessions, and Daly is now gardener to Captain Mann.
5554. By Mr. Morris; Have you any reason to believe that the complaints vou made to
Captain Mann never reached him ? I could hardly think that my reports do not reach him,
as 1 send them direct, by one of the police, to his office. Of course if the clerk liked to put
them away he might do so.
5555 By Mr. Windeyer : Have you any reason to believe that the clerk would do so—have
you observed anything in his conduct that would lead you to suppose so ? I have made some
requisitions and reports to Captain Mann, which he has said he has never received; and
unless they were put aside by the clerk, I do not know how he could have failed to receive
<< a™; i “ ber S eaat Sweeny reported the wardsman of No, 2 ward, for allowing a light at
„ 4 0 clock on the 13th December, 1860. This case was not brought before the Visiting
Magistrate. The eases I now mention I have not the least doubt were all placed before the
superintendent; in some instances the sergeant, the constable, or myself, have been sent for,
and the superintendent has heard the complaint. “ Inspector Lane reported the prisoners
sinking mi o. waid, the whole night, on the Ist January, 1861.” This is the time when
they first determined to fall out on the following morning from their work. I explained this
matter, and stated that I did not believe it was the wardsraan’s fault, as I had heard him
l ! D f U tke P lasoners to gb re over singing. The wardsman was brought
ip e oio ie isitmg Magistrate, and I stated, on oath, that I did not believe it was his
,as e la one all he could to advise them to be quiet; he was discharged.
bergeant bweeny reported sub-overseer Hyland for standing on a ladder and tampering
with prisoners confined in the cells, on the 11th January, 1861.” This
was


was ai the time tue prisoners refused to work, and this man was put over those who were
confined in the cells to prevent there receiving tobacco or any thing of that kind. “ Sergeant
“ Sweeny also reported the sub-overseer Hyland for asking one of the prisoners in the cells
“to sing him a song, on the 16th January, 1861 ” This case was not brought before the '
Visiting Magistrate on Court day, but I requested that it might be put before him. The
superintendent said that be had inquired into it and that there was no case. The
Magistrate said he thought there was a case, and recommended Hyland’s removal. The
sergeant said that he heard Hyland ask a prisoner in the cells, this day, to sing him a
blackguard song, not a sentimental one. This sub-overseer by the Visiting Magistrate’s
direction was removed from the cell and is now on the works as a sub-overseer. He lost bis
appointment for a few days, or a week ; for some very short time.
5556. By the Chairman : Have you ever heard of unnatural crimes being committed in the
sleeping apartments of Cockatoo Island? No more than that I have heard the prisoners
talking the matter over at night. I have sometimes spent hours in listening to them.
5557 What is the impression you have arrived at from that ? I think some of them are
guilty of committing almost any crime you can think of; but there arc some very respectable
men among them.
5558. What I desire to ascertain from you is, whether the conversation that takes place is
of such a character as to imply the commission of these acts ? The conversation that I
have generally heard has been remarks passed to one and another. Ido not think any men,
let them be ever so depraved, would stand up and tell others any transactions of the kind in
which they had been engaged. What I heard was one calling another “ a bloody whore,”
and such things as that —“ an Irish whore,” mentioning the prisoner’s name.
5559. Have you ever heard prisoners address others or seen them treat others as men treat
women? No, I have not.
5560. I mean by using terras of endearment, calling them female names ? That I believe
was behind their hacks. I believe that was only slang they used.
5561. You say that you have listened for hours to the conversation of the prisoners—was
their language often obscene ? It is very had at times.
5562. The Committee would gather from the evidence they have received on the subject,
and from the examination of the sleeping apartments, that the atmosphere must he in a very
impure state at night in those places? Yes; sometimes when I visit the dormitories in a
summer’s evening at 8, 9,10, or 12 o’clock, the smell is intolerable.
5563. Intolerable to you at the outside ? Yes; Ido not know what it must be in the inside.
The sentries complain very much of having to go to the wards, and they only go to the hall.
There are tubs placed down the wards, and the prisoners all make use of these tubs, and in
the hot weather, when these have to remain in the dormitories ten or twelve hours, the smell
must be dreadful. I wonder how the men live there. I have seen dozens of them running
about naked, at all hours of the night. They are supposed to be in bed at eight o’clock, hot
on these very hot nights I never attempt to force them in, for I hardly think I should he
justified in do so, and when I have gone round at ten or twelve o’clock I have seen twenty
men breathing, as it were, out of the bars of the prison.
5564. By Mr. Morris : Trying to get a little fresh air ? Yes.
5565. By the Chairman:' You mean that they come to the grating to try to get fresh
air? Yes. I have sometimes spoken to them, and said, “ How is it you men are not in
bed ” ? and they have said, “It is impossible, sir, to sleep here.’’ Sometimes, when it is wet,
you see the men running about to find a dry place, and the rain coming down upon them
through the roof. I have a servant attached to my place, and one morning he came with his
clothes nearly wet through.
5566. By Mr. Hart: With respect to the crimes imputed to the prisoners at Cockatoo
Island, do you think you would have been likely to have detected them in the act, if the
crime had been actually committed? I have no means of detecting it.
5567. You say you have spent many hours in listening to their conversation ? Yes; but
of course I was out of sight of the prisoners—l was underneath the walls.
5568. Do you think the kind of conversation in which they indulge is more from a morbid
desire on their part to use filthy language than as referring to the commission of these acts
by them ? I think the conversation arises from a kind of bravado on their part, from what
they term “ flaslmess,” as the man who is the greatest blackguard is the man they look up
to —he is the man to lead them anywhere.
5569 Is it desirable to employ prisoners as warders —would it not be an improvement to
employ free men in the wards ? You could never do that—it would be impossible; the
man who would go in there would be in danger of his life. Under existing circumstances,
as the dormitories are placed now, I do not believe one free man would dare go in there to do
5570. You think with respect to the prison warders they connive at what is said or done ?
5571. Do you think these wards are fit for human beings to live in ? Cockatoo is not what
I expected to find it. T >. ~ r
5572 Bo Mr. Morris: Is it much worse? Yes; as soon as I went over arid saw it i
compared it to some very large workhouse, and not to a prison. (Y,de Append:x A } Ido
not think it would bo possible to get free men to act as warders, to be locked up with these
prisoners, as they might unawares kill a man instantly, and they do now sometimes attack
these warders if they speak. I think if the prisoner warders were paid or had some induce-
ment held out to them they would do the duty better. At present, all the men get ape uy
a day, and some of them get-four or five-quarter a day on the works, while the warders
receive only a penny a day the same as all the rest. The prisoners now say they oan buy
157—2 G tho


the warders over to anything; and as these men are generally great gamblers, they are always
gambling, and the warders connive at it.
5573. By Mr. Hart: Are they allowed to have money in their possession ? Yes, I remember
a circumstance where a prisoner had two halves of £5 notes, on the island; it is a frequent
occurrence for them to have money.
5574. By Mr. Sutherland: Sent to the island ? Yes.
5575. By Mr. Windeyer: Do they gamble for money ? Yes; with cards, at tossing, and
all kinds of gambling. It is only occasionally those who are outside can see therm
5576. By Mr. Sutherland: Do you remember the case of a prisoner named Williams who
was brought up for stating that a son of Mr. Broderick supplied him with spirits on the
island? Yes.
5577. State what you know of that case to the Committee ? Ido not think I could supply
you with the date now; but there was a prisoner of the name of Williams, or Lenthall,
living with an overseer of the name of Jones. This prisoner one day complained that Mr.
Broderick’s son had supplied him with grog, he went up to the office taking some grog in a
bottle with him. Shortly afterwards, while I was at the landing guard visiting the men, Mr.
Broderick’s son came to the sergeant and had some conversation with him. I asked
the sergeant what it was about, and he told me that Harry Broderick had been to
him and informed him that he had got into a mess for giving a prisoner some grog,
and that he had asked him, “Do you remember my getting two bottles of grog
for Jones?” He said, " Yes, some two or three months ago,” He said, "Well, I
want you to go up and say, it was brandy or rum, or one of them.” The sergeant
said, “ No, I will do nothing of the kind; it was Old Tom you brought, for I took it
out of the basket to look at it.” I may state here that any person on the island requiring
to get grog has to obtain an order from the Superintendent or Visiting Magistrate, and that
anything brought on shore is examined by the officer at the landing. The next Court day
this case was brought before the Visiting Magistrate, when, instead of the boy being brought
before him, the prisoner was placed in the dock for making the charge. Mr. Broderick gave his
evidence, and in that evidence he admitted that, from statements made to him by his son, he
knew his son had given the prisoner some grog. The magistrate then denounced the pro-
ceedings, ordered the prisoner out of the dock, and directed that young Broderick should be
brought before him on the next Court day.
5578. By the Chairman: Who was the magistrate ? Captain Scott,
5579. What was the result ? I never heard anything more of it from that day to this.
5580. Was he ever brought up ? No.
5581. The matter was shelved ? Yes.
5582. By Mr. Sutherland: Will you state to us how the island boat was managed at the
time you took charge—and if there have been any alterations made, what are those altera-
tions ? I found, upon taking charge of the landing guard, that the guard-boat was employed
more for the special purposes of parties resident on the island than for the actual service of
the prisoners. I made a communication to that effect to the superintendent, who said he
was going to place some documents before the Colonial Secretary, and he would have it
altered. I waited month after month, and finding these frequent attempts at escape being
made and nothing done, I pressed the superintendent to make some alteration, but he never
gave me any satisfaction. I then applied to the Inspector General, and he wished me to put
on paper what 1 suggested. I did so, and he recommended that I should lay it before the
Visiting Magistrate. I beg to hand in a copy of this communication. ( The witness handed
in the same. Vide Appendix Bi) I should state that the alteration was made, and,
according to this regulation, the guard-boat is not allowed to leave the buoy till the prisoners
are off the works. A week or a few days after this alteration was made, a boat was found,
14 feet long by 3 feet 6 wide, in the carpenters’ workshop, quite convenient to
where this boat is supposed to remain, and had the guard-boat plied at the usual
hours, from twelve to half-past one, as it would have then been full of women and
children, the prisoners might then have launched this boat, and got off to the other
side. I may state, as regards the attempts at escapes, and the assistance I got from the
superintendent, one case in particular, that of David Clarke, a most notorious character,
with sentence for life. He secreted himself on the island at 12 o’clock noon, on the
28th June, and was discovered at 6 o’clock, a.m., on the 2nd July, by a sentry.
5583. By the Chairman: Is that man on the island now ? No; he is at Darlinghurst. I
was at the Inspector General’s Office on that day, and on my return to the island the
superintendent informed me that Clarke was gone. I asked him how it was possible he
could get away. He said he had left his clothes at the hole where he had been sawing
timber, and that he believed he had swam from the island. I went to the spot where he
had left his clothes, and came to the conclusion that it was a ruse upon the man’s part to
throw the police off the scent, and told the superintendent I did not believe the man was
off the island. The following day the superintendent sent for me, and said that as Clarke
was a man of great tact, he believed he had watched the tide, and had got a piece of timber
to drift to the opposite shore; that he had then taken the opportunity, when the guard-boat
was being relieved, to swim across. On Sunday night, when visiting the sentries, I saw a
free officer named Balls, who informed me that when he accompanied Mr. Agnew to the
prison in the morning, he received information from a prisoner that Clarke was in
the big wall, which information he immediately gave the superintendent, at same time giving
the name of the prisoner who gave the information. The following morning Clarke was
discovered getting into the water by one of the sentries as he relieved guard at six o’clock.
I may state that the superintendent in this case never informed me that the man was
supposed to be in this wall.
5584.


5584. What do you call the big wall ? The wall facing the landing wharf.
5585. The wall built up where Captain Mann’s garden is—you say he was in the wall—
are there any crevices in it in which a man could conceal himself? There was a patch of
garden for the children of Mr. Ormsby, who was formerly there, and the wall ran in a'
triangular shape. Since Captain Mann has been there, rubbish has been thrown here, and
the place is overgrown with weeds.
5586. It appears very surprising to me that no one should have looked in this place ?
When I went round to visit the sentries a few hours after Clarke was found, to my surprise
I saw this wall being taken down by an overseer and a gang of men.
5587. By Air. Sutherland : The prisoners have complained to the Committee that they have
been treated with partiality, that some have been punished for slight offences, while others have
committed more serious offences without any notice being taken of them ? I have mentioned
several cases illustrative of that where some wardsmen have been punished for breaches of the
regulations while others have escaped. I may also mention that some of the prisoners complain
that they cannot obtain paper for the purpose of writing. A servant I have applied for paper
to write, and was sent only half a sheet; he said he wanted to write to London to his friends,
and that it was not sufficient; they refused to give him any more, although, he states, that a
prisoner called the Marquis of Townsend was allowed to write his life in the office, and to use
a hundred sheets of foolscap. I hardly thought it was possible; but, upon asking some of
the free overseers, I was told it was the fact.
APPENDIX.
A.
Answer No. 5572 :—My reason for comparing the prison to a workhouse is the great liberty
enjoyed by the prisoners, they being allowed to say and do, in many instances, just as they like, there
being no place on the island sufficiently large or separate for the confinement of prisoners committing
themselves, as the late outbreak has shewn ; they are also allowed to purchase tea, sugar, coffee, tobacco,
candles, &c.; they make use of very improper language in the presence of the chief warder, who takes
no notice of them. On the Ist January a number of prisoners refused to be searched before being put
into the cells, stating to the chief warder that no bloody man should search them ; they were put in
accordingly, the guard not being called to enforce compliance. I have also seen the chief warder order
prisoners from the camp to the exempt bank, which order they refused to comply with, and no further
notice taken of them. On one morning the prisoners were called off the works, it having commenced to
rain, but the rain ceased before they arrived at the camp; they were ordered back by the chief warder,
which they refused to comply with, and rushed into the camp, and allowed to remain until after
breakfast.
B.
Main Guard, Cockatoo Island,
2 November, 1860.
Sir,
I have the honor to state that I have the sanction of the Inspector General of Police to
submit for your approval a proposed alteration to further the efficiency of the police guard-boat.
The daily routine of this boat is as follows Leaving the landing wharf at from 8 until 9i;
from 12 until 1£; from 4 until 6—for the purpose of conveying to and from the off shore the residents on
the island, their friends, and visitors. .
I beg to bring under your notice that, under this system, the guard-boat is employed on the
above duty three-quarters of an hour in the morning, one hour at noon, and one hour in the afternoon,
during the time the prisoners are actually employed at labour on the works,
I beg leave to point out that I consider this system to be bad, as, in the event of an attempt to
escape being made from off the works while the guard-boat is at the opposite shore, perhaps with several
children in it, very serious consequences are likely some day to arise.
To remedy this, I beg leave to propose that the police guard-boat should only leave its station
as follows From Bto 9, morning ; from Ito 2, midday; from sto 6, afternoon—during these hours
the prisoners are not on the works. . ,
Under this arrangement the guard-boat will be ready at all times, while the prisoners are on the
works, at a moment’s notice, in the event of a prisoner taking the water, or using other means to effect
his suggest, that under no ordinary circumstances should the guard-boat be permitted
to leave its station while the prisoners are on the works, unless to convey an officer of the establishment
to the opposite shore on some special public duty, or to look after the safe mooring and custody of all
boats arriving and departing from the island.
JOHN F. LANE,
Uaptain D. C. F. Scott, P.M.,
Visiting Magistrate,
Cockatoo Island.
Inspector in charge.
Edward Bell, Esq., M.1.C.E., called in and examined
5588. By the Chairman : You are the City Engineer under the Municipal Council of Syd-
-5589 You attend here, I believe, in compliance with a summons, to give evidence with
regard to the expediency of the employment of prisoners in stone quarries ? Yes
5590. By Mr. Sutherland : Have you made any estimate of the cost of working these stone
quarries ? Yes. , , , c 9 A
5591. By the Chairman : To what stone quarry does the estimate refer ? Any quarry.
5592. Have you reference to any one in particular . The data aie taken chiefly fiom the
559.r D iy H J/!- S Sutherland: Will you hand in the statement to the Committee ? Yes.
This is a report I wrote at the time to the City Council; it originated in a minute sent down
by late Governor General. (The witness handed in the same. Vide Appendix A.)
J 5594.


I have now the honor to state, that the quantity of blue metal quarried at Pennant Hills,
between the 10th November, 1858, and the 4th January, 1859, was— Tons.
Unbroken metal 1,480
Partly broken do , 2,168
Total
3,648
Pence per Ton.
The cost of quarrying the above quantity, inclusive of
overseer’s wages, was £281 Os. or nearly 18gd. per
ton, say 18’48
Carting rubbish from the quarry during the same time was
£43 12s.. or 2fd 2 86
Repairing and sharpening tools, powder, fuze, do. do., £1-5,
or Id 0*99
Superintendent’s wages, and expenses at wharf, Pennant
Hills, £38 13s., or 2Jd
Breaking 1,480 tons, @ 4s. \ _ 10o 9rl
2'54
32T
no. „ (a), is. j
Making together 56'97 pence per ton, or 4s. 9d. nearly.
Cost of metal
Cartage from quarry to the wharf
Boating, inclusive of loading and discharging
Per Ton.
s. d.
4 9
4 0
3 0
Total cost on the wharf, Sydney
11 9
The average cost of cartage to the streets which are
metalled is
Spreading
Wharfinger, weighing, and expenses at wharf, Sydney .
now
Per Ton.
S, d.
1 9
0 3
0 3
Together with
2 3
11 9
Total cost when laid upon streets ..
14 0
5594. By tie Chairman: This shews, I presume, what would be the advantage, in an
economical point of view, of working the stone quarry by prison labour ? Yes.
5595. The stone being excavated and broken for the purpose of metalling the streets of
Sydney? Yes; it shews the cost to us per ton of the metal from Pennant Hills quarry, and
then it goes on to shew what would be the cost if prisoners worked in that quarry, and the
metal were brought down by railway.
5596. Have you anything to say as to the propriety of so employing prisoners, independently
of the economical results; have you considered the subject as to whether it would be safe
for the interests of society that prisoners - should be employed on such works? I think if
they were employed at some distance from the city, to work a quarry, it would be no nuisance
to the public, and might be very profitable to the city, to the Government, and to the rail-
way also.
5597. By Mr. Sutherland : Do you not think it would be better for the prisoners themselves ?
I think so, if they were allowed something for breaking the stone, which might be given them
at the termination of their sentence.
5598. By the Chairman: Do you not think the guard necessary to prevent their escaping
would be very costly ? I think it would be, but I think the remuneration derived from the
metal would more than cover it.
5599. Does it occur to you that the prisoners would escape, in spite of any guard, however
vigilant ? No ; I think that might be prevented.
5600. By Mr. Sutherland: That would depend upon the class of prisoners sent to the
quarry ? Yes; it was never contemplated to send the worst kind of prisoners to these works.
5601. The principal part of the metal now used by the Corporation is broken by old men —•
men not fit for other work ? Yes, that is within the city. The stonebreakers at Pennant
Hills are strong active men, boys, and some women.
5602. By the Chairman: Could the stone be quarried in blocks, brought down to Sydney,
and broken in the gaol ? Yes, but that would increase the cost by 2s. a ton. It would cost
2s. a ton to take it to the gaol and to bring it away.
5603. That would be the difference in the cost ? Yes, we reckon every time we move it
it costs Is. a ton.
5604. By Mr. Windeyer: Is there any place besides Pennant Hills where such a quarry
could be opened, and the work carried on by prison labour ? I think so; at Concord, about
two miles and a half off the line of railway.
5605. By Mr. Wilson : What kind of stone is it ? Bluestone —basaltic rock.
APPENDIX.
A.
City Engineer's Office,
28 March, 1859.
Sir,
In compliance with your instructions, —First, to report to you upon the present cost of
procuring blue metal from the Pennant Hills quarry, delivering it upon the wharf, and carting and
spreading it upon the streets of Sydney; Secondly, to report whether any other means can he adopted
hy which a sufficient quantity of blue metal may be supplied to the city at a cheaper rate than the
present,—
The


The contemplated construction of the railway from Pennant Hills to the river, at an outlay of
£6,000, would reduce the cost of transport 2s. per ton.
Hence the total cost upon the wharf might he reduced to 9s. 9d. per ton.
Since I commenced the preliminaries for preparing this report, I had the honour to submit the
foregoing data to the highest authority in the Government of this country, and to receive in return the
following memorandum relative to the procuring of blue metal from “ Prospect,” and delivering it by
the railway in Sydney.
This communication is so interesting to the Corporation and inhabitants of Sydney, and to the
country generally, that I feel honoured in being in a position to submit it to the consideration of your
Worship and the Municipal Council before the contemplated outlay for a railway from Pennant Hills is
incurred.
“ From the foregoing data it m„y he seen that a man may quarry 2| tons of metal dailjq and
“ would break about If ton of all sorts, large and small. If, then, the Government were to establish a
“ prison at “ Prospect,” upon a good quarry of metal, where the short sentence men might be employed
“ in breaking stone, any quantity of good metal might he delivered at the railway station at less than
“ half the price for which it is now delivered at the wharf, and the calculation is as follows:
“ 400 prisoners, @ £23 each, per annum, or say £3O each £12,000
“ Of these, 16 per cent, might be sick or unable to work, or otherwise employed, leaving 340 available
“ for breaking or quarrying stones. Of this number 115 would be employed in quarrying stone, 18 in
“ clearing away rubbish, 200 in breaking stone, and the remainder in keeping tools, &e., in repair. 315
“ men would quarry 326 tons daily, and 200 men would break rather more than that quantity daily,
“ which would give 96,000 tons yearly, which, at a cost of £12,000 annually, as before mentioned, would
“he 2s. 6d. per ton. If a railway from the prison were connected with the Western Railway, the stone
“ would have to be brought about 20 miles, and this, at a charge of 2d. per ton per mile, would give for
“ carriage 3s. 4d. per ton, making the cost of the metal, delivered at the station, ss. lOd. per ton, instead
“of 1 Is. 9d. There would also be the advantage that the stone would be delivered at the high level
“ instead of the low one, and that if the station were moved to Hyde Park, or the railway continued
“ down Pitt-street, the stone might be delivered at various parts of the city, with very little cost for
“ cartage. The saving to the city would be 50 per cent, upon the cost of the stone ; the saving to the
“ Government, or the community generally, would be that of the maintenance of 400 prisoners, or about
“ £lO,OOO or £12,000 per annum, in addition to the profit arising from the conveyance of about 100,000
“ tons for 20 miles per railway, which, if taken only at 25 per cent, of the cost of conveyance, would
“ amount to £4,000 per annum.”
With reference to these remarks, I conceive it to be the interest of the Government to, and it
would, doubtless, make the connecting link of railway between the quarry and Western Railway, as
the city will not, for several years to come, require so largo a quantity as 100,000 tons of blue metal,
hut Sydney will require ere long 50,000 tons annually, whilst the remainder will be readily taken by the
suburban Municipalities and Hamlets, Liverpool, Parramatta, and other towns and villages along the
line of railway.
I have no hesitation in stating, that if metal can be brought into this city at the rate of 6s. per
ton, it will be more economical to form the whole of the streets of the city with that material than with
any other, and hence the annual consumption would be increased from 24,000 tons to 50,000 tons.
And taking the supply at the present standard of 24,000 tons annually, the saving to the city,
which would accrue for that quantity, would not be less than £7,000 per annum, and should the demand
and consumption reach 50,000 tons, the saving to the city will be about £lO,OOO, whilst the cost of the
50,000 tons will be barely more than you are now paying for 24,000 tons.
I would venture to submit to your Worship and the Municipal Council that this work would he
fraught with so much benefit, not only to the city, but to the community at large, that I conceive the
Government could not treat a suggestion for such an arrangement unfavourably.
I have, &c.,
Edward Bell,
Esq.,M.LO.E.
7 May, 1861.
EDWARD BELL,
City Engineer.
The Right Worshipful the Mayor.
The Rev. Philip Peters Agnew called in and examined :
5606. By the Chairman : You have been Chaplain of the Church of England at Darlinghurst
and Cockatoo Island for some time ? Yes, of both.
5607. For how long? At the gaol about five years, and at Cockatoo Island something over
four. I was attached to Darlinghurst many years before.
5608. With regard to Cockatoo Island, how often do you visit the penal establishment there ?
Generally twice, sometimes three times. I always consider myself bound to attend if
required.
5609. Every Sabbath I suppose ? Yes.
5610. Is there Divine service there every Sunday ? Every Sunday.
5611. In the forenoon or afternoon ? In the forenoon at present.
5612. Performed in the same manner as in an ordinary church—are the services as full in
all particulars ? Not in all particulars ; I read the Litany on one Sunday and the Com-
munion on the next. The service is similar to that generally performed by the military.
5618. It is concluded, I suppose, by a sermon ? Yes. .
5614. Are the prisoners compelled to attend? Yes; 1 think it is necessary for them to
attend.
5615 They are required to attend? They appear to attend very willingly.
5616. Are they attentive ? Yes; I always consider it one of the most attentive congregations
in Sydney. For Cockatoo Island I prepare something as I would for an intelligent
5617. Is the behaviour of the prisoners decorous in all particulars ? _ Yes; they take their
regular part in the service standing up, and sitting down, and responding.
5618. That is not very common in the Church of England ? No ;it was not very common
when I first attended, till it was remarked, and they were requested to pay more attention.
5619. Do vou, on Sundays or week days when you visit the island, have frequent conversa-
tions with prisoners as to their prospects in life ? Invariably when I visit.
5620. Are you of opinion that the discipline to which they are subject on the island at
present has a salutary effect ? No, I think the contrary. _ ,
5621. What, from your experience of the management of prisons, do you think should be
The Rev.
P. P. Agnew.
T^MayTlSei.


the chief features in prison discipline ? I think two principal things ought to be attended
to —first the reformation of the prisoners, and then profitable labour for the Government—
both might be effected.
5622. I presume you include the safe custody and proper punishment of them also ? Certainly.
5623. Combined with those objects, you think the management should be directed to
the reformation of the prisoners, and also, to the employment of their labour so as to
contribute as much as possible towards their maintenance? Yes; I think all expenses
might be covered by their labour.
5624. You are aware that at present the prisoners at Cockatoo Island are under two sets of
regulations, by one of which they are subject to a kind of task-work by means of which they
can shorten the terms of their sentences ? Yes.
5625. Do you think that right ? No ; I think it very wrong to mix the classes together,
and it has led to a great deal of discontent, and many manifestations of insubordination.
5626. You have, I believe, some written statements in your possession, addressed to you
by prisoners, making serious complaints againsfthe authorities ? Yes.
5627. Are you willing to hand them in to the Committee, for the purposes of this inquiry ?
Yes, I will do so ; but I wish the names of the prisoners to be suppressed, as they were
handed to me in partial confidence.*
5628. There has been some evidence given before this Committee which, I believe, in the
judgment of every member—two or three members being professional men, and therefore,
accustomed to examine evidence very closely—is of a very serious character, having the
features of consistency, which are generally taken as the ingredients of truth in evidence, to
the effect that unnatural crime is committed on Cockatoo Island frequently—have you, in
the course of your ministrations, had occasion to inquire into this painful subject ? Yes ; I
have made very strict inquiry on that subject particularly, and I feel convinced that it has
not taken place really; and that there is only one attempt of the kind that can be remem-
bered. There are many prisoners on Cockatoo Island who, I think, would tell me the truth,
and I have asked them personally and particularly.
5629. Do you know a boy on the island named Smith, a servant to Mr. Balls ? Yes.
5630. What is his character generally ? I really cannot say.
5631. Have you any reason to suspect he would invent a story of this kind ? I could not
pick him out, certainly.
5632. By Mr. Hart: The instance you refer to relates to him, does it not ? Yes; I was in
the Court when the matter was brought before the magistrate, and I do not believe there was
the slightest foundation for the statement.
5633. Do you know a man named Frederick M'Gregor ? I can only recollect one man of
that name, a man who has been brought back recently on account of the loss of his ticket-of-
leave. I know him particularly.
5634. Have you observed anything in his conduct that would lead you to suspect him of
fabricating a story of this kind ? No.
5635. Have you any reason to doubt his being as well conducted as the prisoners generally ?
I think I should generally trust that man.
5636. Do you know a man who acted as one of the warders—a young man ? I thought
favourably of that person.
5637. His conduct appeared to this Committee to be that of respectability, if we may apply
that term to a person in his condition. These two persons have stated, in the most consistent
and positive manner, having been cautioned beforehand, as to the serious nature
of the statement, that they have been eyewitnesses to offences of that kind ? It is
unaccountable to me. It would render them very unpopular if the prisoners knew such
statements had been made.
5638. Do you know a man named Power ? Only by name.
5639. By Mr. Hart: With respect to the letters referred to in your evidence, do you think
there is any foundation for the complaints made by the prisoners who have written them ?
The letters are generally merely written for my information. I ask them to tell me how
they spend the night when they are locked up, and also as to how they spend the various
hours of the day.
5640. I understood, from the questions put to you by the Chairman, that they had reference
to complaints against the authorities ? Yes.
5641. Is there any foundation for those complaints, so far as your knowledge extends ? I
think what the prisoners have stated in those letters was the truth ; the facts were before
their eyes at the time.
5642. What facilities have you for giving instruction to the prisoners, both at Darlinghurst
Gaol and at Cockatoo Island—is there a separate chapel ? There is almost everything that
is desirable at Darlinghurst, but the accommodation is very limited at Cockatoo. In fact,
we have service in the dining hall, and it serves both for the Roman Catholics and for our-
selves. I can scarcely see any of the men in private, and there is no encouragement for the
men to attend to their religious duties.
5643. Immediately you have celebrated service in the place, is it opened for the Catholic
clergyman ? Yes, if I happen to be first, but he generally conducts the service before me.
0644. And the prisoners have their meals in the same place, both before and immediately
after ? Yes.
5645. Do you think the effect of that is to demoralize the prisoners, with respect to religious
instruction do you think the instruction under such circumstances can have any beneficial
e ect. We must remember that it is not a religious community at all on Cockatoo Island.
5646.
ISote Statements referred to mislaid by the Chairman.


5646. I understood you to say that the prisoners were very intelligent, and respectful and
paid attention to the formalities prescribed by the rubric ? Yesj 1 should have no
objection to hold Divine service where the prisoners take their food. 1 have held service in
the open aix in the bush, in rooms of inns, in Courts of Justice, and in other places j but
what I complain of is, the absence of any means of speaking to the prisoners in private •
they can scarcely speak to you alone; they are generally in the hearing of others.
5647. What do you think of allowing the prisoners one week in each year, during which
time they should be exempted from work, and be attended by a clergyman, who should
instinct them in the principles of their religion? I think if a couple of hours in a month
were devoted to hearing a kind of scientific, interesting, and instructive lecture, it would be
very beneficial, and would be appreciated by the men.
5648. By the Chairman : With regard to your last reply—do you thing it would be right
to afford such prisoners as desire it the means of instruction while they are confined during
their imprisonment ? Of course, I think so.
564fJ I put my question in this form because I, for one, conceive that though society have
the right to deprive persons who offend against the law, of their liberty; they have not the
right to deprive them of all there prerogatives as human beings; they have not the right to
deprive them of the means of health, or of moral and spiritual improvement ? Or to
morally debase them as the present system surely does.
5650. What I want to elicit is, whether it ought to form part of prison discipline to afford
the means of instruction for such prisoners as desire it ? Yes.
5651. Suppose the men worked an hour a day less to afford them a fair opportunity of
receiving this instruction—do you think that would be so appreciated by them as to induce
them to do a larger amount of work in the shorter time ? I think you could scarcely trust
so much to their honour. The time could not be properly occupied without a resident school-
master.
5652. How then would you impart instruction to them ? I would begin gradually. I have
now some books, a small library, which they appear to appreciate and enjoy, and I believe
that has prevented them from running into many evils. I think if a lecture could be
established, to be delivered once a month in the presence of the chaplain, it would make an
opening for the general improvement of the men.
5653. By Mr. Wilson: Do you not think a resident schoolmaster an absolute necessity in
such an establishment ? No doubt.
5654. By Mr. Windeyer : Do the men ever ask to see you alone? Yes, 1 never visit them
without having these requests; very often they are connected with secular matters, to
request me to open up communications with their friends, or with thousands of little things
they want.
5655. Then it is not generally from any earnest desire to receive advice or assistance ? In
many cases it is; there are many hopeful characters, and I verily believe many innocent
men there.
5656. Did I understand you to say that you approve or disapprove of remitting punishment
in any way by a system of task-work, or would you have the sentences rigidly carried out ?
I think it is desirable to return to the old system ; I saw its operation formerly. The men
worked willingly, and did not require half the superintendence—not half the people pre-
tended to be sick —and they were in better order in many respects than they are at present.
5657. By the Chairman : Do the remarks you have made with reference to Cockatoo Island
apply to Darlinghurst, as to the decorum of the prisoners in attending Divine service ? Yes.
5658. And also with reference to the system of discipline? It is essentially different.
5659. Is there any special recommendation you would desire to make ? I beg to hand in a
copy of a letter addressed by me to the late Governor General, containing my ideas on the
subject; I never received any answer to that communication. (The witness handed in the
same. Vide Appendix Ai)
5660. Does the statement you have handed in relate to Darlinghurst Gaol as well as to
Cockatoo Island ? No.
5661. Are there any observations you desire to make specially with reference to Darling-
hurst ?
APPENDIX.
A.
Fort-street , 14 August, 1860.
To His Excellency Sir William Denison,— . ~ x ~ , , , ,
I he o- , most respectfully, to call your Excellency s attention to the present state and condition
of the Penal Establishment at Cockatoo Island. „ , ~
I had the honor, some time since, of stating personally my opinion in reference to the imprac-
ticability of the new penal regulation, and the doubtful operations which would evidently result in its
entire enforcenient painfully realized, and I consider it my duty to request that your
Evpolleucv mav at once take the matter into consideration, or, at least, allow the prisoners a hearing
S ft?mattSs such vital importance. You may think the subject worthy of attention, when I say,
that prisoners, who, under the old regulation, were so peaceable and so easily and profitably
governed 1 are at present in a most unsatisfactory and dangerous state, being, almost to a man, openly
fr IXnIV chsordered; that within the last few months there have been not less than eleven attempts
at cscane and two or three open combinations to resist authority; and that from what I know of the
minds of several of the prisoners, it is my opinion, that the manner of working the existing regulation
must with this establishment which will
shew thS whilst similar institutions in England have received the deepest attention from the highest
the State? and most salutary reforms have been wrought out. yet here we have gone


The Rev.
P. P. Agnew.
T^MayTlSGl.
steadily backwards until our most important penal establishment is at least sixty years behind the age
and the requirements of the people. , , . ~ .., »
1 Although the Island of Cockatoo has every natural advantage and desirable requisite for a
penal establishment for the reception and profitable working of all the prisoners in the Colony, whose
sentence may exceed one year —having sites for accommodation and matei lal for Duilding, being
situated near the capital, and having demand for labour and a market for produce; being broadly
surrounded by water, and easily guarded, it might be rendered a most suitable depot for prison labour
generally, and at half the amount which is now sought to put the prisons of the interior in proper
condition yet this establishment remains in a most primitive and inefficient condition, affording neither
security for the prisoner nor satisfaction to the Government.
2. No classification whatever exists at Cockatoo Island. The whole of the prisoners are
together, from the first to the last day of their sentence. The youth for his first offence, and the
hardened veteran in crime are inseparably connected at once. Year after year they work at the same
cart, sleep side by side, walk in the same yard, and eat out of the same tin dish. _ No prisoner is
allowed to be alone one hour during his whole imprisonment, and the difficulties and discouragements
by which he is legally surrounded renders it utterly impossible for him to attend to his necessary
religious duties, or that others can assist him in working out any hopeful reformation.
3. The sleeping accommodation is both indecent and brutalizing. The men are herded together
in fifties and sixties, not having private space to undress. They sleep in open racks, one above another,
separated merely by rude and open woodwork. The heat, in summer, is described as intolerable. All
the offices of nature are attended to openly in the place where they sleep. The rustic give safe
refuge to vermin of most offensive kind, which at intervals are fumigated and swept away in incredible
quantities. , .
4. No prisoner placed in the cells is allowed to attend Divine service on the Sunday, i his
reasonable and necessary indulgence has been objected to, both by the authorities on the island, and by
the late Government. There is not a prison in England where religious instruction and consolation is
denied to a prisoner under any circumstances. I see no reason for objecting to this privilege, as the
men from the cells could be brought to Divine service without taking up the time of the officers, or
communicating with other prisoners, by having the first seat in the chapel appropriated to their use,
and by coming in last, and being conducted away first,
5. The last thing to which I would call your attention is, the recent abolition of the ticket-of-
leave, which compels the prisoner to work out his full and entire sentence irrespective of all good and
meritorious conduct. This has at once put the good and the bad on the same footing. Bad conduct
makes a man’s case no worse, good conduct, no better. A sentence of seven, ten, or fifteen years, is,
in many cases, equal to life ; and as men under the old and new system are still working together, it
has occasioned very much dissatisfaction, and connected with many other objectionable features in the
present system, which marks no distinction of character, and cuts off all hope, and has resulted in the
present disturbed and unsafe state of things at Cockatoo Island.
I am afraid, that if an impartial and enlightened inquiry was made into the present working of
the system, it would be found as ill adapted to the general good as anything of the kind in Her
Majesty’s dominions.
P. P. AGNEW,
Chaplain, Cockatoo Island.
The Rev.
S. Sheehy,
0.5.8.
7 May, 1861.
The Rev. Samuel Sheehy, 0.5.8., called in and examined: —
5662. By the Chairman: You are Chaplain of the Roman Catholic Church at Cockatoo
Island, I believe ? Yes.*
5663. Do you attend any other penal establishment besides Cockatoo Island ? Ido not
attend the island now. It is some time since I attended Darlinghurst Gaol.
5664. You do not attend any prison at the present time ? No.
5665. How long were you attending Cockatoo Island, or Darlinghurst Gaol ? I cannot say
how long I attended the island, but I attended the gaol over a period of eight years; some-
times both places.
5666. Was it near the same period you attended the island ? No, I suppose not more than
two years of that time.
5667. How often did you visit the island ? I attended once on Sundays, and some time in
the course of the week—when I say I attended, I mean that I either went myself, or had a
substitute.
5668. What was the course of service—the same as in the ordinary chapels ? Yes; instruc-
tion and mass, the same as in church.
5669. The service of mass was the same as in the churches ? Yes.
5670. How often did you preach to the prisoners? Public instruction was given every
Sunday.
5671. What was the conduct of such prisoners as attended upon you when you were
performing Divine service ? 1 have not seen anything bad in their conduct. In my
experience of Cockatoo Island, I have seen as well behaved men as in any church.
5672. Was the assembly generally as orderly as other congregations? I would not expect
the same from them as from other congregations.
5673. As a matter of fact was it? I have nothing to complain of in my experience of
prisoners in that matter.
5674. Did you ever have occasion to examine the system of discipline prevailing at Cockatoo
Island or Darlinghurst Gaol at the time you acted as chaplain—that is to consider it ? Yes,
I frequently considered it, and made representations to the authorities —not with regard to
Cockatoo Island. I may have spoken with regard to Cockatoo to the Sheriff.
5675. Did you feel satisfied with the discipline ? No; if by discipline you mean the oppor-
tunity of attending religious instruction, I was not satisfied.
5676. I mean more than that, I mean the whole treatment to which the prisoners during
the time they were working out their sentences were subject in its moral effects upon them,
and also in its relation to cleanliness, general health, and so on ? There was much to
complain of in that matter. With regard to the place in which the prisoners sleep, on the
island,
• Note (Corrected by witness on revision ) :—Not at present.


island, Ido not think there is snfflpionf on * •
W7 Wi W OUt any °T- t 0 Wateh “ vcr " tho priMMwcxcSM of I he d 7 mitor J r is - I belie™,
obli. Were complaints ever madp L s except one of themselves.
themselves ? They complained of it to mo a “ o ° ne S'., th « P*<™ers
The annoyane<?B
g? » - bnt no ‘ to tbe same
you haveSl Tr ° f “* ? f f* P*»«. whom
rsir ,msb " ret who *. Y rJLJr y K^x
''‘™ baba ™ d «»"»!«. well
regard toLUaLTl^t Ti/Ze tjd ** C T" i “* ?M ? ««"% with
before me and by my successors, is, the want of a siiiTo? 1 c °mpl a int made by those who went
meet, and where instruction could be imparted I t ?lf°V“i7 hlch the P risoners could
meet, and where they have been accustomed to meet i s p ot a t al g * Wh j Ch tb6 * now
assembling m such a place tends to destrov nn v at . all an appropriate one; and
is used as a place of recreation and as a refeotorv °f re lglon the men mi gbt have. It
for Divine service immediately after hay meot » • place
calculated to produce a want of respect g lt is dfffh w pUrp ? ses ’ the circumstance is
religion in the minds of these men in iuch’i nuJ dlffi ° u J fc produce the same feeling of
were a building set apart for the purpose /have TrT f led mt ° cxistence if there
on the subject pmpo.e. I have spoken to the authorities of the island
5685. You think there should be a ohmpl ? v no r i,
should be one for Protestants and one for'Pathol’- 1 WO 'V ' of “ urfe fu ?oe-t that there
building set apart for Divine worship ’ ” that at least there should be one
fndCaMo'Chap'll "Vthinf it muUbfbetteTfor t w I ’ e v h °”' d t | at ° Prolest « ll t
among such men as we meet there ; ' e vUCW prejudices are strong
inland 0 °/ tbe **“«" a ‘ Da^g-
if there were educat ona” elates estabMed ? I ° f tbe . mea ” s » f ™‘™tiou
Island; I know that at Da SwGao it was Led !L" , W 1“ r£ « ard Cockatoo
think with the younver prisoners i7mivht he * U ullUle S ood was done. I
; - k --- -- s i- l6 ar d h s Y! s r LfL^..b c r k fdo 0
r U do which sheu'd be estabiished both for the prisoneTLd
5690. Ido not mean that, but that there should be a school r + i
giving instruction to the children of the free officers on the l i° f
requisite for them, but I imagine if such a school were establi-hS tL t W °” d bo
attend it, as there would he an objection on the part of the free ,* oUld ?°*
at present there is an objection to attend at the services that take place and tlJt onU fh
who are required attend. i ; tnat only those
° f aooomm ° aation f ° r ° o,ebratiD S “» services of the Koman
5092. Do you consider that those services are of so sacred a character tW n
performed nothing else should take place if possible? aC Ye S a ° WherG tbej ar °
5. 3 : Is the . re an J P lace for th e clergyman to robe and unrobe, to hear confessions and m
give instruction privately to the prisoners? Not that lam aware of- when T •
instructions privately, or hear confessions, it was in this dormitory-a veri unbecoming r,lacT
r 094. Are you aware whether these places have been visited by His Grace the ArchhM ?
I cannot say for certain. I think they have. 7 thG Archhlsho P ?
5G90. Do you know whether he has expressed great dissatisfaction with the system pursued at
both places, and that he considers it would seem to give the weight of his authority to the
present system were he to visit them ? lam aware those are his sentimeuts with regard to
Cockatoo. I know he has visited Darhnghurst Gaol during my chaplaincy, but I am not
aware whether he has visited the island. F y ’ am Dofc
5090. Do you think it desirable that a certain portion of time, say three days or a wppV
de^rable^l^hin k Car; Sb ° SGt apart exc^us^ f° r religious instruction ? Very
5097. In which the prisoners should be wholly exempted from work, and be attended bv
their clergymen ? Ido not know that it would be necessary to give them the whole day
i think they might have an hour in the morning and evening in order that they might have
some consecutive instruction. Many require instruction in the rudiments of religion and
we have no opportunity of giving it. b ’ anci
157—2 H 56g8^


5698. Have you applied for permismonelfeve refused It
the opportunity of seeing the men whenever
I wished to see them individually. wonld be attended with great moral benefit
a jsar. "a” i l, .r.r..T£
benefit resulted from that h { • en to the prisoners—of allowing any one who
fadl abUltya S-tuSjpon different subjects to he approved of by the
“ s t 0 006 ° f
their own class. . , ~ r .i pr( rvman, or by some other person connected
5702. Suppose the lectures weie giv J ntlier matters would it not relieve the minds
with the establishment, upon moral subjec Nq doubt good would result
tmir iS 71 r nowm*rro rould“ be benefited by it, as there are many well disposed
persons in both places. rvu-ml ? Tam not aware —I believe they have in
h B pK » works o/a regions character, and Ido not think
6m h£ti »at Darlinghurst? I think the books provided for the library were of a
57l. 0 Do C pu C noTthink it desirable that they should have books upon general subjects? I
How is the money expended that is voted by Parliament for books for the gaols ? In
Itbink
there was some delay. . . . . +1 welfare and future prospects of the prisoners
5708. Do you consider that it is injurious to the welfare ana lum p ? think
to allow them to mix together as they do, indiscnmina y, g t he autho-
is a great obstacle to their reformation and h J n done was the
rities that it should be done ; but I belmv young people who have
state of .he building. I have some examples T, Z a long time P under sentence,
been ruined by having pen sent among ptm examples I refer to are males—
h7o9 Does that apply to male 01 temale prisoners v
young boys-but I think in both cases there> is the same resuK t;me ? j think
5710 Are there any instructions in catechis g orning> and in the evening
S a Th~: c°ustom in our church, audl believe that is the custom
MU Mr. : Could the men who came ■ 1
know many did read and write—they f . S the first elements of religious
was bhore tta appointment of a schoolmaster. I
found some of the people benefited by it, d ° n r ® : Cockatoo Island, did you ever bear
5718. By the Chairman :At the time you we | ? Th prisone rs have complained
: f f * the sleepins
57T4! The prisoners have complained to you, as a clergyman ? Not under secresy of course;
they have said it was impossible to do goodonoftbe crime ? Not as being
5715. Have any of these complained of the actual commission
the subjects of it. . 9 T „ni o nvr fnr certain I know the complaint
5716 They believed that it took place ? I cannot say tor certain.
6n"fr e The complaint was made to you that these crimes bad been eom-
Stt** STciWr—.• I should understand that frequent inJany
Men have told me such was the case. In such a case of course 1 jpod 4 not outer■ J
particulars, for I concluded from the class of men there, and the state of the place
they slept, the thing was quite possible, and even piobabie.
SEPARATE


SEPARATE APPENDIX.
PART I.
SEPARATE STATEMENTS RECEIVED FROM PRISONERS.
Note ; —Examinations obtained by certain prisoners, presenting only personal statements, are
included.
{On first Visit to Cockatoo Island Prison, 1 February, 1861.)
1. John Page,
Complained that when he went to the island; he had a good suit of clothes, which had been
stolen from the store.
2 (written). John Watson.
Handed in a statement, as follows :
I arrived in Sydney, 26th January, 1859, from Goulhurn ; on the evening following,
was taken in charge by Detective Adderly and another, after picking a lady’s pocket of £l5
in notes, and £24 in cheques. I was committed to the Quarter Sessions, and tried by Mr.
Cheeke on the 20th of the following month, February, and sentenced to twelve months
in Sydney Gaol. After my release from gaol, a man named Henry Foy, came up to meet me
at the gaol gate, and took me to his home, telling me that I could stop there until I could
better my condition. On the same day I had occasion to go to the South Head Hoad with
a message for a man who was in the gaol ; but, unfortunately, I went into a public-house,
and getting drunk, got confined in the watch-house, opposite the gaol, for the first time in my
life, never having been drinking to excess before, and for which I got twenty-four hours.
In consequence of this friend of mine not knowing it, I had to serve it, not having where-
with to pay the fine of 10s. I was thus discharged from gaol on the 22nd February, and
being totally destitute, I was much depressed in health and spirits 3 and not liking to
trouble my friend, I wandered about the town all day until midnight, when, going down
Market-street, fearing every minute I should be arrested for being out so late at night, I came
to a house, at the door of which I found a woman preparing to go to the Market with coffee 3
I asked her to let me stop there till morning 3 her son being at the time in the house she
objected, but said she would allow me to stop at her stall, in York-street, till morning. I
availed myself of her offer, and laid on a box which she had there till daylight, when I
thanked her, and went about my business. I walked about all the forenoon in search of
employment, but found none. During the day, I was stopped in George-street, in company
with another man 3 the prosecutor pointed to me saying, I looked like one of the three men
who choked and robbed him on Wednesday night. I have not any recollection of what he
said to the other man, being too much engrossed about myself being accused of a thing of
which I was entirely innocent. The policeman, who was with him, asked him four or five
times if he would give us in charge, but he appeared very doubtful 3 upon which, the police-
man was inclined to let us go about our business, but a sergeant coming up, insisted on the
case beino- taken to the watch-house; when, on being examined, I did not like to tell the
police I had just come out of the gaol, thinking it would tend to injure me, but said I had
just come down the country, or words to that effect. We were then confined in separate
cells and the following morning, the other man was examined privately, and was able to
give' a satisfactory account of himself; after which, I was subjected to the same process,
when I told them as I told them before. After which, we were both tried before the Bench
(having been charged on suspicion the night before), and remanded. On the deposition of the
policeman I was charged with robbing the man, and the other on suspicion for being m my
company •’ this was Friday. We were remanded till the Tuesday following, on which day
the prosecutor swore to me, but the other man was acquitted. I was committed to the
Quarter Sessions in March, and upon that evidence was found guilty, and sentenced to ten
vears to Cockatoo Island. I have protested my entire innocence ever since, and have written
two statements in which I have set forth the whole of the above facts, but have been unable
to obtain any redress; and not having been allowed to see the magistrate since, I consider
myself seriously aggrieved. I declare that I had neither band, act, or part, in the robbery,
JOHN WATSON.
[ln reply to a question from Mr. Cowper, he stated that he was tried by Mr. Holroyd.]
3 Joseph O’Halloran.
Complained that he had been detained on the island six months beyond his term.
4 Hugh Montgomery Bland.
Made a similar statement.


5. Michael Cantwell.
Tried by Court Martial throe years since—Complained that he had forwarded a petition to
Captain Lovell, who had acted as Judge Advocate, and by whom hope of a remission of
sentence had been held out seven months since, and that he had received no reply to his
petition.
6. William Johnson,
Complained of over sentence.
7. Michael Frayne.
Stated that he came to this Colony a prisoner in 1837. In 1855, he obtained a ticket-of-
leave for Moreton Bay, having, as he believed, according to the English regulations, but six
months to serve before he would be entitled to his emancipation. After his departure, his
mother petitioned the Government, and obtained an answer that he was to obtain his
emancipation at the end of six months. Being anxious to see his mother, who was very
aged, he, after residing two years and a half at Moreton Bay, returned to Sydney, where he
married, and entered into business as a licensed coach-proprietor. In this capacity was under
the notice of the police, having four coaches, a license for each of which was taken out in
his own name. Having acquired other property, to the value of £5OO or £6OO, was appre-
hended as an Imperial prisoner illegally at large.
8. William Washington.
Complained of over sentence.
9. Charles Nixon.
Made a similar complaint.
10. John Hawkins.
Under seven years sentence, ten months of which were served —Desired to petition for miti-
gation of sentence, in consequence of having had his leg broken while on the works.
11 (written'). Alexander Douglass.
Had written a statement of his case, which he desired to lay before the Committee, viz.:—
The Statement of Alexander Douglass, at present a prisoner on Cockatoo Island, —
Respectfully sheweth:—
That your Memorialist is now undergoing a period of three years on the public works,
on a charge of uttering, and in extenuation begs respectfully to submit the following state-
ment for your consideration : —■
James Cameron stated to the Sergeant:—
I sold my horse and saddle to a man named T. A. Rouse, on the Bathurst Road, in
coming from Dubbo, for the cheques in question.
On oath he stated :—-
I met Douglass on the Monday morning; he took me to a house where he gave me
those cheques, and told me whatever money was over I was to return to him; he did not
know my real name, nor had he ever seen me previously ; the name on those cheques is my
proper name ] my reason for passing as Frederick Hellier is to prevent my parents ascer-
taining that I had emigrated ) Douglass did not write those cheques, nor was he out of my
sight to write those cheques; I had nothing left out of those cheques; I never had any
dealings with Douglass previously.
On the following morning Cameron stated to the magistrates :
I will confess the truth ; I received those cheques from a constable in the town of
Bathurst; I mentioned his name yesterday to Captain Battye.
Mrs. Doyle stated on oath :
Douglass told me that he saw Cameron sell his horse and saddle for those cheques.
On the trial James Cameron stated :
I know nothing of Douglass, nor had I ever any dealings with him ; I did not receive
those cheques from him ; I came by those cheques in a dishonest manner ; I stole them from
a person, from a pocket-book containing two more notes and some silver ; this person was
coming from the village of Peel to Bathurst; my reason for stating that Douglass gave me
those cheques was, that Captain Battye told me if I would swear so he would let me go free,
and get me a situation in the police—that is, if I would swear to having obtained those
cheques from Douglass, and that Douglass got them from Sampson ; I never saw Douglass
before the 4th May, 1859, it was in a booth on the racecourse at King’s Plains, where he
was engaged to play music, and I declare that Douglass is innocent of the charge.
N.B. This man (James Cameron) was let at large for a few minutes, but subse-
quently brought back, placed on his oath, when he swears the very words required of him
by Captain Battye, and he was then committed along with me.
Alexander Douglass states :
I never to my knowledge saw Cameron previous to being apprehended on my road
home from King’s Plains j I was remanded from the Bth May until the following December,
whereas, had the law deemed me guilty, they would have tried and sentenced me before, for
X subpoenaed seven respectable witnesses who could have proved my innocence j but my
subpeenao were never served, and consequently I received the sentence of three years to hard
labour on the public works, which lam at present undergoing. I beg to state that Sampson
was an inmate of the gaol from the 23rd March up to the time of my trial in December,
when


when he received a sentence of four years to Cockatoo; hut after four mouths servitude he
went to his liberty, his case having been tried in Banco. servitude ne
Trusting that your Honorable Board will take the above facts into consideration
as well as my having previous y resided in Bathurst, where I was well known as a man
obtaining an honest hying, both as a bricklayer and plasterer, or a painter, and be ng well
known to the authorities as an honest tradesman about the town-and so far enter into the
merits of my case as will result in my obtaining my liberation.
~ , T , ALEXANDER DOUGLASS.
A exander Douglass, per " Abdallah,” was received here on the 7th January, 1860, under
a sentence of three years hard labour on the roads, passed upon him at the Quarter Sessions
has Sen good' ° C ' *" 1 *»«“* B “ ce period his com
Nothing recorded. Cockatoo Island,
6 February, 1861.
GOTHER K. MANN.
12 ( written ). Charles Wagner.
Had also written a statement, which he had forwarded to the office, viz.:
The Statement of Charles Wagner, a prisoner on Cockatoo Island, undergoing the sentence
ot five years for stealing, in a dwelling, the sum of one hundred sovereigns
I was tried on the 25th day of April, 1860, before His Worship the Chairman of
Quarter cessions, at Sydney, and received the above sentence.
tu lam “°, fc g , ullt y of tlie . aboye crime > inasmuch as I had but recently arrived from
Melbourne, with thejiew of investing my small capital in trade in New South Wales, and
bad taken lodgings in a respectable house in Gloucester-street, where I had occupied the
same room for five weeks; three weeks I was the sole occupant of the room, but the last two
weeks was conjointly with a sea-faring man, who subsequently became my prosecutor.
I being a foreigner, and speaking very bad English, was totally ignorant of all law
matters, and unprepared at the time of my trial to prove satisfactorily my innocence, having
been committed on the 19th and tried on the 25th of the same month, and was most ineffi-
ciently defended by Mr. Moffat, he only arriving in the Court at the close of the evidence
for the prosecution, when he only asked a few questions of trivial import, although I had
feed him to be further defended by a barrister-at-law.
I was convicted simply on my prosecutor swearing to one sovereign, of a whitish
cast, out of £176 10s., taken from me when arrested.
The arresting constable took my money while in the lodging-house, and spread it on
the table in the presence of the prosecutor, thereby giving him an opportunity of seeing the
whitish sovereign, which is not uncommon amongst gold specie, for he had no other mark
whereby he could swear to any of the money.
I would now beg to submit points which were not brought forward by my counsel at
the time of trial.
The landlady of the boarding-house had three daughters, the eldest being twenty-two
years of age, to whom I was under engagement of marriage, and was not aware at the time
that the prosecutor, who occupied the same bed-room, was my rival, as, on the preceding
evening to my arrest, he asked me my intentions respecting marriage to the daughter, and
how much money I had (stating that he made these inquiries at the request of the young
lady and her mother). lat once told him £2OO, in gold, at the same time opening my box,
and shewing it to him. The following evening, on my return home from a walk, about
8 o’clock, the prosecutor stated he had lost one hundred sovereigns, which he said he had
drawn from the bank in the morning, and placed in his chest, leaving the lid open. He at
once gave me in change, when I told the apprehending constable that it was easy for prose-
cutor to lay such a charge against me, his having seen my money the previous evening, at
the same time telling him the exact amount of money in my chest, and giving him a
memorandum-book from my pocket, containing a confirmatory account. The prosecutor
admitted that his box, and the door of the bed-room, was always, day and night, unlocked
and open, and that the master, mistress, the three daughters, and male boarders, had equal
means of access; yet he singled me out, and gave me at once in charge.
I had left Melbourne but the month previous, having in gold £209 and ss. when
leaving, £lOO of which I received from Mrs. O’Brien, green-grocer, Elinder’s-lane West,
part of money lent on mortgage, and £lOO from Mr. Rolls, the coach proprietor, of that
city, for a Hansom safety cab, which I sold him. I have written to the aforesaid parties,
and also to Messrs. Muttlebury and Costar, solicitors, who negotiated the mortgage for me,
for the receipts of the above money, and also for certificates of an unimpeachable character
since my sojourn in the Colony.
I am now labouring under a disease of the heart, brought on by premature depression,
in consequence of my incarceration; I therefore beg that your Committee will be pleased
graciously to cause such investigation and inquiries as shall seem fit and necessary.
CHARLES WAGNER.
The petitioner, Charles Wagner, per “Juanita,” was received here on the 28th April,
1860, under a sentence of five years to the roads, passed upon him at the Quarter Sessions
at Sydney, for stealing money; since which period his conduct has been good.
Nothing recorded.
Cockatoo Island ,
8 February, 1861.
GOTHER K. MANN.
13,


jg David Jobson.
Stated that he had petitioned, but received no answer.
24 Michael Doran.
Stated —I came to the island on the 28th May, 1858. I had at that time clothes to the
value of £9 14s 6d with me, for which I have the tailor s bill. I had also a pair or boots,
not included in‘the bill, which cost me £1 ss. I had also two rings in my pocket, to the
value of £3 75., and £9 in money stitched in the breast of my waistcoat, i never_ men-
tioned this to any man until I had been eight months here, when I told Mr. Brown, in the
presence of five men, to take the two rings out of my pocket, and so much money, in the
month of July 1859, four men were going away from the island to their tickets-of-leave, and
one of them named Edwards, who had been a constable here, took away my clothes. I
received information of this from Thomas Lenehan.
25 Robert Banks,
Complained that he had been sent to the island, and to work in the quarry, because, having
a ticket-of-leave for Bathurst, he had been found in Yass.
20_ Frederick Somerville,
Stated that in November, 1849, he had received a sentence for four years, and in 1850, a
sentence for seven years. That he had received a ticket-of-leave for the Yass district. That
he was, for two years, in business at Adelong, where he was well known, as an auctioneer, by
the name of Frank Templeton 5 and that he was seized at Mandra as an absentee from his
district. The warrant under which he was apprehended, stated that he would be free on the
3rd November, 1860, and he was now informed that under the present regulations he would
have to serve two years longer. He was under the impression that when his seven years
sentence had expired he was free to leave the district, as he believed that that sentence had
been concurrent with his former one. During the two years be had been off the island he
believed his conduct had been satisfactory, and while at the diggings he believed that no
one there had been more anxious to suppress crime. A petition had been forwarded to the
Governor General by the residents at Kiandra on behalf of the prisoner, and he begged to
refer to Charles Cowper, juur., Esq., M.P., Mr. Shadforth, and other gentlemen in the
Tumut district as to his general character.
17. Frederick Wm. Scrimes.
Begged to bring his case under the notice of the Committee. In 1848 he separated from
his wife, by mutual consent, being then in England. In 1851 he came to this Colony, and
remitted money to his wife, the receipt of which was not acknowledged by her, and he
concluded that she was dead. Married a second time. Some two years after his second
marriage bis first wife came out to the Colony, and having discovered her husband, demanded
a maintenance from him. He then furnished a cottage for her at Pyrmont, and allowed her
£2 a week. After a time she increased her demand, and as he could not comply with her
exorbitant requirement, she brought the charge of bigamy against him, upon which he was
sentenced to three years imprisonment upon the island. His wife had been in the Colony
four years before she brought the charge. He had been in the service of Messrs. Wilkinson,
Brothers three years and a half. Could refer to Mr. Williams, of that firm, as to his general
character, and believed, if the Superintendent of the island were called upon, that gentleman
would bear testimony to his good conduct. Had never before been charged with any
offence.
18. Daniel Sullivan.
Complained that, being legally free, he had been apprehended for being out of his district.
Had a ticket for Moreton Bay, and was apprehended in Sydney.
19. Michael Crofton.
Had lost his ticket while at Ipswich; had served his time within seven months, and had
been well conducted while on the island.
20. John M'Spadden.
Charged with murder, and sentenced to fifteen years imprisonment —Complained that he was
detained over his sentence, which had expired eighteen months ago.
21. Francis Moran.
Complained that his ticket-of-leave had been cancelled for drunkenness.
22. William Thompson.
Sentenced to ten years imprisonment, the first twelve months in irons—Complained that he
had to serve twelve months longer than a man who had received the same term of sentence,
but without irons.
28. John Hassett.
Complained that he had been detained on the island over his proper time. Was sentenced
to fifteen years —the first three in irons. Had been six years and six months on the island,
and served the first three in irons. Had petitioned, but received no answer.


24. John Smith.
Complained of cancellation of ticket-of-leave, which he had received for Moreton Bay; hut
coming to Sydney to see his wife and family, was apprehended as a prisoner illegally at
large.
25. Louis Breton.
Complained of having been sent to the island for losing his ticket-of-leave.
26. William Head,
Complained of having been detained on the island seven months beyond the expiration of
his sentence.
27. James Edward Carnegie.
Stated —I came out to this Colony in the “ Hashemy,” in April, 1849, under a sentence of
exile for seven years; I did not land in Sydney, but was sent to Moreton Bay. There I
remained some time, and met a number of my Scotch friends; I then came to Sydney,
remained about six weeks at the Royal Hotel, and then proceeded to California. In the
beginning of 1857 I came to Melbourne, and was employed on the press; I wrote a number
of scientific articles in the Argus. I was also the proprietor of two papers — The Evening
Mail and The Evening Bulletin —both of these failed. The Green Room was my entire
property, and I was the only editor. I arrived in Sydney in March, 1859, and acted as
agent for the Nelson Family, whom I was the means of introducing to the Colony, I was
also agent for Signor Bianchi, from whom, as well as from Mons. Coulon, I have testimonials.
During my residence in Sydney I was constantly in places of public resort, and my em-
ployment was of a public nature. I believed that I had fulfilled the terms of my sentence.
I was under the impression that the conditions of my exile was, that I was not to return to
the United Kingdom during seven years, and this condition I had fulfilled. As to my
conduct and character, while I was in Sydney, I confidently refer to Sir Daniel Cooper, Mr.
John Fairfax, Mr. O’Connell, brother of Captain O’Connell, the Honorable Mr. Merewether,
Mr. Dunsmure, and Major Chauvel; and I believe the Superintendent of the island would
speak favourably of my conduct since I have been here.
28. Richard Hart.
Complained that he was kept on the island for having lost his ticket-of-leave.
29. James McLaren.
Stated that he had lost a finger.
30. Thomas Fitzgerald.
Complained that he had been sentenced for five years for passing a coloured half-penny, which
was a minor offence of the lowest order.
31 Richard Hanson.
Eighteen years of age—Complained that he had been sentenced to five years imprisonment,
of which he had served eleven months, for breaking into the market; was tried by Judge
Holroyd; other cases of a similar kind had been sentenced to a month or two months
imprisonment; had been twice before in gaol for stealing clothes the last time about six;
or seven months before.
32 William Craig.
Sentenced for five years, of which he had served two years and four months, for obtaining
goods under false pretences—Stated that he had never been tried before; had sent in a
petition to which he had received no answer.
33 Michael Cantwell.
Stated that he had been on the island three years; when he arrived received two blankets
which had never been changed or washed from that time to the present.
(On first Visit to Darlinghurst Gaol, 8 February, 1861.)
gl Robert Alexander.
Stated that ho was tried at Braidwood on the 2Tth December last, and sentenced to two
yea s on a charge of robbery; that at the time he was apprehended he was gazetted as a
runaway from Tarban Creek He asserted his innocence, and stated that he was illegally
imprisoned, having been sentenced by the Braidwood Bench and not by a Judge.
George Taylor.
Stated—l was convicted at Rockhampton for uttering forged notes, and sentenced for five
vearsbv Judge Milford; two years of which have expired. On the 10 th of January last I
} f JL wnrf The Ground of my refusing to work was in consequence of being working with
refused to work, ihe ground or my' rei* b , we were reapin „ no benefit whatever,
other parties who were reaping a g > be mos t wim to refcur n to work
to-m^row—lndeed nTw-if I could shorten my time. I have a wife.and


family, and would be prepared to work eighteen hours a day at anything if I could shorten
my time.
By Mr. Windetjer : Are you prepared to return to work if your period of labour is not
shortened ? I know it is folly to refuse to work against Government.
36. John O’Brien.
A contractor under the Corporation of Sydney—Complained that for disobeying an order ta
pay wages he was confined in this wing, directly opposite the cell of a murderer (Swan).
In the cell with O’Brien was
37. Hugh Craddock.
Stated that he was confined for disobeying an order to support his children.
38. Charles Oxburgh,
A runaway from H.M.S, “ Iris” —Complained that he had been apprehended on the Ist of
August last, and was detained in prison until the return of his vessel to the port.
39. James Binney,
Made a similar complaint: he stated that he was apprehended on the 4th last November ; had
been remanded from fortnight to fortnight, as there was no one to bail him out; and that
such as he were thought no more of than the basest murderers or felons in the prisons.
During the time he and his companion in the cell, Oxburgh, were obliged to mix, in the
committed yard, with men charged with all sorts of offences.
40. George Davis.
Sentenced at Tamworth on the 18th June last, for horse stealing, to five years imprison-
ment in Darlinghurst—Complained that his sentence was illegal, inasmuch as the Judge had
no power to sentence him for a longer period than three years.
By the Chairman: Have you made any application to the Government on the subject ?
I spoke to Mr. Harrison.
What did you hear from Mr. Harrison was the result of your application ? He said he had
not heard anything of it.
When was that application sent ? About six months ago.
41- _ Patrick Murray.
A patient in the hospital—Stated, I came over on the chain with the last of the prisoners
from Cockatoo. W hen I came in here, and the gates were closed on us, Mr. Singleton came
up and shook me by the arm, while Mr. Harrison, the deputy governor of the gaol, was
counting us. I told Mr. Singleton he had nothing to do with me, as I was under the gaol
authorities. He said, “ I will let you know I have something to do with you,” and he drew
his sword and cut me here ( pointing to a scar over the right eye), and I was put in the cell
that night.
Bi/ Mr. Hart: Did you not strike him first? No, I was in handcuffs.
Did you not hustle him ? No, I could not.
Your wound does not appear to be very serious ? If his sword had not caught against a tree
he would have cleaved me down.
42. Ann M'lntyre.
Stated that she lives at Bichmond, and was taken up on a charge of being drunk in Sydney
streets, and was sentenced to three months imprisonment; was married to John Fletcher
two years ago, and her house and family were going to destruction.
43 (written). Barnett Levi.
The following statement handed in, viz.:—
The humble otatement of Barnett Levi, tried at the Sydney Quarter Sessions in May,
1855, for petty larceny (picking pockets), and sentenced to ten years on Cockatoo
Island; —
Sheweth :—■
That prisoner completed a sentence of five years and ten months on Cockatoo Island,
and emeiged with a ticket-of-leave to Ipswich, Moreton Bay district, in a suit of Govern-
ment branded slops, without a shilling, when he was ordered by the Police authorities to
leave the town and proceed to the country, notwithstanding he had a friend in Ipswich, who
offered to place a sum of money at his disposal to enable him to enter into business, which
was explained to Colonel Gray, Police Magistrate, but without effect. Unaccustomed to the
usii, or agricultural employment, and without any definite knowledge of the boundaries of
the district, he proceeded to Tenterfield diggings where he opened a store, and for four
months was obtaining a honest livelihood, which Commissioner Masterton can vouch for.
Through the agency of one of the police, prisoner received information of a warrant being
issued against him for being illegally at large, and he, afraid of returning to Cockatoo, sold
on and immediately set out for Melbourne, paid his passage in the “ Great Britain” with
tie view re^urn * n S friends, and was unfortunately apprehended and forwarded to
* clbourne Gaol, where he remained for six months, and was returned to Cockatoo to
comp.ete the unexpired portion of his original sentence and two years additional from other
sources. -Now, prisoner feeling there is something so unjust in detaining him in custody
or a number of years without trial by J udge or Magistrate, humbly entreats your Excellency
to


tr> investigate and take the subject into consideration, for as all sentences of solitary confine-
ment, &c., are extension, a man who is disliked may bo kept many years m chains and
bondage. _ _ j-j
P.S. Some six months since the Visiting Magistrate permitted me to petition. 1 aid
so, but it was returned from the Chief Inspectors Office.
{On Visit to Parramatta Gaol, 15 February, 1861.)
44 Martin Kenny.
Sentenced to three years imprisonment for gold robbery at the diggings—tried at Bathurst
in 1859 —Stated that he had been advised by the Judge who tried him (Mr. Dowling) o
send in a petition to the Government, but had been prevented doing so by the rules ot the
prison.
(On second Visit to Darlinghurst Gaol, 1 March, 1861.)
45 George Singleton.
Made the following statement:—! was sent here by the Sydney Magistrates forl*°
obey an order of the Court to pay ten shillings a week for the support of my wifeand four
infant children I have a freehold in Petersham, upon which my wife is llvl "=> ,
portion of which she is receiving rent. My eldest daughter ,s sixteen years of ag b and has
L pn livinv in service at Balmain for more than twelve months. I was at work at Mr. o
th“e wel beforl I came here, at 255. a week. One week I worked three days, one four,
Mr. l LucaT: Had you nothing besides the twenty-five shillings a week ? No.
What are you ? A carpenter.
What induced you to take such wages ?_ It was my * a f cso ” rce ; ? 53 7 i d
the house, even the bedding, and would not allow me to stay there, so
to Mr. Holt’s. _ p
The Committee inspected the stockade, exercise ground, andl walll inrear «.
by the contractor.
{At Sitting, 8 March, 1861.)
AR , * Richard Ainsworth.
The Honorable the Chairman and other Honorable Gentlemen of the Select Committee on
Prison Management, &c., &c., cic.
Gentlemen, ... •, • „n nw ; nff me to lav before you a statement
I have to express my gratitude in allowing me to y 0 w solioit ym
°JZotCTZ7I recital which must appear at the eom-
** -Hug a
forgery, and sentenced to seven years on the roads. receiving and
2 " d » » -
3rd Iftiie Court of Quarter Sessions, Maitland, in January, 1854, charged
3rd - with stealing a horse and road.
On the last occasion I stated to tl Chairman was pleased to remark,
under tbe circumstances a most severe o , h effeot since you well kuow, by good conduct
“ Though five years is the period, it is no t f mQ \ th J regulations of the task-work
“ Jon wiU receive a t^^;'°Va^ emoved to Cockatoo Island, where I remained ten weeks
“ sytemn. Was immedia y <? thence to Parramatta Gaol, and in that
then returned to Darlinghurst, forwarded - the two first sentences
establishment completed the last raen^mned^five^y oars. authorlties at P
lapsed while serving the latter, and t disc harged free. lat once returned to Sydney,
matta, for on the 2nd January, ' > u ff ered a severe attack of dysentery, which continued
and within forty-eight hours exhausted my finances, and on becoming con-
near four weeks. This afflictu t _ f or me to take was to use my endeavours to pre-
valescent, considered the most prud P ded t fi e office of the Honorable the Colonial
ceed into the interior. To this en, l I a free
Secretary with a letter, addresse o g otker settled district. Mr. Elyard handed
to Moreton Bay, where I bad friends > er^ards I waS informed by the messenger that Mr.
in my note, and in a few moments imme diately. It turned out that this.
Cowper was writing a reply, whmh I s Id t 0 call in Constable Singleton That
messenger, at that very period,. had to take me to the Convict Office
officer appeared with him, an „ ppnmDau i e d him, and was there told I had been illegal y
to know if I was free. lat once acc p lo dged in Darlinghurst, at the end
discharged from Parramatta Gaol. 1 hat evening 6 of
157—2 I


of four days forwarded to Cockatoo Island, and after twelve days more returned to Darling-
hurst Gaol, where I have been confined for the past two years and upwards. ■
. 1 would here remark that, on three occasions, I have been advised my detention here
is illegal, that there was no provision in the Road Act to make these sentences cumulative
since they had not been so ordered, and consequently forwarded two statements to the
Honorable the Attorney General, for the time being, but received no reply. I then at the
request of the Sheriff, wrote a third, which was intended to be laid before his Honor the
Chief Justice, but nothing more was heard of it. In March last, assuming my imprisonment
legal, was eligible for a ticket-of-leave in accordance with the Classification Regulations
and although that system ceased to exist in June, 1858, there was an order of IJis Excel-
lency the Governor General posted in this and all other prisons, to the following effect
“ 2 ' Thos f regulations will, however, be acted upon in the cases of all prisoners now
undergoing sentences passed while they were in force.
I,i n -i ~.. . A . , „ , „ “ Charles Cowper.”
1 therefore brought this matter also before the Sheriff, desired me to write a statement
shewing the prescribed period of probation and when it expired. This document was
forwarded to the Chairman of the Board of Classification, and some time after a letter was
receded by the Sheriff, from the Colonial Secretary, inquiring why my name had been
submitted to the Board. I believe that gentleman replied, it had been forwarded the same
as in all cases of a similar nature, when a further letter was received purporting I was not
to receive a ticket-of-leave at all, but must serve the whole of the sentence in gaol, which is
said not to expire till September, 1855. I am well assured if Mr. Cheeke had known
when passing the sentence of five years upon me at Maitland, that I should have been
differently affected to other prisoners he would never have ordered me to Cockatoo Island
but consigned me to _ confinement in gaol, and that by law could not have exceeded three
years for one offence, in confirmation of which I beg to refer you to the second case in the
annexed list; therefore what the law could not do other authority did, and I have
served since that period near two years more than a prisoner on the island
would have endured from the same time with a sentence of fifteen years.
“ January last I again appealed to the Sheriff, and requested his permission to
Mior to to* l° n " Slr “ th y h T of living » favourable recommendation
P * /a P ? Ur °i. 0f Hls Excellency the Governor General, and I cited a case which
occurred last April, when a man made a similar request to petition the Judge who tried
seitonJd IS tn m fifi p had C ° nV ' Cted ° f two cbar S es of highway robbery in June, 1850, and
sentenced to fifteen years roads and ten years roads; he was permitted to forward his
petition. His Honor took a merciful view of the case from the man’s advanced age &c. and
e was duscharged free on the 24th May. The Sheriff replied to my request as follows
be 'l lT 1° P e^ tlon > there was strong a prejudice against me that it would
l d ast be y e e n ar br ° Ugllt * ™ ** * b *
fmm ~ lf ifc be ur S ed 1 bave committed some offence which ought to shut me out
for h d lT Vlleg , e i gra a fi d otl i er pnso ° ers > surely my punishment has been already severe,
or had I been allowed the benefit of credit for labour I should have possessed a ticket-of-leave
nosition^lnd^in but , 1 em P ba s ]cal] y decla '; e 1 have done nothing to place me in so fearful a
position, and although three charges specified at the head of this paper blacken my history
there is no man breathing who has ever been injured by me to the loss of one shflling I
am compeHeii to add, my punishment is greater than that of the murderer, the highwayman,
or others who have committed serious outrage upon society, all of whom to this ver/hour
are receiving the benefit of the order previously referred to, and amongst this numbed there
*. S6 Tf wbo ba^ e com fitted repeated offences since my incarceration, and after all are
bfen j at i arg % I berewitb an nex the history of three of this character, each of whom have
been discharged at no very distant period.
Cockatoo folanTTn considered guilty of causing the discharge of a prisoner from
Cockatoo Island in 1851, by means of false certificates or something of the kind, which
of shewingL T ih ti Y rl mg Ma f iatrate > but 1 Pad no opportunity afforded me
L t rary ? ad thl i FlVllege been g ranted > 1 cculd have proved that
likelv T .ho J°f arg WaS f. bse( l ue . Q % apprehended through my information, and it is not
ke y ! should have assisted in tracing his whereabouts had I been a principal or actor in
was the riT 1 ' m °T e S ; h ° norabl . e g entleman now at tb e head of the Government
ment nf roA? an T°f a f le n C ? mmittee 1852 > to inquire into the discipline andmanage-
tools an r bat occaslon this charge against me became public; to it,
examinational o off 0 questions put by the Committee to Mr. Ormsby during his
and non tin 1 f 1 . 10 P* e J udlce which exists against me.; from that time it commenced,
_ t 0 e present as powerful and keen at the end of nine years as though the
ments nnnnn °' / verily believe that Mr. Ormsby, on that occasion, made state-
of the nffi SCIG P S 0 . w la said, for 1 observed all he had been asked relative to the duties
out to bf oe i Pl s g ° f the bIS replies were fearfull J incorrect, and this I pointed
me thor, fK 8 -j l ' too far to recede. Whatever, therefore, maybe urged against
would Wtn add eVI f 8 i faCt .r l baVe T now been in § aol se ven years and upwards, and I
onnortimftv f * ia xT er be P. asfc; b lam a changed man, and only anxious for an
here in tt ° pl . oVin S tbe sincerity of my regret. I have been for some time past acting
thG Cap , acit / of wardsman, and also attending upon the Rev. P. P. Agnew. Under
would snenw” S 0 se’Vfition for more than two years, I have no hesitation in affirming he
but as iiv Pnc , aVO f Ura °/ ni fo p believe I may also include the whole of the authorities;
looking for nfot P resent stands, all appears hopeless, and nothing remains but the fearful
o ui icr unjust and, I believe, illegal imprisonment, until my powers become
prostrated;


prostrated; and, should it please the Almighty to spare me, I must, under these circum-
stances, be sent adrift in the world, bereft of the ability to provide for the future. But as
Heaven takes out of account repented crime, so earth should, and thus lead to the renewal of
a right spirit within us. In perfect confidence, therefore, I leave the whole in the hands of
your Honorable Committee, beseeching your merciful interposition, and praying at the same
time you may be guided by Him before whom all hearts are open, and from whom no secrets
are hid.
RICHARD AINSWORTH.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
3 p.m., 5 March, 1861.
Ist. Henry Burns was tried for robbery in 1849 ; sentenced three years to the roads;
forwarded to Newcastle Breakwater; absconded; apprehended in Sydney attempting pocket-
picking, identified as a runaway, and sentenced a further twelve months. August, 1852,
received a ticket-of-leave ; in November following absconded from his district; again appeared
in Sydney, stole from a little girl in Pitt-street a £2O note, who had been sent by her father
for change; apprehended and sentenced four years to the roads. This man, in February,
1853, had entered into a scheme with a fellow prisoner to escape from the island; a sort of
boat or raft was put together for the purpose, and just as the arrangements were completed
he betrayed his companion, who was already on the water, and immediately captured; for
this service he considered himself entitled to his freedom ; Captain M'Lerie thought other-
wise, and had him removed to Darlinghurst Gaol. On jumping ashore at the wharf he
attemted to escape from the constable, who fired after him and shot him near the shoulder.
Some time after his arrival at Darlinghurst he was accused of an unnatural offence, and
removed to Parramatta ; he was then allowed the benefit of probation, which expired in Sep-
tember, 1855, when he was again allowed a ticket-of-leave for Goulburn ; committed a num-
ber of offences there, and reached Port Phillip ; there he was identified as a runaway, and
sentenced to six months in irons; again ordered to Parramatta Gaol, during which the
authorities in the Convict Department sought to compel him to serve the full period of the
various sentences passed, but it was found illegal (a case similar to my own), and he was
discharged. In less than three weeks afterwards he committed another robbery, and sen-
tenced three years to the roads ; and since my confinement here he has been again discharged
to a ticket-of-leave.
2nd. Frederick Barlow, in 1848, received a sentence of eighteen months in irons,
for a robbery in Parramatta. This man committed two offences on the island, and did not
receive a ticket till June, 1850 ; six months afterwards he was tried in Sydney for robbing
his master, and sentenced four years roads ; in 1853 he received a ticket-of-leave for
Singleton, was there committed for trial for robbing one of his master’s lodgers, but was
acquitted, and the Chairman ordered him to be escorted to his district. The night of his
release he lodged in a public-house in Maitland, and got in the room where two gentlemen
were sleeping, whom he robbed of £3O ; was again committed for trial, and as the Chairman
was about to pass a sentence of seven years, after his trial and conviction, he craved the con-
sideration of the Court, and prayed not to be sent to Cockatoo Island, as he had been pre-
viously mixed up in some charges against the authorities there; he was therefore ordered to
three years hard labour in Parramatta Gaol; this he served during my stay, and was dis-
charged in August, 1857. In January, 1858, was ordered one month to Parramatta Gaol,
from Windsor, as a vagrant; in March following convicted of another robbery in Sydney,
and sentenced to seven years roads; and in January last was again discharged to a ticket-
of-leave.
3rd. Richard Hart sentenced, in 1848, to three years roads for robbery, remitted
in 1850; in the same year received two years as a vagrant; at the expiration of this com-
mitted another offence, again allowed a ticket; and in 1856 received a sentence of seven
years on some other charge; and in July last again released with the usual indulgence. A
few weeks past this man was ordered here for one month, for attempting to pick the pocket
of a female in the theatre; he had absconded from his district, and was not four houis in
Sydney when he committed this offence. He arrived here in an assumed name, and was
clear to me he had not been recognized. I, therefore, take the credit of saving the citizens
of Sydney from further depredation by him for some time, as I acquainted the authorities of
his being a notorious pickpocket, gave his history, which was immediately inquired into,
and he was returned to the island.
(, At Sitting, 19 March, 1861.)
47 (written), Charles Rogers.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
~ Lucas, Esq., M L,A. ’ l3 March > 186 L
Sir, . . „
Agreeable with permission received from you, I sent a petition praying for a
remission of my sentence, which was four years to the roads, which was passed on mo a-t the
Quarter Sessions held at Sydney, on the 23rd of February, 1860, by Mr. Justice Holroyd.
I now take the liberty of addressing you, sincerely trusting you will cause it to be brought
before the Executive Council, and use your interest in my behalf to obtain for me a remission
which I have so 100" prayed for. Sir, you will remember that 1 was a house painter at
Camperdown, and completed many contracts of house painting foi you and many othci
Members of Council for the last ten years; and in this case I was completing a contract of
work for the prosecutor, and at the finishing of the work he wanted me to do more than^l


had agreed to do, and we had some words about it, and he afterwards gave me in charge in
his own house for obtaining money under false pretences—the amount of the money, five
shillings. When in gaol, waiting for trial, I subpoenaed two witnesses, which would have
established my innocence, but the subpoena was not served on the time of trial. On those
grounds, I asked Mr. Justice Holroyd to postpone my trial; he refused to do so, and I was
tried and sentenced without witnesses or counsel. I trust I may be fortunate enough to
obtain a favourable reply.
Sir,
I am, &c.,
CH. ROGERS.
48 (written) Henry Carroll.
DarJinghurst Gaol,
22 Fehruray, 1861.
To the Chairman of the Select Committee now sitting on Prison Discipline
Sir,
In the years 1859 and 60, a quantity of planks were" sent on to the island
for the express use of the Dry Dock for coping for the blocks. There were about one
hundred of them from about 18' to 22' long, 14" deep, and 4" thick. Likewise about a
dozen large logs from about 50 to 75 feet long, and about two feet square. The whole of
the above timber, instead of being applied to the use for which it was sent, was all cut up
and used in the building of Captain Mann’s house. In addition to the above timber, there
were likewise 27 other shares removed from the dock for the same purpose, as well as several
other planks. I cut the whole of the timber myself by the order of Captain Mann. When
there were 100 feet used for the dock, I was ordered to book 300; the same way with
the wedges. There is another complaint I have to make. This is one which so many of
my fellow prisoners also feel aggrieved at; and that is the conduct of Mr. Taylor, Clerk of
Petty Sessions, who takes upon himself more than the Superintendent, in fact he is the
actual Superintendent, as he leads Captain Mann—for whatever he says, it is sure to be
carried out. It is he that puts all the men into the different billets, such as wardsmen, cooks,
servants, &c., and they are nearly the worst characters, such as those that have twice or thrice
been convicted, who are always coming back to the island ; in fact, unless he is a scoundrel
of the deepest dye, he has no chance of getting on on the island, for a quiet man is nowhere.
If he is an informer or such like, he is looked up as a good man, and the first opportunity
he is put into a situation where there is no work, and eventually Mr. Taylor will get him
his liberty, as he has done several. I can name several cases should you require it. I have
been a prisoner on the island seven years. I never held a billet, yet I can defy any one to
say that I have ever misconducted myself; and what I have stated in this letter I can prove.
I remain, &c.,
HENRY CARROLL.
49 (written). John Holland and Henry Carroll.
To the Honorable Gentlemen now sitting on the Board of Inquiry.
Sirs,
We take the liberty of laying before you a statement of our grievances, hoping,
from your sense of justice, a kind consideration of them. Sirs, we, the prisoners John
Holland and Henry Carroll, received each the sentence of fifteen years; the first three years
of that sentence to be worked in chains on the roads or public works of the Colony. When
we had completed the three years in chains, the authorities on the island then told us that
we should then have to commence the probation for fifteen years; that the time that we
wore our chains lay dead. Gentlemen, if there is an Act that we should do a sentence
equal to twenty-one years we are satisfied; but never hearing of such an Act, and doubting
the validity of a letter produced by the Clerk of Petty Sessions of Cockatoo Island, and
signed by some person unknown, which he asserts that he received from the Colonial
Secretary’s Office, now, gentlemen, we wish you to see that letter, and see on whose authority
a prisoner is detained three years after he is eligible for a ticket-of-leave. Gentlemen, a
prisoner by the name of Clarke represented his case to the Colonial Secretary, on Cockatoo
Island, and Mr. Cowper said he did not understand the regulation that compelled a prisoner
to do an additional probation for a ticket-of-leave on account of the iron time he received;
which makes us believe this regulation arose on the island. Gentlemen, we wish to shew
you distinction made between the rich man and the poor man. When we committed our
crimes we were but boys; our respective ages being, Holland 15£, and Carroll 17 years of
age; besides our utter ignorance of the laws of our country. Gentlemen, had we known the
danger of the crime that we committed we would not have committed it. Now, gentlemen,
I will shew you difference. We were both sentenced to suffer the extreme penalty of the
law, which sentence was commuted to fifteen years, with the first three years in chains.
Shortly after the prisoner Holland was tried, a man hy the name of Lakeman was tried and
found guilty of the same crime, and the sentence of death passed upon him. His sentence,
in the first instance, was commuted to ten years, without chains; and on his arrival on the
island he received the best situation on it, and before he had completed his second year he
obtained his free pardon. Now, gentlemen, a man arrived at the age of understanding, and
knows that he breaks the laws of his country in committing a crime in defiance of the laws;
he received a remission of his sentence, and two boys committing a crime of the same nature
in their ignorance of the laws, must pass the best of their days in a prison. Gentlemen, we
have


have heard great boasting of English justice; but we wish to know if it was just to allow
Lakemau at large; if so, it must be unjust to keep us in prison for a number of years.
We remain, &c.,
JOHN HOLLAND and
HENRY CARROLL.
50 (written). George Walter Rowe.
I)a.rlivfiTiurst Gaol
21 February, 1861.
To the Chairman of the Select Committee now sitting on Prison Discipline.
The Petition of George Walter Rowe, —
A prisoner who was sentenced in the year 1847, in England, to a sentence of ten years, and,
in consequence of getting into trouble in this Colony, I am still considered as an Imperial
prisoner. I received a sentence in this Colony, in 1857, of ten years; the probation for that
is six years and eight months, whereas a Colonial prisoner’s probation for the same sentence
would be five and a half years. In the year 1851 the Government formed a just regulation
by which a prisoner might shorten bis probation by extra labour, which enabled a Colonial
prisoner sentenced for ten years to obtain a ticket-of-leave in four years, and even in three
years and eight months ; whereas an Imperial prisoner has to do the same amount of labour to
obtain the marks which are placed on the board, but he derives no benefit from them.
On the 16tb of last May I was sentenced by the Visiting Magistrate to work twelve months
in irons, the probation for which is eight months, at the end of which time I applied to the
Superintendent to have my irons removed, but he could not tell me whether I was due or not;
the Superintendent then made inquiry of Mr. Taylor, the Clerk, but he either could or would
not tell. Captain Mann then asked me if I ever knew any similar case ; I mentioned one
in which an Imperial prisoner had his irons removed. Upon examining the books he found
my statement correct. I was then referred to the Visiting Magistrate, and ultimately
learned that Captain Mann had written to the Superintendent of Convicts, from whom he
received a reply that my irons should be struck. After waiting a fortnight without them
being struck I refused work. I was taken before the Visiting Magistrate, who did ask
my reason for refusing work, which I stated—to which Mr. Mann replied that my irons
would have been struck before bad I not refused to work. After then completing a sentence
of fourteen days solitary I was directed by Captain M'Lerie to write to him, giving a full
statement of my case, which, if he found correct, he would cause my irons to be struck. I
saw him the week following, when he told me that Captain Mann had received orders to have
my irons removed two days previous to that on which I refused work.
Now, gentlemen, I beg leave to state, in conclusion, that if Captain Mann’s orders
had been promptly executed 1 would not have refused work, and thereby saved myself and
the authorities a deal of trouble. Hoping you will institute an inquiry into my case,
I remain, &c.,
GEORGE WALTER ROWE.
51 (written.) LAURENCE POWELL.
Darlinghurst Gaol,
21 February, 1861.
To the Chairman of the Committee now sitting on Prison Discipline.
Sir
I hope I shall not he too hold in asking you to spend a small portion of your
valuable time in hearing the grievances of 16 or 17 self-taught stone-cutters. Sir, we
believe that the Government expects the free officer in charge, Mr. Fitzgerald, to be able to
direct and instruct those men. I can assure you, sir, he can do neither, for he has never
served one hour to the trade; he does not know whether a stone is cut right or wrong,
unless he is told by one of the prisoners in the gang; in fact, he does not know a square
from a *trafoht-edge. When there is an order given for certain stones to be cut for a
building, each prisoner generally spoils one or two before they complete one fit to be used.
The free officer then gives an order to have them broken up and thrown into the river, before
any other free officer sees them. Now, sir, there is the loss of time in the quarrying those
stones the loss of time in dragging them from the quarry to the stone-cutters, and then the
cutting of those stones; and all this loss of time and destruction of materials from the
want of some freo man conversant with the trade to direct and instruct us. Now, sir, the
Government has been pleased to appoint a certain task for each man under the o d system to
a „d bv doing that task it leaves them entitled to half-a-day s credit and three-
pence gratuity ; consequently they get the benefit of that indulgence called <■ task-work
credit *up to the present day. Now, sir, we. the prisoners addressing you, are labouring
nndeJ the new system, and are compelled to work side by side with those under the old
system and out foot for foot and stone for stone with them, and we get no half-day credit,
nor threepence gratuity, only what the free overseer thinks proper to give us; some days he
gives us three half-pence, and some days a peony ; and when we ask him the reason he is
dealing so unjustly with us, he will give us no satisfaction. W ien we appea to the Super-
intendent for justice, he will tell us to go back to our gangs, as he cannot be losing his time
in listening to' our complaints. We next see the Visiting Magistrate on the mattei . he wi
tell us he has nothing to do with the Engineering Department. And this is the way our
grievances are redresfed. Every hand is raised in vengeance against us. No hope . no hope .


Only work out a miserable existence, and a long sentence, under tbe iron band of tyranny -
and these are tbe causes of so many dangerous and perilous attempts being made to escape
from tbe island. Sir, if any of tbe prisoners on the island told you that they were justly dealt
by, let me describe tbe class of prisoners they are—men, probably, that have never seen the
public works, such as cooks, butlers, servants, and messengers; wardsmen, shedmen, police-
men, moneyed men, and informers. Now, sir, should you take our miserable condition into
consideration, and better our position, it is to be hoped you will take the power out of such
free overseers hands, who take a pleasure in depriving us of our small amount of pay, when
we merit it by completing the task that leaves us entitled to such indulgence. There is one
class more that I wish to bring under your immediate notice—what we prisoners call
“ Cockatoo Island convict gentlemen ” —they are men whose skins are not bronzed with the
exposure to the sun’s broiling effects, nor are they ever exposed to a wet jacket, a blistered
hand, or a hungry belly. These are men who are in positions which allow them plenty of
time to premeditate plans of the most skilful nature, at the same time with the most unprin-
cipled, and unmanly, and foul intentions. Now, sir, like the skilful architect, they form
their plans, point out their retreat, and shew joyously the hopes of success; then the
hopeless prisoners, sir, jump at the moment, seize the opportunity, and commence operations,
with the assistance of those unprincipled scoundrels, that get this up for the express purpose
of getting their liberty at the expense of their fellow-prisoners; when, within a hours
of its completion, these men give the names of the different men, and they are called out one
by one, and chained and sentenced, and solitary is the order of the day. Now, sir, it is for
you to judge how those unfortunate men will be dealt with for the remaining portion of their
sentence; while they are in the cells the witty concoctors of those plans lay their claims on
the Government, pointing out the danger they stand in by their not having been in cells
where their fellow-sufferers suppose them to be. Now, sir, the Superintendent sends a
special letter to the Glassification Board, strongly recommending these informers for their
liberty, at the same time pointing out the danger they will incur by remaining on the island.
The fact is, sir, they obtain their liberty, or a ticket-of-leavc, or seme easy position on the
island, through their very meritorious conduct; and when they obtain that indulgence they
smile at the Superintendent’s simplicity, and laugh at the Classification Board, and dance
with their friends that night, boasting how they have outwitted the Government, Now, sir,
this is as near their character as our abilities will allow us to express. Now, sir, if there
were any hopes held out to us prisoners we should not be so apt to be led away by those
prisoners, superior in cunning, and who take advantage of our ignorance. We submissively
await your impartial decision. J
LAURENCE POWELL.
(At S lling, 12 April , 1861.)
52 {written). JAMES ArNOTT AND (xEORGE THURSTON.
To J. Lucas, Esq., M.L.A.
Sir,
We enclose, herewith, a copy of our grievances for your perusal, hoping that
you will lay them before the House of Assembly at the earliest opportunity. We are aware
that we have not taken the proper steps, but, at the same time, beg you to consider that we
have waited in patient expectation for the last fifteen months, for the fulfilment of certain
hopes which, it appears, have been doomed to disappointment; and that hope deferred
has made the heart sick, the last spark has become entirely extinguished. We have become
as men having no hope, in fine, we have become desperate.
The records which survive of the treatment experienced by the prisoners subjected to
the tyianny of those unfeeling monsters at Melbourne are replete with lamentations: and it
is to be hoped, that when they can be prevented, they will not be allowed to be enacted here,
for the threshold of danger being once entered, terror ceases to exercise its grim sway. In
bringing the various subjects of complaint under your notice, we will endeavour to be as
brief as possible, as it would exhaust your patience to dwell at considerable length on every
separate subject. J
, , Jhe causes of the late disturbance, the many attempts to escape, as well as the out-
break of October, 1859, are these briefly, as follow
. lwo codes of regulations are in operation, by which one class of men receive
certain privileges and advantages, which the remainder are denied. r i he first of these is the
mark or credit system, for extra work, by which all prisoners, tried prior to the Ist June,
1858, are afforded an opportunity of recovering their liberty after having served a little
more than one-third of their sentences; while ail men tried since that period are called
upon, not only to do the same amount of labour, but to serve the full period of their
sentences, without any prospect of any mitigation whatever, no matter how exemplary a
man s. conduct may be. Now this in itself would not be so bad, if the Judges, having been
apprised of the tickct-ofJeave regulations being abrogated, had passed sentences in propor-
mn ; u ic \ery icveise has been the case, as we shall presently shew, sentences generally
being not only as severe, but even more so than they were under the former regulations
This remark applies particulary to the sentences at the various Courts of Quarter Sessions,
an avera S e > are one-fourth heavier than those passed by the higher Courts ; for
si ice, cases o u eung forged cheques are rarely punished by a heavier sentence than
wi.n wn?nr S, T.' *!7 T ICSt . ances a fo ™er conviction is proved, whereas, James Baker,
character nf +l° V or f 'f • i &t time l^‘s or an J ot^er offence, and who received a good
character at the time of trial, was sentenced to seven years at the Sydney Quarter Sessions.
Two


. ~ I™™'?}?* wholesale horse stealers (William and John Maekay), brothers tried
WhlrLf o\t” „?e'r U tH ed r h ’ ?*?' ™prl™ent in a gaol
p ’ • tned fo . r a similar offence, about the same time, in other parts of the
Colony, receive sentences ranging from five to ten years, A party of four men,Hied at the
Yass L cr Sessions, Jctober, 1859, for cattle killing, are disposed of as follows-—One
gets two years one gets five years, and the other two get stven years each ; the names of these
men are Leadbetter, James, M'Kenzie, and Fuller. As the many instances we could mention
similar cases of gross disparity, which would fill about a ream of paper, we shall content
ourselves by referring to only one more, which is the case of James Wade, convicted a few
months since of picking a woman s pocket in the street; this man was sentenced to seven
years haul labour, though it is an offence invariably disposed of summarily at the Police
V- Ce , by three or six months imprisonment, and in this instance, the Bench offered to
dispose of the case summarily, thereby acknowledging that they considered their powers
amply sufficient to pass as severe a sentence as the offence merited (which, at the very
outside, could not have exceeded two years) ; but, unfortunately, the prisoner had employed
an attorney, who doubtless consulted his own interests in getting the case sent to the
cessions. How can we respect the laws of our country when they are administered thus.
_ secondly.—W e complain of the illegality of detaining prisoners after the expiration
ot their sentence, in consequence of having incurred the punishment of a few days in the
cells for some trivial breach of the regulations; but, as this is a subject that will sooner or
later have to be decided by the Judges of the Supreme Court, it is not necessary to do more
than just refer to it here as one of our grievances.
Thirdly.—There is a system of coercion by convict overseers, the evils of which must
be apparent to the most superficial observer, one of the most disgusting features of which is
allowing a man named Berriman to carry a bludgeon all day amongst the men, as if he were
in search of some stray ox. What effect is this likely to have on the feelings of the men
inclined to be peaceable and orderly if they are only encouraged.
Fourthly.—We complain that the present money gratuity is partially and unfairly
distributed, some men being allowed to earn as much as sixpence per day, while others can
only get a penny; now any impartial person will be inclined to admit, that as long as a man
conducts himself with the strictest propriety, and does as much work as his bodily strength
will admit of, he is entitled to the maximum amount granted; but this being a subject°of
(to us) such vital importance, we shall leave its further discussion to persons more competent
to deal impartially with the subject.
Fifthly, —By a course of general injudicious management our health is impaired, the
medical returns shewing that there are always on an average about one-sixth of the whole
convict population of the island incapacitated from labour by suffering from some malady or
other; this is to be attributed, more especially, to the inferiority and insufficiency of the
Government ration, the state of the dormitories, not proper appliances for cleanliness of
body, and to being invariably kept out in rainy weather until we are wet through. Thus,
we are first made ill by bad management, and then driven to the hospital for a cure; and it
speaks volumes for the skill, attention, and humanity of the doctor and his assistant, that
considering the immense proportion of sick to the healthy (a proportion unequal in any
place of the kind under British rule), that the rate of mortality should be as low as it is.
It should here be remarked, that, by a money gratuity issue which is allowed to be spent for
extra rations, the Government thereby acknowledge that the scale of provisions issued is too
low; how then must those be off who get a penny a day or less.
Sixthly.—We are studiously kept in ignorance of all Acts of Council specially
referring to penal discipline, and we often think ourselves illegally dealt with, when probably
we are not; now, as every person ought to be allowed an opportunity of making himself
acquainted with the laws of the country by which he is governed, in order that he may not
transgress through ignorance, we request that copies of all Acts of Council, or extracts
therefrom relating to the prison population, may be published from time to time, and
suspended in some conspicuous part of the convict barracks.
Seventhly.—We are not allowed an opportunity of making the slightest provision
for ourselves by the time our sentences expire; thus the majority of the men are discharged
totally destitute, without as much as will sometimes supply them one meal, and what is the
consequence the records of the Court too truly tell.
Eighthly.—We find our complaints never receive that attention we think they merit.
The Superintendent and Visiting Justice are difficult of access, the men in a body never
being inspected by either of those officers; letters, for which postage is charged, never reach
their destination, or is the postage refunded. There are no means of educational improve-
ment; no classification of prisoners; and lastly, we are compelled to work on Saturday till
two p.m. without our dinner, which is a thing unknown in any other similar establishment
in the Colony, all labour for the week ending at twelve o’clock on that day in every other
prison; and it should be here explained that this alteration was made at Cockatoo Island
for the purpose of enabling the men working under the mark system to obtain the full
amount of credit allowed to be earned daily, a thing we derive no benefit from.
In conclusion, we humbly beg that, should a Board of Inquiry be appointed, we may
be afforded an opportunity of being examined and substantiating these our complaints, and
that should you consider the foregoing statement worthy of your consideration you will take
such steps as to you may seem advisable.
We remain, &c.,
(on behalf of ourselves and fellow sufferers)
JAS. ARNOTT.
GEORGE THURSTON.
Darliiigfturst, 19 January, 1861.
53


58 (written). Patrick Byrne.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen of the Committee inquiring into Prison and Penal
Discipline.
Gentlemen, . . „
I, the undersigned, was tried and convicted at the Assize held in iloscommon,
on the 7th July, 1838, and sentenced to fifteen years transportion, which sentence expired
in Julv, 1853. While serving the above sentence, I received solitary sentences, and sentences
to the'treadmill, and eight months to a chain gang. I was tried on the 11th September,
1854, before His Honor Mr. Justice Dickinson, and received eight years. _ When I received
that sentence, some few months addition to my Imperial sentence remaining unfinished, I
was compelled to do two-thirds of the Colonial sentence, without marks, and then go free ;
that sentence expired on the 11th January, 1860. Mr. Taylor, C.P.S., told me, that by
order of the Classification Board my Colonial sentence would expire on the 11th January,
1860, and that I should receive a ticket-of-leave for the five months addition, received while
serving ray Imperial sentence; but I did not receive the ticket, according to the order he
said he received from the Board, although my character was in gaol irreproachable, but I
was delayed till the 24th April. In July, 1861, I forfeited my indulgence by leaving my
district, which I did on the grounds of being a free man. I was apprehended on the 29th
December, for being out of my district, being hard at work at the time in my own place,
honesty and industry being my motto, and a good prospect before me; but, alas! I was
dragged from my home to Sydney. On my arrival in Sydney, I was brought before Mr.
Horsey; he told me I had two months twenty-four days to do. I objected to it, claiming
as a matter of right the month I was on escort, which would cause me to go free on the 24th
March. He (Mr, Horsey) told me he would not allow me the month, and would not bring
me before a Magistrate. Since I have been here I have seen the Visiting Magistrate ; he
requested Mr. Taylor, C.P.S., to lay my case before the Board. I have applied since at the
office of the Superintendent, and lam told there is no answer from the_ Board yet. Mr.
Taylor has told me that I would be allowed the month I was on escort; if so, lam at the
present moment a free man. Gentlemen, having some important evidence to give before the
Committee, I hope you will give me the opportunity of doing so, by sending for me.
I have, &e.,
PATRICK BYRNE.
Cockatoo Island, 24 March, 1861.
PART II.
A.
To J. C. Read, Esq., 1 March, 1861.
Governor of Darlinghurst Gaol.
Sir,
With regard to the statement made this morning to the Committee by the
four Cockatoo Island prisoners in hospital, I beg most respectfully to inform you, that it has
been since intimated to me by one of the before-mentioned prisoners, named George Jones,
that should the Committee require further corroboration they are referred to other two
prisoners among the Cockatoo men, named Henry Whittaker and James Burns. I have
every reason to believe that these two last-mentioned prisoners could not have had any
prior communication with those in hospital; also, being a wardsman in the establishment,
no such proceeding could have taken place without my knowledge.
I have thought it advisable to make the foregoing remarks in order to convince you
of the genuineness of the information.
J. H. MACKIE.
I have the honor to transmit this document for the perusal of the Select Committee
of Prison Management.
JNO. C. READ,
Acting Principal Gaoler,
4 March, 1861. Darlinghurst.
B.
Richard Ainsworth, per “ Isabella,” to Van Dieman’s Land, 1833; was tried at London,
July, 1832 ; sentence, 7 years, for felony.
Was again tried at the Supreme Court, at Hobart Town, on the sth December, 1839,
sentence, life, for forgery; arrived in New South Wales, per “Layten,” 1840, from Van
Diemen’s Land; and was forwarded to Norfolk Island, per “ Governor Phillip,” on the 14th
July, 1840; was returned to Sydney on the 27th March, 1844, his sentence having been
commuted to 14 years from the date of conviction—he having to serve a commuted sentence
under the Act 2 Victoria, No. 1.
Was again tried at the Supreme Court, at Bathurst, on the 20th September, 1848,
and was sentenced 7 years roads, for uttering a forgery under the assumed name of James
Jabez


&?“ ° f - «
fc loni„J;^niog le a d m t „,t lettef ° n ' 51,6 2f f Fab ™-y, 1?M. for
Cockatoo Island on the 6th March * 1852- A { tc L tie r °ads; received on
Newcastle, on the 3rd February 1853 kIL Vt ? r ® a]kwater Stockade, at
Was again tried .f f7' nI o ar g ed free on the 20th November, 1853.*
sentenced 5 /ears ’ T the 3rd Jan ™* 1854 ’
January, 1854 ; discharged to Darlinghurst GoaUnThe 2oth' March° ° n
on Cockatoo Island on the 3rd February 1859 tn ™ i + arch, 18o4y , again received
Darlinghurst Gaol on the 6 15th Feb^uarv , Ai™ P \T -n discharged to
of September, 1865. 69 ' Alnsworth not be free until the 20th
magistrftrr geltTemt! elZl S
mbJunXZflZe °r Tuli " bar P ' “ el ! isb discharged from y ctkat'„o lin'd „n “the
No 61-U3 dated 16th 7wml the a<morable tbe Secretory,
on the 14th February 1852 ’ ! ' VIIkIDS ° n MS a » rehe,lded ’ “ d returned to Cocka.oo
8 March , 1861.
G. K. M.
C.
[Reply.]
Hyde Park,
gj r Wednesday Evening , 10 April.
1 * - - ■-s Status
f 0n th ! e 6 f h - I May ’ Jury Causes commence and although two Courts will then *it
for three weeks daily, yet one Judge can occasionally be spared. And I shall feel it to hp
duty, to attend the Committee, whenever it may bes't sui/their convenience^to
... could, of course, attend on any day after Ap. 4. But the House sit* at tw +• ’
lo like manner, I could attend on any SaJday; bfarranging togifeTa n t en l“‘"e
m Chambers instead. But your Committees, 1 know, do not usually meet on Saturdays.
I am, &c.,
Chas. Tompson, Esq.
ALFRED STEPHEN.
D.
The Turnkeys of Darlinghurst Gaol.
To the Honorable the Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly on Prison Discipline
„ &c., &c., &c. v ’
Gentlemen,
We feel assured, whilst your endeavours are exerted to place the treatment of
prisoners on a proper and substantial basis, you will alike regard the interests of those who
are placed in responsible situations over them.
Annexed hereto is a recital of the duties we have to perform in the capacity of
turnkeys, on perusal thereof it will be found no opportunity is afforded us for social inter-
course or improvement, but each succeeding day, a repetition of that harrowing spectacle the
consequence of misery and crime. Honorable gentlemen need scarcely be informed how
powerfully this must operate upon mind as well as body, and so render our positions little
superior to those by whom we are surrounded. That solemn day of rest from toil the
Sabbath, brings to us no soothing influences, since we are shut out from its enjoyments • and
if at its close, we enter the hallowed precincts of a place of worship, the fatigue of the body
overpowers inclination and shrouds it in unconquerable drowsiness.
We beg, respectfully, further to submit that the salary for this labour is 6s. 9d per
diem, and if, after a lapse of years, any of our number should become incapacitated there is
no prospect of future benefit, however faithful the service. There are other departments in
which provision is made for the future, and where such is the case it must ever act as a
stimulus to increased utility and diligence, and we would beg to observe the amount of pay
at present allowed enables us to make no provision beyond the time being; families must be
supported,
n . * T his discharge from Newcastle was obtained by forging a letter, purporting to come from the
Colonial Secretary s Office, and to be signed by Mr. E. D. Thomson.
t Ainsworth was discharged in error from Parramatta Gaol at this time, on the expiration of the
fu n n ? e ° f i fi J e yearS * he afterwards was at lar g e f or a few days, and went to the office of the Honorahle
the Colonial Secretary, where he was apprehended by the police as illegally at large, and returned to
Government to serve the residue of his cumulative sentences.
157—2 K


supported, and the consequent expenditure leaves little remaining as a preparation against
debility or infirmity. We, therefore, solicit your favourable consideration of the circum-
stances by which we are affected, and at the same time humbly pray you will make such
recommendation for our benefit as in your judgment may seem meet.
We are, &c.,
John Callaghan, Anthony Keogh,
Chris. Armstrong, John Fallen,
Thomas Lee, Michael Burke,
Christopher Carthy, Joseph Gates,
Michael Wallace, James Beacom,
Alexander Elliott, William Graham,
Philip Mulligan, John Gregory,
Charles Pugh, Michael Ryan.
James Callaghan,
Routine of duty performed by the Turnkeys in the establishment of H. M. Gaol,
Darlingburst.
The number employed are seventeen, and appropriated as follows :
4 permanently stationed at the three wings.
2 at front gate, one permanent, the other changed daily.
1 in hard labour yard.
1 overseer of tailors.
6 at various stations of the wall, inside the yard—east, west, north, and south.
3 performing night duty for one week—their attendance being required from 5 p.m. to
6 a.m.—after which they are relieved by three of the number periodically changed.
This arrangement places each so employed one week out of three as attendants for
the night, and all others are on the spot each succeeding day from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
Sundays not excepted.
E.
Police history of Robert Banks, per ship “ Anglia ” to Tasmania, in the year 1848.
Was convicted at the Supreme Court, Sydney, on the 9th December, 1857, of burglary,
and sentenced to five years on the roads.
Obtained a ticket-of-leave, dated 31st January, 1860, for Bathurst; was reported
absent therefrom in the May following, but for his assistance at the time in the capture of
a horse stealer, he was not deprived of his indulgence.
Absconded from Bathurst in June, 1860, being at the time under a charge of stealing
wearing apparel, but no conviction has followed. Was apprehended in Victoria last
December, returned to Sydney, and his ticket-of-leave cancelled.
Banks stated when mustered, that he was transported from India to Tasmania for
ten years in 1848—that he is a printer by trade, and that he was formerly a soldier in the
Hon. E, I. Company’s Horse Artillery.
JNO. M'LERIE,
Police Department , Sydney, Inspector General of Police.
Convict Branch, 7 May, 1861.
Sydney s Thomas Richards, Government Printer.~-1861.










