





REPORT
OF
ROYAL COMMISSION
APPOINTED TO
Inquiry into and Report upon Certain Matters Relating
to Mungana, Chillagoe Mines, Etc.
1930.
QUEENSLAND.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON MUNGANA, CHILLAGOE MINES, ETC.
PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY: ANTHONY JAMES CUMMING, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
A. 6—1930.




COMMISSION.
Entered on Eecord by me in the Eegister of Patents, No. 17, page 122, this twenty-eighth day of February, a.d. one thousand nine hundred and thirty.
(Signed) G. W. WATSON,
Under Secretary, Chief Secretary’s Department.
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 28th February, 1930.
HIS Excellency the Governor has been pleased to direct the publication, for general
information, of the following Commission.
A. E. MOOEE.
George the Fifth, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, Ireland, and the British
Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India:—
To The Honourable James Lang Campbell, lately one of the Justices of Our Supreme
Court of New South Wales.
Greeting:
Whereas it is expedient in the public interest that full and careful inquiry should be made
into: —
(1) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the appointment of Feter Louis
Goddard as Chillagoe Mines Manager under the provisions of “The Chillagoe and
Etheridge Railways Act of 1918”;
(2) The management of the works and property subject to the management of Peter
Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid;
(3) The conduct of the said Peter Louis Goddard generally in the performance 'of his
duties as such Manager and more particularly his conduct as the Manager of the
Smelters and Ore Eeduction and Treatment Works and other property subject to
his control, and management as such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid;
(4) The interest or interests if any of the said Peter Louis Goddard in any firm,
company, or business, having dealings or any business relationship with the said
Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid;
(5) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to—
(a) The forfeiture of certain Mineral Leases in the Area now known as the Chillagoe
Gold and Mineral Field held by or in the name of The Chillagoe Eailway and
Mines Limited or by or on behalf of the Mungana Mining Company Limited,
and forfeited on or about the First day of April, 1917;
(6) The acquisition of any Mineral Leases in the said Area in the name of one
Frederick Eeid after the said forfeiture;
(c) The formation and registration of a company called “Mungana Mines Limited”;
( d ) The acquisition by the said “Mungana Mines Limited” of certain Mineral
Leases acquired as aforesaid in the name of the said Frederick Eeid or any
interest therein;
( e ) The sale by the said Frederick Eeid and/or “Mungana Mines Limited” to
the Government of Queensland of any Mineral Leases in the said Area;
(/) The purchase by the management of the smelters and ore reduction and treatment
works acquired under “The Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918” of
ores supplied from any Mineral Leases sold as aforesaid to the Government
of Queensland before or after such sale;
(6) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the formation and registration:—
(a) of a company called “Fluorspar Mining Company Limited”;
(b) a company called “Argentum Mining Company Limited”; ,
(7) The dealings by and between the said Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe
Mines Manager as aforesaid or any other person for or on behalf of the manage-
ment of the said smelters ore reduction and treatment works and the said Fluorspar
Mining Company Limited and the said Argentum Mining Company Limited, the
firm of * ‘ Dunlop & Eeid ’ ’ carrying on business as Sawyers and Timber Merchants at
Tarzali, and the firm of “Goddard & Eeid” carrying on business as Landowners
and/or Hotelkeepers at Cairns;
(8) (a) The conduct and (b) the interest of any Minister of the Crown or any person
having any public or official position under the Crown in relation to or in all
or any of the abovementioned matters, transactions, or things, or any matter,
transactions, or thing arising out of or incidental to such matters, transactions, or
things or any of them; —
AND THAT such full and careful inquiry should be made into all the abovementioned matters
to the intent that the whole truth as to such matters should be determined and reported as
hereinafter required and that it should be determined and reported as hereinafter required
whether and if so in what respect and to what degree any and what Minister of the Crown
or any and what person having any public or official position under the Crown or any and
what person having any duty to the Government of Queensland was guilty of any conduct
in relation to any of the abovementioned matters, transactions, or things, or any matter,
transaction, or thing, arising out of of incidental to such transactions, matters, or things,
or any of them, which was improper, having regard to the position and duty of such Minister
of the Crown or person the public interest and the whole of the circumstances, and that it
should be determined and reported as hereinafter required whether and if so in what respect
and to what degree any and if so what transaction hereinbefore mentioned was inexpedient
in the public interest or improper:


Now, therefore, know Ye that We, reposing especial trust in your zeal, knowledge,
learning, industry, discretion, and ability, do by these Presents, by and with the advice of Our
Executive Council of Our State of Queensland, constitute and appoint you, the said the
Honourable James Lang Campbell, to be Our Commissioner, for the purpose of inquiring
into the matters hereinbefore mentioned and any other matter pertaining thereto which to
you should seem proper and meet in the public interests: And We do hereby require and
enjoin you to make diligent inquiry into the matters aforesaid, and for the purpose to exercise
all the powers conferred upon a Commission by “The Official Inquiries Evidence Acts, 1910 to
1929": And we do furthermore command and enjoin you to summon before you and to
examine all such persons as may appear to you able to inform you concerning the premises
and to cause to be taken down in shorthand and reduced into writing the evidence of the
several witnesses that may appear before you, and such evidence, together with a full and
faithful report touching the matters aforesaid, to transmit to the Honourable the Premier
and Chief Secretary of Our said State.
In testimony whereof, We have caused the Public Seal of Our said State to be hereunto
affixed.
Witness Our Trusty and Well-beloved His Excellency Sir Thomas Herbert John
Chapman Goodwin, Lieutenant-General on the Retired List and in the Reserve
of Officers of Our Army, Knight Commander o£ Our Most Honourable Order
of the Bath, Companion of Our Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
St. George, Companion of Our Distinguished Service Order, Governor of Our
State of Queensland and its Dependencies, in the Commonwealth of Australia,
at Government House, Brisbane, this twenty-eighth day of February, in the
year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and thirty, and in the twentieth
year of Our Reign.
(Signed) JOHN GOODWIN.
By His Excellency’s Command,
(Signed) A. E. MOORE.


ROYAL COMMISSION—MUNGANA, CHILLAGOE MINES, ETC.
19 30.
QUEENSLAND.
Presented to Parliament by Command.
REPORT.
To His Excellency Sir Thomas Herbert John Chapman Goodwin,
Lieutenant-General on the Retired List and in the Reserve of Officers
of His Majesty’s Army, Knight Commander of the Most Honourable
Order of the Bath, Companion of the Most Distinguished Order of
St. Michael and St. George, Companion of the Distinguished Service
Order, Governor of the State of Queensland and its Dependencies, in
the Commonwealth of Australia.
May it Please Your Excellency,—
On the 28th February, 1930, I received Your Excellency’s Commission
to inquire into and report upon the following matters as defined by that
Commission :
Whereas it is expedient in the public interest that full and careful
inquiry should be made into —
1. The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the appoint-
ment of Peter Louis Goddard as Chillagoe Mines Manager
under the provisions of “ The Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways
Act of 1918 ” ;
2. The management of the works and property subject to the
management of Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines
Manager aforesaid ;
3. The conduct of the said Peter Louis Goddard generally in the
performance of his duties as such Manager and more particu-
larly his conduct as the Manager of the Smelters and Ore
Reduction and Treatment Works and other property subject
to his control and management as such Chillagoe Mines
Manager aforesaid;
4. The interest or interests if any of the said Peter Louis Goddard
in any firm, company, or business, having dealings or any
business relationship with the said Peter Louis Goddard as
such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid ;


5. The circumstances surrounding and leading up to —
(a) The forfeiture of certain M/qeral Leases in the area now
known as the Chillagoe Gold and Mineral Field held by or
in the name of The Chillagoe Railway and Mines Limited
or by or on behalf of the Mungana Mining Company Limited
and forfeited on or about the First day of April, 1917 ;
( b ) The acquisition of any mineral leases in the said Area in
the name of one Frederick Reid after the said forfeiture ;
(c) The formation and registration of a company called
“ Mungana Mines Limited” ;
(d) The acquisition by the said “ Mungana Mines Limited ”of
certain Mineral Leases acquired as aforesaid in the name of
the said Frederick Reid or any interest therein ;
(e) The sale by the said Frederick Reid and/or “ Mungana Mines
Limited ” to the Government of Queensland of any Mineral
Leases in the said Area ;
(/) The purchase by the management of the smelters and ore
reduction and treatment works acquired under “ The
Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918” of ores supplied
from any Mineral Leases sold as aforesaid to the Government
of Queensland before or after such sale ;
6. The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the formation
and registration—
(а) Of a company called “Fluorspar Mining Company Limited”; and
(б) A company called “ Argentum Mining Company, Limited ” ;
7. The dealings by and between the said Peter Louis Goddard as
such Chillagoe Mines Manager as aforesaid or any other person
for or on behalf of the management of the said smelters ore
reduction and treatment works and the said Fluorspar Mining
Company Limited and the said Argentum Mining Company
Limited, the firm of “ Dunlop and Reid ” carrying on business
as Sawyers and Timber Merchants ,at Tarzali, and the firm of
“ Goddard and Reid” carrying on business as Landowners
and/or Hotelkeepers at Cairns ;
8. (a) The conduct and ( b ) the interest of any Minister of the
Crown or any person having any public or official position
under the Crown in relation to or in all or any of the above-
mentioned matters, transactions, or things, or any matter,
transaction, or thing arising out of or incidental to such
matters, transactions, or things or any of them ;
And that such full and careful inquiry should be made into all the
abovementioned matters to the intent that the whole truth as to such
matters should be determined and reported as hereinafter required; and
that it should be determined and reported as hereinafter required whether
and if so in what respect and to what degree any and what Minister of
the Crown or any and what person having any public or official position


under the Crown or any and what person having any duty to the
Government of Queensland was guilty of any conduct in relation to any
of the abovementioned matters, transactions, or things, or any matter,
transaction, or thing, arising out of or incidental to such transactions,
matters, or things, or any of them, which was improper, having regard
to the position and duty of such Minister of the Crown or person the
public interest and the whole of the circumstances, and that it should be
determined and reported as hereinafter required whether and if so in what
respect and to what degree any and if so what transaction hereinbefore
mentioned was inexpedient in the public interest or improper.
The sittings of the Commission for the purpose of taking evidence
were held in the Land Court Room, Executive Buildings, Brisbane, and
in a building of the State Smelters, Chillagoe. The inquiry was held in
public, and representatives of the Press were present throughout.
The first sitting was held on Wednesday, the 30th April, 1930.
Mr. A. D. McGill of Counsel, with him Mr. R. Martin of Counsel,
instructed by the Crown Solicitor, Mr. H. J. H. Henchman, and assisted
by Mr. J. A. Walsh, of the legal firm of J. F. Fitzgerald and Walsh,
appeared to assist the Commission.
The following Counsel and Solicitors also appeared to represent the
respective stated witnesses :
At Brisbane —
Mr. B. F. Fahey, with him Mr. B. H. Matthews (instructed by
Messrs. Macnish, Macrossan, and Dowling), for Mr. William
McCormack.
Mr. E. T. Real (instructed by Messrs. MacPherson and Coy.) for
Messrs. Peter Louis Goddard, Frederick Reid, Robert
Alexander Dunlop, and Duncan Campbell McDiarmid.
Mr. E. E. Quinlan for the Queensland Branch of the Australian
Labour Party.
Mr. P. B. Macgregor (instructed by Messrs. Feez, Ruthning, and
Coy.) for the Bank of New South Wales, Ltd.
At Chillagoe —
Mr. J. Bennett for Messrs.- Peter Louis Goddard, Frederick Reid,
Robert Alexander Dunlop, and Duncan Campbell McDiarmid.
Your Commissioner, after hearing the opening address of his assisting
Counsel, began to take evidence on the Ist May, 1930, and thereafter,
with a few unavoidable adjournments, sat until the 20th June, 1930.
Forty-three witnesses were examined either at Brisbane or Chillagoe, and
in addition to verbal evidence, one hundred and three documents of
varying volume were received as exhibits. Whilst visiting Chillagoe your
Commissioner had the benefit of an inspection of the works in operation
and of learning the usual course of procedure in dealing with ores.
A transcript of the verbal evidence, which was taken in shorthand,
is attached to this report.


For both clearness and convenience, I will deal with the different
subjects comprised in the directions contained in the Commission, in the
order in which they are set out :
1. The Circumstances surrounding and Leading up to the Appoint-
ment of Peter Louis Goddard as Chillagoe Mines Manager
UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF “ THE CHILLAGOE AND ETHERIDGE RAILWAYS
Act of 1918 ” :
There is no conclusive evidence and indeed no satisfactory direct
evidence as to what was the determining consideration in the selection of
Mr. Goddard for appointment to the position of Manager under the
provisions of “ The Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918.” There
must have been some undisclosed factor in his case sufficient to outweigh
the apparently higher general qualifications of some of the other competing
candidates.
There were at least three others whose wider experience, more
assured technical equipment, and higher personal standing entitled them
to more attention than they appear to have received from those whose
duty it was to examine credentials and weigh the real merits of the
different applicants.
Mr. Jones, the Minister for Mines, the only Minister examined,
who, however, claimed privilege in respect of all discussions in Cabinet
on the subject, said that Mr. Goddard was selected because of his general
efficiency. It is impossible to accept that as a serious statement. Mr.
Goddard’s technical qualifications, so far as any member of the Govern-
ment knew, were not greater than might have been acquired by any
intelligent foreman smelter. Beyond his practical experience as “ a furnace
and converter hand and Smelter Manager”—to use his own description—
no other qualification was suggested. The members of the Government
who appear to have been directly concerned in the appointment—that is
to say, Messrs. Theodore, McCormack, and Jones—knew therefore that
Mr. Goddard had no experience in the administrative or the economic or
commercial requirements of the general management of an enterprise
which combined mining, smelting, and marketing of products on a large
scale.
The members concerned were also well aware that Mr. Goddard
was destitute of engineering experience and knowledge, since they
concurred in putting that forward as the reason for offering him the
appointment at a salary of £l,OOO per annum, terminable on three months’
notice, “to take charge of the smelting operations to be carried out in
connection with the properties acquired by. the Government under the
Chillagoe Purchase Act,” with a promise that his appointment to the
higher position of General Manager at a salary of £1,500 would follow
on the successful carrying out of his duties under the arrangement.
Incidentally, this first appointment ignored the express direction of
the Act to appoint the manager forthwith after the coming into operation
of the Act for a period of not more than five and not less than three
years at a salary to be fixed by the Governor in Council.


A year later—that is to say, on the 22nd April, 1920 —Mr. Goddard
was given the statutory appointment for a term of three years with an
addition of £5OO per annum to his salary. If this was in pursuance of
the promise which was a condition of the earlier appointment in April,
1919, it is surprising, to say the least of it, that there is nothing to show
what was regarded as the successful carrying out of his duties in the
terms of that promise, unless his zeal in preparing the way for the
subsequent proposal to purchase the Mungana Mines is to. be regarded in
that light. There is some evidence of what might have been looked upon
as useful service in that connection referred to in his letter to the Under
Secretary for Mines on the 17th December, 1920, where he speaks of his
twelve months’ careful observation of the Girofla Mine. It is reasonably
certain that the Mungana Mines were definitely, though only verbally,
under offer to the Government before June, 1920, and that was a position
that probably was only reached by judicious advance. There is certainly
nothing discoverable in the records relating to the operations of the
Smelters or the Einasleigh Mine to afford any satisfactory reason for
thinking that his management during the probationary period was
particularly successful in any ordinary sense of that expression.
Mr. Jones more than once in the course of his evidence referred to
the first balance-sheet of the Smelters as at the 30th June, 1920, which
purported to show a profit of £1,375 as having resulted from the operations
of the Smelters and the Einasleigh Mine under Mr. Goddard’s management
up to that date, as a complete vindication of that management and a
justification of the appointment. It is difficult to suppose that even Mr.
Jones could have believed that at the time. It is much more probable
that Mr. Jones had then no knowledge on which to form any opinion as
to the success or otherwise of Mr. Goddard’s management.
When in April, 1920, Mr. Goddard was promoted to the statutory
position, Mr. Jones had not, of course, seen the first balance-sheet referred
to, and if he had any figures relating to the Smelter operations in advance of
the balance-sheet he could have found in them no more justification for
the appointment than is supplied by the disastrous years that followed.
Probably no one, in the then existing situation of markets, ore supplies,
and industrial conditions, could have carried on the Smelters with a
profit to the State, but an honest and otherwise efficient management
and an intelligent supervision and proper control of such a management
could undoubtedly have minimised the annual loss.
It is sufficient for me in this connection to point out that the
simplest analysis of the balance-sheet in question with an elementary
knowledge of the facts will show that the supposed profit was quite
illusory.
During the period covered by the figures, the enterprise had the
benefit of a comparatively high range of metal prices, that has never
since been reached and was, at the end of the balance period, on the
decline. In the period covered by the balance-sheet 10,011-43 tons of ore
were put through the furnaces. In the Profit and Loss Account the
whole debit for mining ore, despatch, and freight was £17,141 ss. Bd.


On looking into the book entries relating to this sum it is found to be in
respect of the cost of mining, handling, and freight for 7,943-875 tons of ore
obtained from the Einasleigh Mine in the period. The difference between
the ore won and the ore treated, viz., 2,067-555 tons, was probably ore
at grass that must be considered to have been paid for in the purchase
price. There is no debit in the Profit and Loss Account in respect of that
quantity, but being smeltable ore of probably equal metal content with
the ore won, it is fair to take its price or value at probable cost. The
7,943-87 tons of ore won, cost of mining and handling 345. 0-3 d. per ton,
and freight to the Smelters 9s. l-sd. per ton, this makes a total of
435. l-Bd. per ton. Multiplying this figure by the 2,067-555 tons, we have
£4,460 as the omitted debit to Profit and Loss in respect of ore treated
during the balance period. This item alone would turn the supposed
profit of £1,375 into a loss of £3,085.
There are other facts militating against the pretence that there
was a profit, in any rational sense, from the operations of the Smelters
during Mr. Goddard’s first year of management.
I say nothing about the act of capitalising £2,100 part of the
assumed interest charge, beyond pointing out that it was a highly
debatable matter in the case of an enterprise, whose profitable future was
not demonstrable, and a considerable part of whose assets was a mine
of doubtful value, which was in fact treated as valueless as early as
May, 1922. A more serious matter, and one bearing directly upon the
question whether the Smelters made a profit in that first year, is the
allocation of the proper proportion of the total purchase money to the
different subjects acquired under the authority of the Act of 1918. Section
5 of that Act provided that a valuation of the property acquired should
be made by a person appointed by the Minister, and that the total
purchase money, £701,000, should be allocated in proportion to the
valuations so made and that the sums so allocated should be debited
against the proper public accounts accordingly.
The directions of the statute were clear and imperative.
There were four subjects to be valued—
(l) Railways, rolling-stock, and all plant and appurtenances
connected therewith.
(2) Smelters and Ore Reduction and Treatment Works and plant
and appurtenances.
(3) Mining plant and machinery.
(4) All other property acquired under this Act.
This latter obviously including the Einasleigh Mine.
Only one valuation was obtained as directed by the Act; that
was of subject—
No. 1, viz., the Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways, the buildings,
sidings, locomotives, and rolling-stock, &c.
That valuation was £500,500 10s. Id.


The other three subjects were not valued, and Mr. Theodore, then
Premier and Chief Secretary, in flagrant disregard of the requirements of
the law, allocated £30,000 only to the subject (2), £l,OOO to subject (3),
and £9,000 to the Einasleigh Mine, and arbitrarily and illegally insisted on
the Railway Department assuming the burden of the remainder £661,000
in respect of property taken over of the total value of £500,500. This
the Department did, only after protest. The only reasonable explanation
of this action of Mr. Theodore is that he evidently desired to make the
capital burden which the Smelters and the associated mine were to bear
as light as possible. A more equitable adjustment must necessarily have
increased the burden and consequently the interest chargeable to the
smelting and mining enterprise.
This would have made any pretence at a profit from the Smelters
difficult, if not impossible.
Mr. Goddard was asked for and gave his approval of this allocation
of the purchase money.
On a careful review of the whole of the circumstances before and
after the appointment, I am forced to the conclusion that Mr. Goddard
was chosen principally because it was thought by Mr. Theodore and Mr.
McCormack that he would be useful in ways and directions not
contemplated by the statute.
2. The Management of the Works and Property subject to the Manage-
ment of Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines Manager
AFORESAID :
3. The Conduct of the said Peter Louis Goddard generally in the
Performance of his Duties as such Manager and more particularly
His Conduct as the Manager of the Smelters and Ore Reduction
and Treatment Works and other Property subject to His Control
and Management as such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid :
4. The Interest or Interests if any of the said Peter Louis Goddard
in any Firm, Company, or Business, having dealings or any Business
Relationship with the said Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe
Mines Manager aforesaid :
These three subjects are so interrelated that, in order to avoid the
risk of repetition, I have thought it best to treat them as one for the
purposes of my report.
Apart from matters of general administration and the reactions of
Mr. Goddard’s peculiar relations with Messrs. Theodore, McCormack, and
Frederick Reid upon the course of his general management and the
economic fortunes of the enterprise, which I will deal with presently, the
practical working of both the Smelting Works and the Mines was not
attacked or criticised in any material way, and I need say nothing on
that subject, beyond pointing out that the system under which ore
purchased was paid for on assay values seemed to me to present a serious
defect.


I am satisfied that the method of sampling for assay was as
thorough and reliable as could be devised, and that the work of assaying
was done by the staff with competency and scrupulous fairness ; but there
was one practical safeguard which might have been adopted, and was
not, and that was to provide an effective check on the substantial
correctness of assays on the one hand, and the practical efficiency of the
smelting or extracting process on the other, by establishing a system of
approximate comparison of the assay estimate of metal content of the ore
with the actual outturn of metals from this treatment. It should not
have presented any insuperable practical difficulty to arrange the smelting
campaigns so as to put through ore of which, at least, the average assayed
metal content being known, the total of metals to be produced in the
campaign could be estimated so that the outturn of metal from the
campaign could be compared and checked by the estimate, and any
discrepancy investigated.
To come now to the general management of the enterprise and the
conduct of Mr. Goddard generally in the performance of his duties. To
some extent what I have to report in this connection will anticipate much
that specifically belongs to subjects (7) and (8) of my instructions, but
I will endeavour to avoid repetitions.
As I have already said, I do not think any management could
have made the enterprise a profitable one in the circumstances in which it
was begun and carried on. While recognising that the avowed purpose
in restarting the Smelters and the Mines was primarily politico-industrial,
in which economic laws may be said to possess no necessary sanction that
does not palliate or excuse reckless extravagance in administration,
unscrupulous exploitation of the enterprise for private benefit, suppression
and misrepresentation of the truth in the yearly balance-sheets of the
enterprise, and cynical transgressions of the law, even for the pretended
benefit of the enterprise.
All these things in one connection or another characterised the
history of the enterprise during the period of Mr. Goddard’s management,
and Mr. Goddard appears, on the evidence, to have participated in them,
either actively or passively, for his personal advantage.
Apart from the Mungana transaction, to be dealt with separately
later, the business relations between Mr. Goddard and Mr. Reid in
connection with the business of either smelting or ore supply do not
appear, on the evidence, to have been criminally corrupt, but unquestion-
ably they were based on a community of personal interests arising from
their association in other business ventures during the whole time that
Goddard remained General Manager, which was not conducive to a proper
regard for the State’s interest where those interests might conflict with
their own. It was a situation from the first in which the old pernicious
conflict between duty and interest was staged, and although, apart from
the Mungana transaction, there is no clear evidence of anything actually
criminal having developed from it, it was always subversive of State


interest, it was demoralising to the employees of the enterprise as well as
to Reid’s competitors in the field of ore supply, and it was certainly
costly both in its direct and indirect results.
I do not wish within the limited space of this Report to multiply
instances of this unnecessarily; it will be sufficient to mention a few of
the salient instances in which I think Frederick Reid unduly benefited
at the expense of the State.
The system of bonuses for continuous and minimum supplies of ore
appears to have been designed to favour Reid, because it was well known
that Reid was the only person who, at the time, had control of the means
to qualify for the bonus. He alone had a labour and transport organisation
available for the purpose. This is sufficiently apparent from the fact that
with one or two negligible exceptions, Reid alone was able to qualify to
receive the bonus. This he did to the extent of £3,835 6s. 6d. between
1922 and 1926. This bonus system might have been defensible in some
measure if the ore obtained by its means had been of any value for
treatment purposes, but as admittedly it did not pay for treatment, and
was never supposed to do so, being only used to keep the furnaces going,
Mr. Reid was the only person directly benefited, and there is evidence
that this benefit was mainly derived from the collection and transport of
dumped or refuse ore from outlying mines and ore dumps, which the producers
did not think worth sending to the Smelters, and which there is every
reason to think would never have been accepted at the Smelters from
anyone but Reid.
I am satisfied also that Reid received from Mr. Goddard’s benevolent
goodwill the advantages of a contract dated 30th September, 1926, for
the delivery of 2,586 tons of lead ore and slag flux on the terms of what
was called the 60/40 tariff, although a tariff less favourable to the supplier,
called the 50/50 tariff, had then been drawn up to come into operation
on the Ist October, 1926.
The effect of this contract was to relieve him from the 50/50
tariff, but his competitors in ores supply had to submit to that tariff for
something like a month at least before it was withdrawn, and the 60/40
tariff restored.
There are some curious and unedifying examples in the evidence of
what happened under the bonus system as well as in regard to rebates in
smelting charges which I do not consider it worth while to enlarge upon.
A not less conspicuous example of the sacrifice of the State interest,
to say nothing worse of it, for the benefit of Mr. Reid, is to be found in
what is called the Tarzali Timber Contract. This was an order given in
May, 1926, by Mr. Goddard, as supervisor of the Mount Mulligan Coal
Mine, to Messrs. Dunlop and Reid, as proprietors of the Tarzali Sawmills,
without advertisement or calling for tenders for a large quantity of sawn
timber of certain dimensions, to the value of £2,500. The timber was for
the use of the Mount Mulligan Coal Mine, and Mr. Goddard insisted in
his evidence that there was extreme urgency for the order as certain


underlying shafts were in danger of closing in, and relied on that circum-
stance mainly as a justification for the order. Whatever was the degree
of urgency, it apparently did not extend to the whole order, since a
considerable quantity of the timber supplied under it, it is said, was
rotting on the surface a year later.
Owing to the absence of Mr. Strang, the then manager of Mount
Mulligan, and the disappearance of a written requisition for the timber
said to have been sent by Mr. Strang, there is an absence of direct
evidence, other than Mr. Goddard’s, as to what the actual requirement of
the mine was. I am satisfied, however, that the Manager did not ask for
sawn timber, and it seems to me preposterous to suggest that good round
timber reasonably sufficient for any mining need could not have been
obtained in the district at less than half the cost of the sawn timber
supplied by Dunlop and Reid. It would be more correct to say supplied
by Frederick Reid because, according to the evidence of Reid’s partner,
Dunlop, who was also the Mining Warden for the district, Reid received
the whole fruits of the contract and the partnership nothing.
It is significant also in connection with this transaction that Mr.
Goddard took upon himself to pay the amount of this contract by two
cheques for £1,500 and £I,OOO drawn on the Chillagoe Smelters Banking
Account and not on the Mount Mulligan Account, though the amount was
afterwards debited to Mount Mulligan, and that these two cheques were
credited to Frederick Reid’s Advance Account in the Chillagoe Smelters
books, to that extent reducing Frederick Reid’s indebtedness in that
account from £2,779, at which it stood immediately before these amounts
were credited.
During this time Mr. Goddard and Mr. Reid were associated as
partners in the building of a large hotel at Cairns, and Reid’s Advance
Account with the Chillagoe Smelters was frequently drawn upon to supply
funds for the carrying on of these building operations, and sometimes these
amounts were transmitted to credit of the Cairns banking account of
Goddard and Reid by Goddard personally.
Not only in this association, but in his open connection with the
Argentum Mining Company, Limited, and the Fluorspar Mining Company,
Limited, in which Mr. Theodore was largely interested, Mr. Goddard was
openly transgressing the provisions of Section 7 (1) (i.) and (iv.) of the Act
under which he held his appointment, and had in fact, by his association
with these companies, as well as by his interest in the Mungana Mines,
Limited, vacated his office as General Manager.
There can be no doubt that these facts were known to his official
superiors, Messrs. Theodore, McCormack, and Jones, as well as the fact
that from the beginning of his management he had totally disregarded the
express statutory prohibition contained in Section 6 (1) ( b ) (ii.) of “ The
Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918.”
It was not to be expected perhaps that those superiors would show
any particular concern for his transgressions since two of them, Mr.
Theodore and Mr. McCormack, were sharers in his transactions, and the


jYear Ended.
(a).
Profit and Loss
Account
Balance.
(b).
Interest to
Treasury taken
to Account in
arriving at (a)
1
(c).
Interest
Capitalised.
(d).
Profit or Loss
Before Taking
Interest to Account.
30th June, 1920 ( Credit )
30th June, 1921 {Debit)
30th June, 1922 {Debit)
30th June, 1923 {Debit)
30th June, 1924 {Debit)
30th June, 1925 {Debit) ..
30th June, 1926 {Debit)
30th June, 1927 {Debit) . .
'
£ s. d.
1,375 3 6
49,450 15 4
71,786 7 3
58,793 15 1
103,166 3 7
29,928 16 8
155,893 8 5
156,126 2 11
£ s. d.
2,539 7 9
12,079 1 11
21,699 12 9
32,455 19 8
46,268 4 1
Nil
Nil
Nil
£ s. d.
2,100 0 0
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
£ s. d.
*3.914 11 3
t37,371 13 5
f50,086 14 6
|26,337 15 5
t56,897 19 6
t29,928 16 8
1155,893 8 5
■f 156,126 2 11
£623,770 5 9
£115,042 6 2
£2,100 0 0
1
£508,727 19 7
former had himself ignored the explicit terms of the proviso to Section
6 (2) of the same Act, and had expended some £90,000 in defiance of the
statutory prohibition.
Not the least serious of the matters referred to, as charged against
Mr. Goddard’s management, is the systematic suppression or misrepre-
sentation of the truth in regard to the yearly results of the combined
operations of Smelters and mines as shown in the yearly balance-sheets.
This misrepresentation of the economic position and results of the enterprise,
I am obliged to say, could only have been sustained by the tacit
connivance or, at least, the accommodating silence of the Auditor-General.
It must have been obvious to him before 1924, when his attention
was particularly called to the matter by Mr. McCaffrey, the Inspector of
Accounts, that the balance-sheets did not truly reflect the position or
results of the enterprise. He must have known, or ought to have known
before then, not only that the statement of assets was grossly inflated and
untrue, but that the Profit and Loss Account was misleading, inasmuch
as it made no provision for depreciation or the exhausted values of mines
or plant, and the credit taken for Treasury interest was the merest sham,
and that there was something seriously wrong with the yearly valuation
of stocks.
Even the fact and implications of the belated writing off in 1924
of £281,821, as accumulated loss on working account of the enterprise,
were only partial admissions of the colossal failure of the enterprise.
The position as indicated in the balance-sheets up to 1924, and
subsequently to 1927, disastrous as it then appeared, fell short of the
truth.
The real position stated in general terms from a more critical
examination of the actual figures in the Chillagoe records and in the
various reports made from time to time on the situation and accounts,
appears to be as follows :
Taking first the figures from the Auditor-General’s Reports for the
years ended 30th June, 1920, to 30th June, 1927 :
* Profit
•f Loss.


Looking at the last balance-sheet at 30th June, 1927, the capital
value of the undertaking is represented in the following figures :
Total value of assets .. .. .. . . . . £960,666 4 2
Less Profit and Loss .. .. . . .. 341,948 8 0
£618,717 16 2
Less sundry creditors and unclaimed wages . . 255 10 6
Balance-sheet value of the undertaking .. .. £618,462 5 8
At page 74 of the Auditor-General’s Report of 1929, it is stated :
The value of the assets for the reopening of the works was fixed at —
Fixed assets . . .. .. .. .. £45,545 0 0
Liquid 15,724 13 6
£61,269 13 6
Allowing on a liberal basis that a fair value of the undertaking,
including metals, ores, and by-products was £lOO,OO0 —
Deducting that sum from the balance-sheet value of
the undertaking .. .. .. .. . . £618,462 5 8
100,000 0 0
The loss not disclosed through the Profit and Loss
Account would be . . .. .... 518,462 5 8
Add the loss disclosed in the balance-sheet in the
Profit and Loss Account, exclusive of interest . . 508,727 19 7
Total loss, exclusive of interest . . ... . .£1,027,190 5 3
or if interest is included the figures will be .. £518,462 5 8
Plus loss shown in balance-sheets including interest
up to 30th June, 1924 .. . . .. . . 623,770 5 9
Accumulated loss on the enterprise .. ..£1,142,232 11 5
5. The Circumstances Surrounding and Leading up to —
{a) The forfeiture of certain Mineral Leases in the Area now known as the
Chillagoe Gold and Mineral Field held by or in the name of The Chillagoe
Railway and Mines Limited or by or on behalf of the Mungana Mining
Company Limited and forfeited on or about the First day of April , 1917 ;
(b) The acquisition of any Mineral Leases in the said Area in the name of one
Frederick Reid after the said forfeiture ;
(c) The acquisition of any Mineral Leases in the said “ Mungana Mines
Limited ” ;
(d) The acquisition by the said “ Mungana Mines Limited ” of certain Mineral
Leases acquired as aforesaid in the name of the said Frederick Reid or any
interest therein ;
(e) The sale by the said Frederick Reid and/or “ Mungana Mines Limited ” to
The Government of Queensland of any Mineral Leases in the said Area ;
(/) The purchase by the management of the Smelters and ore reduction and
Treatment works acquired under “ The Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways
Act of 1918 ” of ores supplied from any Mineral Leases sold as aforesaid to
the Government of Queensland before or after such sale.


8. (a) The Conduct and ( b ) the Interest of any Minister of the Crown
or any Person haying any Public or Official Position under the
Crown in Relation to or in all or any of the abovementioned
Matters, Transactions, or Things, or any Matter, Transaction, or
Thing arising out of or Incidental to such Matters, Transactions,
or Things or any of them :
I deal first with—
(a) The forfeiture of certain Mineral Leases in the Area notv known as
the Chillagoe Gold and Mineral Field held by or in the name of The
Chillagoe Railway and Mines Limited or by or on behalf of the
Mungana Mining Company Limited and forfeited on or about the
First day of April, 1917 :
The direct evidence discloses nothing wrong or irregular about the
forfeiture of the mineral leases. The forfeiture in question occurred
automatically under the Mining Regulations by reason of the non-payment
of the rent due for the current year. This would appear to have been
owing to inadvertence, though there was no direct evidence to that effect,
but, as the company tendered the rent to the Warden and offered to
submit to penalties, on the 11th September, 1917, the same day as that
on which Frederick Reid lodged his application for leases 502 and 503,
which comprised part of the Girofla and part of the Dorothy, included
in the area covered by the forfeited leases, it may reasonably be inferred
that the company had not intended to abandon the area, particularly as
there was an extensive and, to a going concern, a valuable plant on part
of the area.
The Warden, R. A. Dunlop, admitted that before Reid lodged his
application, he, Dunlop, had informed Reid that the leases had become
forfeited and the area was Crown land.
The most that can be said about this incident is that
it does not reflect very creditably on the Mines Department or its
responsible officers. To the telegram from the Warden reporting that the
rent had been tendered to him, with a submission to penalties, the
Under Secretary, without any inquiry into the circumstances in which
the due payment of the rent had been omitted, wired—“ Yours yesterday.
Chillagoe leases mentioned became forfeited for non-payment end of March
last and therefore rents cannot now be accepted.”
This abrupt refusal of the tender may have been a matter of legal
right, but it certainly did not indicate a fair or impartial official attitude.
There might have been equities in the case which the State, with an
effective power to waive forfeitures, should, at least, have paused to
inquire into.
Objection to Reid’s application was lodged ineffectually, and the
company then applied, also ineffectually, for fresh leases of the area
covered by those forfeited. Reid’s application was recommended by the
Warden and subsequently approved by the Minister without further
reference to the objections or the applications of the Mungana Mining
Company, Limited.
B


This result was perhaps, at the time, free from corrupt influences,
but, in view of Frederick Reid’s proved relations with Mr. McCormack,
and, through him with Mr. Theodore, in connection with these leases,
and the subsequent financial benefit received by the Warden in the same
connection, one cannot avoid feeling a certain amount of suspicion with
regard to the whole matter.
( b) The acquisition of - any Mineral Leases in the said Area in the
name of one Frederick Reid after the said forfeiture :
In October, 1917, Frederick Reid obtained exemption from labour
conditions in respect of leases 502 and 503, and in February, 1919, he
withdrew his application for 502 and 503, conditionally on an application
for more extended areas, Nos. 556, 557, 558, and 559, being granted. In
this interval between his application for 502 and 503 and his application
for 556, 557, 558, and 559, Mr. Reid, a few months after his first
application, had had a meeting with Mr. McCormack, at which it was
agreed between them, according to Reid’s evidence, that Mr. McCormack
was to have half of Reid’s interest in the Mungana leases, on condition
that he backed him, that is to say, Mr. McCormack, according to Mr.
Reid, was to do the financing.
At this time Mr. McCormack was Speaker of the House and Mr.
Theodore was Treasurer in the Ryan Ministry. After seeing Mr. McCormack,
Mr. Reid went to Sydney and obtained from Mr. Rhodda, a former
manager of the Mungana Mines, a report dealing with those mines of a
somewhat general but favourable character. No doubt Mr. Rhodda would
understand that was the kind of report required, and it must have been
prepared from memory without reference to mining plans or records.
On the 25th January, 1918, Mr. Reid executed a declaration of
trust of one-half share of the Mungana Mines for Mr. McCormack. At
this time the reopening of the Chillagoe Smelters by the State was being
discussed, and the Act giving authority for this received the Governor’s
assent on the 14th November, 1918.
On the 20th March, 1918, Mr. Reid, having got an option from the
Mungana Mining Company to purchase the machinery and plant then on
the mines for £2,870, wrote to Mr. Theodore, enclosing Mr. Rhodda’s
report, and asking for an advance by the Government of £lO,OOO towards
restarting the mines. This was with Mr. McCormack’s concurrence.
Mr. Theodore, on the 3rd April, 1918, wrote to the Minister for
Mines stating that Reid’s application was thoroughly sound from a
business point of view, and that there should be ample security to cover
the Government. He vouched for the bona fides of the application and
desired its favourable consideration. He pointed out that, when the
Chillagoe Smelters were reopened, which would be shortly, as a Govern-
ment concern, they would draw their principal supplies of silver-lead ore
from these mines. He stated there was no doubt about the quantity of
ore reserves, and that the ore was of sufficient value to make it profitable
to treat at Chillagoe.


Mr. Reid’s application was referred to Mr. Horsley, Inspector of
Mines, for report, and on the 30th April, 1918, Mr. Horsley reported
adversely. On the matter being referred to Cabinet, an advance of only
£2,800 was authorised by Cabinet minute of the 14th June, 1918, expressly
under “ The Mining Machinery Advances Acts” for the purchase of
machinery and mining plant erected on the Girofla and Lady Jane Mines
at Mungana.
A further advance of £3OO was made later.
In September, 1919, Mr. McCormack resigned the Speakership and
became a member of the Ministry as Home Secretary, and on the 22nd
October, 1919, Mr. Theodore was appointed Premier, Chief Secretary,
Treasurer, and Vice-President of the Executive Council.
When in .February, 1919, Mr. Reid substituted his application for
leases 556, 557, 558, and 559 for leases 502 and 503, there was no
opposition on the part of the old company. They evidently recognised
the futility of opposition and gave Mr. Reid the option of purchasing the
machinery and plant on the mines. When the leases 556, 557, 558, and
559 were granted to Reid he was the only person appearing on the record
as having any interest in them.
The declaration of trust in favour of Mr. McCormack was never
registered, although there is provision for registration of interests in the
Warden’s Office, and, up to the date of the formation of the company
called “ The Mungana Mines Limited,” Mr. Reid remained the ostensible
sole owner of the leases. It is quite clear now from subsequent disclosures
that Mr. Theodore, Mr. McCormack, and Mr. Goddard all had substantial
interests in the leases, and that the Warden probably also had some
definite expectation of benefit from that source.
(c) The formation and registration of a company called “ Mungana
Mines Limited ” ;
(d) The acquisition by the said “ Mungana Mines Limited ” of
certain Mineral Leases acquired as aforesaid in the name of
the said Frederick Reid or any interest therein :
The company called “ The Mungana Mines, Limited,” was formed
for the purpose of acquiring, and did duly acquire, ostensibly from
Frederick Reid, the mineral leases 556, 557, 558, and 559, with all
plant, machinery, tools, implements, and stores on the several areas, for
the consideration of 10,000 paid-up shares.
I have come to the conclusion, on the whole evidence, that the
formation of the Company was part of a design already conceived of
selling the mines to the State, with the secret co-operation of Messrs.
Theodore and McCormack, through the instrumentality of Peter Louis
Goddard and the State Smelters. Some of the facts, amongst others,
pointing to this conclusion are that no serious attempt appears to have
been made to obtain the necessary capital to restart the mines on anything
like an adequate scale of production.


Mr. Reid stated in his letter to Mr. Theodore of the 20th March,
1918, that the estimated total expenditure for getting both mines on a
proper working and producing basis was £15,000. A total of £3,100 only
was obtained from the State. Mr. McCormack had only contributed about
£2OO, of which £lOO appears to have been supplied by Mr. Theodore.
Mr. Reid, according to his evidence, had provided some machinery and
£2OO of his own money, and he said he had borrowed some £1,500 from
his wife. With these limited resources a start had been made on the
Girofla Mine, and, up to the end of 1920, ore had been mined and sold
to the Smelters, and from the proceeds of sale a sum of £3,000 was
divided between Mr. Reid and Mr. McCormack in October, 1920, without
making any provision for the payment of debts owing and payable by
Reid as the ostensible and responsible owner of the mine. One thousand
five hundred pounds, representing Mr. McCormack’s share in this division,
was made available to Mr. McCormack by cheque drawn on the State
Smelters Bank Account at Chillagoe, and I am satisfied that one-half of
this amount went to Mr. Theodore.
As I have already indicated, there is very little doubt in my mind
that, during 1920, the ground was being judiciously prepared, with the
sympathetic aid of Mr. Goddard, for the idea that the State should
acquire the Mungana leases in the interests of the State Smelters.
This required, of course, an alteration of the law, and to that end
a Bill had been in Parliament which was subsequently passed
and became law on the 20th December, 1920, to amend “ The Chillagoe
and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918,” so as to enable the Government to
acquire, purchase, lease, or take on tribute any mine that, in the opinion
of the Government, would further the profitable carrying on of the
business of the State Smelters. As indicating what at that time was in
the minds of those interested in Mungana, the terms of a telegram from
Mr. Reid to Mr. McCormack on the 10th December, 1920 —ten days
before the amending Act was assented to —are very significant. Reid
wired—“ Please ask Department make up principal and interest due to
the end of the year and advise also flotation expenses. When will the
Bill become law ? ” “ The principal and interest” referred to the Govern-
ment loan to Frederick Reid to purchase machinery for the Mungana
mines, and the flotation expenses were the expenses of flotation and
registration of the Mungana Mines Limited, which Mr. McCormack had
undertaken to pay, and which was part of the £2OO contributed by him,
and the Bill was the impending Act to enable the Government to purchase
mines.
When the Company, “ The Mungana Mines Limited,” was formed
on the 16th November, 1920, it had a nominal capital of £20,000, divided
into 20,000 shares, of which 10,000 were fully paid up to £1 each, and
were allotted to Frederick Reid as consideration for the sale by him to
the company of the “ Mungana leases.”
These 10,000 paid-up shares are the only shares requiring to be
considered; none of the reserved shares were ever issued or otherwise
dealt with.


The 10,000 paid-up shares were, in fact, shared equally by Reid
and McCormack, though this fact was not disclosed in the only list of
persons holding shares in the company that was ever furnished to the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, notwithstanding that the company
was required under penalty to furnish such returns annually. This discreet
reticence may not have been inspired or intentional. The secretary
repudiated the suggestion, but it is curious that it happened to be in
line with Mr. McCormack’s evident desire to avoid putting on public record
the extent of his interest in the Mungana leases.
Of Mr. McCormack’s 5,000 shares, only 388 were put in his own
name in the filed list of shareholders, the balance being then held for him in
Mr. Reid’s name. Later these were, in part, transferred, only 900 remaining
in Reid’s name until the winding up of the company. Those so transferred
were 900 each to his sisters, Annie and Grace McCormack, and 888 to
another sister, Mary Ellen McCormack. These were mere nominal transfers,
the sisters claiming no interest in the shares and having received no
benefit from them.
In the only list of shareholders, as I have stated, filed with the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, 1,250 shares appeared in the name
of Patrick John Mangan. These shares were the property of Peter Louis
Goddard, and were admitted to have been received by him without other
consideration than friendship. They were contributed equally, and we
must suppose with equal friendship, by Mr. McCormack and Mr. Reid—
-625 shares each. Mr. Reid also admitted that of his shares he held 200
for Mrs. Dunlop, the wife of the Warden Dunlop. This was also a gift
of friendship, and Mr. Reid further admitted that his dealings with
respect to these shares were entirely with Mr. Warden Dunlop.
(e) The sale by the said Frederick Reid and/or “ Mungana Mines
Limited ” to the Government of Queensland of any Mineral
Leases in the said Area;
(/) The purchase by the management of the smelters and ore reduction
and treatment works acquired under m The Chillagoe and
Etheridge Railways Act of 1918 ” of ores supplied from any
Mineral Leases sold as aforesaid to the Government of Queens-
land before or after such sale ;
8. (a) The Conduct and (6) the Interest of any Minister of the Crown
or any Person having any Public or Official Position under
the Crown in relation to or in all or any of the above-
mentioned Matters, Transactions, or Things, or any Matter,
Transaction, or Thing arising out of or incidental to such
Matters, Transactions, or Things or any of them :
The matters that arise for consideration under these three heads
are so linked together that no advantage is to be gained by attempting
to deal with them separately.
I may say at once with regard to 5 (/) that there is no suggestion
m the evidence that the prices paid by the State Smelters, or the
conditions of supply in respect of ore mined and sold by Reid from the
Girofla to the Smelters, during the short time in 1919-1920 he was


woiking that mine, were in any way questionable. It is true that during
this time it is clear that Goddard must have been aware he was to be
given some interest in Mungana, though the extent of it was not perhaps
exactly defined until some time in October, 1920, and Mr. Goddard is,
therefore, exposed to the charge of impropriety in buying ores as Manager
of the Smelters from a mine in which he was financially interested, but that as
a matter for criticism is merged and lost in the more serious charges that
must be made against him and those more guiltily associated with him in
connection with the sale to the Government of the Mungana Mines.
It is a painful thing to have to say of men who have occupied
high and responsible positions in the State that they have betrayed, for
personal gain, the trust reposed in them, and have acted corruptly and
dishonourably. Yet that is the invidious duty I feel is imposed upon
me by the view I take of the evidence put before me on this part of
the inquiry.
I find it impossible to avoid the conclusion that Messrs. Theodore,
McCormack, Reid, and Goddard have been collectively and severally guilty
of a dishonest exploitation of the State in the sale to the State of the
Mungana Mines for £40,000.
The long concealment by Mr. Theodore of his interest in the
Mungana leases, and the failure to obtain direct evidence of his complicity
in the design to bring about the purchase—strong as the inferences might
be —invested the known history of the whole matter with an appearance
of indefiniteness compared with what it has now assumed in the light of
the revelations of Mr. Theodore’s banking account.
When it was established on that evidence, unimpeachable as it is,
that Mr. Theodore received, promptly and regularly from time to time,
one-half of Mr. McCormack’s share of the fruits of the Mungana
transaction, the whole of the antecedent facts acquired a new significance.
On proof of that cogent fact, which explains most of the earlier
ambiguous features of the evidence, there is, in my opinion, only one
reasonable conclusion on this part of the inquiry, and that is that Mr.
Theodore was a party from the beginning to the design to bring about
the sale to the State of a mine that everyone concerned knew, or ought
to have known, had no absolute, and probably no relative value remotely
approaching the price which it was intended the State should be induced to
pay for it. It might be said that there was room for difference of
opinion as to the relative value of the mine and that the division of
£3,000 in October, 1920, supplied proof that the mine was capable of being
worked profitably. The answer to that is that the £3,000 appearing in
the Accounts of the Syndicate as a divisible surplus was not profit in
any business sense and that the £1,500 remitted to Mr. McCormack was
from the Smelters Advance Account, and represented at the best
only proceeds of ore sold.
The true value of the Girofla mine may be better gauged by the
results of the actual operations during the period 1921-1922 when the
mine was worked by the State under Mr. Goddard’s direction in pursuant"
of the tribute agreement preceding the purchase.


.
Silver.
Copper.
Lead.
The average assay was
Less smelting loss
9-28
10% 0-93
0*48
10% 0*05
8-5
15% 1-28
8*35
0*43
7*22
The average metal prices in London
for the period were —
Silver, .3s. 3*4d. per oz.
Copper, £69*04 per ton.
Lead, £23*45 per ton.
Deduct realisation costs —
Copper, £13 per ton.
Lead, £6 10s. per ton
which gives
3s. 3*4d.
£56*04
£16-95
Value per ton
£17 4
4s. 9d.
£14 6
The dry weight of ore in tons won from the mines was 8,468-0494.
The gross metal content was —
Silver, 78,615-0914 oz., or = 9-28 oz. per ton.
Copper, 40-9086 tons, or = 0-48 per cent, per ton.
Lead, 727-0750 tons, or = 8-5 per cent, per ton.
Total value per ton .. .. .. £2 16 7
The admitted smelting costs were .. 213 8
Leaving .. .. .. 2s. lid. per ton
to meet cost of mining, freight and ore despatching, maintenance,
proportion of development cost, and overhead expenses.
These figures were probably known and certainly available to Mr.
Goddard as Manager of the Smelters and Supervisor of the Mine. Even
if he did not consider the matter in this detail, as a practical man
knowing the assays he could not fail to know that the working of the
mines was a dead loss. He must have known also from the assays of the
ore purchased from Reid before the period of the tribute agreement that
the mine could not possibly pay in the conditions prevailing in 1920,
1921, and 1922. Yet he was urging upon the Government the purchase
of the mine and saying nothing about the economic aspect of the matter.
He had succeeded apparently in making the Minister for Mines also a
keen advocate of the purchase—a result psychologically interesting. The
evidence does not suggest that the Minister for Mines was a conscious
agent of this purpose that was actuating others in the matter, but he was
a willing instrument who is not free from moral responsibility for the
intended fraud upon the State, for that is how the transaction must be
characterised when it comes to plain language.
Mr. Jones had neither the strength of character nor the mentality
to cope with the situation. He had to admit that about the date of the
purchase he heard from several people that Mr. McCormack had an
interest in the Mungana leases. He would not say that he heard Mr.
Theodore was interested. He made no inquiries as to the fact. It was
his curious conception of his duty as a Minister—to use his own words—


that he was not there to inquire into the private actions of his colleagues.
He was apparently willing to subordinate his plain duty to the State to a
misconceived and spurious loyalty to his colleagues.
It is probable that there were other persons having necessary
official connection with the business in some of its stages who must have
had suspicions about who, and what was, involved in it, but in their
case the silent pressure of authority and the attractions of the line of
least resistance are sufficient to account for the fact of public attention
not being directed to the purchase until after it had become an
accomplished fact. I do not think Mr. Dunlop falls into this class. He
probably, up to the time he left Chillagoe, knew all that Mr. Reid knew
about Mungana.
I do not propose to follow the course of the negotiations traced in
the evidence, in which Mr. Goddard was the local agent and intermediary
of the Government and a potent factor in bringing to fruition a
transaction from which he was secretly to derive a substantial pecuniary
benefit.
There are certain significant stages in it, however, to which brief
reference may be made.
Messrs. Theodore, McCormack, and Jones apparently were the only
members of the Government keenly interested in the Mungana leases, and
the proposal to purchase them was met with what perhaps was a natural
opposition from those who had not the same reason for feeling enthusiastic
about the matter.
The situation on the Government side received timely and careful
stimulation from Mr. Goddard and Mr. Reid. In January, 1921, Mr.
Goddard wired that the Smelters were in a serious position for want of
ores. Mr. Theodore’s instructions were to wait recommendation by the
Minister. The Minister, Mr. Jones, was then on his way to Chillagoe,
and a telegram from the Under Secretary to Mr. Goddard informed him
that “ The Premier (Mr. Theodore) was awaiting the Minister’s recom-
mendation.” On the 17th January, Mr. Jones, the Minister, wired from
Chillagoe to the Premier strongly recommending the purchase of Mungana.
On the 25th January, 1921, Mr. Theodore wired to Mr. Jones—“ Think
the decision will be favourable.” On the 27 th January, 1921, Mr.
Theodore wired to. Mr. Jones to offer Reid less. Jones’s reply to that
was —“ Price bedrock owing to recent mine developments.” Mr. Theodore
then wired to Jones —“ No decision arrived at future policy be considered
on your return.” There was after this a lull in the negotiations for
purchase and the tribute arrangement was put forward, in which the
royalty to be paid was to be considered as part payment of purchase
money in event of the mine being purchased.
The proposal to purchase was revived by a letter of the Minister
for Mines, Mr. Jones, to Mr. Theodore, the Premier, dated the 12th
December, 1921, suggesting that the matter be brought up again, and
stating that copies of the letter in which the purchase was very strongly


urged had been sent to each member of the Government. In the light of
the recent disclosures as to Mr. Theodore’s position in the matter, the
irony of the recommendation is striking.
In January, 1921, Mr. Saint Smith, a Government Geologist, and in
March of the same year, Mr. Horsley, a Government Inspector of Mines,
had furnished reports on the Mungana Mines of a highly commendatory
character. These reports were evidently not sufficient to remove the
opposition to the purchase coming from disinterested members of the
Government.
This is not surprising when the reports are analysed and brought to
a residuum of cold facts. Mr. Horsley’s is, in addition, curiously at
variance with his earlier report made on Mr. Reid’s application for a loan
to enable him to work the mine.
The reports in question do not appear to have been strongly relied
on by Mr. Jones in his recommendation of the 12th December, 1921.
A suggestion, apparently emanating from the dissentients in the
Government, was made that a report and valuation of an outside
independent expert should be obtained. This was done. Mr. Poole, of
Sydney, was called in. He made a report in which he recommended the
purchase by the Government. There is intrinsic evidence that it was
made in conditions and in an atmosphere favourable to that result, but
also there must be said of it that when critically examined with respect to
matters of substance it would have proved very unsatisfactory to a
person seeking for information on which he could rely in making a
personal investment.
It covered both mine and plant. The whole necessary basis of the
valuation was the value of the mine as a potential producer of ore of a
smelt able value. The machinery and equipment had only a reflected or
relative value, depending on the value of the mine in the sense I have
indicated. So far as the mine is concerned, Mr. Poole’s report was based
almost entirely on assumptions, both as to the quantity and quality of
the ore bodies. He relies on Mr. Rhodda’s report, which he had before
him. This was the report obtained by Mr. Reid in 1917 from Mr. Rhodda
in Sydney, and written by him many years after he had left the mine,
and without reference to the mine plans or official records.
Such as this report was, it appears to have brought the opposition
to the purchase to an end, and a contract was made fixing the price at
£40,000. The various reports referred to and the correspondence in the
course of negotiations all spoke of a body of rich ore that had been
discovered by Mr. Reid in the course of his operations in the Girofla mine
preceding the tribute agreement. It has a somewhat sinister significance
that in all the years that Mr. Goddard had the Girofla mine producing
for the Smelters, both during the tribute period and after, there is no
trace of that body of rich ore. The ore remained persistently and
consistently low grade,
c


6. The Circumstances surrounding and leading up to the formation
and Registration—
.(a) Of a Company called “ Fluorspar Mining Company Limited ”
and
(b) A Company called “Argentum Mining Company Limited ” ;
7. The dealings by and between the said Peter Louis Goddard as
such Chillagoe Mines Manager as aforesaid or any other
PERSON FOR OR ON BEHALF OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE SAID
Smelters Ore Reduction and Treatment Works and the said
Fluorspar Mining Company Limited and the said Argentum
Mining Company Limited, the firm of “ Dunlop and Reid ”
CARRYING ON BUSINESS AS SAWYERS AND TIMBER MERCHANTS AT
Tarzali, and the firm of “ Goddard and Reid ” carrying on
business as Landowners and/or Hotelkeepers at Cairns :
Very little remains to be said with regard to these matters.
The Fluorspar Mining Company, Limited, was formed and registered
in April, 1923, and the Argentum Mining Company, Limited, in December,
1923. Both were promoted and practically controlled by Peter Louis
Goddard. In the first he appeared openly as a director because in the
earlier [stages of its life the company did not do business with the
Smelters, and a mere breach of the statutory conditions of his appointment
was perhaps not deemed important in view of the fact that he had Mr.
Theodore as an associate. Mr. Theodore was from the beginning associated
with Mr. Goddard in this company, but his connection with the company
was not disclosed in the annual list of shareholders furnished to the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies until the year 1927, when Goddard
had ceased to be General Manager of Chillagoe and Mr. Theodore had
ceased to be a member of the State Government. In the end Mr.
Theodore and Mr. Goddard practically held the whole of the shares of this
company between them. In the case of the Argentum Mining Company,
Limited, the case was different. The object of the company was to
acquire a mine known as “ The Night Flower,” which had been worked by
Messrs. Chong and Toomey. As the working objective of the company was
to sell its ores to the Smelters, Mr. Goddard’s connection with the
company was intended to be kept from public attention. In the first
return of shareholders sent to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies,
Mr. Goddard only appeared as a transferror of 1,200 shares to W. R.
Forbes and Wm. Mangan. These it appeared were merely Goddard’s
nominees and they thereafter held the shares for him. He was entitled
to one-tenth interest, which represented about 1,500 shares—these shares
he continued to own during the whole of the relevant time, but they
appeared in the return to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies under
other names.
A similar reticence was observed in regard to Mr. Theodore and his
shares, his shares also, some 1,500 in the beginning, appeared in the
return under other names.
One improper and inexcusable feature of Mr. Theodore’s secret
connection with these companies was that both companies applied for and
obtained from the Government advances in aid of their mining operations,


which conceivably were influenced by the fact that Mr. Theodore had a
personal interest in the accommodation. Mr. Goddard’s connection with the
Fluorspar Company became of still more questionable propriety when later,
other markets having failed for the fluorspar produced from the mine,
it was conveniently discovered that the material had an important utility
as a flux for use in the State Smelters, and from that time Mr. Goddard,
as Manager of the State Smelters, bought from the company controlled
by Messrs. Theodore and Goddard, a large quantity of material, the price
of which was necessarily fixed by Mr. Goddard; a position that was
undeniably vicious in its possibilities. It is not surprising that at the close
of Mr. Goddard’s management there was a considerable debt owing by the
Fluorspar Company to the State Smelters that was supposed to have been
balanced and paid by the alleged delivery by the company of 188 tons of
fluorspar, the existence and whereabouts of which have oddly enough never
been discovered up to the present time.
It does not require any observations of mine to indicate the gross
impropriety, to say the least of it, of Messrs. Theodore’s and Goddard’s
secret connection with the Argentum Mining Company. That very secrecy
shows that they themselves were conscious of it. I had no evidence that
would enable me to say how the matter of price and other conditions of
supply of ore from the mine to the Smelters were affected by this secret
relationship. I can only say it has a very questionable appearance.
I have already dealt with the only transaction in which the firm
of Dunlop and Reid and the State Smelters were jointly concerned which
appeared to be of doubtful honesty. That was the Tarzali timber contract.
There was no evidence offered that there had been anything
detrimentally affecting the interests of the State Smelters or the mines in
the business or financial operations of the firm of Goddard and Reid.
Comment on that association is limited to the obvious reflection that Mr.
Goddard would naturally find it difficult to reconcile his duty with his
interest in his business relations with Reid in which the State Smelters
or the associated mines were concerned.
To summarise shortly the main conclusions of my report—
(l) The appointment of Peter Louis Goddard was not made
honestly in the true interests of the State by those who were
responsible for it.
(2) The management of the State Smelters and the conduct of
Peter Louis Goddard in the performance of his duties were
generally highly censurable, as displaying indifference to both
moral and legal obligations, recklessness in expenditure,
unscrupulousness in administration, dishonesty in advice and
action in connection with the sale of the Mungana Mines to
the State, and systematic concealment and misrepresentation
of facts material to be disclosed in the public interest in the
course of his duties, all of which conduct was actuated by
consideration of his pecuniary or other personal advantage.


(3) The enterprise was disastrous to the State in its financial'
results. These results were aggravated by faulty management,
but were largely the inevitable consequence of the policy
imposed by the Government on the enterprise.
(4) There was deplorable laxity of control exercised by the
Treasury and the Department of Mines over expenditure at
the Smelters and associated mines, including Mount Mulligan.
This laxity must be ascribed to a large extent to the improper
business relations existing between Messrs. Theodore,
McCormack, Goddard, and Reid.
(5) Messrs. Theodore, McCormack, Goddard, and Reid were guilty
of fraud and dishonesty in procuring the State to purchase
the Mungana Mines for £40,000.
(6) The moneys shared between them as the proceeds of that
transaction were fraudulently obtained.
(7) Mr. Theodore was guilty of the grossest impropriety in
becoming secretly associated with Mr. Goddard in the Fluor-
spar Mining Company and the Argentum Mining Company
when he must have known that Goddard’s connection with
them constituted, not only a serious breach of Goddard’s duty
as Manager of the State Smelters, but as also a breach of the
statute under which he had been appointed.
In closing my report I feel impelled to place on record my sense
of the value of the services rendered to the Commission by the gentlemen
who have been associated with me in the inquiry.
Mr. McGill and Mr. Martin, the Counsel appearing on behalf of the
Crown to assist in the inquiry, Mr. Henchman, the Crown Solicitor, and
those associated with him, in addition to their able assistance in the actual
conduct of the inquiry in its public sittings, have given ungrudging and
invaluable aid in the necessary and laborious task of evolving essentials
from the mass and getting the evidence in proper relation and perspective.
Mr. Buckle, the Accountant detailed to assist the Commission,
brought to bear on this branch of the work a zeal and ability that merit
the utmost commendation I can give them.
Mr. Fahey and Mr. Real, who represented interests affected by the
inquiry, contributed with ability and invariable courtesy to my knowledge
of the case in matters affecting their clients.
I have finally to make grateful acknowledgment of the services of
Mr. Hebden, the Secretary to the Commission. His resourcefulness in
matters of memory, his zeal, energy, and method in his work, his courtesy
and tact with all brought into contact with the Commission, were as
conspicuous as they were unfailing.
I have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most humble obedient servant,
(Sgd.) J. L. CAMPBELL, Commissioner.
4th July, 1930.
Prize, Is.]
By Authority: Anthony James Cumming, Government Printer, Brisbane.




