

1938
VICTORIA
REPORT
of the
ROYAL COMMISSION
on
INDUSTRIAL LIFE
ASSURANCE
together with
Appendices and Minutes of Evidence
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY’S COMMAND.
[Approximate Cost of Report.— Preparation, not given. Printing, (700 copies) £82.]
NO. 6,—[1s, 6d.) —4709,
Authority: H. J. GREEN. Government Printer, Melbourne.


George the Sixth by the Grace of God of Great Britain, Ireland, and the British Dominions beyond
the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
To our Trusty and well-beloved—
THOMAS STUART CLYNE, Esq., LL.B., Barrister-at-Law,
OSWALD GAWLER, Esq., F.I.A.
THOMAS FORRISTAL, Esq., L.1.C.A., and
ARNALDO JOSEPH LEWIS JAMES, Esq., L.I.C.A.
Greeting :
Whereas the Governor of the State of Victoria by and with the advice of the Executive Council thereof hath
deemed it expedient that a Commission should, forthwith issue to inquire into and report upon the business of
industrial life assurance in respect of the following matters :
#
(1) Methods employed by agents in soliciting such business and in procuring contracts of assurance ;
(2) Provisions contained in the forms and other documents used in the conduct of such business, including
proposals, personal reports, policies, premium receipt books and guarantee bonds, and the practices
relating to the use of such forms and documents ;
(3) The costs of procuring, maintaining and administering such business, particularly in relation to the
benefits obtainable by policy holders ;
(4) Conditions under which policies are forfeited ;
(5) Conditions,under which paid-up policies or surrender values are granted;
(6) Practices relating to the forfeiture of policies, the issue of paid-up policies and the grant of surrender
values ;
(7) Methods of paying claims.
Now know ye that We, reposing great trust and confidence in your knowledge and ability, have constituted
and appointed and by these presents do constitute and appoint you Thomas Stuart Clyne, Oswald Gawler, Thomas
Forristal, and Arnaldo Joseph Lewis James to be our Commissioners for the purposes aforesaid :
And We do by these presents give and grant unto you or any three of you full power and authority to call
before you such person or persons as you shall judge likely to afford you any information upon the subject of this our
Commission, and to inquire of and concerning the premises by all other lawful ways and means whatsoever : And We
will and command that this our Commission shall continue in full force and virtue, and that you our said Commissioners
or any three of you shall and may from time to time and at any place or places proceed in the execution thereof, and
of every matter and thing therein contained, although the same be not continued from time to time by adjournment :
And We do hereby appoint our trusty and well-beloved Thomas Stuart Clyne to be Chairman of you our
said Commissioners;
And lastly We direct that you do with as little delay as possible report to us under your hands and seals the
result of the said inquiry and make such recommendations in respect of the foregoing matters as may be considered
necessary in the public interest.
In testimony whereop We have caused these our Letters to be made Patent and the Seal of our said State
to be hereunto affixed.
Witness our right trusty and well-beloved the Right Honorable William Charles Arcedeckne, Baron
Huntingfield, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor
of the State of Victoria and its Dependencies in the Commonwealth of Australia, &0., &c., &c., at Melbourne, this
seventh day of March, One thousand nine hundred and thirty-eight and in the second year of our Reign.
(Sgd.) HUNTINGFIELD.
By His Excellency’s Command,
(Sgd.) H. S. BAILEY.
Entered on record by me in the Register of Patents, Book No. 31, page 170, this seventh day of
March, One thousand nine hundred and thirty-eight.
(Sgd.) L. CHAPMAN,
Under-Secretary.


Contents.
PAGE.
Introductory . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Part I.
The Business of Industrial Life Assurance—
Characteristics.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Companies Engaged in the Business .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Australian Industrial Life Assurance Business . . . . . . .. .. .. .. 8
Victorian Industrial Life Assurance Business .. . . . . .. .. . . .. 9
Defects .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9
Legislation Affecting Life Assurance Business, including Industrial Assurance Business in Victoria .. 10
Some Factors in Life Assurance .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 11
Premiums .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Mortality Tables .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Life Assurance Fund .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
Expense Rate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Part 11.
Report on Matters the Subject of the Commission —
(1) Methods employed by agents in soliciting such business and in procuring contracts of assurance 14
(2) Provisions contained in the Forms and other documents used in the conduct of such business,
including Proposals, Personal Reports, Policies, Premium Receipt Books, and Guarantee Bonds,
and the Practices relating to the use of such Forms and documents .. .. .. 15
(3) The Costs of Procuring, Maintaining, and Administering such Business, particularly in relation to
the Benefits obtainable by Policy-holders . . . . .. .. .. .. 18
(4) Conditions under which policies are forfeited .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
(5) Conditions under which Paid-up Policies or Surrender Values are granted .. .. .. 21
(6) Practices relating to the forfeiture of Policies, the issue of Paid-up Policies, and the grant of
surrender values . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 27
(7) Methods of Paying Claims .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Part 111.
Recommendations .. .. . ■ .. ■ • . ■ . • .. .. .. .. 29
Appendices.
“ A ” —Copy of particulars required from the life assurance companies carrying on industrial life assurance
business in the State of Victoria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
“ B ” —Some particulars of the industrial life assurance business of the companies compiled from the latest
valuation returns delivered bv the companies to the Registrar-General under the Companies Act
1928 .. .. .. ' .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ■ .. 36
(1) Dates of the Respective Valuations, and the Tables of Mortality, and Rates of Interest
Employed in such Valuations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
(2) Details of participating and non-participating policies in force, according to the type of
policy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
(3) Total Industrial Life Assurance Business of each company .. .. .. .. 38
(4) Details of participating and non-participating policies in force of the companies arranged
in groups .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
“ C ” —lndustrial Assurance Business in Victoria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40
“ D ” —Methods of Remuneration of Agents, Average length of service and numbers .. .. .. 41
“ E ” —Expense Rates of companies carrying on industrial life assurance business .. .. .. 43
“ F ” —Particulars of Lapses in Victoria for 1935, 1936, and 1937 .. .. .. .. .. 44
“ G ” —Conditions under which Paid-up Policies are granted and methods employed in the calculation of the
amounts thereof ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 45


Royal Commission on Industrial Life Assurance.
To His Excellency the ' Right Honorable William Charles Arcedeckne,
Baron Huntingfield, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of Saint Michael and Saint George; Governor of the State of
Victoria and its Dependencies in the Commonwealth of Australia, <&c.,
&c., <&c.
May it please Your Excellency :
We, the undersigned members of the Royal Commission appointed by Letters Patent
dated the seventh day of March, 1938, to inquire into and report upon the business of industrial
life assurance in respect of the following matters
(1) Methods employed* by agents in soliciting such business and in procuring
contracts of assurance;
(2) Provisions contained in the forms and other documents used in the conduct of
such business, including proposals, personal reports, policies, premium
receipt books and guarantee bonds, and the practices relating to the use of
such forms and documents;
(3) The costs of procuring, maintaining and administering such business, particularly
in relation to the benefits obtainable by policy-holders;
(4) Conditions under which policies are forfeited;
(5) Conditions under which paid-up policies or surrender values are granted;
(6) Practices relating to the forfeiture of policies, the issue of paid-up policies and
the grant of surrender values;
(7) Methods of paying claims;
have the honour to report the result of the said inquiry and to make such recommendations
in respect of the foregoing matters as we consider necessary in the public interest.
On receiving Your Excellency’s Commission, we held a preliminary meeting to determine
the procedure to be followed in making our investigations and to make arrangements for the
taking of evidence in public and the attendance of witnesses. Thirty-one public sittings were
held, commencing on the 16th day of March, 1938, and in the course of these sittings, evidence
was given by 125 witnesses.
At the public sittings of the Commission, the Australian Mutual Provident Society, The
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited, The Colonial
Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited, The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company
Limited, the Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company Limited, and The Provident
Life Assurance Company Limited, members of the Life Offices Association of Australasia, were
represented by Messrs. Eugene Gorman, K.C., W. K. Fullagar, K.C., and J. G. Norris;
The Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited by Mr. J. A. Spicer;
The Australasian Catholic Assurance Company Limited by Mr. J. Galbally;
The Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Limited by Mr. R. T. Cahir;
The Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances Limited by Mr. S. H. Collie, and
The Producers and Citizens’ Co-Operative Assurance Company Limited by Mr. N.
Mitchell. *
Mr. A. M. Fraser appeared to represent the State Parliamentary Labour Party and the
Rev. D. Daley the Anti-Sweating League.
Mr. Gregory Gowans appeared to assist the Commission.
Ninety-six witnesses gave evidence of complaints against the life assurance companies,
and these witnesses included policy-holders and other persons called on their behalf. Other
witnesses included ex-agents and agents’ guarantors, who also made complaints against the
companies. On behalf of the companies eighteen witnesses were called.


The Commission in making its investigations pursued the following course : —Evidence
of the complaints of policy-holders against the companies carrying on industrial assurance
business was first heard, and then the evidence was heard of witnesses, including actuaries and
executive officials, called on behalf of the companies.
Prior to the appointment of the Commission, a Committee was appointed by the
Government to inquire into certain matters relating to industrial assurance and particulars
relating to these matters were supplied by the companies to this Committee. These particulars
were, by arrangement between the Commission and the companies, treated as part of the
evidence to be considered by the Commission, and your Commissioners addressed a further
request to the companies requiring them to supply additional particulars relating to their
industrial assurance business in respect of the matters the subject of our inquiry. A complete
copy of these requests is set out in Appendix “ A.”
In making our Report we have for convenience divided it into three parts ;• —
Part I.—Deals with some preliminary matters which we consider material to the
purposes of our inquiry. As industrial life assurance is a matter of
considerable importance to a large number of persons in the community
and in order that our Report and recommendations may be viewed in
their proper perspective we have deemed it appropriate to deal briefly
and generally with the business of industrial life assurance with special
reference to the business in Victoria.
This part deals with, amongst other things, the characteristics
of industrial life assurance, the nature and extent of the business in the
State of Victoria and some factors of importance in any consideration
of the business of life assurance, including industrial life assurance.
Part II. —Deals with the result of our inquiries in respect of the matters upon
which we have been directed to inquire and report, and
Part lll.—Contains our recommendations.


PART I.—THE BUSINESS OF INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE.
Industrial life assurance may be described as the business of effecting assurances upon
human lives the premiums in respect of which are payable weekly or at other short intervals
and are received by collectors who make house to house visits for that purpose. The sums
assured are small in amount and the weekly premium is the basic unit of the tables, the sum
assured being a variable one depending upon the age of the assured and the type of policy.
Contracts of industrial life assurance are for the most part entered into by the wage earning
members of the community. One other feature of industrial life assurance is that policy-holders
are not as a general rule required to undergo medical examination.
These characteristics of industrial life assurance are well known and are substantially
the same in all British communities where the business of industrial life assurance is carried
on.
In the State of Victoria endowment assurance is the predominant feature of industrial
life business and whole of life assurance forms a comparatively small part of it. On the
other hand in Great Britain whole of life policies form the greater part of the business, though
in recent years there has been a marked increase in endowment assurance.
The business of industrial life assurance is carried on in the State of Victoria at the
present time by the following companies : —-
Australian Mutual Provident Society.
The Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society
Limited.
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company Limited.
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company Limited.
The Provident Life Assurance Company Limited.
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited.
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company Limited.
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Limited.
The Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances Limited.
The Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance Company of Australia
Limited.
In the month of January, 1938, the last-named company discontinued the business of
making contracts of industrial life assurance.
The Australian Mutual Provident Society, The Australasian Temperance and General
Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited, and The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society
Limited are mutual societies, and the remaining companies, which we refer to for convenience
as proprietary companies, are companies with a share capital and are carried on not only for
the purpose of providing benefits to policy-holders, but also for the purpose of earning profits
for shareholders.
Although The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company Limited has the word
“ Mutual ” as part of its name, it is in fact a company with a share capital.
It was suggested in the course of our investigations that the Australasian Catholic
Assurance Company Limited had adopted a name which might indicate that the company
had some official connexion with the Eoman Catholic Church, but it appeared from the
evidence that the company had no such connexion.
In Appendix “ B ” some particulars of the whole of the industrial life assurance business
of these companies are set out. These particulars are compiled from the latest valuation
returns delivered by the companies to the Registrar-General under the Companies Act 1928,
and show: —
(1) Dates of the respective valuations and the tables of mortality, and rates of
interest employed in such valuations.


AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE BUSINESS.
Year.
Number of Policies
in Force.
Sum Assured.*}-
1931
1,549,877
£
67,440,828
1932
1,595,347
69,409,234
1933
1,667,531
72,180,800
1934:
1,782,291
77,024,429
1935
1,920,116
83,316,521
1936*
2,078,460
90,748,635
Number
op Policies.
—
1932.
1934.
1937.
Assurance (whole of life)
3,777
3,445
3,462
Endowment Assurance .. ..
87,662
100,798
123,206
Pure Endowment
7,518
7,518
5,672
Total ..
98,957
111,761
132,340
Sum Assured.
£
£
£
Assurance (whole of life)
110,357
92,464
102,015
Endowment Assurance ..
3,819,520
4,402,129
5,893,001
Pure Endowment
313,263
329,557
247,587
Total ..
4,243,140
4,824,150
6,242,603
(2) Details of participating and non-participating policies in force according to the
type of policy.
(3) Total industrial life assurance business of each company.
(4) Details of participating and non-participating policies in force of the above-
mentioned companies arranged in the groups appearing in such Appendix.
Certain of the companies have, by their Articles of Association, defined the nature of
the industrial life assurance undertaken by them, but the majority have not, although at the
same time the nature of the business carried on by all of them conforms generally to the
characteristics mentioned.
The business of industrial life assurance as at present conducted by assurance companies
began to take shape in England during the third quarter of the 19th century, and the business
itself appears to be a development of a far older system of making provision for the burial
expenses of persons of limited means by the co-operative efforts of those who desired to make
such provision.
According to the evidence adduced before the Commission industrial life assurance was
undertaken in the then Colony of Victoria by the Australasian Temperance and General
Assurance Society Limited in 1885. Comparatively little progress in the business was made
until after the beginning of the present century.
During recent years there has been a marked expansion of industrial assurance business
in the State of Victoria, and the business has now attained extremely large proportions.
As some indication of the development of the business of industrial assurance in Victoria,
and also the other States of the Commonwealth, we refer to the following figures which have
been taken from the Commonwealth Statistician’s Finance Bulletin, No. 28 :
* Preliminary figures, f Excluding bonuses.
The above figures show that the average sum assured per head of the population has
increased from approximately £lO in 1931, to approximately £l3 in 1936.
The following figures published by the Government Statist serve to illustrate the growth
and extent of this business in the State of Victoria.
The number of policies issued and the sums assured for the years 1932, 1934, and 1937,
are shown in the following table: —


—
Number of Policies.
Amount Assured,
Annual Premiums.
£
£
Assurance (whole of life)
48,199
995,703
60,105
Endowment Assurance . .
688,100
32,041,098
1,924,479
Pure Endowment
43,791
1,688,541
99,556
Total . .
780,090
34,725,342
2,084,140
The following figures published by the Government Statist show the total industrial
business in force in the State of Victoria in 1937: —
In Appendix C we have set out a summary of the industrial life assurance business in the
State of Victoria for the respective office years ending in 1936 and 1937 of the eleven companies
engaged in the business. The figures appearing in this Appendix are taken from particulars
supplied by the companies. Some discrepancies exist between the foregoing figures for the year
1937, published by the Government Statist, and the figures contained in Appendix C, but these
discrepancies are immaterial.
It may be convenient at this stage to add that according to the evidence, the average
policy in Australia was for a sum assured of approximately £43 with an average weekly premium
of about Is. In the acquisition and maintenance of industrial life assurance in Victoria nearly
1,500 agents are engaged.
Though industrial assurance in Victoria in its initial stages probably was, and to some
extent still is, a means of providing funeral expenses, the extraordinary development of endow-
ment assurance may be regarded as an indication that large numbers of the wage-earning
community consider such assurance as a means of saving and also as a means of making some
provision for dependants.
The great expansion of the business in the State of Victoria appears to warrant the
assumption that industrial assurance has served and is serving a public need, and it is said on
behalf of the assurance companies that the business provides for a large section of the community
an opportunity of obtaining the benefits of life assurance which they could not otherwise obtain.
Whatever may be the benefits which industrial policy-holders seek to obtain it may
well be doubted whether the business of industrial assurance is a satisfactory means of providing
such benefits, and this is especially so in the case of whole of life industrial assurance contracts.
The business of industrial assurance is extremely expensive to maintain and manage.
A very large proportion of the premium income goes in expenses of management, and this is
to a substantial extent due to the practice of collecting premiums weekly from house to house,
and to the method of paying and organizing the agents.
Another unsatisfactory feature of the business and one which to a certain extent may
be related to the great cost of maintaining and managing the business is that a great number
of policy-holders allow their policies to lapse, i.e., the policy-holders fail to keep their policies
in force owing to the non-payment of premiums.
Industrial life assurance has often been criticized because of the heavy wastage of
business caused by lapsing. At the same time the question of lapse causes a good deal of
anxiety to most companies and they endeavour to prevent it as much as they can.
The care taken by some companies in the procuring of new business does tend to
reduce the number of policies issued by them which subsequently lapse. We refer
particularly to the care taken in this respect by the Australian Mutual Provident Society.
An extraordinarily large number of policies lapse in the first few months after they are
taken out and the only advantage which the holders of these policies derive from their payments
is the assurance cover which they secure during the period for which their policies are in force.
Where, however, policy-holders are compelled to allow their policies to lapse after a considerable
number of premiums have been paid it is obvious that great hardship is caused to such
policy-holders and this is a serious feature of industrial assurance business.
The heavy wastage caused by lapsing appears to be inevitable as the business is at
present carried on.


The contract of industrial life assurance is often made between two parties of very
unequal position, and it cannot be denied that frequently the contract entered into between
the policy-holder and the company is not advantageous to the policy-holder, and this is
particularly the case when his policy lapses after many premiums have been paid.
In the Report of the Departmental Committee, appointed in 1919 by the British Board
of Trade, to inquire into the business carried on by Industrial Assurance Companies and
Collecting Societies and known as the Parmoor Report, after the name of its Chairman, Lord
Parmoor, there is the following statement :
“ On the one side was the company and its agent, fully informed, looking for
profit and eager to issue the policy ; on the other side was the prospective assured,
ignorant, as a rule, of business and unable to realize the need to scrutinize the contract
pressed upon him (or more often her).”
Associated with this inequality between the parties is another feature of the business
which justifies criticism, and that is the high pressure salemanship adopted by the agents of
the companies.
Industrial assurance is in fact sold and the agent and the canvasser are employed to
sell it, and there appears to be some justification for the complaint that the methods of the
agent and the canvasser are in fact the cause of many people taking out policies they do not
want.
Though there has been a gradual reduction in the high cost of maintaining and managing
the business and the companies have endeavoured to liberalize their policy conditions, in our
opinion, for reasons hereinafter mentioned, the business of industrial life assurance as at present
carried on requires a substantial measure of regulation in the public interest.
While in most British communities, the business of industrial life assurance has been
the subject not only of specific definition but of regulation with the object of safeguarding the
interests of industrial policy-holders, in the State of Victoria the business is not the subject
of any express legislative definition or regulation. The only regulation of the business in the
State of Victoria is contained in legislation which affects the business of life assurance in
general, and this legislation is contained in the following enactments, namely; —
(a) The Companies Act 1928, Part 111. —This Part is modelled on the English
Life Assurance Companies Acts of 1870 and 1872 and deals generally with
the business of life assurance, providing for deposits by companies, the
keeping of separate accounts and funds in respect of life assurance
business, and the making of annual and other periodical returns. This
legislation also contains provisions dealing with the amalgamation and
transfer of a company’s business and the winding up of a company.
Part 111. does not make any distinction between companies carrying on industrial
life assurance business and companies carrying on ordinary life assurance.
Other provisions of the Companies Act apply generally to life and
other insurance companies.
( b) The Instruments Act 1928, Sections 21 to 24.—These sections not only require an
insured person to have an interest, but also require the insertion in the
policy of the name of the person for whose benefit the policy is made.
They further provide that no greater sum shall be recovered than the amount
or value of the interest of the insured person.
(c) The Instruments (Insurance Contracts) Act 1936.- —This Act contains provisions
preventing an insurer in certain circumstances from avoiding a contract of
insurance where the insured has not correctly answered the questions in the
proposal. ’
(d) The Life Assurance Companies Act 1905 of the Commonwealth of Australia. —
This Act deals with and regulates insurance on the lives of infants under ten
years of age, and in particular limits the amounts for which such lives may
be insured.
(e) The Insurance Acts 1932 of the Commonwealth of Australia. —These Acts
provide that persons carrying on life assurance business in the Commonwealth
should make certain deposits with the Treasurer.


We may add that industrial life assurance has been the subject of specific definition and
of regulation in Great Britain, Northern Ireland, the Irish Free State, the Dominion of Canada,
the Dominion of New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa.
In the Commonwealth of Australia, Queensland is the only State which has made the
business of industrial life assurance the subject of statutory definition and regulation.
Under the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, section 51 (XIV.), the
Parliament of the Commonwealth has power to make laws with respect to insurance other
than State insurance ; also State insurance extending beyond the limits of the State concerned.
No statute has been enacted by the Commonwealth Parliament dealing generally with
life insurance. In 1929 and in 1930 Bills relating to life insurance were introduced into the
Commonwealth Parliament. Neither of these Bills became law.
Having made a brief survey of the characteristic features of the business and of its
nature and extent in the State of Victoria, we now consider it appropriate to refer to some
factors which are important in any consideration of the business of life assurance.
(a) Premiums.
“ The premium payable by the policy-holder forms the foundation upon which the
whole structure of life assurance is built.” (The Practical Calculation of Office Premiums by
Henry Moir.)
What is called the “ net premium ” is the premium which according to a given mortality
table and rate of interest will be sufficient to provide the benefits guaranteed by the policy
without providing anything for expenses and contingencies.
Possible variations between assumptions and experience regarding mortality and interest
are not specifically provided for in computing net premiums, neither are possible losses on
investments nor the expenses of acquiring and carrying on the business.
All of these are provided for by means of an addition or loading. The loading and the
net premium together constitute the office or gross premium, i.e., the premium actually
charged.
Though competition may affect premium rates, the office premiums on the average should
be sufficient to meet the liabilities undertaken by the company and the expenses incurred.
The elements in the computation of office premiums in ordinary life assurance, as
indicated in Henry Moir’s Paper on the Practical Calculation of Office Premiums, are :
1. Bate of Mortality.
2. Rate of Interest.
3. Rate of Expense.
4. Margin for possible fluctuations in these Rates.
These are also the elements in the computation of office premiums in industrial life
assurance to which there may be added a possible margin for surplus in the case of participating
policies.
As might be expected, a higher sum can be obtained in ordinary assurance than in
industrial assurance for a given premium. The sums assured, which may be obtained for a
premium of Is. per week in industrial assurance and for a premium of £2 12s. per annum in
ordinary assurance have been compared in the case of the respective companies, and this
comparison shows that for with-profit policies the differences between the sums assured are
less than might have been expected. Well managed companies grant larger bonuses in their
ordinary department than in their industrial department, and this makes the advantages
obtained under ordinary policies much more substantial than those obtained under industrial
policies.
In ordinary life assurance the sum assured is the unit and the premium varies, but as
already mentioned in industrial life assurance, the premium is the basic unit of the tables, and
the sum assured varies.
(b) Mortality Tables.
While the mortality tables generally used in ordinary life assurance are constructed
from the experience of assured lives, for the purposes of industrial assurance business most
actuaries prefer what is known as a “ population ” table, constructed from official returns of
population and of deaths in a community. The rates of mortality, according to successive
population tables, have shown a series of falls, particularly at ages which may be described as
those of early middle life. The Australian tables of mortality clearly illustrate the general
tendency towards falling death rates.


The history of industrial life assurance business in Great Britain and Australia shows that
certain large companies have at times revised the tables used by them for such business, arid
when adopting a table with reduced rates of mortality, have found it possible to grant somewhat
increased sums assured, for the same weekly premium. On some occasions, the benefits so
resulting have been applied, not only for the benefit of the holders of new policies, but also for
the benefit of the holders of some policies in force at the date at which the change was made.
There does not, however, appear to be much scope in Australia now for continued increase in
sums assured from this cause, because the greater portion of Australian business is for
comparatively short terms and changes in mortality tables are not likely to affect, to any
marked degree, the provisions of short term contracts.
The continued use of older tables of mortality does not necessarily operate to the
prejudice of those policy-holders who have participating policies if,, where such tables are used,
the practice is followed of granting bonuses at regular intervals.
(c) The Life Assurance Fund.
The creation of a life assurance fund is an essential feature of the business of life
assurance, and is necessary to safeguard the interests of policy-holders.
An examination of a mortality table reveals how the risk of death increases as age
advances. If a contract of life assurance provided for the payment of annual premiums to be
adjusted at the beginning of each year, in order to meet the risk of death in that year, the
premiums at young ages would be relatively small, but there would be a steady increase in the
annual amount thereof until, at advanced ages, such premiums would become so large that
few policy-holders would be likely to pay them. The premiums which are usually payable under
a policy are therefore level premiums, i.e., premiums which remain unchanged for the term of
the policy. Thus the amount payable during the early years of the policy exceeds the amount
required to cover the risk during those years and such excess is used to form a reserve,
accumulated at interest, with which to meet the liability of the company during the later years
of the policy. If the policy is an endowment assurance, the reserve to meet the sum assured
must be accumulated more rapidly than in the case of a whole life policy. The sum of the
reserves constitutes the life assurance fund.
Companies are usually obliged to cause a periodical investigation to be made into their
financial condition by an actuary, and this investigation shows the extent of their net liabilities,
under their policies, in comparison with their assurance funds. Such an investigation should
also show whether the operations of the company have resulted in a surplus or a deficiency.
The valuation basis adopted by the actuary can, and often does, affect the amount of the surplus
available, for a conservative valuation tends to reduce the surplus in the early years of the
policy and to increase it in later years.
Surplus may arise where one or more of the following conditions exist; —
{a) Where a rate of interest is earned in excess of the rate assumed ;
(6) Where a mortality experience is more favorable than that assumed ;
( c ) Where administration expenses are less than those assumed in calculating office
premiums;
(d) Where the premium is loaded for the purposes of providing bonuses ;
and, in certain circumstances, lapses also are a source of profit.
In Australia, the surplus of the larger companies appears to be mainly derived from
interest.
During the early history of industrial life assurance, policies did not generally participate
in distributions of surplus, but in recent years there has been a marked tendency in favour of
participating policies. It might be here observed that in the State of Victoria the great majority
of the policies now in force are with-profit or participating policies.
The existence of surplus and the amount thereof must necessarily depend upon the
efficiency of management of the particular company. While surplus enures for the benefit of
all the participating policy-holders of a mutual company, in the case of a non-mutual company
the amount of surplus available for policy-holders generally depends upon the provisions of its
constitution relating to the distribution of surplus.


The accumulation of large funds by the leading companies as shown in their published
accounts has given rise to much ill-informed criticism, and the companies themselves have
provoked some of this criticism by reason of the prominence given in their advertisements to
such matters as increasing premium income, growth of funds, and larger bonuses, but the same
prominence is not given to their liabilities. A knowledge of the principles of life assurance
should help to remove many of the misunderstandings as to the function and application of the
moneys received by companies from the policy-holders’ premiums and from interest on the
companies’ investments.
(. d ) The Expense Eate.
As we have already pointed out, one of the outstanding and, perhaps, inevitable features
of the business of industrial life assurance wherever it is undertaken, is the high ratio of expenses
to premium income, generally known as the expense rate. The expenditure incurred in acquiring
new business and collecting renewal premiums, and in # the handling of a multitude of small
payments, makes the cost of industrial life assurance business relatively high compared with
that of ordinary life assurance business.
The cost of industrial life assurance is an important factor in determining its value to
the policy-holder. If the expense rate be unduly high, as is the case with some companies, it
is clear that the benefits which these companies can give to their policy-holders are much less
advantageous than those which can be offered by companies with a relatively low expense rate.
The problem is complex owing to the number of factors involved. The expense rate must
necessarily depend on many factors, the chief of which are the following:—Efficiency of
management, the volume of existing business, the acquisition of new business and the ratio of
the amount of new business to the amount of existing business.


PART II.—REPORT ON MATTERS THE SUBJECT OF THE COMMISSION.
Before dealing with the specific matters referred to us for investigation we consider it
desirable to refer briefly to complaints against the companies made by policy-holders in the
course of our inquiry.
As previously stated 96 witnesses gave evidence before the Commission of various
complaints, the majority of which can be classified as follows :
(а) That policy-holders were induced to take out policies by the misrepresentation
of agents;
(б) That the sums assured were too small having regard to the premiums payable;
(c) That the amounts of paid-up policies and surrender values were inadequate
having regard to the premiums paid;
(d) That policy-holders were not entitled to surrender values; and
(e) That policy-holders were unable to obtain paid-up policies.
It can, we think, be safely assumed that the experience of the policy-holders who made
complaints is typical of the experience of very many industrial policy-holders.
The business of industrial assurance must always to some extent be subject to the
complaint that the agents of the companies procure business by misrepresentation, but we
consider it a matter of some importance that against two of the companies no complaints of
misrepresentation were made, and this is probably due to the fact that these companies have
exercised a supervision over their agents more strict than that exercised by other companies.
The other complaints we have mentioned are more or less inseparable from the business
of industrial assurance as at present carried on, and are due partly to the high cost of acquiring
and maintaining the business and partly to a misconception on the part of policy-holders as
to the nature of life assurance, a cardinal principle of which is that those who live longest
must necessarily contribute far more towards the fund from which claims are paid than do
those who die during the early years of their policies. Several aged persons complained that
in respect of whole-of-life policies they had paid premiums amounting to far more than the
sums assured, but some of the larger companies have endeavoured to diminish this grievance
by refusing to issue whole-of-life industrial assurance policies or by ceasing to collect premiums
on such policies when the assured reaches an advanced age. Other complaints of a less
important nature are referred to in the subsequent pages of this Report.
No good purpose can be served by traversing at length the evidence relating to the
various complaints, but as a result of our investigations we are satisfied that industrial
policy-holders should be granted benefits more liberal than those they are at present entitled
to receive from the companies.
(1) METHODS EMPLOYED BY AGENTS IN SOLICITING SUCH BUSINESS
AND IN PROCURING CONTRACTS OF ASSURANCE.
The preservation of existing business and the acquisition of new business depend upon
an elaborate organization in which the agents play a prominent part.
According to the evidence the companies endeavour to select suitable persons as agents,
lay down rules for their conduct, and employ a staff of superintendents and inspectors to
supervise their work.
The agents’ success and remuneration depend upon their capacity to acquire new
business and it follows that they exercise all their powers of persuasion when canvassing for
such business.
One of the allegations against the companies was that their agents were subjected to
pressure to obtain new business, and although the companies strenuously denied this, it is
evident that by means of competitions for prizes and circulars containing instructions and
advice, and the exhortations of the officers of the companies, the agents are constantly under
some sort of pressure to acquire new business.
Many of the policy-holders who gave evidence alleged that they had been induced to
take out policies by the representations of agents which were untrue, and the agents against
whom these allegations were made were not called as witnesses. We are satisfied that some
of the allegations were well founded.


It also appeared from the evidence that, apart from any question of misrepresentation,
policy-holders in many instances were not made aware of the terms of the contracts into which
they had entered. It is not unreasonable to assume that the evidence submitted to us on
these matters is illustrative of what has frequently occurred.
There is little reason to doubt that the zeal of agents has induced many people to take
out policies which they were not, in fact, anxious to obtain. The numerous lapses that have
occurred within a few months after the policies were effected justify the conclusion that
over-persuasion by agents has induced people to take out policies which either they did not
want or on which they were unable to pay the premiums.
The chief reasons for this over-persuasion appear to be: —
(a) The method of paying agents ; and
(i b) The pressure put upon agents by the companies to obtain new business.
An element in this pressure upon agents is the practice of some companies of paying
commission to salaried officers directly concerned in the acquisition of new business. This
practice should, we think, be prohibited.
There was also evidence before the Commission of certain practices adopted by agents
which cannot be too strongly condemned. Amongst such practices were the procuring of
prospective policy-holders to sign proposals in blank, the failure of agents (and sometimes
superintendents) to return policies and premium receipt books received by them from policy-
holders, and the inducing of policy-holders to take out further policies by offering them paid-up
policies in lieu of existing policies.
It is not possible to prevent misrepresentation in any business which depends for its
existence upon the activities of agents, but the two considerations mentioned (a) the method
of paying agents, and (6) the pressure put upon them to obtain new business, are to a certain
extent responsible for some of the misrepresentations of which the policy-holders complained.
The method of remunerating agents is outside the scope of our investigations, but we
consider that the mischief resulting from the unsatisfactory conduct of agents in soliciting
business and in procuring contracts of assurance will be, to some extent, remedied by the proposals
contained in our recommendations.
The number of agents engaged in industrial life business in the State of Victoria, as at
the 28th day of February, 1938, their average length of service, and their methods of
remuneration are set out in Appendix D.
(2) PROVISIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORMS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS USED
IN THE CONDUCT OF SUCH BUSINESS, INCLUDING PROPOSALS,
PERSONAL REPORTS, POLICIES, PREMIUM RECEIPT BOOKS AND
GUARANTEE BONDS, AND THE PRACTICES RELATING TO THE USE OF
SUCH FORMS AND DOCUMENTS.
Proposals. —The form of proposal generally used by the companies in their industrial
business is not open to objection, but as already stated, the practice of some agents in obtaining
proposals signed in blank is one that may well be prejudicial to the policy-holder, and we consider
that if an agent takes a proposal from a prospective policy-holder signed in blank and then fills
in the proposal, he should be deemed to be the agent of the company.
In the filling in of the proposal there is always the possibility of an omission from the
proposal, or of an innocent misstatement therein, and if this omission or misstatement is not
fraudulent, the policy, in our opinion, ought not thereby to be avoided.
Personal Reports. —The form of personal report used by the companies, like the form of
proposal, is also not open to objection. According to the evidence before us, no objection can
be taken to the practice of the companies relating to personal reports. Some companies adopt
the practice of having the report filled in by a person other than the agent who acquired the
business, and we consider that this practice might with advantage be adopted by all the
companies.
Policies. —The policy is the document embodying the terms of the contract between the
company or society and the assured.
The companies carrying on industrial assurance business have not adopted any standard
form of policy applicable to any particular class of industrial assurance business though each
company has its own standard form for the various classes of business undertaken by it.


One defect in many of the forms of policy now in use is that substantial benefits, to which
the policy-holder is entitled, are not expressly set out in the policy. The policies of the
Australian Mutual Provident Society are expressed to be subject to the By-Laws of the Society,
and nearly all the other companies have adopted a form of policy which is expressed to be
subject to their Articles of Association, and it is only by a reference to such Articles of Association
and By-Laws that the rights of the policy-holder can be fully ascertained, with the result that
often the policy-holder is not aware of all the benefits to which he is entitled.
We might add that under some policies benefits of a substantial nature are not given to
the policy-holder as a matter of right, but as a matter of grace depending upon the discretion
of the directors of the particular company.
Another objection is that the contract of assurance entered into between the policy-holder
and some of the proprietary companies does not always disclose what shares of the surplus or
profits of such companies are allotted respectively to the policy-holders and the shareholders.
In the case of Some companies, this allotment is entirely in the discretion of the directors,
and the division that is sometimes made by them appears to be substantially in favour of the
shareholders. In the distribution of surplus made by one company during the years 1934, 1935,
and 1936 about 60 per cent, went to shareholders and the balance to policy-holders. It is, in
our opinion, only proper that a proprietary company should state in its policy what proportion
of its surplus or profits is available for policy-holders.
It may not be expedient or proper that all the benefits which a company is prepared to
grant to a policy-holder should be incorporated in the contract, as much might depend upon the
success of its operations, but there are certain benefits which, in our opinion, should be regarded
as rights of the policy-holder and not merely concessions, and these should be incorporated in
the policy.
These benefits include the following :
The right to a paid-up policy ;
The right to a surrender value ; and
The right that a policy should not be forfeited until some reasonable time elapses
after the last date to which premiums have been paid.
There may be other benefits of a less important nature, which a company may be
prepared to grant to policy-holders, but these will, no doubt, depend upon the amount of the
surplus or profits of the company.
One of the benefits to which we have referred, i.e., the benefit of a paid-up policy, has
been by some companies made a part of the contract, and generally the companies do not
object to a policy-holder having a contractual or even a statutory right to a benefit of this
nature. The benefit of a paid-up policy and the other benefits to which we have specifically
referred are of great importance to a policy-holder, and for reasons hereafter to be mentioned
these benefits, we consider, should be granted to the policy-holder as a matter of right.
In several countries the form of the policy is the subject of legislation. Such legislation
either prescribes what should be contained in the policy or declares that the form of the policy
should be approved by a public authority.
In our opinion every policy should contain, in addition to the usual essential terms or
provisions of the contract, the following provisions:—
1. Whether the policy is a participating or non-participating policy;
2. If participating, the minimum proportion of surplus which the company
undertakes to make available to policy-holders;
3. The conditions relating to the right of the policy-holder to a paid-up policy;
4. The conditions relating to the right of the policy-holder to a surrender value;
and
5. The conditions under which the policy may be forfeited.
Premium Receipt Boohs.- —The usual practice of the companies with regard to premium
receipt books is to supply to the policy-holder a book in which the agent enters particulars
of payments at the time they are made. The premium receipt books used by all the
companies, except one, are substantially similar in form, and are so arranged as to enable
the following entries to be made therein :
The policy number, the name of the policy-holder, the amount of weekly
premium. ,
The due date of premiums, the amount received and when paid, and the
agent’s signature.
In the case of one of these companies, provision is also made for the agent’s name and address.


The company which does not supply a premium receipt book to its policy-holders
supplies a receipt holder into which the receipt given for each payment is affixed. These
receipts do not always identify the policy or the period covered by the payment, and a further
disadvantage is that such receipts may easily be lost. In our opinion such receipt holders
should not be used.
We consider that the premium receipt book supplied to the policy-holder should contain
at least a statement of the following particulars : —•
The name of the agent ;
The name of the policy-holder, and, in the case of “ life of another” policies,
the name of the assured ;
The date and number of the policy ;
The sum assured and the contingency or contingencies upon which such sum
is payable; and
The amount of the weekly premium.
We also consider that in addition to the foregoing particulars, the following information
should be endorsed in distinctive type upon premium receipt books, namely :
1. Whether the policy is a participating or non-participating policy;
2. If participating, the minimum proportion of surplus available to policy-
holders ;
3. The conditions relating to the right of a policy-holder to a paid-up
policy ;
4. The conditions relating to the right of a policy-holder to a surrender value;
and
5. The conditions under which a policy may be forfeited.
As the premium receipt book is frequently in use such an endorsement should enable
the policy-holder to keep himself informed of some of the important rights to which he, in our
opinion, should be entitled.
If a policy-holder has more than one policy he should be provided with either a separate
book for each policy or a book which will contain in respect of each policy all particulars and
information to which we have referred.
In the event of the premiums falling into arrears where the policy-holder has more than
one policy, he should have the right, on making a payment, to determine in respect of which
policy such payment should be made, otherwise the payment may be applied by the agent in
payment or part payment of the amounts due on two or more policies. Where there are
several policies in the names of different persons in one household, a separate premium receipt
book should, in our opinion, be issued to each policy-holder.
While the companies make every effort, through their agents, to collect premiums, a
service for which the policy-holders pay, by the loading of the premiums, they are not bound
so to do, as their policies always provide that if the premiums are not called for, the policy-
holders must make payment of such premiums at the companies’ offices.
Guarantee Bonds (and Agency Agreements). —The agent is usually required to provide
some form of security for the due performance of his agreement with the company. Where this
security takes the form of a guarantee agreement, the guarantor becomes liable to pay to the
company all moneys which the company is entitled to charge the agent in respect of his agency
—in other words, the general indebtedness of the agent to the company.
As the agent is required to refund to the company commissions received by him in respect
of policies which lapse within a certain time, his guarantor becomes liable for the amount Of such
commissions. This obligation is contained either in the guarantee agreement or the agency
agreement. This is not always understood by the guarantor who, in some instances, has been
called upon to make payments to the company in respect of a liability of which he was unaware.
While some of the companies do not avail themselves of their rights against the guarantors
in respect of commissions repayable on account of lapsed policies, and while these rights may be
useful as a protection against fraud on the part of agents, we consider that under a guarantee
agreement the guarantor should not be required to pay to the company the amount of the
commissions repayable by the agent on account of lapsed policies.
The agent is also required to set up a reserve fund by refunding to the company a certain
portion of his earnings, week by week, until a certain sum has been accumulated. This sum is
4709.—2


held by the company as a guarantee of the agent’s fidelity and of the stability of his “ Renewal
Debit ” during the continuance of the agreement and for thirteen weeks after its termination.
The company credits the fund with interest, and at the end of such period of thirteen weeks the
balance at the credit of the fund, less deductions on account of shortages, defalcations, or
commissions due to the company on account of lapsed policies, is repaid to the agent.
Some of the smaller companies deduct the sum of either 3d. or 6d. per week from the
agent’s earnings as “ guarantee premium.” The agent has no claim for the return of the amounts
so deducted either during the continuance or after the termination of the agreement. The
companies making this deduction did not justify the practice. These payments, although small
in amount, are a cause of irritation to the agents of these companies and this practice should be
discontinued.
Most of the companies in their agency or guarantee agreements provide in effect that the
production in any legal proceedings of a certificate signed by some specified officer of the company
certifying to the liability of the agent or guarantor and to the amount thereof shall be conclusive
evidence of such liability and amount.
Representatives of the companies submitted in evidence that in a business of this nature
where the transactions were so numerous, and the amounts involved so small, such a provision
was essential, otherwise considerable difficulty would be experienced in obtaining a judgment
against a defaulting agent or guarantor in a court of law. Whilst there may be some justification
for the acceptance in legal proceedings of such a certificate as prim a facie evidence of the
indebtedness of the agent or guarantor, there is certainly no justification in our opinion for its
acceptance as conclusive evidence. At the present time the agents of these companies have no
redress if wrongly debited with amounts alleged to be due in respect of cash deficiencies or with
commissions alleged to be repayable on account of lapsed policies.
We consider it reasonable that the production of such a certificate in legal proceedings
should not be more than prima facie evidence of the indebtedness of the agent or guarantor.
Bonus Certificates. —It is not the general practice in industrial life assurance business
to issue a bonus certificate showing the precise amount of bonus in respect of each policy as is
the case in ordinary assurance business.
Of the four companies which declare annual bonuses, one prepares a bonus certificate
setting out the amount of the bonus declared in respect of each policy and forwards the certificate
to the agent for delivery to the policy-holder and the other three companies issue bonus
certificates setting out particulars from which the amount of the bonus may be calculated and
their agents are instructed to explain to each policy-holder the method by which the amount of
his bonus can be ascertained.
This latter method of informing policy-holders of a bonus distribution may possibly
account for the complaint made by some policy-holders that they were not aware that bonus
additions had been made to the sums assured under their policies.
(3) THE COSTS OF PROCURING, MAINTAINING, AND ADMINISTERING SUCH
BUSINESS, PARTICULARLY IN RELATION TO THE BENEFITS
OBTAINABLE BY POLICY-HOLDERS.
The benefits provided by the business of industrial life assurance are comparatively
small in relation to the premiums payable owing to the high cost of procuring, maintaining
and administering the. business even in the case of well-managed companies. The methods
adopted of procuring business and the practice of collecting premiums weekly, by house-to-
house collections, are mainly responsible for this high cost. It is obvious that the costs of
industrial life business are much higher than the costs of ordinary life business.
We have not been able to ascertain the expense rates of some of the companies in
respect of their Victorian business, but it appeared from the evidence supplied by the companies
for the year 1936 —the latest year available for all the companies—that for the whole of their
industrial business the expense rates of the companies varied widely. One company had an
expense rate of slightly under 30 per cent, and another company an expense rate of over
60 per cent. It is obvious that the benefits to policy-holders must necessarily be small in the
case of a company with an expense rate of over 60 per cent. One of the largest companies
showed that for the year 1936 it had an expense rate of 28.4 per cent, in respect of its Victorian
business.
Details of the latest available expense rates of the companies appear in Appendix E.


Some of the companies have been successful in reducing their expense rates. The larger
the business the more likelihood there is of this being done, but it appears from the evidence that
two small companies have in'recent years succeeded in making a considerable reduction in
their expense rates. On the other hand, some of the smaller companies have expense rates which
plainly make it impossible for such companies to provide all the benefits which policy-holders
are reasonably entitled to expect. Unless the expense rates of these companies can be reduced,
their policy-holders may well regard their policies with little satisfaction.
According to the Report of the Committee on Industrial Assurance and Assurance on the
Lives of Children under Ten Years of Age, set up in Great Britain in 1931, and known as the
Cohen Committee, after the name of its Chairman, Sir Benjamin Cohen, K.C., the two largest
companies in England had, in recent years, expense rates of approximately 28 per cent, and
33 per cent, respectively. The other companies in England transacting industrial assurance
business had higher rates.
The expense rates for the whole of their industrial business of the six companies which
are members of the Life Offices Association of Australasia, and carry on industrial business in
Victoria, varied according to the evidence between, 29 • 8 per cent, and 44 • 6 per cent. These
percentages were given in respect of the latest year available for these companies, and it may
be added that these companies transact over 90 per cent, of the industrial business in force in
Victoria.
We have been unable, from the evidence supplied to us by some of the companies, to
ascertain their expense rates, not only in respect of their industrial business in Victoria, but
also of all their industrial business. The fact that the expense rates of these companies cannot
be ascertained, in our opinion, justifies adverse criticism.
The larger companies keep a separate revenue account and assurance fund in respect of
their industrial assurance business and in their returns to the Registrar-General submit a
separate valuation balance-sheet for such industrial business.
Some of the smaller companies do not keep a separate revenue account and assurance
fund in respect of their industrial assurance business, and as the law now stands they are not
obliged to do so.
We consider that separate accounts of industrial assurance business should be kept by
every company carrying on the business, that expenses should be allocated so that the industrial
branch should bear only its just proportion of such expenses and that the auditor of the
company should certify that the accounts have been duly separated and the expenses properly
allocated.
Unless the accounts of a company are kept so as to indicate clearly the revenue and
expenditure attributable to its industrial business it is impossible to determine accurately the
expense rate of the company in respect of that business.
In our opinion, therefore, every company carrying on industrial business should be
required by law to deposit with the Registrar-General in respect of such business all such
statements and abstracts as are now required to be deposited in respect of its life assurance
business.
The adoption of this practice would help policy-holders to ascertain whether or not the
company had made a surplus in the carrying on of its industrial business.
Where a company has a favorable expense rate, the holder of a participating policy will
probably derive some benefit in the form of bonus additions to the policy, but this is not
likely to be the case where the expense rate of a company is unduly high. This is particularly
important in Victoria, where a large majority of the policies in force are with-profit or
participating policies.
While the foregoing recommendations would assist in enabling the financial condition
of a company to be ascertained, there still remains the problem of the high cost of procuring,
maintaining and administering the business of industrial assurance. As we have already pointed
out, the expense rate is a complex problem owing to the many different factors involved.
It is, in our opinion, not only extremely difficult, but also unwise to lay down any hard
and fast rules with respect to the regulation of the cost of industrial assurance. Such rules
might not affect the older and stronger companies, but might prejudice the development of
younger companies. We consider that the supervision by a Government authority of the
financial affairs of a company with a power in such authority, under certain conditions, to take
steps to prevent the company from issuing new policies, should have a salutary effect on
companies whose costs of administering their industrial business are unduly high in relation
to the benefits obtainable by policy-holders.


We therefore recommend that —
(a) Every industrial assurance company should be required to deposit with the
Government Statist copies of such statements or abstracts as may be necessary
to be deposited with the Registrar-General if our recommendations are
adopted.
( b ) If, in the opinion of the Government Statist the costs of a company in procuring,
maintaining and administering its industrial business in relation to the benefits
obtainable by policy-holders are unduly high, he may cause an investigation
to be made into its financial affairs, and if as a result of such investigation,
the Government Statist is satisfied that the company is unable to reduce such
costs in such a manner and within such time as he considers reasonable then
the Government Statist, with the consent of the Attorney-General, may apply
to a Judge in Chambers for an order prohibiting the company from issuing
any new policies of industrial assurance in the State of Victoria. If a
company against which such an order has been made is able to reduce such
costs in a manner approved by the Government Statist it may thereupon
apply to a Judge in Chambers for an order removing the prohibition against
it from issuing new policies.
Although it is not within the scope of our investigations to make a recommendation upon
the question we consider that the Government Statist should be enabled to exercise the powers
to which we have referred whenever he has reason to doubt the financial stability of any industrial
assurance company.
Another question in connexion with the costs of industrial assurance business arises out
of the allocation of the profits of proprietary companies between policy-holders and shareholders.
In our opinion, the right of industrial companies to determine what allocation should be made
of such profits between policy-holders and shareholders should be regulated.
According to the evidence, three companies which differ widely in regard to age, funds,
and volume of business distribute to participating policy-holders not less than 80 per cent,
of the surplus earned in connexion with their with-profit policies, and we consider that the
companies should distribute to their participating policy-holders in respect of each inter-valuation
period at least 80 per cent, of the surplus or profits which may be earned by the companies
during such period by that part of their industrial assurance business which relates to with-profit
policies.
If, however, a company can prove to the satisfaction of the Government Statist that
the allocation of surplus or profits we have recommended is unfair to its shareholders, we
think it reasonable that such allocation should be varied by the Governor in Council upon
the recommendation of the Government Statist.
(4) CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH POLICIES ARE FORFEITED.
The policies of all the companies contain a provision to the effect that the policy-holder
shall not forfeit his policy until he has failed to pay his premiums for a period of four weeks.
While this provision in the policy sets out the express condition upon which a forfeiture will
occur, the substantial grounds for the forfeiture of policies are many and various, and are due to
financial and other reasons.
An unduly large number of policy-holders allow their policies to lapse shortly after the
policies are effected. In the year 1937, according to the evidence before the Commission, over
49,000 policies lapsed in the State of Victoria, and the total sums assured under these policies
amounted to a little over two and a quarter million pounds. In Appendix “F ” there appears
a summary of particulars relating to lapsed policies in respect of the years 1935, 1936, and 1937.
This summary is compiled from figures supplied by the companies.
The large number of lapses in industrial assurance business is a frequent subject of
complaint wherever the business is carried on.


A summary of the causes of lapsing is narrated in the Manual for Superintendents and
Assistant Superintendents issued by the Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company Limited.
According to this Manual the most frequent causes of lapses are as follows
“ (a) Failure to explain properly and fully the terms of the assurance at the time of
taking the proposal, and again when delivering the policy.
(i h ) Failure to obtain advance payments with the proposal and to maintain them.
(c) Over-persuasion of people to assure above their means.
(i d) Unpunctuality, irregular collections, and neglect.
(e) Failure to give special attention to the collection of the first payment missed.
(f) Failure to re-canvass the business from time to time and to deliver bonus
certificates.
{g) Neglect and unsympathetic treatment of transfers.”
The above causes may account for an appreciable number of lapses but, in our opinion,
there are other and more fundamental causes for the very great number of lapses which occur
in the business of industrial assurance. These are :
{a) The financial distress of policy-holders due to unemployment or sickness or other
causes beyond their control.
This cause of forfeiture was made abundantly clear by the evidence
given to the Commission as to lapses which occurred during the recent
financial depression.
{b) The pressure of agents inducing people to take out policies they do not want.
In our opinion, this cause of forfeiture is confirmed by the evidence
of the very large number of lapses which occur in the early currency of a policy.
According to the evidence of some witnesses lapses have occurred owing to the failure
of a company to inform the policy-holder that his premiums were overdue, and also owing to
the ignorance of the policy-holder as to the terms of his policy, but, in our opinion, these causes
are negligible.
Whether lapses are a source of profit to the companies is a question which depends on
many considerations. While the effect of lapse is a loss to the policy-holder, it cannot be
assumed, as is often done, that the lapse of a policy is in every case a source of profit to the
company.
A lapse which occurs in the early currency of a policy is not a source of profit to an
assurance company, because of the heavy cost of procuring and maintaining industrial business,
but the evidence before the Commission warrants the conclusion that the lapse of a policy three
or more years in force is a source of profit to the company. This profit may of course be applied
for the benefit of remaining policy-holders in the case of mutual companies, and for the benefit
of both policy-holders and shareholders in the case of proprietary companies, but in the case of
some companies which cannot yet be regarded as soundly established, the reserves released by
lapses can be and probably are utilized either in meeting heavy expenses of administration or
in endeavouring to improve the financial condition of the company.
(5) CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PAID-UP POLICIES OR SURRENDER VALUES
ARE GRANTED.
A paid-up policy as generally understood is a contract which varies the original contract
of assurance and is expressed by an endorsement on the original policy or by the issue of a new
policy, or some other form of documentary evidence.
Under such a paid-up policy, the terms of the original contract are altered —the policy-
holder is relieved of his obligation to pay further premiums, and the amount of the original sum
assured is reduced and this reduced sum is payable upon the contingency or contingencies
provided for in the original policy.
In calculating the amount of the sum assured under a paid-up policy, some companies
make an allowance for bonuses in force at the time of the grant of the paid-up policy, but a
paid-up policy does not as a general rule participate in any .subsequent distribution of surplus.
Where the policy-holder desires to discontinue the payment of premiums and is not in
urgent need of money, the grant of a paid-up policy is a convenient and reasonable method of
adjusting the terms of the original policy.


A surrender value as usually understood is the consideration in cash given by the
assurance company for the surrender of a policy of life assurance.
Most of the companies are not averse to the grant of paid-up policies, and although some
companies pay surrender values on certain of their contracts and the majority of the companies
only in cases of demonstrated hardship or necessity, all the companies are opposed to any
general right to surrender values being given to policy-holders.
According to the particulars supplied by them to the Commission all the companies are
willing to grant paid-up policies, but we are satisfied from the evidence that some of these
companies have not always been ready and willing to do so.
The conditions under which paid-up policies are now’ granted are not uniform. In the
case of some companies paid-up policies are granted as a matter of contract, while in the case
of other companies they are granted as a matter of grace, depending upon the discretion of
the directors of the company.
Two of the companies grant paid-up policies after the original policies have been four
years in force, and the remaining companies when the policies have been five years in force,
although according to the evidence two of these latter companies prefer that the policy-holder
should take advantage of their non-forfeiture systems whereby the policy is kept in full benefit
for varying periods.
Policy-holders in one company are entitled in certain circumstances to a paid-up policy
automatically, but the policy-holders of the remaining companies are granted paid-up policies
only upon making an application therefor. It may be mentioned that according to the
evidence policy-holders were often not aware that they could apply for and obtain paid-up
policies.
Where companies grant paid-up policies either in pursuance of their contracts or as a
matter of grace the amounts are ascertained by one or other of the following methods or some
variation thereof ;
(a) By calculating the sum which bears the same relation to the sum assured as
the number of premiums paid bears to the number of premiums payable.
(b) By a method of calculation based upon the reserve value assumed to attach to
the original policy.
In Appendix “ G ” we set forth some of the circumstances under which paid-up policies
are granted by the companies and the methods adopted by them in determining the amounts
thereof. •
We consider that the conditions under which paid-up policies are granted are for the
most part unsatisfactory and require regulation with the object of providing more equitable
treatment for the policy-holder.
During the public sittings of the Commission, Counsel for the companies which are
members of the Life Offices Association of Australasia announced that these companies had no
objection to the grant of a paid-up policy after the original policy had been at least five years
in force.
In our opinion it is a matter not to be disregarded that in Great Britain industrial
policy-holders have been given a statutory right to paid-up policies. This right is contained
in the Industrial Assurance Act 1923, and the Industrial Assurance and Friendly Societies Act
1929, and in these enactments methods are prescribed for ascertaining the amount of the
paid-up policy. We may add that in 1929 and again in 1930 a Bill was introduced into the
Commonwealth Parliament whereby provision was made that industrial policy-holders should
have, after a certain period, a right to a paid-up policy.
Though the grant of a paid-up policy is a practice of almost universal application in
life assurance business, and while authorities on the subject of life assurance generally agree
with the practice, opinions differ as to the following matters ;
The method of calculation ;
The treatment of bonuses ; and
At what stage in the currency of a policy the right should be granted.
Whatever method may be prescribed, it should be so framed as not to impose any
undue strain on the finances of soundly conducted companies and at the same time as to
provide for the policy-holder some benefit which is fair and just.


The values arrived at by the application of any prescribed method should be made
minimum values, thus enabling the companies to grant to the policy-holder more generous
terms if they are able to do so.
This view has been emphasised by an actuary well-known in industrial assurance
business, Mr. H. Hosking Tayler, F.1.A., in a discussion on paid-up policies and surrender
values which is reported in the Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, Yol. LXIII. At page
296, Mr. Tayler said : —■
“ A statutory basis common to all offices might also be a suitable basis for
the contracts of particular offices having regard to their individual circumstances, but
it could not be expected that it would be a suitable basis for all offices. From the
nature of the case, where it was not a suitable basis for a particular office, it should
give values which were below those appropriate to the office and not values above
them. It was therefore necessary to seek a basis which gave not a sort of average
of the values resulting from the bases applicable to individual offices, but rather values
which did not exceed the lowest which were properly applicable to any soundly
conducted office.”
It is also desirable that any rule which prescribes a method of calculating amounts of
paid-up policies and surrender values should be capable, so far as practicable, of easy
application and should, where possible, be so expressed as to be readily understood by the
policy-holder and it is difficult to do this and at the same time maintain a precise and just
relation between reserve values and paid-up policies for the varying forms of industrial
assurance contracts.
It appears to be clear that in the early stages of an industrial policy, the policy has
very little reserve value owing substantially to the initial and renewal expenses involved in
procuring and maintaining the business of industrial life assurance, and some time must elapse
before the policy can be regarded as having any appreciable reserve value.
We are satisfied from the evidence that an industrial policy must be at least three years
in force before it acquires any appreciable reserve value derived from premiums paid, and, in
our opinion, such reserve value or some part thereof should, subject to suitable restrictions, be
applied for the benefit of the policy-holder, if he is unable or unwilling to continue the payment
of his premiums.
In determining the amounts of paid-up policies, companies generally adopt the following
methods :
(a) Those which ascertain the amount of assurance which may be purchased by
a reserve value which is assumed to be attached to the particular policy and
is calculated on a basis determined by the individual company;
( b ) Those which ascertain the amount of assurance by taking a sum which bears
the same proportion to the full sum assured as the number of premiums
actually paid bears to the total number payable for the full term of the
policy;
or some modification of these methods.
Any method of calculating the amount of a paid-up policy for the purposes of industrial
life assurance must necessarily be based upon assumptions which are not entirely free from
criticism.
We do not overlook the consideration that an equitable adjustment should be maintained
between the rights of policy-holders who desire to vary their contracts, and the rights of policy-
holders who desire to maintain their contracts unaltered.
In devising a method of calculating paid-up policies it is important that such a method
should not prescribe amounts greater than can be purchased by the sums accumulated out of
premiums paid after making reasonable allowance for initial and renewal expenses, and for the
risk of death since the issue of the policy. Accordingly, in calculating the reserve value under
method ( a ) there is usually a special allowance made for initial expenses. The use of the
proportionate method ( b) in the case of endowment assurance contracts produces, for most
durations, results which approximate to those obtained under the former method ( a) where a
special allowance is made for initial expenses.
The proportionate method is easy of application and not difficult to understand and we
therefore think that in the calculation of the amounts of paid-up policies in the case of contracts
of endowment assurance, the balance of advantage rests with that method.


The method prescribed by the English Act of 1923 is a reserve value method. Under
this Act, it is necessary to find the value of the policy by English Life Table No. 6 (Persons) with
interest at 4 per cent., and in so doing, an allowance of one year is made for initial expenses. The
amount of the paid-up policy is then arrived at by ascertaining such a sum as can be purchased
by 75 per cent, of such value. The Commonwealth Bill of 1930 provided a method similar in
its main features except that the Life Table was to be such as was prescribed by regulation.
The English Act of 1929 adopted in the case of certain endowments and endowment
assurances the proportionate method without modification.
The Cohen Committee recommended that these methods of calculating paid-up policies
should be altered in the following respects. In the case of whole of life policies, the Committee
suggested the retention of the principle of the 1923 Act, but recommended that, instead of the
uniform amount of 75 per cent, of the value of the policy, the amount should be 90 per cent, for
policies in force for ten years and upwards with a deduction of 2| per cent, for each year less than
ten, provided that in no case should the amount be less than 75 per cent.
The Committee also recommended that the proportionate method laid down by the 1929
Act should be followed in the case of all endowments and endowment assurances with this
proviso—“ that no regard should be had to the premiums payable in respect of the first six
months, either in calculating the actual premiums paid or the total premiums payable from the
outset up to the date of maturity.”
At the present time, some of the large companies in Australia grant full proportionate
values, and one of these companies adds a proportion of declared bonuses.
We consider, however, that a full proportion of the sum assured could not be granted by
any but the larger companies, but after due consideration of the evidence before us, we are of
opinion that in the case of endowment and endowment assurance contracts the amount of the
paid-up policy exclusive of bonuses should be ascertained in the following manner ;
By ascertaining the sum which bears to the original sum assured the same
proportion as the number of complete months’ premiums that have been paid on the
policy bears to the number of months’ premiums originally payable and taking, in
respect of the undermentioned policies, the following percentages of the sum so
ascertained ;
{a) For policies on which three years’ premiums have been paid, 70 per cent. ;
if) For policies on which four years’ premiums have been paid, 80 per cent. ; and
(c) For policies on which premiums have been paid for five years and upwards, 90
per cent.
In the case of whole of life policies, we have made some endeavour to devise, for the sake
of uniformity and simplicity, some method which would be an adaptation of the proportionate
method, but the formulation of such a method is beset with considerable difficulty, and we have
therefore deemed it expedient that some form of the reserve value method should be adopted
for ascertaining the amounts of paid-up policies in whole of life assurance. Accordingly, in the
case of whole of life policies, we recommend that the amount of the paid-up policy, exclusive of
bonuses, should be ascertained in accordance with the following rules :
(1) Rule for ascertaining the amount of a Paid-up Policy : —The amount of a paid-up
policy shall be a sum bearing the same proportion to 90 per cent, of the value
of the policy as the sum of one pound bears to the value of the reversion in
the sum of one pound according to the contingency upon which the sum
assured under the original policy was payable.
(2) Rules for Valuing Policies. —The value of the policy for the purposes of the
preceding rule shall be determined in the following manner ;
(a) The value of the policy shall be the difference between the present value
of the reversion in the sum assured according to the contingency upon
which it is payable and the present value of the future net premiums,
(i b) The net premium shall be such premium as, according to the assumed
rate of interest and rates of mortality, and the age of the person whose
life is assured at his birthday next following the date of the policy,
is sufficient to provide for the risk incurred by the company in issuing
the policy exclusive of any addition thereto for office expenses and
other charges ;
Provided that the date of the policy may be assumed one
year after the actual date.


(3) General Rules applicable hath for valving the policy and for ascertaining the amount
of the Paid-up Policy :
(a) Interest shall be assumed at the rate of 4 per cent, per annum.
(h) The rates of mortality shall be assumed according to such tables as are
from time to time prescribed.
(c) The age of the person whose life is assured shall be obtained by adding
to the age attained by him at his birthday next after the date of the
issue of the policy, the duration of the policy in completed years
and months at the date as at which the value of the policy is required
to be ascertained.
At the present time the A 1133 Table of Mortality would be an appropriate table to
adopt.
In making the foregoing recommendations in respect of the amount of a paid-up policy
we have not taken bonuses into account and we now propose to deal with the treatment of
bonuses in relation to the amount of the paid-up policy.
There are different practices adopted by the companies in dealing with bonuses in
relation to paid-up policies. Some companies omit bonuses entirely from the calculation of
paid-up policies. Other companies reduce the bonuses in the same proportion as that in which,
the sum assured is reduced. In adopting these courses the companies appear to follow practical
expediency rather than any precise adjustment of rights. It would seem, according to some
methods of distributing surplus, that bonuses are allotted during the early years of a policy
before the moneys accumulated from the premiums paid under that policy could have
contributed to the surplus out of which the bonus was allotted. Whilst there may be some
justification for bonuses not being taken into consideration in the calculation of a paid-up
policy during the early years of the policy, there is no justification, in our opinion, for the
exclusion of bonuses allotted in subsequent years. We think, therefore, that it would be
reasonable to exclude all bonuses which may have been allotted during the early years of a policy,
but that the full amount of all bonuses subsequently allotted should be included in the amounts
of paid-up policies, and we accordingly recommend fhat bonuses allotted during the first five
years of the currency of the policy should be excluded, and that bonuses declared thereafter
should be added to the amount of the paid-up policy determined in accordance with our previous
recommendations.
As we have already indicated, an industrial policy upon which at least three years’
premiums have been paid has acquired some appreciable reserve value, and we accordingly
consider that a policy-holder upon whose policy such premiums have been paid should be
entitled to a paid-up policy.
Where such a policy is not liable to be forfeited on account of the non-payment of
premiums and the policy-holder desires a paid-up policy he should, on application in writing
to the company, be. entitled to a paid-up policy and the company, within one month of the
receipt of such application, should notify the policy-holder of the amount of the paid-up policy
to which he is entitled and should issue to him some documentary evidence setting forth the
amount and date of the paid-up policy.
On the other hand, where the holder of a policy on which three years’ premiums have
been paid fails, for not less than twelve weeks after it became due, to pay a premium payable
in respect of such policy, he should thereupon become entitled automatically to a paid-up
policy, and the company should, within one month after such policy-holder has become so
entitled, issue to him a new policy for the amount of the paid-up policy or deliver to him some
appropriate documentary evidence that he is entitled to such paid-up policy and setting forth
the amount and date thereof.
The right of policy-holders to surrender values is a question about which divergent views
have been expressed. The companies do not favour the grant of surrender values, and various
objections have been made, both in Great Britain and Australia, to the grant of surrender
values. These objections have probably more weight in Great Britain than in Australia,
because in Great Britain the majority of the contracts in force are whole life policies.
In Australia a very great number of policies of industrial assurance are for terms of
fifteen, sixteen, and twenty years, and some companies even issue policies for terms of twelve
years. According to the evidence the most popular term is twenty years.


As the companies are opposed to policy-holders having a right to surrender values, they
have not made such a right a part of their contracts of industrial assurance, although some of
the companies provide in some of their policies for the grant of cash options, which, in the case
of one company, have been described as guaranteed surrender values. At present, the grant
of a surrender value depends upon the discretion of the company, and one of the complaints
made by policy-holders was that they were refused surrender values in circumstances in which
they considered the discretion of the company should have been exercised in their favour.
The grounds upon which the companies base their objections to a right to surrender
values are principally the following;—
(а) The danger to the financial stability of the companies which may occur in
times of economic depression ;
(б) The interference with the companies’ methods of investment;
(c) The creation of an adverse selection against the companies; and
( d ) The discouragement of thrift on the part of the policy-holder.
The evidence relating to these objections was far from satisfactory, and in many instances
amounted to a relation of the possible dangers to which assurance companies might be exposed
if they were compelled to grant surrender values to policy-holders. We are not prepared to
say that the grant of surrender vahies might not operate to the disadvantage of the companies
in times of financial emergency. Any danger that the companies might fear on this ground
could, we think, be avoided by empowering the Governor in Council, in times of financial
emergency, to suspend the obligation of any company to pay surrender values.
In our opinion, the payment of surrender values will not have any material effect upon
the methods of investment of the companies.
Actuaries in giving evidence before the Commission submitted that the right of
policy-holders to withdraw would create an adverse selection against the companies, but their
evidence amounted to expressions of opinion which were not conclusive. That the effect of
this objection is not yet clearly determined may be gathered from the views of Mr. W. E. H.
Hickox, F.1.A., of the Prudential Assurance Company Limited.
In an article on Surrender Values and Paid-up Amounts in the Journal of the Institute
of Actuaries, Vol. LXVIL, Mr. Hickox, at page 222 says: —
“ A considerable portion of previous discussions on surrender values has centred
round the mortality of lives surrendering. Space will not permit a recapitulation of
many of the numerous points raised, and, moreover, few of the arguments are convincing
owing to the impossibility of procuring adequate data by which to test them.”
At page 223, Mr. Hickox says :■ —
“ I am of the opinion that the mortality option on surrender of an ordinary
policy is normally not material, and have not therefore made any specific provision
for the risk in my calculations.”
If adverse selection is an element to be taken into account in the business of industrial
assurance its effect is not, in our opinion, sufficiently material to justify the denial to the policy-
holder of a right to a surrender value.
The remaining ground is that the right to a surrender value will discourage thrift on the
part of policy-holders, but whether this right to a surrender value will discourage thrift is a
question on which at least two opinions might be expressed, that of the policy-holder who seeks
a surrender value, and that of the company. We do not think, however, that this ground affords
a sufficient reason why, with proper safeguards in the interests of the companies, surrender
values should not be granted.
When a policy has been a considerable number of years in force, it is reasonable to assume
that the average policy-holder will not be anxious to sacrifice the benefits provided by his policy
for an immediate cash payment.
It was asserted by witnesses that a strong motive in taking out a policy of industrial
assurance was the desire to possess a sum of money at a time not unreasonably remote. When
a policy-holder has paid a substantial proportion of the premiums payable his desire to obtain a
surrender value may only be a more acute expression of a similar motive.
We may mention that in the State of Queensland in 1933 a statutory right to surrender
values was given by legislation and, so far as we can ascertain, this right has not appreciably
affected the companies operating in that State.


We consider that the attitude of the companies to the grant of surrender values is somewhat
too harsh, and we think it fair and reasonable that, when a policy has been in force for some
considerable time, the policy-holder should have the right to a surrender value. Having regard
to the evidence before us, we are of opinion that the policy-holder should have this right when
his policy has been in force for at least six years. This right should also apply to the holders
of paid-up policies, and in their case the qualifying period of six years should commence at the
date of the issue of the original policy.
For the sake of maintaining simplicity, we think it proper that the surrender value should
be determined in the following manner ; —•
In all cases where a surrender value has to be computed, there should be first
ascertained the relevant paid-up policy if such a policy has not already been granted,
calculated in accordance with our previous recommendations, and the surrender value
should be the present value of the paid-up policy as at the date when the application
for the surrender value is received by the company.
Such present value should be ascertained by the use of a table of mortality and
a rate of interest prescribed by regulation.
We may add that our recommendations with respect to the methods of calculating
paid-up policies and surrender values are based upon the assumption that the policy is not
subject to any lien by way of loan or otherwise.
(6) PRACTICES RELATING TO THE FORFEITURE OF POLICIES, THE ISSUE OF
PAID-UP POLICIES, AND THE GRANT OF SURRENDER VALUES.
All the companies by their contracts provide in effect that a policy-holder shall be allowed
four weeks’ grace in which to pay his premiums, and if any premium is overdue for more than
four weeks his policy shall become void, and all premiums paid thereon forfeited.
In practice, however, the companies do not insist upon the strict terms of the contract
but, in fact, allow the policy-holder a considerably longer time than four weeks before they
exercise their right to forfeit a policy.
Some of the companies have endeavoured to avoid the consequences of forfeiture where
policies have been in force for a period of years. This has been done by providing that when a
policy has been in force for a number of years and the policy-holder has failed to pay his premiums
as required by the policy he should be entitled to a paid-up policy or some form of deferred
assurance.
One company grants to such a policy-holder a paid-up policy automatically after four
years’ premiums have been paid upon the original policy.
Some policy-holders complained that they were not aware that their policies had been
forfeited, and other policy-holders that they were not made fully aware of the right of the
company to forfeit the policy, but we think that in the great majority of cases of forfeiture,
the policy-holder was fully aware of the fact that he had ceased to pay premiums and of the
consequences of his failure to do so. The right of a company to forfeit a policy is one which
may cause and has undoubtedly caused great hardship to policy-holders whose policies have
been many years in force.
In our opinion, the right of a company to forfeit a policy is one that should be made
the subject of statutory regulation, because we consider that this right may be exercised by
some companies to the prejudice of policy-holders.
We have already recommended that policy-holders upon whose policies premiums have
been paid for at least three years should be granted paid-up policies, and if this recommendation
be adopted, the serious consequences to the policy-holder resulting from the right to forfeit will
be considerably diminished.
The statutory method which should be adopted to regulate the right to forfeit has been
the subject of much controversy, particularly in respect of the question whether the company
should be required to give a notice to the policy-holder before it exercises its right of
forfeiture.
The English Act of 1923 provides that before a policy of industrial assurance can be
forfeited, a notice must be sent to the person assured giving him 28 days in which to pay the
amount due, and this period of 28 days is in addition to the usual period allowed by the
practice of most companies before a notice is served. The result under the English Act is
that a policy may remain in force for some considerable time before it finally becomes


forfeited. On the other hand, the Insurance Act 1936 passed by the Parliament of the Irish
Free State, provides that no person who has effected a policy of industrial assurance shall
incur forfeiture of such policy by reason of a default in paying a premium in respect of such
policy unless a premium payable in respect of such policy is unpaid for not less than ten
weeks after it becomes due. Under this Act a forfeiture notice is not required to be given by
the company.
It is at least questionable whether an obligation to give a notice before exercising a
right of forfeiture should be imposed upon the companies. Such an obligation would
undoubtedly cast a severe burden upon the companies without a corresponding advantage to
policy-holders, because in our opinion the policy-holders who are not aware of the conditions
relating to the forfeiture of their policies are comparatively few.
We consider that the provisions of the Insurance Act, passed by the Parliament of the
Irish Free State, relating to forfeiture are preferable to those contained in the English Act of
1923, and constitute a reasonable and fair method of regulating the right of forfeiture now
contained in the contracts of the companies.
We therefore think that the provisions relating to forfeiture contained in the Irish Act
should, subject to modification, be adopted in the State of Victoria, and we accordingly
recommend that: —-
( a ) Where a policy has been in force less than one year the policy-holder should
not incur a forfeiture of the policy on account of the non-payment of
premiums unless a premium payable in respect of such policy has been
unpaid for not less than four weeks after it became due ;
{h) Where a policy has been in force one year and under two years the policy-holder
should not incur a forfeiture of the policy on account of the non-payment
of premiums unless a premium payable in respect of such policy has been
unpaid for not less than eight weeks after it became due; and
(c) Where a policy has been in force for two years and upwards, the policy-holder
should not incur a forfeiture of the policy on account ’ of the non-payment
of premiums unless a premium payable in respect of such policy is unpaid
for not less than twelve weeks after it became due; and
If the recommendations already made be adopted that the conditions under which a
policy-holder will forfeit his policy for non-payment of premiums should be endorsed on his
policy and premium receipt book, the policy-holder will, in our opinion, have little cause to
complain that he has not been made fully aware of the risk of forfeiture that he will incur on
account of the non-payment of premiums.
We have already considered the practices relating to the issue of paid-up policies and
the grant of surrender values, and it is unnecessary to repeat here the results of our
investigations relating to these practices.
(7) METHODS OF PAYING CLAIMS.
The evidence disclosed very few complaints relating to the payment of claims. It
appears that claims are not often disputed by the companies and many claims have been paid
which the companies might have resisted.
It is the practice of most of the companies to settle claims without delay, and some of
the companies submitted schedules of settlements effected over a period of two years as
proof of the practice.
Such complaints as were made by policy-holders before the Commission regarding the
settlement of claims mainly related to combined life and sickness assurance policies issued by
the Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited. The terms of its policies relating to
sickness benefit were such as to give rise to misunderstanding on the part of policy-holders.
The evidence as to the settlement of claims disclosed one objectionable practice. It
appeared that some companies were prepared to pay a sum representing the discounted value
of the policy at a date prior to the maturity date, but certain companies only granted this
privilege if the assured effected a new policy and allowed one year’s premiums to be deducted
from the sum payable to the policy-holder.
According to the evidence cases have occurred in which the policy-holder had no desire
to obtain a new policy, but was willing to take out a new policy solely for the purpose of
obtaining, and because he could not otherwise obtain, an immediate cash payment. Such
cases, in our opinion, are an abuse of the practice of pre-maturing policies.


PART III—RECOMMENDATIONS.
In accordance with, the direction contained in our Commission, we make the following
recommendations which in our opinion are necessary in the public interest.
1. METHODS EMPLOYED BY AGENTS IN SOLICITING SUCH BUSINESS AND IN
PROCURING CONTRACTS OF ASSURANCE.
Recommendations—
(a) jA policy of industrial assurance should not be invalidated by any non-fraudulent
| omission or mis-statement made in the proposal upon which the policy was issued.
(b) Where an agent or officer of an industrial life assurance company wholly or partly fills
in a proposal, he should be deemed to be acting as agent for the company and not
for the proposer to the extent to which the proposal has been completed by him.
(c) A company in carrying on its industrial assurance business should not make any contract
with any officer or servant of the company who is directly concerned in the acquisition
of new business to pay such officer or servant any compensation or reward by way
of commission.
2. PROVISIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORMS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS USED
IN THE CONDUCT OF SUCH BUSINESS, INCLUDING PROPOSALS, PERSONAL
REPORTS, POLICIES, PREMIUM RECEIPT BOOKS AND GUARANTEE BONDS,
AND THE PRACTICES RELATING TO THE USE OF SUCH FORMS AND
DOCUMENTS.
Recommendations —
(а) Every policy of industrial life assurance should contain an endorsement in distinctive
type setting forth the following particulars :
(i) Whether the policy is a participating or non-participating policy ;
(ii) If participating, the minimum proportion of surplus which the company
undertakes to make available to policy-holders ;
(iii) The conditions relating to the right of the policy-holder to a paid-up policy ;
(iv) The conditions relating to the right of the policy-holder to a surrender value ;
and
(v) The conditions under which the policy may be forfeited.
(б) A company should deliver to a policy-holder a premium receipt book, and in such book,
the following entries should be made by the company: —
The name of the agent;
The name of the policy-holder and in the case of “ life of another ” policies, the
name of the assured ;
The date and number of the policy;
The sum assured and the contingency or contingencies upon which such sum is
payable ; and
The amount of the weekly premium.
If any alteration in the particulars contained in these entries is made, the
entries should be amended to accord with such alteration.
(c) Payments received by an agent should be so recorded in the premium receipt book as to
clearly indicate the date to which premiums have been paid in respect of each policy.
(d) Every premium receipt book delivered to a policy-holder by a company should have
endorsed thereon in distinctive type the particulars mentioned in paragraph (a) of
these recommendations.
(e) Any provision in any agreement whereby the guarantor of an agent of the company is
required to pay to the company the amount of the commissions repayable by the
agent on account of lapsed policies should be void.


(/) Any provision in any agreement whereby it is provided that the production in any legal
\ proceedings of a certificate signed by an officer of the company certifying to the
\ liability to the company of the agent or guarantor and to the amount thereof shall
be conclusive evidence of such liability and amount should be void.
( g) A person to whom an industrial policy is issued should be entitled within twenty-eight
days of the receipt thereof to return the said policy with an objection to any term
or condition thereof, and if he so returns the said policy, the company should forthwith
cancel the same and refund any premium or premiums which has or have been paid
in respect thereof.
( h) If a company or any person authorized by it should take possession of any policy of
industrial assurance premium receipt book or other document issued in connexion
with the policy, a receipt should be given therefor, and such policy book or other
document should be returned within twenty-eight days to the person from whom
such policy book or other document was obtained, unless the policy has been
terminated by reason of satisfaction of all claims capable of arising thereunder, or
unless the company is entitled to retain the said policy as security for any money
due and owing to it by the policy-holder.
3. THE COSTS OF PROCURING, MAINTAINING AND ADMINISTERING SUCH
BUSINESS, PARTICULARLY IN RELATION TO THE BENEFITS OBTAINABLE
BY POLICY-HOLDERS.
Recommendations —
(a) Companies carrying on the business of industrial life assurance in the State of Victoria
should establish a separate fund to be called the “ Industrial Assurance Fund.” to the
credit of which all moneys so received in respect of such fund should be placed.
(. b ) Such companies should in respect of their industrial life assurance business make the
statements and abstracts required to be made by them in respect of their life
assurance business under Part 111. of the Companies Act 1928.
(c) Every revenue account of a company relating to its industrial life assurance business
deposited with the Registrar-General should be accompanied by a certificate of the
auditor of the company certifying that its accounts in respect of such business have
been duly separated from all other accounts of the company and that the expenses
appearing in such revenue account are a correct statement of the expenses incurred
in respect of its industrial life assurance business.
(i d ) Every industrial assurance company should be required to deposit with the Government
Statist copies of such statements and abstracts as may be necessary to be deposited
with the Registrar-General.
(e) If, in the opinion of the Government Statist, the costs of a company in procuring,
maintaining and administering its industrial assurance business in relation to the
benefits obtainable by policy-holders are unduly high, he may cause an investigation
to be made into its financial affairs, and if, as a result of such investigation, the
Government Statist is satisfied that the company is unable to reduce such costs,
in such manner and within such time as he considers reasonable, he may, with the
consent of the Attorney-General, apply to a Judge in Chambers for an order
prohibiting the company from issuing any new policies of industrial life assurance
in the State of Victoria. If a company against which such an order has been made
is able to reduce such costs in a manner approved by the Government Statist, it may
thereupon apply to a Judge in Chambers for an order removing the prohibition
against it from issuing new policies.
(/) Every company should distribute to its participating policy-holders, in respect of each
inter-valuation period, at least 80 per cent, of the surplus or profits which may be
earned by the company during such period by that part of its industrial assurance
business which relates to with-profit policies.
(g) If any company can prove to the satisfaction of the Government Statist that the
allocation of surplus or profits hereinbefore recommended is unfair to its shareholders,
the Governor in Council may vary such allocation upon the recommendation of the
Government Statist.


4. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH POLICIES ARE FORFEITED.
Recommendations—
{a) Where a policy has been in force less than one year, the policy-holder should not incur
a forfeiture of the policy on account of the non-payment of premiums unless a
premium payable in respect of such policy has been unpaid for not less than four
weeks after it became due.
(6) Where a policy has been in force one year and under two years, the policy-holder should
not incur a forfeiture on account of the non-payment of premiums unless a premium
payable in respect of such policy has been unpaid for not less than eight weeks
after it became due.
(c) Where a policy has been in force for two years and upwards the policy-holder should
not incur a forfeiture of the policy on account of the non-payment of premiums
unless a premium payable in respect of such policy has been unpaid for not less
than twelve weeks after it became due.
Where a policy-holder has paid at least three years’ premiums upon his
policy, the recommendations hereinafter made as to his right to a paid-up policy
will have the effect of avoiding the consequences of forfeiture.
5. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PAID-UP POLICIES OR SURRENDER
VALUES ARE GRANTED.
Recommendations—
(а) A policy-holder upon whose policy three years’ premiums have been paid should be
entitled to a paid-up policy.
(б) The amount of a paid-up policy, exclusive of bonuses, in the case of endowment and
endowment assurance contracts, should be ascertained in the following manner; —
By ascertaining the sum which bears to the original sum assured the
same proportion as the number of complete months’ premiums that have been
paid on the policy bears to the number of months’ premiums originally payable
and taking in respect of the under-mentioned policies the following percentages
of the sum so ascertained :
(i) For policies on which three years’ premiums have been paid, 70 per
cent. ;
(ii) For policies on which four years’ premiums have been paid, 80 per
cent. ; and
(iii) For policies on which premiums have been paid for five years and
upwards, 90 per cent.
(c) The amount of the paid-up policy, exclusive of bonuses, in the case of whole of life
policies, should be ascertained in accordance with the following rules :
(1) Rule for Ascertaining the Amount .of a Paid-up Policy. —The amount of a
paid-up policy shall be a sum bearing the same proportion to 90 per
cent, of the value of the policy as the sum of one pound bears to the
value of the reversion in the sum of one pound according to the
contingency upon which the sum assured under the original policy was
payable.
(2) Rules for Valuing Policies.- —The value of the policy, for the purposes of
the preceding rule, shall be determined in the following manner ;■ —
{a) The value of the policy shall be the difference between the
present value of the reversion in the sum assured according
to the contingency upon which it is payable and the present
value of the future net premiums.
(5) The net premium shall be such premium as according to the
assumed rate of interest and rates of mortality and the age
of the person whose life is assured at his birthday next
following the date of the policy is sufficient to provide for
the risk incurred by the company in issuing the policy
exclusive of any addition thereto for office expenses and other
charges.
Provided that the date of the policy may be assumed
to be one year after the actual date.


(3) General Rules applicable both for Valuing the Policy and for Ascertaining the
Amount of the Paid-up Policy :
(a) Interest shall be assumed at the rate of 4 per cent, per annum.
(b) The rates of mortality shall be assumed according to such tables
as are from time to time prescribed.
(c) The age of the person whose life is assured shall be obtained by
adding to the age attained by him at his birthday next after
the date of the issue of the policy, the duration of the policy
in completed years and months at the date as at which the
value of the policy is required to be ascertained.
At the present time the A M33 Table of Mortality would
be an appropriate Table to adopt.
(d) Where a paid-up policy is granted by a company there should be added to the amount
thereof as determined in accordance with the preceding recommendations all bonuses
declared upon the original policy between a date five years after the issue of the
original policy and the date of the grant of such paid-up policy.
(e) Where a policy-holder becomes entitled to the grant of a paid-up policy, and his policy
is not liable to be forfeited on account of non-payment of premiums, he should be
granted a paid-up policy on application in writing to the company, and the company
should within one month after receiving such application notify the policy-holder
in writing of the amount of such paid-up policy and should issue to him some
documentary evidence setting forth the amount and date of such paid-up policy,
and the contingency or contingencies upon which it is payable.
(/) Where a policy-holder becomes entitled to the grant of a paid-up policy and fails to pay
a premium payable in respect of his policy for not less than twelve weeks after it
became due he should thereupon be granted automatically a paid-up policy and the
company should within one month thereafter notify the policy-holder in writing of
the amount of the paid-up policy and should issue to him some documentary evidence
setting forth the amount and date of such paid-up policy and the contingency or
contingencies upon which it is payable.
id) A policy-holder upon whose policy six years’ premiums have been paid should be
entitled to surrender his policy and receive a cash payment therefor.
The holder of a paid-up policy should at the expiration of six years from
the date of the original policy be entitled to surrender such paid-up policy
and receive a cash payment therefor.
(h) The surrender value should be the present value, calculated as at the date when the
application for such surrender value is received by the company, of the paid-up
policy or an appropriate paid-up policy determined in accordance with our previous
recommendations. Such present value should be ascertained by the use of a table
of mortality and rate of interest prescribed by regulation.
(i) Power should be given to the Governor in Council to suspend during a time of
financial emergency for such period as he thinks fit the obligation of a company
to pay surrender values, if the payment of surrender values is prejudicial to the
financial stability of the company.
6 PRACTICES RELATING TO THE FORFEITURE OP POLICIES, THE ISSUE OF
PAID-UP POLICIES AND THE GRANT OF SURRENDER VALUES.
The recommendations already made under paragraphs (4) and (5) deal with the practices
referred to.


7. METHODS OF PAYING CLAIMS.
We consider it unnecessary to make any recommendations with respect to the methods of
paying claims.
8. GENEEAL.
Kecommendations
{a) If the recommendations we have made be adopted, various notices will be required to
be given by a company to a policy-holder, and we consider it proper that when
any such notice is required to be given it should be given in writing and either
delivered or sent by post to him at his last known place of abode.
(h) Wherever the conditions of a policy are such as would confer on a policy-holder
rights or benefits more favorable to him than are conferred by the foregoing
recommendations, these recommendations, if adopted, should not prevent the
policy-holder from claiming the rights or benefits conferred by the conditions of the
policy.
(c) We consider that in any legislation to give effect to these recommendations “ Industrial
Assurance Business ” should be defined, and we consider that the following or some
similar definition should be adopted :
The business of effecting assurance upon human life premiums in respect
of which are by the terms of the policy made payable by the assured at intervals
of less than two months and are contracted to be received, or any one or more
of which have actually been received, by means of collectors.
(d) If effect should be given to these recommendations by legislation, such legislation
should, come into operation at once.
We make the last recommendation for the following reasons. The National Health and
Pensions Insurance Act 1938, passed by the Parliament of the Commonwealth, will require many
industrial policy-holders to make contributions as provided by the Act, and we consider that
consequently many of these policy-holders will be unable to keep their policies in force. In the
next place it is not improbable that some companies may follow the example of the Producers
and Citizens’ Co-operative Company Limited and discontinue the business of making contracts of
industrial life assurance. If this occurs there is a possibility that the policy-holders of such
companies may more urgently need the protection which our recommendations, if adopted, will
afford to industrial policy-holders.
In making our investigations we have derived much assistance from the Eeports of the
Parmoor and Cohen Committees, and we have to some extent been guided by the legislation
relating to the business of industrial assurance enacted in other countries.
There are many matters connected with the business of industrial life assurance in respect
of which we have not made any recommendations, because some of these would in any event
be extremely difficult to regulate, and others, such as the method of remunerating agents, were
not within the scope of our investigations. In our opinion, however, the recommendations
which we have in fact made relate not only to the major part of the industrial life assurance
business in the State of Victoria, but also to the more important questions concerning the
policy-holders in the conduct of such business.
The regulation of the business of industrial life assurance in other countries is to a
substantial extent under the control of a Commissioner or Eegistrar, but we consider that if our
recommendations are given effect to by legislation, the appointment of such an officer will not
be required. Such official assistance or supervision as may be required in the administration
of such legislation can, in our opinion, be given by the Government Statist,
‘ We desire to place on record our appreciation of the assistance given to us by the
companies concerned with our investigations and particularly such of these companies as were
members of the Life Offices Association of Australasia.
4709.—3


We also desire to express our appreciation of the assistance given to the Commission
by the Counsel who appeared before us, by the Secretary of the Commission, Mr. A. A. Calwell,
by the Reverend D. Daley, and by Counsel assisting the Commission, Mr. Gregory Gowans.
Given under our hands and seals this twenty-seventh day of September, 1938.
T. S. CLYNE, Chairman.
0. GAWLER, Member.
T. FORRISTAL, Member.
A. J. L. JAMES, Member.
ARTHUR A. CALWELL,
Secretary.
[Minutes of Evidence me not 'printed.']


Age at Entry.
Class.
11
Whole life policy
Twenty years’ Endowment Assurance Policy.
20
Whole life policy
Twenty years’ Endowment Assurance Policy.
40
Whole life policy
Twenty years’ Endowment Assurance Policy.
60
Whole life policy
. . Twenty years’ Endowment Assurance Policy.
APPENDIX “A.”
COPY OF PARTICULARS REQUIRED PROM THE LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANIES CARRYING ON
INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF VICTORIA.
1. Copies of returns submitted by your Society (or Company) to the Registrar-General in respect of each of
the past three years, including latest valuation return.
2. Copies of tables of rates, proposal forms, personal statements concerning health, policy forms, copies of
Agency Agreement, and Agent’s Guarantor bonds.
3. Particulars of industrial policies lapsed during each of the past three years, showing total and Victorian
business separately—
(i) Number of policies.
(ii) Total sums assured.
(iii) Total premiums received.
Note. — If the total premiums received are not available, please supply particulars of premiums paid upon
representative samples of 500 lapses in Victoria in each year.
Particulars of any experience which has been taken out to show the durations of lapsed policies.
4. State total amounts of surplus or profits (if any) in respect of Industrial Assurance Business available at
the end of each of the past three years, and give particulars concerning the amount allocated to industrial policy-
holders, also methods of distribution. In the case of Companies with share capital the amount allotted to shareholders
should be shown.
5. (i) Under what conditions are industrial policies lapsed, surrender values paid, and paid-up policies issued ?
(ii) How many paid-up policies have been issued, and for what amount in each of the last three years ? (In
Victoria.)
(iii) How many policies have been surrendered in Victoria, total surrender value paid, and total sums assured
of such policies during each of the last three years ?
6. Does your Society (or Company) issue industrial policies, in respect of pure endowments or whole life
assurances, and if so what is the highest age at which a proposal would be accepted ? Is any limit placed on the
amount of industrial assurance which will be accepted —
(a) on an individual life, and/or
( h) from a household ?
7. What is the ratio of expenses including taxation to (a) premium income and ( b) total income in each of the
past five (5) completed years in respect of ordinary and industrial business separately ? If possible, the expense ratio
for industrial business in Victoria should be shown separately. Amounts written off assets should not be included
as expenses.
8. In how many cases during the past five years have bondsmen been asked to make payments under the bonds
on account of commission due by agents in respect of lapsed policies ? What amounts were involved ?
9. Can you suggest any action which would reduce complaints against industrial assurance business, and what
machinery for investigating and settling complaints would you recommend ?
10. Give particulars of any action taken to prevent misrepresentation on the part of agents to proponents, or
misunderstanding on the part of policy-holders of the terms of their contracts.
11. State the number of Industrial Assurance Agents employed on the 28th February, 1938, and the average
length of service of such Agents.
12. (a) What was the amount of commission paid to agents in the Industrial Department during each of the
last three completed years ?
( b ) State the expenses of management in the Industrial Department (excluding commission paid to Agents)
during each of the last three completed years.
13. State what amount of assurance may be obtained by —
(a) the payment of 525. per annum in the Ordinary Branch ;
(b) the payment of Is. per week in the Industrial Branch in the following specimens of —
(i) with profit policies ;
(ii) non-profit policies.


Society or Office.
Valuation Date.
Mortality Table Used in Valuation.
Kate of
Interest Used
In Valuation.
Australian Mutual Provident Society
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life
31.12.1934
Experience of male lives in New South Wales
and Victoria, shown by Censuses of 1891
and 1901, and deaths 1890-1902, inclusive
0/
/o
3
Assurance Society
30.9.1937
“ Australian Males,” 1911 ..
3
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society
31.12.1936
“ Australian Males,” Table 1920-22
3
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company
31.12.1934
Moors and Day’s Aust., Males 1891
Si
Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company
31.12.1934
English Life Table (No. 9, Males) ..
“ Australian Males,” 1901-10
2i
The Provident Life Assurance Company
31.12.1933
3J
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company ..
30.6.1937
Oil
3i
Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances
30.9.1936
OM
4
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation
Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance
31.12.1935
0«
4
Company
31.8.1935
OM
4
Associated Dominions Assurance Society
30.6.1936
“ Australian Males,” 1901-10
4
14. In respect of each of the specimen “ with profit ” policies referred to in the previous question, quote
specimen bonuses allowed during each of the last three completed years to such policies (assuming them to be ten
years in force).
15. State the rate of interest assumed and the table of mortality used and the actual methods employed in
calculating —
(а) the amount of a paid-up policy ;
(б) surrender value.
N.B. —The reply should state how bonuses are dealt with.
16. Give specimens of surrender values in the case of a twenty-year Endowment Assurance Policy on a life
aged twenty at entry and under which a weekly premium of Is. is payable, where such policy is—■
(a) Five years in force ;
(b) Ten years in force ;
(c) Fifteen years in force.
17. Give specimens of surrender values in the case of a whole life policy on a life aged 50 at entry and under
which a weekly premium of Is. is payable where such policy is—
(a) Five years in force ;
( b ) Ten years in force ;
(c) Fifteen years in force ;
(d) Twenty years in force.
18. Give particulars of Industrial Assurance business in each of the last two completed years, showing —
(a) total number of new policies issued (excluding free paid-up policies granted) ;
(b) total maximum amounts assured under such new policies ;
(c) total number of policies in force at the end of each such year, and the total maximum amounts assured
under such policies.
APPENDIX “B.”
SOME PARTICULARS OF THE INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE BUSINESS OP THE COMPANIES
COMPILED FROM THE LATEST VALUATION RETURNS DELIVERED BY THE COMPANIES
TO THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT 1928.
(1) DATES OP THE RESPECTIVE VALUATIONS, AND THE TABLES OF MORTALITY, AND RATES
OF INTEREST EMPLOYED IN SUCH VALUATIONS.
Appendix “ A ” — continued.


With Participation in Profits.
Without Participation in Profits.
Description of Business,
Number
of Policies.
Amounts
Assured.
Bonuses.
Yearly Premiums.
Office. Net.
Number
of Policies.
Amounts
Assured.
Yearly P
Office.
remiums.
Net.
Whole of Life Assurances
99,686
£
2,842,860
£
204,784
£
176,999
£
112,053
32,427
£
664,745
£
29,070
£
15,541
Whole of Life Assurances —
Limited Premiums
17,185
582,251
12,278
41,721
25,939
58,475
1,991,017
70,205
42,658
Whole of Life Assurances —
Limited Premiums and Paid
Up
4,555
117,809
8,668
5,544
Whole of Life Assurances —
Commuted Premiums
310
3,980
1,104
Whole of Life Assurances —
Paid Up ..
1,203
14,247
1
47,344
433,863
Whole of Life Assurances —
Joint Lives
330
10,776
2,632
681
377
553
15,805
1,102
570
Whole of Life Assurances —
Joint Lives Paid Up
241
2,075
Endowment Assurances
1,657,718
78,690,767
3,950,141
4,907,659
3,620,377
27,640
949,038
67,344
51,469
Endowment Assurances —Paid
Up
340
3,932
89,631
1,817,868
Endowment Assurances —Pay-
able for Full Term
58,911
2,160,039
116,612
84,472
Endowment Assurances with
Return ..
9,195
366,208
23,523
20,549
Deferred Endowment Assur-
ances—Paid Up ..
105
1,708
Deferred Endowment Assur-
ances with Return of Pre-
miums and Interest
476
21,885
519
550
415
Increasing Endowment Assur-
ances
114,946
6,232,715
437,830
285,119
225,546
Double Endowment Assurances
17,780
939,068
6,668
47,714
36,689
3,003
137,607
8,052
6,054
Double Endowment Assurances
—Paid Up
5,469
137,500
Double Endowment Assurances
—Payable for Pi'll Term ..
14,428
1,028,662
49,250
39,425
Triple Endowment Assurances
1
50
3
3
Children’s Endowment Assur-
ances
10,861
350,946
17,594
13,200
Children’s Endowment Assur-
ances—Paid Up ..
73
577
Pure Endowments ..
29,026
894,487
3,686
61,548
56,439
91,843
3,759,089
211,988
182,715
Endowments—Paid Up
108
930
Endowments with Contingent
Premiums
12,157
492,302
32,347
27,098
Endowments—Premiums Ceas-
ing on Cessation of Second
Life—Joint Lives ..
4
400
30
18
6,096
155,135
10,753
8,957
Endowments—Payable for Full
Term
44
3,100
112
104
Infantile Option
Children’s Special Option
11,993
339,582
2,553
23,604
19,058
, #
394
71,588
727
534
Cash Income Policies
204
5,222
565
332
House Purchase Policies
9
3,286
81
65
. #
Extra Premiums
5,059*
5,059*
Grand Total ..
1,961,941
89,931,709
4,622,136
5,563,303
4,110,176
462,853
14,311,310
635,377
490.987
(2) DETAILS OF PARTICIPATING AND NON-PARTICIPATING POLICIES IN FORCE, ACCORDING TO
THE TYPE OF POLICY.
♦ Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited.
Appendix “ B ” — continued.


Name of Company.
Number of
Sums Assured.
Bonuses.
Yearly Premiums.
Policies.
Office.
Net.
Group I.
£
£
£
£
Australian Mutual Provident Society
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance
607,837
34,246,604
2,120,144
1,741,185
1,279,129
Society
806,020
33,141,155
1,564,831
2,323,509
1,702,029
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society ..
295,188*
11,659,342
874,629
679,810
522,339
Total of Group ..
1,709,046
79,047,101
4,659,604
4,744,504
3,503,497
Group II.
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company ..
67,036
2,467,208
2,336
147,768
101,843
Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company
389,697
13,369,946
41,304
697,849
497,677
The Provident Life Assurance Company ..
71,346
2,617,769
159,429
120,420
Total of Group ..
528,079
18,454,923
43,640
1,005,046
719,940
Group III.
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company
91,030
3,420,692
18,952
226,394
204,658
The Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances Limited
31,574
1,070,156
70,799
56,198
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Limited
27,030
858,904
60,419
45,827
Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance Company
Limited
10,827
505,485
27,994
21,850
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited ..
27,209
885,758
63,524t
49,196t
Total of Group ..
187.670
6,740,995
18,952
449,130
377,729
Grand Total
2,424,794
104,243,019
4,622,196
6,198,680
4,601,166
(3) TOTAL INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE BUSINESS OF EACH COMPANY.
Note. —Annuity particulars have not been included in any of the above figures.
• Not including one policy for a deferred annuity of £2l 13s. 4d. at office yearly premium of £2 12s.
t Includes an amount of £5,069 7s. as Extra Premiums (Associated Dominions Assurance Society Ltd.).
Appendix “ B ” — continued.


With Participation in Profits.
Without Participation in Profits.
Description of Business.
Number
Amounts
Bonuses.
Yearly Premiums.
Number
Amounts
Yearly Premium*,
of Policies.
Assured.
Office.
Net.
Office.
Net.
Whole of Life Assurances ..
48,862
£
1,315,156
£
204,222
£
78,792
£
47,826
£
£
£
Whole of Life Assurances—Limited
Premiums
1,389
171,339
9,902
5,601
4,446
43
1,907
42
38
Whole of Life Assurances—Commuted
Premiums
310
3,980
1,104
Whole of Life Assurances—Paid Up
. ,
2,966
65,143
Whole of Life Assurances—Joint Lives
108
3,898
2,616
228
115
Endowment Assurances
1,375,449
66,770,729
3,903,325
4,148,390
3,032,231
50
1,992
il9
l02
Endowment Assurances—Paid Up ..
67,743
1,527,856
Deferred Endowment Assurances—
Paid Up
105
1,708
Increasing Endowment Assurances ..
114,946
5,232,715
437,830
285,119
225,546
Double Endowment Assurances
8
280
86
18
12
.
.
Deferred Endowment Assurances with
Return of Premiums and Interest
476
21,886
519
550
416
Pure Endowments
84,401
3,436,191
193,298
165,663
Endowments—Paid Up
, .
, ,
2
20
. .
Endowments with Contingent
Premiums
• . i
12,157
492,302
32,347
27,098
Total Group I,
1,541,578
73,619,982
4,559,604
4,518,698
3,310,591
167,467
5,527,119
225,806
192,906
Whole of Life Assurances ..
Whole of Life Assurances —Limited
46,697
1,415,285
88,808
58,712
30,966
615,120
25,990
13,754
Premiums
15,763
409,899
2,376
36,051
21,450
57,484
1,961,265
68,280
41,303
Whole of life Assurances —Paid Up
1,203
14,247
1
44,292
368,143
i',ioi
. .
Whole of Life Assurances—Joint Lives
Whole of Life Assurances —Joint Lives
206
6,193
10
403
233
552
15,778
575
Paid Up
241
2,075
• .
Endowment Assurances
201,369
8.75L796
37,133
549,236
404,638
. .
. .
Endowment Assurances—Paid Up ..
Endowment Assurances —Payable for
340
3,932
21,501
285,758
•
•*
Full Term
t ,
58,911
2,160,039
116,612
84,472
Endowment Assurances with Return
, ,
9,195
366,208
23,623
20,549
Double Endowment Assurances
Double Endowment Assurances—
8,494
566,680
4,120
28,006
21,560
Paid Up
Double Endowment Assurances—
••
6,450
136,896
Payable for Full Term ..
10,861
* .
13,200
14,428
1,028,662
49,260
39,425
Children’s Endowment Assurances ..
Children’s Endowment Assurances—
350,946
17,594
» •
Paid Up ..
73
577
. .
1
" 38
.
Endowments—Paid Up
, .
. .
.
Endowments—Payable for Full Term
. .
• i
44
3,100
il2
104
House Purchase Policies ..
9
3,286
81
66
••
••
Total Group II.
285,015
11,511,841
43,640
720,178
519,758
243,064
6,943,082
284,868
200,182
(4) DETAILS OF PARTICIPATING AND NON-PARTICIPATING POLICIES IN FORCE OP THE COMPANIES
ARRANGED IN THE GROUPS SHOWN HEREUNDER.
f Australian Mutual Provident Society.
,4 Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society.
Mutual Life Assurance Society.
Group I.
f Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company.
.4 Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company.
Provident Life Assurance Company.
Group 11.
Appendix “ B ’’—continued.


With Participation in
Profits.
Without Participation in Profits.
Description of Business.
Number
Amounts
Bonuses.
Yearly Premiums.
Number
Amounts
Yearly Premiums.
of Policies.
Assured.
Office.
Net.
of Policies.
Assured.
Office.
Net.
Whole of Life Assurances ..
4,097
£
112,419
£
562
£
9,399
£
5,516
1,462
£
49,625
£
3,080
£
1,787
Whole of Life Assurances—Limited
Premiums
33
913
09
43
948
27,845
1,883
1,217
Whole of Life Assurances—Limited
Premiums and Paid Up ..
4,555
117,809
8.668
5,544
Whole of Life Assurances—Paid Up
86
577
Whole of Life Assurances—Joint Lives
16
685
6
50
28
1
27
1
1
Endowment Assurances
80,900
3,168,242
9,683
210,034
183,608
27,590
947,046
67,225
51,367
Endowment Assurances —Paid Up ..
387
4,254
Double Endowment Assurances
9,278
383,108
2,462
19,690
15,117
3,003
137,607
8,052
6,054
Double Endowment Assurances
Paid Up
49
604
Pure Endowments
29,026
894,487
3,686
61,548
56,439
7,442
322,898
18,690
17,047
Endowments—Premiums Paid Up ..
105
872
Endowments —Premiums Ceasing on
Cessation of Second Life—Joint
Lives ..
4
400
30
18
6,096
155,135
10.753
8,957
Infantile Option ..
11,993
339,582
2,553
23,604
19,058
Children’s Special Option ..
394
71,588
727
534
Cash Income Policies
204
r^.9.9.9-
565
332
Triple Endowment Assurances
1
50
3
3
Extra Premiums * ..
5,059
5,059
Total Group III.
135,348
4,899,886
18,952
324,427
279,830
52,322
1,841,109
124,703
97,899
Grand Total
1,961,941
89,931,709
4,622,196
5,563,303
4,110,179
462,853
14,311,310
635,377
490,987
Policies Issued —Office Year Ending in—•
Policies in Force at End of Office Year.
Society.
1936.
Number.
1936.
Sum
Assured.
1937.
Number.
1937.
Sum
Assured.
1936.
Number.
1936.
Sum
A^ured.
1937.
Number.
1937.
Sum
Assured.
Australian Mutual Provident Sociotv
36.476
£
2,136,677
41,532
£
2,441,192
252,165
£
1.4.1 £3,497
276,675
£
15,561.129
The Australasian Temperance and General
Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd.
39,541
1,651,621
40,283
1.761,949
234,327
8,937,124
245,257
9,477,039
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society
Ltd.
14,853
601,657
16,211
646,041
80,148
3,185.550
87.585
3,476,987
The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance
Co. Ltd.
12,344
581,950
12,520
012,571
80,719
2,891,744
84,337
3,118,913
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance
Co. Ltd.
4.353
157,736
4,072.
171,500
19,233
700,503
20,832
The Provident Life Assurance Co. Ltd.
1,589
53,507
986
36,231
10.892
348,468
10,958
353,978
Australasian Catholic Assurance Co. Ltd. ..
6,194
236,520
5,797
226.68(1
26,344
994,329
29,079
1,095,367
The Commonwealth Life (Amal.) Assurances
Ltd.
3,467
132,599
3.041
106,498
10,258
369,302
10,550
377,028
The Producers and Citizens’ Assurance Co.
Ltd.
1,185
-r 43.45(1
604
22,872
2,757
125,458
2,785
125,351
Associated Dominions Assurance Society
Ltd.
*
*
*
*
3,508
120,819
4,973
176,438
Commonwealth General Assurance Cor-
poration Ltd.
774
25,846
875
31,853
5,232
166,298
5,516
177,385
Totals
120,776
5,621,569
126,527
6,057,387
725,583
31,963,092
778,546
34,689,950
'Australasian Catholic Assurance Company.
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation.
Group Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited.
Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances.
Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance Company.
* The amounts tabulated opposite this description appear in the Report of the Associated Dominions Assurance Society Ltd.
APPENDIX “C. ”
INDUSTRIAL ASSURANCE BUSINESS IN VICTORIA.
Summary of Particulars Supplied by the Companies Engaged in Industrial Assurance Business Showing
the Extent op such Business in the State of Victoria for their Respective Office Years
Ending in 1936 and 1937.
* Particulars not available.
Appendix “ B ” — continued.


APPENDIX “D.”
METHODS OF REMUNERATION OP AGENTS.
Average Length of Service and Numbers.
Industrial assurance agents are not employees of the assurance offices, but are parties to agency agreements
under which their remuneration is determined on a commission basis. The agreement provides that the agent
undertakes the weekly collection of industrial assurance premiums and the canvassing for new business. Each
agency comprises a certain area or district in respect of which the agent is authorized to collect weekly industrial
premiums and to canvass for new business. The agent’s remuneration, therefore, is dependent on the amount of
his weekly collections and his ability to procure new business.
Collecting Commission.
The total amount of the weekly premiums which the agent is authorized to collect, is termed the renewal
debit of the agency, and the commission payable on these collections is the only assured income of the agent. For
this work he receives a percentage of his actual collections, the rate varying in some offices according to the industrial
table under which policies are issued. In most cases, however, as far as the metropolitan area is concerned, the
rate is fixed at 12-| per cent.
The collection commission earnings of the agent are, of course, dependent on the amount of the renewal
debit of the agency, which in the case of the Australian Mutual Provident Society averages approximately £3O.
The average amount of the renewal debit in the case of the smaller offices is much less than this sum.
The agent builds up his renewal debit by the excess of new business over lapses, and earns increased
collecting commission until such time as the office considers it desirable to reduce the debit and transfer portion
thereof to another agency. This practice of reducing the debit which in effect reduces the amount of collecting
commission capable of being earned by the agent was criticized by the Rev. D. Daley. There may be some
justification for this criticism, but it must be remembered that the collection of weekly premiums is only portion
of the agent’s duties, the canvassing for new business being an important function. The offices claim that collecting
should not occupy more than two to two and a half days each week, so as to enable the agent to devote a reasonable
proportion of his time to canvassing for new business. The practice of reducing the amount of the renewal debits
enables the office to form new agencies, thus increasing the number of agents canvassing for new business.
New Business Commission.
The terms of remuneration to the agent on account of the introduction of new business are so designed
that increase of premium income is the main test of merit and the value of the agent’s business to the office is
measured by its effect on the premium income. The agent is required to refund to the office commissions paid on
unstable business.
With the exception of the Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life-Assurance Society Limited, the
agent is paid a commission equal to a certain number of times the increase of premiums collected, i.e., the excess
of new business and revivals over lapses. For example, if an agent introduces in one week, new business with
weekly premiums totalling ss. and in the same week writes off cases with weekly premiums amounting to 35., which
have lapsed on account of non-payment of premiums, the difference of 2s. is the increase in the business for that
week, and the agent is paid this amount multiplied a certain number of times —if twenty times—the payment would
be £2. Should the lapses in any week exceed the amount of new business introduced, the agent is required to
cover that excess by new business before being eligible to receive new business commission.
This method of commission payment is known as the “ Increase System,” and is based on the principle that
if a policy in respect of which the agent is authorized to collect the weekly premium lapses, he must secure a new
policy on which the same premium is payable before being eligible to receive commission payment on new business.
The rate of commission payable on new business varies with different offices and with the industrial table
under which the policy is issued. Subject to certain conditions some offices allow the agent a deferred commission
additional to the introductory commission based on a certain number of times the net increase in the renewal debit
of the agency over a period of thirteen weeks. One office allows a further additional commission on account of
industrial policies effected in new homes, i.e., homes in which previously there were no policy-holders of the company.
Generally, it may be said that under the “ Increase System ” of commission payment, the agent receives as
remuneration for his services an amount equal to at least fifteen (15) times the increase in the renewal debit of the
agency, with the possibility in some cases of this number of times being increased as high as thirty (30).
The Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited remunerates its agents on
the basis of a certain number of times the weekly premiums on new business introduced, the agent being responsible
for commission paid on lapsed policies only in respect of the difference between the total premiums received by the
society on such policies and the amount of commission paid thereon. Thus, when the society has received, in
premiums, an amount equivalent to the amount of the introductory commission, the agent has no further financial
responsibility if the policy lapses.
In addition to this introductory commission, at the end of each month the agent is paid a bonus of a certain
number of times, varying from two to eight times, the increase in the renewal debit of the agency, but if the sum
of the weekly premiums on lapsed policies for the month exceeds the sum of the weekly premiums, on new and
revived cases, the agent is required to refund a sum equal to the aggregate amount of such decrease multiplied by
the number of times which the society is paying the agent for increase at the date at which such decrease occurs.
The society therefore remunerates its agents on account of new business introduced, partly on the “ Increase
System,” and partly on the basis of a straight-out commission on the new business.


Society.
Number.
Average Leng
Years.
th of Service.
Months.
Australian Mutual Provident Society
497
4
The Australasian Tefaiperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited
462
4
7
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited
144
3
2
The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Company Limited ..
195
1
11
The Provident Life Assurance Company Limited
17
1
10
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company Limited
45
3
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Limited
12
3
8
The Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance Company Limited
2
3
4
The Commonwealth Life (Amalgamated) Assurances Limited ..
33
2
10
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company Limited
48
2
4
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited
27
1
6
Total
1,482
3
8
Under this method of commission payment, the agent is not required to secure a new policy on which the
same premium is payable as on the policy lapsed, before being eligible to receive commission on new business.
The commission rates on new business payable by this society are much lower than those payable by the other
offices, but agents engaged by the latter offices have a far greater responsibility in regard to lapsed policies than
those engaged by the Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
The relationship between the company and the agent is strictly that of principal and agent, and as such the
agent is not subject to any of the privileges of an employee, particularly in regard to the fixation of minimum
weekly remuneration, sick and recreation leave, and compensation under the provisions of Workers’ Compensation
Acts.
The Queensland Industrial Assurance Agents are subject to Industrial Court Awards, and for the purpose of
these Awards, the relationship between company and agent is that of employer and employee, and such relationship
is also preserved by the Workers’ Compensation Acts, as under these Acts the agent is entitled to compensation.
The latest award provides that the minimum rate of wages to be paid to such agents shall be as follows :
(а) For an employee who has had six months’ previous experience—£4 11s. per week.
(б) For an employee who has had less than six months’ previous experience—£4 Is. per week,
together in either case with such extra remuneration as may be mutually agreed upon between the employer and
the employee.
The Queensland Award further provides that in the case of absence from work through sickness the employee
shall be entitled to receive a full week’s minimum wage in any one year of service ; that the ordinary working
hours shall not exceed 44 per week and these hours may be worked at any time ; that the employer may deduct
10 per cent, of the employee’s total remuneration from the commission or other remuneration in addition to wages
earned by such employee until the sum so held equals £2O and that this sum shall be held by the employer to
guarantee the employee’s fidelity and the stability of the renewal debit during the continuance of the engagement
and for thirteen weeks after its termination.
The Number of Agents Engaged in Industrial Life Business in the State of Victoria as at the
28th day op February, 1938, and their Average Length of Service are Set out hereunder :
Appendix “ D ” — continued.


Year Ended.
Expense Rate—
Victorian
Industrial Business.
Per Centum.
Expense Rate—
Whole of Company’s
Industrial Business.
Per Centum.
Australian Mutual Pr
evident Society.
31st December, 1932
27-839
33-506
„ „ 1933
27-693
33-419
„ „ 1934
28 071
29-773
„ „ 1935
28-621
29 626
„ „ 1936
28-413
29-792
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
30th September, 1933
39 69
„ „ 1934
37-66
„ „ 1935
36-55
1936
36-31
„ „ 1937
35-82
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
31st December, 1932
39-92
38-24
„ „ 1933
38-49
„ „ 1934
35-49
35-65
1935
35-74
„ „ 1936
34-04
35 08
Mutual Life and, Citizens' Assurance Company Limited.
31st December, 1932
34 04
„ 1933
33 99
„ „ 1934
33 04
„ „ 1935
32 04
„ „ 1936
32 51
Australian Metropolitan Life Asstirance Company Limited.
31st December, 1933
50-6
„ „ 1934
47-2
„ „ 1935
46 6
„ „ 1936
46 0
„ „ 1937
44-6
Provident Life Assurance Company Limited.
31st December, 1933
47-92
„ „ 1934
47 11
„ „ 1935
39-62
1936
37 03
„ „ 1937
36 65
Commonwealth General Assurance. Corporation Limited.
31st December, 1933
48
54
„ „ 1934
57
60
„ „ 1935
44
43
„ „ 1936
35
39
„ „ 1937
33
36
Commonwealth Life. (Amalgamated) Assurances
Limited.
30th September, 1933
641
„ „ 1934
69-4
„ „ 1935
55-7
„ „ 1936
53-2
„ „ 1937
48-3
Producers and. Citizens' Co-operative
Assurance Company Limited.
31st August, 1933
70 12
87-24
„ „ 1934
56-61
82 14
„ „ 1935
71-34
64-63
„ „ 1936
40 08
56 10
.. 1937
61-08
67-39
APPENDIX “ E.”
EXPENSE RATES.
Summary of Information Supplied by the Companies Engaged in Industrial Assurance Business in
Victoria Regarding the Ratio op Expenses (Including Taxation) to Premium Income.


Year Ended.
Expense date Per Centum.
30th June, 1933
414
„ „ 1934
38-6
„ „ 1935 . .
37-2
„ „ 1936 ..
37-9
„ „ 1937 . .
35-8
Year Ended.
Expense Kate Per Centum.
30th June, 1933 . .
60 7
„ „ 1934 ..
51-0
„ „ 1935 ..
65 0
„ „ 1936 ..
65 0
„ „ 1937 ..
58-9
1935.
1936.
1937.
Society.
No,
Sums
Assured.
Xo.
Sums
Assured.
Xo.
Sums
Assured.
Australian Mutual Provident Society ..
6,581
£
385,564
7,970
£
472,916
8,396
£
508,105
The Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life
Assurance Society Ltd.
23,846
1,011,069
20,327
873,869
19,808
869,105
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd.
6,939
277,769
6,829
273,146
7,173
297,679
The Mutual Life and Citizens’ Assurance Co. Ltd.
3,538
166,501
4,461
208,155
5,500
262,686
The Provident Life Assurance Co. Ltd.
893
33,407
698
25,337
406
14,444
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Co. Ltd.
2,719
100,190
2,465
91,025
2,581
103,326
The Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative Assurance Co.
Ltd.
944
37,768
844
35,400
556
23,178
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Ltd.
3,006
133,385
277
9,737
327
12,998
The Commonwealth Life (Amal.) Assurances Ltd.
2,171
78,166
2,309
88,814
2,460
87,818
Australasian Catholic Assurance Co. Ltd.
2,507
97,063
2,461
101,108
2,175
90,005
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Ltd.*
Totals
53,144
2,320,882
48,641
2,179,507
49,382
2,269,344
The following Companies supplied the undermentioned particulars of their expense rates
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company Limited.
Ratio of expenses to premium income of the whole of the company’s ordinary and industrial
business :
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Limited.
Ratio of expenses to total income in respect of the whole of the Company’s ordinary and
industrial business;—
APPENDIX “F.”
LAPSES.
Summary of Particulars Supplied by the Companies Engaged in Industrial Assurance
Business Showing the Number of Policies which Lapsed in the State op Victoria
During the Years 1935, 1936, and 1937, and the Sums Assured by such Policies.
* Information not Supplied.
Appendix “ E ” — continued.


APPENDIX “G.”
PAID-UP POLICIES.
Summary of Particulars Furnished by Companies of Conditions Under which Paid-up Policies abb Granted
and Methods Employed in the Calculation of the Amounts thereof.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.
Policies on which four or more years’ premiums have been paid are maintained in full force for thirteen weeks
after the due date of the last premium paid and then automatically become paid-up policies.
Whole Life. —The value of the policy is found on the basis of the table of mortality used in valuing the liabilities
under Industrial Department Policies with interest at 3| per cent, and is applied to purchase a Paid-up Policy at the
assured’s then attained age. The single premium used for this purpose is 110 per cent, of the net single premium
calculated on the above mortality table and interest rate.
Endowment Assurance. —For policies other than whole life (Adult or Infantile), the benefits will be reduced in
the proportion of the number of complete months’ premiums that have been paid on the policy to the number of
months’ premiums originally payable, provided that at least five years’ premiums have been paid. If four years’
premiums have been paid, the Paid-up Policy is 95 per cent, of the proportion calculated as above. If more than
four and less than five years’ premiums have been paid, the reduced Paid-up Policy is found by interpolation between
those calculated for policies with four and five years’ premiums paid respectively.
When a participating policy is changed to a paid-up non-participating policy, bonuses to date of change, on
the reduced sum assured, are added thereto.
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
Although the paid-up policy privilege is not a contractual right under the policy, for Very many years this
Society has been granting paid-up policies upon application after the original policy has been at least four years in force.
Whole Life. —An “ Old Series ” group of Whole Life Assurances has been closed to new business since 1913.
The Paid-up policies are based on an old scale published by the Prudential Assurance Company and to these Paid-up
Policies are added the bonus additions to date of application. The resulting total Paid-up Policies are equivalent
to from 75 per cent, to 80 per cent, of the full Paid-up Policy on the basis of the Australian Males 1911 Table with
interest 3 per cent. These “ Old Series ” Policies, although payable at death only, are matured upon the attainment
by the life assured of the age of 80 years for the full amount of sum assured and bonuses. In 1932 the
Society introduced a Whole Life Policy with premiums ceasing at age 80. This table was withdrawn in 1937. The
Paid-up Policies granted in respect of this table are the proportion of the sum assured paid for, that is the ratio of the
premiums paid to the total premiums payable : bonuses not added. Then in 1937, upon the withdrawal of this Table,
a new Wliole Life Table was introduced with premiums payable throughout life. The basis for Paid-up Policy for this
particular Table is not yet determined.
Joint Whole Life Assurances for purposes of Paid-up Policies are obtained by first calculating the equivalent
single age at entry and then adopting the basis for the Whole Life “ Old Series ” mentioned above.
Endowment Assurance. —Under Endowment Assurance the paid up policy is the proportion of the sum assured
paid for, duration being taken to completed half years. If a debt exists on a policy, then the Paid-up Policy resulting
from the “ Proportion paid ” rule is reduced in the ratio of the net surrender value to the gross surrender value.
Bonuses in force are not added to the Paid-up Policies so found.
Children’s Deferred Endowment Assurances. —For ages at entry 1-5 next birthday, these Policies are issued for
16 or 21-year terms as may be elected. The Paid-up Policy is the proportion of the sum assured paid for, duration
being taken for completed months. Where any debt exists, the Paid-up Policy is scaled down as in the case of
Endowment Assurance.
Endowments with Contingent Premiums. —Non-Participating : This Policy is a Pure Endowment on the life
of a child where premiums are payable by the parent and cease if the parent dies before the completion of the original
term.
The Paid-up Policy amount allowed is the proportion paid for, the duration being taken in months. Where a
debt exists, the Paid-up Policy is scaled down in the ratio of net to gross surrender value.
Pure Endowment:—Non-Participating—Paid-up Policies, Proportion of the sum assured paid for.
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited.
In this Society the conditions of industrial policies do not provide for the granting of paid-up values but, as
an ex-contractual concession, values are given on application after a policy has been in force for five years if, on
investigation, it is found that the non-payment of premiums is due to hardship caused by ill-health, unemployment,
&c.
The amount of Paid-up Policy is obtained by dividing the amount of surrender value (including the cash value
of bonus) calculated by the method detailed below, by the Ordinary Department single premium rate for the attained
age and unexpired term. Paid-up Policies continue to participate.
The Society does not encourage policy-holders to apply for paid-up policies.
Surrender values are at present calculated on the basis of the Australian Mortality table constructed by Messrs.
Moors and Day, based on the 1891 census, the rate Of interest assumed being 3| per cent.
The calculation is made on the basis of 60 per cent, of the reserve value, using a special net premium equal
to the net premium for an age one year older than the true age at entry and, in the case of endowment assurances,
a term one year less than the actual term. The cash value of any attaching bonus additions is added to the surrender
value, 60 per cent, of the corresponding reversion being used.


The Mutual Life and Citizens’’ Assurance Company Limited.
Whole Life. -Whole life policies are not now issued.
Endowment Assurance. —The actual guarantee (stated in the Policy) is as follows :
“ After this Policy shall have been five full years in force, and on application within the four weeks
grace allowed by the Company for the payment of premiums, the Company shall grant in lieu of this Policy
a Policy without participation in profits but free from the payment of future premiums for such proportion
of the Amount of Assurance as the number of complete years’ premiums paid bears to the number originally
payable under this Policy.”
In practice application within the four weeks’ grace is not required.
Australian Metropolitan Life Assurance Company Limited.
Paid-tip policies are not given in any circumstances where policies have been for less than five years in force.
Whole Life. —A Special Table of benefits was calculated on basis of a net annual premium of 1’560 corresponding
to an office premium of Is. per week. From this we ascertain the benefit for age attained at discontinuance of
premiums and deduct this from the tabulated benefit for an age three years older than the age at entry.
Endowment Assurance. —For Policies issued under tables of benefits not now in use :
Paid-up Values arc calculated by dividing the original Bum Assured by the original term of the Policy
and multiplying by the number of complete years for which premiums hav e been paid, less—
-2 where that number is 5, 6 or 7,
1| where that number is 8,
11 where that number is 9,
1 where that number is 10 or over,
to agree with former basis of Valuation.
For Policies issued under current table of benefits :
Paid-up Values are calculated by dividing the original Sum Assured by the original term of the policy
(i.e., age at maturity less age next birthday at entry) and multiplying by the number of complete years for
which premiums have been paid less 2.
Provident Life Assurance Company Limited.
Paid-up Policies are issued after five years.
The amount of a paid-up policy is arrived at by the method of proportion —two years of duration
being deducted to cover expenses.
The usual bonus rates apply to paid-up policies, the bonuses being calculated on the reduced sum
assured.
Australasian Catholic Assurance Company Limited.
Paid-up policies are issued after policies have been in force five years.
Whole Life. —Whole life paid-up policies are arrived at by the method described by Dr. A. E. Sprague, M.A.,
D.Sc., F,F.A., F.1.A., in the Transactions of the Faculty of Actuaries, Volume 111., page 201. The formula used is ;
P'x + h
Paid-up Policy = 1
P'x +' n
where P’x = I'l Px -f- ‘OOl, based on (F I ™-) mortality with 3J per cent, interest, his graded from \\ to 1 depending
on the age at entry. The resulting table was then graduated.
The above gives the paid-up policies for Ordinary Department Whole Life Policies, and to allow for the extra
expense of Industrial Department business the same table is used, but the duration is taken one year less than the
actual.
Endowment Assurance. —For endowment assurances the paid-up policy is for that proportion of the full sum
assured which the number of years’ premiums paid after the first two years bears to the original number payable.
Commonwealth General Assurance Corporation Limited.
Policies which have been five full years in force may be exchanged for paid-up policies for reduced amounts
on application being made within ten weeks from the date of last payment.
Paid-up Policies are arrived at by the method described by Dr. A. E. Sprague, M.A., D.Sc., F.F.A., F.1.A.,
in the Transactions of the Faculty of Actuaries, Volume 111., page 201. The formula used is;—
P’x+ h
Paid-up Policy = 1
P’x -)- n
where P'x = I*l Pa: + ‘OOl, based on O< NM) mortality with 31 per cent, interest, his graded from 11 to I depending
on the age at entry. The resulting table was then graduated.
The above gives the paid-up values for Ordinary Department Policies, and to allow for the extra expense of
Industrial Department business the same table is used but the duration is taken at one year less than the actual.
The Commonwealth Life ( Amalgamated ) Assurances Ltd.
Paid-up Policies are granted after five years premiums have been paid.
Whole Life. —In whole life, paid-up policies are calculated by using the surrender value to purchase paid-up
assurance on a pure 0 M 4 per cent, basis.
Surrender values are based upon the valuation reserves and upon the policy of placing the eventual fulfilment
of the policy contracts in the forefront. They range from 26 per cent, to 50 per cent, or more of the reserve.
Endowment Assurance. —In endowment assurance and other suitable tables, paid-up policies are calculated by
the proportionate method disallowing the first two years’ premiums paid.
Appendix “ G ” — continued.


The Producers and Citizens' Co-operative Assurance Co. Ltd.
Paid up policies are usually granted after policies have been five years in force.
Whole Life. —Paid-up policies are arrived at by the method described by Dr. A. E. Sprague, M.A., D.Sc., F.F.A.,
F.1.A., in the Transactions of the Faculty of Actuaries, Volume 111., page 201. The formula used is
P'x + h
Paid-up Policy 1
P'x + n
where P'x = !•! Px f 'OOl, based on O< NM) mortality with 3|- per cent, interest, his graded from 11 to 1 depending
on the age at entry. The resulting table was then graduated.
The above gives the paid-up values for Ordinary Department Whole Life policies, and to allow for the extra
expense of Industrial Department business the same table is used but the duration is taken one year less than the
actual.
Endowment Assurance. —The paid-up policy is for that proportion of the full sum assured which the number of
years’ premiums paid after the first year bears to the original number payable.
Associated Dominions Assurance Society Ltd.
Paid-up Policies are issued after policies have been five years in force.
Interest rate assumed—4 per cent.
Table of Mortality—Australian Males Table 1901—10.
Authority: H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
Appendix “ G ” — continued.
