





TERRITORY OF NEW GUINEA.
MISSION CONFERENCE
held at
RABAUL, FROM 20TH JUNE TO 11TH JULY, 1927.
(a) Agenda Paper.
(b) Report of Proceedings of the Conference.
(c) Report of Findings Committee.
(d) Minutes of Meetings of Advisory Council at
which one Reports were discussed, and the
Administrator’s comments on the
recommendations of the Council.
CHAIRMAN OF CONFERENCE; -
Mr. H. C. Cardew, Commissioner of Native Affairs.




AGENDA PAPER
1 , Co-operation in Medical Matters.
(a) Auxiliary Medical Services.
(b) Pree Issues for Pree natives.
2. Sanitation of native Villages e.g. Llatupi & Malaguna.
(a) Establishment of Native Auxiliary Sanitation Committee
(b) Institution Methods for Preservation of Native health
v/ithin Restricted Areas.
Notification of Endemic Diseases.
a. Language. ... . T
Discussion of question of Universal Language.
Publication in Native Language of Laws.
a Native ft nv eminent Representatives , their Jurisdiction..
Native Councils Institution of, their Jurisdiction,
Geneial Discussion.
Ilative Taxation.
r - -r - ■■ ■ ■ 1 ■—••**
Dative Education.
Including:- Compulsory Education.
Subsidisation of Mission Schools^
Education in Agricultural Pursuits.
General Discussion.
7 dative Child Welfare.
General Discussion.
8* Dative Marriages.
General Discussion.
9. Dative Customs (Customs in Conflict v;ith European Standards^
Cannibalism.
Headhuntlng.
Homocide generally.
Adultery.
Divorce.
Sexual complexities, including homosexual practices.
Magico-Heligious practices.
especially Sorcery, Secret Societies, and
general ceremonial life.
Their place in Dative Life.
Their reprehensible features.
Methods of modifying them. n
Reports by Missions of social organisation and ethnologica
phenomena of interest in relation to Administration.
Geneial Discussion,
Matter, and Circumstances affecting the Duration ojf
Dative Life.
General Discussion.
.Dative Labour Problems*
General Discussion.




PROCEEDINGS 0F THE CONFERENCE.
First Day, June 20th, 1927.
His Honour, Judge Wanliss, Deputy Administrator of the Terri
tory opened the Conference*
Us Honour % Lords ,B1 shops Mr. Jarman “giw”
for him he was. called away on other duties. t x
However, his loss is my gain, and his resets f ..
afraid I do not quite share, because his absence has *
possible for me to bo here this morning and to meet again
after long absences several very old friends.
I think that this is the first time that such a
Conference has been held, a Conference all the members
of all the Missions in the Territory or practically all, x
thihk it a most august occasion to have such a
body of Gentlemen who are devoting their lives to
mont of the natives, and to discuss their different vie) s,
and to come, if possible, to some go no and I am
certain that your presence hero in the Ministration
of the utmost use to How Guinea, not only
but to all our welfare and interests. _ , -n iQ -u nr) Wolff
I think when wo find our good friend Lord Bishop Wcitt
coming from Madang and Sonior Flierl fromkorobe,
Sis ?ipe experience of work amongst the natives
placed at our disposal, we should be very grateful for their
coming. I am also delighted to soo one I can call a very aoar
friant, Father Kiraohbaum whom I last saw B°J-n« to^h
work in the wild Sopik District, which most people dread ax a
few P eo P]: G t Jjj®* we aro deG piy indebted to himt^Jiff
him who arc bringing an experienced and JgP ath ° t^ f onlylay
towards native, to such a gathering as this. I t °^ 9 S G £_
that it gives mo the greatest pleasure that I am
ough to bo ablo to welcome you today. _ - r n n-forence and
I trust this will be a very successful c “ r ® ®
that the fruits of it will remain with us here hie tine
may be one of many, and if you can spare your valuable time
msfhe^good.
nf some of your further discussions* .
Mr. Chai- I will call upon Mr. Bishop, J^eproson^pra/for
man. the Church most lately operating in the Territory to pray
wisdom in our deliberations. ilnof . ATl - nrx fu G Ap-onda
Before we begin discussion the questions on the Ag
Paper, I will read two letters of apology, £thor Bock
Uoe-Dko of the Liebenzell Mission, and one from rather Hock
o? the Catholic Mission at Kieta; also another one from tho
Solomon Island Mission of Seventh Day Adventists.
From Mr. Doepko;- , . „ +
"Unfortunately, I am unable to bu Present tha
Conference to bo held on tho 6bh June as follow-
station at Lugos; but am pleased to^ submit to you tne
ing matters for your gonsideration*




From father Book :-
”1 am wishing to attend it i$ person dospito
of the additional labour imposed* on mo by tho absonoo of
two fathers, but owing to the scarcity of the moans of
communication tho question is to know if I will find an
opportunity to go to Habaul, in tho beginning of June."
From the Solomon Island Mission of Seventh Bay
Advo ntists:-
n V7o arc not sending any subjects for the Agenda
Paper, as wo will not bo able to send a representative as we
have too many of our own councils about that date."
Mr. Cox May wo ask Mr. Chairman, what tho procedure will bo?
It has boon suggested that discussion should take
place on tho various subjects? Is it intended to take a
vote round tlx table on each question?
I would suggest that a committee bo formed to
draw up the findings on each question after they have been
discussed in general conference.
Mi. Chair- I would suggest then that tho procedure of the
man. Confer cnee should bo as follows : -
ings
(9) That a Commit too of Find/ bo formed of
one member from each Mission.
(2) That subsequent to tlx discussion, the
Committee of Findings further discuss tho
mall er in c oumill oe•
(3) That tlx resolutions arrived at be submitted
to the whole conference for the information
of the members, and voted upon on the last
day.
(4) That the resolutions arrived at bo submitted
to tho Administrator through tlx medium of
the Government Officials attending tlx
Confer once.
Mr. Cox. I tjhink that is a very good arrangement.
Mr. Chairman. Will each Mission please appoint one member to the
Committee of Findings and hand in tho names to the
Conforencc tomorrow?
The first item on the Agenda paper is:-
Co-oporation in Medical Matters
(a) Auxiliary Medical Services.
(b) Free Issues for Free Natives.
As these matters concern the Public Health Be-
partmont, I will call on Br. Cilonto to open tho discuss-
ion.
Br.Cilcnto. In many instances, Missionaries are more closely
in touch with certain native areas than any Bopartmont of
tho Administration is. This is particularly tho case,
-here Missions are established in areas which are only
visited by tho District Officer or the medical staff once
a year.
A groat deal can be done in those areas by
co-operation between the Missionary authorities and tho
medical department. The Department is prepared to expend
money up to a certain amount fixed from time to time on
free issues to natives but necessarily for audit purposes
etc., this issue must be •
3




The Department of Public Health, therefore,
. • f-o tv .'SG r tno 1 icy of distribution
is anxious to e ontinue its pi
to Missions but can only do so whore the Mission funct
as it ware, as an auxiliary medical unit. Tma does not
indicate a desire on the part of the Department of
Health to control Mission activities, it is
viov; to supervising the distribution of cirugs ±or
the Department is responsible.
Where adequate reports can bo furnished in tin
form required by us, every effort will be made to continue
the nresent system of free issues. It is hoped also tha
in the near future in areas where natives are able to pay
for medicines that arrangements will be made xor such Pay-
ment and that where this is done, the money so received
shall be used for the supplying of further medical or
sanitary requiiemonts in the area of origin.
The amount of drugs expended this year to
Missions was equivalent to, roughly, £750 and the distribu-
tion was about equal between the various Missions in touen
with the Department of Public Health. . .
It is very necessary that the fullest informal -
tion should bo received constantly in regard to epidemics
and provision is made for this in the law: it is fw s °
portant that the Government should be fully aayised as to
the common diseases which exist tmy are more
quent or less frequent each year, and unethox m ,
the living conditions or the economic staming o±
natives and so on. .
The Missions can do more in this respect than
this Department and the Department of Public .Health
specially requests that reports will bo sont in irom tim
to time dealing not only with alarming disease *
tions, but giving all information available about the
diseases that exist and any points in relation to tnoir
woul(i tig really valuable information and
would be of the greatest assistance to the Department of
Public Health. Only on "knowing' a problem is it poosible
to make adequate provision for combating it.
Wo look to the Missionaries to mako this m-
formation availablo to us.
i/tr ,Margatt:s Road Q. papu r •
NATIVE MEDICAL WORKERS
That the system of native medical orderlies
in villages bo continued, but that they receive a
thorough training qualifying them to hold some kin Ox
a certificate, which would bo a guarantee of their
There is no occasion to dwell on the medical
needs of the people. All whose work brings them in close
contact with the natives know that siolmess and disease
are rife amongst them and the groat excess ox deaths
over births in some districts, gives alarm lest ix a
generation or tv;o, the population die out.
4




Finely native medical sole nee, whilst it has
served a good and useful purpose in the past, is today
largely out of date, and if the people are to he saved
from extinction it will ho only hy the intervention of
the latest medical and surgical science. These have made
their appearance in the present modioal services of the
Government and of the various Missionary societies operat-
ing in the group.
The territory however is so vast, and Doing
situated as it is in the tropics, and medical work in the
country being of the nature it is, it is quite clear, there
will never he foreign doctors and nurses in sufficient
numbers to cope with the tremendous physical need of these
islanders. Even in districts where white doctors already
Sxist, and whore there are hospitals where the patient
receives every kindness and care and attention wo find a
great want of confidence on the part of the people, and
fear which hold them back from taking full advantage of
the medical skill and treatment placed at their disposal.
Mary sick natives will submit themselves or bo submitted,
to all kind of treatment at the hand of native medicine
men or sorcerers and will pay thorn largo sums of money
rather than go and get the best hospital treatment
at the hands of a foreign doctor. They have more faith in
one of themselves than in one of another nationality. Hence
the primary importance of training native workers in the
science of healing as practised in civilised countries.
A beginning has boon ma.de in this direction
in that in many villages there are now native medical order-
lies* who have been commissioned by the Government to
practise a little medicine amongst the people. Dative
mission teachers have for years engaged in similar ..orx. Chx
the whole we believe such service has had good effect.
There may have been occasions when a little knowledge nao
boon a dangerous thing, but generally the results have been
beneficial* ffiia policy af enabling the native to taka care
of his own physical needs is a sound one and should have
unanimous support. What wo would plead for is a
training for native medical orderlies sent by tne Goyernmo
to work amongst the people, enabling them to treat sxilfully
all but the very bad cases; such native workers to hola sorno
kind of a certificate which would bo a guarantee of ( their
efficiency * Sue h a medical worker would not bo roq.au c
in every village— A village having a big population would
of course need its own Doctor living in tnc midst, so as o
be equally accessible to all. A hospital would oo xi^cussary,
for while* the work would chiefly be with outpatients, there
would bo cases that would require to be kept at hand, in
order to encourage natives to take up medical ..ork, by
way of some remuneration, those attending for troatmon
could bo expected to make a small payment, as they ha.va
to pay now when calling in ono of the native modxcxnc npn.
Thorough-going nodical education of tnxs nature ior natxvos
would require tho establishment of a Modi cal School,
would bo nocossary for such a school to onxst xn connection
with a hospital whore students would have -ne oppoxtunxty
of gaining practical experience.
5




Such a hospital would be better situated where
there is a large population and if it were reserved
strictly for local natives. One reason local natives
often give for not wanting to attend a Government
hospital is, they are afraid of the foreign indentured
natives, of whom there is generally a good number in
such lf the people had a district hospital
to themselves far removed from an environment such as
that which must necessarily exist in a place like Habaul,
we feel that a great deal would be done to break down the
distinct prejudice there is against Government hospitals.
Ihe staff of such a people's hospital could control a
series of small sectional hospitals each under a native
medical orderly, of which mention has already been made.
Connected with the same Medical School,', but not
necessarily on the same site could be a maternity home and
a training ground for selected women in midwifery, child-
welfare and simple nursing. All who know native village
life-are seized with the necessity there is for such an
institution* Women are confined often amid the midwives,
who are ignorant in the first things of cleanliness. In
the village Wxhare we reside two women recently became
mothers, died from tetanus, the gem having been dis-
covered under the finger nails of the native midwife who
helped thorn. An unusual birth often means that violent
measures are resorted to, or the woman is left to die.
We feel that there would be a ready response amongst the
women to go into training at such an institution, but it
would require that the tone of the home be decidedly
Christian as any other treatment mated out would defeat
the purpose of the school. It would be a great gain if
such women could be selected from the wives of native
medical orderlies; in any case/lt would be a distinct
advantage to have a trained midwife attached to each
sectional hospital.
Mr. Cox I agree that in addition to the medical work,
Missions are able to do from their own funds the system
is a good one by which the Administration supplies drugs
and other accessories free of cost to the Missions and
the Missions should be prepared to furnish returns
regularly showing how such drugs are used and giving
returns of cases treated; the work that the Missions do
being regarded as auxiliary work to the work of the Public
Health Department, though not involving control by the
Administration of Missionary operations, but rather to be
looked on as assistance.
I also believe, that natives should pay as they
are able for drugs and treatment received, but fear that
to enforce this at this stage would prejudice medical
work amongst themi and that it would be wiser and more
effective to advise Missions to urge the people to give
some remuneration either in’cash or in kind, such pay-
ments to be used for further medical work.
I think the medical Tultuls should bo better
trained and they should become a very capable and useful
body of assistants* 1 also believe that Missions as they
find practicable, should undertake the training of such
assistants and also native midwivos.
Mr.Pilhofer We tell our people that drugs and medicines
usually cost a lot of money and in order that they may
value the medicines given to them we toll them they may
bring food as payment.
6




Wo give our drugs to ovory porson whether they are paid for
or not, and most of the food they bring is used for the
natives living on the Mission, or for other patients. In the
Hospital at Finschafen, patients mostly come from far away, so
that their relatives are unable to bring them food.
We therefore- encourage our congregation to take
collection for buying rice. All the treatment in the hospital
is done free,
Ir. Chairman In regard to the payment by natives for medicines and
hospital attention they may have received, I have to
you Gentlemen, that I an totally opposed to the idea*- It is
hard enough now to induce the natives to go into hospitals,
if we charge them for attention and medicines, their unwilling-
ness will bo very much increased.
When I was District Officer in Habaul, I instituted
a system of what might bo termed massed treatments. Habaul
district was divided into sections each containing some 4,000
people. .
Tho people were gathered together at a central point
every few months. Eioy were inspected by a doctor or generally
two doctors and a staff of medical assistants, ovory native
was examined, tho sick wore brought in to tho rondoarous, end
if they wore too ill to bo carried, tho doctor went to see
thorn in their houses. Ho excuse was accepted for tho non-
attendance of any natives, tho census was taken and all names
carefully chocked. On the last day of the gathering, the
Administrator generally went down and addressed the assembled
Lulu ads, and asked them if they had any complaints to mako.
During tho period the people were kept together they were fod
by tho Government. The system worked admirably and the im-
provements in tho people was most noticeable.
Dor instance, I recall the gatherings whic h were he Id
with Hordup as a c oncontration point. On tho first occasion,
112 sick wore sent into hospital in tho last
occasion that the gathering was held, only/was sent in.
I am citing those cases to show wnat can bo do no.
I quite agree also that r ogulations should bo promulgated in
regard to sanitation of villages. I have to inform you that
in the original draft of regulations under tho Bativo Adminis-
tration Ordinance, I inserted regulations dealing with tho
sanitation of villages and like matters, Those wore cut out on
account of that ridiculous fetish of ours "forced labour".
Another very important matter which should^ receive
our attention is the question of village water supplies
especially in the Blanche Bay District wjjero the natives have
often to go considerable distances for their water. I have
taken stops to ensure that when the titles are being register-
ed that t lie water supplies which the natives have been using
for years arc conserved to them.
Further discussion ensued amongst the members of
tho Conferanco, the Chairman, and Dr. Cilonto in regard to the
payment for medicines and treatment.
The majority of the members of the Conference wore
in favour of this course; the Chairman and Mr. Cox dissented.
7




Proceeding on 21/6/27.
Second Day of Conference.
At 9,30 a.in, the Chairman declared the Conference re-
opened. . . ~ .
Mr. Chairman The various matters which are open for discussion tnio
morning are the matters under Section 2 of the Agenda
Paper, copy of which you have before you.
!♦ "Sanitation of Native Villages" e.g. Matupi and kalaguna.
The Establishment of Native Auxiliary Sanitation
Committee and __ . .
a. The Institution of Methods for Preservation of Native
Health within Restricted Areas.
These subjects <are now open for discussion.^
Will the various Missions -presentplease nominate a
representative to the "Findings Committee" on the various
subjects discussed.
1. Father Kirschbaum, Mission of the Holy Ghost.
2. Rev. Flierl, Lutheran Mission.
3. Rev. Cox, Methodist Mission Society of Australia.
4. Feather Mertyns, Million of the Most Sacred Heart
of Jesus*
were nominated.
Proposed by the Rev. Cox that bhe Rev. F.R. Bishop bo
also included, in the above.
Mr. Chairman Decidedly# Will you .act-,..Mr. Bishop?
Mr. Bishop Yes.• ‘ * •
Rev. Co-X The question of the Sanitation of various Native Villages
in the■.’Territory now comes before us for discussion-
also the establishment of a Sanitary Committee etc.
• and the question of who would constitute such a
Committee. .
Dr.Oilonto Mr. Chairman, My Lords and Gentlemen; the establishment
* of Native Sanitary Committees and the establishment of
model native villages in the Territory appear to me to
be importance. In fact, they are very import-
ant factors. 1 ~
Firstly, the areas of the-villages would be
defined in the Gazette in precisely the same manner as
a white town is defined in the Gazette. Within that
area there'would be of necessity certain restrictions.
In the first instance it would be essential that;
1. A-general clearance -of the whole of the area and-
the removal of"all unnecessary undergrowth.
2. Adequate provision for the removal of all refuse,
rubbish and faecal matter.
3. The Removal of all pigs and dogs from close environ-
ment of the native houses. All dogs would require to be
* ‘ registered and any sick or suffering from ary disease
would be immediately destroyed without exception.
* 4. it i s suggested that the area should be based upon
a sanitary plan approved by the Director of Public
Health" and the Commissioner of Native Affairs, after
cbn suit at ion with -t he Sanitary Q ommittoe
8




k The houses built would conform to a standard pl a &
Approved by & tho Commissioner of Native Affairs and the
Director of Public Health and would bo the usual typo
built bv tho native in his own village as fai as -ms
possible but on this matter we cannot justifiably commit
our solves.
The question of whether the houses bo built on
tho ground or on piles or stilts or otherwise arises also
as to what will bo tho nature of tho roof and the
flooring bo stamped earth, or composed oi wood, buc-
matters aro very important. -nnovc.
In tho interosts of health if all xloors were
constructed of wood and were raised off the ground it would
definitely assist in tho prevention 01 diseases. It--ould
at least institute a certain degree of ho alto in this
Again thoro arises tho question of an adequate
water supply. The haphazard obtaining of water supplies _
by natives from various villages is not by any means advis-
able. Obtaining water from shallow pools, etc* , not
tend to assist the natives from a health point of view.
Take the village of Matupi for instance, there
is oertaihly not any adequate water supply. Water is
obtained by carrying it. .
Tho question of latrines also arises. There
should be latrines for tho men and latrines for the womon.
All encouragement should bo given to the natives in order
that latrines be erected on a recognised plan. Pive years
after the sanitary area as suggested was created wo wou
hope to see that other villagers had followed fcne steps
made by the other natives, not by force but by persuasion.
Porco must not and could not bo used for such a purpose
and MORE could bo effected by the gentle art of persuasion
in that regard.
In native villages, tire re are usually tijceo (d J
loeal native representatives of the Government, namely,
thfl Talftul and the Medical Tal-Jol U If such legal
roprosentativos of tho Government could be taught the
principles of sanitation from a European standard, thon y,
in turn, could act as teachers to tho other innabitants f
respective villages.- i,„ m
The native Committee as suggested would Affair-
the right to put before the Commissioner of Native Affairo
any suggestions or objections of whatever nature. T
three villages for enar.ple which aro in mind as trial
villages aro tho villages of Matupi, Nordup, and Malaguna.
iso Si thoao village Ipp oar op tho agenda Paper bofoiojou.
Such adaption is not as yet passed by the La«,
it is only suggested that same bo used for general practice.
I have ° to be quite honest, made regulations «r inclusion
in the Now Health Act to come into xorce I nope, in about
twelve months tine. Shis now Health Act contains sugges-
tions with reference to sanitation of native communities,
now’ before His Honour, the- Administratex . j. „
As already stated these matt or s arc now before
His Honour, the Administrator for his sanction and should
bo in order at an early date. These proposed regain o o
are similar to those now operating in jSI-J1 aid. Snaoc-. io
the best of my recollootion there is no which I
have omitted in this regard and it will no doubt be found
very satisfactory.
9




o 1 -P r\-r f-Tryi c< Ci 1Q 8 T aild G OUG XS Q
Bishop Vostoxs about the Bmjtationmd
s»r
regard to the kind oi hous« O/the
such nodal villages. ~ vish to build simply
Territory, we hear the villa^cx thjy - ish to
on the ground and m sw o lts off the ground,
build.. their nousos on -round is, I think by
Dr. Cilonto So build tno houses ofi and freeing the
far the better plm, oui^ o infest thoir houses
natives from the mosquitoes T-ko the houses of
~-hon they oxo built on *^ a So minor in
tha Philipino x usually
which they build tnen on stilt;b. possible
iihe thoir houses
flref they continually burn for tho purpose of snoring
out mosquitoes. it is not dasirod to
Aq for as POSSIOIO 10 -Lb r.uo
X . _p 1 1 vnr 1 nils lia olv G
change the customs of the "native pro-
people. It is for fire place. With
sent plan, provision being “ T , O typos 0 f houses
which^I °havlairoady'recommended for tho Native
Labour Ordiiranc thfl Hativo Labour Ordinance
it v;as laid down that ail labour house
living quarters tmst be * to His Honour,
Labour Ordinance, 1 have sUbE ss , jd a sympathetic
the Administrator - -he tyQ typQS of houses
attitude ixi tnio ul , i l.on pilos
be now permitted for native laoour i.e. P^
ground but
t o have a
damp-proof
floor.
Mr. Chairman
the model
be made tor af-o . * b t ho congregating^of
intended to inflict narasnip y area but it is
various families into one specific ar naintaill
desired to help the native in that
a bettor environment for hmsclt ana
cleanliness floorin g ß would bo
givehat 1* to clay
2 . KaiiKß d Barth.
3. Cement as the case may bo.
in 4-i - T-v« n ■n rons t rue tx rig giigsg no v»
Furthox t-non consora & provision will
houses in tho native modal /ill -6 V Ja,lls to bo of
also be made for botto x built nous to table
planks half as wide as tnose 42e are readily obtain-
in which c£ ™ J officer in Kieta, I remember
able. When I r,as ° f rculosis and it vas
5Sf '/ssjsssz.
h«w °* ** &***• ttot
beds are essential*
10




. , Ti . . _ v ,, rv clear to us all that the changing of housing
Eov. Fliorl It is v- r J fron old on tin os it not a good ono
customs 01 natives iron oiaau suffered in health
SST*
nniTj ox xno „ j
in my District) on tho ground, and agui* fron the
Districts, they prefer to live in houses e
ground on piles. They li»e to nave their liras, ms y
because of the numbers of mosquitoes and secondly,
mountain boys, because of the cold. th r 0 no t
Tho boys complain of sickness if thoy
permitted to have fires in their houses. It is for the
good of tlx boys that those two old customs of tno ol
timo "bo allowed, to ronnin*
Mr. Chairman % attention has boon engaged for some time now on tho
Mi. Onairm Qf inproving tlx housing problem and gone
living conditions of tho natives. Groat improve no ntsvo re
mado in Buka, I mean Small Buka. A general oon & r asation
was mado of various social groups into largo communities,
and no trouble was experienced in this R
ware mado, foods planted and a good water s^PP A y t
nvailablo. d?hc natives built Oovcrnxacnt rost housoa, •»
oud generally tended to make tho community clean an
Soj S' Pigs and dogs wore drinking from tno water
?oolsTsod by the nativol but with the introduction of^
sanitation and. cleanliness great changes eon p a
I have, said, all without any trouble or difficulty v.hat
e ' r ' jr ‘ What can be done in ono District can certain-
ly bo done in another and particularly where Latupi an
Malaguna DX \lTsV°£ sure. our duty to see that better
living conditions ai o made possible °
that European methods of sanitation bo g*
natives in order that they may better tno ir environmor
Unless we do this and teach th- native
rudiments of sanitation, wo are going to lose many of our
Dr. Wolff I°“dolirx C to S spoak about tho housing of tho natives in
have only the one kind of house which is built
on tho ground and which has proved excellent.
Dr.Cilento That is so, the housoa in the Kralls. The floors are
ss srw* •
remarks in this connection that the houses are nonlthy.-
E.v. Coe I »ould V l 1 ‘ h I “ld‘ cimunltifs.“could not
the roofs bo of coconut leaves as at present, is
essential 'gla bo oj '.ood- th(j Mr a ronoto dis-
txl.t. oonta’S/ Soj tno nntdEoa -
better houses. I think it »°uia wuu - it nav
bottofthatAhe to bo erected continue to
use tho coconut leaf as heretofore.
11




To Cilento At the present we are only-really interested in two things
in connection with the housing; the first is the fires and
the second is waterproof roofing and proper floors*
In the Philippine Islands for instance, wooden
walls were introduced to take the place of the ordinary
bombom walls originally .used by all natives with the result
that it accounted for a large percentage of Tuberculosis*
Therefore in this regard, we must not inflict
any hardship on the natives by compelling them to come from
their own village style and custom of housing and live in
one central village, if it will cause sickness.
Chairman It would appear that my remarks were not correctly interpreted
It is not desired to take natives from their own villages,
lock stock and barrel, and compel them to live in any area we
may think of setting aside for such purpose. It is proposed
to establish on trial, model villages for the purpose of
benefiting the natives and their living and sanitary condition
This, to be by persuasion, but by force or law.
r, Cox The establishment of such houses on better lines would no
doubt tend to make the native keener on bettering his
quart ers.
her I would like to suggest that a house be built for the
schbaum Luluai, Tul-tul or medical Tul-tul in the villages. It
would tend to make them more interested in their work and
the house so built could be used as an office.
Cilento I think five years would be a reasonable period in which
to carry out these suggested regulations. There is no
power given in these regulations to a District Officer to
move a village. This power is only vested in the Commission-
er of Dative Affairs in conjunction with the Director of
Public Health to suggest the removal of a village to the
Administrator - the actual power lies only with the
Administrator.
. Plierl In my District, some houses are so close that if fire were
to break out, the whole village would ourn e
. Pilhofer When our Mission started the people only lived in poor huts.
We saw that no progress could be made while the people
continued in such primitive conditions. We persuaded them
to live in villages which they now appreciate. We had
some trouble over their rights when they first moved into
these villages, but now they are making nice roads. In
the interior, at Pinschafen, they have started growing
vegetables and making plantations. We could not have
accomplished this if they had continued living in isolated
huts. It is fairly easy to get them to live in villages on
the coast but in the mountainous regions, we find it more
difficult.
. Vesters I would like to confirm the ideas suggested by
Rev. Mr. Cox. We take it that the Administration is not
12




intending to confine the villages to very sdo.ll areas.
I would liko to suggest that it would ho host to show
k tho natives hy persuasion tho groat advantages that
I would accrue fron tho proposed regulations and thus
intensify sanitation, fhero is ono question I would
like to ask Dr. Oilento.
Art/peoplo oonpolled to c ono together on the teach. Wha
is the reason for bringing then fror.r the nountains
down to tho beach?
Dr. Cilonto I agree that bringing poople to tho boach is very
unreasonable, but it facilitates tho work of the
District Officer. In Hew Britain, the village of Sail
v;tis ordered to c one to tho beach. But they found that
thoy wore side there and so returned halfway to the
hills* They were thon ordered to return to tho "beach.
I examined then last year, and found a lot of
them suffering from Filariasis* I strongly held that no
village should bo shifted unless for obvious mediaal
reasons, and that no village should ba moved for tha
convenience of the Government. The only roasntyshould
be for the natives 1 own good.
Father Kirsch- I think some clause should be inserted in tho
baum. Ordinance giving power to move villages.
Dr,. Cilonto. Such provision is already made but it is hedged about
with many restrictions.
Father Xirsch- When a village has been mov.ed it should be
baunu final. I know of cases when villages have been moved
as many as 5 times in 8 years, and now thoy have moved
back into the swamps again.
' Mr. Chairman There i s no power vested in the District
Officer to move a village compulsorily.
Rev. Fliorl Sometimes moving is a very good thing. The
Gorman District Officer moved some villages at tho
mouth of the Markham and this proved a very good thing.
;
Dr. Cilonto The District Officer can only nove a village
by application to tho Administrator. Hie District
Officer can give orders for sanitation, but the
situation is not yet well enough known to be able to
lay down do finite linos* Instructions arc sont to
District Officers only for thoir guidance in such
natters.
Regulations are circulated to District
Officers, as to any action they nay think fit to take -
but in some oases insistanoo might cause trouble.
Mr. Chaiman Regulations wore brought out in. 1921 but
it was considered forced labour;
Rev. Cox May I ask what sort of latrine it is
proposed to adopt?
Dr.Cilonto The kind of latrine will vary according t»
tho situation of the village. If the village is




situated at sea the faeces will go out to sea but i± 0.1;
is an inland village an incinerator will have to be
built and all refuse burnt. If there is not enough
current to carry refuse out to sea, then it will have
to be carried out to sea in buckets.
Then there is the question of water supply.
At Nordup, for instance, the old German well is choked
up and water has to be fetched from a spring a long way
up the hill, and this is in a village miles from the
Administrative centre of the Territory after 51 years
of White Administration .
What v?e have to concentrate on at present,
then, is latrines, incinerators, water-supply and hous-
ing. Any power will be more economically used if we have
properly defined village areas to include all the houses-
this does not mean of course that all natives are to be
crammed into a small area.
Where/lt is necessary to spend money, the
natives will pay, if they are able; if not, the Govern-
ment will bear the cost.
Mr. Chairman In many cases, tanks have been supplied
for water supply - these will have been paid for by the
natives at cost price. It is our intention to supply
more as required.
Rev. Cox Is it intended to abolish pit latrines
altogether?
Dr.Cilento Yes, pit latrines are dangerous* If
the subsoil water is close to the surface, this water
may be contaminated for several hundred yards round.
Mr. Chairman If there is no. .further discussion, we
will now take the question of Endemic Diseases. Dr.
Cilento please.
Notification of Endemic Diseases.
Dr. Cilonto As I said to you before, there are only-
two things in medicine; one is skill and the ability to
do things in medicine and surgery. The other, the
diagnosis of various diseases etc.
Diagnosis comes by an examination and is
not information gained in a roundabout manner.
We want to have a hundred eyes, and we
want an eye in every village. It is useless for a native
to be a good Christian after he dies, Cleanliness is
next to Godliness.
Every member of a community should be
an eye for the Department of Public Health . Wo will
put natives in villages as an intelligence corps. V Jo
rely on you just as wo roly on our small doctor for
information and to be collecting stations for information
and we rely upon you to be a hundred eyes for the Public
Health Department.
Notification of endemic diseases means
notification of any diseases that are constantly chang-
ing.
14




If an epidemic disease occurs, we must hear
of it* What wo want to know from you is the Malaria
that is occurring what changes have taken place re
Malaria* We want you to toll us about any changes in
the diseases that are always present. This year, there
were chest complaints, last year there was Malaria*
Wo know you will tell us there are epidemic diseases,
because you are sufficiently interested in them. I
say toll us about the Malaria that occurs in order th&t
wo may watch its prevalence. Bo oyos for us and kcop us
fully informed as to what is occurring in the various
villages in your districts and neighborhood. Any
sociological factors are what wo want to know. By so
advising mo of these matters you will assist me in
every way and assist my work in this Territory.
Bishop V/olff. We heartily approve of this plan and I would
ask that in the uvent of any epidemic disease breaking
out in any village that authority bo givon to the Luluai,
Tultul, or Medical Tultul to close that part of tho
village for a time just as a quarantine. Advice could
bo sent to a doctor, the village or part of it to be
kept closed until a doctor has arrived for inspection.
Br.Cilonto Tho village could bo quarantined in the
same manner as a ship is quarantined for any disease.
Do person could enter tho village. Any person desir-
ing to speak to any person in that village could speak
across tho boundary. Provision could bo duly made
for the quarantining of any area in this regard.
Rev. Cox Would the authority of the Luluai carry
sufficient weight?
Br.Cilonto Yes.
Rev. Pliorl There arc good grounds and reasons that
tho people being in the remote regions should bo given
power to do something in those cases. For instance,
tho doctor was notified that there was an epidemic of
Dysentery, but the village was not put under
quarantine immediately as no District Officer was
available to do this. Village and Luluais
must have the power to put the village or villages
under quarantine and the District Officer could bo
notified of this action afterwards.
Rev.Philofer Ten years ago, the rate of mortality
among the natives in our Mission District especially the
old people was very high, on account of infectious
diseases, and we thought it was out duty to stop such
diseases.
If any infectious or suspicions disease
broke out in any villages no other native from the
surrounding villages was allowed to come to that village
visiting anyone but there was groat difficulty in that.
15




A police boy, if he is sent to get a boy from a village
has no respect for any quarantine so made. One case is
mentioned of a police boy who was sent to take a native
from a village. He took a man who had just recovered
from an infection of the lungs. He took this man in spite
of a piotest from the village people. The nan died on
the road.
Sven Patrol Officers do not respect any such
quarantine of villages for infectious diseases. Quaran-
tine, I say, must be respected in this regard# We are
teaching our natives to be clean and thus keep away
diseases of an infectious nature. Our people are of the
opinion that Quarantine is only possible if rigidly carried
out.
Pr.Cilento What, method is used to warn natives in a
neighborhood of quarantine restrictions in a village?
Rev.Pilhafer A warning is sent to each village in the
vicinity by one of the villagers. A note or sign is
placed in a stick on one of the native roads or tracks.
Hr. Wolff If Luluais had power to quarantine, I think
whites should be allowed to travel through a village.
Rev.Pilhofer What guarantee have we that the power of the
Luluai to quarantine would not be wrongfully used, or
used for his own ends?
Mr. Chairman If Luluais abused their power of quarantine
they would have to be punished.
Dr.Cilento I will include provisions for native quarantine
in the new Ordinance.
Rev. Cox I think that the idea of quarantine by the
natives themselves is a very sound one.
Dr. Wolff I think that medical officers or missionaries
should be allowed in the quarantined area to render such
assistance as is necessary.
Mr. Chairman As it is now 1.40 p.m. the Conference is now
adjourned till 9.30 a.m. tomorrow.
16




Proceedings on 22/6/27.
Third Day of Conference.
Mr. Chairman Declared the Conference to be re-opened at 9.45 a.m.
The subject to be discussed, Gentlemen, is
Section 14 of the Agenda Paper - "Languages"
Rev.Pilhofer Concerning: Universal Languages:- Three possi-
bilities are to be considered :-
(1) To make one of the existing group languages
a universal language.
(2) To introduce the genuine English Language
as "Lingua Pranca".
(3) To use and perfect as universal language the
already existing "Pidgin English."
With regard to (1) the Territory of Hew Guinea
spreads over such a large area and is divided into so
many remote islands that wo can see no way of making
one of the existing group languages a universal language.
With regard to (2), it i s no doubt advisable
to teach those natives who have acquired a higher stand-
ard of education the genuine English, for this will en-
able them to take part in the solving of the problems ox
the race. But we are of opinion that at the present time
it i s impossible to teach the average native a genuine
language, with a view to making it a universal language.
An authority on Missions in Australia wrote some months
ago in an Intcrnat ional Review
"It is manifest that the thought content of the
English language is very much beyond the power of the
native mind."
With regard to (3) "Pidgin English" is quite
universally accepted in the Territory as the Lingua
Pranca of the people. In structure and grammar it con-
forms very much to that of native languages. In this is
grounded the fact that natives acquire it rather easily.
The main objection which is raised against its use is
its primitive character. This at present is doubtless
true, but "Pidgin" can be enriched and perfected. Wo
would suggest that some committee bo appointed to take
in hand the work of perfecting a Pidgin English Grammar
and Dictionary. This does not mean, however, that
Pidgin English should in any way whatsoever sot aside
the use of the native group language.
Rev.Xirsch- Road a paper.
baum.
"Remarks on the question of a Universal
Language ".
The question of adopting one universal lang-
uage for the whole of this Territory may rightly bo
considered a vital one, in view of the future develop-
ment of the country.
17




Gor t a inly nono among the members of this
Gonjoranco, and very few, if any, of the white popula-
tion, have not, in one way or another, or rather in many
v;ays ana on numerous occasions, exporioncc-d tho difficulty
oi making themselves understood by the natives, because of
?£° ?rf OnGO °f a universal language in this land of Babel,
line of which is not found in the whole world.
Inai /i duals con, and often do. r acquire a useful
imowledge oi tho languages or dialects of the respective
districts which come within tho sphere of their duties
and acci/ities, but almost all tho whites and cs:xcially
government officials, missionaries, and others find in most
cases, not only impiacticablo but utterly useless to
earn one or two native languages as a moans of communion-
erng wihh tho whole native population in this country whore
sovoial hundred different tongues arc. spoken.
_ What woule happen if, which is impossible,
° nl ? °^ stin C universal language hero, the pidgin or
tail boy, should cease, all at once to exist in tho whole
I would not like to conjecture the
ci-Loc .oi 3U ? il u misfortune in the Territory. Fortunately
a v;id ? s proad arjd sympathetic public fooling regard-
. £ 1100Q ssity of a universal language, that makes it
unnecessary to ontoi into details in ord.r to prove not
only tho advisability, but the absolute necessity of such
language in this Territory. Assuming the necessity of a
universal language ihc important question arises which
language should bo adopted?
nnri r v, is obvious that choice, if ary must bo
maae between aEuropoan and a Native language.
t us consider the case for and against
regarding a European language. The only apparent reason
xor adopting a European language would seem to consist in
providing Europeans without any preliminary trouble or study
I* 1 ”! m °nns of conversing with the natives. On the other
nand there is much to be urged against such a pioposal.
(1) Wo have in this country, to deal with
people very primitive both in language and culture. Oui aim
is to raise and elevate them slowly to a
higher level. In imposing on them a highly cultured and
do/eloped language, such as all European languages are, wo
would reverse the order, presupposing in thorn what wc must
try to teach thorn. This would bo an unpsychological manner
0 ?+. P 1 0c 0 0 -pplios to all Europoan languages ,
qltnough if a European language would bo adopted that
language could bo only English.
. (E) Tho introduction of a European language
hitherto unknown to the would bo possible only by
it in schools. As the number of schools is, and
..ill be in tho future, limited wo could teach only a
vory small percentage of the inhabitants of this Territory
and e spe c ially so, as the relatively small population is
scattered over such vast spaces. One may urge, that wo do
find countries whore native races have displaced their own
language for that of their masters, but the fact it is
this process taken place very slowly and only after
centuries of civilisation, as in the caso ox India aid the
18




Dateh Indies. In tlio latter Islands a beginning '••as
made just twenty years ago with the Dutch language
after three centuries of colonisation, while in India
today a groat number of people have their own native
language in spite of the extremely dense population.
If it were decided to introduce a European
language, it would be, as a matt or of c our sc, the
English language, and then a now difficulty would eo
added to those already existing, namely the insur-
mountable obstacles of English transcription*
Wo now come to the second aspect of the
question, namely, the introduction of a native language
as a universal language.
A general reason in favour of a native
language is this, all the native languages spoken in
tip Territory are, as a rule on the same level as
regards mentality and grammatical structure and this
7;ould enable the natives to learn a native language
more easily than any European language. At the same
time it would not bo difficult for the few Europeans
to acquire a native language. Moreover the whole
framework of the native languages is much more adapted
to the conditions of tropical life than any European
language could be, for instance, the phraseology and_
vocabulary as a whole. After those general observations
wo will endeavour to state some of the conditions which
are necessarily required in order to make a native
language a universal language*
(X) In order to mate a native language the
\ - universal language it a mild bo spoken
by a comparatively largo number of natives.
(2) The particular language chosen should
have a reasonable opportunity of being
accepted by other tribes.
Regarding the first condition wo can say
that attempts have been made to make several languages
district languages, but with those district Languages wo
do not roach our final aim - one universal language,
moreover it would bo difficult to select one language
that would satisfy all parties concerned. As regards
the second condition wo find a strong dislike among tho
natives themselves, to loam a particular language of any
other-tribe.
To overcome all those difficulties there is
open only one solution which has boon already followo
by the natives themselves , namely in adopting tno Pidgin
or "Talk boy n and spreading it wherever they can, so tho
question of a universal language for tno natives is no
more a problem but an established fact.
As it is nccossa.zy to consider tho case xor
and against the adoption of Pidgin, let us consider
what must bo said on this point.
As regards the first consideration viz - the
number of people who speak tho language, no one will
deny that it is the language most extensively used the
Territory, not only among tho natives, but also by white
people in conversing with the natives. E?ho highly
important as well as tho most insignificant order is
given in Pidgin.
19




As to tho second consideration namely tho _
readiness o£ the native trioos in accepting tho Pidgin
is an addition to their own language, there can ho only
one opinion.
Xt lias boon observed everywhere that boys
returning to their villages, oven remote villages,
not only romonbor the Pidgin out arc proud of it ana anxious
to share their knowledge with others. .
As to the reason v;hich can bo urged against the
Pidgin as tho universal language the principal seem to- be
the dislike among the white population that English should
not be reduced to such an awful slang as Pidgin, but we
contend tha^Pidgin
The whole grammatical structure and idoalogy
are adapted to tlx genius of the native langugagos or
to state it more conectly, taken from thorn and although
tho vocabulary is to a great extent from English,yet in
many cases tho original meaning has be on changed according
to the native mind and life.
As a fact, Pidgin scons to bo poorer than
it really is because already it has boon developed to a
higher degree than it formerly was, and the process of
development is continuing day by day.
With the development of Pidgin, words hither-
to unknown will be absorbed and in this way tho Pidgin
will servo as a medium to the final .adoption of English
as tho universal language. .
\; Moanwhilo the Missions will continue as
I formerly teaching English in intermediate and higher
classes in order to hasten the day when Pidgin will give
place to English. „ /
The views I am about to place before the
Conference Mr. Chair man, are not those of tho Methodist
Missionary Society but merely a few thoughts of my own
on the subject > .
In considering the selection of a universal
language only three come within our purview, namely :~
English, Pidgin English, and Native language.
With respect to English wo might
say that no matter how l.argely and well it is taught it
will never become the language of the people generally.
Selected boys brought from the villages to central schools
where English is the only language used in teaching and
given many years of sound training may acquire some
knowledge of English, but this wo learn will soon be
forgotten when the student is cast on his own resources
in a purely native environment. # .
In many respects English is a dniicult
language to loam and often even well - educated Europeans
of other nationalities speak it very indifferently; how
then can wo impose it on such backward races as these.
All the languages of these tribes in those islands that
have been written have boon written phbnetically, and
that is the only way they have boon taught to read and
write. It is not possible to write English phonetically,
even if it wore, it would moan chat all the literature would
have to be translated into phonetic English, which would moan
a terrible labour and expense. Then there arc maiy sounds
in English which thousands of natives cannot possible pro-
nounce .
20




So v;o fool it would bo a waste of time and
money to try and teach tlie people English*
While there is a groat deal to be said in
favour of Pidgin English as a universal language
we must remember it is but a "Pidgin English"; a
c onglomeration of words taken from several languages
scattered all over the ’..orld. Those from_ England
predominating. The arrangement of words in Pidgin
is very crude while the vocabulary is unrefined
and at times coarse . The language is ridiculous
if not obnexSous to every English speaking person.
It tends to corrupt good English. How many there
are today,Sng 11 sh speaking people who use no end
of Pidgin words when speaking thclk mother tongue.
Articles written in the local newspaper arc often
full of them while business firms advertise their
address in the "Habaul Times 1 ' as "House Sodawator"
and "House Jewel". Such a heterogeneous language
as Pidgin English adopted by a people cannot bo
as full and as expressive as one T s mother tongue,
tnerod ere, as a language it is inadequate. By all
means, let us use Pidgin until we have something
better to replace it, but do not lot us settle on
it as the official language of the Territory.
Other native countries have a native ton
language for the official language, and wo have
no greater difficulties to overcome than some-
of those had. Other countries have had. the
problem that stares us in the face - that
mixed tribes and numerous languages but a universal
language has boon decided on 1 and used wherever
possible with the result that today it has over-
stopped language' frontiers, and has become a
common language amongst the people.
We have a language suited for a universal
language in that of Haluana. Whether this could bo
used on the mainland of How Guinea which is so far
away and across the seas it is hard to say. Such
a language could probably bo used though, on
Ho w Britain, and on the "'adjacent islands. Sc
far as wo know it is today the most universal
language in the Territory, i. 0., there are more
people spc a king it than: arc speaking any other
lavage. It is well known by ov.r 40,000 people
21




on tho Peninsula. is extensively known
on the Buko f York group while in IWr; Ire-
land hundreds aro acquainted with it.
Kioto is already an oxtensivo mission
literature in the language 1 , and as the literature
is all the people have, it is eagerly road and
thus knowlodge of the language is disseminated.
The language is used in the training
institutions and colleges of the two Missionary
Societies operating on Nov; Britain, so every
teacher and pro ache r who goes out to work in tho
villages is well versed in the dialect which ho
uses as oft as he has the opportunity so
knowledge of the language is spreading as
missionary work advances.
A conside ratio number of words from
tliis language are used in the Pidgin, English
employed here.
The* language is not difficult to
pronounce. Natives from other tribes who learn
the language speak the words without any
effort. Europeans also experience little
difficulty in pronounciation when once they
have mastered it. The language is very full
and .h on w ell an qui re d can b o vor y expressive.
The language might be simplified by
eliminating from any text-books on it, all
synonymous words and expressions not absolutely
essential.
Father If we aro to introduce a Universal
Mertyns. language, wo will only bo able to use either
a Native language or as has boon stated Pidgin
English, because tho real English to be taught
to all the people scorns to mo impossible on
the grounds which have been stated by Father
Airsohbaum. If we aro to fix tho question
of a universal language to bo used hero in New
Britain, in New Ireland, Manus, Now Guinea, and
Buka, wo have to taxo that language which already
is universal language. I think most Missionaries
will agree that owing to tho. groat number of
22




languages in all parts of the Territory it is impossible
to introduce a native language.
My opinion is really that of Father Kirschbaum
and I can only say I have been against Pidgin from the
beginning of my missionary life, but I have been con-
verted Since I had to do work: in New Britain and other
Islands, I found that to come in touch with the natives
I had'to use Pidgin • Pidgin has been developed for 20
years, and I feel that it will be the bridge to real
English. I can only see one way to introduce a universal
language and that is Pidgin.
Bishop I feel that I will not be the last to speak, on this
Vesters subject, and I think that it is very good to consider
such an important subject as is laid down before the
Conference from all its aspects. I feel that the previous
speakers have done their best to give their reasons and
arguments pro and con and that is a very fair procedure.
The question is very complex and consequently I am not
quite sure that the question will be Solved to-day. 7e
have exchanged ideas with the Mission, and this exchange
was bearing: great fruit - the question is not solved
however. It was a very good idea of Rev. Flierl to
bring this matter before the Conference. I will not dwell.
upon the points already spoken on, I will only bring
forward some similar considerations.
Pidgin is not English, therefore we say Pidgin.
Pother Kirschbaum put in evidence that the speaking of
Pidgin exposes to ridicule and this may be true, and
we ourselves all feel this difficulty. Often, when I
have been walking d.own China Town and have heard the
Chinese spoken, I could hardly refrain from laughing
uuch a queer manner of conversing. Certainly this feeling
will disappear as time goes on.
R^luana^has greatly increased in importance, and this
is greatly due to missionaries of all denominations. fhe
knowledge of it has spread to a great extent. Pidgin is
daily being used more and more throughout the Territory -
we know that the Methodist as well as the Catholic Mission
have to acknowledge that certainly if it were not for
Pidgin there would be great difficulty in carrying on tne
work.
Gospels, instructions, lives of the Baints have been
translated into Pidgin and everything that we say and
hear can be expressed in Pidgin when the person can
speak Pidgin. It has been said that Pidgin wduld be a
crude and primitive language. It is all that, but it
can be developed to a very much higher degree just as
the Missionaries have developed the Native Language.
Things are expressed in such a plastic way they
retain their meaning much more than in the original
text. The natives are simple and primitive folk and w©
must discuss things at very great length to make ourselves
understood. .7© have to put ourselves on their level.
23




jr. the Malay, ‘we havd a heterogeneous language taken
from the Arabic, and some from Sanscrit language.
Religious expressions are from the Sanscrit - others
from the Arabic and Dutch, Tuis heterogeneous character
is one of the difficulties of speaking the language
to the people. In former times, an effort was made
to introduce Malay as the "Lingua franca", but
this was not done. Pidgin can, and would be, the
kind of conversation which would be used by the
Administration in its relations with the Natives.
Dr 7/olff Under es" I see in the Agenda Paper:-
"Native^Laws"
The Government likes to publish some law or laws
relating to the people. How can it be By some
nublications in the native tongue - perhaps in Raluana
or some other. But by this method you cannot touch
the whole country. ... .
for instance, in our part of New Guinea it is imrjossible
to speak to the native in any language other than^ his
own language. If it were to be published in Englisn
or Raluana’how long a time would it take, but on
other hand, if we were to take Pidgin, we could publish
something almost at once, e.g. if some of the laws wore
published they could be s6nt at once to a native, who
has been to school and he, bein? able to read and write,
could at once explain them to the others. They would of
course have to be written phonetically« I think that
from the practical side, it would be very good to use
Pidgin and later on perhaps in 60 years, it may be
possible for our successors to introduce English as the
universal language.
Mr Chairman The policy of the Administration, Gentlemen, is
definitely to teach and spread English, ./e are aware
that there are many difficulties to be overcome, out we
hope for the present to improve Pidgin English by the
teaching of euro English. The result of the association
of natives with persons speaking pure English is seen
here in Rabaul where the majority of natives do not speak
Pidgin, but an impure English, for instance, in my own
household, my wife invariably speaks pure English to
native servants and is understood by them. Most
Europeans can make the natives in Raoaul understand them,
but "Bush Pidgin" is a different matter. ±ho
European in Rabaul would have great difficulty in under-
standing a boy speaking bush Pidgin, therefore we are
teaching English in our school at Malaguna, and will
teach nnglish in the sonools we are establishing tnrough-
out the Territory, but the difficulties are not insurmoun
able. I would refer the Conference to the institution
24




of English as a commercial language in other countries. I
would cite one instance, the West Indies, I'here as
lately been held ift Africa, an educational congress a
hv Mr Ormsbv Gore, who is one of the greatest _
authorities at present in the world on Native Adminis-
tration. Throughout the report, stress is laid on the _
necessity for teaching the native races of a country the
official and commercial language of that country,
economic progress can be made by any na V. the
not given these opportunities. 1 wol £ d fof
Conference that the commercial and ofncial language o
this Territory is English. Papua also _insists on the
teaching of English throughout the assisted schools 01 the
Territory although there are two native languages
oraotically universal, one in the Eastern half and one
K SK half Of the Territory, languages are
Mocu and duau; in Eiji also. English must aught
every assisted school. As I have stated before, a
present the aim ox the Administration in tea ° h^ t
is to raise the standard of Pidgin English so that it may
be of some economic value to the native races of the
Territory. The Administration considers that it is im-
possible to promulgate a native language as a universa_
language for the Territory. I take it that one of th
languages at present being taught by a Mission (which
a language for the district in which they °P®
be considered if a native language were to bo adopted as
a universal language for the Territory, hut one could
not ask a Mission or Missionaries who have spent their
lives in learning thoroughly teaching and printing native
languages adaptable to their districts to oettiso:n iall
their best work, and introduce into their district a n w
native language, which would have previously hoen adopted
bv only one Mission. .
lam sure the Lutheran Mission, for instance would n
favour a proposal to adopt the Blanche Bay
which is at present the native language of tne Methodis
il] Conference is aware, the average Australian is
not a pood linguist and has a good deal of difficulty
in learning a foreign language, and I- am sure tha
Present European in the Territory would not rouble
to learn any'native language. There is not the slightest
25




doubt, in fact all members of the Conference have noted
the fact that Pidgin English is being
thmnp'h the Territory with remarkable rapidity.
tSXSd I «uIJ ?.ad a P“%^ r “ t a o???“er hl
I have received lately from the District Otfic
Ai ”It e is -oleasing' to note the way "Pidgin English"
is spreading to the interior, itwasparticuiariy
noticeable at Sammatc, the scene*of the bt«cdol
murder, Where I Was surprised t 6 all
children, youths, and young men, could spea*
lano-uae'e Although they had never crossed therrace,n c e,
tteyhll* learned the language from friends returning
from indenture. I mention this
probability of the question of a that
arising in the near future. It would seem that
desuite everything to the contrary. Pidgin will be
the ? Esperanto of this Territory, for very many years
fc °This e country has a unique opportunity of teaching
English as we have as a basis pidgii o ..
i now so widely diffused throughout the Territory.
Pn-cr I would be a most optimistic man were 1 to
Re suggest that we would attain finality on the question
ft S this Conference. It feel that; the introduction of
a universal language would assist in t .
education of the people generally, but can
such a language as will be satisfactory ,
standpoint? ! take it that in proceeding to introduce
a so-called universal language that language will n
betery effective unless it is adopted, for use xn the
dav-schools of the people - that means the languag
la S'eve? U we of tJj Sh a J op ted
think: we cannot fail to see a f f beyond the people.
» tn. universal language when i the advraold
That has not prevented i and so it is being
schools or Government schobls however a 3 tho
used in a very limited way, but to thin think: it
quite meeting the case. I cannot thin
practical solution
26




Those objections might be somewhat exaggerated and we
might overcome somewhat that feeling in time but those who
have some knowledge of its use must admit that while capable
of improvement it is at the present time a poor language
comparatively speaking, in spite of what we have heard of
how expressive it may be.
The literary objection to Pidgin is that there is no culture
behind it, it is‘simply something that has "just happened."
At the same time, we must admit that it is a useful means
of communicating with the people and we would find ourselves
in great difficulty if it were now to be dispensed with or
forbidden.
It is useful. But, it will never amount to much unless
it is used in the schools of the Territory. The Missions
control most of the schools. Many of those schools are very
simple schools and only very simple subjects are taught there,
and very often that teaching is inadequate; but there are
hundreds of schools run by the Missions and in these the
language which we have called the Universal Language has to
be used in the printed literature issued by the Missions, The
advance of the people in acquiring the language will be so
unutterably slow and unless that is done there is not'likely
to be any improvement in the position as it is to-day, nor
satisfactorily in the near future.
lam still open to conviction'on what should be done but
I do not think our Mission, and, I suppose other Missions
will be ready to scrap their literature and print other
publications in Pidgin.
I wonder whether'this Conference is going to get much
farther than we are, beyond the fact that we might determine
that we are not going to have, a Universal Language - that
the time has not yet come,
Government and Missionaries could teach English here and
there to select pupils with a hope that that would be the
beginning of a plan which 100 years later will bring about
a wide spread knowledge of pure English. It is thought that
we should suggest to the Administration perhaps that in
order to secure one of the things which we are hoping to secure
by the introduction of a Universal Language, namely a greater
measure of justice than is now possible through constant
misunderstandings which arise through the use of Pidgin,
greater care should be exercised in the appointment of
interpreters in dealing with matters affecting natives. I
am not sufficiently informed to make a definite proposal. I know
that the Commissioner for Native Affairs and others have
felt that often there has been a miscarriage of justice
because the language has not been sufficiently understood by
the natives and that perhaps the truth did not come out for
27




I do not feel in a position to say that the adoption
of a Universal Language is one that we can consider
as possible under present conditions. One great ob-
jection to Pidgin is that the Missions are not likely
to adopt it as their literary tongue.
Rpv I am of the opinion that it is not necessaiy to 1
R6V ilierl muSh time on tiS, speaking of Pidgin. Pad. In is apoloon
all over the Territory. District Officers have only
Pidgin if they are to go; raunioate with the natives, ana
so they must be able to speak it. The great idea is to
pet to the hearts of the people and that can only o
done thro\igh the medium of a Native 'longue. kOo
Missionaries know the Native Tongue very well, but as
we have seen it is not possiole to take one of the
Native Languages for the whole country. I tuink it may
be possible that Raluana will become the Universal
Language of New Britain and Hew Ireland but impossible
for it to be that of New Guinea. ... , .
The Commissioner of Native Affairs said it is goo o
use English afe much as possible but to get at the heart
of the people, the Native Language must be used it must
be used" in the village, in the seminary and in the
church school. We think no Missionary could get on
without using the Native Language,
Pidgin will be used and will do good service and
by Inf by it will provide a bridge for the introduction
of English. The native knowing it will have conversa
ion with the others and will instruct them ia it,
I think we should use Pidgin as far as possible and
instruct in the Native Language the Mission workers and
do as much as possible in the teaching of English.
Mr Chairman I would li,e to reiterate to the Conference that th °
Government in trying English as the
Universal Language has, as its main idea, a desire
improve Pidgin and it is with that oeject in view that
English is being taught. Europeans many peculiar
ideas on the teaching of English by the Administration,
i'or instance, a man from the British Solomons a3lc ® d “
recently what was the use of teaching the ci ent
the natives as soon as they could understand sufficient
English to be able to read books in that language, would
through their perusal of a certain class of 11 that
lose all their respect for a European. I replie^^ rabnre
it was not necessary fbr them to read .buropean
to achieve this result, as the action of certain
Europeans in their relation to native races woul
bring about a similar condition in regard to the stare
of the native mind relating to what is so commonly
spoken of as "European prestige". What the man in t
street cannot realize is that until native rac
speak: the commercial language of the Territory, y
cannot be considered to have bettered themselve
economic sense*
28




s|a ; .vi
used!^”’s£oS SwayffsHrSotier tongue,
md°Pldvln should he used from the praotioal Pldsin
SSTK IIX XiAT?SUfS’SSj-
that names of towns and peoples and seas mus
Be, Cox ’Two'Kute the
J£*g4«“ ss* fes £ “ ie ■>**“ thelr °”
Rev men d tf“glen'thefoSefL’musAearn
til© dialect there • . . i •fnT tgroiling the
Dr Vesters Certainly the Native languagev we«t S' an? to the£°by the
hearts of the people - certainly we get n ® well from
use of their own native tongue* v\fc j£ n , -nipnsed to
our experience in other countries. J,® wOU We wou ia like to
dispel doubt in the mind oi Rev . * expresses best
the°natives^own
so many different languages. ionwuiee and has no
Mr. Cox has said that Pidgin is a poor language
literature. I grant that it is yoo • teach it as the
development is not the Native Language
Universal Language. At the on Pidgin in the same way
had no literature and we can develop Pxdgin very
as the language has developed* Om Mis
best in this matter*
*r. Bishop 3) shop Gilbert Shite who was for many
cf r p-i tq ?md Rorrest River Distncio aiiu. viw n , n
of the "Australian Board of Mission Review ** s ££d®i prayer
refused to print in his paper a version of the *9™ - gj*
in Pidgin English, as in all his ex perienc use pidgin, and
Strait!. he had never found the necessity to
found that by using Simple English the na still I do
stand him. That seems yety wonderful to us. hut sjiii
feel as does his Lordship, .Dr. Vesters, that P er ™*P“ .
!Si“oSSS be enlarged some day with some simple English
words.
29




Two years ago, in Buka, the Administrator and I were
discussing Pidgin and he stated that while he was a very
poor speaker of Pidgin he had no difficulty in maxing him ~
self understood by the natives. It is the same /ith me.
Wherever I go in the Territory and when the gospel o±
Jesus Christ is spoken of, they seem to understand.
is no language like their Mother-tongue. Is tne
Raluana dialect going to help at say Gasmatta. Must we
ask a man who is'going to spend his whole life^ in that
District to learn a new tongue? difficulties are tre-
mendous, but I know that we can teach our native children
here in their own tongue.
The Conference adjourned for tea at 11.15 a.ra.
At 11*30 a.m. the Chairman declared the Conference re-
opened. , jo
Rev Cox I would like to correct a misapprehension on the part ot
Dr. Vesters who spoke of my stating that Pidgin had no
literature behind it. I stated that it was not cultured.
Dr Vesters I apologise Mr. Chairman.
Rev Pilnofer I suppose that the Missions will use the Dative tongue
and that English will be taught in the advanced classes
while Pidgin will remain the "Lingua Franca". But, it we
acknowledge this fact do we nor have to acknowledge perfect
Pidgin as much as we can? people in the remotest places in
New Guinea express daily how quickly and far Pidgin
spreading and"l might suggest that we should bear in mind
that there is at present no other Universal Language, nor in
the near future is there any hope of any one other than
Father Mertyns °I see under the heading Language, "Dative Laws" Ihat
will come later on but will those laws oe published in
English or will they be written in the Native Language^
But nobody can read them, only if they come to the Mission,
and askAvhat is in the paper. Therefore, for that reason
it would be advisable to'use Pidgin so that the Tultul can
read. On the other side, there are many happenings at
Court Cases where misunderstandings arise through not
knowing Pidgin and I may say that Natives have been ques-
tioned in Pidgin English who really had no knowledge of
that Pidgin. * Tnerefore, I may say as Mr. Cox has already
30




suggested that more care should be exercised in the appoint-
ing of the interpreter. And I may say that the District
Officer and the Patrol Officer should be prepared really to
speak: in Pidgin English for if they have only English, we
have seen that many misunderstandings arise, e.g. the
hativahalways answers to the question in the * affirmative*
If one asks a native "Have you not done this," he will
always reply "Yes". Misunderstandings arise when officials
don ! t understand how the native expresses himself in this
way.
Mr Chairman Boys are being trained in the Government School at
Malaguna who, when they have acquired sufficlent’knowledge
of English will be allotted to the Central Court, and each
District Office. These will be classed as official
interpreters. Por instance, there are Manus boys being
trained for duty later on at Manus, and boys of Gasmatta
for duty at Gasmatta.
Ir Papua, the Central Court interpreter in my time was
a native speaking several languages, and he Was of inestim-
able value in this work. I think, Gentlemen, that this
scheme will in some measure overcome the difficulties which
you have suggested.
In regard to your statements, I quite agree with you.
Misunderstandings arise through District Officials not being
able to speak Pidgin English properly. However, most of
the more experienced officials can speak excellent Pidgin
English, and the newcomers pick it up in a very short time,
Tnere was a suggestion some years ago that all Officials
should learn a native language, their increments being
deferred until they did learn a language; however it was
considered that this scheme would penalise officials. Por
instance, a junior official stationed in the Sepik District
would therefore learn a language of that District. Would
it be right then to keep that officer in a rough
like that of Sepik, simply because he could speak the Sepik
language? If he went to another District his knowledge
would be of no use, and even in the Sepik District, would
allow him to converse in the vernacular with only a very
limited number of people.
In the British Solomons, a similar procedure took place.
Officials were granted an increment when they could speak a
native language. All the officials learnt the same
language, the easiest one to pick up, and so the scheme was
of no use. My opinion is nowever, that a good knowledge of
Pidgin will enable a District Officer to perform his duty
- * • * efficiently. . , , ..
Hcv Cox Tne question brought up now is going to work out . 6
best solution to the problem of teaching a pure English.
Pidgin English at present has not given entire satisfaction
so many speak it imperfectly. Statements are misconstrued
31




f and answers to queries are not understood, .Something
better is requiredc Por example, some time ago the
District Officer had given a great-deal of time and taken
a lot of trouble to get at the real facts of a case which
involved a large amount of shell money. The District
Officer had done his level best. But he thought that he had
not got the real facts and he ashed me to make investigations
in the village. I went to some trouble but in the end was
able to get the facts. It took some time but I felt finally
that I understood the real position. I reported my decision
to the District Officer and he supported mo, and stated that
he felt mine was the best decision, and one accepted by the
people as right. But he had only Pidgin to assist him and
that was the point I wanted to bring out. After all the time
and trouble he had taken he had not got the correct views.
And as he felt that the information he was nolding was not
right, he asked me to assist him. His investigations had
not led him to a point where ho was able to give a just
decision.
fk-at Pidgin English will improve there is no doubt, but
we are not prepared to say that it can be regarded as a
satisfactory solution to the problem of a Universal Language,
Rev Plierl Ao regards the training of the boys I feel that there is
danger of their losing touch with their Mother-tongue, unless
they are returned home for a period of say 3 months in a
year to brush up their knowledge,
Mr Chairman The policy we adopt in our kUlaguna Seuool jlo for every
pupil therein to return home for 3 months on furlough. The
sending boys to Australia for‘a period to perfect
their ED- lish is more than a suggestion, it is at present w&ll
in hand, and the first of the boys will be proceeding to
Australia in a very short time.
Rev Coil Tay danger is not the forgetting their mother tongue during
the long period they remain in the Government schools. They
are alienated from the village life and customs and prevented
from entering‘into the native life.
At Malaguna, we have a native who speaks good English, and
who can converse with white people - the roshlt of one year
in Sydney, Tre Government School would take, I believe,
something like 10 years to equip a native with a good knowledge
of English, He cans becomes no longer a native - he is not
initiated into the customs of the village. The difficulty
might be overcome by sending the natives to Australia - they
would need a year.
32




Raluana is widely used by the Missions operating
within the Gazelle Peninsula area* The Methodist
Mission has adopted it as its literary language as
well, and has printed many boohs in it* Our Mission
teachers - white and native - are expert in the
language • Thousands of the people speak: it‘and we
find it the most effective for our purposes, e.g. the
transfer of Missionaries from one place to another, and
on tours of inspection.
There are many whom we find cannot speak: the
dialect of the Gazelle Peninsula but we have no
difficulty in finding competent interpreters amongst
the people.
The most effective way of getting to the people
is the native language, but we have to admit that
there is no dialect in this Territory which can be
regarded as universal.
We may very definitely say that we feel that the
dialect of the Gazella Peninsula should be adopted.
Of the other suggestions that have been made there are
none which would be quite as satisfactory.
Administration officials would be able to express what
they wanted to satisfactorily, and people would be
able to express their minds quite clearly to the natives.
PIDGIN I do not think: we would object to calling it
Pidgin although His Lordship, Dr. Vesters, thought wo
were sensitive on that point. We might call it "Bastard",
it is not English. (The Chairman interjects "Bsohe-de-
mer TT I beliare they call it").’
It is Pidgin - not English, and we may hope for very
little from it as a bridge towards pure English. It
differs widely from real English in its construction
and grammar.
If it is to be introduced as the universal language
it must be written phonetically - I have now amongst my
treasured relics an order printed by the Administration
in Pidgin which is really priceless. I aon*t know
who was responsible for it - it was not written phonet-
ically nor is it pleasing to the eye of any English-
speaking person and if orders and regulations'and
notices are to be published in Pidgin English, then in
effect (as Dr. Wolff has pointed out) they must be
written phonetically.
His Lordship, Dr. Vesters, refers to the fact that
a suggestion was made at one time‘that Malay be
adopted as the universal language, but the suggestion
was opposed on the grounds that where it was intro-
duced Mahommedanism invariably followed, and while the
objections to Mohammedanism were not religious ones
they were very definitely political ones. At that
same Conference - which by the way was held over 20
years ago - the cuestion of the introduction of
Pidgin was discussed and it received short shnlft. I
remember that the criticism passed on* it at the time
was that it was uncultured, unrefined, and crude in
expression and that its use was often offensive to
English speaking people.
33




Mr Chairman T.:C fir ot gwo boy*, to r ,o to A: it, trail a will bo placed
with Mj • Grovco wao was previously head-master at
Malaguna• Wo are in oor.n-va'doation with the Education
Du;pw>romont of and haw Waluo in regard
to the placing of other boys in educational establishments.
.Several L 7 a;:’i«*ns are resident in Victoria, One i*> being
trained in Wireless and the others in various trades,
dome of our pupils who have been undergoing instruction
for 4 years can speak: and express themselves in good
English, they are also able to write fair composition. The
Administration are fully aware that whilst in Australia the
pupils would have to be kept under the closest supervision.
The Naruans are domiciled in the Salvation Army Home in
Melbourne; our own pupils would be in the care of people
we know like Groves. I, myself, will be going down South
next year and I will take two boys. In an Australian
environment they should quickly learn colloquial English.
Hev Cox In considering where to send them some of the Church
Schools might be kept in view. There are Fijians and
Tongans in Australia. I thin:: it would be possible for
arrangements to be rna.de as good'as could be given else-
where. If they go to Australia, they learn much more than
they do in this Territory from the Colloquial point of
view which is much better than the academic.
Mr Chairman I think the publication of the laws relating to natives
in the vernacular was the next subject of discussion.
Would some member of the Conference like to give his views
as to the best way this can be carried out? Would it be
possible to send the Native Regulations to the Missions to
be put into the Native Language? Mr. Margetts has done
similar work for me already on other occasions in the
Blanche Bay dialect. Bq you think so Mr. Flierl?
Rev Flierl I think so.
Rev Pilhofer I think that be a good idea. We can print it
in our monthly papers.
Rev Cox I do not think we can improve on the suggestion made by
the Administration that these orders be printed in the
native language by the Mission and that beyond that the
Missions would undertake to write them in Pidgin English.
Beyond that, we cannot go - we must let things take their
course.
Mr Chairman Instructions have been promulgated by Mr. Margetts and*
the Duke of York teachers and in the Churches, Gentlemen,
the question will be referred to the Committee of Findings
who will place their decision before you.
Item 5 of the Agenda paper is the next matter for dis-
cussion. Mr. Flierl, will you open the discussion?
34




'Rev Fliehler Read a paper -
"First allow us to cite a few experiences that the
natives have had in our Mission District. V/hen the
Missionaries came to the mainland of hew Guinea they found
the chief and the elders of the village acting as magis-
trates. They exercised all powers of jurisdiction. But
through the influence of civilisation and the Missions
the old heathen justice has gone.
Therefore it became necessary that a modern reform
of the old organisation should follow so that native
custom and native law these two foundations of a race, be
preserved from ruin and dissolution and that the people
be guarded against stagnation and demoralisation through
having new duties and tasks.
In the early times, there was only one district at
Madang, to which our whole Mission District belonged.
Therefore when quarrels and difficulties arose the natives
came to us for assistance. But we soon saw that we could
not possibly take on us these judicial activities,
irrespective of the fact that we had not the necessary
time to listen to all the long reports and arguments and
stories about the village affairs. We found that in spite
•of a knowledge of the lang:uage and of the people we were
not the proper persons to deal with these matters, for
we realised that we never could acquire the very necessary
knowledge of the details of their history, incidences in
the past, their inter-relationships family and tribal
life, which would enable us to advise the natives in a
satisfactory manner.
Therefore we encouraged the native to re-establish the
custom of having councils and a leader, whose duty it
was to settle the village affairs. They acted upon our
suggestion and soon it proved to be a great factor in the
development of native village life. It was such a great
factor because due to their communistic system, the natives
can accomplish their tasks only when they work as a
combined whole - while as individuals their accomplishments
are very limited, furthermore it was a gr :at factor
because.'l: ‘this way they bridged the gulf between the old
and the now times. Among many native,- peoples it has been
the experience that they have lost interest in life when
fear and warfare drop away without having any substitute
in its place.
The matters dealt with in the councils are those. In
the first instance they must taxe hoed that everything
in the village proceeds peacefully and orderly, that is
why every person who believes that hd has been wronged
receives a hearing at their meetings, all differences
and disputes in regard to boundaries, ownership of land
and trees, hunting and fishing rights, inheritance and
matrimonial matters are settled.
35




Several villages which lonaed a geograpnioal um y
joined and formed a sub-district, lbs meetin 0 b .'
the problems and affairs which are beyond the scope of one
village and which one village alone cannot handle, e.g.
road-making. they also settle disputes in winch several
villages are interested. They receive appeals from
persons who believe that they have been unjustly treaced
hy tlio village council. .
Governor Hahl when he was informed about the arrangement
expressed his appreciation and encouraged it to be
carried on. But during and after the war, a period of
uncerbainty set in due to the conflicting attitudes ox
different District Officers. At present ,
regulate their affairs more or less without the s ? n 2^° n
of the Government. And it is greatly desired that tnis
form of native self-government should be made legal.
Therefore we should like to suggest:-
( 1 ) That the natives be allowed to have selx-govern-
ment according to former custom. .
(2) That village councils have the right to appoint
or dismiss their luluais and tulbuls.
(5) That native teachers be not forbidden to be
members of the village council if the village
desires to have them as members, > i
(4.) Tnut the councils have the right of punisnment
for instances, forced labour for the good of
the community and corporal punishment ior
children and half grown hoys.
(b) That no individual present his grievance befor
the District Officer before it has been dealt
with in the village council and sub-district
council wherever it exists.
Rev Rlierl Might I be allowed to tell a story? It is a true
story of how the native councils work. In our district
there are S cirouits, over 1000 people to each circuib.
Ho do not distinguish between heathen and onrxotian.
The tribes have done away with sorcery, spirit-iear,
vendettas, etc. but it tales a long time. roup a,
group can be instructed. Now tor the story. In 1922 our
District Officer heard that a case of murder had *
The man ted had two wives and having quarrelled with one
had killed her. We all agreed that the matter should be
reported to the Government. The first step was ta<cen
36




the members of the native council were told that this
man would have to be brought before the Government xor
murder, and they brought him out without any ftree,.
moral power of the council was enough to bring Q
He came out and was awaiting the District Offic £ lve
arrest for a period of about 3 months. /vhe “ t . the
the matter was reported to him and he prepare,
man in for the court. Sut he was not enough ? h
murderer away. He had to send for boys. Tne wifeand^
think it would be good to send her over the sea. It was
true - she was with child - so of my own power I her
permission to go home, later on. when the District Officer
came and asked me for the woman he was told sae ma ® derer
sent home by the Senior and he was satisfied. The murderer
had been taken to Rabaul. He was away a long-time and at
length I heard from a police boy that he had died. _ malce
not know where the wife was and we Mr. Schultz
investigations. He found the woman and she was sent bacK
by the Government. On this occasion, I wrote to the Gove
ment asking would it not be good for those natives whoever
required as witnesses to be heard at home and tha ' . .
said should be written down in a report. said in
letter that the Dative Council brought in the murderer a
held him without any force - but had the Council ®
to be taken away over the sea, they would have hidden h!m away
in the furtherest mountains. Had the matter been d
by the Dative Council, they would not have kille , ,
formerly - a few strokes of the cane perhaps and he would
made to do road-mending. . ... the
I do not suggest that all cases should oe tried by the
Council hut this story shows what power the Cou^® I J ot a
such cases. I think there should be a difference between
whites and natives. About whites, I have instruc
white man is met the matter should be reported at once,
HO t nat 1 76S • ve
Dr. JlTolff You can find it in Africa too where the Council o
Cuiefs forms the prime jurisdiction. It is a lega ■
diction of course. But as far as I can unders an ,
are different on the Gazelle Peninsula and Dew Guinea. Her .
there are Jkuluais, on our side none. 0± course i e rhaps
have Councils the old men could settle some cases but
the Administration could arrange for the wn« to
here already the Luluais. Perhaps it would x b
institute some kind of sound jurisdiction.
Dr Vesters Read a paper
37




"Power of the Luluais as Magistrates"
Most observers are unanimous in stating that the Luluais
in general in their present state of ignorance and lack
of training, have not yet arrived at that stage when their
administrative and judicial powers could be extended.
This conclusion is based on the following reasons;-
Ao a rule, they have not a sufficient sense of duty and
responsibility and the other necessary qualities intimately
connected therewith, such as calmness, impartiality
courage.
There are, however, some remarkable personalities who,
in different surroundings, would be well qualified to
maintain their authority and rule their people, but who are
impotent to do so owing to the numerous points of contact
which exist between them and native views and dustoms. In
particular toe they swayed by personal and local interests
supported by wealth and power. But many have only a
vague idea of justice and the promotion of common prosperity
amongst the people: own personal interests and those
of their relatives or clans are the dominant principle which
guides them. Moreover, they lack that fearlessness which is
so necessary when exterior influences are at work against
them.
There is frequently a lack of c&mness.
In the "varkurais” or trials much depends on the circum-
stances of the plaintiff: if he happens to be a rich man,
and thus capable of bribing the luluai, the case is often
judged immediately ahd heavy penalties are imposed.
If on the contrary, he is a poor man and unable to reward
the magistrate handsomely, the caSe often lingers indefinitely
until it is entirely forgotten or, what is perhaps worse,
a decision is given against the plaintiff.
Tnore is frequently a lack of impartial!ty.
Tno interests of the family affect the decisions in many
cases: if, for instance, some member of the chief I family
is the plaintiff in a case of adultery the offence is some-
times punished with extreme severity: if uhe case occurs
in another family very little compensation is given.
Tuen there is the fear that certain parties may take
revenge: thus the secret societies are constantly dreaded
and in many cases these intimidate the luluais and prevent
a just trial.
Nov/ it is quite true that the District Officer cannot
possibly look after the administrative and judicial matters
of all the villages in his district. On the other hand
there is no doubt that the people can be ruled best by
their own luluais or magistrates, who thoroughly understand
both the mentality and customs of the natives.
38




Consequently the luluais should be given certain judicial
powers, which for the present should be limited and under
strict control. Later on, these powers could be extended.
The following suggestions may be worthy of
Consideration.
(a) Really bad luluais should bo dismissed from their office
and replaced by better ones. These latter could bo chosen
by the District Officer upon presentation by the Council,
in accordance with the wishes of the people freely expressed.
Information with regard to the fitness of prospective
luluais could bo had from the Mission Personnel,
(b) The luluais should be in possession of a'small code
containing a brief summary of their privelegos, rights, and
duties, such as the mailing and repairing of roads, the
obligation of Seeing that the villages and compounds be kept
clean and neat, the reporting of diseases and abuses, It
should also contain information with regard to the different
ordinances to be observed by the people; the manner in which
the luluais could help in census tailing, the procedure to be
followed in judging such offences as stealing, the damaging
of plantations, sorcery, slander and attempted adultery.
In order to assure as muon as possible impartiality in the
judgment of the more serious offences the luluai of the
delinquent should be entitled to call in the help of two
other "chiefs from other compounds or villages.
In order to guard against blackmail, the fines could revert
in part to the plaintiff, or, in the case of false accusation
to the defendant. The remainder could be handed over to the
District Officer and employed to pay the luluais a modest
salary. .
(c) The luluais should be obliged to keep a register or
record and to note therein the cases that have appeared
bofoie them, the names of the contending parties, the dates
of the trials and the fines imposed should be entered in these
registers, and these latter should be shown to the District
Officer in ais tour of inspection and signed by him,
(d) The luluais should be strictly controlled and period-
ically visited. All suspect cases judged by them should be
investigated. All persons should have access to the District
Officer in order that abuses may be reported, complaints
lodged and grievances redressed,
(e) Tue authority of the luluai should be strongly
supported by the Administration, but at the same time two
eventualities should be borne in mind
39




(l) Some luluais are extremely canning with regard to
the manner in which they behave themselves in tne
presence of the District Officer: in dealing with their
people they follow quite a different course, .
(£) In many village there are, what I may be allowed
to term, native advocates. These men are adepts in
representing a case to the District Of-iicer, an some
tiroes they intrigue against the luluai. If they
succeed in their'” endeavours they are generally revvarded.
if they fail they suffer no loss.
In both oases the tubfuls concerned could oe heard,
especially those of different clans or tribes.
At all cost the luluais should be protected against
any evil influences either frotn the part of individuals
or from the part of secret societies especially e
n g ü buan IT .
It is a fact that the fear of revenge or even _
menace of poisoning prevents justice being done in many
trials. This is a most important point, and the luluais
should be strongly advised to report to the competent
authority' any such cases of interference, iiuch
aggression, ifproved, should be severely punished.
(f) Luluais, and in.-a lesser degree tultuls, shoula
receive a certain training. Intelligent and honest
men should be chosen for these offices, but
tahin° uo duty they should receive let us say, a six
months’ course of instruction with regard to general
morals, duty, rights and common welfare, ouch practical
branches as hygiene, a;riculture, and court procedure
based on the ordinances, the examination 01 witnesses
and the imuosition of fines should also be included.
A good luluai is of invaluable assistance to tne
Government and a source of constant protection to he
people. . . ,
In order that the people should enjoy a ha ppy,
contented, and successful village life, it io absolutely
necessary that they have a good magistrate. Villages
thus favoured present few or novoroblems, while others,
where the people lack efficient leadership are a con
tinual source of trouble.
With the coming of the Missionary and the Government,
the appointment of village chiefs has vastly changed
Som what it was formerly. In the old days a man was
elected by the people to the position because he was their
leader in war. Vhad earned the right to be chosen
as their head by virtue of having proved himself the
most skilled amongst’..them in battle, he was elected by
the people because he was considered the most worthy, to
the office of Chief, frequently to-day village
magistrates are appointed and the peoplevJ^esStl that
little or no voice in the matter, with the result that
th° position is often filled by men who have no
legitimate right whatever to it and the people suxfer
in< 7 e°contend°it should always he the prerogative of the
majority of the people to select a man whom they desire
to be magistrate in their midst, duch a responsibility
is one that could well be left with them, one ilia
they would be deeply interested in and tame pleasure
40




in doing, It would - ive them to feel that they had some
part in their Government. It is really only they who
have the necessary knowledge who could make a wise
selection. Pro oably born and re red in the same place,
and daily taking his part in the village life of the
community every man in the village would be intimately
mown by the other men. they would best 'mow who
amongst their number was most fitted to be their head.
oo we asm that in the appointment of magistrates
the people be considered. It often happens when a
village is found to be without a magistrate or when a
magistrate requires changing that an appointment will
be made there and then, some magistrate 1 o assistant
called tultul and some pushing young man fluent in
”Pidgin TT or some otrier prominent Loan in the village is
given the position, The nomination is made by two or
three men who are keenly interested and while the people
are lined up generally more or less paralysed with fear,
they are asked in Pidgin in the presence of the magistrate
elect whether or no they support the nomination, 'Jhe
majority of them do not understand the uestion but the
interested few, tell them to answer TT Yos TT and the
appointment is made, though the Plan appointed is
possibly the last man who would have got the appointment
if the people had had a favourable opportunity of dis-
cussing- the appointment and making their own selection.
Tx-e Government is hoodwinked while to the majority of
the people the appointment means extortion and general
dissatisfaction, ouch a state of affairs exists in
many villages to-day.
Je would suggest as a remedy that when a magistrate
requires to be appointed, the people of the village be
given ample notice, and that they be requested to dil-
igently confer together with a v&ew to selecting the
one whom the magority thin.: would best serve their interests
Should District Magistrates be appointed it could be part
of the District Magistrate work to attend such meetings
for the election of village magistrates, in order to ensure
that the man elected was indeed the choice of the majority.
The value of such a system of sectional magistrates
would be, there would be more government of the people by
the people themselves and less government by foreigners,
which is something to encourage. ;/e feel too, it would tend
to better Government, ho matter how skilled a District
Officer may be in governing the people, and no matter how
long he has been in the country he cannot govern the people
liwe one of themselves. Only a native can understand tne
native mind and only one born and bred amongst the multi-
farious ramifications of native life and custom is
eligible to successfully adjudicate in matters affecting
such.
41




The majority of cases that come before the court have
to do with things of which the best foreigner has but a
very limited knowledge. Drom the nature of things he
nas to seek a lot of information more or less irrelevant
often through an interpreter by tae unsatisfactory medium
of pidgin English before he can come to a decision.
Oftentimes his informant aware of the Officer’s ignor-
ance tells just enough to suit his own purpose. *uth
the result that the oppressed are very often more
oppressed and vice and deceit are encouraged. Only the
natives themselves know what a lot of this kind of thing
goes on. Such corruption is impossible in a court
presided over by a capable native magistrate who is
already well-informed in the practices and customs of the
case and with these he deals. He is possessed of infinite
patience, and it is nothing for him to sit for hours on
nd before a crowded court sifting out every grain of
evidence before giving his decision which is invariably
accepted.
There are very few matters it is not possible within
the ability of good native magistrates to adjudicate in
and we think the Government will be wise to give the right
men more power rather than deprive them of the power they
have.
he would advocate the splitting up of districts or
sub-districts into sections, each of which to be under a
sectional magistrate who would also be the magistrate of
the village where he resided, oectional magistrates to
be appointed by the District Officer on the nomination
of the village magistrates in the section who would see
that only the best and the ablest man amongst them was
elected. Such sectional magistrates could be made
responsible for the good government of their sections and
for their services could be paid a small salary. The
duties of the sectional magistrate would be to see that
the section is properly governed and to give guidance and
help to village magistrates. One can easily imagine
occasions when difficult cases would have to be tried,
or when strong important men'in the village would appear
before the court on a charge, when the village magistrate
would feel he would like to have the support of the
sectional magistrate. The sectional magistrate would
also be a help to the people in that he would act as a
second court of appeal to the people who might think they
had not obtained justice by any decision of the village
magistrate*
The appointment of sectional magistrates would do away
with the practice so common to-day and &o rankling to
village magistrates of the people taking matters to mag-
istrates other than their own. nothingseems to enrage a
magistrate more than to see another magistrate trying a
case in his village without his consent, ouch a practice
should be prohibited. All matters coming under the
jurisdiction of a village magistrate be dealt with
by him. hppcial cases could be dealt with by the sec-
tional magistrate.
42




Sectional magistrates could wel. form a native council with
whom the Government could confer and with whom the overnment
•ould deal in all matters aff ctin; the people generally. Ho
ouch body exists at present. Tue people have little or no say
in the mailing of the laws that are to govern them. Consequently
unsuitable regulations are made, regulations that are not observed
and Government to some degree becomes a farce, hu think; the Gov-
ernment would be wise to take the native into its councils. Ho
nows his people well, and the kind of government they need and
we believe he has too great respect for the • overnment to take any
•undue advantage of the position a seat in the cou uils of the
country 'would give him, A native Council must come and we do not
think the present too early to make a beginning.
I suggest that in those areas where the people have been taught
to read, a handbook in the vernacular for the guidance of
magistrates as to the matters‘they have power to adjudicate in
methods of dealing with cases, sentences to be pronounced, fines
to be imposed, etc, and that in the compilation of such work the
h tive Council (if such be formed) be consulted.
ouch a handbook containing regulations under the IL tive
A'iministration Ordinance 1921/22 was published in 1923. .-/bile
this was not published e. for the use of magistrates it
was issued to them and Served as guides to taem 'with cases.
The book was availed of, so that one saw it met a much felt need
and we have often been asked for a copy since the supply ran out.
huoh a book could well be issued again. ,7o would suggest though,
that it be less technical and more practical than the former
and that in its compilation the natives be consulted.
criticism of the last book was that while a few of the sentences
were somewhat severe the majority were far too lenient.
Tithin the cover of the same book could be included instruction
to magistrates relative to roads, cleaning of coconut groves, etc.
It could be made a book of general information containing aUI it
was necessary for the magiscrate to mnow in his capacity as
Government servant. Huch a nandbook would . reatly help him in
his work and give him authority in approaching the people on
all matters the book contained.
•/e think it would greatly assist magistrates and the Government
and the cause of law and order generally if a good courthouse,
open, were erected in every village where oases could be heard in
all weathers, and where Government notices in the vernacular could
be published and posted up from time to time, Tnere is no such
provision at the present time, the court being held in the open
wherever the magistrate may decide, ouch a court house would
be a kind of sanctum sanctorum for the magistrate and would be
used by the .District Officer when collecting taxes, or other
occasions when it was necessary for him or the Medical Officer to
meet the people. It would be a recognised rallying ground of the
people to receive any instructions issued by the Government from
time to time.
7e would suggest that once a week there be a compulsory parade
of all the people before the village magistrate. The advantage of
such a parade would be, it would keep the magistrate in touch with
43




a ll his people. At present a man may - o for weeks
or months and his magistrate never see^him.
Certainly the magistrates beat the drum or blow the
conch shtell to assemble the people, but olten as
many stay away as attend. The magistrate loses
contact with those who are under him. The
occasion of a parade would be used to give the
people any instructions regarding attention to
roads, cleaning of plantations and otlier matters
afiecting the life and well being of the people.
Opportunity could be taken to attend to minor differ-
ences amongst them and trifling matters not worth
taking to a regular court could be smoothed out. It
would give the people an opportunity of discussing
with their magistrate anything they might have in
mind for their own betterment.
One advantage of such a parade would be that any
in the village who might be sick would be discovered.
Many people die each year or have to suffer severely
through their sickness or complaint not having been
reported in time, ouch people are loath to report
themselves while it would seem their relatives and
friends often take great pains to hide the cases
rather than to reveal them. Consequently it is fre-
uently happening that nothing is known of a case <6f
sickness or of a person having a sore until weeks are
passed and the patient is almost beyond recovery. If
there were a compulsory arade and roll-call of the
people every wee:: such oases of sicknees would be
known immediately and brought before the notice of the
medical orderly who would attend to the patient.
Opportunity could be taken of such a parade to inquire
what births and deaths there had been during the sreek,
the record to be made by the medical orderly according
to the requirements of the Vital Statistics form issued
by the Government for the purpose. The value of such
a record would be that frequently and regularly it
would be more reliable than the loose uncertain methods
often followed now in collecting figures.
Such weekly parades are held in some villa ges add
where properly conducted are proving of great
benefit to the magistrate and the police.
Mr Chairman It is now 12.30, Gentlemen, and the Conference will
be adjourned until to-morrow at 9.30 a.m.
44




Proceedings on 25/6/27
Fourth day of Conference.
At 9,30 the Chairman formally declared the Conference
re-opened.
Mr Chairman Before going on with oection 5, Gentlemen, I would
like to ask that dection 6 dealing with native Hducation
he held over until to-morrow morning so as to allow of
the Head Teacher T s attending. The matter now before the
Conference is dection 5.
Rev Gox 1 would ask the permission of the Chairman to read a
brief paper which 1 have prepared indicating in a
general way my views on the question to be discussed.
It is most desirable that the control of the people
should be through the native leaders who should have
author!ty to hear and adjudicate on all native tfoubifcs.
It is desirable because responsibility makes men,
if the people are not to be trusted with such responsio-
ility there is no hope of their ever rising in the
social scale of developing any sense of independence,
and it is inevitable they will decline, It is further
desirable because it is hopeless to expect .European
Officers to deal with the multitude of cases always
arising, and if a genuine attempt were made to have them
thus dealt with the coot would be enormous and certainly
prohibitive, .furthermore the native luluais are now
\ dealing as they have always been
accustomed to doing. It is true that it would appear
that in so doing they are acting illegally in view of
the Native Administration Ordinance 1921/22 but tney are
not aware of this aspect of the matter and the simple
fact is that if the luluais did not deal with these oases
they would be left unsettled because the number of
officials needed could not be provided.
It may be argued that while the Administration may
silently acquiesce in what it knows is being done
illegally, it could not take the responsibility of
formally authorising these men to exercise magis-
terial powers because they are not trained and tnere-
fore not fitted to action of a judicial nature. In
reply ih may be said in the first place that seeing that
the circumstances of the case render the system operating
necessary there surely can be no. reasonable objection to
an official recognition of the fact whion would of itself
make for order and discipline, and secondly and oi more
importance, the native leader untrained though he is, will
understand the native mind and therefore a native
much better than the white officials who do not know the
native language, and will be less likely to make mistakes
than oven the best trained official. may be admitted
frankly that justice is not always done by native
45




magistrates, sometimes because of laclc of a] ? d
sometimes from lach of judicial training, but can it be
claimed that justice is always done by white officials,
when cases are heard by them? Whites.will a3.ways be
handicapped by their ignorance of native _customs a
f'onseuuent failure to understand the native mentality
an? in seehing to impose the provisions of ordinances and
regulations framed according to civilised ideas will
often unwittingly do a great injustice. buch facts
serve to fill the native mind with a constant dis
and will most assuredly and effectively Prevent in
confidence on the part of the
authority which stlone can loi good r
SSW S«v e P oSuhtfa»f?o r ;ievt„t the abuses
which have frequently occurred in the past we sugg
his position, he will presumably thP ; ® a “ or
est influence, but where this man through old age or
through untrustworthiness is not suitable the peopi
V *SS5tSy forbidden.
(£) lathe kagiatrates should hear and
troubles in which only natives are. conc trespass
adultery, theft, sorcery, quarrelling deots ß>
Stasis: •
Sjinran S°the Disni" Officer who should deal
with the case.
46




(3) A record should be kept in a book provided for tne
purpose 01 all caseo dealt witin giving date, names
of parties, nature of charge, verdict, amount of Tin-
if any, and now fine disposed of, these records
being in tne native language, vox tne purpose ox
keeping such a record a native wuo can reta ana
write should be appointed to the native
magistrate. .
(4) To 'assist native magistrates and better equip tnem
for their responsibilities a course of simple
training should be provided by the Administration.
An Institution where men who could benefit by such
training and prospective magistrates could receive
a six months’ course would be of great assistance.
(5) A building not necessarily of European material
should be'erected in each village to serve as a #
Court douse. This building should not be walled in
on more than one or two sides. In it Government
notices could be posted and court cases oe neard,
in all weathers and it could be used by District
Officers when tax collecting or visiting the villages
for any other purpose.
(6) A native recorder should be allowed iOr each
magistrate. It will be the recorder’s duty to ma.ee
the records above referred to. , . ,
(V ) Native magistrates should be paid a fixed salary which
we ould suggest to be at the rate of £1 pex iwpn
for a copulation up to 100 controlled beyond that
10 /- per 100 or part thereof# amount would be
less than is now received by the native-magistrates
and would be covered by fines paid in to the
Administration. , . .
(8) The recorder should also be paid an allowance wmoh
might be on the basis of the number ox oases recorded,
say l/~ per case. ..
(9) pines;- hf.ere there is an injured party half tne
fine should be paid to such party, and tne remaining
half direct to tne in other oases
the whole ox the fine should be paid bo the
Administration. *
(10) District luluais should be appointed wnere men of
outstanding ability and influence can be secured and
such men should, he available for assistance to
village chiefs xi hen such assistance is desired.
47




Mr. I am quite in agreement with Mr e Cox, I think it most
Chairman desirable that Luluais should be given some magisterial
authority. Sometimes, of course, it would be necessary
for a white officer to take over the case* In Papua there
are no Luluais but they have a system of 11 Village Constables’ 1 .
Each constable is supplied with a pair of handcuffs but no
key -* he has no magisterial power - so that as soon as he
takes a prisoner it is necessary for him to bring him in.
The Constable f s main duty is the supervision of the village.
The scheme was working successfully. As Mr. Cox says we
should give the Luluai some recognition. The difficulty
is that of blackmail - many cases have come before me per-
sonally especially in the Kieta District. The Luluai
should be appointed by the people. Instructions have been
issued to District Officers that in appointing Luluais care
should be taken to ensure that the chief man in the village
is appointed. The Tul-tul is appointed by the Government.
District Officers have instructions that the Tul-tul should
not be of the same social group as the Luluai.
I would ask the Conference to consider, would it not be
better to appoint two Luluais instead of one as at present.
These could form a village council. They should be appoint-
ed by the people and should be of different social groups.
Even when appointed by the people the trouble is tha-t a
strong social group sometimes have their own man appointed.
As we already have native councils in Mo robe District
would it not seem advisable to have the same system of
councils here? Such a system should alleviate to some
extent the difficulties we have now. The scheme would be
applicable in certain districts only. Such districts as
were proclaimed by the Administrator would have to be well
under the control, before this can be done. Every island
in the Torres Straits has its the Chairman is the
white schoolteacher and the system works very successfully.
When I was Resident Magistrate at Daru, Judge Murray asked
me'to try and initiate it among the people of Mawatta, many
of whom could read and write English. Accordingly, I
started a Council on the same lines as Torres Straits, "but
it was not successful - it worked for about three months.
Then I found that they, the Mawatta people were fining
natives who came through their Territory to obtain salt
water, very heavily, and we had to abolish the Council.
I have just received two letters from the District Officer,
Manus, v/hich it might be as well if I read nows-
rrl beg to report that the above native was brought
before me charged with adultery, On the evidence I
convicted and sentenced him to 3 months imprisonment
with hard labour. I also deposed him from the office
of Kukerai, I took this step because I found on
enquiry that he had been making a habit of his hobby
and numerous husbands in his village had been seriously
annoyed in consequence, I considered that he had
abused the power given to him by his position and so
removed him from office”.
48




"I bog to report that on a patrol of the N 0.2 Road,
Manus, I found this man’s village to be in a dirty and un-
cared for condition and that part of the road for which
he was responsible to be overgrown with bush for a con
siderable distance.
11 After due enquiry I found that he had sufficient
able-bodied men to carry out his instructions had he
troubled to issue them and there were no complaints on
his part that his people had refused to obey him. _ 1
also found that he had been imprisoned for disobeying
an order of a District Officer to keep his village
deario I therefore decided to depose him and called a
meeting of the elders to elect his successor. chose
a man and I confirmed their choice as there appeared to
be no reason for not doing so.”
The thing to consider is the possibility of Luluais
abusing their power.
I would like the Committee to lay before the Confer-
ence an absolutely concrete scheme - either of Councils or
Luluais, as to fines, whether they are to be in money or
in kind and an absolutely detailed scheme from which an
Ordinance could be drafted.
X think that would be very good work. As regards
Flierl Councils; the best way of practical solution of the ques
tion of blackmail would be to have an open council -
public, open councils just as we have in New Guinea. No
clique has the power; the councils are open to everybody,
young men and even the women can attend. Everybody can
come and hear. Under these conditions the public opinion
is obtained and that I think is the best possible guard
against blackmail. They do not want any ’’Big Fella Luluai
and they do not want him to have any powers but they wish
him to be chairman (they have no chairs. 1 ), but have no
power whatever otherwise - blackmail is impossible.
How many members are there, Mr.Flierl?
Chairman
y o Oh, in small villages there is a small council, if the
Flierl District 18 large - anyone can come who likes. It deals
not only with matters such as road-mending etc., hut also
with the spiritual needs and other things.
(
Father 1 believe aprpposa.l was mentioned by Dr. Gilento for
TClr ßoiibaum » medical council to consist of -
The Luluai,
Tul-tul, _
Medical Tul-tul as representatives of the
Government,
Three others.
The latter three to be taken from different social
49




groupa. The Lulual cannot decide hut the Council must vote
Ind a two-thirds majority obtained. The Council having vo-
ted and disagreed the Luluai may decide«
2£ r# What was your suggestion as to paying Mr. Cox? £1 P er
Chairman month?
RevoCox Yes 9 and I might mention that that is considerably less
than the amounts now being received.
a They receive 1 0/- now (by not paying tax).
Chairman
Rev. Cox Yes, but frequently they receive numerous perquisites
amounting to a considerable sum in most cases. ,
If the suggestion that the Conference be asked^ to bring
up some concrete scheme which would supply the requiremen s
for an Ordinance is to be acted on, we might consider the
widcm of refraining from putting too much detail in to such
an Ordinance. It is advisable that we do not define tea
closely the matters with which the Magistrate or Council
should deal, and as to the amount of the fine to be imposed.
I think it would be advisable to leave that as far as
possible to be a matter for native control. The usages in
different areas are so different in places quite close
together, for instance the price paid for a wife in the
Duke of Yorks may be so different from the price paid on
the Gazelle Peninsula. The same thing applies to native
ideas in regard to punishments and how they should be meted
out. I think it is worth while considering the advisability
as to whether it would not be better not to attempt to de-
fine too closely such matters.
Mr. The question is that of the legality of such an Ordin-
Chairman ance. There may be some legal objection.
Rev. Cox Oh, yes, I quite understand that.
Mr. Mr.Flierl has suggested that the Councils should be
Chairman allowed to impose either corporal punishment or
labour. That is out of the question under the Mandate.
In Papua, provision is made in their Ordinance for boys
under l 6 to be birched. lam absolutely against putting
young boys in gaol. Some time ago I included this provi-
sion in a draft Ordinance. The Prime Minister s Depart-
ment threw it back at me and asked had I not read the
Mandate?
Plierl May I offer an explanation? Moral force, I mean.
Rev. Cox Great importance is placed on Native Customs. The
Administration is bound and limited in dealing with many
cases by the requirements of the Mandate that native cus-
toms shall not be interfered with. (I believe the exact
wording is "So long as they are not repugnant and contrary
to the principles of humanity".) We have as a result in
some cases a retrograde movement, e.g. polygamy. And
50




might it not be better that instead of demanding an
Ordinance that would deal with all these matters and give
natives power to administer native customs as has been
the case in the past.. This system of Luluais and Tul
tuls was introduced many years ago and natives are simply
making a blind of native customs and usages in dealing
with such cases amongst them as adultery and other
matters which occur from time to time; I think it would
be wise to continue a system something along these lines *
Native Districts are controlled by native authorities -
matters left in their hands and always to be subject to
review by the District Officer on appeal, so that irregu-
larities can be adjusted - including blackmail. It is
a matter of very great difficulty for us to sit down here
and try and draw up schemes and recommendations concern-
ing native life,
Rev ° I would seek to emphasise what Mr,Cox has said. If
Pilhofer. we wish natives to do something and to control their own
authorities, then we must allow them to do things accord-
ing to their own native style. As soon as we try to do
things in our European style then the thing is doomed to
failure. Y/e have had some notable progress in our own
Mission on the basis now being discussed and I think it
is due to the fact that we allowed the natives to do
things according to their own ideas, and if the Adminis-
tration gives them some new Ordinance in regard to self-
government we may be sure that the natives are capable
of it. Some weeks ago an authority on South Africa
wrote are natives, and therefore we must allow
them to act as natives*’. Natives, of course, make
mistakes,but then too there is a great difference between
a mistake made by the Councils or the Luluais and a mis-
take made by the District Officer. A mistake made by
the District Officer has far-reaching consequences. If
the District Officer is wrong, the blame will be put on
the Administration and a mistake made by a District
Officer cannot be rectified so easily as can a mistake
made by a native magistrate. And, regarding punishment,
I understand the Chairman has said that imposing corporal
punishment is against the Mandate, but can we not bear in
mind the great difference between the Administration
imposing such punishment and the natives administering it
themselves? Natives are a primitive people and so they
administer primitive punishment.
Tne matter of fines has been mentioned, I think
there is grave danger for natives to have such power in
fining the people instead of using the other punishments.
As far as I can see, if self-government and jurisdic*
tion be granted and an Ordinance is issued then we should
have two kinds of Ordinance - one for the people hereabout
and one for our people in New Guinea.
51




Our natives have a great longing for being allowed some
degree of self-government, and we should bear in mind this
longing and their respect for the self-government. I was
surprised to read in a paper some time ago a statement of
Governor Murray’s that some of his people had refused a
form of self-government saying that we whites could govern
them better than they themselves could, But, on the other
hand, would it not be a great advantage if we could get
the natives to take some interest in self-government? Our
natives were compelled to take steps by themselves and for
themselves because our Missions are in some cases 6 or 7
days’ journey inland. Some others are but a day’s journey
inland. And how our people have progressed by this
method some of you will have heard, and will have read the
report of Mr.Langwill who went through that area,
Mr. The difficulty, Mr.Pilhofer, is this. If there
Chairman has been corporal punishment administered and the Chief is
brought before the District Officer on a charge of assault,
the District Officer can do nothing but fine the Chief, If
we legalise Councils then we must legalise Corporal Punish-
ment, that is the difficulty.
Dr. I fully agree with the different proposals made by
Vesters Mr. Cox about native magistrates, and I am quite of his
opinion that it would be almost impossible to go into
details about this matter on account of the great differ-
ences which divide the Districts of this Territory, I
believe Mr,Cox mentioned all the essential points. It is
hoped that in these will be found the basis for an
Ordinance and the matter of Luluais. We find in several
other countries, e.g. Piji and the Dutch East Indies,
native Luluais operating very well. If is, of course,
necessary that the native village Luluai belongs to the
same district. They are a very important institution.
I cannot see what greater powers can be given them. They
operate very well in other countries and should be a means
of preventing blackmail in trials and other matters... I
believe we have here a very useful institution.
Mr. We have already provided in the Regulations for the
Chairman appointment of the Luluais of Districts.
Regulation 120, Section 2, Native Administration
Regs.s- "A District Officer may appoint Luluais and
Kukerais of specified portions of his District and such
Luluais or Kukerais shall have the chief authority in such
specified portions of the District. 11
That is practically what a District Luluai means. The
Village Luluais come under them. If the District Officer
gives orders to the District Luluai, he sees that the
village Luluais carry them out. In our standing instruc-
tions we have provided for the appointment of a District
Luluai wherever possible.
52




Rev. May I put one question about this difficulty? That is
Flierl about corporal punishment. We have had experiences in
some parts of New Guinea that the people had heard that the
District Officer had said that no Luluai had the right to
beat the people. But it would be against the principles
of humanity if we did not punish a man when he deserves it.
Is not the father to punish the son?
Mr. The only people who can administer punishment are
Chairman= parents and school teachers. The Criminal Code says«-
"It is lawful for a parent or a person in the place
of a parent, or for a schoolmaster or master, to use,
by way of correction, towards a child, pupil or apprentice
under his care such force as is reasonable under the cir
curns tances".
Father
Kirschbaum What is the difference between a Luluai and a Kukerai?
Mr. The.jc meartfthe same thing. "Kukerai 11 is specially used
Chairman in Kieta District.
Father Why not make them both the same, and use either one or
Kirschbaum Ihe other?
Mr.
Chairman "Kukerai" is the word in popular use in some Districts
Father
Kirschbaum I think it would be better if we used but one word.
Rev. Cox We will deal with that in Committee.
Mr.
Chairman Is there any further discussion, Gentlemen?
Rev. Cox I understand that the restrictions on corporal punish-
ment are not under the Mandate?
Mr. I believe they are in the Mandate, but I will lock in*-
Chairman to the matter.
Rev. Cox I do not think they are included in the terms of the
Mandate.
Mr. I ami under the ij'npression that they are, Mr. Cox. I
Chairman remember that some time ago the Japanese took exception to
the restrictions in the case of the Caroline Islanders.
Rev. Cox I think the regulations were an enactment of the
Australian Go ve rnme nt.
Mr.
Chairman I will look into the matter
53




Rev. If the natives used forced labour for punishment or if
Pilhofer the Administration made use of it for the good of the white
population, would the Mandate apply then?
Mr. If we were to frame an Ordinance, we could impose
Chairman forced labour as a punishment, but we would have to make it
legal by an enactment, Just as we do imprisonment * We could
not use the term n forced labour 11 . We are not allowed to
force natives to plant coconut groves for their economic
good - we can force them to grow food-stuffs, but not crops
for their own economic benefit.
Dr. As regards forced labour I think it would be a good
Wolff thing for the natives to make some plantations. The
District Officers could invite them to do so.
Father I would like to hear the opinion of the members of the
Mertens Conference about cases to be tried by Luluais. If I
understand Rev*Mr.Cox aright, then he is to try all cases
except murder, poisoning, etc. What about rape? Is that
the only one to be tried by the Central Court, Rabaul?
I would like to know really what cases the Luluai is to
try and what ones he is not to. I think the District
Officers and the Central Court preserve some special cases
for trial by them, and it would be good to hear what cases
are tried by the Government.
Mr. I take it that there are certain cases which come
Chairman within the scope of the criminal code - e*g* murder, rape,
stealing over £5 and 1 would think that the cases to be
tried by Luluais would be those enumerated by Mr. Cox.
Would you mind reading them, Mr. Cox?
Rev. Cox No, I don’t mind doing that, Mr. Chairman, but I don’t
for a moment suggest that I have covered them all:
adultery, theft, sorcery, quarrelling, debts, trespass,
disobedience of legitimate orders.
Mr. (Perusing Regulations) The Regulations under the
Chairman Native Administration Ordinance cover most native crimes,
e.g. prostitution, assault, etc.
Dr. May I say one word more? I think it would be very
Wolff good to instruct the Council that in cases of stealing
besides being punished, the offender should be compelled to
make restitution of the value stolen.
Mr.
Chairman I think Mr. Cox has suggested that.
Mr. Cox Yes, that would be in accordance with Native Custom.
Should there be no further discussion, Gentlemen, the Com-
mittee is saddled with the responsibility of drawing up
’’findings” for the Conference, and it is to be hoped that
-H - - • >, •
3 a r n n i.. v
54




those findings will not provoke further discuss ion* On
the point we have raised could we not have a little fur-
ther discussion? I am not attempting to advise the
Conference on cases that may he dealt with hy a Native
authority. Is there any reason that the suggestions we
have made to the Conference that the natives he allowed
to apply their own rules and regulations as far as
possible should not he adopted? lam delighted to hear
that in New Guinea? native control is so highly developed.
I think it is something that should he encouraged. Would
it he possible for a copy of the Mandate to he placed he- 5
fore the Conference?
Mr. Yes, they could he obtained from Central Administra-
Chairman tion.
ReVoCox I think it would help us to know there is nothing in
the Mandate which would make it impossible for us to say
that the Administration could not give the people autho-
rity to use corporal punishment or for them to take the
whole control of Native Affairs into their own hands.
So that it would not he possible for a man punished hy the
Luluai to bring a charge of assault against the Luluai.
It would help us to know that we were not doing something
"ultra vires'*.
Mr. I think it may he in Vol.l "Mandate of German
Chairman Possessions". I shall let the Conference have it tomor-
row .
Rev. In cases that have to he dealt with hy the Central
Blierl Court, would there he any possibility of native witnesses
being heard nearer their own home and their evidence
written down?
Mr, No, it cannot he done legally. But,for years, I
Chairman have been advocating a Circuit Court to overcome this
difficulty. In Papua, Governor Murray travels round and
hears every case on the spot. As I say, I have advocated
that a similar procedure here for some time, and I think
that there is every chance of its being done in the very
near future. There is every likelihood of another Judge
being appointed. It would have come about almost imme-
diately hut for the fact that Mr. Phillips is going to
travel investigating native claims under the Land Regis-
tration Ordinance. In certain cases - well, in Kieta for
instance, it was found recently that certain land had
been planted which was found to he outside the area pur-
chased. The owners had to re-purchase, and I think they
paid the natives £so. lean assure the Conference that
the matter is "on the tapis".
Rev. Cox I think the Conference should not pass on without
expressing some opinion on that point.
55




I think we might take. It unddr this heading#
Ghairman
TV.v Cox I would suggest that the Conference might indicate
Rev. Cox its opinion that such method would he the proper thing.
Mr< Yes, I would like the Conference to do so.
Chairman
D In this connection 1 would like to ask would it he
Vesters possible for the proceedings to be accelerated and for
trials to he fixed for a certain day?
called in from a long distance for trial - then the
matter is postponed. Could not something he done so
that the natives do not have to stay a long time in
Rabaul? I think that by such an institution the number
• of cases will he diminished. Could not the
Officer he instructed that a definite day is fixed, y
Wednesday or Thursday? Those concerned in a contested
case could then he heard on such definite days. 1
believe that such an arrangement will be of great advan
tage to the natives*
Mr . Most cases are brought on by a summons on which the
Chairman date of hearing is stated. But, of_ course, if e
native cannot read, he should be advised of that date.
£ i n ]j ew Guinea we have connection with Rabaul every
Wolff six weeks. If a native comes in from far away he may
take a long while to reach ladang where he has to wait
for a further t\vo or three weeks for the steamer. he
loses much time, as much as five months so ; ae times, be-
fore he reaches home again, and, in the meantime, he is
unable to plant his garden and in consequence is short
of food when he does return. They have coapl ined to
us and said that when in Rabaul, they have not been al-
lowed to go along to the Mission places but had to stay
in Rabauland work like prisoners.
Mr. I don’t think they are compelled to work as prison-
Ghairman ers, Dr. Wolff. They may work if they choose and they
are paid for so doing. The worst aspect of bringing
witnesses here is that in many cases the Dis nc
Officer reduces the charge to obviate the necessity of
sending witnesses into Rabaul#
Rather I would like to give an example of what has actually
Kirschbaum happened. Not long ago, a case occurre wIC lo a wprp
brought up before the Central Court. The people were
right away in the central ranges of New Guinea. The
Kiap brought them down to Ambunti, where they had to
wait six weeks because the boat had not come back.
at Aitape, they had another long wait before the s
came# It was over six months before they bac .
Chairman I have known longer periods than six months.
56




Father Ever since, when the District Officer comes to that
Kirschbaum village,there is no one in the village. Another P° in
I would like to mention is the procedure of police coys
in bridging in witnesses. There are great abuses at
present in handling cases. Is there no written proce-
dure as to what a police boy should do? How should he
deal with the people?
Mr. All police boys are instructed by the District
Chairman Officer as to the procedure they are to adopt in making
arrests. But if they get away from white control this
procedure may not be carried out. I think we expect too
much of police boys - they are really only savages in
uniform. Here the Superintendent of Police instructs
them twice a month.
D r , When police boys are sent out could it not be the
Wolff procedure to give them a signed notice? In cases where
we Missionaries feared an abuse of power on the part of
thp. police boys we could compel them to produce this
paper and ensure that no abuses were taking place.
Mr. I think that matter came up before. It is of
Chairman course a matter for District Administration. The
Criminal Law was amended some time ago; the Law now
admits of the arrest of natives without warrant.
Hev. We are always receiving complaints of abuse of power
Elierl on the part of the police boys.
Mr. I am afraid we are getting away from the subject,
Chairman Gentlemen.
Rev.
Pilhofer May I raise the question of taxes?
Mr. Ho, I don’t think so.
Chairman
Rev. Cox Well, we understand that the discussion can only be
closed for the present - tomorrow morning we will have the
Mandate.
Mr. Yes, I will ask the Crown Law Officer or Central
Chairman for it. Is .there any further discussion,
Gentlemen?
Father „
Kirschbaum Yes, as to duration of term of office of the Councils
Mr*
Hargetts Cannot the Tul-tul resign?
Mr. Yes, but he can be re-appointed at once.
Chai man
Mr.
Margetts Against his will?
57




Mr. Yes, but there is an amendment going through to the
Chairman effect that a Luluai, Tul-tul or Medical Tul-tul can re-
sign If sufficient notice be given to the District
Officer, I have discussed the matter with the Crown
Law Officer and he is of the same opinion as I myself.
The medical Tul-tul at Madang wished to resign and make
a contract and Dr, Brennan would not let him. Regulation
121 of the Native Administration Ordinance 1921-1922 says;-
"District Officers shall appoint such natives as they
think proper to be Medical Tul-tuls of tribes and
villages",
Rev,.Cox What will the amendment be?
Mr. It will give power to resign on giving certain
Chairman notice. He cannot "throw his cap in" at any time he
pleases. He must give notice.
Rev. Cox The Medical Department will no doubt object to that.
Mr.
Chairman I think not. Medical assistants will be appren-
ticed.
Rev,Cox And therefore unable to resign.
Mr.
Chairman Yes.
Rev. Cox Has Rather Kirschbaum any suggestions to make as to
the procedure in the event of a Tul-tul wishing to be
relieved?
Rather It would meet the case if they were able to resign
Kirschbaum on giving notice and not forced to retain the office by
the District Officer against their will. I have known
Tul-tuls who have mentioned to the District Officer that
he wished to resign but as he was a good man the District
Officer did not want to get rid of him and so he was a
Tul-tul until his death two months ago. I do not think
that was right.
Mr.
Chairman I think that would have been an isolated case.
Rather
Kirschbaum I hope so.
. Whilst at Kieta, I never raised any objections to
Chairman Tul-tuls resigning.
In connection with Jurisdiction. It would be advis-
Rlierl able for criminals, when they have to be hanged, not to be
hanged in public as is done now. In the old times it was
not done before the public, only in the presence of a few
prisoners. One case was that of a chief who having seen
a hanging thought he would show the people how it was done,
and in so doing managed to hang himself.
58




Mr, I don’t agree with you. Hanging is a very gruesome
Chairman and impressive ceremony and should be carried out with
proper solemnity and with a proper scaffold - not just a
rope slung over a tree and then cut down. I know from
my own experience in Buin what a great effect it has
upon the people. The case I am referring to, which oc-
curred during the military occupation, was that of a
professional murderer and really I don’t think the man
should have been hanged and I did my best to get him off.
The office is handed down from father to son. He ad-
mitted to thirteen killings but it was simply a hereditary
office. The hanging took place before about 3>ooo °r
4,000 people of the village. The Marist Mission
Fathers mentioned to me afterwards what a great effect
the hanging had upon the people. Is there any further
discussion. Gentlemen? The Conference will adjourn for
10 minutesc
Mr. (At 11.30 a.m.) I declare the Conference to be re-
Chairman opened. One of the subjects for discussion was Education
and I have asked that this be held over until tomorrow
so as to enable the Head Teachers to be present. The
next subject is ’’Child Welfare” and as Br.Cilento has
just telephoned that he cannot possibly get down I would
ask the Conference that that matter, too, be held over*
We can go on with the subject of ’’Native Marriages”.
Rev Cox Under Education, might there not be some things in
which the teachers are not able to assist us?
Mr. There might be. We will therefore pass on now to
Chairman Sec. 6 Native Education, and I would ask the Conference to
deal only with matters that will not interest the teachers.
With regard to the section relating to attendance of
natives at Missions, I have to advise that the Ordinance
is now before the Advisory Council. One section provides
that a native may attend the Mission with his own consent
and the consent of his guardian.
Rev. Cox Regulations can be brought in without being sent
South?
Mr. Yes, an Ordinance cannot be amended but Regulations
Chairman can be brought in - subject to repeal by the Governor-
General 0
Rev. Cox That means that finality is not in the hands of this
Administration?
Mr. No, but we can bring regulations into force here and
Chairman they become Law until they are repealed.
Rev. Cox Might I suggest that the proposed Ordinance be put
before the Conference for our information?
Mr.
Chairman I would have to obtain permission to do that.
59




Rev. Cox It would be useful for us to have that information.
Any comment could be left out but it might help us in cur
f indings•
Mr. The Draft Ordinance may be amended.
Chai man
HeVoCox Yes, but I want to be quite clear as to my sugges-
tion. I don’t want to suggest that the Conference
should criticise the Ordinance as such. But if we have
it before us it will help the Conference and our findings
would be on the same lines.
Mr. It is out of my hands now, and I would have to obtain
Chairman permission from the Deputy Administrator.
Rev. Cox What I mean is, that we would like to have it present-
ed to the Conference. I mean it would simplify the work
of the Conference.
M r • Yes, but we will still be discussing this matter to-
Chai man morrow. The subject will be open to discussion.
May I ask you about the matter of returns? School
Pilhofer returns. Is it the intention of the Administration to
continue the present system?
-N" 0 ? a H we want to know is the number of teachers and
Chairman children.
Rev. Cox In what way will it differ from the returns sent in now
r ° . # Now you have to send in the names of the teachers and
Chairman children. In future we will want the numbers only.
■^ r# Before we had to send in the names and numbers of
Vesters children attending our schools only.
M r • Yes, High Schools only. The Mission will have to give
Chairman the teachers some form of certificate to cover their remis-
sion from taxation.
Rev. Cox 0h ? yes, it is necessary for some form of certificate
so that each student and teacher will be able to
so in fact.
Mr.
Chairman Read a definition from the proposed new Ordinance of
”student”.
Rev. Cox That is only the proposed definition. I think we will
contest that. We could point out several objections.
Mr.
Chairman That is the proposed definition.
Rev. Cox That, of course, is a matter which we should not dis-
cuss without the head teachers.
60




Mr, Yes, perhaps it would be advisable to leave this
Chairman Native Education Section until tomorrow.
Rev. Cox Yes, I think so„
Mr• We might take the subject of "Taxation 11 for discus-
Chairman sion.
R 0y o I was very pleased to hear Dr.Cilento speak of the
Pilhofer introduction of a scale of taxes. Some people are so
wealthy that they are well able to pay a tax of £1 per
year, others would find it hard to pay more than 1/~•
It is now very difficult for some of our people to earn
enough money to be able to pay the 10/- each year.
There is no difficulty for those natives who have small
plantations to earn the 10/-, they can earn it easily,
but we have, of course, our coastal area which is very
dry - very poor and the people' are unable to pay the 10/-
each year. Now there are the Mountaineers who do not
pay any taxes. Our people are always indebted to the
hill people. The hill people could, I think, pay 5/-
but we cannot pay 10/- though we are willing to pay 5/
they often say. As far as I know the Administration
does not like to make scales in taxation. But they have
it in Papua and therefore I would ask you, Mr,Chairman,
whether it is not possible for us to have it here.
Mr, Personally, I am in favour of a graduated tax, but
Chairman the Administration is not. The policy is that if a boy
can’t pay 10/- then he can’t pay anything, but I myself
am in favour of a scale. That could be effected by a
small amendment of the Ordinance, similar to the section
relating to the Education Tax where the District Officer
has the power to remit this tax at his discretion. I
think that, if we had a similar section in the Ordinance
re Head Taxes, it would meet the case. If the District
Officer thought the natives could not pay 10/- he could
accept say 2/- or 3/~° Many District Officers do that
without any legal authority,
Mr, I have prepared the following papers-
Margetts "We would suggest that natives recently come under control
should not be expected to pay taxes immediately, but that
they be given a period of exemption, and that when taxing
does commence it be on a gradual scale - mounting up a
little each year until the maximum is reached for the
District, Only natives who are deriving revenue from
the work of their hands can be expected to pay taxes.
People who have no coconuts or little or no market for
their garden produce or for their fruit or other indus-
tries cannot be on the same level as those who are enjoy-
ing these benefits. Neither can they be expected to pay
the same amount of tax. While for one man it requires
no effort whatever to pay the tax, for another, it means
selling many heavy baskets of food from his garden and
carrying them long distances. The present head-tax is
61




not toe hard, but it inflicts something of an injustice
on others who have not these means of revenue and has
the effect of keeping natives back from coming under
control.
We feel it would be a wise policy on the part of the
Government to encourage new people to come under control
if it were definitely stated that for a period of years
such natives would be exempt from taxation, and that
when their taxation did commence it would be on a gradual
scale mounting up a little each year until the maxhimm
for the District was reached, understanding that the
maximum would be determined by the opportunity the people
had of earning revenue.
Hev. Some of my own people of Village Island, our Mission
Flierl Station, Sio, about 70 miles north of Finschafen, have
complained very much of the method of tax collecting.
It is only an island dwelling, and the village is a
large one - about 800 people - they have no opportunity
of earning money and have not many opportunities of
making copra. To pay their taxes, the only money they
have is that earned by* contract boys who bring their pay
back to the village. Last tax time the boys had very
little money and they said "How can we pay the taxes?’
They are very poor and they are not able to pay the tax.
Mr.
Chairman What was the name of the Island, Mr .Flierl?
Rev.
Flierl Village Island, our Mission Station, Sio.
Mr. Is there not a big reef there? Cannot they collect
Chairman trochus shell?
Rev.
Flierl No, I don’t think so.
Dr. About collecting taxes, I will give a case. There
Wolff are some islanders who must sometimes go and trade for
their own benefit. Once they had asked the District
Officer what time he would be coming to collect the taxes.
He said he thought about two months therefrom. The people
went back and set out for remote places in their canoes.
On a Saturday or Sunday about a month later, they received
word at the village that the Kiap would come for the
taxes on the following Monday and the people were afraid
that he would arrive and they would be unable to pay the
taxes, all their men being away. I said to them "The
Kiap will not oblige you to pay the tax”, but I could not
persuade them and they asked for our launch so that they
might go and bring the people back. I lent the launch,
the people came back,and on Monday the taxes were paid.
The procedure is to send a police boy along the coast
Chairman to give the people due notice.
Father
Hirschbaum Yes, but the people are far away.
Mr.
Chairman Well, I think that is how it is done here, Mr.Margetts?
62




Mr.
Margetts Yes.
Father Another thing I wish to speak about is the coliec-
Kirschbaum tion of taxes and inspections on Sundays.
Rev*Cox It would be a very distinct advantage if the time
for collecting taxes can be given definitely. Another
matter came under my notice recently. For some reason or
other? shortage of officials? I believe - collection was
not made until the end of the Financial Years two months
later the tax for the succeeding year had to be paid.
Natives are very primitive people and they kno little
of making preparations. They live from hand to mouth
and in the matter of obtaining money for the payment of
taxes they usually do not begin to get in the money until
the tax is due. I hope that the time is near when there
will be a regular month for each village. So that the
people will know definitely just when the taxes have to
be paid. Then again? with regard to the collection of
taxes on Sunday. It should be forbidden for officials
to make tax collections on a Sunday. The feelings of the
people are trampled on and all the work of the Mission
made harder. It is being done too frequently with no
regard to the feelings of the natives. At the time when
the people should be? and want to be? at Service? the
District Officer arrives for an inspection and to collect
taxes.
Mr. I quite agree with you there. Ido not favour the
Chairman collection of taxes on Sunday unless there is some very
good reason for the collection to be made on that day.
In regard to fixing a day of collection? circumstances
may arise that would make it very difficult to do so.
At present? the Administration is handicapped through
lack of staff. A District Officer may lay down and set
out a regular programme for the collection of taxes in
his District, then when he is ready to set out perhaps a
murder is reported and the work held up for months.
Emergencies which are always arising make it almost im-
possible to adhere to a fixed routine - so that it is very
hard to lay down a hard and fast rule. Should you lay
down a fixed date and then be unable to proceed on that
date, the effect on the native mind is very serious.
Tax collection should be made at yearly intervals. If a
tax is collected in December then there should be no fur-
ther collection until the following December, sc that the
people may be given a chance to get the money ready.
{Heading the Ordinance) The Administrator has power to
reduce the tax. Section 17 of the Native Taxes Ordinance
says that;- 11 The Administrator may by order remit the
whole or any part of the tax in any Financial Year and
such power of remission may be exercised in favour of
either individuals or districts”.
Rev. Cox Then I take it that in odoing so he would make his
decision cover certain Districts?
Mr
Chairman Or Subdistricts.
Rev, Yes? but he has not instructed the District Officer to
Cox collect less than 10/-.
63




Mr. No , but certain District Officers are doing it, I
Chairman think the matter should rest with the District Officer»
The District Officer .-.could remit part of the tax and I
think such discretionary power would meet the case. Two
days ago 9 the Baining matter was spoken of and I think
that a wrong impression exists.. The plea was that it was
necessary for the women to carry those heavy burdens down
to the coast to enable the men to pay taxes. We found on
investigation that this was not so, and that the men of
the village were simply making use of the women on this
plea. The question of taxation was simply an excuse to
make the women carry the taro to the coast, I suggested
that the natives should be collected together, and told
that the tax would be remitted, but if the women were
again made to carry heavy burdens the tax would be re-
imposed.
Rev. Cox You say the matter of remission should be left to
the District Officer, I take it that that is supplemen-
tary,
Mr. Yes, I might say, Mr. Cox, that whenever a District
Chairman Officer has recommended that the tax be remitted, this
has been done.
Rev. I know several cases .where the District Officer has
Pilhofer remitted the tax, but I am still of opinion that it
be better if there were fixed amounts. Now in our
hinterland, the District Officer usually takes any amount
the people can pay. One person may pay 5/~s> another 8/-,
another 10/-, but there is great danger of the people
being demoralised because every person will try to give
as little as he can. Even if he is able to pay 10/- he
will try and bring it down. For such areas there should
be a scale of say 5/"° I think that would be better.
When new areas are taken into taxation, they should be
given notice a year before. In some cases, it has hap-
pened that villages which have never paid taxes before have
been called upon by the District Officer to pay taxes one
day without any notice,
Mr, I think that is an exception. Most District Offic-
Chairman ers tell the people, if he thinks they can pay, that
next year they must pay the tax. I think yours is an
isolated case.
Rev,
Pilhofer Yes,
Rev. Sometimes old men and sometimes young boys have to
Plierl pay. Is it not possible to make regulations about that?
Shortly before we left, I had a complaint, taxes were
due in another three months and had only just been paid
for the last year. They said it would be very difficult
for the people to find the money.
64




Mr. It is set down in the Ordinance that if a man is
Chairman 11 able bodied” he must pay* I think we must leave the
matter to the discretion of the District Officer*
Father I would ask is there not a definite age for natives
Martens to be taxed? ”Able bodied” is not, I think 9 satisfac-
tory*
Mr*
Chairman II o *
Rev* Cox Hot for the boys?
Mr* Taxable boys should be fit for work under the
Chairman Native Labour Ordinance*
ReVoCox Under the Native Labour Ordinance there is a fixed
age.
Mr *
Chairman Yes? it is proposed to raise it*
Dr*
Vesters To what age?
Mr*
Chairman 14 years 5 I think*
Re Vo Cox Can we not have something definite as to how soon a
boy becomes liable for tax?
Mr. I shall read the relative sections of the Native
Chairman Taxes Ordinance. Native Taxes Ordinance, Section 2,says
”Native means any aboriginal native of the Territory,
but does not include any person who is not a full
blooded aboriginal native”*
Rev. Cox Where does ”able bodied” come in?
Mr*
Chairman Section 13? which deals with exemptions, sayss
’’Natives who in the opinion of the Officer collect-
ing the tax are unfit for work”.
Rev. Cox It would be an undoubted advantage to have the age
set down* For example, the age at which boys can be
recruited. The District Officer has taxed some very
small boys again and again*
Mr. Personally, when I was District Officer I fixed the
Chairman taxable age, at the age when a boy reached the stage of
puberty*
ReVoCox I would suggest that under the Section Native Taxes
the boy be exempted until he reaches the age at which he
is liable to be signed on,
Mr.
Chairman Is there any further discussion. Gentlemen?
65




father I have still another question., Vhat about the ex-
Kir schbaum emption of the father of a number of children?
y r ° That exemption is being made use of more and mo re» I
Chairman would like to see a system of bonuses. In Papua* bonus
day is quite a 51 big day" 3 but the trouble is they may
bring along someone else’s children..
ReVoCox Is there a bonus for every child?
Hr.
Glialn n Over and above four* I think.
.- ReVo _ the reduction of taxes is left to the District
Pilhofer Officer trouble will arise because the District Officers
are frequently changed. How* one District Officer might
be willing to allow of the reduction of the tax to some
thing lethan 10/- while another may think otherwise and
insist on the payment of 10/-. That is where hardships
come in.
r ° > if we leave it with the Administrator he would
Cnairman still be in the hands of the District Officer,, He 9 himself,
wouid not know the circumstances and would be advised by
the district Officer, you cannot eliminate the personal
element of the District Officer. *
Rev. Cox not be advisable that in such a case where
the District Officer has recommended and the Administra-
tor-approved of the remission of the tax it should be a
matter that would hold and not be one that could be re-
vised and altered by the District Officer on his own
authority?
ihat is what I would like. What I would like to
suggest is that if taxes are reduced in certain areas the
reduction should be for all the people not a reduction
ior some and not for others,
Yes> 1 thlnk the .District Officer should say that
®_Y er y Y 13,11 sna ll pay either say 5/“ or a fixed sum. If
there is no further discussion, Gentlemen, the matter
will be placed before you in due course.
Rev ‘ Gox . ®® fo Y e we ad J° urn > the Committee of Findings has been
ashed to draw up their Findings for the Conference. This
involved a good deal of work on the part of the members.
'We want our work to be satisfactory as far as possible so
as to expedite the work of the Conference. Now we have a
Stenographer taking notes of the proceedings here, would
it not be possible for typed reports of the proceedings
each day to be placed before the Committee?
Chainran f • Pcdnted , cu t to Mr. Cox the difficulty of having the
Cnairman typing done in time. The Stenographer first of all
transcribed his notes and_ then his typed copy had to be
read over and corrected where necessary. Consequently, as
he reports ran into about 17 and 18 typed pages daily, it
was a matter of impossibility for the final typed copies
to be made available in time. It was not possible either
to secure wax sheets.
At 12.30 p.m.the Chairman declared the Conference
adjourned until the morning cf 24th June.
66




Proceedings of the. Conf.eren_c_e_
Fifth Day.*.. 24th 19.22.
At 9.35 a.m. the Chairman declared the Conference re-opened.
H r> The matter before the Conference this morning is
Chairman Section 6 of the Agenda Paper - Native Education
Then proceeded to read a Draft Ordinance.
Those are the two proposed amendments- The subject
"Native Education" is now open for discussion- Will you
open it, My Lord? (To Bishop Vesters)
Dr
Vesters Requested Rather Lakaff to read the following paper,-
"A few rem_ajd^s_ . 0
The natives of these islands in general are capable
of making progress in the various branches taught in e
primary schools of Europe- Thus in our catechist school
at Taliliqap we qre quite satisfied with the progress of
our students in such subjects as English, Geography,
Natural Science, Religion and Mathematics-
However, let me remark that this last mentioned be
branch is the great stumbling block for very many- It may
of interest to note that their knowledge of the various
flowers, plants and trees that grow profusely in the bush
is really astonishing-
Most of the students are endowed with excellent
memories and are capable of learning long passages by
heart in an incredibly short time, and most of them, too,
excel in handwriting.
Native teachers can help a great deal in the moral
and intellectual elevation of the pupils, and, bearing
this fact in mind, I am convinced that the schools in
which these teachers are prepared should be looked on
with favour by the Administration- .
Cur school at Talilqap shelters boys from New Britain,
New Ireland, Manus and several smaller islands, and these
students drawn from various tribes, are taught in a common
language- the language of the Blanche Bay Districts- I
believe that these boys when they return as teachers
their homes will be of immense value to the Administration
in the government of the colony, as they will be able to
teach their people the advantage and necessity of Euro-
pean culture, and because of their knowledge of English,
Besides an elementary instruction in English,Geo-
graphy,etc- our boys receive a practical training in
agriculture under the guidance and supervision of a
skilled teacher. They are obliged to work for two hours
every day in the plantation which helps th provide them
with food, and, in their free time, they are given every
facility to cultivate vegetables for their own use- Each
student has a small plot in which he is at liberty to
plant flowers ,shrubs,fruit-trees, or vegetables as he
chooses- . .
Such manual work is a great aid to the physical de-
velopment of the boys, and helps them to form habits of
industry and labour- - Rather J* .Lakaff ,M,S. C.
Catechist School, Talilqap-
67




He Vo Read the following paper -
Margell s ”Go verumen t A_s_s_i_s_t_an_ce_ to Miss ion Vi^llage. Schoj)ls 1 '
Up till recent years all the native education the
country has been given by the Mission and solely at tiieir
expense, with the result that today in many parts of the
Territory there are thousands of people who are well able
to read and write their own tongue, Education is being
recognised as one of the greatest factors in race devel-
opment o What this has meant to the people is hard to
estimateo Education makes a strong appeal to most of
them and one of the most encouraging signs of the times
is the keen desire on the part of hundreds of young men
to acquire knowledge,
Wow the Government has come to realise that it is
part of its duty to educate the natives, the Missions
are looking to it to assist them, especially in the edu-
cational work they are doing in the villages. Scattered
all over the area occupied by the various Missionary
Societies are hundreds of native pastors who also act as
village teachers„ Most of these are trained men. We
realise, however, how very inefficient even some of these
men are and the criticisms one hears occasionally of
their work are not altogether without foundation. But
it is largely owing to the efforts of the native teachers
that enlightened knowledge has spread so in the village
and the fact that today thousands in the country can read
the Bible, and can .read and write and do simple arithmetic
is some evidence of the value these men are to the com-
munity.
These men would be of greater service to the country
if there could be secured for them a regular attendance
of scholars at their schools. Today, attendance is very
unsatisfactory. Frequently, the school bell rings in
vain - not a scholar appearing to go to school. On other
occasions, only a few attend. It is often left to the
children themselves whether they attend or not. If a
scholar does not wish to go to school (and naturally this
often happens) he stays home. Many parents are absolute-
ly indifferent. They never send their children to school.
Others will tell their children to go, but do not see that
they obey, 3 while others again will take their children
during school hours to help in the gardens. Very often
it is the chief who is responsible for the unsatisfactory
attendance. Many magistrates have the impression that,
because a mission teacher is in charge of the school,
anything to do with the school is a mission matter and not
a matter affecting the Government of which he is the
representative, so he holds aloof from it. In some dis-
tricts, in his zeal as village magistrate, he will have
the children during school hours working on the roads. It
sometimes happens that such a practice on the part of the
chief is brought about by the unsympathetic attitude of a
Government official towards the schools.
While perhaps the time is hardly ripe for a system of
compulsory education to be introduced here, as exists in
civilised countries, we feel the Government would assist
68




the cause of education greatly if it incorporated in the
laws of the country that every child up to a certain age
residing within a reasonable distance of a village school
must attend such school and that parents who neglect send-
ing their children to school? will be punished? and that
it shall be regarded as one of the first duties of a vil-
lage chief to see that all the children regularly attend
school*
It would impress the people that it was the desire of
the Government that the children should attend school regu-
larly? if the Government took it upon itself to provide a
kind of leaving certificate* Such a certificate would be
something for the children to work for? something for them
to treasure* A Leaving Examination of this nature might
easily become an Entrance Examination to admit boys
especially to further studies that would qualify them to
fill some public position*
ReveElierl Read the following paper prepared by the Lutheran
Mission for the Conferences -
Na ti ve Edu cat i o n . 11
It is of the greatest importance to train the charac-
ter of the natives* They must acquire a new outlook on
life? in order to see the problems facing them? they must
see the low level on which they are living and must be
taught to raise themselves to a state worthy of human
beings* But to train and educate the natives will only
be possible when and where they have cast aside their pagan
ideas? their animalistic beliefs? and their fears of demons
and spirits* As long as they cling to the old ideas there
is no possibility of elevating them* The old ideas are a
hindrance to progress for they free the natives of all
responsibility and place the factors of their progress into
a sphere which is beyond their power. Religion brings the
possibility of training and of development* Their intel-.*-
lectual and practical training should go side by side*
In our schools? we try to teach the natives to better
their condition of life? to put larger areas of land under
cultivation? to build more substantial houses? to form bet-
ter communication between the villages by building roads?to
i prove their foods? to learn to keep cattle? to learn to
care for the sick in a hygienic way? and to practise clean-
liness* Therefore hygiene is a subject upon which stress
is laid in all our schools* Having these things as an aim?
we encourage the pupils even in our training schools to
build their own houses? to cultivate their own fields and to
keep domestic animals. It is not our aim at present to
bring them to a high intellectual level nor to teach subjects
which would prove of no value in serving their tribes.
As far as our Mission is concerned? compulsory educa-
tion does not really come into the question* Eor if the
natives realise the need of education there is no need for
compulsion* As long as he does not realise the need? com-
pulsion will not gain the desired end. Compulsory education
is no real education* All that we desire is that District
Officers a favourable attitude towards our mission
schools and teachers*
One of the problems vdiich is difficult to solve is the
training of the girls* In our village schools girls are
69




educated as well as boys. This training alone, however;
does not suffice to make then competent for their future
life's work. Natives realising this, bring as many girls
as possible to the different mission stations to be
trained in domestic work. Especially do native teachers
desire that their future wives acquire as much domestic
knowledge as possible,, Unfortunately 9 we are handicapped
in this respect by the Ordinance which prohioits naving
girls over twelve years of age at the station unless under
contract,, «
V/e also wish to express the desire that pupils oi
village schools be not allowed to be recruited except with
the consent of the parents or guardians«
Referring to subsidisation of Mission schools we
might state the following. At present our school work is
of such a nature that we could hardly meet the require-
ments which would rightly be exacted upon the acceptance
of a subsidy.
May it be stated here* however, that we have founded
an extensive system of village schools, not only along
the coa . but also far inland. These village schools are
being taught by native teachers and the part which they
play in the uplifting of the people and the opening up of
the land is by no means a small one. During this Con
ference we have again and again been assured of the fact
that the Administration desires the co• operation of the
Missions. It follows, therefore, that the Mission
teachers also, 'who as a rule are the most educated men in
the villages, cannot be dispensed with. The attitude
sometimes shown by the representative of the Administra-
tion with respect to the teachers causes natives to draw
the conclusion that the Administration really does not
appreciate their work and influence.
E_(hjjc_ation in Agricultural Pursuit^
As soon as the natives gave up their pagan liye the
Mission stressed and encouraged agricultural pursuits• The
result is that today they grow tobacco, Irish potatoes,
European vegetables and they have increased the supply of
indigenous fruits and vegetables-
Of their products they now sell large quantities to
our stations and plantations- The problem of extensive
agricultural development is as yet unsolved because there
is not a market for many of their products. Besides, this
Question is closely connected witn. the native laoour
problem. If it is the policy of the Administration ex-
tensively to encourage the establishment of new European
enterprises, the demand for native labour will be so
great that nearly all the able bodied men in native agricul-
tural pursuits will thereby be made impossible.
Mr.
Chairman Have you anything to say, Mr. Bishop?
Rev.
Bishop No.
70




Mr,
Chairman You Mr, Herne?
Mr.
Herne These are just a few of my impressions since I have
been in charge of the Malaguna School, (He read the fol-
lowing paper,)
NATIVE EDUCATION IN TERRITORY OF NEW GUINEA.
In presenting these few impressions with regard to
the Education of the natives of this Territory, I wish to
intimate that they are neither authoritative nor critical 9
hut just as I have stated, impressions gained during the
short period I have heen in charge of the shhool at
Malaguna,
The first and what is considered the most important
subject namely the teaching of English, deserves consider-
ation, The teaching of the subject is a very difficult
task fraught with almost insurmountable difficulties as
applied to the natives of the Territory - due principally
to environment 6 This is most noticeable in the teaching
of the spoken word, A gratifying amount of success has
been attained with regard to the written English, of which
I have proof in recent work done in the school e 9 but the
difficulty of ready speech and conversation has not yet
been overcome. The remedy for this lies in endeavouring
to change the environment. The proof is evident in the
free flow of English by boys who have been obliged to
hear and speak English for a considerable portion of the
day as for instance, those employed in European households
or those who have been down South with their masters or
mistresses a
In considering the other branches of the subject,
reading presents the same difficulty as with European
children and it is the teacher 1 s business to see that
reading becomes a mental act and not a mechanical process *
Spelling and writing do not present much difficulty -
after all they are merely habits and when first correctly
framed look after themselves. One other branch of this
subject which owes its importance to its close connection
with English conversation is phonetics ° 9 the art of using
the organs of speech in such a way as Jo be able to re-
produce any desired sound. The importance of this art
in English conversation is self evident and deserves a
great deal of attention from teachers of English through-
out the Territory,
If the New Guinea native is educated up to the point
at which he can extract the thought contents from any
subject matter presented, then the way is paved for
higher education and he has the key to the book of
knowledge which he may extract for himself,
No school curriculum is complete that does not
embrace such subjects as come under the heading of
Manual training and, at least, Elementary Agriculture
or School Gardening, and both of these subjects deserve
the greatest consideration in any educational scheme for
the natives, Man’s first need is to provide himself
71




with food and next with shelter. Hence the native must
he first an agriculturist, and secondly a draftsman.
Any system of education that fails to recognise^the
importance of these hy not providing for them in their
scheme of instruction fqils to recognise the needs of
the people.
Definite instruction in Elementary Agriculture
along with a plot of ground to carry out
and verify what is taught in the instruction period is
necessary. nothing convinces the native mind so
cihly as seeing for himself what the master did so mugb.
«talk talk" for. This will make the native a better
farmer and of more economic value to his country.
Having provided himself v/ith food in abundance, he
next turns his attention to shelter. Here comes in his
training in Handcraft and Mathematics. Ho doubt with-
out any training he can knock himself together a house
kunai to meet his needs but when it comes to providing
himself with furniture and other little conveniences
that is where his training in handcraft will benefit him.
Thus equipped he helps himself and his fellows by
being able to provide for himself a better and more
sanitary home,. It behoves us then to instruct him
along these lines.
Erom a teacher 1 s point of view, Compulsory Educa-
tion is necessary in the schools and if carried out
with discretion on the teacher’s part, need not impose
any hardships on the pupils or their parents.
If education is a good thing for the masses of
the country (and who can say it is not?) why not make
it compulsory?
One other point I would like to touch on is the
education of girls. These are to become the wives and
mothers of the generations to come and their influence
on the men and women who are to be, must be something
wor Ith considering in any scheme for the benefit of the
people of a country.
The subject of instruction in Hygiene in schools
in tropical lands such as this, cannot be too strongly
stressed.
The death rate, it seems certain, could be reduced
and the general health of the people improved by a
regular course of instruction in Hygiene.
Hev. It v/as my privilege to live the first eighteen
Bishop months of my life in the Territory at Malaguna * and
I saw something of the v/ork that was being done in the
schools and I think everything is most wonderful in the
schools there. I thought the boys’ English was really
wonderful and even at the present day boys from Manus,
come to me and ask me to correct their letters to their
friends - and really their English is remarkable §
72




in fact I am sure it compares more than favourably
with that of hoys of their own age in Australia.
Their writing is far superior to that of the average
Australian hoy - it is almost copperplate. I have
seen them working problems on the hoard that I could
never have done at their age. To me it is all very
wonderful and I do feel that we are going to succeed
in educating numbers of the natives in good English.
I am sure that there is some hope of teaching English
to some of our superior hoys anywhere * anyway - you
know I always look upon Man and Aitape hoys as more
advanced and I think there is great hope of some of
those hoys learning to read and write good English.
Mr. Most people have a totally wrong impression in
Chairman regard to the ideals of Native Education. The men
in the street? on being asked what is Native Educa-
tion for? will invariably reply "To make the native
of economic value to the European". I think that
idea is quite wrong. If a hoy docs a course at school
and then goes hack and applies the knowledge so gained
to the betterment of his social condition? our labour
has not been in vain.
Y/hen we first started the Technical School? we
tried the experiment of taking hoys straight from the
hush? and putting them in the school. We found? how-
ever? that without the necessary spade-work? their
progress was very slow. So at the present time the
hoy enters first the Elementary school? and that serves
as a feeder for the technical school. He laarns to
read and write? and to do simple carpentering. We have
a Sloyd*s class in the elementary school and with his
groundwork the hoy progresses much quicker in the
Technical School. Some pupils are? as I mentioned
before? also being trained as interpreters? teachers
and clerks.
As regards compulsory education? I think we must
agree that it may he necessary. As Mr. Margetts said?
the native parent is quite apathetic in the matter and
he will not force his child to go to school. In Papua?
compulsory education is legislated for? any hoy living
v/ithin two miles of a school must attend. If ho does
not attend the parent is fined. Of course? in Papua?
every Mission has its own special zone and therefore the
denominational question docs not arise. The only way
in which compulsory education could he introduced into
this Territory? would he to specify that every child
should attend some Mission school and that the parent
shall specify what school the child shall attend. I
would like the opinion of the members of the Conference
in regard to the scheme.
73




As regards subsidising schools, the system is
already in force in Eiji and Papua. In Papua, the
Mission teach English and for every child attaining
a certain standard of English, a capitation grant is
given. It is not very much, hut still it helps.
As to Eiji - Mr. Cox would know better than I,
I think they have two systems - one where they allow a
capitation grant, and another where they pay the
salary of the teacher.
Both insist that English must he taught - other-
wise no grant is made. I would like the Conference
to drav/ up a concrete proposal as to what form the
subsidy should take. The Administration might he pre-
pared to grant some assistance, hut the Conference
must understand that if either Compulsory Education or
Subsidisation of Mission Schools is introduced, the
Administration would require some form of Control of
Mission Schools either by inspection of examination of
scholars. The Administration would require the schools
to he properly equipped and staffed so that the subsidy
might not he wasted.
With regard to Agriculture, the Gentleman on my
left, Mr. Hopkins, knows more about it than I do. I
do not know what scheme the Agricultural Department
has in view. I do know that they are sending tea
seedlings at my request to the Lutheran Mission for
planting - they are only too ready to assist the
Missions in any way they can.
Mr. The scheme of Native Agriculture has been concen-
Hopkins trated mainly in the Markham Valley and we have had
two Agricultural instructors sent up there for duty
at the Central Depot. One of the inspectors I have
had to bring in, but he will be going back there again.
One feature of the scheme was the employment of
the natives as casuals. There they pick up the rudi-
ments o£ agriculture and after three months they go
back to their'.village to carry on the good work, and tell
their fellows how they can make money in planting the
different things we buy from them.
We hope in time that the boys will take more and
more to this scheme - especially when we are able to
lay down a definite standard of the prices we can give
them. I think then, they will show great interest.
The duties of the Superintendent include visiting
native villages and making friends with the Luluais
and giving, them advice on the crops. They are in-
vited too, to come to the Depot to see hov i the things
should be grown.
This has been going on now for about eighteen
months and so far I must admit there have not been any
great hut I think I can see a growing interest
74




on the part of the natives.
I think the scheme will he most successful on
the other side of the Markham. If we can concen-
trate on the hoys on that side and get them interest-
ed it is only a question of time till we have the
desired results - hut it will he two years at least
before we are going properly.
Dr, I believe that all the present members of the
Vesters Conference will come to the opinion expressed that
something has to he done with regard to attendance
at school. We all know very well how difficult
the question is. It is one of the biggest and
most important questions. The question to he
solved is 9 as to what way this help shall he grant-
ed. And I absolutely agree that the Administration
could help us a great deal. The Missions control
nearly all the elementary schools and they are all
doing their very best and spending a great deal of
money and making a wholehearted effort. Therefore
we would readily welcome the help of the Admin-
istration on this question. I do not all at once
favour the system of compulsory education. I am not
quite sure that it should he the first means to he
used and I do not favour it therefore as the solu-
tion to the question. When we see other countries
we know at once that compulsory education has much
against it. I remember very well when my ov/n
country - Holland - introduced it 5 it was noc so
very long ago. I grant that it may he attended
with some measure of success in an old country hut
there is a great difference between a country of
many centuries and a new country. I believe it
should he the last means to he used and I do not
think we are in a position to impose these condi-
tions. There are other means which perhaps might
he used before it - there are the means of persua-
sion? moral persuasion and the showing of a
interest on the part of the Administration. Certain-
ly we know the Administration is in favour of the
system hut I am of the opinion that something more
could he done in this connection if only the Admin-
istration would give their support much would he
accomplished. We are using all means of persuasion
and reporting to parents that they have to go? hut
as long as we see the Administration is in favour
of the scheme? we will he greatly helped.
The Chairman has said and promised much on this
point? hut we are asking for very little. I con-
sider the compulsory education to he the extreme
means of training the child. It would he an immediate
means of assistance if notifications^ could he sent
xo the District Officers? who would in turn instruct
the Luluais as to the approval of the Administra-
tion so that the natives would know that regular
training is approved by the Government. This s I
75




think 5 would he of very great help? because the
natives now the Administration is powerful - we
impress on them to the full how responsible is
the Government. Later on perhaps? it will be found
that compulsory education is not necessary any more.
If this can be brought about? we have to express our
appreciation of the help extended in this way. We
appreciate very much the moral support of the Ad-
ministration. Much is being done by our schools
and we could see the means of doing much more - we
could have a proper school for agriculture and we
could suggest to the people the necessity for
agricultural development giving ways and means on
these general lines.
May I say a few words? I must say I was very
much surprised to hear this morning that the Li rector
of Education has proposed to introduce compulsory
education. As I came here I had not it in mind to
ask such a great help but I did intend to ask at
least a little help in the matter of education. It
is thought that the Administration? and the Li rector
of Education? especially, is in groat favour of
Native Education as being done by the Missions i
but it is thought too that a great many of the Listrict
Officers and other officials have not the tact neces-
sary in this matter. Eor instance? if the natives
ask for information about the Mission they say there
is nothing in the Ordinance that obliges them to
send their children to school or to the Mission.
Some officials have not the tact for this matter and
so the natives get the impression that the Government
does not like the schools.
And I would like to mention some happenings
some time ago? when the natives asked the Kiap about
the Mission (they call every official "Kiap" whether
he is the Kiap or not) and the conclusions of the
natives were that the Kiap did not like them to go
to the school. It was told to them that the Mission
was "Peck peck nothing". This official later came
before the Eather who had heard of this and spoke to
him about it. He asked him was it true. The first
time he gave no answer? nor the second time? but the
third time he said "Yes"? I have said this? that the
Mission is nothing." He did not use that first word
again. My wish is to ask for a little he£)p from
Listrict Officers and other officials such as the
Public Health Lepartment and the Medical Assistants
and that they be instructed that the Administration
is really in favour of the Mission work and schools.
I think that is the very least we may ask and
therefore as I say I was very surprised to find oven
that the matter of compulsory education was in mind.
I would not like to bring a complaint against any
official and as I know that anything said in this Con-
ference is not published I merely wish to explain.
76




Rev.
Cox The question is a very difficult one and it must
he looked at from different standpoints. Mr. Herne
referred to the necessity for compulsory education.
That is all very well hut the system presupposes a
competent teaching staff. You must have a properly
organised staff and until you can secure that you can
scarcely suggest compulsory education. There are other
aspects too. The question of subsidies has been taised,
hut .this we understand does not refer to the vernacular
schools. The subsidy will not apply to schools where
English is not taught. When v/e speak of compulsory
education as Missionaries, we speak of it as in connec-
tion with our village schools which are controlled by
native teachers. So far as our Mission is concerned,
we train our native teachers for that work so far as v/e
can but often we find ourselves in the position of having
schools vacant and having use the best qualified man
we have - no trained teachers being available. These
untrained men "keep the flag flying". We are obliged
however much we would like to have regular attendance at
schools to use our moral influence to secure that atten-
dance as fully as we can.
It is very little to ask the Conference to look at
this matter in a practical way. We have for years dis-
cussed this question and we have been requested to ask
the Administration to bring in some system of this kind
and v/e have always replied that we could not take the
responsibility of asking the Government to bring in such
a measure which would involve us in so much responsibility
to which v/e would not be able to stand up. If v/e are
to habe compulsory education then officials must habe
the right to enter and criticise our methods and our
staffs. I don’t think we would appreciate this, but
if along the lines suggested by some of the speakers, we
could have the moral support of the Administration in
instructions to District Officers and Chiefs, then it
would not be possible for the Chiefs to come along as
frequently happens now and call the people out of the
school to work on the roads.
We have experienced over and over again, chiefs v/ho
have not been well disposed tov/ards us calling the people
away to the roads, and they have been supported by an
unsympathetic District Officer. That I am sure is not
the intention of the Administration, If v/e could have
that done away with- it would go a long ways it may bo
possible for moral support of one kind or another to be
given - vc must look at this question not as Missionaries
pure -and simple, but we must look at it from a practical
stand point - our recommendations will go to a higher
authority and any weaknesses will be discovered. I feel
that as a Conference we cannot ask for compulsory educa-
tion to that extent.
I think it v/ould be better for us perhaps to traverse
the whole ground to be discussed - one point at a time.
I wish to say a few words Mr. Chairman. I agree
Elierl with what Mr. Cox has said, and we have to be thankful
for the attitude of the Administration. It will greatly
77




help us in our school work* in the education of the
people 9 hut for compulsory education - I hear that it
may he wished for in some areas 9 hut conditions are
very different. We experienced in our areas a gold
rush and there 9 there is no necessity for compulsion.
Men rush to the goldfields? and so we have them in our
hill country? there is a rush to the school. Parents
as well as children are longing for education and come
to the schools freely. It is much better for them to
come of their .own free will - much more so than for
them to he compelled to come. A time may come? when
this rush may cease? hut we hope it will he a long time.
Heathens as well as Christians send their children to
learn. The people come freely as they like - if we
had compulsion? they might not like to come. There
would too? he great difficulty in making education com-
pulsory in remote places - it is quite simple in places
siear the station. Then there would have to he a staff
of officials to organise all the work? so that we are
not for compulsory education. I would like the people
to he shown that the Administration is in favour of our
school work - that they see in it good results. As for
the subsidy - I cannot say much more than has been said 5
it is very important for the people to know that the
Administration is so interested in the v/ork? hut we v/ould
not like money from the Administration. We would like
all hindrances to our work to he put away, as for instance?
the section relating to girls.
I think Mr. Cox misunderstood me in my remarks in
Chairman the matter of subsidy. I was only quoting the policy
of Piji and Papua - not of this Administration! we have
a perfectly open mind on the matter? and simply desire
to obtain the best system.
With regard to compulsory education? I think that
where there is a trained staff? there it in-
stituted. Matupi? for example? there are white teachers
there? and the place is quite close to white civilisa-
tion. I think children should he made to go to school
there. But you can see my point? that ii?would not he
fair to institute compulsory education unless the schools
are properly staffed although it is done in Papua.
As it is 11 a.m. Gentlemen? I think we will adjourn
for ten minutes.
At 11.30 a.m. the Conference re-opened.
Mr.
Chairman Might I ask that any of the Members who have not done
so already? to hand your papers into the Secretary?
Mr. Barry?
The question before the Conference is Section 6 -
the matter is open for discussion.
Rev. I v/ould like to stress once again how very important
Margetts it is that we should have some Administration assistance
for our village schools. Perhaps something has been
said to depreciate somewhat the work these schools are
doing? and as I said in my paper? we know there are in-
stances when the village schools are not all that we
would desire them to he? hut perhaps it v/ould he too
much to expect help from such schools? hut v/e v/ish to
say that these are only some of our schools. There
78




are other schools where we have capable native teachers
and the necessary school.'equipment 5/ and even such
schools as these are frequently notwell attended, I have
several such schools in my own circuit. Parents know it
is school time - the teacher beats his drum or blows
his conch scheel but as I have remarked frequently, no one
comes to school. I feel Mr. Chairman that something should
be done to get the children to school. Our Missions are
providing the educatioh for the people - it may not be
all that we would like it to be , but yet what great work
we are doing. Some of the members of the Conference have
spoken on the writing of the boys and how much like cop-
perplate writing it is. At Raluana frequently tourists
call in to see us and when v/e have taken them down and
shown them the books of the boys these people say our
school is far better than most Australian ones? and how
much better the work of the boys is, compared with the
work of boys down' South with the same advantages. I feel
Mr. Chairman, that the Administration should take some
special steps towards getting every available child to
school. District Officers could be instructed that it is
no little part of their work to see to this and to
ledge the village schools, to instruct the chiefs too, that
it is part of their work to encourage and acknowledge the
work of the schools. At Raluana, we have had a chief who
has done his duty in this respect. Every week at the
weekly parade he would stress upon the people the impor-
tance og sending the children to school. I think it should
be the power of the chief to inflict some small fine on
those parents who deliberately omitted sending the children
to school. I would not say they should be fined if the
child missed one or two of even three days. There are
some who seem to take a delight in opposing the views and
wishes of the chief, and it would seem to be due to spite.
Those members of the Catholic Mission who came from
Vunapope this morning, know that coming along the road
there were many men and women working while the boys and
girls v/e re at home minding the babies.
I feel that I must plead for some Administration
assistance in the matter of the village schools. I re-
member on one accasion when Colonel Hore was at Kokopo
I spoke to h.im of the difficulties v/e were having at Toma
with regard to the attendance of the children at school.
He made/special journey and called all the people together
and gave instructions to the chief and the people that i c
was the wish of the Administration that the people should
grow up wise and not ignorant and he strongly urged and
encouraged the people to send their children to the schools.
That area is today the area where our schools are always
well attended. It is the best section of my circuit for
school attendance and that shows what can be done when
we have the sympathy of the District Officer. I would
plead Mr. Chairman, that not only should the District
Officer be instructed to help the schools as much as was
in his power but if any handbook for the guidance of mag-
istrates be published, instructions should be included
in it was the wish of the Administration thac tney should
do so. . . .
We know that children disobey their parents, that
they sometimes play truant, and parents and school teachers
are empowered to use the cane where necessary. Some
79




punishment might he used to get the children to attend
school regularly. It may take years - we cannot show
results in a few months, and the people would realise
that it was the wish of the Government for the children
to attend the schools and that it was for their own
benefit•
Although the schools are crude they are for the
people and great benefits will be derived from them in
time to come.
Mr. I take it you are in favour of compulsory educations,
Cha i rman Mr, Marge 11 s ?
Mr.
Margetts Yes - moderately.
Rev.
Elierl We cannot agree with Mr, Margetts and we know that
generally when the people realise it is the wish of the
Government that they attends they will attend,
Mr.
Chairman Would you give village councils authority to punish
children for not attending school Mr, Elierl?
Rev, No 9 I would not.
Elierl
I think all the Missions are of opinion that the
Wolff Administration must show that it is in favour of Mission
work, It must show it in such a way that the natives and
the District Officers and other officials will know. I am
not of opinion that it is necessary for native councils to
have the right to punish children for staying away from
school. Once they know that the Government does favour
the work of the Mission, I do not think we will have any
difficulty. It would be clear to the minds of the natives
that school is a very good thing for them. I think we
would make very great progress once they saw what a good
thing it was. Could we not have a regulation stating that
the Government was favourable to the work so that recruiters
cannot come to the villages and apeak against the work of
the Mission with a view to getting the boys to sign their
contracts?
Rev, We 'would have advanced a long way if we could secure
Cox from this Conference a recognition on the part of the
Administration of the value of the work that is being done
in the schools.
The system in Eiji was recently the object of crit-
icism (I speak for our own Mission and I know the Catholic
Mission has its feelings too) and v/hile we did admit that
the schools left a lot to be desired we felt that criticism
a good deal. A reply was sent by the general Secretary
of our Mission indicating that while we would admit it
quite readily we thought that nevertheless it might have
been recognised that for a long time the Administration
had not moved and the only work that was being done was
being done by the Missions and that the education we were
able to give had resulted in more than 10,000 of the people
acquiring some English besides being able to read and
write and do many other things.
It must not be forgotten that the opportunity to judge
work done and progress made by the Mission is not so great
80




when it refers to work done in English - anyone could
judge of the success or otherwise of the Government’s
work. Government officials admit that the work leaves
a good deal to he desired. So that the Mission schools
are not the only ones that may he censured on the basis
of hut if it were possible for outsiders to go
into Mission Schools and correctly judge what was being
done 9 I think quite a different opinion would he held®
¥e have heard of the ease with which hoys attend
school. I have made enquiries in Eiji and find it is
the same over* there. In our higher schools 9 we have had
no difficulty in keeping our students for long periods 9
nothing less than six years without a contracts verbal
or written of any kind. They come knowing very well what
is expected of therA. There you have an indication of the
value of the elementary work we have done in the village
schools 9 all these have gone through the village schools
there they have learned to read and write. And if we
can have some recognition on the part of the Administra-
tion as to the value of these schools v/e would have made
a distinct advance. ¥e all come here with open minds.
The object of the Conference is to give us an opportunity
of airing our views the result being that often we find
how unwise those views were. ¥e examine the position
from every angle and I don’t think any of us is in a pos-
ition to form a final judgment. What v/e do want is some
indication from the Administration that we have its
supports something of the kind is highly desirable.
Mr. Is there any further discussions Gentlemen?
Chairman In regard to your remarks Mr. Cox* I think it is
absolutely certain that the Administration recognises the
work of the Missions and the schools. It might be pre-
pared to subsidise educational establishments working
under proper conditions. I think that shows how practic-
ally the Administration is willing to recognise the work
that is being done.
Rev. I would point out that I am speakings every one will
Cox understands of vernacular schools. If we are now informed
that the Administration is willing to institute some
subsidy for them it will be news to me. ¥e have not heard
anything of the suggestion that any schools should be
subsidised other than those which teach English.
Mr. That is the procedure in Eiji 5 not to subsidise
Chairman vernacular schools. Perhaps Mr. Cox can give us some in-
formation on the question.
Rev. I don’t know of any system. There may be one. I have
Cox some literature on the question but I don’t think there
is a subsidy for the vernacular schools.
81




Dr* To those which teach English?
Vesters
Rev. Yes 9 hut you would not call them "vernacular”.
Cox
hr. I am quite in agreement with Mr. Cox. Certainly
Vesters the appreciation hy the Administration of the Mission
schools should come to the knowledge of the people.
That is what we desire. We 9 of course 9 know that the
Administration appreciates. Health and Agriculture
are all very important hut it seems the main duty
of the Administration is to definitely acknowledge
our work. That very great help is derived from the
Mission schools is heyond douht. The people do not
Snow of the approval 9 here and there 9 perhaps there
may he one official who tells them hut in others that
is to say in other districts 9 the Tultul does not
know how the work is appreciated 9 and therefore atten-
tion may he lacking on the part of the people. If
the Administration would only give some hint the
Luluais and Councils would do '“heir duty 9 and they
whuld see that the schools were well-attended 9 and
if this can he done I believe very much will have been
attained. Officials look every day in the villages
for signs of cleanliness P the Luluais are punished if
it is not found 3 and so I can agree with the Rev.
Mr. Cox that a practica,l demonstration of sympathy
on the part of the Administration would he the most
satisfactory thing. I hope the Conference will pass
a resolution in favour of this. There should he
issued to Luluais instructions 9 and they should he
allowed to punish obstinacy in a certain way 5 and I
believe the point of Mr. Margetts that the children ,
should not he punished if occasionally they missed one
or two or three days even ? is a very good one.
But power should hc/given to punish in some way*,
parents who refuser to send their children to school.
I think there will he found a way to punish these people
and power should he given to the Council to control
had will on the part of the parents. I would like to
make myself very clear to you Mr. Chairman 9 I do not
plead for compulsory education 9 hut to control parents.
Mr.
Chairman I think that is a very fine point. If there is
no further discussion on this subject „ the matter will
he referred to the Committee of Bindings who will lay
their report before the Conference in due course.
Hev. Could we not do it under the Native Administra-
Margetts tion Ordinances 1921/22?
Ho it is not lawful, (here he read two Draft
Chairman Ordinances)
(1) Hative Education Ordinance
(2) Native Taxes Ordinance.
At the present time there is no compulsion in
regard to education.
82




Q ra May I ask a question relating to girls well as "boys?
Q]_ff "7e have heard this Ordinance regarding the natter of
labour 5 hut now lam not clear as to what It will he in
futurec How it can happen sometimes that the District
Officer comes to the Station and wants to see the ooys and
girlSc He asks them would they like to go home? he explains
nothing else* You see if that is the proceeding? I think
it really will make Mission work much harder•
Por instance, it may happen that a girl has done some-
thing wrongs it might been that very morning? and
naturally she says she would like to go hornet when at a
later date perhaps she would regret saying this* Of course
I know that a District Officer doing this is very tactless?
he does not know how to ask and this may bring very many
difficulties to our work* You see when he goes about it
this way? the natives get the impression that the Mission
is doing something wrong* We do not like this we think
he should wait until he hears definitely that the Mission
is doing something wrong* Then he could proceed* Is it
right that the Mission should be controlled in this way
always? Just as if it were doing something that was not
right*
Mr* I think that incident most likely arose from an incid-
nairman ent with your Mission in Aitape* Complaints had been made
that girls had been away from their homes for a long time
in the Mission at Sek? and the people wanted them back*
Dr* Ho 9 not at all*
Jolff
Mr* \7ell we cannot overcome the personal equation in
Chairman District Officers ¥e will proceed new Gentlemen? if there
is no further discussion? to the question of the subsidisa-
tion of Missions* I would like to hear some scheme pro-
pounded? what do you think? Mr* Cox?
Rev*
Cox Well? we have not had any time to discuss a system of
subsidy as applying to vernacular schools* I could feo
further than that and say that we as Missionaries have
not at any time asked for such system* I think that we?
and the other Missions as well, have always regarded this
proposal as an offer of assistance on the part of the
Administration towards these schools in which English was
taught - and my judgment has been asked on several occas-
ions*
Me have discussed the matter from time to time and
we have not been impressed with the value of the proposal
to our Mission* In Eiji? you have other conditions? a
better type of people and a very much more developed people
than we have here* Our Mission work for instance? is young
at the present time? they are nearing their Centenary there
while we have just celebrated our Jubilee in the Territory*
83




It is not only from the point of view of years that
the Administration and - I don’t know just what to call
it - an Education Council on which there would he repres-
entatives of the Missions as well as the Government
something of type is needed. And if we have organised. a
large number of schools and a well qualified staff? tne
majority of the schools being Missionary schools? it would
be a Missionary conference. I am speaking as a Methodist
Missionary because I have no knowledge of what is being
done outside. , , , ._
We have a number of fully qualified teachers working
under the system and we receive quite considerable
assistance in the matter of buildings etc. - I think it
is half the cost. But the development has now reached
to that stage when the Eijians are demanding to be taught
in English? and it is necessary to have such schools there
because the people are so much further advanced. Less
than two years ago? we reviewed our position in regard uo
the teaching of English in some of the advanced schools
and we decided to eliminate English as a subject. To teach
it only in an elementary way demanded quite a considerable
time? which our students could not afford. Our present
system is to give all the knowledge required to all other
work apart from English? which is ®f no practical value
when it is taught? because we have found that we could not
hope for a good working knowledge of English that would
enable them to read books or to attempt to teach it in
schools? at the same time the thought was expressed that
we might later on? have schools in which English would be
a subject that would have considerable attention. We sug-
gested High Schools? where lads would come at a much earlier
age than they do now and v/ould be given thorough education.
In a wider sphere it might be useful. It seems to me
that the teaching of English is a question of very prac-
tical difficulty for the Missions - it is one that needs to
take a great deal of our ti&e in this Conference.
We have heard what Mr. Herne has said about the
extreme difficulty there is in giving a really useful know-
ledge of English under the conditions under which they work
at Malaguna. There? they have a competent and well-trained
staff - a sufficient staff - and equipment and the circum-
stances are so much better than elsewhere in the Territory.
It would be interesting to know how many of all the students
who have passed through the School have a really useful
working knowledge of English? Y/e have heard something
of what they have acquired? how they have been able to
read? and write compositions but how many of them could
ca-rry on a conversation in pure English? The number I am
sure is very limited when compared with the number of boys
that have gone through the school. We have at Malaguna
a boy who speaks good English? and can carry on a conver-
sation with Europeans ? that is the result of one year in
Australis-, when he ws-s engaged in translation work in the
84




Native Language 9 and during that period he acquired
real useful English. I suggest that the results such
as are desired can he obtained in a way that has so far
not been attempted and it is possible that they wiibl not
be obtained in a.ny other way. It is a question of en-
vironment much more than a question of time. I think it
will be admitted by those who are most competent to speak
that there is nothing to indicate that the boys who go
through the school will be able to go out and ,teahh English
to ’others. Their knowledge of English will be so im-
perfect although they have the advantage of competent
English-speaking teachers. I think it is hopeless to
expect that unless they arc given every facility to acquire
not only colloquialisms but such other English as they can.
I don’t think that will be possible unless they are sent to*
say 9 Australia, If we attempt that I don’t see any reason
to doubt that real .useful English will be acquired.
It does not appear to me to be a subject to which we
have given a great deal of time and I suppose that a subsidy
will only be thought of in that connection. ¥e ourselves?
may later on? bo able to do something along these lines.
With that foundation I am sure we will discover that it is
the best way to arrive at the results we are seeking. Y/e
would not feel justified in asking for a subsidy. In our
Missions we are not teaching English at the present time*
even in our advanced schools. In our half-caste school
of course? nothing else is taught. We are not in a posi-
tion to talk about subsidies - it is not la sight at present,
we have a lot of other things for the next two or three
years and when they are done we will be able to look at the
question agains
Lr, I don’t think we have to solve the question of a subsidy
sters just now - I think the time is a little premature not yet
ripe to give the final results of what Y/e are doing in the
Catholic Mission. I think that it is too early to give a
practical way to solve the question of subsidy. We on our
part are really just "feeling" and v/e cannot say that up to
the present the results are ripe enough to justify a subsidy.
Dr. May I say a few words about the system in Africa? on
r /olff the Cold Coast? I have not been there myself but I Jnow
something about this Colony. There is always a grant made
to those schools that are teaching English. It is very
high and meets all expenses including those of buildings
and the salaries of teachers. In that part of Africa?
85




nearly every native goes to school. I recently
read in some papers that now the Government has
resolved to reduce the grant hecause the natives
have not been drought up to a higher standard as
natives - hut they like to he just like the Europeans
and it is net for their own benefit or for the
country as a whole that they should he? and so there
will not he any more grant.
Mr. Have you anything to say Mr. Elierl?
chairman
Rev. I certainly cannot say we have done very much in
Elierl the way of regular English instruction.
Mr. Mr. Pilhofer is teaching English is he not?
Chairman
Rev. Yes? hut it is a kind of Pidgin. I think you
3 ilhofer realise the conditions we work under - cur hoys come
from the far interior and it is impossible to teach
them pure English - the conditions are so very primi-
tive over there. I do not think we can ask the Adminis
tration for a subsidy for we could not come up to the
standard which would he expected were such subsidy to
he granted.
Mr. If there is no further discussion? Gentlemen? I
Chairman think we will refer the matter to the Committee of
Eindings who will lay their report before the Confer-
ence in due course.
It is now 12.30 and the Conference will he
adjourned until 9«§o on Monday morning.
86




Proceedings of the Conference.
Sixth Day, 27th. June,1927.
At 9.45 a.m. the Chairman declared the Conference
re-opened. The matter for discussion was Section 6? Native
Education.
Mr#
Chairman I would like Mr. Eraser to give his views on the
question. Mr. Eraser has keen here several years and has
keen in touch with the Education question all the''time. He
is the second master at the Malaguna School.
Rev.
Cox Before doing that Mr. Chairman? would it be possible
to have an indication of what crimes are included in the
Criminal Code to assist us in dealing with matters that
have been placed before the Committee?
Mr.
Chairman I will get the Criminal Code.
Mr.
Eraser Read the following papers-
" The Elementary School. "
H. G. Wells makes the following statement? "Education
is the newest of the arts and sciences?" and these words
are worcfih remembering.
The idea of only the outstanding pursuing leaning
has been familiar to the whole world for centuries. The
idea of preparing the minds of the whole communities for
co-operation and common action by a training in common
ideas is a comparatively new one even in civilised
countries.
We have handicaps to fight against - handicaps of
bad environment where our scholars are raised - handicaps
of heredity.
What is education? Education is something which draws
out what is in man. It forms his character and gives him
the means of fuller life? refinement» culture? communion
with the best thought of all the ages? good citizenship
and sc on.
One object of the elementary school is the training
of natives for their general betterment. Our institution
has been in existence for five years and the results
are extremely gratifying and indicate that the object is
being attained.
Another object is the training of a certain mumber
of natives to fit them to be assistant teachers. We have
trained boys? some of whom are now acting as assistants.
After several years as assistant teachers under the super-
vision of a trained teacher? they will be able to conduct
small schools.
The teaching of a certain number of natives to enable
them to take positions in the lower grades of the Govern-
ment Service is yet another object. We have boys who have
practically finished their course and who will fill these
positions. Many boys have a working knowledge of the type-
writer and can do copying work.
87




We also train a certain number of natives to enable
them to enter the technical school - our Sloyd classes have
turned out some very creditable work.
With these aspects in view it is essential that
English be spoken. We do not employ the vernacular. We
will not burden the scholars with the learning of a new
language . As Government influence extends, as trade ex-
pansion occurs, the growth of Pidgin naturally follows.
English is not difficult to teach if it is taughj on
the principle of improving Pidgin.
The only difficulty I have experienced in the teaching
of the spoken word is the innate shyness of the native.
When one has the confidence and sympathy of the native this
difficulty is overcome, and we have found that he can be
taught a reasonably good working knowledge of English.
The other divisions of English present no difficulty.
We teach reading, Composition, Writing, Comprehension]*
Dictation. Comprehension is remarkably fine - how the boy
eagerly awaits the next instalment of say Robinson Crusoe.
A member of the Conference mentioned the difficulty of
getting good results in Arithmetic. We find this so. The
difficulty is to make the subject interesting. ¥e teach with
the idea of making the scholars accurate and quick . in cal-
culation and to develop the power of reasoning. Some
scholars are very quick at Addition.
We also teach nature knowledge, stories, geography,
occupations, singing, and physical training.
One lesson a week is given in hygiene. The school
can exert an immediate influence on those who come within
its sphere. A large part of the scholars 1 daily life is
spent in school. If during this time they acquire habits
of neatness and cleanliness they are in possession of
virtues that will influence their lives, when their student
days are over.
Mr.
irman Would any other member of the Conference like to
discuss this question?
Rev.
Cox Do I understand that we are dealing in particular with
only one phase of the subject?
Mr. I think we have fully discussed the first two sections
bairman but if there are any other points they may be laid before
the Conference. I would give the members every opportunity
to state their views.
Rev.
Cox Well the question of subsidisation of Mission schools
is related to the question - it is difficult for us to
discuss this quite separately, We as Mission representatives
have been asked our views on the question of a subsidy for
Mission schools and I think we have come to the point that
there has been no indication to us up to the present of any
suggestion as to a subsidy for vernacular schools. Possibly
the question is not I am not aware of vernacular
schools being subsidised elsewhere and I am not aware of
any such proposed to subsidise those schools here. Some days
88




ago you indicated what the Administration definition
of a ”student” would ho. If we may be allowed to take
the whole question I would suggest that there is a
difficulty in the proposal that a student can only be
"one who has been attending the school for 6 months
prior to the tax collect ion”„ There is a provision
in the proposed Ordinance to allow of the District
Officeih defining a »bona fide” student.
The difficulty in the District Officer’s being
allowed to differentiate is? I take it* that there is
no definite protection for the Missions if the District
Officer happens to take another view. To indicate
the difficulty I would remind the Conference that
last year in the Kokopo District? that is to say the
year ended 30th June? 1926? taxes for the year ending
30/6/26 were not collected until the end of that year
and a few weeks later officers acting? I take it? on
instructions from the Administration? proceeded to
collect the taxes for the following year. That ex-
perience might not occur again. It is conceivable
that a student will pay tax in his village one year.
On the Ist July? he may enter a Mission school ° 9 the
taxes are collected a few weeks under this
definition the student would be required to pay taxes
although he is a. bona fide student for this succeeding
year.
The attention of the District Officers might be
drawn to this point. Another point - schools being
temporarily under the control of other than a
European teacher. I am thinking just now of certain
schools of our own where owing perhaps to the ill
health of the white teacher? the schools have to be
left in the care of a native teacher. Students
there are bona fide students and I take it that such
students would also be exempted from taxes so that
some latitude should be given to District Officers on
this point.
The most important point? is that requiring that
bona fide students must be receiving five hours tuition
in English each week out of a total of eighteen hours.
The simple fact is? that that would wourk out in students
being penalised because for practical reasons we would
not give five hours per week to the teaching of English
- we would sooner pay the tax. We propose to institute
the teaching of English in special schools. We had
such a school we even had the timber obtained
to build it? but at that moment we had the misfortune
to lose our qualified teacher and it was sost difficult
to secure another. We have done so now but he must
first learn the vernacular and other subjects neces-
sary in our work. We are just moving our whole educa-
tional establishments from the Duke of York Islands
to the mainland. This will les,d to very big develop-
ments and we have every prospect of teaching English.
I think I am right in saying that with the excep-
tion of the Catholic Mission? no other Mission is
teaching English? neither the Lutheran Mission nor the
Catholic Mission at Madang teach English.
89




Dr, Oh? yes we do*
Wolff
Mr, Mr, Pilhofer also is teaching English I believe,
Chairman
Mr, Yes 9 but it is really a kind of Pidgin,
Pilhofer
Rev, That is the point I want to bring out Mr, Chairmans
Cox it is Pidgin. We are prepared to consider that as a
practical questions but that is not the solution the
Administration wants - because that solution would
have no practical use ; but we are not discussing
that at the moment. If the Administration is prepared
to accept not a five hours period of Pidgin per week*
but such time as will be determined that would be
something we could but I take it that you
were considering the teaching of English. We have
for the time cut that out of the programme for our
time is fully occupied in training men for their other
work? and.if this definition of "students 11 is allowed
to stands I repeat that it will mean that the educa-
tion system of the Missions will be penalised - that
is the practical difficulty.
Mr. I don’t agree with you Mr. Cox - Missions could get
lairman exemption ¥/here necessary 5 the Tax Collectors will
receive instructions from Central Administration in
regard to exemption. The time fixed? that is to say?
five hours per week? was decided on after discussing the
matter with the schools where English is now being
taught 5 and the main point as to the teaching of English
seems to have been lost sight of - the idea is to speak
English? but at present the idea is by teaching English
an improvement in the standard of Pidgin will be effected.
As I may? provision is made in the Brdinance for the
granting of exemption by the District Officer he thinks
such provision is necessary.
Hev. That is so? but it leaves the question very open
Cox to the District Officer. There is no indication as to
what a bona fide student may be? if he is not that
defined above.
Mr. •
Chairman The indication is in the Ordinance i.e. the teach-
ing of English and the period the boy has been at shhool.
¥e found it necessary Jo draft the definition of student
now before the Conference because boys would enter the
schools just before the tax collection commenced and would
leave immediately the collection were completeds this
has been done and is the reason for the six months being
inserted. You may? however? rest assured that very
stringent instructions will be given to District Officers
in the matter. Any Mission can make application to
Central Administration for exemption? and if the claim
is justified that exemption will be granted.
If there is no further discussion? Gentlemen? these
two first subsections of item 6 of the Agenda Paper are
now referred to the Committee of Findings who will submit
90




their report to you in due course.
In regard 10 the question of Agricultural
Education, I would like the members of the Coruerence
to put forward some concrete scheme to deal with this
matter. Any assistance you may he able to give the
Administration in this regard will he very much
appreciated,
Ea the r
Mertens X think it is just a question to he asked
the Director of Agriculture as to how ww can help
the Administration in this regard. We can only help
hy laying out small gardens and instructing the natives
hut how can we force children to do the work? I would
like to hear the Director of Education or any other
representative of the Administration on the subject and
hear him tell us hy what means we can assist,
Mr. I regret that the Director of Agriculture
Chairman is not present this morning, and therefore perhaps
we might postpone this subsection until he is able to
attend the Conference, I would prefer it to be adjourned
until we have his views,
p ro Could the matter as to the age at which a child
Vesters may he kept at school discussed? It is related in the
one part to the question of ITative Education and on the
other part to the question of Indentured Labour,
not know if the Administration has fixed an age up to
which the children may he kept at school, lam very
new to the Territory and have no experience on the
question, hut if we could keep the children up to the
ages of 13 and 14 years, I feel that that would he just
the age at which they could most profit hy their in-
structions, Dr, Cllento could perhaps speak on the other
question as to the maturity of the children, hut we
believe that that is the age when they reach their prime
condition - they are a little backward in this direction
and I always think that 13 or 14 is the age when they
are best developed, and when they more easily retain
their instructions.
If they are not exempted from tax paying they
have no means of providing the necessary money. As to
the question of Indentured Labour I do not know if the
Chairman is prepared to put this question now. The
younger hoys being impressionable are at a groat incon-
venience on plantations, for as I was saying 13 to 14
years for them Ms just the age when they are being
interested in their moral training, and I believe wo
should lay great stress on this point. The Mission arc
teaching them their moral sense of duty and rendering-
immense service to the Administration, and therefore
I say recruiters and others should not he permitted to
come along and take them away to a plantation where they
vail he placed among other bigger hoys - the results of
this intermixture we know too well. Perhaps we could
hear some other member of the Conference on this point,
Mr, I think the subject comes under section 11
Chairman my Lord.
91




Dr, Yes ? but it is also a question for the
Yesters schools is it not? I think we should fix the age up
to which children could he kept in schools with
consequent exemption from tax paying later on we
will come to the native labour aspect, I have no
great experience on this matter? hut certainly some
of us have been a long time in the Territory and cam
speak on the subject.
hr. It seems to me that the whole question
Chairman should ibe referred to the heading '-Dative Labour 11 ,
It can be raised then when discussing the age at
which a boy may be recruited. If you raise tha ..age
at which he may be recruited then you automatically
raise the age at which he may be taxed.
Dr, With respect to the question asked hy Kis
Cilento Lordship Lr. Yesters? in regard to the development
of native children in this Territory? it is common
belief that children here develop much earlier? that
is wrong. I have kept some careful records of de-
velopment amongst children here and I have compared
them with the records of development among children
in northern Queensland which is also a tropical
country, I have found that while white children in
Hcrthern Queensland come to the age of puberty at
the average age of 13 years and 9 months - in this
Territory at any age bet ween 15 and 16. The average
ages in cases which I have examined is at least a
year later - sometimes more than a year. Of course
you do find some falf-caste and native girls coming
‘to puberty at the age of from 13y to 14fr years? but
in the vast majority of cases? it is from 14*g to 1 6
years. The natives? therefore reach the pubescent
period at the age of about 16 .
With regard to mental development? I am
quite in agreement with Dr, Yesters that from 13
to 14 years or even 15 years of age is an extremely
dangerous age for natives - that is the time when
their whole ideas and outlook is undergoing great
stress. They are in a period of transition both
mental and physical* Their mind is like a blank
slate and on it you can write anything you wish.
If they leave the missions at that age you subject
them to other things at a time the mind
is most likely to be impressed by other things,
Lut on the to her hand, Mission teachers? and all
teachers? must bear in mind that from 13 to 16 years
of age discipline is extremely difficult - it is
hard to keep their interest but they learn much more
and much faster during thest three years than they
do at any other time. If they do not learn during
these three years? it will be very difficult to
teach them anything afterwards.
At one time? for my sins? I was put on skull
work. I did all those available - several hundreds
and I noticed one very peculiar thing. You know? you
tell the age of a skull by the joining up of the
92




sutures. -Ms joining up begins m_a furope-u
at the age of 4 5 always. -O thau is iO L '
that age ve re-sort", our ideas - we uo no - le<-m
anything further, ‘-s loot: at our ideas j. __
direction and Mature says "hell, there is no uore
use for this ’orain to O row, so I mil join up those
little places I have left to permit of expansion.
-nuongst Australian natives the man is uam
factor, the woman does not count, ho places his
possessions in something li'se oraer.-
his oluh, "boomerangs dog, and last, of ail hi •
In the male, the sutures begin to join at one a*e
of about 35, in the female at any age gom 25;
hilu ou can find points on cuiur me-
the age asd-rom 2C to 25 you already find the sutures
beginning . uhat unless you care for
them during the age of puberty you will
-dll not be able to acquire education leer on -nc
in ,11 probability the education you Mve ill
he wasted. . . fovmir
As a medical man 1 m strongly in favour
of their education proceeding up to the age ox lo
years, but on the other hand, there till oe -ne
political and administrative aspects to oe consiaerea
in this respect. I ill not cmscuss tnem here - I
simply nm.e this very lengthy reply co nib moioship s
que sti on.
• - llerl Hay I say a fen ords, hr. Chairman?
natives remain very snail and -eo.. *or a
lon time, we have observed this on our on statio-
and"me hnow of a case where in "I SI4 a boy mas trough,
to us to be fed and cared for. e nursed him un.il
he was strong and well enough to go baemto his
village. He is over Utoday, and looms lime a cnilu o
of nine, between the ages of 15 and M they grow
very strong and jig.
: r> At what age do you pupils acquire
Chairman knowledge more readily hr. Maser?
■ r Me like to get them young if possible
braser because they are more impressionable - I mninm
abo t 13 to 16.
In Papua, the rocruitable age is set at
Chairman 16 under their batiye labour Ordinance. I
v & night let the matter stano. ana onng it up
under Section 7? "Child ,-elfare «
_ T.- t qpv n■ f g ,? ' xrords 5 hr* Chairman? I
Cur people, especially those of Kew Guinea, are still
on a very low level and hat they need most a. .he
93




present tine is an elementary education in the natter of
cultivating the soilc I believe the question of learn-
ing a foreign language has been over stressed* A well
known doctor in South Africa recently remarked that he
v/ished the natives had never been taught Erench because
now if he desires to have a menial task done it takes
him months to secure anyone to do it and usua.lly he is
unable to secure anyone * whereas if he wants a clerk *
he can get many more than he wants* Referring to the
teaching of English* I think the hission schools will
experience some difficulty if it is not possible to
include in the Ordinance, a paragraph referring to the
exemption of missions * kor instance* our mission is
about to revise their whole educational system and
introduce three grades - a low one* and an intermediate
one and a higher one * I am not sure whether it would
be possible or not to teach for five hours of the week
in the higher grades* but I think it would be possible
for our students coming mainly from the far interior
and their education having been received only at the
village schools is very primitive* -and so it is not
always possible to start in the first or even the second
year with the teaching of English* Therefore I would
like to second the Rev« mr* Cox on his suggestion re-
garding this point.
Rev. Cur district over there is a good deal younger
klierl than here* The Methodists have had their liission here
for over years* we have had ours for only about 4C *
In our district* the natives had seen no white man until
we came in 100 5 to hew Guinea* but the work had begun at
the Methodist Mission here in 1875° Rov- it must be
easier here than over there to teach English* Mr* Cox
has said that they are considering establishing a
special 9 school for the teaching of English over here
a-nd with such a plan I could really agree very much*
Row if we heave it to the Methodist mission here and
afterwards if the scheme is a success* we could start
something similar over there* Thereby our education
of native teachers would not be interfered with or
hampered and as an experiment* we could single out the
best boys to be taught English* and in time after we
have seen how it works* we can have English taught in
our other-schools *
Mr. I think Mr, Pilhofer* in regard to exemption*
Chairman the great majority of your pupils - in the first and
second grades - at any rate* ■ ould be exempt from taxa-
tion on account of their age.
Rev-* l T ot all* but most of them I think *
Pilhofer
Mr. Is there any further discussion on the question
Chairman of Native Education* Gentlemen? 7e seem to be returning
to it again and again* and I -ould like to have the dis-
cussion completed*so that we may o et on with the next
94




question*
p eVu He can Taring it up again tomorrow?
Yes. The subject for discussion now is Native
Chairman Child Welfare".
p re Hr* Chairman 5 my Lords and Gentlemen? in touch-
Ciiento ing on the subject of Jiative Child welfare? I desire
to he extremely brief? and to leave the discussion
for you to deal with as you in your work in the
villages are more in touch with the subject than I
am. I would? however? point out several
you* The whole value from a medical point of foiew
of population? can be summed up in the rate of sur-
vival. One can lookmupon a large birth rate as a
tragedy if there is also a high death rate amongsc
the natives. How you often find in Southern papers?
paragraphs to the effect that the native population of
this Territory is dying out because of the low birth
rate, hut that is quite untrue. have not a low
birth rate in this country? but a high one. It is
higher than the English? higher than the German and
very much higher than the Australian birth rqoe.-
it is also very munh higher than the American. But
for every thousand children born in the Bainings ?
417 die before they reach the age of one year. So far
as we can learn throughout the whole Territory for every
1000 births we can trace? 118 that we are able to trace
die before reaching the age of six months. That does
not include the very great number of children that are
to be born? but are not because of abortion. inen
again? there is the large number? of which we have no
record? of those children who are secretly killed.
This question will? I believe come up later? but at any
rate I can discuss it here? that is *che greau loss in
children through*-
Ml Infantile mortality
(2) Abortion
(3) Infanticide
(4.) Fourth and finally? the question
of orphans - children whose parents
have died.
These four factors are to my mind the main factors
in child welfare. We need not discuss an infant which
manages to struggle along until it is two years
age r it then becomes part of the village and is looke
after.
Before going any further? I would like to have the
opinions and experiences of the members 01 tne Gonier-
ence with regard to the four factors.
(a) Infantile mortality
(b) Abortion
(c) Infanticide
Dr. (d) Care of Orphans
pXierl May we read a paper we have prepared?
95




Mr. Yes*
Chairman
Rev, Head the following papers-
Eliehler
11 Chi Id Welfare. !i
Two factors to he considered are=-
(1) The unhorn child
(2) The horn child
With regard to (1) many native /women deliber-
ately cause abortion. This? according to native
opinion? is no crime. It is done to avoid the duties
connected with nursing a small child or to hide
illegal sexual intercourse. The only means by which
this crime can he lessened is by hygienic education
and religious influence. Whenever such a case comes
to the ears of the village council; they call the
woman before them and admonish her sharply.
As regards (2) the main topic to be considered
with respect to the born child is the high rate of
mortality. This is caused by uncleanliness? neglect-
ing the laws of hygiene? carelessness in case of
sickness 9 insufficient nourishment and infectious
diseases. - especially Whooping Cough. In order
successfully to combat the causes of this high rate
of mortality we must again make use of the means
already mentioned above. The death .rate of native
children is always higher than those of civilised
countries. As long however? as a high nirth rate
balances this high death rate there is no cause
for alarm. It is therefore? necessary to strengthen
the will to live in he minds of the natives? and
to convince them xtrhat a future is in store only for
a race whose population is increasing.
We might just mention that difficulties arise
when a very young child loses its mother? of course
whenever such a case is made known to us we take the
infant to the station or provide for it as best we
can? but the Territory is so large than many perish
before we are able to be of any assistance.
Mr. Have you a paper Mr. Hargetts?
Chairman
Mr. I have nothing quite to the point? but I have
Margetts something dealing with bigamy - that mighc be useful
if I read it.
nßigamy and Polygamy in closely missioned
Areas 11
While the people in this part of the Territory
are generally monogamists? there have always been
those who have had two or more wives. We have no
desire whatever to interfere with this custom in
those areas where Missions are not operating? or where
as yet missionary work has not got a great hold on the
people o Even in those districts where Mission work > has
been long established and where it counts for much in
the lives of the people we do not wish co interfere in
bigamous or polygamous habits of those who for long
years httve lived in them. We feel however? that in such
districts no further marriages of this ( character should
be permitted? and that such unions that have taken place
recently to the detriment of others should not be
allov/ed to continue. .
Y/hile in some enlightened Districts the practice of
having more than one wire is tolerated no longer? in
others it is




growing* Without stressing the ethical side of the
question the practice has to be considered in the light
of race preservation - more children are seldom born
into the world* Many polygamists have but small families
Very seldom do satisfactory conjugal relations exist
between a man and his wife when she knows that other
women have an equal or perhaps a larger share in his
attentions and his regard, neither has she the same
desire to raise children to him when she knows that
other women are also mothers of his offspring, so abortion
is practised and means taken to prevent conception.
A woman has not the opportunity nor desire to fulfil
her mission in the world when she is only one of a
man's v/ives. So the race suffers. Often an elderly
man tired of his wife he has had throughout the years,
will take a young girl as a second wife. By the time
she is grown up and still v/ell able to bear children,
he has become something of a spent force. An iniquitous
feature of bigamy or polygamy is that in order to
satisfy some men’s desire to have several wives often
other men have to do without. Young men grow up and
find all the young women have been taken by older men
and not being sexless, adultery is the result.
In almost every case 'where there is bigamy
there is domestic unhappiness. After a woman has
perhaps been long wedded to a man she deeply resents
another woman coming to share her place or maybe take
her place in the home. There are jealousy, taunting,
hatred, quarrelling and fighting. In Fiji, such
women bit off one another f s nose. We have not heard
of that being done here, but it is not because there
has not been the desire.
We frequently hear that polygamy is practised
in order to get cheap labour for garden work. No doubt
that is taken into consideration when men take more
than one wife, but one cannot help but feel that the
primary object in their minds is to have the use of
another woman. It is a yielding to a lower impulse.
It sets bad example 6 , an example many today are follow-
ing. It makes it hard for those who have put this
practice behind them or are endeavouring to do so to
see others engaging in it, and the practice is growing.
So we ask that in those areas where Mission influence
is being generally exerted, that bigamous and polygamous
marriages be not permitted, and that where such unions
have taken place recently to the detriment of others,
they be allowed to continue no longer.
"Safeguarding Regulations relating to
Marriage"
That as a safeguard to girls marrying
before they are mature or young girls being married
to elderly men or girls who have married according to
native custom, being put away by their husband without
sufficient cause, in those districts where practicable,
it shall be required of the people that they be married
either by a white missionary or a District Officer.
97




In the work of visiting the churches, often
amongst those who come forward to be married are girls far
too young to become wives whom we have to send back to
their guardians for a further period. Those who appear
before the Missionaries to be married are only a small
proportion of those who arc married according to native
custom. Consequently, numbers of men must be living
as husbands with girls who are not yet of a mature age.
Vie leave it to the medical officers to tell us the
effect of this practice upon the vital statistics of
the country.
Then there are elderly men who have grown tired
of their old wives or who have buried them, who take to wife
young girls. There is nothing whatever compatible in such
a marriage which is often strongly objected to by the girls
but because the man has some influence in the village by
reason of his position, or his wealth, has to submit, with
the result that there is an unhappy marriage. Before many
years are passed, he is an old man while his v/ife, a buxom
girl, is still capable of bearing a family.
Another evil practice that has become prevalent
years is that of men putting away their wives withoui
sufficient cause, and taking other women. Many men refrain
from being married in the church for that reason, knowing that
a union thus effected to a great extent is binding and
permanent. They prefer to be free to put away their wives
if they so desire. The iniquity of such a practice is that
women are often put away without just cause. The man sees
someone whom he thinks he likes better, and he trumps up some
story about his wife to put her away. He then marries to the
other woman; maybe the story he spreads about his v/ife is
true, but probably he himself is the cause of her conduct.
Even i£ she is at fault, a man ought not to be allowed to put
away his wife simply because she is not an ideal helpmate.
There is a sanctity about marriage even according to native
custom that should be to a large extent binding. Often great
injustice is done to the woman thus put away. She is turned
adrift, frequently with a baby, to return to her own people.
Something of the stigma of a castaway rests upon her and her
chances are weakened of becoming the wife of another man.
We are of opinion that these evils would be
greatly mitigated if in those districts where practicable
the people were required to be married by a white Missionary
or by the District Officer who would see to it that the
girl was of age before marrying her, and would refuse to
effect the marriage of an elderly man with a young girl.
Having been married by a white man, according to the law of
the land affecting native marriages, a man would consider
his marriage vows sufficiently binding to warrant his not
putting away his wife except for some very serious cause, and
then only in the regular course.We feel it would greatly assist
if some simple marriage certificate could be issued by the
Government to be given to each couple.
98




Mr.
Chairman 1 would like Mr. Pilhofer to tell us how the
introduction of cattle in his district is affecting child
welfare. Are they giving the babies milk?
Mr.
Pilhofer At present I do not think the introduction of
cattle affects this matter because if a child reaches the
a ge of two years it will be able to eat some other food
and should the mother die before he reaches that age* it
it difficult to give the child the milk of the cows
because of its uncleanliness.
Mr.
Chairman I think that in the Gainings, where they, the
natives, goats, the Mission sterilises the milk before
it is used. At Malaguna, the women bring their bottles
daily to be sterilised and filled by the sisters, with milk
supplied by the Administration.
Father The trouble is that the native women must come
Mertens twice a day to the Mission station to have the bottles
filled with milk. I would like to touch on the point
of girls marrying too early. Dr. Cilento has already
said that the time of puberty is not so early as with many
other peoples and I would like that girls be only married
at the ages of 17? 18 or 19 years - the basis on which I
make this request is that about fifty per cent of first
born babies die.
Dr.
Cilento More.
Father I think that because girls marry too early, befor
Mertens they are grown up, is the cause of so many of the first born
children dying. If they were not to marry until they reache
the age of 19* I think many of those children would live.
But on the other hand, if mothers have to work heavily befoi
the child is born, I think that too would cause the death
of the child. And then there is the matter of cleanliness.
As has already been stated this is most desirable and I thin
we shall have to do a little bit to instruct young women in
this subject as has been done in Europe for many years and
will, we hope, be done here in a short time.
I would point out that we have started to give
Chairman. assistance in a small way in the free distribution of milk
to Missions for feeding children whose mothers are dead.
In the Bainings, about 5 0 or 60 goats were distributed among
the natives so that the children might be supplied with milk
The biggest cause of infant mortality is faulty feeding.
In Tabar, a man v/as not allowed to cohabit with’his w r ife
99




while a child was “being suckled - it might even he for
12 or 18 months. This was a counsel of perfection*
h especially in regard to natives* and in my opinion* nature
provided the remedy in polygamy.
Since polygamy is disappearing before Mission
influence* men now cohabit shortly after the child is
born with the result that the mother’s milk dries up and
the child is given Taro to eat. I would like the Conference
to put forward some concrete scheme in the matter of
child welfare. The Administration is prepared to do all
it can. It has been proved from the vital statistics
supplied to the Administration that a very high rate of
Infantile Mortality exists throughout the Territory*
something like deaths before the age of 1 year for
every 1,000 births. I would like the Conference to
consider some scheme to be placed before the Administrator.
|Mr. Pilhofer Referring again to the question of cattle - our
natives frequently desire to buy calves from our Mission -
we could sell dozens but have not the stock - and so we
considered the question of importing cattle from Australia.
The expense, however, would have made the price too high
for the natives. Could the Administration make some
arrangements in this regard?
Mr. Chairman Well, so far I don’t think they have ever con-
sidered the question. We have done nothing apart from
sending goats to the Bainings, and supplying Condensed
Milk to Missions.
'Mr. Pilhofer I tried to get some goats but they all died on
the hills - only cattle would do.
Mr. Chairman The German Administration supplied the local
natives with goats but there aren’t any left now except
one or two. I think they ate them at Sing Sings. The
goats did well here however.
Mr. Plierl There is danger of the cattle contracting ticks.
CWy Indian cattle would do.
a not >
Mr. Cox Are they /prohibited?
£r>- oilonto At the present time they are, for the reason that
we have here a very large number of Talanea flies and we
are afraid that if we import the cattle the flies may
cause a new disease in the Territory. But recently the
Administration has been informed that in Papua a large
number of cattle have been reared in Papua itself and v/e
have cleared the way so that any cattle bred and reared
in Papua can be imported here. The people in Lindenhafcn
have imported a lot from Gili Gili in Papua and they are
doing extremely well. The German Government made some
experiments in this direction and I have the figures, but
I did not bring them with me. Another thing* it is
extremely difficult to spread cattle amongst natives.
Natives, unless they have had special training, will not
look after the cattle as they should be looked after* and
the result is they either take very little care of them
or attend to them so little that they die. So it would not
be good business to buy high priced cattle for the people
100




when they will not look after them. Even when they have
the cows they seldom give the milk to the children and when
they do give it they do not p.repare it the right way. Unless
we could have some kind of an institution where the
feeding could he done under supervision and even then the
work is so great that the small numbers of Doctors and
Missionaries could not cope with it. If we did have an
institution we could at the most attend only to about
20/30 women and even that small number would have to live
right close handy. When you have trained natives they are
still very thoughtless and will still feed their children
on Taro. I remember once training a woman for four years 5
in the jth year she had her 4th child and still after all
her training she fed it native fashion. It is very
difficult to do anything in this way. There are two
things I might mention at this juncture. Amongst the
Sulkus if a woman becomes pregnant her husband deserts her -
consequently the woman conceals her pregnancy or abort
herself. There are some twenty faeans which will sometimes
bring about abortion - acting on the principle of Tannic
Acid. These preparations are as a rule accompanied by
considerable danger to the woman. They abort themselves in
many other ways which we will deal with under Section 9«
There is one method of abortion here which is always
successful} i.e. abortion by contraction of the Uterus
and to make the Uterus contract} the natives expel the childj
be regular tapping. The woman is placed on her back and
her pelvis raised in the air. The foetus about the end of
the second or third month is located by a capable woman who
taps it by short jabbing with her after an hour
contraction sets in and the foetus is expelled. These
practices can only be overcome by education. There is
nothing that I as a Medical man know except these tv/o -
the betterment of the sociological conditions and of these
one is food. Eood must be better. Now I can take some rat£
aged about say 5/6 months old and I can write on their head*
the day each one will die and it will die on that day - or
during that week say. One will die every day* suppose we
take 20, one will die every day by giving them food contain*
ing poison, that is to say not containing Vitamines. You
can watch them right through and you can produce signs day
by days although they may seem quite healthy you can
produce the signs of old age. They become many more times ■
susceptible to disease than a normal rat. In natives, the
same conditions may be observed owing to their unvaried die’
The growth will not be regular, e.g,* limbs of irregular
length, and they become very susceptible to disease of the
bowels and the respiratory system, as for instance tuber-
culosis and pneumonia and dysentry. Not only will he be
unhealthy but he will be mentally deficient and will have n<
desire to progress. You can take any race you like and
discuss the diet of the race or you can give me the diet an<
I will describe that race to you. You can take any race at
all and determine where it stands in the scale of health.
In the diet of these natives you will find:-
(l) that in their diet there is too much carbo-
too much starch and sugar, too little
proteins or meat fibre.
Practically any food matter may be classed into Vitamines
A, E, and C. B you will find in their diet but A and C you
will not find*
101




A and C, and I speak now from the most recent experiments in
England, Germany and America are those factors which
determine the vigor of children and freedom from disease.
How I leave it to you gentlemen that one of our tasks and
a very definite one is to increase the diet of the natives
in their villages hy teaching them to grow and hy encour-
aging them in their growth of more foods containing Vitamines
and especially Vitamines A and C.
Some time ago, I had printed a small publication
on this matter which with the permission of the Conference
I will place before the Conference tomorrow, and I think
that in it you will find some indication on the lines in
which it might be found possible to increase the survival
rate. Apart from that I think it would be extremely
difficult to suggest any other method of increasing the
health of the country or of reducing the mortality rate
except upon these lines.
Mr. Hargetts spoke of the question of bigamy. I
am not concerned with the ethical side of the problem but
only from the point of view of abortion and infanticide. I
have found this a very largo factor and I place the follow-
ing before you without comment. At one place half the
women admitted to me that at some time or other they had
practised abortion. They only admitted this after a good
deal of questioning by me and after I had examined each one.
I believe they thought I could tell from that examination
and that otherwise they would not have confessed. In many
instances the husband has only the one wife, and if she is
pregnant then no one can look after his garden, and as they
could not do this their husbands insisted that they must
not remain pregnant. Over and over again I hoard this, the
women could not remain pregnant because then they could not
carry out the duties allotted them by their husbands.
The second factor that militates against the
survival of the children is the fact that a little v/hile
after one child is born the mother becomes pregnant again, so
that before she can look after the first one properly she
has another child. The birth of the second child is the
signal for the death of the first. As soon as the first dies,
the second comes on - until she has another child, and so on.
I took the trouble to get the ages in many instances and it
seemed that the first child would die at the age of 18
months at which time the mother would have a second, but
this v/ould die in another eighteen months when the third
was born, and so I would find it - one child living out of
three - if there were no further children the third lived, if
there was another it died.
The only way to deal with the problem is by
instructing the natives in hygiene and gradually lifting them
up to a higher level. It will be useless unless something
is done every year for two generations, for otherwise in
fifty years, the race will be extinct.
Mr. Chairman As it is 11.15 a.m. we will adjourn for ten minutes
Gentlemen,
The Conference re-opened at 11*30 a » m *
Mr. Chairman The subject for discussion, Gentlemen, is Section
5 of the Agenda Paper - “Native Child Welfare’ 1 .
102




Rev. Margotts I think the Conference would he very pleased
to hear Dr. Cilento as to just what is the effect of a
girl marrying before she reaches maturity.
Dr-* Cilento The effects are these. There is apt to he a
very considerable cramping of the child’s head with the
result that many first born children die.
Secondly 9 in many cases the mother dies. In
many cases where the child is successfully born there is
a very great risk that the uterus will not return to
its original position or its original condition. The
effect is that the uterus does not readily become healthy
again and when it is not healthy it is very heavy, and
being heavy, it falls backwards, the woman is constantly
suffering from pains in the backs she frequently
suffers from pains and cannot be impregnated again.
The results are bad health, and the risk that she will
not have any more children for several years. You may
sum up the position thuss-
(a) When the woman conceives? she may not boar
the child,
(b) She may die in bearing the child.
(c) Some fifty per cent first born children die.
(d) The uterus will not readily go back to its
original position and condition with the
result that the woman is unhealthy and not
so fertile as before.
Rev.Margetts Thank you.
It is because of those statements made by Dr.
Cilento that we have hesitated to come forward with a,ny
very definite scheme because it would seem almost
impossible to correct in a short time the position as it
exists nov; in regard to the abnormally high death rate -
not only of children but also of adults. Dr. Cilento has
spoken of the conditions which he has discovered after
long and patient investigation and he has found more or
less extremely small families amongst the natives - that
is not an indication that there are few births ° 9 there may
bo many births but the survivors are few. I think? though,
that the Doctor will have been quoting facts and figures
relative to more primitive conditions? i.e. conditions
amongst natives who are less advanced perhaps than others;
and there is an indication I think? that in some districts
at any rate, there is some improvement in the conditions.
We notice instances of this in our Missions - there are
many considerable families amongst Mission teachers. I
don’t knov/ just v/hat the position is now, but we have
remarked on it in other years.
Throughout every part of the Territory I have
observed so many men in the hey-day of their manhood
fall ill and die for very little reason and I have too
observed some other facts, for instance, in our Mission
wo have to calculate that in the Mission work the years
of service of a native teacher will bo very short as
103




compared with the years of service of a European.
Erom our Ministers , we expect from 40 to 44 years of
effective service and after such service provision is
made for him to retire. The effective service of
a native after completing his training is something
under 20 years.
As regards the matter of diet. I lived for
some years in New Ireland, and I often remarked on the
amount of fat which people there consumed. They are
expert pig raisers (l am speaking of the central part
of Namatanai) they have the "best pigs I have ever seen
and they take the utmost care of them. They are
continually having feasts and large numbers of the pigs
are consumed. They take delight in eating the white
fat and many amusing stories are told of how the natives
revel in the pure white fat. I have a picture in my
mind now of a chief I once saw. He had his two hands
full of a mass of the purevhite fat which he was making
short work of. I have seen the chiefs eating great
lots of fat from the inside of a turtle. We have observed
that the best carriers come from that District and the
boys are regarded as the best labour in the Territory.
Perhaps this matter of diet has some relation to that
fact. I think that a large number of deaths are due
to uncleanliness, and the most unwise feeding of children
by their parents. I think that if some of the reprosen- 1
tations from the Missioh at Manus were here they could
tell us of what has come under their notice and the result!
of the general practice of feeding babies on taro and the
very large mortality that results from that practice.
I think that one outcome of this discussion
will be that we are forced to realise that it would
be well to propose that something be done to introduce
a better diet in the villages - that will be one of the
most useful things 5 and side by side must go on the
work the Missions are doing in trying to uplift the
people. And in this matter the Administration could
assist by giving some indication of the most useful
methods of teaching hygiene and other means that would
be v/orth our while giving attention to for the improve-
ment of living conditions and physical welfare of the
people.
Another matter worthy of consideration is
that of training lt would have to be done
in actual practice. We must have obstetric cases to
deal with before we can commence such training and
perhaps we might he able to get large numbers of natives
to for what assistance we could give.
Out of all this there might perhaps evolve a
system of training the people and teaching them, so that
they v/ould begin to hope for a new and a better life.
I think it would be of very definite assist-
ance to the Missions if some extension of the present
104




system of assisting the feedingJ* rf*°hm«n
We have had experiences at cared for 5
being brought to the two deaths occurred
they were properly fed and while control 0 f no medical
due to previous in £ iu £ nccs ld havo overcome, we have
practitioner and which no ono could lave ov
rescued successfully a very of ono 0 f the
I remember a representative that children
Commercial Interests remarking some years g invaria bly
who had been born and rearod°n plantations ance
fat and chubby, but soon village, so that the
on the return of their Parents If f he Adminis-
work must be continued a littl ntinue and possibly
tration can see its way clear to c P something
develop a little of ““'iSuio «the training of
along the right lines, and I oex to the villages
midwives, the introduction 0 alone the right lines in
and the education of the P®^ 1 !; ans f nd the most practical
hygiene, will probably be th<s me : n future to improve
methods we shall be able to adopt in the iu us if
the position. I think too, it wouldbe a wQuld
we had from Mr. Cilento some indicatioi _ uts may one
be the best foods PoasiWo for growing . * recommena-
fer*lf we ToSd have lines, it
| would help US to secure a° m * h P r^ a J C f oodfto be grown is
)r, Cilento T ha cause the customs of the
a problem of some diffic y instance? you
various vlllagos are so E ut
cannot force a village o i w iu prepare a
with the permission of the comp ieted in time,
i a ?iL°seM e a S copy C to the head of each Mission, if I may
| d ° B °* There is one little thing that
in connection with the remain ° likewise their
amount of fat consumed You will recall
fondness for the tips ° f ella kai-kai?" and the
the Pidgin, "This a f * lla} he go t plenty
boys invariably reply , their standard of excellence.
grease". ■Oreass' sso.na to 'bo therr J oiitlo „ e4 the ».te.
chairman During this discussi , prev f o usly discussed
of the formation of cr £^ e ® dtll His Lordship Bishop Vesters
the necessity for creches with H would * e establishet
and the Hev. “ ar f^ S ' ch district and wouldpare for
s S 3
tho native ™“!; n t “ e^smln ls tratlon Mould bo only too
g?ad o; £o a assist tho Missions in any such scheme.
105




Dr. Vesters I can ‘but say that we greatly appreciate the
attitude of the Administration. We shall he^ only too
pleased to help and we are prepared to start in the
very near future something of the kind $ it is only
a question of trained Sisters. I have seen these
institutions - creches as the Frenchmen call them -
in other countries of Europe? and can say that their
work is of enormous value and assistance to the
country. Wonderful results have hcon obtained hy
them especially perhaps in Germany. We shall do all
we can to assist in this regard and most certainly
we shall he able to do something along the lines
suggested. I believe the Administration is prepared
to co-operate with, the Missions in this question.
Confirming the exposition of Mr. Cox about
the enormous death rate of children in several parts
of the Territory? referring more perhaps to New Ireland?
I quite agree with the Hev. Mr. Cox in this matter -
we too have had our experiences. Some time ago? I made
a trip round New Ireland and the j)laces where we found
the greatest number of children were Ammear and Trya -
there were fewer in Tabar and fewer still iggOther
places. There is certainly a relation a.lsq/the question
of Indentured Labour. We cannot deny that of the
people a very large number is taken for labour and
towards these the attention of recruiters is directed.
There were many single women and many with children?
but I do not know of any cases of women coming back
from a term of indentured labour with children - we made
this remark to ourselves. They have nice clothes but
there is a total absence of children amongst these
newly returned. This must be a considerable factor
in the absence of children# I quote part of a statis-
tical return received from Eather Nerhaus of Namatanai.
Their birth rate is not very high. I will read it.
II At our station and sub-station there were in 19H ? 2175
people? and in 1925? there were 1750* a decrease of 1425
in 20 years? or 20 per cent. 11 This shows that tne native
are gradually decreasing in this part of the Territory.
The births are not so numerous as the deaths. Infantile
mortality is great. Many women have no children at all
for the following reasons 2-
(a) Laziness. They are too lazy to bear the
inconvenience of having children.
(b) Abortion. Infanticide.
(c) The absence of a fine for forced abortion. The
District Officer should be furnished with
instructions to fine heavily anyone found guilt}
of forced abortion.
Mr. Chairman. There is legislation to cover the offence of
abortion.
106




Dr. Cilento True? but it is almost impossible to secure
a confession.
Dr. Vesters The fourth factor is that many get divorced
at a very early age. There are too? other reasons which
have been spoken of by earlier speakers. The mortality
rate of New Ireland seems to me to be a very great one.
Many women who are with child do not come to a good
delivery so that the children die. Many women are content
with families of three or four? very few having more than
four to six children. Another reason is the prevalence
of sterility in this District.
I will quote a few figures of Father Folham
at St. Paul f s in the Bainings. During the period? July
1925/1926? there were 19 births and 36 deaths. From July
1926 to December 1926? there were 3 births and 17 deaths?
(12 children and 5 adults).
Mr. Chairman I think that the average mortality figures here
in this Blanche Bay District are very much more satisfacto
At Matupi for instance? the increase of population there i
approximately four per cent annually. It is an interesti
fact that in many instances a native population on coming
into contact with a European civilisation shows a sharp
decrease for the first twenty years? then there is a perio<
when very little improvement of population is shown? and
after that the population increases. This fact is borne
out by the statistics which we have collected from Matupi
and sub-districts of the Blanche Bay District. These
districts are under such a measure of control that our
statistics may be taken as correct. j
Hev. Margetts With reference to the suggestion that something 1
be done either by the Administration or by the Missions
with regard to the caring for and feeding of babies? I
think we shall have to be very careful that we do not take
from the people a responsibility that is theirs. The
people here have a very great love for their babies? it is
not of course? as great as the love of a v/hite mother has
towards her child - but it is considerably greater than
that of the mothers of some other countries. One cannot g<
through the villages or come in contact with the natives
at all without making this conclusion. i
Only one day last week? returning from the
Conference? we passed a small family on the roadside.
There were the father? mother and two or three children
and in the mother f s arms was a little baby" and there
was the little thing crowing with the greatest delight
and pleasure to the father and mother. That sight we saw
on the roadside is a very common one in the villages.
They are a people who love their babies and it is a common
practice in the villages if a mother should die? leaving
a lit tie baby? for some other woman to come forward to
take the place of the mother. I know of many instances
where mothers themselves with large families have taken
care of• such motherless children. And so? Mr. Chairman?
107




I would ask that we be very careful in not taking this
great responsibility from the people and leading the people
to believe that the Missions and the Administration are
prepared to be foster mothers to such motherless children.
ITo matter how many children the Missions or the Administration
could take care of, the work would only be like a drop of
water in a bucket. The people would get the idea that there
was no longer any need for them to look after their motherless
children for the Administration and the Missions were prepared
to act as foster-mothers. The matter has been exemplified
on my own station where several motherless children have been
taken care of. When another mother died the father brought
his children to the Mission to be cared for and the result
was the relatives and friends were not given an opportunity
of caring for the children. I feel, Mr. Chairman", that it
would be greatly over-loading both the Missions and the
Administration if we were to take this work up to any extent.
I feel that we should not take the babies away because they
belong tothe people and if we can train the people to look
after their babies it will be very much better than if we
looked after them and took this very great responsibility
from the people. I have thought Mr. Chairman, of the Papuan
scheme where a bonus is given for every child after the fourth
by one wife, if such bonus could be given here, might it not
encourage the people to have more children?
•Plierl What Mr. Margetts has told us is quite right. We
cannot take from the people their own responsibility. In
our District if a mother dies, the child is looked after by
another mother, but often she has not enough milk for the
two children. In our Mission, we only take the babies in
very real cases of need and we return them to their villages
as soon as they are strong enough. We never keep them for
more than three years at the most. That is the right course,
with regard to the betterment of conditions, we have made
observations in our Mission area. At Tomy Islands, when the
Mission came, there were but a few people; there is a great
number now, something like 220, and so in other areas. It
is wrong to take the little children and the better plan
would be to train the people to take care of them themselves
oy giving them the correct nourishment and eatables. We
have over there, some Indian corn which we have taught the
natives to .sow. We have many other foods besides, includ-
ing the different varieties of taro and so on. Formerly,
the people always had a period of hunger when the taro
cultivated gave out, but now owing to the introduction of
Chinese, and other taros, there is no longer any of those
hunger periods. This Chinese taro will grow in places
where the ordinary taro will not grow. In other parts we
have sown peanuts. As regards the taking of the babies
I ao not agree with this and I think it is far better to
leave them to the people and to train them to look after
them.
. Cliento To conclude some of the remarks made by Dr. Vesters,
I quote some figures from the Southern part of Mew Ireland.
In 191 b, the Methodist Mission at Omo and Pinehedu supplied
108




me with some figures, and of a P°P u l ation T °r„? ’^oo,
there were 268 more deaths than hirths. I followed
the figures up last year, and the results were 3
per cent deaths which is a very cons iderahle figure.
Working out these figures, it can easily he seen t
if something startling does not happen the people
will he extinct in 57 years. The problem is a very-
pressing one. Progress must he made every year for
two generations for unless progress is made every year,
there will he no population after two generations.
Mr, Flierl has pointed out that example ox
Tomy Islands. ¥e can expect those results wherever
there is someone working for the good of the natives.
Where you have a Mission working in a smai:\ ar ®* + irm .
must tend for the natives' progress. But I want y
to fix your attention on the great area, where there is
no one today - neither Missions nor Government; hut
already other evil influences - I heg your pardon
should say already evil influences are at work there -
the Trader and Recruiter. I would ask you therefor
to turn your attention towards those areas on the
threshold of the country which are controlled slightly
today, and which may he wholly controlled tomorrow.
If you can only lay down some groundwork on which tne
Administration can work I know that in so far as rfl y
department is concerned at any rate, it will he greatly
appreciated. The points we have to safeguard are
those of disease and under nourishment. If you can
"put the spur" to our activities, we will he very
grateful.
Mr Chairman Before closing the discussion, I would like
the Conference to consider the subject of creches. _ I
can assure you the Administration is prepared to give
material assistance. The object of the establishment
of creches would not only he philanthropic, hut also
educational.
Rev Pilhofer As far as my experience goes, little children
amongst our coastal natives suffer intensely from
malaria, and very many die oh account of it. If ™ey
are brought in at the right time, we can save them, hut
if it is too late of course they die.
Another evil is Whooping Cough - at least
70 children have died from Whooping Cough. Our hill
people are in much better conditions than those near
the coast and the hill people are increasing very much.
Mr. Chairman As it is now 12.30 Gentlemen, we will adjourn
till tomorrow at a * m *
109




Proceedings of the Conference,.
Seventh Day, June 28th, 1927.
The proceedings commenced at
Mr. Chairman I declare the Conference re-opened.
I regret that I have not been able to obtain a
stenographer for this mornings but as it is close to the
end of the Financial Year, the Treasury is not able to
spare Mr. Costello.
The subject for discussion this morning. Gentlemen,
is Section 6 of the Agenda Papers which deals with Education
in Agricultural Pursuits. I will ask Mr. Hopkins to give
his views on this subject.
Mr. Hopkins I dealt the other day with our scheme in the Markhaj
Valley; apart from that, we find it a very difficult matter
to induce the natives to give the necessary attention to the
cleaning of their coconut groves. At presents we have two
inspectors whose duty it is to go round and inspect the
native plantations. They interview the Luluai and Tultul
and report to them if the plantations are unclean and give
them instructions for the future. Sometimes these instruc-
tions are carried out but more often, I am afraid, no notice
is taken of them. This is where the Missions could co-oper-
ate with us and render us very great assistance indeed. If
the Missions could point out to the natives after the
Inspector’s visit, the great benefits that would accrue to
them by carrying out the Inspector’s instructions and back us
up in this way, it would not be so difficult. Our idea is
to develop the natives’ own ideas, not to interfere v/ith him;
to show him methods by which he can increase his output.
We have then, two inspectors going round and
looking at crops and showing the natives some practical ideas
of agriculture. Another thing is trying to induce them to
grow commercial crops. We have, of course, the cotton in the
Markham District, but we cannot say that has been altogether
a success. Their point of view is that they don’t see v/hy
they should grow commercial crops when they can make more
money from traders. Some boys come in to the station and
learn - but when they return to their villages they don’t
make use of their knowledge - they soon forget all they have
learnt and it is very little benefit to them, and that is
when the Mission can also help us.
We have also two agricultural instructors
stationed in the Markham Valley, v/hose duties are to instruct
the natives in the growing of various economic crops, includ-
ing coconuts. When I was over in the Markham District, I
eaw the benefit of this help. Some of the coconut planta-
tions were kept nice and clean and the bananas mulched. Thit
was largely due to the Mission help. The cultivation was nc
so good in the lower Markham as in the One of the
troubles is that the boys are natural agriculturalists
in the latter district.
on cne appointment of the new Director of
Agriculture, the present scheme may possibly be extended.
I would like to say again that the work of the
two inspectors v/ho go round will be of little use if the
Missionaries do not carry on the work after their visits.
110




Rev. Flierl I would like to say a few words. Our Mission,
* and I am sure, every Mission is thankful for the helping
hand of the Department of Agriculture, for their advice
and supply of seedlings etc. We are prepared to help
the natives to make progress in agriculture. In some
places we have keen successful, hut in others we have
found the natives too apathetic.
On the low hills close to our Mission in Madang,
there is good hlack soil, where coconuts grow well. The
natives grow more coconuts than they can consume. But they
have organised themselves. They smoke their copra and
have made one of the hoys an inspect or | he goes round
and tells all the other people. They have their own store
at Bilihili and their own hoat. As soon as they get a
boat load, they send it over to Madang. We are, of course,
very pleased to see such progress, hut it is not everywhere
that coconuts grow so well, in the mountains for instance
the coconuts will not grow. It is only close to the coast
that this can he done.
Mr. Chairman One of the main features for developing native
agriculture in Papua, is the growing of rice in the Mekeo
District ° 9 this scheme has been very successful. The
Government have erected a rice mill in Port Moresby, and
in one year, I understand, the natives grew 300 tons. But
the same trouble was experienced in that the natives looked
after the crops until they came to maturity, hut compulsion
had to he used to make them garner the crops.
In the Buna Bay District, coffee was grown, hut I
heard from the Controller that continual pressure had to
he exercised to make the natives keep it clean.
When I was in Kieta as District Officer under
the Military Administration, I made every native plant
coconuts. If a native was away under Indenture, his social
group planted the number of coconuts required for him, and
fathers planted the necessary number for their sons of
immature age. The last count which I took shortly before
I left, of coconuts thus planted was 73f 1 never had
the slightest trouble after the initiation of the scheme.
The natives marked out the position of their plantations
and took the greatest interest in them. In fact there was
instituted the greatest rivalry amongst the various villages
in regard to these plantations, the general cleanliness,
and well being of the community.
I am sure that the Administration through the
Department of Agriculture is willing to help the Missions
with seeds of economic plants for distribution to native
communities. Already on my recommendation. Kapok seeds
have been ordered to be* sent to the Lutheran Mission in
the Morobe District. The main difficulty with the economic
products of native communities living away from the coast,
is the difficulty of transport to the market, but at
Pinschafen a motor road runs up to Sattleberg at an elevatior
111




of 3,000 feet and some distance inland. I was impressed
by the native agriculture in this district which has been
fostered by the Lutheran Mission. I would allude to the
p growing of English potatoes and other vegetables which are
usually not found in a tropical clime. I also found in
most of the villages of this district a very wide distribu-
tion of cattle which have been sold to the natives by the
Mission. I understand that the Mission have no difficulty
in fostering the growth of economic plants amongst the
people o
When Dr. Cilento and I were out at Matty and
Awa, we determined that the excessive death rate there was
due to lack of food. The only food available was vulau a 7
large species of swamp taro, and fish. Several kinds of
field fruits have been sent to them and the last report we
had was that they were growing well.
I would like the Missions to impress on the native
that the Administration will give them every assistance in
planting and that they will pay them ruling prices for their
produce.
The trouble has been very largely a question
of marketing. Can your Mission buy larger quantities Mr.
Plierl?
Hev. Plierl I think now that Salamaua is established we
could do so.
It. Chairman I feel sure that if the Missions write to the
Agricultural Department, they would be glad to supply plants
and seeds c
Dr. Wolff I have no doubt the Missions will be glad to
help, especially as by this means a higher standard of
health among the natives can be obtained.
I have some experience in Africa, where the
natives are better planters than here. The:* Government are
trying to help the natives to grow coconuts, cotton, cocoa,
and other things the same as here. They found that a pure
culture of coeton did not pay, but when they mixed crops,
perhaps cotton one side and maize on the other, then the
crops xoaid all right. The African Government had the same
difficulty at first as we have here, the natives would not
plant, but after a time, the District Officers persuaded
them to make plantations and these were called Kiap
112




plantations *
Our Mission in Madang tried to get the natives
to clean their plantations, hut the natives say that there
is no profit in it, some traders offer them as low a
price as 100 coconuts for one shilling*
Mr. Chairne-n Hound here, the price i s 17 for one shilling.
Dr. Wolff That i s a good price. In Africa, it was seen
that it v/as no good getting the natives to grow crops if
there were no traders to buy their produce i there were
traders on the Coast of course, but very few in the
interior. The Government said, therefore, that if cotton
were planted, they would guarantee to buy it at current
prices if there v/as no trader. This was a good thing
because if the trade would not pay the current price,
the natives could always get the Kiap to give them a fair
price.
It will be the same here. If the natives are
sure of a good price they will take an interest in their
crops - but if not, they will not, and the Mission can do
nothing.
I have tried to make the natives trade for
themselves* I asked the District Officer and he says
there is no Ordinance forbidding this. There are of
course, a great many traders and difficulties might arise.
But I repeat, that if there is no profit the natives will
not grow crops.
Hev. Flierl I would like to say that I agree with Dr.Wo Iff.
There are, round our Mission, many very good coconut groves,
but they are not in good condition. In 1923 and 1924 the
Mission were not in a position to buy from the natives,
but the conditions are better now. The natives sell some
of their produce to Chinamen and some to the Mss ion, but
they say that the Mission pay better prices. I hope that
now the groves will be better looked after.
Mr. Chairman There is an amendment coming out in the Common^
wealth Gazette to the effect that the Government can fix
prices for produce. During the Military occupation, there
was a trade monopoly in the Western Islands. (Maron and
neighbouring Islands) and the firm of Wahlen only paid 2/"*
a bag for Copra - Copra was then selling at £44 a ton. This
was stepped by General Johnson, who, of course, under
Military occupation had more power than the Administration
has now.
Once traders know that the Administration has
power to fix prices, it will have the effect of stabilising
the prices for produce. As you will have seen in the
Gazette the ITissan Group has been resumed and it is now
possible to establish further trading stations there. All
this v/ill tend to make prices better.
113




Dr. Wolff I think it is a good thing that the
Government is going to fix prices* Our Missions
are not allowed to trade by canon law. That is to
say - we are not allowed to buy and sell for higher
prices o Perhaps we might buy from the natives and
sell their produce and give them all the profit. I
do not know if this is against the law.
Rev. Plierl A Mission station can have a trading licence*
Dr. Wolff Ho, it is against our canon law.
Hev. Cox I think, Mr. Chairman, you referred to Papua.
Is it not a fact that coconut plantations are made too.
Mr. Chairman Every native in Papua plants 10 coconuts. Th
Government sells the copra and gives the natives half
and the other half goes to trust fund for the natives.
There are, of course, more traders here, than in Papua,
in the Hew Britain District there are something like
220. Where the traders are paying good prices there i
of course no necessity for Administrative action.
Dr. Wolff Could not some regulation be made so that the;
could not sell coconuts, but only copra? I don*t mean
force them, but, for example, forbid Chinamen to buy
coconuts.
Mr. Chairman Well that is another aspect of the matter. T 1
Administration is probably bringing in a scheme for the
grading of copra, and thus improve the quality. A good
deal of the native copra if not improved in quality
would then be quite unsaleable.
Rev * a regulation is good for all parts.
In Ui~oCJiafen we cannot dry copra in the sun, we have
to smoke it. Some of the natives bringin their green
coconuts to be dried'in our kiln.
Mr.Cnairman We hope that the natives will ultimately
have their own kilns* that will solve the difficulty.
Rev. Cox When the old regulations were in force the
traders bought green coconuts. Will Mr. Hopkins give
us some indication as to whether the cotton scheme is
a success? Is it not a fact that it is open to question
Hr. Hopkins _ Yes, it is open to question, upland cotton
is all right here, but it has not proved a success in t Jr
Markham Valley. Sea Island cotton would probably do
better; a new type is being tried in the Valley but
the reports at present are not altogether favourable.
I am surprised to hear they are having trouble with
stainers there; I was under the impression that the
Mqrkham was free from stainers.
114




The cotton experiments are still being carried
, out but it is too early to say whether it is a profitable
proposition,
Rev. Cox The people of these islands are land people; would
it not then be an eminently practicable scheme in addition to
teaching trades to teach agricultural pursuits 0 cannot
touch the whole bulk of the people and this is an economic
Question- I think it would be a wise move on the part of
the Administration in addition to Malaguna to devote a
large area of land for such training, not only for economic
crons but for food stuffs J The need of the native for
money is limited but the need will increase. They now eat
tinned food such as they never thought of before. The more
pressing need is for the better class of food to be grown
for their own consumption. It would be more help to the
natives to secure for them a general agricultura.l trainings
so that they could produce better food* and better crops, alsc
better copra - and to assist them along those lines.
It was suggested by someone outside the Territory,
when the Administration was first feeling its way here,
that some of the Expropriated property should be used for
such a purpose. The Administration has the matter in its
own hands - they can resume land.
Chairman And pay for it.
v, Cox They can proclaim any area crown land. I
suggest that this would be a practical line for the
Administration to take, Tr 7e feel that the Mission is bound
to give its moral support to the• Administration and help in
the work of keeping the groves clean, and free from pest;
But if the Administration would follow the line they
suggested, the natives could be taught to grow economic
crops and there would be no shortage of food such as taro,
yams, tapioca,, etc. On the plantations it w ould not be
necessary to resort to rice. They might have home grown rice
as a change, but I was thinking of imported rice.
It would be worth the Administration giving
their attention to securing better prices for the natives.
Some areas are exploited most unjustly, If they had
some protection it would help them to develop, I remarked
yesterday on the increase of the population of Matupi as
shown by the vital statistics. The population all round
Ha.haul is increasing, part!}?- due to the fact th-t there is
no indenture labour in Matupi, but also because living
conditions are good. I think as much as possible should
be done on the lines I have indicated for the good of the
natives
115




T£ r . Chairman The Markham station was started for this reason
the idea being to extend the scheme so as to have a
similar station in every district. It is now the intenti
of the Administration to establish a garden at Toma for
the growing of foods for the natives, i.e. indentured
labourers in Rabaul,
Rev Cox We are all gratified to hear that the scheme wa
started in that connection, hut it would, of course,
necessary to find adequate markets. If not by competitioi
then by establishing an Agricultural Depot, I hope it
will not be taken amiss if we comment on this movement.
The scheme commends itself to us, but it would
benefit to the people if the station were a training
establishment, not for attempting to grow cotton or
economic crops but as an experimental farm for young men
to learn to grow all crops, I think this would
adequately serve the purpose. Could not some more suitab
place be found than the Markham Valley, somewhere more
accessible 9
Mr, Hopkins The question is would boys come to be trained 9
Our experience is that they would not. At Sangang, we
grow all foods. Our experience there is that the boys
come in for three months as casual labourers and we
instruct them. They then go back to their villages and
that is usually the end of it. Hew would you get student,
to come 9
Dr, Wolff I agree with Mr, Hopkins, It is not like
Australia, where the students fee to a college and are
interested in their work. Here the natives are interest©'
in their schools. The Mission can do a lot in this
they can make them interested in their
plantations then they can go to the school,
cannot hope for very good results* I agree it is difficu
to get boys to come, they are afraid it is merely the
white man T s ruse to get them for indenture,
Rev„ Cox The Administration has launched the scheme. If
there are no students the whole thing falls to the ground
I suppose some method will be found to get students, X
do not think the method of getting in casuals will be fou
satisfactory. They will not apply much knowledge after
three months; several years will be necessary. If only
cotton is to be grown, it is not a practicable scheme. I
the students are indentured, great care will have to be
taken tha,t they do not get the impression that they are
being taken to work merely as indentured labour. Each
student could have a part of the station for which he was
entirely responsible and get any profit that was obtained
from it. Is it conceivable that if indenture failed,
force might be used 9 If some such system were introduced
progress would thus be expedited, and surely the diffioul
are not insurmountable*
116




Tr w n lff Then the agricultural schools were started in
r ’ Africa, we had some experimental men from America and
they did very well. ¥e had the natives in the schools
for'one or two years and after that they helped with a
niece of land and some animals. The results were not
entirely satisfactory. Another thing was that Mission
Teachers were Invited to attend the school during
vacation. The Government paid for them. This was
attended with some success. The teachers came home an
opened up school gardens. These were small beginnings
hut the Missions liked the scheme and were pleased witn
the results,
Mr. Konkins One of our difficulties in the Markham is that
it is newly onened up country, and the people do not
understand the aims of the Government. In a year or
two' s time the young men will come and ask for instruction
At first they think it is a device of the white man to
get labour, w© should then he able to introduce them to
new plants, and they would be keen on them and so get
interested,
Mr. Chairman Is there any further discussion on this quest lor
Gentlemen 0
Rev, Hargetts What steps are taken by the Government at prese)
to get the people to keep their groves clean
Mr Hopkins Two instructors are sent round to the Luluais ar
Tultuls, Pamphlets in the native vernacular, have been
circulated to all the Missions, giving instructions to th
natives on this matter, If any Mission has not received
them I still have some I can let them have. The reports
coming in have been filed for some time now and these sho
a gradual improvement, There is great difficulty in
getting the boys to act on the instructions, wl ii
listen all right to all that is said but it ends there.
But conditions ar©lmproving every year on account oi the
inspector's visits. There is sufficient work for more
inspectors than we have at present.
Rev, Pilhofer Me must be careful not to disappoint the native;
the Markham scheme, We all know how easily disappointed
the natives a
Mr. Chairman A certain amount of compulsion will always have
be used as I said before, in Papua, the natives had to be
compelled to garner their crops. Is there any further
discussion, Gentlemen 9
Father Eirschbaum Is it intended to grow anything else, rice, for
instance 9
Mr. Hopkins Yes, certainly. We intend to grow rice among,
other staples.
117




1 Mr o Chairman I think they grow only sago in the Gepik,
) Father Kirschbaum 9
ather Kirschhaum We grow tobacco too, In 191? j we grew about
16 tons of native tobacco, but now we only get about
1 ton a year . We would like to have better seeds. May
I ask what kind of rice it is intended to grow
Mr, Hopkins Yes, the Upland rice.
Rev, Margetts Is the Government prepared to supply seed
coconuts for the Raining District 9
Mr Konkins I ca,n hardly says there should be no difficulty^
what ouantities would be wanted? a few thousands 9
Rev. Margetts Yes,
Mr, Hopkins I will ask the Administration about it.
Mr, Chairman We sent a consignment of seed coconuts to the
Bainings, and the natives paid for them in kind.
Dr, Wolff When new seedd are introduced, would it not be
better to try them first instead of giving them straight
to the natives. In Africa, I remember, they introduced
a different kind of maize but the natives did not like its
it tasted bitter. They also found that the native maize
grew better,
Mr. Hopkins Tha,t has been our experience here.
Dr. Wolff I would suggest that if we introduce any new
seeds, that they should be from equatorial Africa,
Mr. Chairman The finest maize in the world was grown in Papua;
some was sent home to London,
Mr, Hopkins We sent some samples of maize to District Officer
to try out, but it did not turn out as we expected.
Mr, Chairman Is there a,ny further discussion, Gentlemen, on
this question, or would any member like to say anything
Child T7 elfare 9 Well, we will take question 8 on
the Agenda Paper - native Marriages. This question was
brought up by every Mission, but a.s yours was the first to
raise the question Mr. Flierl, will you open the discussio
Rev. Flierl There is one suggestion I would like to make - an
that i£ that there should be as little interference with
native marriages as possible either by Missions or by
District Officers,
The natives in this matter are best left to
themselves. The elders and councils understand the nativ
customs and the native mind as no white man can, Therefo:
if they are left to themselves they will solve this questD
118




themselves under Christian influences. Our marriages are
not made by the Missions hut hy the elders, although we make
a little difference between counles who are Christian a.nd
those who are Heathens* The elders have always done it, and
done it well. They take council over it before they do
anything in the matter.
Mr, Chairman There is a proposed amendment to Regulation 66 of
the Native Administration Ordinance that sayss-
"Provided that the provisions of this regulation
sha.ll not apply to marriages between natives which have been
solemnised in accordance with the Marriage Ordinance 1012-14' 1
The Crown Law Officer has given his opinion that
marriage under the provisions of the Marriage Ordinance can
be divorced by native custom.
Rev, Plierl I was under the impression that divorce was not
sanctioned by the Government, It is not sanctioned by the
natives themselves.
Dr, Wolff What is the definition of a minister 9
Mr. Chairman The names of ministers authorised to celebrate
marriages are published in the Gazette.
ev, Cox I do not think the matter has been satisfactorily
defined. Under the Marriage Ordinance white marriages are
registered, but there is nothing to prevent native marriages
being dissolved by native custom - such a position can but
create chaos. Could not something be done to prevent this 9
do not suggest at present that native marriages conducted
by Missionaries shall be registered under law. We keep such
records in our private books of course, but they are not
registered, and the Marriage Ordinance only applies in a
very few cases,
r do not think there is anything in the Ordinance
that provides against a marriage registered under the
Ordinance being subject to native custom. Is there anything
to prevent us continuing our practice of many years T standing?
. Chairman There is no divorce for marriages solemnised
under the Marriage Ordinance in the case of natives being
the contracting parties. There was a case in the Central
Court not long ago, where a Japanese wished to divorce his
wife, a native woman. He could not do so because there was
no clause in the Ordinance to permit his doing so. The
Matrimonial and Jurisdiction Ordinance, Section 60
says § -
'’Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance
contained nc suit or other proceeding for nullity of marriage,
dissolution of marriage, judicial separation or restitution
wiTjjtgal rights shall be instituted or maintainable by
or against any person who is an aboriginal native of New
Guinea and whose marriage is the subject of such suit or
other proceedings.
The term "aboriginal native" of New Guinea means
any aboriginal native of the Island of New Guines/or any island
119




adjacent thereto and also any aboriginal native of any
island in the Pacific Ocean or of any of the East Indian
islands or of Malasia and also any person who is wholly
or partly descended from any aboriginal native as aforesaid.
In Papua, if a European marries a native woman
divorce is impossible . An amendment has gone South to make
it possible for marriages to be dissolved where one of the
contracting parties to the marriage is a native.
Dr. It sometimes happens here that the natives, who are
Wolff Christians, get married, perhaps before the Missionary or by
natives and the District Officer comes along add says that
such marriage is not legal and gives permission for the
girl to be married to another man. Should not such a
marriage by the Missionary he legal and the District Officer
have no power to interfere?
In many cases the Father (priest) is the only
qualified witness to matrimony among natives, in these cases
it does not matter if they are Christian or not.
Rev. Prom the legal point of view there are only two sorts
Cox of marriages described. One under the Marriage Ordinance
and one under the Native Administration Ordinance. Dr. Wolff
is right, there is no provision in any Ordinance for the
recognition of Mission marriages. The District Officers say
that Mission marriages count for nothing. Could we not have
an Ordinance dealing with native affairs by whicn Mission
marriages would become valid and oificially recognised?
Mr.
Chairman I had a letter from Mr. Doepke of Manus on this
subject in which he says •-
"When appointing Kukurais, that more regard be given
to the "big men" of the village, in preference to appoint-
ing ex-police boys or other indentured natives, to tnat
office.
That as many young men are quite unable to obtain a
wife owing to the more wealthy men buying up all the avail-
able women, the number of wives held by one individual
be more restricted, and that men desiring marriage be
compelled to submit their application to the District
Officer."
I do not think that this would be quite feasible.
We will now adjourn for teh minutes.
Adj ournment*
Mr.
Chairman I now declare the Conference re-opened. The subject
is Section 8 of the Agenda Paper, Native Marriages.
120




Rev.
Cox Could we ask the Chairman for the proposed amendment
to the Marriage Ordinance?
Mr. I think the amendment has gone South. These are the
/chairman Regulations under the Native Administration Ordinance
(1) Every marriage "between natives which is in accord-
ance with the custom prevailing in the tribe or of
natives to which the parties to the marriage or either
of them "belong or belongs shall be a valid marriage.
(2) The Administrator may forbid the marriage of a
native woman in accordance with native custom if
woman objects to the marriage and has been educated in
European surroundings, or has acquired European habits
to such an extent that, in the opinion of the Adminis-
trator, it would be a hardship to compel her to conform
to native custom.
Rev. Cox
Could we have the new amendment laid before us?
Mr. Yes, I can get it for you, would you like to adjourn
Chairman in this matter or will we continue the discussion?
Rev. Cox There is only the point raised by Dr. Wolff, I have
nothing to add, except some provision should be made in
the Ordinance for the recognition of Mission marriages. I
think the Conference should be able to work out something.
At preset native marriages are recognised and Mission
marriages are not. If a Missionary conducts a marriage of
wnite people it is binding, but if a Missionary marries
natives the marriage is not binding, and this is what we
want to secure.
Father I would like to state a practical case. The Church
Kirschbaura may celebrate a marriage between natives. The Kiap comes
and says that someone else can take the woman, that means
that our marriage is nothing.
Mr. The only way out of that is to marry by native
Chairman custom first.
Father
Kirschbaum Yes, but they say that such Church marriages are
not binding.
Dr.
Wolff That isr the Judge’s opinion, but surely a Christian
marriage is higher than a native marriage.
Rev. Cox
I have the impression that under German custom it
was the practice to legalise Mission marriages, perhaps
someone else may remember.




~Mertens I can "bring the German Regulations tomorrow. Jnder
native custom the woman is sometimes forced to taxe a man
she does not want. Would it not "be better to have
provision made that both parties have liberty of choice?
According to native law the woman has no say at all, she
should be as free as the man. The Catholic Churcn never
admits divorce. I think cases should be made harder than
at present; there should be an enquiry made and statements
taken by both parties. Some provision also should be made
for the children. The petitioners should take their case
before the District Officer who should not grant a divorce
before a full enquiry has been made.
Hr*.
Chairman There is a Regulation which says
"If a marriagebetween natives has been dissolved the
party who by native custom has the duty of maintaining tne
children of the marriage shall maintain them in accordance
with that custom. Any native who commits a breach of tms
Regulation shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty- Dor a first offence, three pounds or
imprisonment for four months or both. For a subsequent f|
offence, five pounds or imprisonment for six months or botn.
D r.
Wolff The Regulations that Hr. Chairman read say that the
District Officer may forbid a marriage - is that right,
Mr . Chairman?
Mr. * , ,
Chairman Ho, the Administrator may xorbid.
•TN
Wolff It is the custom in certain districts to force the
natives to marry. If there is force then is no contract.
In canon law, if there are witnesses to prove that iorce has
been employed, then the canon says the contract is irnyalid.
Therefore as the natives reach a higher level, something
should be done to make both parties free.
Llr
Chairman The policy of the Administration is not to interfere
with native custom, so therefore we cannot intenere with
their marriage customs if they are not repugnant to the laws
of humanity.
Rev.
Hargetts Read a paper
"Safeguarding Regulati ons Relating to_jJarriage
That as a safeguard against girls marrying "before they
are mature, or young girls being married to elderly men, or
122




girls, who have "been married according to native custom, those
districts where practicable, it shall be required of the
people that they be married either by a white Missionary or
a District Officer.
In the work of visiting the churches, often amongst
those who come forwardo be married are girls far too young
to become wives, whom we have to send back to their guardians
for a further period. Those who appear before the Missionary
to be marhied are only a small proportion of those who are
married according to native custom. Consequently, numbers
of men must be living as husbands with girls who are not of
a mature age. We leave it to the medical officers to tell
us the effect this practice has upon the vital statistics
of the country.
Then there are elderly men who have- grown tired of
their old wives, or who have buried them, who take to wife
young girls. There is nothing whatever compatible in such a
marriage,'which is often strongly objected to ay the girl;
but 'because the man has some influence in the village by
reason'of his position or his wealth, she has to submit, with
the result, an unhappy marriage. Before many years are passed
he is an old man while his wife, a buxom girl, is still
capable of bearing a family.
Another evil practice that has become prevalent in
recent years is that of men putting away their wives without
sufficient cause, and taking other women. Many men refrain
from being married by the Church, knowing that a union thus
effected is to a great extent binding and permanent. They
prefer to be free to put away their wives if they so desire.
The iniquity of such a practice is that women are often put
away without just cause. The man sees someone whom he thinks
likes better and he trumps up some story about his wife
to put her away. He then marries the other woman. Maybe the
story he spreads about his wife is true, but probably he
himself is the cause of her conduct. Even if she be at
fault, a man ought not to be allowed to put away his wife
simply because she is not an ideal helpmate. There is a
sanctity about marriage, even according to native custom,
that should be to a large extent binding. Often a great
injustice is done the woman thus put away. She is turned
adrift, frequently with a baby, to return to her own people.
Something of the stigma of a castaway rests upon her and her
chances are weakened of becoming the wife of another man.
We are of the opinion that these evils would be
greatly mitigated, if in those districts where practicable,
the people were required to be married by a white Missionary
or a District Officer, who would see to it that the girl was
of age before marrying her, and would refuse to effect the
marriage of an elderly man with a young girl. Having been
married by a white man, according to the law of the land
affecting native marriages, a man would consider his marriage
123




vows sufficiently binding to warrant his not putting away his
wife, except for'some very serious cause, and then only in
the regular course. We feel it would greatly assist if some
simple marriage certificate could he issued hy the Government
to he given to each couple.
Rev.
Plierl We have our different difficulties in different places.
One of our difficulties is that young men coming from over-
seas see a woman they want and go to the histrict Officer and
say they would like to take her, and the marriage is made in
a few minutes. Some of the communities are very hitter about
such proceedings, and I think such praatices should cease.
Rev.
Cox Is there any provision in the Ordinance for Distriict
Officers to make marriages? It has been reported to us from
Kavieng that sudh. marriages have taken place.
Mr.
Chairman There is no provision made, hut I know it is done.
The only man who can perform marriages in Rahaul is Mr. Street
who is the Registrar.
Father
Kirschhaum hoes the Government recognise marriages where the girl
has been betrothed at the age of two years?
Mr.
Chairman Yes, otherwise itwould he interference with native
custom. Sometimes the tamhu is returned and the betrothal
dissolved.
hr.
Wolff The natives considerrsuch a promise binding. Could we
not have an Ordinance to say that such promises made after a
certain year were not binding? There are many cases whete the
girl does not like to marry the man to whom she has been
promised, and it is very hard for her to be forced.
Mr.
Chairman I think marriages in the Missions are on the increase.
Rev.
Pilhofer I think it should always be borne in mind that the
natives are not individualistic but communistic, and they have
their pride. We cannot treat natives like white people. Some-
times a boy wishes to take a girl, and his clan will not agree
to it. Then he may go to the District Officer and get his
permission to take the girl. The District Officer treats him
as an individual. This is a great shaking of native customs'
and causes very great bitterness. And all I have said refers
to divorce. Our people have no real divorce. It may sometimes
happen that a man sends his wife away, but not often because
124




they have to pay such a high price for a wife. But now
divorce is made easy "by the District Officer, who "bases his
opinion on European standards. Of course if the two parties
agree to divorce nobody will hinder it, and it must he
recognised hy the Government and the Mission. But every
step that interferes with the native’s own custom causes
trouble .
"Rev • _ , .
Hargetts Hay I ask the Chairman if there are any regulations
for the safeguarding in the case of native marriages girls
being "bought when they are too young?
T./T T
Chairman There is nothing in the Native Administration Ordin-
ance.. Perhaps there is something in the Marriage Ordinance.
The age of consent is left out.
Section 21 of the Marriage Ordinance only applies to
marriages solemnised under that Ordinance.
Rev.
Margetts In view of what Dr. Cilento said aboat the serious
consequences arising from the marriage of young girls before
they reach the age of puberty, could not some clause be
iinserted to safeguard such girls from too early marriages."
Mr.
Chairman There are no existing regulations.
Rev. Cox I was glad to hear Mr. Pilhofer refer to native customs.
We all know how dangerous it is to interfere with them more
than is necessary. A District Officer should be able to inter-
fere in a marriage, if the girl has not reached the age
puberty, even if it cut& across native custom. If the natives
come to the Missionary to be married, we cannot turn them away.
On the other hand, as Mr. Pilhofer says, it is dangerous to
interfere. Some eager Missionaries would try to do away with
the buying of wives, representing it as an iniquitous practice.
But'some of us regard it from the other point of view. Purchase
acts as a safeguard for the woman, the woman belongs to the
relatives, therefore she is protected. To put it baldly, she
is a source of income.
I will tell you of one experience. There was a couple
who lived quite close to mo, and one night the woman was very
brutally treated. The next morning the relatives of the woman,
who lived some miles away, were down on the beach
enquiries about it. Therefore I think interference is a bad
thing.
But I think the Government should have some power in
regard to fixing a wise age; they could, for instance, give
instructional o the chiefs.
125




Rev.
\ Flierl The natives’ rights are not laws and some of them are
evil customs, hut we must look to the influence of Christian-
ity to gradually rectify this. In our district the marriage
of young people is frequent, hut I think the marriage age is
ri s i ng.
Mr.
Chairman What is your opinion, Mr. Margetts? Is the age rising
in your district?
Rev.
Margetts I am afraid there is no improvement, Mr. Chairman,
especially in the Toma district.
Mr.
Chairman What is your opinion, My Lord? (to Dr. Wolff)
Dr.
Wolff The Mission Father always tries to send them home if
he thinks they are too young.
Father
Kirschhaum On the North West coast I am afraid the age is decreas-
ing. There is very little chance for a hoy of 16 to get a
wife as alj. the young girls are taken hy the older men. On
the'coast there is a great shortage of women. The hoys have
to wait a long time for a wife even in the hills, too long
in fact.
Mr.
Chairman What is the position on the Sepik?
Father
Kirschhaum The cage is decreasing there too. Boys used to wait
until they were initiated, hut now they don’t have any
initiation.
Father
Mertens If a Chinese marries a native woman, must he marry her
legally?
Mr.
Chairman Yes, the marriage must he legal. A Japanese was recent-
ly fined under Section 7 of the Native Labour Ordinance,
for not marrying a native woman.
Rev.
Hargetts Kay I ask, Mr. Chairman, if there is a Government Regul-
ation forbidding old men to marry young girls?
Mr. t 0
Chairman There may be instructions to District Officers/that
effect. There is noregulation because of the policy of non-
interference with native customs.
I think the suggestion to fix the marriage age an
excellent one, though I may say that there is no lav/ in Europ-
ean countries to fix the age - not even the age of puberty is
specified - I heard of a case only the other day where the girl
was only 12.
126




Rev. Cox There was a questionnaire sent round to the missions
with reference to the marriagq'bf old men to young gir s.
is the policy of the Administration on this point, is it
suggested that regulations should he made?
Chairman Yes, the Administrator on his trip had complaints laid
before him at nearly every place he touched at.
-i t nh the marriage age in our district is rising,
h lerl moinly due Jo tS iSencc the councils. *. have not come
across many of the difficulties mentioned. The T £at is one
instance, do not permit young girls marrying. That
reason why we are anxious to have the councils legalise .
Chairman If there is no further discussion, gentlemen we will
leave the subject to the Committee of Findings and take Section
9 of the Agenda Paper - and Section 11 after Section 9, so tho-t
Dr. Cilento can be present when we discuss Section ie.
We will now adjourn.
127




PROCEEDINGS ON 29TH JUNE. 1927.
Eighth Day of the Conference.
The Chairman declared the Conference re-opened at 9*3^*
IHr.
Chairman I find that Regulation 66 reads as follows*-
"Every dissolution of a marriage between natives which
is valid according to custom prevailing in the tribe or group of
natives to which the parties to the marriage belong, or, in a
case in which the husband and wife belong to different tribes or
groups, is valid according to the custom prevailing in the tribe
or'group to which the wife belongs, shall be a valid divorce or
dissolution of marriage."
: Rev ,
Cox That is more satisfactory.
fcr.
Chairman I will read the proposed amendment to the Marriage
Ordinance. (Notes read frcm Advisory Council file).
There was a case when a Japanese took a woman from
Arawe. Her people came after her in canoes and were finally
picked up by the "Nusa", and came in to me to complain. If the
Japanese had brought the woman to the Registrar, he could not,
on legal grounds, have refused to marry them if they were over
the consent, and both consenting parties.
Rev.
Cox Does that mean 16 in the case of a native woman?
Mr.
Chairman Yes. We propose to enact legislation to have the
power to stop a marriage referred to above if we think it
should not be contracted.
Rev.
Cox Could we have the proposed amendment again, please
Mr. Chai man?
jKi*.
Chairman Reads the amendment.
Rev.
Cox That might be two natives.
Mr.
Chairman I would like the opinion of the Conference, as to
whether an officer should have power to prevent these marriages.
Rev.
Cox I think the power should be vested in the Commissioner
of Native Affairs. I think it most undesirable that there
should be a general marrying of natives under the Ordinance.
128




r>!ni man Of course, native marriages are another thing. If
Chairma discussion on this section, gentlemen I
think we will pass on to section 9 - *ut Mr. Margetts, who
is not able to he present, would like the discussion on
secret societies to he deferred until tomorrow.
c l e J' Do we take the list in order. Hr. Chairman?
Chairman Yes, homicide comes first; there I s Y f£y little to
say on this subject. I need hardly say that the Adminis-
tration are suppressing it.
Is it hery prevalent in any particular areas?
Chairman We know from court cases that cases occur in every
Chairman t> Jn Mad£ , ug lately there was a case of the kid-
napping of a plantation hoy in order to sell him..for ni
head ’ In the case of homicide, the Conference may like
a native accused is given every assistance. Counsel is,
however, fA^cLfLd^aU^Tcustom
So There is a case of rape «.
+ V|P Court in which counsel has been hrie±ed.
Other cases ace defended hy Mr. Oorfe of Hatlre Affairs
Department. Mr. Hogan, the Crown Law Officer, although
Prosecutor, gives Mr. Corfe assistance.
We will now pass on to adultery, I think that was
one of the crimes that it was suggested should Wealt
with hy the Luluai, Mr. Cox, and yen too, Mr. Plieeri.
Cox Yes, it is proposed that it come under their juris-
diction. I would suggest that it is worthy of consider-
ation whether action might not he taken when the injured
party refrains from taking action.
Chairman At present, complaint Is restricted to the hnshand
or the wife. But that has’ been amended. If a hoy was
away at work under indenture, and his wife committed
adultery, no action cr -. Id he taken, hut the amendment
the husband’s relatives to lay the complaint.
Cox* I hope this matter will come before the native courts.
129




If native custom is carried out, it is a punishable
offence and complaint can be laid by a husband’s rolati/es,
so why should a technical provision against native custom
be made in the Ordinance?
Jhairman This was the Regulation (quotes regulations), but
the Regulation has been amended.
Dr •
Wolff You mentioh the injured party. Has a husband not
the right to protect his wife if she is accused? The
innocent party should bo able to decide whether action was
to be taken.
Mr
Chairman This amendment was made in order that the husband's
relatives could take action against the wife-
Dr. . .
Wolff I don’t think that is- right. Sometimes a boy is
away under indenture for 3» 4, 5 or even 6 years, and the
girl waits and waits and doasn’t know if her husband is
coming back or if he has taken another wife; that is the
difficulty.
And then couldn’t something be done to do away with
the promising of wiTes? The g£irl is sold when she is 2 or
3 years old and that means she keep the contract all
her life a contract which the girl has not made herself
and has no right to break. I think wome provision^should be
made to make suvh promises invalid. Perhaps the girl doesn t
like the man, she may have/been educated in the Mission, and
she finds she doesn’t like the man, he may remain pagan or
take another wife .
She might refuse marriage, but under the Ordinance
she is bound to marry.
Rev.
Pilhofer According to native custom in adultery cases, the
relatives have the right to lay the complaint - in the case
of a wife it usually is the uncle, who is her guardian.
Mr.
Chairman Under the amendment it is now the husband, ther wife
or the husband’s relatives. Do you think it should be
extended to the wife’s relatives?
Patixe r
Mertens I know of a case where a man has been married 8 times.
I think divorce should be made much more difficult.
130




Mr •
Chairman I think that matter might ho left in the hands of the
Luluai or Councils.
Wolff I think it should he more difficult, thqy should come
before the District Officer or Luluai and he should try
first to make peace between them, and send them away and tell
them to come hack in one or two months’ time and perhaps by
then they would have settled their differences.
Mr.
Chairman Like a decree nisi under European Law. Is there any
further discussion on this question? We will now pass on to
the subject of Homo-sexual practices.
I brought up this question at the Advisory Council
some time ago when we were discussing indentured labour,
but I don’t think it can be stopped by legislation. I wrtte
to the Administrator on the subject and he replied that it
had to be stopned. I recommended a draft amendment to the
Native Labour Ordinance, which would stop the practice of
older boys on the plantations having small from the
villages' around to work for them, do their cooking and odd
jobs,"etc. But this was considered too drastic. I them
referred the matter to the Government Anthropologist. He
said he thought that employers could stop it, and that the
passive party should be prosecuted (at present the
party is not prosecuted). But I think if the passive party
were prosecuted, we should not have any cases reported, _and
I also find employers quite apathetic on the subject. Has
the Conference any suggestions to make? I have seen a
report of a Conference held between the German Government
and the Missions on this subject and they were fully alive
to the evil. However, nothing was done - their suggestion
was that single women should be brought on to plantations
but I think that practi not be countenanced.
Y/hen the Government Anthropologist was im Papua in
charge of the New Guinea copper mines, where they employed
1,000 boys, he Stated they introduced a number of married
couples from the Goaribar! District, where the women are not
immoral, but unmoral, and husbands are complaisant.
Rev. . . ..
Cox May I raise the question, Mr. Chairman, whether
this would not come under the heading of Native Labour'.
Perhaps Dr. Cilento might give us some useful advice as he
knows more about the subject of homo-sexual practices than
we do.
Mr. .. ,
Chairman We will wait for the attendance of Dr. Cilento before
pursuing this subject. You desire toisfer to Polygamy, hr.
Pilhofer.
131




Rev.
Pilhofer The District Officer gave permission to take a second
wife to a native official, seeing it was a native custom -
hut if the clan does not allow the custom, the Government
should not allow it either.
Mr.
Chairman In Papua, native officials are not allowed to take two
wives; if a village constable takes a second wife he automat-
ically loses his office. There is no legislation here to
prevent polygamy. The mandate says that there is to he no
tnirerference with native customs except those that are repug-
nant to the principles of humanity. In Papua, polygamy is
fast disappearing. We might do something here in the way of
prohibiting Luluais and Tultuls from taking a second wife.
Dr.
Wolff Yes, it is disappearing, hut sometimes Luluais and
Tultuls abuse their power in this way and get: more than one
wife. I think native officials should he deprived of their
power if they commit bigamy;. I do not mean make it illegal
hut it would he prevented in this way.
Rev,
Cox May I raise the question of the wording of the regul-
ation under the mandate pertaining to customs not repugnant
to the principles of humanity, Mr. Chairman? In some areas
the interpretati on of th:.s principle has led to a retrograde
movement. The Administration officials are not allowed to
interfere with native customs. Dor instance, in some villages
there are houses of prostitution, I believe there are many in
the Manus District. These were closed, hut a District Officer
gave ■Demised on for them to he opened again; of course, they
have again been closed. It is difficult to know the best
means of dealing with the question of polygamy, hut we can
certainly approve what has been suggested. There is a strong
feeling that in areas which have been under effective control
for so long and have been under better influences, that the
limitation of the powers of the Administration under the
mandate has definitely resulted in a retrograde movement.
These natives who come under white influence know and under-
stand the reason why certain native customs are bad, but there
has been a reaction. There came a time during the war^ when
chiefs became influential, through association with whites,
and they discovered that they had liberty and license that
had not seemed possible before. And then they felt the
promptings of the old man and reverted to the had old practices.
Mr.
Chairman Do you think polygamy is on the increase?
Rev.
Cgx Yes, I think it is. Dor instance, in the Duke of York
Islands, chiefs who are influential use such influence to
obtain a plurality of wives.
132




Some people who hear of these things down South say
it is the Missions’ business to stop these things; well, it
is the Missions’ business - but it is the Government’s business
too. Of course, we cannot do much in uncontrolled areas, but
in certain areas, for instance round these parts, a great deal
could be done.
Is it reasonable that native customs of this sort be
allowed to go their own way? In matters of this kind could
not some legislation be introduced? I don’t propose to inflict
hardships on a people who do not understand, but I do think
something could be done in this matter.
Mr. | .
Chairman It would mean an amendment to the Ordinance.
Rev. Cox Yes.
Rather
Mertens Head a paper.
‘•As the Mission has been severely blamed bn many occas-
ions for interfering with native customs, it may help to clear
up misunderstandings if I mention a few words in conoluaija
about native customs in general and our attitude towards them.
Reflecting on these charges of ’’Missionary interference
with native customs”, I can only conclude that those who maxe
them have not a very extensive knowledge of the subject, i
shall enumerate just a few casual examples of native customs
whiuh, I venture to think, would scarcely meet with their
approval.
When a woman gave birth to several sons successively
it was the custom to strangle the latest arrival. This was
supposed to ensure the birth of a daughter next time and
subsequently much tamboo.
When a man was dying it was customary for his relatives
to hasten him up by gently strangling him or hanging him
by the feet. The object of this was to conclude the obsequies
before the news got round; should a big crowd assemble, much
tamboo would have to be distributed.
Poisoning, superstitious actions to bring about an
enemy’s death, killing by driving a piece of spear into the
anus of a man, twisting the neck to right and left untilthe
victim was dumb, strangulation with the rope of a sling in
case of incest, mutilaf.cn -f a dead body at the KOMKCM cere-
mony, extortion of tamfcso f rust fee poor, plundering of plantat-
ions theft of tamboo, eta , violation of women idleness
during several months at the duk-duk dances, eatrng of porson-
oS substances, as u. •*,*. » Um-, which rendered them
133




stupid for the rest of their lives, cruel murders, cannibal-
ism, slavery, the burning of a dead chief together with his
living wives, as at AROWE, these and numerous other customs
opposed to Christian morality and the laws of civilised
nations, have been “interfered with” by the Missionaries but
who will say that such interference has been detrimental to
the natives?
By means of religious instruction, Christian education
and moral persuasi on the Missionaries continually endeavour
to suppress such evil and injurious customs and they make the
abandonment of them a necessary condition for membership with
the Church.
Good, or merely harmless customs are never interfered
with . We know from long experience that the natives are
healthier and happier, and better in every way, when relieved
from the tyranny of degrading customs.
I think it will be conceded that the Missionaries are
in a position to acquire the most accurate knowledge of native
customs owing to their intimate association with the people
for a long period and their familiarity wit3/the language.
Again, taking into consideration their professional training,
I think it may fairly be assumed that they are sufficiently
competent to discriminate between GOOD and BAD customs from
the moral, physical and social points of view. If then, act-
uated by Christian and philanthropical motives, these Mission-
aries labour zealously, yet intelligently and discreetly, to
eradicate evil customs, and supplant them where necessary with
good ones, can their interference be regarded as blameworthy?
I think not.
Hence it is that we do not fear the ignorant statements
and unkind insinuations of our critics because we feel complete-
ly confident that the Government, having at heart the best
interests of the natives, will recognise the value of our efforts
in this and similar matters and will encourage and support us
in carrying on our work.
Rev.
Margotta Road a paper *-
"BIGAMY AND POLYGAMY IN CLOSELY AREAS.
While the people in/this part of the Territory are
generally monogamists, there have always been those who have
had two or more wives. We have no desire whatever to inter-
fere with this custom in those area® where Missions are not
operating, or where as yet Missionary work has no great hold
on the people. Sven in those districts where Mission work has
been long established, and where it counts for much in the
lives of the people, we do not wish to interfere in the bigam-
ous or polygamous habits of those who for long years have
lived in then. We feel, however, that in such districts no
further marriages of this character should be permitted, and
that such unions that have taken place recently, to the
134




detriment of others, should not he allowed to continue.
While in some enlightened districts the practice of
having more than one wife:- is tolerated no longer, in others
it is growing. Without stressing the ethical side of oLe
question, the practice has to he considered in the light
of race-preservation. That a man has a plurality of wives
does not necessarily mean that more children horn IY } uo
the world. Many polygamists have hut snAll families. very
seldom do satisfactory conjugal relations exist between a
man and his wife when she knows, that other women have
perhaps an equal or larger share in his attentions and
regard; neither has she the same desire to raise children
to him when she knows that other women are also mothers
his offspring, so abortion is practiced and means taken
nrevent conception. A woman has not the opportunity/nor
desire to fulfil her mission in the world when she is only
one of a man’s wives. So the race suffers. J
elder y man. tired of the wife he has had through the years,
will I take a young girl as a second wife. By the time she
i: up Ld still well able to boar children, he baa
become something of a spent force. An iniquitous ieatur
of biearnv and polygamy is that in order uo satisfy some
men’s d?si?e to ha?e several wives, often othermen have to
do without. Young men grow up to find all
have been taken by the older men, and not being sexless,
adultery is the result.
In almost every case where there is bigamy or
eamv there is domestic unhappiness. After a woman ha. 3 perhaps
been wedded to a man, she deeply resents another woman
ooming to share her place, or maybe take her “ * he a
home. There are jealousy, taunting, hatred, and
fighting. In Fiji such women bit off one another s : noses.
¥e have not heard of that being done here, but it io not
because there has not been the desire.
We frequently hear that polygamy is Practised in order
to get cheap labour for garden work . No doubt that is take
into consideration when men take more than one * d
others engaging in it, a * influence is being generally
tW-- no^longer.
Chairman To show you ty
.. Ablingi,
135




during the Military Administration. As the members of the
Conference are no doubt aware, in the Arawe District, that
is on the South Coast of New Britain, if a man of any
standing dies, his wives are killed and buried with him.
The murder is done in this way. A mal is procured (mal is
the very long and narrow loin cloth worn by the natives of
the'Arawe District) placed round the neck of the woman who
is seated on the ground, a man takes each end of the mal,
which is pulled tight and another man or an old woman stands
behind the victim and jerks the head sharply back breaking
the vertebrae.
This practice had been going on for many years, when
an energetic Patrol Officer managed to arrest three of the
participants in one of these murders. The Patrol Officer
took them before the District Officer who heapd what he had
to say. After hearing his statement, the District Officer
said, "Give them six Sticks of tobacco and send them back to
their village, we must not interfere with native customs."
I simply quote this, gentlemen, as an instance of what did
actually occur and the attitude which can be adopted by an
inexperienced officer.
We will now take Section 11 of the Agenda Paper and
leave Section 10 till Dr. Cilento van be present. Section 11
deals with Native Labour problems.
i
I would like the Conference to give particular attent-
ion to the question of married men taking their wives with
them on to plantations, that was one of the matters under
discussion when the new Native Labour Ordinance v;as being
framed.
Planters are divided on hhis question. One of the
main features in the new Ordinance is that every labourer has
to return home every three years. There is a provision to
this'effect inserted‘for all labourers except house servants
and skilled labourers.
I believe there is to be a meeting of returned soldiers
to protest against this new phase of labour conditions, the
plea being that it makes labour more costly and is not necessary.
But it is necewsary, as we know, both in regard to inc-
rease of population, for the mitigation of disruption of village
life, and for the prevention of illegal recruiting practices.
Every native is a factor inthe social organisation of
his village; he is a member of a social group, and has certain
responsibilities, also, he has usually certain properties to
look after. If, therefore, we remove such a unit from an
organisation for a considerable length of time, it must tendtt)
disrupt the whole social organisation of the ln
regard to the movement of population, it is an established fact
that where we close a district to recruiting, an increase in
the population is shown in a few years.
136




> The removal of a number of the virile population of a
community must have its natural effect on the vital statistics
of that community. In regard to the third phase, the Adminis-
tration are aware that whore a boy is allowed to make a new
t paper in many cases' an unscrupulous employer will exert
constant pressure on the native before going home until he
succumbs and re-indentures.
Other* employers after paying their boys have purposely
allowed them to wander about until the money they have rec-
eived is expended and they are then compelled to return to
their employer, and re-indenture. Soma employers have said
to me that we should not force a boy to return home, as such
an act is against the liberty of the subject, but I am com-
pelled to say that one of the worst features of the indenture
system is the element of compulsion that exists within it. I
said to this same employer, ,f lf a boy, three months after
making his contract, came to you and said that he wanted to
return home, would you allow him to go?" The retorted
"Certainly not." Where then is the liberty of the subject in
that case? I also contend that with the establishment of a
system wherein a boy returns home to his village after indent-
ure without re-signing before his return, that this will be
a step in the direction of our ideal of free labour. There is
nothing at all to prevent an employer, when a boy is returning
home, giving him a paper asking any captain of a vessel to
give him a passage toihe employer's plantation, and if the boy
is willing to return, he will take advantage of this order.
If, as it has been stated, the old man of his social
organisation would prevent his returning, how did the boy get
away in the first instance, when he made his first paper?
Ho, gentlemen, in my opinion the returning of boys to
their homes a.fter indenture without being re-signed is
essential, if we are not to be charged with not paying due
regard to the welfare of the indigenous members of our popul-
ar i on.
ev.
liehler Read a paper, presented by the Lutheran Mission.
NATIVE LABOUR PROBLEMS .
The native labour question presents a very difficult
and also a very important problem. Already the demand for
native labourers is such a great one that recruiting is
becoming a heavy burden to the people. One recruiting
vessel follows the other and one recruiter walks in the
still Wc .m footsteps of the one just gone before. By means
of enticing, threatening and deceiving, boys are led to
follow the recruiter. Hot long ago, a recruiter sent his
boys to some hill people to tell them to come because the
Missionary desired to see them. After they reached the
valley they found themselves at the mercy of a recruiter.
Another sent his boys into an uncontrolled area with guns
who by force brought out a number of boys and one girl. In
137




addition to this, Patrol Officers go and requisition the
hoys whom the recruiters were unahle to persuade in the
abovementioned ways, andthey also take men above the
age allowed to recruiters.
Some weeks’ ago, approximately 400 natives were in
this manner taken out of Azera and at present the+agme is
taking place north of Einschafen. Por the sake of/gold
fields hundreds of natives are sacrificed.
These conditions have been caused by the present
demand for labourers. We can assume that the future will
be even more dark because monthly if not weekly new European
enterprises are started and the opening of new recruiting
areas does not keep step with the demand for labourers. If
these conditions continue it will be harmful to village life,
and agricultural development by natives will be impossible.
This danger is conditioned not only by the large number of
natives needed by these enterprises but also: by the long
term the boys are absent from their villages.
Many of them are under contract nine and twelve years
without spending any time in their village between the differ-
ent contracts. During such a long period of time they become
estranged to village life, they become acquainted with every
possible form of immorality, do not do their part in increasing
the race, and become parasites of civilisation.
In order to preserve village life married men should be
recruited only for higher positions, for example, overseers,
and for place© where village conditions can be provided for
them.
The ordinary contract labourer shoulcj/be unmarried for if
he would take a wife with him she very frequently becomes a
prostitute, and if he leaves a wife in the village the people
there will be burdened in caring for her and the natural fam-
ily life is interfered with. Some difficulties in the system
of indenture would be lessened if the village natives would be
permitted to do free labour at near by plantations.
We consider it to be in the interest of native welfare
that in the future European enterprises be limited, for if
these would lead to a destruction of village life it would
slake the foundation of the Papuan race. Last year in a confer'
ence in Africa it was stated as a rule that only five per cent
of the male population should be employed by Europeans.
Rev.
Cox Is there anything in the amendment with reference to
the limiting of casual labour for three months?
Mr.
Chairman The ideal system is of course free labour. There is a
provision in/the new Ordinance that will permit boys living




within 25 miles of a plantation to work as free labour, the
wages to be practically the same as indentured labour.
I have a very interesting report from Tanganyika by
Major Crde Brown. If the Conference would like to see it, I
will bring it down. We keep the greatest check on recruiting,
and where illegal cases of recruiting are brought to our notice
they are very heavily punished. It was found, during the
German and Military occupations, that licences granted to
Asiatics were very much abused. We now only issue licences
to Asiatics who have businesses and plantations, and then only
fjr their own requirements.
We all know that recruiting licences may be abused, but
we are keeping the closest supervision possible on recruiting.
Conditions on plantations are improving. You have all
seen the new dietary scale - boys must be well fed - but we
have very fow complaints in that connection.
I would like to add a few words about the sdhemo for
married women accompanying their husbands on indenture. Some
of the big companies, particularly in the Kieta D.istri ct, have
stated their willingness to set aside a certain area for
married couples. Bach couple will be able to have a garden
which the woman will tend, and their life will approach as
near to normal village life as possible. .The families will
have medical attention. I think it is a very good idea.
Rev.
Cox Is it a fact, Mr. Chairman, that no women are recruited
i n Papua?
Mr,
Chairman I think it is, with the exopr ilon of domestic servants.
I remember the bimc* whan i>-wddngers on the steamers saw women
working on the wharves in P-ott Moresby and made a protest
about it.
Dr.
Wolff As matters stand, at present, we cannot do without the
indenture system. We should favour the system of free labour
as much as possible, I would like to ask, Mr- Chairman, about
skilled boys who live on the station, some of them have been
educated there. Would it not be possible for them to stay as
long as they liked as free labourers? Many of them do not like
to make a contract although they wish to stay.
Another matter, we have some boys who wish to work on
the schooner, they may live at home on the station with their
wives, if the schooner went away more than 25 miles, could we
still keep them as free labourers?
Mr.
Chairman Ho, it would be breaking the Ordinance.
139




Dr. _ _ ,
Wolff It is better to educate them up to free labour.
Chairman ' ' Provisions could be made for free labo** in certain
cases. Under the present system, a boy must be signed on
to a certain place. The Native Labour Ordinance has, on
the whole, worked very well.
Dr. , . .
Wolff We have had cases near Madang, where planters have
v/anted to renev/ a contract and the boy was v/illing. The
District Officer said he cannot renew it without going home.
The bay would then gat on the steamer and go somewhere else
and make paper somewhere else and not go home %at all.
Rev.
Cox I take it, Mr. Chairman, such cases are provided
against under the Ordinance. I think the time has come for
the Administration to look at the question from a very much
voider aspect. The population of the Territory do limited,
I think from the latest*estimate it is 400,000. That popul-
ation will only be able to develop a limited area. What the
limits are we cannot decide. Some estimate can be obtained
from the experience of a man like Judge Murray. But I think
• • the time has come for the Adninietratiott to take steps to
find out exactly what limitation is. r
I + > as a line of argument, that 40O t --O<X> peopi©
could reasrv—- -uly be expected to cultivate a certain area, to
b 0 arr i,ed at, then we'have to find out what proportion of
t>~ C x*<r u ,lation can. be safely used as labour for outside
interests,. ■ •
Mr.
Chairman We take 12jr per cent I think, it is in the annual
report to the League of Nations.
Rev. ‘ ,7
Cox That labour is only capable of developing a certain
area. Has the Administration gone so far as to ascertain
whether the alienation of any further land is safe for the
country? Would not the granting.of further lands be against
the interest of the planter, and the development of the country
in the long run?
We are glad to hear that the Administration is to grant
a certain amount of labour. I don’t know if the 25 mile
limit is altoget>* ;r a wise thing, but at any rate the new
Regulation is along the I think soma* x
could be mad* 1° test out whether tne o mile limit is a souhd
prinrmp-le* I think it might spoil the morale ox the people.
In our printing office we have some boys who have been working
there for many years, and drawing high salaries,, they are very
efficient. We' get over the Ordinance by saying they are there
for tuition. I think some • provision might be made for such
cases-w&ere they live further than 25 miles away from their work.
140




With reference to the proposal for married men to bring
their wives and families to plantations with them. I
think this would be a good thingy provided every safeguard were
taken against their becoming prostitutes. It would not be much
good unless the married men lived in villages set aside for
them, where single men were not allowed to live.
I think the proposal to make it compulsory for boys to
go home is a very desirable one. The system of indenture in
very many cases has worked great mischief and is undoubtedly
telling against the population. It has been our experience
that the period necessary is longer than three months.
Mr.
Chairman We will now adjourn for ten minutes.
Adjournment.
Mr.
Chairman (at 11.15) I declare the Conference ro>opened.
Dr.
Wolff. I agree with the new amendment, I think it will be a
very good thing, but I don’t think an extension over 25 miles
would be good. You might have labourers brought from an island
a long way away, and they might not be able to get home when
they wanted to. I certainly favour a scheme of free labour,
but perhaps at present it would be too difficult. Perhaps
where a boy is educated and he wishes to work as a'free labourer
it might be dome with the permission of the Administrator.
The Administrator might declare certain boys free ]abourers.
Rev.
Flierl When I came into Rabaul, this time, the puzzle was
solved for me. I often wondered where the boys in our village
had gone to. How when I am in the streets of this town, boys
come up and greet me, boys who left the village when they were
young and who are now fine big strong men.
It is very assuring to hear that a start is being made
with free Haboufc, it is a thing that will have to come some
time.' ' We know that some kind of permanent labour is absolutely
necessary, but when free labour comes no contracts will be
needed.
In Java which is a seventh part of the size of the whole
of Hew Guinea inducing Dutch Hew Guinea, there is a population
of 75 millions, and of course with such a population labour is
easy to obtain. What they did there was to take over whole
villages into plantations, say - one village would work one
portion of a plantation and one another part. They would work
on the plantation and when their part of the work was done,
they were free, it was not necessary to work them all the time.
It has been said that the labour question is the burning
141




question for a colony - and the Administration will have to
see that too many labourers are not taken from the population.
Some boys are away six to nine years. This is very detri-
mental to both village life and the population.
What Mr. Chairman said about villages being estab-
lished on plantations is bery good. But one thing to be
feared is that when a man gets old and is no longer able to
work he will be turned out of the plantation and have to go
back to his own village where he would be strange and a
burden on the community. But we hope the best way of doing
it will be found.
Mr.
Chairman In some cases what Mr. Plierl has suggested has been'
tried, namely in Matty and Awa, certain parts &f plantations
have been given to villages to keep clean and look after and
the Company have given them £5 a ton or the copra. The
Company supply the bags of course. They paid the boys £1,200
in Matty last year.
We are trying to extend this system. Permission is
given 'under the Native Contracts Protection Ordinance.
Permission is granted in evefy case so as to encourage the
system.
Rev.
Cox I wish"to make myself quite clear. We accept all the
qualifications and limitations that are laid down, on general
lines. And we quite recognise that the colony is not yet
free for a system of general free labour. But we hope that
consideration will be given to individual cases, where they
entail hardship.
The Conference looks on indentured labour as a differ-
ent thing from Contract labour and we are now discussing
indentured labour. It will be a Jaappy day for the people and
for the whole colony, when labour will be entirely free, but
that day is not yet in sight.
Mr.
Chairman With regard to the number of natives employed - in
1922, it was about 24,000. But what I would like the Confer-
ence to bear in mind is that cattle and labour saving devices
are being introduced more and more and this will solve the
labour difficulty to a large extent. It is very difficult to
state or even to estimate the number of acres it will be
possible to place under cultivation, but cattle and labour
saving devices must be taken into consideration in regard to
the workable area. In the British Solomons they reckon that
one head of cattle is equal to three or four boys.
Rev.
Oox We agree that it is a misfuntune that so many restric-
tions are applied to the importation of cattle, although the
indications are that experience with Australian cattle has not
142




proved them as successful as in !the Solomon Islands. May I
ask, Mr. Chairman, whether the Administration has accepted
the figure of 12-g- per cent as a basic figure, I think the
figure in Papua is much lower.
'I only wanted to suggest that it was the duty of the
Administration to satisfy itself on these points.
Mr.
Chairman I believe there is a movement afoot to try to intro-
duce Chinese labour, but I don f t think there is much chance
of getting it.
Father'
Martens I would like, 'Mr. Chairman, to raise the question of
the age at which boys may be recruited. I believe the Regul-
ation states that no boys under 12 should be recruited; I
don’t know what age will be agreed upon, but I think 12 is
too low. Mr. Chairman states that the age at which a boy
becomes liable toimd tax was determined as the age at which
he had hair under the arm. If that is so, I think the age
should be 16 or 17- In Malaguna, Father Borgenhausen made
enquiries concerning about 40 or boys, whose names figured
in the Baptism Book. Those boys born in 1910 and 1911
already have hair under the arm, of thos© born in I§l2 only
one has hair arid on none of those born in 1913 and 1914 can
be seen any hair at all.
I suggest therefore that 16 is not too low a figure
to take and that they should not be forced to pay head tax
under 16, and until that age they should be called schoolboys
I have had a chart made out by the Rev. Father Meyer,
M.Sc. at Reber (Watom) during ten successive yearsshowing
the average growth of boys out of a population of 240 people.
The medium height of men is 166 cm. and of women 153 cm.
(See attached Graph).
It will be seen'that at 10 years -the average height
is 122 cm., at 12 years 133 cm., at 16 149 cm,, and at 17
years 152 cm. They are really growing therefore up to 19
years of age, the greatest growth taking plave between 13
and 16. Dr. Cilento has also stated that the best age for
instruction is from 13 to 16.
I suggest that they should not be recruited before
the end of their 15th year, and that until that time they
should be instructed by the Luluai to attend school.
Mr.
Chairman The fixing of the age by the hair under the arm is
only my own idea. In the amended Ordinance the age is raised
to 14. The question raised is, could boys of 16 be employed
as beetle boys?
144




The planters contend they would damage the trees.
Dr.
Wolff Mr. Chairman has said that the Administration would
like to restrict homo-sexual practices, and if the Mission
knew the way they would certainly do so. But there is only
one way that I would like to put forward. Too small
monkeys are employed on plantations, and if they are employed
they should he protected. Boys of 13, 14 or even 15 years
have not enough character, even if they are Mission hoys;
they are not strong enough to resist temptation, I therefore
entirely agree with what has heen said, that small hoys
under the age of 16 should not he recruited.
I think, too, that some age should he fixed for head
tax, if a hoy has ha-ir under the arm and he can prove he is
not 16 he should not he made to pay tax.
It .
Chairman The age 6f recruited hoys is rising. I know some of
the hig companies 'are stipulating that a certain percentage
only of small hoys should he recruited. Some recruiters
were bringing in so many small hoys that the employers now
lay down severe restrictions.
Rev.
Cox I do not think it unreasonable to aslc~ that the age
he raised to 16. I do not think there is much in the plea
that only monkeys can climh trees for beetles. It is cert-
ainly cheaper to employ them, we admit. There will always
he a certain amount of hoys on a plantati on v/ho can ! t do
other work.
After all, a hoy can expect a long life after 16.
The natives till they reach that age are too small, they are
not equal to heavy work, and I do not believe there is any
need to employ small hoys fo& special work. If we give hoys
opportunities to attend school and develop until they are 16,
it would he a step in the right direction.
Rev.
Pilhofer Mr. Cox asked about women being recruited in Papua;
Judge Murray in his states that he is strongly opposed
to the recruiting of women.
Let us look at this'from the standpoint of the natives
themselves.' Married hoys should stay in their villages with
their Y;ives, if not, they should not he forced to take their
wives against their will, their clans often object. If he
wants to take her and she likes to go, then he should not he
hindered. The other question, homo-sexual practices - I think
this vice could he checked if the policy was carried out of
hoys making one contract. The hoys who have' made two or three
contracts are the worst offenders.
145




At present, a boy whoso time is expired is off
immediately, and then perhaps he has to wait some time,
sometimes several weeks, for a boat and he is exploited by
Chinamen and spends all his money, and he is then ashamed
to go home. Such boys should work until they are able to
get away. They then have to mmke contracts because they
cannot go home with an empty box.
Mr.
Chairman The instructions to the District Officer here are to
pay the boy 10/- the day he is time expired and the remainder
on the day he sails. With reference to the boy working till
he can get a boat - he may, and often does, work for his
employer as a casual during this interval*
This question is engaging the attentioh of the Adminis-
tration. The suggestion is that the Administration should
take over all paid off boys and repatriate them. There arc
very great difficulties - the labour force is very large and
the inspectorial force is small. We are aware that there
are abuses, but we hope that if the Administration takes over
the repatriation of all labour that this question will be solved.
Dr.
Wolff There have been many cases where boys could not find
their way homsa. The District Officer has told me to take boys
home and charge their fare to the Board. I am glad to hear
the Administration is considering the scheme of repatriation,
because it is often very hard on boys who have to get home.
We are able to send bur boys right home, but we have our own
boat and the planters have not and so are not able to do so.
Mr.
Chairman Some planters personally take their boys home, but I
think it is exceptional. This question of repatriation'is
most seriojn and I repeat - is engaging the very serious
attention of the Administration. Is there any further discus-
sion, Gentlemen?
Hev.
Cox Another question I should like to raise, Mr Chairman,
is that of Sunday labour. The practice of v/orking steamers
on Sunday still continues. This is not possible in Sydney,
it is not possible in Papua, and I think the time has come to
ask ourselves if it is necessary to do it here. The question
is, not can we afford to do without it, but can we afford not
to do without it? I do not think it is asking too much,' as
a civilised community, for this one day in seven to be set
aside for all the natives as a day of rest. ’We all observe
it ourselves -'not only for religious peasons but for recreat-
ive purposes as well.
Many of these boys are Mission boys and they aror not
able to attend Church, and some of them are* very sensitive on
this point.
146




I do urge that something he done to bring about
the cessation of the unnecessary Sunday labour.
Rev. , . , , . .
Flier 1 1 agree with what Mr. Cox has said, complaints
sjave been made to me, that boys are called away at Church
time.
Chairman The District Officer at Kavieng stopped one boat
being Idaded on a Sunday, hut it was found that under the
present Ordinance he had no power to do so. In the
amended Ordinance the hours of work will he defined ana
every boy will not work on Sunday and all rations must be
given out before 1 o'clock on Saturday.
If it is found necessary to work on Sunday the
District Officer's permission will have to he obtained
first. I do not know if free labour will come under this
Ordinance, but if net, some provision will have to be made.
Dr.
Wolff I agree with what Mr. Cox says about Sunday labour,
and I think we all agree that the Administration should see
what can be done. I know of cases where the Doctor sends
word that he is coming to a village on Sunday and the whole
village has to be present. Once it happened that he came
earlier than they thought and they were in Church. If we
pointed this out to the Doctor he would perhaps not take any
nbtive, but the Administration could give instructions to
Officers not to work on Sundays.
Mr.
Chairman If there is no more discussion, Gentlemen, we will
adjourn.
147




PROCEEDINGS OF THE
9th Day 30th June 1927.
At 9,30 Mr Chairman declared the Conference opened.
this subject, this was the proposed draft.
(1) A labourer shall not malce use of the services of
any non indentured native for any purpose whatsoever.
Is) A labourer atoll tot make use of
any indentured native for any purpose other than h
for which the native is engaged under the provisions
the Native Labour Ordinance. ..
PROVIDED that the provisions of these Regulations
shall not apply to the wife and children of a labourer.
Penalty £3 or imprisonment for six months. _ ...
This was considered to be drastic and the matter is stil!
in abeyance. The matter was referred to the Governmen
Anthropologist. He stated that when he was Papua in
the New Guinea Copper Mines in charge of the labour there
numbering about 1000, the difficulty was got t
signing on a number of married couples from A District,
where the women were not immoral but unmoral, they
pandered to the sexual impulses of the boys.
The Government Anthropologist also suggested that the
passive party should be always prosecuted. I personally
have approached several employers, but found them quite
apathetic on the matter. In ray opinion if the passive
narty is prosecuted all reports would stop, the number of
cases would diminish, but the practices would still go
I believe in some casOs it is usual to give the passive
party, usually a monkey, a lap lap as paymen , *?e . t
monkey's box was opened and 40 lap laps were “•
Under the latest amendment to the Criminal Code ng
can be inflicted for this offence. )io
Dr Cilento lam afraid the suggestions which bear on the question
of recruiting of women opens up a wide field wnicn is
hedged with difficulties. These homo-sexual practices
are extremely common. Tue Medical Officer at Kavieng
1911 furnished an interesting report on this subject.
Dr. Hoffman found these practices so eommon on the h ust
coast of New Ireland that every man oon f ®
kept a monkey. The Rev Boettcher confirmed this inves-
tigation. All this is done with the utmost secrecy, and
conviction is a very difficult matter, rfhen
North West Islands investigating the decline of the pop-
ulation an Overseer on the Island of Nmii,,o told me tha
homo-sexual practices were practically uniyersal.
were a lot of boys on the Inland and only two
were not touched. This Overseer told me ;°® s d
boys had access to every boy. The natives themsfelves
no secret of it. As a test we called a boss boy,




who was suspected, and told him that no action would
be taken ahd talked to him on this question, Ho was an
Aitape boy, and he admitted that arftong his own crowd the
practice was universal. A.jked why, he said the reason was
lack of womeni statements were confirmed on the
Island of Luf, where the population is dying out. fx-ere
were 9 women on the island, three of whom were beyond
the child bearing age. These women never left the
village, because they could not do so without being
raped. This is a very serious question because when
homo-sexual practices are indulged in the desire for the
natural practice is lost. They prefer the unnatural
practice.
The boys who are the worst offenders are often the
best working boys. Three of the best boss boys I uver
had were all suspected, for this reason many planters,
who know quite well what is going on, will not report it,
they do not want to lose their best boys.
There is, to my mind, only one thing that will do any
good, and that is the recruiting of a greater number of
women with their husbands.
G.f, Anderson caused a great sensation when writing on
labour conditions in stating that to every 100
Indians brought into the country, only 40 women were
brought in. Surely this is not more appalling than
conditions in Rubaul, where there is 1 woman to 300 boys,
and 3 resident women to every 100 boy*,. D.P. Anderson*s
book had a great deal to do with the forbidding'of
recruitment by the Indian Parliament, Somebody, sooner
or later, is going to point out that there is 1 woman
to 300 boys in Rabaul.
Some time ago I examined 31 native women, and every
one was suffering from Gonorrhoea, A watch was put on
one of these women, who wau suspected of being a
prostitute, it was found that 13 boys had access to her,
11 of whom had Gonorrhoea, We started an anti-Gonorr-
hoeal Government station for quarantine purposes on
"Vulcan Island but it was closed after 13 months. It
was found that every native woman in Rcibaul had
Gonorrhoea, That really means to say that every woman is
a prostitute, as it is not generally the husband 1 s
faul(£, and it is a disease that is not contracted
innocently. The problem is very serious, because it
does not end here, these women go back to their own
homes and having become prostitutes carry the disease
with them. I know of one village in Talasea where two
indentured women went baok to their village and after
two years QOfo of the population was suffering from
Gonorrhoea.
That, then is the problem of homo-sexual practices.
I suppose nobody objects to the recruiting of women,
the question is what safeguards are £oing to be provid-
ed to give adequate protection to these women. The
planters are not going to take any action unless it
aifeots the working capacity of his boys, again, if
more women are recruited
149




they must be married and accompanied by their
husbands, Every planter must provide proper ,
married quarters each of which is a village community
leading a normal village life. I believe every
labourer'should have the right to bring his wife and
children, who should not have to work on the plantation,
but should be given a small area to cultivate the same
as they have in their own homes.
That is the only cure for this evil, the only hope
and the only way to healthy living, . , .
Mr, Chairman I agree with the Doctor. I know from what
he says concerning boys carrying back homo-sexual
practices (learnt and indulged in on the plantations/
to their villages is true. There are some places, li e
Rosel Island, where monkeys are kept solely for homo-
sexual practices, they wear a distinguishing mark, a
cassowary feather as a rule, Speaking of the importa-
tion of Indian coolies in Eiji, it was the practise
of the Immigration Department, when a boatload of
coolies came in, to give all men and women numbers,
and tell certain women off to certain coolies, the
women themselves had no say in the matter at all. 0
course that kind of thing could not continue and^ so the
whole system wa p abolished. There may be^ something
raising the agfe of recruits to lessen this evil, but in
my opinion it cannot be stopped by legislation, < ,
Mr. Cox We should like, Mr Chairman, to hear Dr Gilento s opinion on
this point of raising the age and employing young boys
on plantation. These young boys are not needed except,
perhaps, as house boys and I think the employment on
plantations of only elder boys would go a long way to
check these practices, t
Dr.Cilento A measure of this description might seem hard on planters,
but we have found that where permission is given
employers to use their own discretion, such permission .s
abused. When Salamaua was first opened up conditions there
were very hard and Mr Gardew and myself went to see that
labourers and carriers had a fair deal, and that health
conditions should be safeguarded. We found weedy boys,
not fit to carry loads, being employed. The miners ad-
mitted they were not, but said that they were merely
being taken as personal or cook boys etc. So we permitted
them to go through, leaving it to their honour that they
would not use them for carrying.
We found that as soon as they had the boys signed on, they
150




used them for carrying and other hard tasks and so we had
to forbid the signing on of these boys altogether.
Our experience is that employers sign on small boys
for specific purposes and that they never honour their
obligation. Once they arc signed on they do the same
work as other boys, I do not think any boy should be
signed on before he attains full development. The
determination of the ago is a very difficult matter.
Boys of 12 years of ago can be produced who dor* look a
day older than 9 and some boys of 12 have reached a
fair physical development, I am of the opinion that
no boy under the age of 14 and then only of good physical
development should'be recruited. At present the
Medical Officer has no say - and as the District Officer
is concerned in party politics it should bo the Medical
Officer, To sum up I am definitely in favour of the
age of 14 and then subject to the satisfaction of the
Medical Officer.
Mr. Chairman The Conference yesterday favoured 16. I mentioned it to
a prominent official yesterday and he said 12 was the
right age. His contention was that the work and good
food helped to develop the boy just at the age he
needed it.
As regards Balamaua, I would like to supplement the
Doctor’s remarks. V/e ‘ found that all packs were over
the regulation weight, one pack was 112 lbs. V/e said
that any packs over 50 lbs would not be allowed to go
through. We allowed mats of rice which weighed 53 lbs
to go, provided they were unbroken. We afterwards
examined several of these mats and found that they
had been opened and axe and mattock heads inserted
and the mats sewn up again. After that we made a hard
and fast rule that no pack including food for the
trip should be over 50 lbs. I merely mention this to
supplement the Doctor’s statement.
Mr. Cox V/e have heard Dr Gilento with great interest, but
I dont think that what ho has said quite covers the
whole ground.
The married boys bringing their wives on to the
plantation only meets the needs of the married men -
and the percentage of single boys Will still continue
to be larger than the married ones, and this percentage
will increase, I dont suggest that I know the
solution. I think perhaps that‘the Chairman takes too
serious a view’of this question, and the matter may
bo exaggerated, but we are bound to admit facts.
I believe under the definition of the Criminal Code,
that thdre is no offence unless penetration takes place.
However, such practices are carried on, with the resultant
damage to the morale of the boys, and these practices are
taken back to the villages. One remedy Ihat has been
suggested is that the boy return to his village after his




indenture and only make the one contract is worthy of con-
sideration, but it would have very far reaching effects
and I am not pressing it.
The evil is a very great one, and one day some one will
publish the facts and it is our bounden responsibility to
discuss every suggestion. What we want is something that
is likely to produce immediate results.
I think that small boys should sleep in a separate com-
pound, We have had instances on our own plantations. We
have found small boys, the supposed passive parties are
very often very active parties. This is not a matter of
penetration but an indecent act to the consummation of
which the small boy is often th 6 leading or active party.
I feel bound while on my feet, to express the opinion
that there is little hope of any improvement in this
direction being realised. I am in favour* of the suggestion
to let boys bring their wives on indenture but this will
not be a cure for the evil.
Mr. Chairman As regards the question of penetration. In almost every
case before the Central Court penetration is
Another aspect of this question that I would like to bring
before the Conference is that of putting small boys in
prison.
I am utterly against this. I wanted to insert a clause
in the regulations to allow birohing for small boys, but
I was overruled f I should like the support of the Con-
ference on this question. Under the latest amendment to
the Ordinance, a boy can be whipped for sodomy. Perhaps
we can get a regulation through allowing birching, it is a
shame to put young boys amongst criminals. I am sure
every member of the Conference agrees with me on this
point.
Dr Gilento I agree with the Chairman about birohing, provided it is
properly carried out, and about sending young boys to
prison, gaol has a degrading effect on them and begets
contempt for the laws and contempt for calaboose. If they
go in casual offenders they come out criminals. As
regards the‘question of the bringing of women on to
plantations, I do not suggest that every boy should bring
his wife, but that the life'should approximate as closely
as possible to village life, where there are single as well
as married boys. Of course adequate protection should be
given to the women, but there should be an ordinary house
for boys and a house for monkeys. I suggest that the whole
be laid out as a village with playgrounds and gardens
where they can grow luxuries for themselves.
152




That is how they do it in Java, where they experienced
great difficulty with the indentured system. They found
there that where the natives lived in compounds which were
a mirror of native life that they were healthier and
happier in every way. Before you bring' women to the plant-
ations you must have something like village life. The
growth of a scheme like this will be slow, the natives are
suspicious of innovations by white men, I should think it
would take ten years# If we can do something along these
lines I think the question will have begun to solve itself.
If nothing‘is done there will be, sooner or later, a howl
of protest, and Home and Territories will insist on too
violent a change.
Something meanwhile should be done to build up a system on
the lines suggested until the time is ripe for legislation
to be brought in.
I would point out also that this would be an opportunity
to teach the native to work while living in village. Some-
time or other the indenture system will have to go. They
will not work in the present villages, and this would at
least be a first step in that direction.
Mr Flierl I think that this very serious complaint would be solved
if the population were higher, that is to say take several
whole families and let them establish a village. Our
congregation is opposed to taking away women. The few who
went away have all come back and confessed to prostitution.
Dr Wolff I think all the Missions are in favour of village life,
on the other hand some consideration must be given to the
planter. But I think this would be the best thing for both
sides. But I think it would be a good thing for a wife to
be sent back to her village if she is divorced as otherwise
single boys v/ould be trying to get the wife away from her
husband.
As Dr Gilento says the indenture system must go in time.
A difficulty that I can foresee in the village scheme, is
the one of having different tribes in the different
villages. Another thing, is, is it a good thing to force
them to go home after three years if they get settled down?
If couples like to stay I think they should be allowed to
do so. Single boys should be made to go home. But if the
couples keep going home there will be no village life.
Dr Gilento One difficulty we experience when wo do not insist on a
boy returning home is that employers bring undue pressure to
bear on the boy to make fresh paper. Cases occur where boys
are told if they do not make fresh contract they will be
sick at the end of the three months and they are so
frightened that they make paper again#
Mr Chairman It is common property in Rabaul that when labourers are
paid off, illegal means of recruiting are sometimes employed
to induce them to re sign. The boy is taken into a room
without witnesses and the third degree is put on him day
after day to make a new paper. Even after a boy had been at
work many years,those practices are more often than not success-
153




ful. Other boys are paid oif and deliberately induced
to spend all their money before the departure of the
boat conveying them homo, with the object of forcing them
to make a new paper. Instances of the above methods of
recruiting'come very often before the Native Affairs
Department, but unfortunately no prosecution can be in-
stituted through the lack: of evidence. Another method
particularly during the Military and German Administration
was to employ women as an incentive to recruiting, A man
dying, his widow was more often than not offered to a boy
as an inducement to his recruitment, in fact I personally
know that women recruiters carried unmarried girls about
with them when recruiting and the boys were offered a
night with these girls in lieu of hand money. These
unions with widows of deceased labourers resulted in those
marriages of convenience, which I now trust have been
suppressed. In one case of such a marriage the woman on
return to her village in Numatanai was stoned to death as
she had committed "Tribal incest". Whenever a marriage of
indentured labour is dissolved for any reason the woman
must be sent back to her horhe, or the matter referred to
the Administrator in Rabaul, any infringement of the
Ordinance is visited with a severe penalty.
Dr Cilento History in other countries has shown that where natives
come into contact with white civilisation they must progress
along white lines or perish. If we study history we find
that Where this contact occurs that the coloured populat-
ioh declines, then a period of struggle for existence sets
in, we see that in races like the Samoans and the Maoris
who when they started to increase again they were a changed
stock not white stock or the stock of their forefathers
but a new, a changed stock. They start as huntefs and
fishers and they begin to be agriculturists, they then
progress from agriculturists to industrialists. To come
to our people. These people are beginning to be
agriculturists. They are being caught in the wheel of
progress and will soon have a flair for industry. The
early Britons were caught on the Roman wheel which threw
them up to a higher civilisation. It will be the same here
they will * establish their ov/n plantation villages while
they will, we hone, keep their own village life too, The
whole question. Is population and more population,
Mr Oox I think we are rather off the subject of homO-sexual
practices. Dr Cilehto referred to the subject of inden-
tured Indian labour, I think this has been done away with
all over the world, and one thing we have to bear in mind
is that this system marks a people as inferior, am
afraid I am not so optimistic as the Doctor, I think that
progress will be slow. But we are pleased that a start
is being made to admit some free labour and the^ scheme
to make plantation villages is a very wise one indeed, I
have suggested - I cant get this out of my mind - that
it is time for the Administration to get figures to
ascertain what percentage of the population it is safe
to indenture. Is not the figure mentioned, IBg/o much too
high.
154




Mr Chairman That is‘the present position. It is now 11 o ! clock
Gentlemen, we will adjourn for 10 minutes.
At 11,15 a.m, the Chairman declared the Conference
re-opened,
Mr Chairman I think: all the matters under h T o, 9on the Agenda
have been discussed with the exception of Secret
.Societies which we are IGavin till tomorrow, //e will now
take ITo.IO on the Agenda Paper which deals with
"Matters and circumstances affecting the duration of
native life", I would like the opinion of the Con-
ference as‘to whether it is advisable to extend the
regulation, that forbids the wearing of clothing on the
upper part of the body, to female natives,
Hev Pliehler Read a paper -
Matter and Circumstances affecting the duration
Native 1 Life,
Some of the matters and circumstances affecting the
duration of native life have already been mentioned at‘
some time or other during the course of the Conference,
as for example, contagious diseases and insufficient
nourishment. One of the main things to be considered
under this topic is the lack on the part of the natives
of power to resist disease. This makes the natives very
susceptible to disease, on the one hand, and on the
other hand, greatly diminishes his chances for recovery
after having contracted a disease. It is astonishing
how frequently and how easily natives suffer from in-
flammation of the lungs. Diseases which by n 6 means
threaten the life of a European, for instance, influenza,
and measles, frequently result in pneumonia in natives.
To this lack of vigor must also be added his extreme
carelessness in earing for his health. Therefore, he
very often exposes himself to agencies detrimental to
his health. They sleep in draughty houses in every kind
of weather, they will bathe in oold rivers during a
slight illness or immediately upon having recovered from
a serious disease. They are also very irregular with
regard to their habits of living both in respect to
eating and sleeping. One other factor which makes very
large demands upon their vigor must be especially men-
tioned, namely their excess in sexual intercourse.
While married people satisfy their sexual desire in the
natural manner, daily the boys on the plantations
satisfy their desires equally as often, in an
unnatural manner.
155




Dr Gilento l/ll th is usually the figure taken for the virile
portion of a population,
Mr Cox .Yell that is only 9 c /o. ’I have discussed this
question with Judge Murray, and he stressed the absol-
ute necessity for the protection of women, He said
"When single women are recruited you nnow the result,
either prostitution or a marriage of convenience,./hen
it was abolished the planters said that recruiting
would never be any more good. But this was not proved
to be the case,” I think: therefore that this conference
should ask, that if married women are recruited that
every safeguard should be afforded to prevent their
becoming prostitutes, otherwise the results we hdpe for
will not be attained. There are, as‘we all know,
irregularities in every village life, out this is not
the same as prostitution. We do not want,in seeking a
solution to forget the just demands of planters,^
People who have invested their money and labour in the
Territory want some return, and the Administration must
expect some return for the expenses incurred by the
Mandate,
Mr Chairman I have been in communication with several of the big
Plantation Companies in the Territory, more especially
in Kieta with a view to their setting aside an area of
land for a model village community for their married
labour. In every case favourable replies were received.
Most of the Companies saying that they would give at
least 20 acres for the furtherance of this scheme.
The Administration had in mind a scheme for moving
whole villages on to a plantation from areas where
living conditions were unsanitary and the people were
dying out through apathy, as we could only cause this
removal by persuasion, I did not think the scheme work-
able, as the average native is the most conservative
being on earth. However, I oan assure the Conference
that the Administration has given careful consideration
to the institution of village communities on plantations
and I trust steps will be taken in the near future to
further it.
The present Native Labour Ordinance insures that
married couples shall be housed away from single men.
Dr Wolff 7/hen a boy takes his wife to a plantation is the
wife to be under contract too?
Mr Chairman Not necessarily.
Rev Cox The question was raised yesterday whether women
should be indentured'at all, I recommend that no women
be indentured at all, they have their own work to do.
On the other hand I think that some provision be made
in the ordinance for the fr6e labour of women
accompanying their husbands, that is to say» that they
may work if they desire to*
156




Along the ooast and also towards the inland we find
tuberculosis exacting its toll of casualties. We are
unable to give statistics because for this purpose a more
thorough investigation by a specialist would have to be
made.
The wearing of clothing is frequently mentioned as
having a bearing upon the length of native life. Though
it cannot be denied that owing to the uncleanliness and
imprudence of the natives in wearing clothing, their
health may be injured, yet on the other hand when done in
a reasonable way it may be a great protection to their
health. Whatever may be said we cannot deny the fact that
natives buy, have and wear clothing contrary to the
clothing Ordinance. This Ordinance really leads them to
be hypocritical because when they hear that an officer
is coming, they simply hide their clothing affected by
the Ordinance. It would be far better that they would be
fined for wearing very dirty clothing rather than for
wearing certain clothing.
Again referring to the former mentioned factors harmful
to their health and vigour, we desire to state, that we
have for years instructed them both in church and in
school, and truly we are able to see fruits, though
there is yet very much to be done to educate them and to
lead them to live a truly hygienical life.
Rev Margetts What is the reason for the regulation prohibiting the
wearing of clothing?
Mr Chairman For medical reasons, this was adopted from the Papuan
Ordinance. The Ordinance there was brought in because
it was found that natives wore filthy clothes and got
them wet, and would not trouble to chahge, and also
exchanged them amongst themselves* So, on medical
grounds, the wearing of clothing Was forbidden.
Dr Wolff I am hot a medical man and what I say is my personal .
opinion, not that of the Catholic Church. Where I have
been in Africa, I cannot say I have ever heard of such
an Ordinance, and I think: the natives there are very
healthy. I do not think that the natives should be
forbidden to wear clothing, but that if they are found
wearing dirty olothSs, they should be made to wash them.
At the present time, in the parts where the natives
are living a long way from the District Office, they do
wear clothes, and very dirty clothes too, and take them
off when the District Officer comes along. I would
prefer to see them wear clothes if they want to, but
we should educate them to wash,
Mr Chairman The best argument I can advance is for the Conference
to go down to the "Bung" and see the women there.
The natives exchange clothes and spread skin disease
in this way. A great deal of thought was given to this
question in Papua, and the measure was supported by
every Mission.
157




Rev Plierl I think that if the natives are educated they will >
win wear clothes in the right way. In our District,
it is often cool at night especially in the mountains,
and natives appreciate clothes to keep them warm. On
o-reat holidays they will wear a waistcoat.
They must he educated up to these things - they do,
what seems to us, very dangerous things, I know of
one case, where a man with inflammation of the lungs,
went straight out of hospital and we found nim having
a bath. We must teach them the proper way to wear
clothes and to keep them clean and dry.
Rev Cox This is a very difficult question. I do not think
the regulation has resulted in an improvement in the
health of the people. I believe the natives in Papua
are allowed to wear clothing. The police boys here
wear heavy clothing above the waist.
The people show no wisdom in the wearing of clothes
but they can be educated up to it. At one place that
I visited I was met by the chief who was dressed in
nothing but a waistcoat. 7/e have had to ask for
exemptions to permit our students to wear clothes in
school. In some of the inland places, the natives
find great comfort in clothes, which them from
the cold.
Has the wearing of clothes a detrimental effect on
the natives? If they wear wet clothes, I agree it is
dangerous for them, and I admit‘some of them wear very
dirty clothes. In recent years, when we meet on
Sunday, I ’have preached that cleanliness is next to
godliness, but progress is slow.
I kno\fr we have not very far to go to'see dirty
clothes, but in justice to the natives, I must say that
they are not always as dirty as they look. They have
not got the facilities for washing clothes that we
have. When clothes are washed in sea water or even
in fresh water, without soap, the results‘are not
good, I am not saying they are not dirty, but they
are not as dirty as we sometimes think. I do not think
it has been proved that forbidding natives to wear
clothes has brought about any improvement in health.
If the Medical Department issued instructions to the
people to keep clean and not to pass on skin diseases
through dirty clothes, as they have done in regard to
diet, it would go a long way towards solving this
problem,
I am not in favour of the extension of the regulat-
ion forbidding women to wear clothes above the waist.
Rev Margetts If we prohibit women from wearing clothes above the
waist, I think there will be a great uproar. Perhaps
such a regulation might be brought in for areas'
recently brought under control. But round here,
women become accustomed to them, and most of them are
very modest in this respect.
158




tiio valet •
r-f .vomer ”/oro r,rohihit:d from neann clothim above
tixo'v/aist. 1 repeat there .vould
there are many men who ooject to u t
*“ .4 44”; rSS%S £S/ 0 »» »»
W»“u„ be raaoonaible for iiastsniar- «» «u»« “•*•>■ ““<•
ovorfl£,,l»t let v.s loavo It to tte ».<W>lo
Dr Client© Government on_this /aestion. i’ho
last Report 1928-I^B
Department of Public t.ealon.
95. "In this connection attention l 6 direouod touwas
oh regulation which .or'oi 'e the .earxn- o. olota.. 0..
the urocr -curt of the body. i , r.; ra-tion .ao cor
<•>'■l'r-d aroarontly, it the or.oollont mtt .uion ox
-.irov onting the spread of cU sease, and Preserving -a
"ativc customs. Pho passage ox txme. -O'7-v.r, La«
to ltj lily tac at icaicse or one promotion. uia
n i or anomalies have occurred fiat x-adicaos she
• aaal education of the native mind ««?,.! . ,t
a nrociation of clothes as a mark. or cipher - .
Certain indulgences have been granted in L clothes
t . thss for c..ample; males may no-/ .'ear oio»,ne„
on" Sundays; police ho vs and •there ' ear uniforms; eng-yho
i. v;rc, etc., are per mi .to,, trousers xor
natives en : od in mining must nave a -. -tc..wtc. f
i.. ....ctxal fact, these are suniptaar - laws
shepherd the native over the transition bet s.n,a,.ery
an! civilisation. I’ho Administration rooo>iices ** xzb
■ .: idc and standard the .r. ehcy of desire on -se o
the hotter class native •vdioh mirrors t \l en
ovimcnt at v/iich the race is'arriving and noil*
this is -aided and directed, ana whero *
cl it nos" Is ’ actually made “ basis for tno 10u.y.ou o±
cleanliness clothing is a great vivilioxng x~ *'’iothes
96. x’he payoholo, ioal aspect i also irap * “ > Qr
-•ere v/orn or decoration long oolero taey
159




j 3cenc y , ~;*td suoh io til tho o-oi a men' all an.
colour o. iho 7 ala to self respect and 6el I eot.om, #
v /Geologically, tide la of tue ut nOQZ val..e to a aaujoot
9? ,* vn absolute proi ibitio: against dothin: would ?>o
r3co -ni-»ed by the natives a. a barrier that places t-.om
..finitely and finally in a position of obvious
inferiority, Inferiority t.'ioro doubtless in* tuits
ostent tion, aowev ;r, aninuontionul, is harm-d and dj‘~
necessary, dr, .003 >izal the ilipinc patriot ait lo o r,
rote in ids "La mfolcnoia cie los PilipiiiOs” a few
reciarho '.mioh have bean translated as follows:-
"Deprive a nan* tne ■, of* tils di m ity, and ou
not only deprive him of nis oral stren oh, out
you aloO malo him uoole ... lor taoso that /Lon
to mu to -oo o f ' him. i■.an*sis l -i o a o 1 x o o t Qjt*.
fa.w© it a■ ry from im at cl he in a corpse,
ho that seen... activity in a corpse, win on-
c otin t& i. o ,r* s • , ,
98« ip art alto, ot -or ’ ro: tno above, t m co ox
do thm hao b nr. ..can- >mti.r-m to lea ? to xiiourionia
natives discharging vessels or doing other heavy
work, The most dangerous factor in this disease is
unequal over-heating of the body and those who have seen
natives perspiring profusely at their work: and later
standing shivering in the evening breeze, or sleeping
bare on the bare decks of Burns Phil.p*4b vessels, will
readily appreciate the reason for the deaths that occur
after each voyage. The‘gradual, carefully guided
institution of clothing, based on social status,
physical necessity or desirability (as for example, in
the base of the clothing of Luluais, Tultuls, doctor
boys, mission teachers, etc*, and in the other case, ox
ship 1 u boys, etc., engaged on arduous labour in all
weathers) will be in the hands of the Administration a
considerable factor for progress, , .
When the Administration asked my opinion on this point
before, I said it was dangerous and drastic legislation..
and suggested that natives be taught that clothes were a
mark of superiority to which thby could attain, I
suggested that Luluais, Tultuls, and Medical Tultuls,
and qualified Mission workers should be permitted to
wear clothes, that in short, it should be something that
marked out the capable boy, with provision made against
dirty clothes.
The filthiest clothes I have ever seen are the grass
skirts worn by the women*in Papua, as soon as one is too
old, it is not taken off, but a new one is put on, and
so on for years.
160




I am strongly opposed to dirty clothes, hut I think any
native in new areas might be allowed to wear clothes,
provided they are clean clothes.
Are we to look forward a hundred years hence, and still
see the natives without clothes? You may say that they
know nothing about clothes, but look at these "crannies
(Malays) some of the cleanest people in the place; fifty
years ago they were quite uncivilised*
I■do not think it should be an offence to wear clothes,
but, by all means, make it an offence to wear dirty
clothes.
Mr Chairman It would be quite impossible to ensure that the regul-
ation was carried out, we should never have enough
officers to carry out the work of inspection.^
Dr Oilento I know that is a point. But what are we doing about
the present dirty clothes?
Rev Flierl I quite agree with what the Doctor says, my opinion,
or rather ray experience is that the wearing of clothes is
a great protection against inflammation of the lungs.
Dr Oil onto Another point is that Mr Cardew' insists upon every
boy being supplied with a blanket, and when he returns to
his village he has to do without this.
Clothes mark a higher step towards civilisation, aM
what we have to do is lead them along the right path.
They will wear clothes and we have to see they wear the
right kind of clothes•
There was a great outcry in the British Solomons when
they tried to force them not to wear clothes there.
Dr Wolff We cannot control the washing of clothes but we can
educate them up to keeping them clean themselves. In
Africa, they all wear clothes and they went through stages
when they wore too many clothes, or absurd clothes; but
now they dress very well.
Rev Pilhofer During the war, the natives could not buy clothes, they
were too dear, and many of the female natives would not
come to church, because they were accustomed to wearing
clothes.
We debated the question some time ago and found from
statistics, that people who wore clothes were not so sus-
ceptible to colds, etc. In our schools.round Salamaua
and Pinschafen, the nights and sometimes the are very
cool during the rainy season. We cannot open the windows
of the classrooms unless the pupils wear some clothes, and
that is unhealthy. This makes it a difficult matter for
us, it is against the law to wear clothes, yet we have to
educate them how to wear clothes. I think therefore that
what Dr Oilento says is right, it is a matter of education.
Rev Cox I would like to support Dr Oilento f s psychological
point. Some of our students have been admitted to the
ministry. They wear clothes when in the Mission and when
they come through Rabaul, they are very conscious of the
indignity of walking through Rabaul unclothed. I think
the final criterion should be the people themselves. Our
own rule is that when a student is training he shall not
wear a coat, and when he has completed his course, he
shall please himself while under our influence. We do
not encourage thorn to wear more clothes than necessary, but
they come to take the view that it is not respectable not
to wear clothes.
161




I have preached without boots and without coat,. but I
have known native pastors refuse to preach without^ a
coat. I do think that clothes develop the natives self
respect and it is our duty to see that they wear clean
clothes: I think it would be wise if the Conference made
a recommendation to this effect. T thinir it should
Cr Cilento If such a recommendation is sent up I think it bhouxa
Dr Cilento J raiual wo<sesa . I have already advised the Ad-
ministration about this. It should at fir 1 . '
of people only, firstly, people in authority, lik
Luluais and fultuls, higher educated b °Y s bo^ tive
with special trained qualifications, secondly, native
sanitary areas. These permissions should be granted
always with the proviso that it is an offence to wear
dirty clothes. I suggest that the recommendation
should outline a gradual process.
Dr Wolff I agree with all the Doctor has said, I woul
ask him if he has found that the districts where no
clothes are worn, are more free from skin diseases.
Dr Cilento My experience is that the wearing of clothes has little
effect on skin disease. I think if we took figure ,
there would be no difference between natives of a
district who do not wear clothes and those of a district
who do, provided that the other conditions are the
same. What diseases can clothes distribute. We ba T
skin diseases everywhere, the commonest place is between
the legs, it is the boy who keeps himsel-f clean who
is more likely to escape them, not the boy who does
not wear clothes. ... +v . _
Compare the British Solomons and the Hebrides with this
place, and you will see that the figures for Tuberculosis
are the highest here, I will give you the figures or
the Territory last year:-
Pneumonia 24 per cent.
Tuberculosis 23 "
Dysentry 24 "
leaving 27 per cent for all other causes. You will
see that 47 per cent of the deaths were caused by lung
diseases. If the natives were clothed the death rate
would be lower. , , ncr
I say, teach them to keep their clothes clean by teacning
them that clothes are a boon and they gradually get the same
ideas about clothes as we.
Mr Chairman Is there any more discussion on this question
Gentlemen? . .
Rev Maro-etts We all know that clothes to-day, are dirty, but what
steps have..been taken to get the natives to wear cleaner
clothes? , Dr Cilento has suggested that the wearing of
162




filthy clothes he an offence. But who shall say v/hat are
filthy clothes? The District Officer pulls up some man or
woman, and takes him or her to court. It r a f °ithy
like Mr Cox has suggested, where the clothoo appear iixrny
hut are simply discolored. The natives very often hav
little or no water, prohaoly no soap or else thy -
washed in the sea. It is impossible to got d
in this manner, and there might easily he an J n *
Dr Oilento I think the District Officer is usually a man of sense.
Dr Cilonto specify n Filthy « a s dirty and
Dr Wolff We must not forget that the white population not
living here as workmen but as masters. A labour
iclr his host clothes and keep himself clean Je cannot
expect them to keep as clean as we can ourselves,
Mr Chairman I would suggest that a free issue of soap might meet
case.
Dr Wolff We have not tried that yet. ~ mission
Dr SSL.*: “Z ITIA If til £«i«
to make the natives keep themselves clean, ve ca , ’
do this with them all. . „,_ oc , V\nr c'nmetimes
Dr Westers I think the natives are learning cleanliness, but sometimes
circumstances are against it. In the Earning ,
instance, there is no water. There is no lack or
instruction, hut there is a lack of water, natives
Mr Chairman It has been ironically suggested that as tne n
wear dirty clothes they should not he allowed even to wear
laplaps, although the suggestion was made apparently,
sarcastically, there is a good deal of common it.
if we cannot prevent the natives wearing G ,
the lower part of the body, is there any reason why we
should extend the lack of personal cleanliness c n o thes
part of the body, by allowing them to wear filthy clothes
th i r v;oSid again suggest that members of the oSses
should visit the local bung and view the blou
worn by the women there and sniff the scent therefrom.
If there is no further discussion Gentlemen, we will
adjourn until tomorrow.
163




Proceedings of the Conference.
Tenth Day, 1st July, 1927.
The Chairman declared the Conference re-opened at
9 *3O.
Mr Chairman /e will take that section of item No, 9 of the Agenda
Paper dealing with Secret societies.
Ruv Mar. etts R 0(J»d a paper,
"RBaTRICTIUG JHS OP -CHE "TUBUAF* (DUI J)UK)" .
We would suggest: That in vidw of the baneful
effects upon the people of certain practices connected
with the annual custom of the Nukduk, and the disorganis-
ation caused in the life of the community, the Govern-
ment adopt and enforce the retaliation brought in by the
German Government restricting the appearance of the
Nukduk to the month of May. Alk>o: That the Government
appoint a Commission to go thoroughly into the question
of the Nukduk with a view to restricting it still
further, and finally doing away with it,
Without going into much detail, it is the general
opinion of those who have had much to do with the
custom of the Nukduk that it has a detrimental effect
on the people as a whole and that they would be setter
without it, T is is the opinion of many of the people
themselves, who say that the custom would die out were
it not for chiefs in the village who keep the practice
alive, for what they make out of it. The custom is
detrimental to the well-being of the people in that for
the period it is engaged in the life of the village is
completely disorganised. The men are away in attendance
on the Nukduk, while the women are engaged cooking for
the crowd assembled. Gardens are neglected and the
usual avocations of the people let drop.
The chief who has the Nukduk is always careful to see
that the people in attendance have plenty of food. The
gardens of the people are freely availed of, with
result there is always a great surplus of food which is
often wasted, and which the people are sometimes hungry
for later on. Crowds of men become mere idlers, sitting
around night and day in the Nukduk enclosure, or
following the Nukduk from place to place. The custom
is bad from a health point of view. Those taking part,
clad in the hot Nukduk dress, will dance until they are
tired out and bathed in perspiration; they will then
sit and rest often in the (to them) cold night air. We
know one case where a man nearly died from exhaustion;
while in anoth r the man dropped lead in his Nukduk
dress.
There is a lot of extortion practised in connection
with the custom, the people’s money being taken from
them for the least cause, ./omen will be fined for not
having the men f s food properly cooked, or for ignorant-
ly trespassing on anything the Nukduk has made taboo.
164




7/e knew of one woman who had to pay 150 fathoms of shell
money because her little daughter was overheard singing
snatches of a Dukduk song. In the bush especially the
custom is saturated with sorcery and is the cause of a
lot of immorality. Many of the village schools might just
as well be closed during the Dukduk period, as in the
general disorganisation caused by its appearance, the
children are affected, The custom is perpetuated because
of the gain those having the Dukduk make out of it, each
person joining the society having to pay anything up to
over 100 fathoms*of shell money. The men generally get
little out of it, except, they see the dances and share
in the feasting, which wo must confess, makes a’great
appeal to the natives. Ve do not think however, that the
custom is essential.
On the whole'the people would be better if they put it
away from them, as they put some other customs,
which at the time they found it very hard to part with,
but which n6w they are glad to be rid of. */e would not
suggest immediately depriving the people of the Dukduk.
Perhaps that would be*a mistake. They could be weaned
from it gradually, by, say the custom being permitted
every two years, instead of every year, until, after the
expiration of a stated time, the custom should finally
cease. These are only suggestions. The subject wo feel
is one that is well worth a commission being appointed
to consider the details of. In the meantime, might we
ask that the regulation brought in by the German Govern-
ment that the Dukduk be restricted to the month of May
be adopted by the Government and enforced. In our own
district this year, in some villages, the celebrations
began in April, the people spreading the report that they
got permission from the District Officer and each year
District Officers get requests for the festival to be
continued into June, frequently these are granted. On
our inquiring the reason, we have been told, it is because
the German regulation has not been incorporated in the laws
governing the people, which puts the whole question in a
false position. Either the regulation *is good for the
people and should therefore be adopted, or it is doing
them an injustice and should be lifted. As th 6 regulation
in the first instance came from the Government, we look
to the Government to do something in the matter.
I would like to add a few remarks on this question
Mr Chairman, it is a thing I feel very strongly on.
I have been surprised this year to find how prevalent
this custom of the Dukduk has become. It is to-day the
first of July and the Dukduk or Tubuan is still being
carried on all through the District where I reside. In
165




Raluana, scarcely a native is to be seen in the morn-
ing s, whereas at other times ol tne year the men are up
early in the mornings visiting their fish traps and going
about their work, three months, practically speaking,
the sea is deported. This week, at the quarterly meeting
of teachers, we were told that the practice is very
common round Raluana and in the bush. The avocations
of the people are not carried on. The time of the men is
given up to the Dukduk and women have to spend their time
preparing and taking food to the men who attend this
Dukduk f
One night last week, I had to send word at midnight to
a chief to tell him that the Tubuan dancers must be quiet.
This noise was disturbing not only me, but white neighbors
living near. I went into Mokopo on Saturday to see what
could be done about it and was informed that there was
absolutely no Ordinance to restrict the appearance of the
Dukduk.
It has become the custom year after year for the people
to approach the District Officer for permission to start
the Tubuan earlier than the month of May ahd to continue
these celebrations into June. Mr Chairman, the District
Officer has not only given this permission but the people
have been given to understand that there is no regulation
to empower the District Officer to prohibit the Dukduk.
If they liked they could continue it indefinitely, and
nothing said if the thing is done decently'and in order.
As I here we are at the first of July, and all over
the country Tubuans and Dukduks are still going: on, and the
people ' iven to understand that they need not shut down.
There was a regulation brought in by the Gorman Govern-
ment to restrict the Dukduk to the month of May, and for
very good reasons, Bince that regulation till the present
time almost, that practice has been observed, and the Duk-
duk dies at the end of the month, anyhow for our
own District, the people are much surprised that the Tubuan
is allowed to go on to such a late date. Because, while a
obtained permission from the District Officer,
the bulk'of the people continued in ignorance of such per-
missions, and think that is being carried on in defiance of
the Government, Buch thoughts in the minds of the people
make for a weakening of Government influence. They say:
"Here we are now at the end of June and the chiefs are still
carrying on".
It encourages them to think that the power of the Dukduk
is greater than the Government and greater than the Churoh.
When remonstrated with by one of our teachers the people
turned and said, "What is your power as compared with the
Dukduk"?
As I said Mr. Chairman, the people are suffering because
their avocations are stopped,and instead of being restricted
166




to the month of May they are told they can carry on in-
definitely*
I feel Mr. Chairman, that if this practice is given bade
to the people, that it will be the greatest setback that
the Government and Missions have had for the last generation.
In the olden days before the making of roads the Dukdufc
was confined to the beach and the tracks were made taboo.
With the opening up of roads the custom has grown to such
proportions never known before, The worst features of the
Dukduk are practised in the bush. If the unrestricted
practice is given back to the people the Government will not
be able to cope with it,
I know of at least 1,000 natives who have put it behind
them. Every Christian is forbidden to wear the Dukduk
dress. I know that a large portion of the people wish to
abolish it, and it is only kept going by the power of the
chiefs, the people do not have a say in the matter. The
chiefs get a large amount of "tambu" out of it, and the
people merely get feasting and dancing and the sight of a
new Dukduk dress. The chief’s wealth i 6 increased, and
only people who know what the Tubuan is, know what great ex-
tortion is practised. Every paltry excuse is made to levy
fines.
Only last Wednesday, a man came and told me of a woman who
was walking along the road, and suddenly a man appeared from
ambush with a basket in his hand containing food. The woman
was fined for gazing upon Tubuan food. This Tubuan is made
a cover for extortion, stealing and adultery. There is a
lot of adultery committed in connection with it. The names
of certain women are incorporated in the Dukduk songs.
Women have boen known to bo so affected by evil men who lure
them on, that they come up to the Dukduk enclosure and are
then ravished by the men.
Yesterday morning, I got word that one of my teachers in
the bush was sick, and I gave instructions for him to be
brought into our hospital at Raluana. I saw him last night,
a mere shadow of his former self, and labouring under strange
delusions.
On my enquiring the cause of his sickness, I was informed
by himself and his wife, that a few weeks ago, he with
others went to attend some Dukduk festival. In the bush, was
the sketch of a dog, drawn on a banana leaf, the drawing
having been made by the one owning the Dukduk. The people
167




were expected to present the dog with shell money, and to
take certain precautionary measures to save them from the
power of the evil spirits, the dog represented.
Should anyone fail to do this, the man owning the Duk 4 -
would solicit the aid of the spirits to punish the
offender; being a Christian teacher, my man did not per-
form those obligations, beeause he felt he could not. A
few days afterwards he got a boil on back, and through
not having proper care and attention it developed so, that
ho suffered a great deal from it and would cry out in
pain, hews of his sickness soon spread and there was only
one conclusion arrived at by the people, that was that
the evil spirits had him in their hands for not recog-
nising them in the matter of the dog. This was told the
teacher and in his weak state he came to believe it to be
true and became partially demented.
All he thinks of now is the dogs biting him wherever he
feels a pain. The man is wasting away and will probably
die. If the power of the Dukduk has such a hold on the
mind of a Christian teacher who is somewhat enlightened
what a terrible hold it must have on the people generally.
Those responsible for the Dukduk make great capital out
of a case such as this. The man was suffering from
natural causes but those responsible for the Dukduk spread
the report, the man had been smitten by the spirits and
so the power of the Dukduk is more firmly entrenched to
the great satisfaction of the chiefs and the oppression
of the people.
As I have said these practices are inimical to the
highest wellbeing of the people and if restrictions are
enforced or the Dukduk abolished there will be no vio-
lation of the terras of the mandate. I do not say we
should abolish it dll at once, but it should be a gradual
measure,
The people themselves have suggested that it should be
t&ken away, there has also becn~a suggestion that it
should be restricted to every second year.
I plead Mr Chairman, that the regulations restricting
the celebrations to the month of May, made by the Dorman
Government be adopted, and it should bo stipulated that
the Dukduk should also die in that month. One asks the
people if the Dukduk is finished, and the answer is "Yes
it is finished but it is not dead yet," The dying cere-
monies where they burn the dresses, etc., are made an
excuse to carry on.
In case it may be thought that an injustice would be
done, I would suggest that the Government appoint a
commission to enquire into the advisability of the
abolishing or restricting of the Dukduk.
Dr Gilonto Have you any figures Mr Margetts, whereby we can es-
timate the amount of economic loss to the community?
Rev Hargetts No.
Mr Chairman matter was brought up some time ago and it was
suggested that the German regulation be adopted. The
Government Anthropologist was instructed to enquire into
the advisability of such a proceeding and his report was
that the ramification of this society was so great that
an injustice might be done, wa®e the Dukduk confined to
the month of May. because the society was intimately
concerned in the deaths, burials, etc.
168




Dr Vesters Read a paper * ~ .
Re Night Dances, which to a certain extent, atlect
the duration of Native Life.
"Djtncoo in' Veneral may "be contributing to health, as
corporal exercises but being exaggerated as they sometimes
are, they must be'prejudicial, 'This particularly applies
to nightly dances, especially when continued during a
period of time, such as the bort-dances in New Ireland
and others. . , _
Tne natives frequently dance the whole night long, are
overheated and heavily perspiring, they sit or lie
on the ground and takS a cold, especially in the mountain
regions as in Baining, oases of Pneumonia and lung dis-
eases are frequent on suoh occasions#
We can appreciate a fine dance in a beautiful moon-
light night, but they should be exceptional and limited,
never practised for night after night. Immoral dances
of course should be entirely forbidden.
There is moreover the enervating drum beathng which
should not be allowed at night time in surroundings
whfere there are Europeans, who badly need their rest. We
know of many complaints of our fathers in some Districts,
as Duke of York, Vunaraariiba and others, troubled by
continuous dances.
Such in a certain way is also the Tubuan whose revel-
ries take place mostly in thfe night time. The members
are dancing or roaming about, then they sleep ih the
Tarain, and this at least during a whole month* but we
can say nearly always much longer. The Tubuan leads to
more excesses in other respects. We know that the^
Tubuan to-day is now more ifchat it was in olden times.
We know that the Tubuan is not everywhere the same,
neither is it held every year in all places, but we
believe that we can safely state that in most of the
cases the Tubuan celebrations are associated with serious
disorders; we only point to the following matters
Socially, there is a long interruption of family
life, the men being nearly all the time in or about, the
Tarain, I need not stress the danger for the abandon ed
women; likewise school and church attendance is y©*y
much hampered, and the whole regular community life
is suffering. _ .
Economically, there is a stagnation in the iiP.l*a
work and an excessive consumption of food stuffs,
unfortunately this last only is provided for the
members of the Tubuan, the others many times haying
to be satisfied with very little.’ As this
is lasting for a pretty long time, the result often is
169




a shortage of food for a period of time.
Hygienically, we already mentioned the case of disease
occasioned by the frequent nightly dances. I
refer also to the use of malira and sorcery,
immoralities, to some kinds of extortions existing,
which, if they are not any more essential to-day to
the Tubuan, which I do not know, at least find an easy
occasion in thi° institution, The question has been
often put if the Tubuan could not be purified of the
excesses and made an innocent recreation, which then
we may safely concede to the people. Several Eathers
assure that on some beach places the process was so
nearly performed and we have this year the assertions
til one Missionary that as far as his place was concern-
ed the Tubuan ran nicely, really a mere popular
recreation.
One thing being quite out of discussions, viz., that
disorders are particularly intolerable by the length of
time, we would advise to bring the Tubuan within
reasonable limits of time say a fortnight, and to
strictly maintain these limits without any exception.
This would be a great step towards the regulation of
an old and inveterate custom. We know that at present
the natives take it very easy with the time fixed if
any."
Br Gilento I am afraid I do not know enough to speak with much
authority on this subject but if you take away the
privileges of the chiefs, the society would lapse.
I would suggest that there should be punishment for
extortion and fines under false pretences. In that
case, of course, protection would have to be provided
for the informers. Protection might be a difficult
matter, because of the fear of reporting.
Some law might also be instituted to prevent blackmail.
Mr. Chairman There is at present a regulation prohibiting blackmail.
Br Gilento The people do not know about it.
Mr Chairman I suggest tnat we leave this matter to the "Committee
of Bindings" who will no doubt support Mr. Margetts. One
of the largest collection of Bukduks ever held was
carried at Bai recently.
Rev Bishop Yes, I witnessed the dying of the Bukduk there. There
were forty of them being paid off.
Rev Cox It might be of great value to us to know why the
Government Anthropologist did not support the restriction
of the Bukduk to one month, and if he favour the con-
tinuance of the Bukduk all the year round. There were
very good reasons for bringing in the Regulation.
Mr Chairman When was the Regulation brought in?
Bather I think it was an instruction issued in the Gazette.
Mert en9
170




Rev Cox Anyhow it was before I came to the territory and that was
more than twenty years ago. The reasons were that people
kept up the celebrations for many months, their gardens
were neglected resulting in a shortage of food. I think
it would be quite safe for the Conference to recommend t&e
restriction to the month of May. I do not’think it is
necessary that it should die in that month, but the
actual ceremony should finish in that month. The dying
does not matter so much. I do not feel I can support the
suggestion that it should be restricted to once in two
years. The Dukduk moves from place to place every year.
I do not favour either that the Conference should recommend
the abolition of the Dukduk, I think it is enough to
recommend the appointment of a Commission*
When the question has been brought up before I have always
resisted abolition, I do not think it would be a safe
procedure. The question has been submitted to men in
other parts of the world and the leading authorities are
all against abolition.
I do not think therefore that we should go further in
the "Committee of Findings" than to recommend that a
commission be appointed to ascertain the loss to the people
occasioned by the Dukduk and what action it is advisable
to take in the matter. I think also a recommendation might
be made that instruction*- be given to chiefs that abuses
and extortion must cease, and that this is in the best
and highest interests of the natives themselves# //e do not
want to abolish customs but to purify them in the cases
where these customs are associated with extortion and
abuses.
Mr Chairman And where they interfere with the economic life of the
people and the garnering of field fruits*
There is a dance in Kavieng, not an immoral dance, but
one which, while in progress stops all work in the
gardens and seriously diminishes the supply of food. It
is under consideration of the Administration to restrict
these dances to one month in the year. The kalaguna dances
only occur every three years*
It seems to me taat noone knows enough about these two
dances, the Bort and the Dukduk - to advocate their complete
suppression. Mr. Chinnery (Government Anthropologist)
found out very little about them, but found out enough to
say that it was dangerous to interfere with them to any
great extent*
171




_ n Php Bnrt is only one dance, and not by any means the
Conference should recommend the restriction of such
daSces! ?hey are immoral and dangerous to the health of
th We P would*support the Administration in this and there
is a strong feeling among the people themselves that
these dances should be restricted*
Mr Chairman The Sort dance is confined to inolude ot her
ass*. *k Lwss.fffijs gs- - « -r
sss £SS Kss sir."
on the coast the dances are very immoral. I
to say that if a Commission is appointed they ahoul g
into the origin of such dances. ther6 is
The latest school of Anthropology holds that there x
no reason for the ramifications of secret societies.like
the Dukduk into the socia! ' li fe . ot P®°J X V bUshed
mhP rpason for the secret societies being estaoxisnea
was to protest against matriarchal rights and these righ
under this system of matriarchal rnh®^*a?°®*themselves-
societies were their only means of asserting themselves.
the matriarchal rights still exist but they are no
barrier to a good sociul system. i -r>r*nn+-
Dr Cilento That is an important point from a developmental point
Dr Cilento inav is P with in a recent Anthropological
repoiL Is it not possible, to use the Dukduk society as
a basis of a social or S aßisa^ion^® o “ et^ 1 t S W h! t C i?'bad and
alone the lines of progress by cutting out what is bad ana
adding what is good, and so give them the responsibility
upon which social progress depends. . , mieht
I do not think we know enough to condemn but re mig
s „ merl fi S* Sa*. e ri^ D S e oS 6 but we have other
He, merl moat of tb e ; ejected ,Ith oareUh,atsron.
The Mission did not forbid the dances but with the spread
of Christianity they ceased of themselves. If the elders
of the council decide that a dance is immoral they do
away SittT??. The District Officers are trying to revive
thes» dances again. They are not forbidden by the Mission,
but the people understood that it was against our wishes
and it is now practically done away with.
Father I think: there should be some restriction on ™e time
Martens when the Dukduk dies. I think the burning of t e
172




■ „ aewnSe'oSSlJr.noe that the findings
decide. I do not consider «»« „
to say as much at this stage, vve ignorant of
ihffL?f?o sly "?y much on thin question. I thin*
we should be wise to leave the
?eoSmend D that the Government Issue instructions to
fa Chairman ‘“|"/^n^^oS e ?ha?Tmoral dances
5r J ° lff SereVe no dances prohibited
under the regulations, hut there are many,
SeJS Tor instance, where the fathers are ail of the
opinion that they are immoral. The“ftives come^ oo
SIS RffSt-tS 1
sys-s-i %d I „*JSiSr.?isi? , i O . si-sa
Hr Chairman ™ere are some '
of the Delta Division, Papua, there
mill 3!
SSSi. o^uch
brthriSstltutlon 4 i?theL U Ha E uru dances. In these
dances, one village visits another and the men h g
wives for a certain period, generally five days. h f
S e wL , lor a tMs d reassn“nayhe Missionaries Chalmers
and Tomkins were killed at Goanhari some
Dr Vesters sometimes lasts a
long time and I think some tiling might he done agains
Rev Her his hordshlp would say what the
Dr Vesters * The despoiling of coconuts and gardens, and so
posit ['«&*
UTotVn Sftrfea! Christmas, and has
only just been lifted.
173




Rev Cox Most people who have been here any length of time
think: that action should be taken in these cases, but
it is very delicate ground. Action was taken on one
occasion and all the trees were cut down* It is wise
to act with caution in these matters of native customs,
and not go too far, I am speaking from long experience.
These things can be stopped and must be stopped. The
Government might issue instructions to limit the
prohibition or Taboo. But I question the wisdom of too
much interference at first, we should start by drawing
the attention of the people themselves to the evils
resulting from these things.
Dr Gilento I must support this suggestion, there is not sufficient
co-operation between the Government Officials and the
population, and there cannot be much co-operatioh until
these matters are set out in the native language, and
until the natives are educated in government and civil
process. It is time something was done to bring the
native into contact with the Government and this can
only be done by bringing about a "rapprochement" with
the Luluais and the Tultuls who are the natural medium
between the people and Government, and the Government
and the people.
Until we can find some means of teaching the natives
the meanings and'intentions of and reasons for laws we
shall do no good, but when it is found possible to do
this the problem will be solved.
Rev Cox I don't know whether Dr.’Cilento was here when we
discussed village councils, it would be more^ fruitful
if the Government expressed an opinion on this matter.
I am sure it would hasten development if there were more
frequent co-operation between Government and Missions,
If the representatives of the Government could discdss
with the Missions, the various aspects of native life,
and encourage the Missions to put on paper their
experiences, we might be able to get under things. We
are in close touch with the people - we speak their
language and understand the native mind better than the
layman and co-operation between the Government Authoritis
and ourselves would be to our mutual advantage, and we
could look at things from different aspects.
I think it would be a good thing if the Conference
could recommend that opportunities be more frequent.
Dr Cilento Both Mr. Gardew and myself were in favour of the Missions
being represented on the Advisory Council but we were
defeated, I think that all interests should have
representation, commercial and missionary.
Rev Cox The Advisory Council is purely an official body whereas
in German times there was wide representation on the
council, commercial and otherwise, but the Government
preponderating - they had fourteen representatives.
174




The Missions take proat interest in and have great
knowledge of the Territory, they invest and spend large
sums for the advancement of the community and I do
not think*they should bo inarticulate. Other interests,
of course, have similar claims. Any help that it is in
the power of the Missions to give, they are willing to
give if the Administration seek such help. I think
the Missions have a very just claim to representation on
the Advisory Council.
Mr Chairman I will read the amendment that was proposed by Dr
Gilento and myself but was over-ruled.
By the insertion of the words after the word
"Agriculture” appearing in the 6th line of Section 4,
Bub-section 2 of the Advisory Council Ordinance 1926,
the words "and two unofficial members nominated by the
Administrator and holding office for periods of one year,
one such member to be representative of the Mission
societies and one member to be representative of the
business interests of the Territory.
Dr Cil&nto The Advisory Council can co-opt at discretion any
member of the public who is an expert on any particular
subject.
Mr Chairman We will adjourn for ten minutes.
Mr Chairman I declare the Conference re-opened.
Dr Yosters I v?ould like to give whole hearted support to what
Mr Cox has said. I think that the force of this Con-
ference should be perpetuated, and we are certainly
grateful to the Administration for this opportunity of
meeting. I feel it is a very important step in the
history of the colony, and we have been able to discuss
matters of very great interest.
lam sure all the Missions support Mr. Gox f s suggestion
for representation on the Advisory Council. They could
give disinterested help from knowledge and experience
gained over many years spent in the interest of the
natives.
We see hero around us Missionaries who have spent tens
of years - uninterrupted years - devoted to the social
service and moral welfare of the people, and this of it-
self should be sufficient title for them to have this
claim advanced.
Dor my part, speaking for the Catholic Church, I join in
whole hearted support of this suggestion.
175




I support Mr Cox and Bishop Vesters, because there
must be many things in which our help would be valuable
to the Advisory Council. The Missionaries all come hex'e
with the intention of staying here, not three or lour
years, but their whole life. They have, therefore, the
interests of the whole country and whole people at heart.
Rev f'lierl When I was informed in February of the convening of
the ’Conference, I was doubtful of the usefulness of a
man, so poor in English as I. But I dared to come and
I do not repent of it. We have been treated with the
utmost fairness from the Chair, there has been no
restriction; we can ri£e up and speak; as often as we like
and as long as we like, about things which are nearest
our heart. I hope the findings of the Conference will
be for the good of the Missions and the good of the
Government.
I support the suggestion of Mr Cox that the Missions
should"be represented on the Advisory Council; I
should not wish to be a member myself - but I hope that
Mr Gox would represent the Lutheran Mission,
father I hope I shall be pardoned if I come back to the question
Cirschbaum of the Dukduk. As I have said, these societies were
established to protest against matriarchal right, and
this is a problem which will solve itself as it has in
other parts of the world. The next iotep is always free
patriarchal right, and that is the practical end, and
there is therefore no need for these societies.
In the Bepik, we have the free patriarchal right,
through the .Vest Polynesian culture. All the masks that
you have here are worn at our sing-sings, but these
sing-sings are not 1 secret and are open to anyone to
attend even the women, there is no payment and no ex-
tortion. I say therefore, that there is no need for
these societies to hasten the coming of patriarchal
rights - it is bound to come and there is no reason why
it should not be anticipated.
Mr Chairman Is there any other question any member would like to
bring up before we adjourn?
Rev Cox I v/ould just like to add something before we adjourn
Mr. Chairman. I do not think I shall have a more
opportune time for saying it. something has already
been said in appreciation of the action of the
Administration in calling the Conference. I have looked
forward for a long time to the holding of such a
Conference, it was first suggested about two years ago.
And now that our anticipation has been realised I think
we should be neglecting our simple duty were we not to
put on record our appreciation.
176




I would like to mehtion especially the sympathetic way
in which the Conference has been controlled from the
Chair, and the way that answers have been given to all-
questions ashed. The sympathetic attitude of the Chair
has gone a long way to make our deliberations effective.
Dr. Gilento too, has been most helpful in giving us such
valuable assistance and advice.
I would like also to move a special vote of thanks to
Mrs. Gardew for looking after our comfort and providing
us with morning tea, and I would like her to know that
we appreciate it and we should be pleased if a message of
thanks could be conveyed to her from the Conference.
Dr .Volff I would like to add a personal word. This Conference is
composed mostly of English speaking people and I know very
little English. Although I always speak under
correction, I try to speak English as well as I can* I
must thank from my heart, the Conference for the
patience that has been shown to me and although I have,
I am sure, made many mistakes, I have never seen a smile
on anybody ? s face.
Mr Chairman I am sure that there is no need for any apology for any-
body’s English. I the Conference for the kind
message to Mrs. Gardew - I am sure she has been exceedingly
pleased to do anything she could.
I will not say good-bye to you, the Conference will meet
again on the day the "Montoro" comes in, but I would
like to thank the members who live so far away for
coming. I was doubtful if Mr. Flierl would be able to
come but we were glad to see him and his counsel and
advice has been of the greatest assistance to us.
Dr Volff and Father Kirschbaum and Mr Pilhofer have all
come a long way too - and we are very grateful to them
for coming in*
Dr Cilento Thank you for the remarks you have made in appreciation
of anything I have been able to do. I would like to say
that the Public Health Department is always pleased at
any time to do anything in its power to help the Missions.
Mr Chairman The Conference stands adjourned, Gentlemen, till the
morning of the arrival of the "Montoro”*
177




Proceedings of the Conference.
Eleventh Day. July 11th, 1927.
The Honourable C,W,C, Marr, M.H.H., Minister for Home
and Territories accompanied by His Honour, the Administrator
attended the Conference at the morning session.
Mr Chairman I declare the Conference re-opened. I will call on
Mr. Cox to welcome the Honourable Minister in the name of
the Missions.
Hev Cox I feel it a great privilege to speak: in the name of the
Missions represented at this Conference, /Ye very much
appreciate the fact that we are given this opportunity of
meeting the Honourable Minister and congratulate the
Commonwealth of Australia and this Territory on having a
gentleman of such calibre and qualifications to occupy the
high office of Minister for Home and Territories.
/Ye have all appreciated the holding of this Conference
where we have been able to exchange views with the rep-
resentatives of the Administration. VYe do frankly and sin-
cerely wish to co-operate with the Administration, our
aims, namely the betterment of the people are identical,
though the Administration does not concern itself with the*
evangelisation of the people, that is our peculiar mission,
our supreme call.
Australia holds this Territory under a mandate, for the
people, and it iS our duty as Missionaries to promote to the
utmost the moral, material and social welfare of the
people.
I would like to express the opinion also that there are
no inherent differences in the aims of Planters and
Missionaries. We deplore the differences that have arisen
in the past and we are sure that the better thinking
Planters deplore them too, things such as the publication
of anonymous letters as we have seen lately.
We have had an opportunity at this Conference to discuss
all questions affecting the natives, and we hope that
better understanding will result from*it. We hope that
the bindings will ndt be pigeon-holed, but made use of,
for what we want is, to give all the assistance in our
power, - not criticism but assistance, though we some-
times got more kicks than laurels in our work.
In the name of the Missions,we welcome you Sir,
The Hon, I must first thank you for the welcome you have extended
C.W.C, to me. I would like also to say how glad I am to have the
arr opportunity to meet the Missionaries who are devoting
their lives in the endeavour to evangelise New Guinea,
There are several types of Missionary - there is the
Missionary who looks after the welfare of the natives and
the Missionary of commerce, who is sometimes perhaps, not
all he might be. But their ideals are, or should be,
the same.
178




lUie natives will be a bettor asset when their standard
of living is better than in the past and the roen who are
furthering this end are worthy of all support.
All the countries under British rule have always looked
to the Missions for help, and for equity in dealing
with natives, for they have no axe to grind,
Australia is keen on New Guinea, /e hope it is des~
tined to be the "Pearl of the Pacific" if all Greeds
and all individuals make good. As Mr Go:: said, we hold
New Guinea under a mandate and we have to account to the
League of Nations, so the natives are our particular
care, and it the duty of the Administration, the
Missionaries and the planters to elevate the natives and
not to lower them. It should be the aim of the Planter
to do this, even if only for economic reasons alone,
and he will realise this,
I thank you for your welcome, and appreciate this
opportunity of meeting you.
Applause,
Mr Chairman I declare the Conference adjourned till 2,30 this
afternoon
At 2.30 the Chairman declared the Conference reopened
Mr Chairman This is our last meeting, //ill you give us the
report of the bindings Committee Mr Cox please?
Rev Cox Head the report of the Pindings Committee.
(Report attached)
Mr Chairman There are one or two points I should like to bring up.
At th£ meeting of the Planters with the Minister this
morning, the question of Government recruiting came up,
but I think the Conference will agree with me that
Government recruiting is hot desirable.
The question also arose, of the advisability
commercial interests being represented on the Advisory
Council, but the Minister said that he considered that
the white population was at present too unstable, and the
question would be given further consideration, after the
disposal of the Third Group.
There is one matter that I see has been left out of the
bindings report and that is the formation
of Greches, I think that this might be added to the
report, with the proviso that they should be used as
training hospitals in midwifery.
Dr Cilento I will make the motion. I move that the following
paragraph be added to Section 5 on the report of the
bindings Committee•
"Also where possible assisted Creches be established
and run on approved lines,"
Rev Cox I will second the motion.
179




“ Chail " a “ KtSU.WbR.-Si h e Si" carried
“fioirihat the report of the /indlnge Committee he
adopted with the addition to Section 5 of the paragrap
which was the subject of the last motion.
Rev Cox seconded the motion.
The motion was carried unanimously. «
Rev Gox Mr Chair .an has raised the question of recruiting of
Rev Cox ux *a. 4s this i s the last meeting, we shall have no
opportunity to submit the minutes of a the 10 * 1
to the Chair, could we not have a deputation to the
Minister before he goes Couth, and press our point
in reference to the returning of labourers every three
Dr 01 lento ? T“ould male the suggestion that that purpose »ould
be better served by the presenting of a letter to the
Minister by, say two Missionaries. experience of
deputations is that they are not very effective, th
verbal word is apt to be forgotten, whereas the
written is always before him. I thm-c this would be
better than argument. . . .
Mr Chairman I brought up the point this morning about recruiting
affecting the decline of the population. all kn
that illegal recruiting may go on, and that undue
pressure be brought upon boys to make them re-sign.
Complaints were made more in regard to the big firms.
Shore is one company that owns 23 plantations for
example, and another one 20. Up to now the niprop-
riation Board has been the worst offender, and we have
now several "Expropriation Boards" to consider.
If a bby desires to return to work with the same
employer, there is nothing to prevent the employer
giving him a paper which would enable him to get a
return nassage to his place of work at any time.
This system would be a step in the directidn of our
ideal of free labour. In the next Gazette, there will
be a notice published that unless a n^ tive ® h ° 5 a ® la . e
re-signbd, is given facilities for return to his place
of work ho action will be taken against him for
desertion; This is a very vital question, and i
should like to kno ; that we had the support o± the
Missions behind us.
180




Dr Gilento The Planters this morning brought the following
points:-
(l) That indentured labour is a great civilis-
ing factor through the natives being
brought into contact with the white
man and learning his ways.
(2 )That when boys finished contract they very
often did not desire to return#
(3) That when the boys got home, they were
frequently prevailed upon by the
older men not to return.
But it was obvious that the main factor in these
objections was the extra cost. The Banters stated, I
think, it was Dr# flood, that a Planter employing
100 boys under 3 years contract had always 30 per
cent of such boys becoming "time finish" and it
therefore necessitated employing 30 per cent more
boys, in addition to which is the difficulty in
recruiting boys. The only practical suggestion made
was that to extend the 3 year contract to a 5 year
contract. The Planters were evidently looking at
their own point of view and not at the fact that the
native is lost to the tribe as a potential father.
Referring to Government recruiting, it was stated
that fancy prices were being asked for boys and
that if the Government took over the sole recruiting
that this would be done away with# The Minister
suggested that 10 per cent of the population should
be taken.
But the points against Government recruiting are
these;- The Government is no business man. Govern-
ment officials cannot ask or beg natives to come.
It would lower the prestige of the Government,
The Government could become the medium of
repatriation, by some means of a system of reconds
and checking at the Diotrict Office. /Ye should
lot then have the spectable of boys running round
. abaul "nothing".
But I do not think the Government should be the
sole recruiter, I imagine the position of a District
Officer pressed by a rich man to get boys, /Ye are
all human. It would be a system open to the gres sest
abuses, which would seriously reflect on the
Administration. Tuis might easily become an internal
ional question - and if we introduced slavery in any
form whatsoever we should give them something to
talk about,
Mr Chairman I -uite agree. If one Conference would back us up
on the point of repatriation it would be of great
assistance. Once repatriation is controlled by*J;he
Government# one of the greatest objections to the
indenture system will have been removed.
181




Rev Cox I ~o not think we need discuss whether we are iu favour
of Government recruiting or not.
'Mr Chairman Will you move Mr. Cox?
Dr Cilento Perhaps it would save time if*l made a motion in
favour of Government recruiting, I am sure I shall
have no seconder.
I will move that "The Government be the sole rec-
ruiter of labour".
The motion was not seconded. Dr Cilento then mowed:-
"That this Conference is of the opinion that the
Administration should take no part in the active
recruiting of labour, but should interest itself to
the utmost in the satisfactory repatriation of labour
as discussed in an earlier minute.“
The motion was seconded by Mr Cox and was carried,
unanimously.
Rather Could not the Planters’ case be met by cases whefe
Kirschbaum the boy does not wish to go home, he can do as he
likes - go or not.
Dr Cilento I have a case of that kind. One of my boys is a
Buka boy whd was brought from his home when he was
4 years old, he has no recollection of his home arid
no talk except Pidgin. It would be cruelty to sedd
him home,
Mr Chairman Provision for such cases has been made.
Dr Wolff It was mentioned about controlling prices. This
sounds like slavery.
Dr Cilento His Lordship has put his finger on the point. The
question of prices is even more acute than the shortage
of labour,
Mr Chairman Is there any other matter to discuss Gentlemen?*
Rev Bishop I would like to pass a vote of thanks to Mr Cox, the
Chairman of the findings Committee, It was wonderful
the way he got things together and helped us to
draw up the report and the way he worked.
Rev Cox I am sure anything I have been able to do, has been
done very happily and it has been a great pleasure to
do anything to assist, I feel that I have not almays
been as competent as I might be - but I have done my
182




best and done it gladly.
Dr Gilonto I would like to thank the Conference for the gre&t
consideration they have shown to medical points in the
Agenda. I have always found the Missionaries very
willing to help us in our work - and I am sure the
Public Health Department will always be glad to assist the
Missions in any way they can.
I am asking Mr. Hopkins, of the Agricultural Department
to assist me to get out a list of the best native foods
to plant. I thank you for your hearty co-operation.
Mr Chairman I do not think we have any further mattere to discuss
Gentlemen.’ I thank you all for coming to the Conference.
Personally, I can say that my relations with the Missions
have always been cordial. I have seen a great deal of
Mission work both here and in Papua and I have always been
interested in Missions. I can remember the impression
that was made on my youthful mind by an account of
Missionary enterprise in America in a volume of travel which
I was reading. A Roman Catholic priest had been sent into
that country now known as Louisiana to evangelise the
Lilians there. He was captured and his two feet were out off
and the stumps seared, v/hilst he was recovering, he
evangelised the two attendant Indians who were practically
his jailers. many months, he was reached by a band
of Spanish soldiers who desired to take him back to
civilisation with them. He refused and in the wood out
which accompanied the account (which was stated to be true)
the Missionary is seen stumping away into the forest on
crutches accompanied by his two faithful adherents’ to
continue his work of evangelisation while on the other side
of the clearing the Spanish soldiers have doffed their
casques in recognition of his sacrifice.
I am not always in accord with the Missions, but when
I am not, I do not hesitate to say so. But I do hold
that Missions are absolutely essential to the development
and uplift of a native people.
I am particularly glad to see Bishop Wolff and Mr.l'lierl
here who have come from some distant districts, and whose
opinions have been of the utmost value’to the Conference.
It now only remains for me Gentlemen, to bid you
farewell and Godspeed.
I declare the Conference closed.
183




REPORT
OF THE FINDINGS
COMMITTEE.




00-OPERATION I U MDDICAL MATTER
(l) That this Conference is of opinion that the medical
,r orx£ done by the various Missions in the Territory of New
Guinea should be regarded as an auxiliary to the Public Health
Department such relationship not to involve control of
Missionary operations by the Administration, but to be interpreted
as assistance to the Administration which will supply necessary
drugs and appliances free of cost to the Missions who will
furnish regular returns showing how such drugs are used and
giving particulars of cases treated, and the result of such
treatment; it being understood that the Missions will continue
as at present to supply considerable Quantities of drugs and
medical appliances for their work out Vf their own funds.
( 2 i
, the Conference is of opinion that in uistricts where
the people are aole to do so they should pay for drugs and
treatment received, but that until a greater measure
of confidence in those giving treatment is secured, and until
the value of such treatment is more fully realised by the people,
idle only practicable v/ay to secure payment' is for the various
Missions to be requested to impress upon the people the value ’
ot the services they are receiving, and, as they deem judicious,
io encourage them to give such remuneration as they are able
whether in cash or in kind, such contributions to be used only
m the furtherance of medical work, amongst the people, food stuffs,
e.g. being used to feed patients, or when not reouired for such
purposes to be disposed of, and the proceeds of such disposal,
together with any cash received from the natives to be paid into
trust Dunds for, the purpose above referred to; such Trust I’unds
to be in the hands of the several Missions concerned; it being
understood that the ultimate aim will be that as soon as it can
e se oured without seriously prejudicing medical activities
amongst the people all who can do so shall be required to nay
lor drugs and services received,
(3)
That this Conference is of opinion
(a) That tne system of native Medical assistants
should be continued and more fully developed, and such
assistants should receive a more adequate training than'
at present and be more closely controlled in their work,
and inasmuch as qualified native assistants will
frequently be give much tame to their work
some form of ayrnent of those who are competent add
otherwise worthy should be inaugurated,
(b) That the several Missions should as far as -practic-
able undertake the training of native midwifes.
184




SANITATION Off NATIVE VILLAGES.
(1)
That the Conference is of opinion that wherever there
are settled communities of natives, and particularly in the
vicinity of considerable settlements of Europeans, a proper
system of sanitation of such native settlements should
be secured as early as possible.
(£)
That the Conference is of opinion that to secure such
sanitation
(a) The people should be required to keep the area
surrounding any village or native house clean by
keeping it free of bush or undergrowth and des-
troying in a satisfactory way all refuse; a
shelter detached from any human dwelling place
should be erected for all pigs; and all dogs
should be registered, diseased dogs being
destroyed.
(b) The people should be required to build good houses,
such houses as far as possible to be the type of
house ££ which the people are accustomed but to be
roomy and particularly to have'weather proof roofs
and as far as practicable to have damp proof
floors; the people being required to sleep on
beds raised from the ground and also to keep their
houses in good repair
(c) An adequate supply of fresh water should be secured
as far as practicable for all people, covered in
wells being easily provided in many localities.
id) A system of Latrines should be provided for all the
people, there’being at least two public latrines in
every village, one for females and one for males,
and private latrines where houses are nothin groups,
the people being encouraged to have private
latrines everywhere as is found practicable,
(3)
That the Conference is of opinion that the Administration
should have the power to require a village to be moved from
one locality to another when" it can be shown that for medical
or possibly other reasons this is desirable, no village being
so removed merely for the convenience of Administration
Officers, and the decision to move a village always to be in
the hands of the Administration alone acting on the advice of
the Commissioner for Native Affairs and the Director of Public
Health.
(4)
That the Conference is of opinion that to secure an
improvement of the sanitary conditions of villages and the
enforcement of sanitary regulations a Native Auxiliary
Committee should be formed in every village to which such
regulations shall be applied, such Committee’to consist of
three representatives of the Government, viz, the Luluai, the
Tultul, and the Medical Tultul of the village and three
representatives of the people to be chosen by themselves.
185




NOTIFICATION o*' ENDEMIC & EPIDEMIC DlajlAaSdf
Tfiat this Conference is of opinion that it would be of
:; r©at value to the Administration if the several Missions
would as may be found practicable supply to the Public
Health Department information which they may receive as
to the incidence and development from time to time of
endemic as well as epidemic diseases in the areas controlled
by them*
QUARANTINE Off VILLAGES BY NATIVE AUTHORITIES
That this Conference is of opinion that a Native Sanitation
Committee or a Native Council should have authority in out-
lying Districts in the event of the occurrence of an in-
fectious disease to quarantine a native village by placing a
distinctive mark on the outskirts of such village on roads
or tracks leading to it and by notifying adjacent villages;
such quarantine not preventing a European from entering such
village, with native boys providing such native boys do not
halt within the quarantine area.
UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE
T»k*t the Conference is of opinion
(1) Tnat while the Administration and the Missions may be
successful in teaching English to a limited number of
selected natives in a few advanced schools the practical
difficulties of imposing so advanced a language on the
rank and file of so primitive a people are so great that
it would not be practicable to introduce as a
universal language for the Territory within a reasonably
short time.
(p) That in view of the large number of languages
or dialects in use amongst the people, and the fact that
while group languages are being used by the Missions such
group languages apply to strictly limited areas and a
number of such languages would be required it would not be
practicable to adopt any native language as a universal
language for the Territory.
(2) That as Pidgin English is already widely known
throughout the Territory and as moreover its construction
and grammar correspond closely with those of native
languages, and while its primitive and ’’pidgin” character
would make it undesirable that it should be adopted as the
official language of the Territory, this language will
probably continue to be of the greatest practical use
throughout the Territory and it will improve probably
with the passage of time through many additional English
v, ords being introduced into its vocabulary.
186




(4) That great practical help in overcoming
difficulties of language would be given by the Adminis-
tration undertaking the training of interpreters by
teaching selected natives from the various districts
English and probably by sending such natives for the
last year or two of their training to selected schools
or persons in Australia.
(5) That laws and regulations affecting natives
should be published in the English language and
translated by competent persons into the native languages
spoken in the several Districts or, where translation
cannot be secured, into pidgin English written
phonetically.
NATIVE GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVES - TJEIR JURISDICTION.
That this Conference is of opinion
(1) That in view of the necessarily limited staff of
European officials as well as the advisability of natives
being trained in self-government it is desirable that the
control of the native people should as far as possible be
in the hands of their own leaders through systems suited
to the local conditions in each District.
(2) The Native Chiefs and Councils should have Govern-
ment recognition and should be given jurisdiction to deal
with all matters affecting natives only with the exception
of such serious cases as murder, poisoning, rape and
possibly others which come under the criminal code, it being
definitely provided that in no district where Native Chiefs
or / and Councils function shall any case in which they
have jurisdiction come before a District Officer‘before
having been dealt with by the native Authorities, the
District Court being regarded as a Court of Appeal.
(3) That the largest possible liberty should be given
the people to deal with their affairs in their own way so
that native customs should be interfered with as little
as possible,
(4) That the loluai and the Tultul should be nominated
by the people and appointed by the District Officer.
(5) That in areas where village Councils are not
already functioning such Councils should be established and
shall consist of‘two representatives of the Government,
viz., the Luluai, and the Tultul, and several representatives
of the people to be elected by themselves.
187




(6) That where the conditions demand i-t and w here
suitable men are available, District oroectionalLuluais
should be appointed on the nonunation of the yillag
Luluaia or District Councils should oe appoxnted^by
the Village Councils, to assist the tillage Luluais
or Councils as the case may be, , , i Q« n ecL
(7) That a handbook of instructions should isoi
to Chiefs and other native authorities to gui
their official duties and their control of'-
such instructions to bo general rath-.r than
leaving a large liberty to the people to ■^thJir
as possible their own type of Government oasod on
own eXDcrienco . , r* __ti
(8) That a Commission consisting _of repres^
of the Administration and of the Missions shoul
ajpojhtd to consider the details of the scheme such as:-
C * : '* (a) The advisability of fixing maximum penalties.
(b) The Question of damages to inured parties.
(c) The erection of a suitable ouilding for the
holding of courts, etc.
(d) The advisability of weekly parados.
(c) The matters to be dealt with by llatiyc Courts.
(f) The training of Native Magistrates an
loaders. 0
(g) The question of payment of Chiefs and other
Native Officials. n „
(h) The establishment of District Native councils
to confer with the Administration.
(G) That provision should be made for the registration
of Luluais and Tultuls and members of tne village and
District Councils on due notice being given.
TAXATION OF NATIVE^.
That this Conference is of opinion
(1) That in areas newly brought under control natives
should not be taxed until they have settled down to th<3
new conditions say for at least two or thre y • ,
only in strict relation to their aoility to pa<, °»
only after one year's notice has been given.
188




(L) That in view of the fact that there are areas where
the amount of money amongst the people is very limited a
sliding scale of taxation should be adopted, the maximum
being reached only where the people are able to pay
without undue hardship,
(2) That when it is found that in any given area the
people are unable to pay the maximum amount a lower amount
should be fixed by the Aaministration to apply to all
the people within that area,
(4) That a definite time for tax-collecting in each
area should be fixed and as far as practicable adhered to,
and that adequate notice should be given the people that
taxes are to be collected,
(5) That at least nine months should elapse between
any two collections of head tax.
(6) That no native should be liable to pay head tax
under the age of sixteen.
(V) That exemption from taxation should be granted.
fa) for all boys attending Mission Schools
up to the age of sixteen years.
(b) for all bona fide students attending
either advanced schools or schools for the
training of Catechists or Teachers
irrespective of whether they are taught
English or not.
NATIVE EDUCATION.
That this Conference is of opinion
(1) That t _,oneral compulsory education is not yet
desirable in this Territory.
(2) Tuat it would be of great assistance in the
educational work: done in vernacular schools by the several
Missions if there were Government recognition of the
value of such schools.
(o) Tuat the work of education would be assisted
greatly and a better attendance result if there were a
sympathetic attitude on the part of the District
Oificers towards village schools*
189




(4) That it would be of great assistance in
securing more regular attendance and a consequent
improvement in school work; if instructions were
issued by the Administration to Native Chiefs and
Councils to support the Miosions in every possible way
in their school work by refraining from requiring the
scholars during school hours to work on the roads
or elsewhere and by urging regular attendance at
the various schools,
lb) That in view of the fact that the natives
are people of the soil, education in agricultural
pursuits is very desirable.
( u ) Taa.t to encourage the natives in agriculture
care should bo taken.
(a) Tna.t sufficient land is preserved
lor the use of every village.
(b) Tnat in recruitment of labour the
villages be not depleted of all
able-bodied men.
(?) That schools of agriculture should bo es-
tablished by the Government in suitable localities
where there is adequate land where young men could
be trained in all branches of Agriculture and where
an abundance of all kinds of suitable foods could be
grown.
(8) That seeds and economic plants should be
distributed as found practicable by the Administration
to the villages.
(9) That instructions should bo issued by the
Administration to native chiefs and Councils that all
coconut groves and Plantations should bo kept free of
bush and posts, and that the people should be
encouraged in habits of industry so that they would
develop their soil more fully enlarging their
plantations and always having an adequate supply
food; and further that the several Missions should be
requested to assist the Administration in this matter
by using every opportunity to instruct and encourage
the people,
(10) That the Administration should undertake to
secure for the people a market and a fair price for
their produce.
NATIVE CHILD WELFARE.
That the Conference is of opinion
(1) That the birth-rate of the Territory would
bo higher were it not for practices used to prevent
conception and to induce abortion; and also that
infant mortality is abnormally high in many parts
of the Territory.
190




(2) That the high rate of infant mortality is
duo to
(a) The too early marriage of many women.
fb) Under-nourishment and improper feeding
of infants.
(c) Under-nourishment of the people generally,
due to an ill-balanced diet, and in
some cases to food shortage.
(d) A lack: of cleanliness on the part of those
handling and feeding infants.
(e) Epidemics such as e.g, //hooping Gough.
(f) Infanticide
(3) That any improvement regarding birtn rate or
infant mortality can only be a matter of slow progress
through education by Missions and the Administration.
(4) That it would assist to secure the desired
improvement if advice could be given by the Administration
as to the most useful foods to be introduced into the
villages and also by the issue of seeds or plants.
(5) That the training of midwifes by the Missions will
also be a step towards secur L ng the desired improvement and
also where possible that assisted Creches should be
established and run on approved lines.
(6) That instructions should be issued to Native Chiefs
and Councils and other Native Leaders to discourage in
every possible way any practice preventing conception or
inducing abortion, as well as infanticide; and to encourage
the people to aim at a high birth rate and such measures as
will prevent the present high rate of infant mortality, special
attention being given to New Ireland.
NATIVE MARRIAGES.
That this Conference is of the opinion
(l) That native marriages should be interfered with as
little as possible by Missions or Government, such matters
being left in general to the family or village authorities.
(2/ That there should be an amendment of the "Native
Administration Regulations 1923", Section 69. (1) to provide
that a mairiage celebrated between natives by a Missionary
shall be a legal marriage.
191




(;/) That there should bo an amendment of the
"Native Administration Regulations 1923", oection / ,
to have inserted after the wbrd "marriage" where it
first appears in the oection, the words:- Other tha
a marriage celebrated under the Marriage Ordinance
1912-14".
(4) That the consent of the Commissioner of _
Native Affairs should be required before the marriage
of any native, or, natives under the Marriage Ordinance
1912-14.
(5) That steps should be taken to prohibit the
marriaabs of any native girl before the age of
puberty, and in general to discourage the too early
marriage of native women.
(6) That no native should he forced to marry agains
his or her will. .
(7) That dissolution of native marriages should not
be granted for the trivial causes now often accepted,
and in any case not until every effort has been made to-
reconcile the parties. , ,
(8) That in areas long under effective control and
civilising influences, such as the Gazelle Peninsula and
other parts of the Territory, bigamy and polygamy should
be prohibited. . , , „
(9) That no bigamist or polygamist snouid oe
allowed to hold a position as a Government representative.
(10) That instructions should be issued by the
Administration to all Native Chiefs and Councils wi h
reference to the matters dealt with in oection o to .
inclusive of this Resolution.
iJATIVh GUbTOMo.
Secret .societies
That this Conference is of opinion
(1) That the appearance of the"Dufcduk" or "Tubuan"'
should be restricted to the month of May year l,
such restriction to apply to the so-called ea o
"Dukduk" or "Tubuan". .
{ 2 )That extortion and oppression of the people
particularly women should oe prohibited.
(3) That instructions should bo issued by the
Administration to the people that the "Dukdufc" or "Tubuan"
can only be allowed to continue if extortion and
ounression bo eliminated.
192




(4) That a Commission should be appointed to
investigate carefully and as fully as possible the
whole matter of the "Ruhdulc" and "Tubuan and other
similar mash dances in other parts oi the Territory
with a view 6$ advising the Administration as to the
wisdom or otherwise of limiting or eventually
prohibiting the customs.
Native Dances.
That this Conference is of opinion
(1) That all immoral dances should be prohibited.
(2) That in view of their unhealthiness as well
as the immorality connected with them, all-night dances
(such as are common in New Ireland) should be
restricted to at most a few nights in any one month.
(3) That in the neighborhood of any European
residence no noise, shouting, beating of drums, or
dancing should be permitted after 9 p.m.
GENERAL
That this Conference is of „
(l) That the Commission to inquire into the uukcluk
should also inquire into the matter of very lengthy
prohibition preventing the using of coconuts in certain
areas, with a view of advising the Administration as to
whether any action is desirable or not.
(2 ) HOMS SEXUAL PRACTICES.
(a) That it would tend to diminish homo-sexual
practices if the so-called passive party
were also prosecuted in the event of
evidence against such party proving
incitement to the act.
(b) That it would tend to further diminish homo-
sexual practices if the age of recruiting
boys be raised to sixteen (16) years.
(c) That separate sleeping accommodation should
be provided for young boys where they are
living with older boys.
(d) That as far as practicable married men who
are indentured should be accompanied by
their wives.
(g) That in view of the prevalence of homo-
sexual practices and the degrading
influence‘of imprisonment on their
mentality, young boys should not be sentenced
to jail, but should be summarily dealt with
by birching under proper safeguards.
193




I. JITTERS & AEEECTDTCr. THE! DURATION. OF
NATIVE LIES»
CONFERENCE -
U That the regulation prohibiting the natives
from wearing clothes other than those of native material
on the upper part of the body has little if any beneficial
effect on the health of the natives,
2* That it should be left to the choice of the
people themselves whether they shall we at clothes on any
part of the body*
3, That natives should not be permitted to
wear filthy clothes 5 due consideration 'feeing always
given to the fact that under certain cor’itions and while
doing certain work? clothes cannot be c 1 .. :.u«
4* That instructions should be issued by the
Administration to Native Chiefs and Councils pointing ouc
the danger attached to the wearing of wet or filthy cloth-
ing? and the exchange of clothing between people infected
with skin diseases and others? and any other
matters recommended by the Department of Public Health,
194




IT AT LAL OH THQBLETIS.
The Conference is of opinion
(1 ) IIiDEhTURTD LABOUR
(1) That every indentured labourer should return
to his native home after the completion of each contract
of service without previously being bound to any nev/
contract or agreement,
(2) That in view of the fact that numbers of inden-
tured labourers after the expiration of their contracts
remain about Rabaul and other centres until their
money is spent and frequently are unable to reach their
native villages 9 the Administration should consider
the adviaability of steps being taken to secure that
all time expired labourers be returned promptly to 1
their native homes and that in the event of the Admin-
istration taking over the repatriation of siich labour
exception should be made in the case of employers who
undertalee to the satisfaction of the Administration
to return their time-expired labour to their homes,
(3) That no boy excepting for household duties 9
should be indentured under the age of sixteen; .years,
(4) That as far as practicable married bqys , who
are indentured should be accompanied by their wives
who should not be indentured 9 provision being made
for the establishment of village life in special
compounds and also for their own food gardens in
which the women could work in an area set apart for
that purpose alone.
(5) That to safeguard the interests of the future 9
both with reference to the native population and the
interests of planters and others and in view of the
large number of natives now under indenture 9 the
Administration should carefully investigate the posi-
tion as to the native population of the Territory
and the proportion of such population which can safely
be taken from the villages and how this will affect
the alienation of further land for plantation purposes.
195




195-
(11) EREE LABOUR
(1) That indentured labour should be regarded as a
temporary expedient, and that free labour though perhaps
not in the immediate future should be regarded as the
ideal and the ultimate solution of the native labour
question.
(2) That the proposal to permit free labour within
a 25 mile radius of the labourer’s native home is a
wise one, and that in the case of advanced and better
qualified boys an extension of the 25 mile limit should
be permitted, and that in any case whether of better
qualified boys or not, where the labourer does not as a
fact travel by water, but travel wholly by land from his
native home to his place of employment no distance limit
be set,
GENERAL MATTER 6.
SUNDAY OBSERVANCE
That this Conference is of opinion
fl) That natives should not be required Ijo work loadljig
or discharging steamers on Sundays excepting under special
circumstances,
(2) That no tax-collecting should be done on oundays
excepting in areas where no Mission work is done,
(3) That natives be not required to parade for
inspection on Sundays excepting in areas where no MissL on
work is done,
CENTRAL COURT,
That this Conference is of opinion that to avoid the
very long absence from their homes of natives who are
parties or witnesses in Central Court cases being heard at
Rabaul, such cases should be held as near as practicable 1d
the homes of the natives concerned.
In this connection the Conference would point out that
the hearing- of Court cases in Rabaul, frequently involves
the natives concerned in absence from their homes for six
months and sometimes longer.
REPRESENTATION ON ADVISORY COUNCIL,
Thar this Conference is of opinion that to secure the best
results, there should be representation of Missions and oMier
interests in the Territory on the Advisory Council.
196




I SSI 01? CONFERENCE NEW GUINEA HELD AT RALAUL FROM
JUNE 20th to JULY 11th, 1927-
inutes of meetings of hew Guinea Advisory Council at which
the REPORT OF THE FINDINGS COMMITTEE on the Mission Confer-
ence was discussed and the Administrator’s comments on cre
recommendations of the Council.
CO-OPERATION. IK MEDICAL
(1) The Council unanimously agreed that this section
should be adopted.
Administrators Approved, hut the supply of drugs ana
quantities must he controlled hy 'the Depart-
merit of Public Health®
(2) It was decided that this resolution should not he
adopted. The Council consider that as ix is one policy
of the Administration to treat free natives wichouc
charge, and as the Missions are being supplied with
drugs free of cost to themselves, no charge should he
made hy the Missions.
Administrators So far as our issues go? yes? hue che
Missions have the right to sell their own
medicines *
(3) (a) It vms considered that the maximum amount control
hy the Administration is: .available and it was not neces-
sary for Missions to have control over the medical tul
tul and the Council do not consider it desirable that the
natives should receive payment other than they do at the
present time hy the remission of their taxes*
(h) The Council is of the opinion that the re solucion
should he expressed that the several Missions, should*,
as far as practicable ? assist hy training of native mid-
wives c
Administrator: As far as the Conference resolution is
concerned there is no mention of Control hy
the Missions« I could not agree to such controls
hut see no objection to the suggestions con-
tained in the resolution if the question of
Mission control is not implied* 1? however?
agree with the Council regarding payment®
SALLII AT 1014 VILLAGES #
Section (1) This has been the policy of the Administra-
tion and continues to he so®
Administrators I agree*
197




Section (2) (a) This is considered highly desirable hut
impractioahle. Po should he taken hy legislation for
District Patrol Officers? lledical Officers or
their assistants to declcire animals diseased and order them
to he destroyed.
Section (2)(h) The natives are always encouraged to
huild good houses.
Section (2)(c) &. (d) This is the routine procedure, now
in practice hy the Administration - the natives being in-
structed to provide latrines.
-administrators I concur with the remarl:s under Section
2o (a)j»(h) 9 (c) and (d), As regards (a) the new Health
Ordinance will mame the necessary provision.
Section (3) Adopted,
Administrator * I concur,
Section (4) Decision of Council - The time is not ripe
for any formation of native committees.
Administrators I concur. The question of village councils
and native courts in suitable cases is under
consideration, V/hen any such system is
applied the necessary power could he given,
T 011 PI C ATI 011 01 IAHLI lIP & EPIDEHIC DISEASES.
Decision of Council, Agreed? this is desirable*
Administraotrs I concur.,
OP EILLAGDS BY HaTIVE AUTHORITIES,
This is agreed to as being very desirable? hut it is
considered that is should he done through the present
organisation,
Administrator s I concur, Hew Health Ordinance should
provide for this,
Uhl VERSAL LADG-UAGE -
Paragraphs 1 to 5 should he adopted.
Administratoro I concur. The policy of the Administra-
tion has been to gradually introduce English*
using pidgin as a bridge,
IUjOTE GOVERN .
Sections (1) and (2)
Should he adopted with great caution. We have had an
example in the Duke of York Islands where a luluai inflict-
ed heavy fines on natives. It is considered that in time
n cne natives should he able to settle their own disputes?
out any powers in this direction should he granted with the
greatest caution.
198




Administrators I concur. Matter of native courts
now under consideration*
Section (3) Dative law stands unless repugnant to
civilisation.
Administrators I concur.
Section (4) The luluai to he nominated hy the people
and appointed hy the District Officer* Tul tul should he
nominated and appointed hy the District Officer.
Administrators This is our present practice.
Section (5) It is considered that self-government of
villages as extensive as possible should he encouraged-?
hut 9 here again? it should he with the greatest caution.,
Administrator; I concur.
Section (6) The time is not yet ripe.
Administrators Paramount luluais have already heen
appointed in many instances. These
have control of groups of villages*
Section (7) Impracticable.
Administrators If and when native courts are constituted
regulations will he made fully explaining
the jurisdiction. Similar provision would
he made in the case of Village or Group
Councils.
Section (0) In order to experiment it is considered
desirable that the constitutional powers of the council
might he determined hy the Administration at some early
date for which purpose the assistance of Missions and
others could he invited.
Administrators These matters will he settled hy a
hoard of Experts.
Section (9) Adopted.
Administrators I concur as far as Luluais and Tultuls
are concerned*
199




TAXATION OE NATIVES.
Sections (1) to (3)
iiew areas should not he taxed until the people are
le to pay* and when the tax is imposed it should he for
3 regular amount fixed for the Territory, and not for
any specific area.
Administrators I concur. This is the practice at present.
The tax lf natives are not able to
pay this no tax is collected.
Section (4) Adopted.
Administrators hot concuripd in. Under present staff
conditions it is impossible to fix a time
sufficiently far ahead to he of any use.
Section (5) The taxes should as far as possible he
collected within the financial year in which they are due.
Administrators I concur. This is the practice.
Section (6) The Council agreed with this recommendation.
Administrator As the proposed age for commencing work
is 14 years s I think that should he the age
as regards taxation.
Section (7) (h) (exemption from taxation for all bona
fide students attending either advanced
schools or schooi dS for the training of
catechists or teachers irrespective of
whether they are taught English or not).
... Th f Presiding Officer drew attention to the fact that
T a «7n^ er WES cc~ redhy a recent amendment of the Native
Taxes Ordinance (Oction 13) which reads s-
(a) hy inserting in paragraph (e) after the word
mission 11 the words n and who are exclusively
employed in teaching at that mission"* and
by inserting after para (e) the following
paras - °
"(ea| any native who is resident at a mission
for une purposes of educational instruction and
has keen, during his residence at the mission,
under the charge of a European teacher for at"
least six months immediately prior to the date
on which any tax is collected and, during that
period, has received tuition for not less than
eighteen hours per week, of which five hours
have been devoted to the study of the English
language 5 0
200




"(cb) any native residing at a mission fnv
ha- P^p oses °f educational instruction who
Ssidenor mplled .l /ith the Provisions of
residence prescribed in the last preceding
h not received the amount
paragraph * n tlle - LaS ' t preceding
of the *n Pr ? TeS t 0 the satisfaction
J w ?dl'lids:? 2 ** the tax that is
Administrators if they are bona fide students they
J cessS ; n *** shown the 7
necessity for great care in this matter
r eaEs e t V o *s® + SCh °° lS bein S used as T
means to evade taxation.
TIDUCATIOIT.
1- The Council agrees with the Commission-s decision.
Administrators I concur.
1 doe s° re cognise ° f jf nil station
wording of the section is Scho °T s hut the
meant by --Government recognition®? 1, &8 What iS
Administrators x concur.
CoLWis of® dm^ nistrat i on « The
nor have fiv ■hp pn departures therefrom
Conference ttee? r ® SSed in the Pindi^s of the
Administrator; 1 ™ tur , It la the pollcy .
be
Administrators I concur.
Js 6,7, 8, 9 and lo This iq +vw= t •
istration. 13 the P oll cy of the Admin-
Administrators The above is the poliev • *
tural School (native? p°v" • Agncul-
°n the north coast of Hew E?ifain tabliShed
2011




NATIVE CHILL- TVSLFARS.
The Council is in genera,! agreement with this
resolution., The whole matter of infant welfare is a
already receiving serious consideration by the Admin-
istration and it is hoped to set up infant welfare
centres shortly.
Administrators I concur. We have ashed for three
infant welfare nurses.
NATIVE HARRIAG2S.
1. The Council is in agreement with this section.
Administrators I concur.
2. In the absence of knowledge ibf the reasons that led
the Conference to consider such an amendment desir-
ables the Council is not prepared to recommend any
alteration of the existing law.
Administrators I concur.
3). The Council observes that both these sections were
4- . dealt with at a previous meeting when a recommenda-
tion by the Council on these lines was submitted to
and eventually approved of by the Administrator.
5- The Council agrees to the recommendations contained
in this section.
Administrators I concur.
6. The Council considers this Finding to be inconsistent
with that contained in section (1) with which the
Council agrees.
Administrators I concur. It is inconsistent.
7* The Council is of opinion that this section is suffic-
iently covered by Regulations 70 and 72 of the Native
Administration Regulations 1923•
Administrators I concur.
&. The Council is of opinion that this section if given
effect to at this stage would interfere unduly y/ith
native custom.
Administrators I concur.
y. The Council does not agree with this section.
Administrators I concur.
10, The Council is in agreement with this section if any
of the Findings are adopted.
Administrators N 0.5.5 only is adopted.
202




ITATIVL CUSTOMS.
Secret Societies,
i s 2 ? 3 and 4c The Council considers that extortion and
oppression are already prohibited by legislation and
is not prepared to make a reco: mendation regarding the
remaining portions of this resolution until the whole
matter has been investigated by the Administration«
Administrators The Lulc-Dul: is being investigated by the
Anthropologist. Action will be taken on
his Report.
hative Dances,
1 and 2, That until more is lenown of these so called
immoral dances*' and their effect on the community P
it is not possible to consider the imposition of
any restrictions,
with regard to the holding of native dances and
the question of Secret Societies, the Council recoamends
cnat a full investigation he conducted by the Administra-
cion t
Administrators I understand that the Anthropologist is
investigating these dances. I do not intend
to tame any auction until I receive his
Report *
3- The Council is of the opinion that it is not con-
sidered advisable at this stage to exthnd the
provisions already in force.
Administrators I concur. There is a curfew law pro-
hibiting natives’ being in the town after
9 p• m© 5 except on pans.
General.
U T £e Council considers that this matter should also
oe included in the programme of the investigations
by the administration whicthe Council has already
recommended above.
administrators X concur,
2« Homo- sexual Practices.
(a) The Council is in agreement with this section.
Administrators I concur,
(n) The Council is of the opinion that a recommends.-
cion in the terms of this section would not
diminish the prevalence of homosexuality.
Administrator s X couhit ao •-> -p -•>/-*+ j.i_
concur. as a iact 2 the a.ge proposed
in the new native Labour Ordinance is 14,
203




(c) As it a, pears to this Council that homo-sexual
practices arc just as likely to arise "between
adolescents as they are between adults and
adolescents s a recommendation under this section
would he insufficient to meet the case.
Administrator % I concur.
(d) The Council is in agreement with this section*
Administrators I concur.
(e) The Council agrees that under certain circumstances
and proper safeguards, birching is preferable.
Administrate;; c I concur.
The Council in commenting generally on the whole of this
section, is of the opinion that the Conference has failed
to touch the real root of the problem of homo-sexual
practices amongst native labour which is lack of normal
sex outlet.
LATTLRS AND CIRCmeS^ r CAS THiTPUHATIOK OP
NATIVE LITE. ' '
The Council is of the opinion that the present
Regulations (los, 110 and 111 of the Native Administration
Regulations 1924) should not be deleted. These regula-
tions permit the wearing of clothing among people v/ho are
sufficiently advanced and, in the opinion of the Council,
their only inadequacy is their failure to control the
wearing of clothing by female natives. The Council is
also of the opinion that the wearing of wet or filthy
clothing and the exchange of clothing worn by people affect-
ed with skin diseases shuuld be considered an abuse within*,
the meaning of Regulation 110.
Administrators I concur. It would in my opinion be im-
possible to control the wearing of filthy
and infected clothing.
NATIVE LABOUR PROBLEMS.
The Council is of the opinion that it is inadvisable
to consider away from their context, several phases of a
subject of such prime importance s that it would be pre-
ferable for the whole of the proposed new Native Labout
Ordinance to be submitted for its consideration. The
eouncil recommends that an investigation a,s suggested in
section 5 (Indentured Labour) should be undertaken.
204




Administrator: tQ the practice of the Administration
t-.nfly scrutinise the proportionsof
males aM females in villages aTrfJSJs
am a istric officers are enjoined to re
for a os los t 0 roorilUag 'L m
*■" ■*■■ • • • ■- ■ * Is net int lead.
GS-.-EIRniL i.ttJTHRa
1# is of the opinion that, bearin'- in nine
tne transport prebiems existing in the°fe?ritorv
UZmisns? *° »*««« ii'iL
a to lnlstr.tor: itii l^onr io aa„ V e s oannot be so .ployed except
Jhe council is in agreement with this section,
administrator; I concur.
i ' iie agrees that Sunday rarades oVi m ,i .
be enforced except for specif Lit fi
Administrator: I concur.
OaJf'ZlJ. U-QHR7.
fhe council is iix tie 01 ininn +.
clrani t n-v +■,, , . tnat a regular
circuit of tne central court is imperative.
Administrator; Tjwio ~
mis can be none at present without any judge*
205






