







' 1 H ~ / I I
v\ / £ \ J «
J_ • 7
2/ ] ’ " : I” I / A \
arcompotnzymg report fry C mmecke tote *&**%, 0^$f^*P ato,u>8 f s' ! \ ff
Japlorer# Trig Surveyor, SkrYCjTtepartrrventSA. 11/ " 1 $
OH BLOCK Of fASTON AL COUNTRY SITUATE ON OVERLAND L*V\) / I
TELEGRAPH LINE IN ( I ‘ /7
NORTHERN TERRITORY Of SOUTH AUSTRALIA m _ \ ) jzA e r^ran / iirTtited. f K 1 II
ApproxTmute oweou 2opoo sguoore mites. hrtel g
ItrJUTco zzyeerrs leaser ; %%/?xk */ tr
jst? : yeours at syxpenrr orsgujure rfdte, remeurr - p
-jup iSy'ecCh* QttMV sfimwgs OTzg /^y^/l/yf t j yrauAcU / i
TTtioe rerercUT. - / N /] >- U/p/dtareHpyie-ycL (trvd, MreifgTtxsseil'
Tdepraphv tijt&kFroposeclRoute of Troon# - 5 >'
- Vi
ifc Ly% v%fU v\
\ fp \% y N H. y-
r Q gg^MT PEAKE , ... ,., , STATION $47rmlesfivn RrrtOtigz* V 4
- SHee/o Ho weJE Ehpt // K i ’
*•4 lji.,Mj//,, u, if / joerrnazrvent-&urf, -ce i » ■ 1 f
/ v> „ J
/ f-f jy)tjZ2L —g *“* I \\. scrzih
J?ertse. mxztyas *orxU> WeU grcissJdL Sf yfj I I V\
, / I ,<# v. It-. I
•' 4*ftss H “ oT '
c 7/^L u y / / i
g || 7 j?; —Tf r. , jjjaA y' n / ■ z 7 i
■ ■ \i Wa^T^sun \^
22 ifi** 22 1
Jm* €* * i // M
f \IW ■' t**% 1 J m # I
*■*% I f I, f\*. *i%J %s. * v / t4$&M I
JLL_ -0/ i ‘d I
■ I#) ■
; aoanfwi f .tiri ——
Ja'/'Mmh^^V«KS5«^S,r , «-A#aio T JWis/ n > hiw*.
/» z. z. x. || *•■ T^
MTpRPt^fNc .,. 'i^^%^,W'^w>7* f l. BOOT H BY 'SpUru*Mtyr aaUhvuhs hert>c*y*. '- t >, Ji {/vroNafSiza (iiJferk £ , fV, L E jfr M r
/ »r iim>i»t i afair’»A -,
a u, \ —— ■*— ** ujs jxyj v \) a ►*« f
..■ / . ** LL s ,rcuts Nooco^rcd i I /Jr H \y
MagrUtic**nsgcjrajiS derust ..» r . dw». JK ] y W'liw If 1 I ! r / f
s if v r f If * M c a \HfSsii sfe#?*'® f* Jr ,'•'> f J* vAwt/ if $7T*f“ (& LgJ?
»• Wfwf vvv#vw ****■•? * Vv * fca\, A ■ p 1 ' /{ JvAintTuli&tly •
if y . \ / x .y 7iyy>- fyr
fssur M* ?. v . , \ m d f aP S / O U ' y\f S i f J(2
'.‘If'' Sand/ coYezedO yrzt/i/ TTuaZcrcry scrzjdy ,*r aK w- 4 ..—/ J.. r / ,1 / r 1 *
. 7 \ / f T/s’fir 7*TSh ff ,J I
ts \ * S T U f sdj / \ J r^Trfv^
_,, _.\ »i k h _ jjo_w cbiFf^ \Jtjzt$heU.' ffrt*as4 /olceorvs J
y r ” ■ ' ■' "■ f--,f 1 : ; '-^-;.-i- s ' "“‘‘ rS
y \ |1 / I
TISZ+s* A S \ ' AMT MILTON r ‘
Ur ore; a fry .At\ a coles hill r)
= Jx'd*
WeOe numbered/horn q.te/p fy \ mtjohmsto.e ■
Sis' aS \
M'ere rnyzUe' Ty vrAzTepez >p/y \
Spoc futures Uy ' y \
1 / r y W y \ A HILL
y • t r\ofy s *Vy [ ?°em.hill \
syjLfop/ y £>/ Trytey/yi /y/y rrt y i\y $ A \
“ ~ \
Qy jT A apla hill \
j - ! [ *——— h—
NN/FDK jy/NN£C/T£ AND C* A MTFoV? STER
Ljcen soeT SjurTtgrons \etc, \ \
, — jo ~~ ■ ” ’ ;vft
p
I S.. 1 ■ -- «/. M %C*MT*i y
ATSiJmmE**.;.r.mx^ ■'^ u^m^,mim " l^'^"SSESSSSS!SSI^mSmne^i^~A' ,;. wS»watfMii83M«iiaa»M«^m^Wn>MM *** — ,llWnr,wtl1 * WT’Wffl— i iiiihhumb— tmmmmtmirmrmu umicjHwa—Hi—g—— 1 ** lnBlfc^*—1 negw« rnsasammm — Tmi^^^^|~-|^||MM||||||[|||M> i 1 r BnM^B M alM j^^» ff p^| r M*M»^**MM , MM || MAM^Si
‘






REPORT
ON
PASTORAL COUNTRY
ABOUT
BARROW’S CREEK
♦
TELBGEAPH STATION,
’ / *
OYERLAND TELEGRAPH,
N. T.
20,000 Square Miles.
0
25 Years’ leases.
SRfriaftre:
FREARSON AND BROTHER, KINO WILLIAM STREET.
1 8 8 2.






* { ■ ' . — - .. - ~' - ■ ■ r*;
I -•r jfilfci
»: «m* . - **:&f-tfS-£ •■. '■''*■'}<, >^<v,«-^*«4r7Ua»- , 'R>* i *'>-. • ’ ; '«wt«Mi I* • ~* 1 t P»,.v j|L. .„ - -’■ > _. , _ _.i < . ‘'^Msj^^¥*^'>;- i j*' **"~~3 'SZH I .J T«y >».V* ~ .r 8
fi vStaSfa* ' -- • ■' ■' ’•• ■:■—.■■• ■ -.,„/:•■■ , ■ ':v ; -;--:^;: : **■ i J : ‘ ■ -• ‘V -j||£J?V ' ' " *"" ‘l *' ' I


EXTRACTS
FROM THE DIARY OF
JOHN McDOUGALL STUART,
(The Great Explorer),
On his Trip across the Continent, 1860.
[Ordered by the House of Assembly to be Printed, 7th
June, 1861.]
PARLIAMENTARY PAPER, No. 65.
Wednesday, April 18.—Under the high peak, Mount Freeling;
at daybreak sent Keckwick in search of water while I ascended the
high mount to see if any could be seen from this place. To my
delight I beheld a little in a creek on the other side of the range,
bearing 113 deg. about one and a half miles. I find this is not quite
the highest point of the range ; the highest one is about 13 miles
further on to the N. W. W. About two miles off I can see a gum creek ;
it looks green, and the country from W. to N.E. is a mass of hills ;
to the B.W. high broken ranges. The range is composed of the
same description of rocks as the MacDonnell Range, with more quartz
than mica. We have found new shrubs and flowers, also a small
brown pigeon with a crest. On the peak I have built a cone of
stones, and named it Mount Freeling, after the Honorable Colonel
Freeling, Surveyor-General, and the range, Reynolds Range, after
the Hon. the Treasurer.
Thursday, April 19.—Mount Hugh—During the nightthe horses
separated, and we did not get a start till after 1 o’clock, when we moved
to the east side of the Mount, to where I saw the water. Found
plenty in a gum creek, which is the head of the one we crossed on
Tuesday night, just before making the range. We were obliged to
go a long way round to get to it, as the hills are rough sharp rock,
and impassable for horses. There is abundance of grass, with a
little spinifex. At this camp I have marked a tree J.M‘D.S. ; the
cone of stones at the top of the Mount bears 293 deg.
At 10 miles distant, in a branch creek about half a mile to the
north of this, is more water. A little higher up in a ledge is a
splendid reservoir 30 yards in diameter and about 100 yards in cir-
cumference. We could not get to the middle to try the depth, but
where we did it was 12 feet deep, and must be deeper in the middle.
A few yards higher up another ledge of rocks, behind which is
another reservoir, but smaller, having a drainage into the other one.


This I have named (after Mr. James Chambers’ youngest daughter)
Anna’s Reservoir,
Friday, April 20.—East side of Mount Hugh—Started on a
south-east course to find a crossing place over the range in which
we had some difficulty, on account of the roughness of the hills. On
the other side we found a large gum creek with water in it, running
to the north-east. The range is well grassed, with gum creeks
coming from it, with a mulga scrub.
Here we discovered a new tree, the seed of which is red and like a
bean. I have obtained a few ; the foliage is very thick. The largest
tree we have seen is 18 inches through ; the wood is soft when it is
in the state of a bush, and has thorns on it like a rose. We also
obtained some of the seed as a vegetable we have been using ;we
find it first rate ; it can be eaten as salad, boiled as a vegetable,
or cooked as a fruit. We find it a most useful thing. We have
got other seeds of new flowers. The bearing from this to the cone
of stones on Mount Hugh is 283 deg.-45 m.
Saturday, April 21. —Gum Creek, east side of Mount Freeling
—Started at 7.80 across the scrub to another high hill. For seven
miles the scrub is open, and land beautifully grassed. At twelve
miles from the camp we crossed a gum creek coming from the range,
running north-east. There are a number of gum trees, and the new
tree that was found in Captain Sturt’s expedition of 1844, but mulga
predominates. At fourteen miles we struck a large gum plain, and
alter a short time again entered the scrub. At about 22 miles met
another arm of the gum plains, with large granite rocks nearly level
with the surface. In the holes of the rocks we found rain water.
At 32 miles crossed the sandy bed of a large gum creek, divided into
a number of channels, and at four miles we camped on a small creek
with a little rain water creek running north-east. The soil is of red
sandy colour, but grass abundant, with occasional spinifex.
Sunday, April 22. —Small gum creek under Mount Stuart —To-
day I find from my observations of the sun, 111 deg. om. 30 secs.,
that I am now camped in the centre of Australia. About two and a
half miles N.N.E. is a high mount, I shall go to it to-morrow and
build a cone of stones, plant the British flag, and name it Central
Mount Stuart. Have been in search of permanent water to-day ;
examined a large creek, no surface water, but can get a little by
scratching in the sand. Splendid grass all round.
Monday, April 23. —Centre—Took Keckwick and the flag, and
went to the top of the Mount, wh'ch I find higher and more difficult
of ascent than I supposed, but after numerous slips and knocks we
reached the top. It is as high as Mount Serle, if not higher. The
view to the north is over a large plain of gum, mulga, and spinifex,
with watercourses running through. The large gum creek we
crossed winds round this hill in a north-east direction ;at ten miles
it is joined by another. After joining they take a course north, and


are lost sight of to the N.E.E. and S.E. broken ranges. To the
west is a very high peak ; between it and this are a number of
isolated hills. Built the cone of stones, in the centre of which I
placed a pole with the British flag nailed to it. On the top of the
cone I. placed a small bottle, in which is a slip of paper, stating by
whom it was raised. We then gave three hearty cheers for the flag,
descended the hill, and found everything right. The water we are
camped at still continues, which makes me think there must be more
higher up. ihe range I have named John’s .Range, after my friend
and well-wisher, John Chambers Esq. (brother to James Chambers
Esq.), from whom 1 have received much kindness.
Tuesday, April 24.—Central Mount Stuart—Sent Keckwick in
search of water, and to examine a hill with a cone of stones on it,
while I made up ray plan, and Ben mended the 'saddle bags. Keck-
wick returned in the afternoon, having found water higher up the
creek, also a new rose of beautiful description, with sweet perfume.
The native orange tree also abounds here. Mount Stuart is com-
posed of hard red sandstone, covered with spinifex, and on the top a
' ittle scrub,
VV bdnesday, April 25, —Central Mount Stuart—A remarkable
hill visible two miles off to the west, with another small hill at the
north end, in the shape of a bottle. This I have named Mount
Esther, at the request of the female who made the flag. Started at
9 o clock, a little north of west to the high peak seen from the top
of Mount Stuart, which bears 272 deg. Around the mount the
country is well grassed, with red sandy soil and no stones. To the
north and south of our line are a number of isolated hills, principally
granite. At ten miles there is a quartz reef on the north side of the
south hills. At 12 o’clock struck a creek coming south, and run-
ning north. It has three channels ; found water in one and camped.
The large creek flowing round Mount Stuart is named the Hanson,
after R. D. Hanson Esq,, of Adelaide. ’
b riday, April 27. East side Mount Denison—Sent Keckwick
to the south-west to a remarkable hill which has the appearance of
giving water. W aited till past 12 o clock, but as he did not return
I started, intending to go to the top of the mount. On the north-
east side of the ranges the appearance was good for water, and seeing
that the mount was some distance off, and it would make me late to
return, 1 tinned my attention to look for water, which X was success-
ful in finning in a creek coming from the hills, and running a little
to the east of noxth, ffraces of natives hereabouts. After reachin o,
the camp had the horses saddled and brought to water, leaving a
note for lieckwick to follow in a W.A.W. direction to a’gum creek
about thiee miles di&tant. He has returned, and lound permanent
water under the high peak to which I sent him, and which I have
named Mount Leichardt in memory of that unfortunate explorer
whose fate is still a mystery, Keckwick describes the water he


found as abundant, beautifully clear, and springing out of conglo-
merate rocks which resemble marble. The water is running, and
likely to do so for some time ; it’s length is upwards of a quarter of
a mile falling into natural basins in the solid rock, about six feet in
depth/ The country round the base is covered with luxuriant grass
and vegetation. Mount Leichardt and the range are composed at the
base of a soft conglomerate rock, in great irregular masses, heaped
on one another.
Saturday, April 28 —Gum Creek, under Mount Denison—
Started on horseback for the top of the mount; left my horse in a
small rocky gum creek, thinking it would lead me to the foot of the
mount. At about a quarter of a mile from the mouth of the gorge,
came on some water in a rocky hole ; followed it up, and at 200
yards was stopped by a perpendicular precipice with water trickling
over it into a large reservoir. Had to take to the hills, which were
very rough after much labour arrived at the summit. This is the
highest mount I have yet been on. It has taken me fully eight
hours to climb, and the view is extensive. Central Mount Stuart
bears 950 deg., Mount Leichardt 155 deg. 30 m. To the south broken
ranges and wooded plains, and a long way off appears a very high
mountain to the south-west, the same description of range. To the
W.S.W. a number of ranges seem to terminate. About 30 miles is
a high mount to the west; open country with patches of woodland ;
to the W.N.W. apparently high land in the distance ;to the north-
west seemingly an immense open plain with patches of wood, and
bearing to the next range, highest point 334 deg. To the north
another plain ; to the north-east termination of MacDonnell Range.
As this is the highest mountain I have seen in Central Australia, I
have named it Mount Denison, after His Excellency Sir William
Denison, K. 0.8., Governor-General. The next range, bearing 334deg.
being the last of the highest ones, I have named Mount Barkly after
His Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, Governor-in-Chief of Victoria.
When on the second high point of this mount I saw smoke rise in the
creek below, a short distance from where T left my horse. Descended,
and found him all right. Reached the camp at 4.30, and found all
straight ; intended to have built a cone of stones on the summit, but
was too exhausted to do so, Erected a small one, and put a piece
of paper underneath to show a white man had been there. On the
creek where we are camped I have marked a tree J.M’D.S. Mount
Denison bears from this 249 deg,
Sunday, April 29. —Gum Creek, under Mount Denison, Lat.
24 deg. 48 m., variation 3 deg. 20 ra. E. —Mount Denison and sur-
rounding hills are composed of hard red brown sandstone. About
100 yards from the summit is a course of conglomerate rock from a
quarter to 4 inches in diameter, and has the appearance of having
been rounded at a former period by water, and on the top three or


four pines are growing. The mount and adjoining hills are covered
with spinifex ; the plain is grassed.
Sunday, May 6.—The Fisher— Went to a native well, watered
the horses, and camped.
Monday, May 7.—The Fisher— Passed a good night, and teei
recovered from past fatigue. Started for creek east side of Mount
Denison, and reached it after dark. Camped here for the night.
Tuesday, May 8. —Creek east side of Mount Denison Must
remain here two days to allow the done-up horses to recover.
Wednesday, May 9.—Resting horses and putting things in order.
Sunday, May 13. —Appearance of creek to E.S.E., to which I
shall go. At three miles, what I supposed to be a creek is a small
gum flat which receives the drainage from John s Range. Found
a hole in which water had been. The peak I have named Mount
Rennie, after Major Rennie, of the Indian army. At seven
miles distance, came upon some more low hills with another promi-
nent peak of dark red sandstone. This I have named Mount Peake,
after E. J. Peake Esq., of Adelaide. I now find that the gum
creek I crossed between Central Mount Stuart and Mount Denison
runs out and forms the gum plains we have just passed.
Monday, May 14. —Stony hills in mulga scrub —At three miles
passed a gum creek emptying itself into the scrub. At seventeen
miles passed another doing the same, and at twenty miles another,
which has a remarkable hill at the north-west in the shape of a large
bottle with a long neck.
Saturday, May 19.— Centre— Crossed down to the Hanson.
The water is a few inches below the surface in the sand, east side of
Mount Stuart, bearing 250deg., about ten miles distant.
Tuesday, May 22.—The Hanson—Started on a course of 48deg.,
crossed the Hanson, running a little on our right. At six miles
crossed it again, running to the north for two miles farther. Also
crossed other four of its courses running in the same direction. The
most eastern is spread over a large valley, and forms a lagoon at the
foot of some sand ridges, the highest of which is ten and a half
miles from last camp. On the east side of it is a laige lagoon, five
miles long, and one and a half broad. Proceeded through a little
scrub and splendid grass ; at twelve miles cut a small gum creek
coming from the range. There are a number of birds and fresh native
tracks in the creek. Round this is a large gum plain completely
covered with grass. Reckwick went to get water, and found some
where the natives had been digging. Saw some natives, who seemed
paralyzed with astonishment, but afterwards ran oft with all speed.
At fourteen mileswe again struck the creek with plenty of water ;
it winds over abeautiful plain. Camped here.
Wednesday, May 23. —Cum Creek, East Range. This creek
X have named the Stirling, after the Hon. Edward Stirling, M.L.C.


Followed it into the range on the same course towards a bluff
where I hope to find an easy crossing at one mile from the camp!
The hills commence on the S.E. side of the creek, but on the N.W
side they commence three miles further back. In the creek there is
an abundance of water for 13 miles. At 10 miles there is another
large branch, with water coming from the S.E. At 14 miles ascen-
ded the bluff', and obtained the lollowing bearings to a high peak on
the south side of the creek, which I have named Mount Gwynne
after His Honor Justice Gwynne, 186, deg. At two miles distant
is another hill on the north side, 249 deg., which I have named
Mount Mann, in memory of the late Commissioner of Insolvency,
Central Mount Stuart bears 131 deg. to the highest point at N.W.
termination of next range, to which I shall now go. They appear
to be two large hills, the north one, the highest, I have named
Mount Strelitzki, after Count Strelitzki, bearing 358 deg. Another
high, peak on the same range I have named Mount Morphett, after
the Hon J. Morphett, M.L.C. The view from the bluff is extensive,
except to the W.N.W., which is hidden by a range, which I have,
named Forster’s Eange, after the Hon. Anthony Forster, M.L.C.’
From the S.W. is the appearance of a long continuous range,
much broken ; on this side (N.E.), are table hills with a number of
isolated ones on the north side. To the N.W. -is a scrubby and
gum tree plain, to the N.N. W. some low isolated ranges, to the east,
are a number of spurs from this range composed of hard, dark, red,
sandstone, mixed with small round quartz and ironstone, in some
places flinty quartz. The range and hills are covered with spinifex,
mt the valleys are grassed. Descended, and crossed a most beauti-
fully grassed country ; at four miles struck a creek coming from
the range, and passing between two low ones running towards the
N.E.
Friday, May 25.—Range of low hills. Started for Mount
Strelitzki. Passed some mulga scrub with plenty of grass. At
21 miles came upon a small gum creek. Gave the horses water,
filled our canteens, and proceeded to the foot of the Mount and
camped.
Saturday, May 26.—Mount Strelitzki, Camped. Very heavy
clouds from the N.W. The Mount about four miles distant. At
sundown it rained for about an hour. The clouds seem to come
from the N.W., and the wind from the S.E.
Sunday, May 27.—Lagoon N. E. of Mount Strelitzki We had
a few heavy showers during the night. There is water in the
lagoon.
Monday, May 28.—Lagoon N’E. of Mount Strelitzki. Started
at a quarter past nine. Wind piercing cold. For three miles had
to go 47. N.W. to clear the low stony range running to the east side of
the lagoon. I then changed to 22 deg. for the far distant range.
The first three miles of this was through a thick mulga scrub ;


plenty of grass, and a little spinifex. It then changed to slightly
undulating ; the country of a reddish soil, gum trees, cork
trees, and numerous low sandy plains much resembling the gum and
spinifex, to the west.
PARLIAMENTARY PAPER, No. 169.
Diary of J, M‘D. Stuart, Esq., Exploration 1860-61.
Monday, April 1. —Hamilton Springs, bearing 22 deg. 30 ra.
At one p.m. came upon a very pretty flat of beautiful grass, with
water in the middle of it, and as the afternoon has everj ap-
pearance of rain, I have camped. To go in the rain would only
spoil our provisions. We had scarcely got the packs ofi, when it
came on heavy, and lasted about an hour ; it then ceased till sun-
down, when it came and continued till 10.30 p.m. Cleared
off a little, but was showery all night.
Tuesday, April 2. —Green flat in scrub. Started at 8.20 a.m.
on same course, and camped at 1.30 p.m. under rocky hill, which
has a very prominent appearance. Had a heavy shower of ram at
noon lasting half an hour, and causing the country to become heavy
for the horses. Ascended the hill, which I have named Mount
Harris, after Peter G. Harris, Esq., of Adelaide. Obtained bearings
of the different points all round. The last seven miles, sandy soil,
spinifex, scrub, mostly young cork tree, and broad-leaved mallee.
Latitude, 23 deg. 4 m. 13 sec.
Wednesday, April 3.—Mount Harris, We have put up a
small cone of stones on top of Thisre was a very thick
fog during the morning. Started at eight for Ann’s Reservoir.
Arrived at the creek about two mites B.S.E. of it, and finding it
running, camped amongst excellent feed. By keeping to west of my
former track I have found the country much opener.
Thursday, April 4. —The Wicksteed, Reynolds’ Range—Heavy
dew during night. Started at 7.40 to cross the range bearing to
Mount Freeling 312 deg.; at 1.30 p.m, crossed the range and reached
the' creek, camping at the same place as I did on my previous
journey, and finding feed and water abundant. This creek I have named
the Woodforde, after Dr. Woodforde of Adelaide. After crossing
the range we found the bean-tree in blossom, which is magnificient ;
we roasted some of the beans and find they make very good coffee.
The creek is a running stream, and the country still boggy.
, Friday, April s.—The Woodforde, Reynolds’ Range—Started
at,7.30. a.m.; course 13 deg. W. of my former track through
very thick rnulga, and one mile of spinifex. Camped at 4.30 p.m.
on the Hanson, now also a running stream. Passed a native wurley
which was built with great care, and thatched with grass, and in
it a quantity of grass laid regularly for a bed. Near the front was a


large quantity of firewood. Latitude 22 deg. sm. 30 sec. bearing
to Central Mount Stuart 25 deg.
Saturday, April 6. The Hanson—Started at 8 a.m. on a
course of 46 deg. 30 m. to the springs in the Hanson ; this led me
through about four miles of thick mulga. After crossing
the central line we arrived at the creek and camped below the
springs. Bearing to Central Mount Stuart 251 deg. 20 m.
Monday, April 8. —The Hanson, E.N.E. of Centre—Camped on
the Stirling. Through all the day’s journey, the country abounds in
grass and water, occasionally a little spinifez mixed with the grass.
Tuesday, April 9. —The Stirling, Forster’s Range—Bearing
to Central Mount Stuart 233 deg. 30 m. Started at 7.30. a.m. to
cross Forster’s Range on the same course. At 10.50 a.m.;
camped oa the north side of it on a large gum creek with water. This I
have name the Taylor, after Jno. Taylor, Esq., of the firm of Messrs.
Elder, Stirling & Co., of Adelaide. Obtained the following bearings
from the North Hill at the gorge where the creek runs through
Mount Morphett 11 deg. 30 m., Mount Strelitzki 357 deg. This is
a most beautiful place, a plain 4 miles broad between two granite
ranges completely covered with grass, and a gum creek winding
through the centre. I made a short journey to-day, and to-morrow’s
journey will be a long one.
Wednesday, April 10. —The Taylor—Started at 7.25 a.m. on
a course of lldeg. 30m. lor Mount Morphett, and ascended the sum-
mit. Ran a creek down and found water, followed it till it was lost
in a grassy plain. Proceeded to the next hills, passed through a
gap, made for a creek on the north side where we found water and
camped with Mount Morphett bearing 204 deg. 30 m., Mount
Strelitzki 273 deg.
Thursday, April 11*—North side Mount Morphett, Crawford’s
Range—Started at 7.45 a.m. First four miles over a beautiful
grassy plain with mulga, wood not very thick, then it became more
sandy, and covered with gum ; cork-trees and other shrubs which
continued within a mile of where we camped on a small but beauti-
ful grassed plain.
REPORT ON PASTORAL COUNTRY AT BARROW’S
CREEK ; BY R. R. Knuckey Esq,, Superintendent of Over-
land Telegraph Construction Party.
In fulfilment of the promise I made you, I send you a rough
sketch of the country you have taken out in Central Aus-
tralia. I have marked on it the route of the O.T. line and all
reliable data. I must tell you that all the information on the plan
is correct, and obtained from reliable source, some from my own per-
sonal knowledge, and other from men who I know have visited and
explored the country.
I find that your block starts from Lat 23° South and Long.


135° E., extending to Lat. 21° 8. and Long. 132°-40, a total area of
about 20,000 square miles (this is approximate as I have no scale
with me). Starting from the southern boundary of the country,
and following the telegraph line and extending to the westward the
country is well grassed “ open Mulga ” red soil. Around the ranges,
Reynolds and Stuart’s Bluff,” there is permanent water
Stuart’s report, and more recently Mr. A. T. Wood, who watered
the sheep he was taking through the continent for Dr. Brown at
Anna’s Reservoir. I believe he had about 9,000, and although
it was in the height of the dry season he got plenty of water for
them at the Reservoir. The country north of Reynolds Range up
to Mt. Leichardt is, according to the . description of the late Mr.
Gosse, Deputy Surveyor General, well grassed around the Lander,
and from his description I think the creek (the Lander) is similar
to the “ Hanson,” and that would mean that water can always be
obtainable at easy depth in dry seasons, supposing the creek itsel
were dry.
There is a large permanent waterhole close to Mt. Leichardt on
the east side of the range (Stuart’s information), and he (Stuart)
gives a very favorable description of the country around it.
Following the route of the telegraph line I can give you no better
information than what is marked on the map. The Woodforde is
splendidly grassed, and water can be obtained by sinking at any
time. The Hanson is not well known, except where it follows the
line. It is a very large creek, and drains a very large area of coun-
try. Our opinion is that it forms a lake to the westward, as Ave find
that the drainage from the country travelled through by Stuart, as
far as Mt. Rennie, trends in the direction where we know the Hanson
goes. •
Water can be got nearly anywhere along this creek. The Tea
Tree well, sunk by Mr. Wood in 1871, is simply inexhaustible, as
the water comes in as fast as it is drawn out; beautiful water it is
too, good as any in Adelaide. Country around Central Mt. Stuart
is very good grazing, and the last saltbush we saw is there. This
brings me to remark that the water in the well at Barrow’s Creek is
slightly brackish, and for that reason splendid for stock, for we find
that when the stock we had on the line got out of the saltbush country,
and the water they had to drink was all perfectly fresh, they did not
do well at all. I have seen wethers killed at Barrow’s Creek over
701bs. weight. The country north of Barrow’s Creek (around the
Taylor) is splendid, and there is always plenty of water in the
Taylor Creek at a place called the Sawpit Camp (a good place for a
head station it would be) plenty of grass and permanent water.
There is an unlimited supply of water in the well on the Taylor. You
must remember that the depth given in the sketch means the depth
sunk, not the depth to the water level. We sunk as far as we


could, or until the flow of water was so much that we could not sink
lurtner.
To the east of the line the country has been explored by Messrs
Harvey and Ross, and I have dotted in their track. The Waite
country of Mr. Tennant’s is very fair country. The Waite is fairly
watered, and where 1 have marked it in black dots is where Mr.
Harvey saw it last. His opinion is that it is a better watered creek
at the foot than at the head. If this is so you have secured the
best part. We know the country is well grassed all round.
I am sorry that I had no time to make a more respectable looking
plan, but you can easily get a draughtsman to do that for you in
Adelaide. Mr. Woods would be the best man if he would do so.
The only recommendation I can give it is that it is correct, and that
the information in it is reliable, and 1 suppose that’s the main point.
I can say the same thing for this report.
Yours Faithfully,
R. R. Knuokey.
COPY OF ORIGINAL REPORT ON RUN, CLAIMS—
-20,450 Square Miles.
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA, ABOUT BARROW’S CREEK.
, In order to avoid as much as possible repetition, and also to render
tins report at once simple and easy to comprehend by a reference to
the accompanying map, I have divided the whole block into six
parts ot nearly equal extent by dotted lines.
The assertions as to the amount and permanency of the waters,
abundance of the grasses, &c., &c,, may be considered thoroughly
leliab. The .) r are result of careful examination of this country
at various different times and seasons, during a period of about four
years.
Block No. 1.-3,650 square miles. All that portion of Block
No. 1 south of (Stuart’s) Bluff Range, amounting to 690 square
miles, consists ot sand covered with spinifex, mulga, gum, and
grevilha scrub, and is altogether destitute of water, with the ex-
ception of the Native Well, near the telegraph line, and a few rock
water-holes, two and a-half miles west of the Native Well. The
xNaave Well is an irregular shaped hole about 12 feet deep. In
or maiy seasons there is a slight soakage (which was at one time
consi ere permanent), into this well from the adjoining hills. It is
situate in the centre of a gap in the Bluff Range, which has here
received the name of Harris’ Ridge. Close to the Native Well the
lelegraph Department endeavoured to sink another well, but after
tI! v f °w i l? Ut , ls feet throu £ h s °lid granite it was abandoned,
ei a iveWell when full holds about 10,000 gallons of water, and
lasts travellers nearly throughout the year. The rock holes to the west-
ward nold about 3,000 gallons of water. The Bluff Range con-
12


sists of a single line of barren granite and sandstone hills running
due east and west, and forms the Northern boundary of the desert
portion in No. 1 Block. Immediately to the north of this range,
and throughout the remaining portion of No. 1 Block (2,960
square miles), the country is of an entirely different description,
good grass being everywhere abundant, together with saltbush,
cottonbush, and other herbs. This is especially noticeable south
of Mount Freeling, and Mount Boothby, in the valley between
Mount Thomas and Mount Leichardt, on the Lander River, and
also between the Hanson and Woodforde Creeks, and especially to
the east and north-east of the latter creek, near “ Well in Sand,”
shown on the map. The hills forming the Reynolds Range are
similar to the Bluff Range in their barrenness, some portion of them
being generally densely overgrown with large mulga trees. The
creeks have fine gum timber growing along their banks, suitable for
many purposes. The scrub (mulga) throughout this portion of No.
1 Block runs in belts, and is very dense in places, with fine large
open salt and cotton bush flats between. This country is suitable
both for cattle and sheep.
From the Native Well the overland track follows the telegraph
line for about 12 miles, then turns off towards the north-west,
passing an old well about 25 feet deep, with no water, and further
on a hill on which there are three large rock water-holes, holding
about 5,000 gallons of water. The track then turns to about west
until it strikes the head of the Woodforde Creek at a water-hole,
which when full is over six feet deep, and about 100 yards long.
This water lasts a considerable time, and when no surface water
remains water can always be obtained by sinking in the sand in the
creek bed, even after two years of drought. This place is marked
“ good water” on plan. About five and a-half miles north of this
water-hole the track passes the Viol Spring, capable of watering a
few teams of bullocks. This spring is merely a soakage from the
surrounding heights, and is governed to a great extent by the
amount of annual rain that may fall in this locality. About two
miles farther north the track crosses the Woodforde creek for the
first time. Near this crossing Dr, Brown’s expedition sank a well
some 30 feet deep, obtaining a fair though not permanent supply of
water. The well requires to be sunk deeper, when it will furnish a
more abundant supply of water. It has been carefully timbered with
large slabs, and reflects great credit upon the workmen who were
employed at it. A good supply of water can also be obtained at the
crossing by sinking in the sand of the creek for about 12 months
after rain. Proceeding onwards the road turns to the north-east
passing “Well in Band” {vide plan). This water has never been
mown to fail, and after two years’ drought is capable of watering
about 100 head of cattle. It is a well about six feet deep, sunk by
travelling teamsters in the bed of the creek near the eastern bank,
10
O


and is now the usual camping place for all travellers. About six
miles from this well, northward, the road again crosses the Wood-
forde Creek to the eastern side, and then follows the telegraph line,
the next water on the road being the Tea Tree Well ;it is about
14 feet deep, sunk through limestone rock, and contains an
abundant and permanent supply of the purest water, which rises to
to within a few feet of the surface. This well has been fenced in and
supplied with door, windlass, about 60 feet of troughing, and several
iron buckets and chains. The natives, however, who are somewhat
troublesome in this neighbourhood, are constantly doing some
damage to the above materials, and such things as they can detach
or break are deposited in the well, which already contains four iron
buckets, besides other rubbish. A little beyond this well the
Woodforde loses its identity as a creek, but I have no doubt in
seasons of heavy flood the surplus waters find their way into the
Hanson Creek, which is only a few miles to the westward of the
Tea Tree Well, and which taking its rise in the Reynolds’ Range,
under Mount Finniss, runs eastward for a few miles ( plan),
and then north-east, parallel with the Woodforde, and some six
miles to the west of it. The Hanson, like the Woodforde and other
creeks in this country, has a wide, sandy bed, with clay banks
fringed with large gums ; the depth of the sand (pure white), varies
a good deal from one to 15 feet; at its head and near Mount
Finniss there are some permanent springs in the Hanson, the water
showing itself in small pools all over the creek bed. With a little
attention a fine water-hole could be scooped out here, which would
water at least 1,000 head of cattle, or a corresponding number of
sheep.
North of Mount Thomas water can be procured in several places
in the bed of the Lander River, within a few feet of the surface,
either by scooping a hole or sinking a well. South-west of Mount
Thomas there are several large rain water-holes in a branch creek of
the Warburton. These holes would last about nine months. About
*
nine or 10 miles W.S.W. from Mount Freeling there are some more
springs with an abundant supply of surface water. These springs
are quite equal in every respect to those near Mount Finniss.
Anna’s Reservoir of Stuart is situated in a rocky glen a few miles
E.E.S. from Mount Freeling. It is a large permanent water-hole
in a rocky basin, and capable of watering whatever stock may be
brought to it. It is about 25 feet deep in places ; above it and
nearer to Mount Freeling there are several more waterholes, some-
what smaller than the reservoir. About four miles north of the
Native Well, and one mile east of the telegraph line and road, the
Telegraph Department have sunk a well ; it is 40 feet deep with
an unlimited supply of very bitter water, which rises to within eight
feet of the surface (the well contains over 30 feet of water). This
water has never received a thorough trial. Sheep would undoubtedly


drink it. I have observed sheep and cattle drinking similar water
on the west side and in other places. From one to three miles east
of well there are a number of rain water-holes in a small creek,
which last about nine months after being filled. About six miles
north of Mount Boothby, near a peaked hill, the 0. T. Construction
Parties sank a well which has now fallen in, and can scarcely be
recognised. Besides these waters which can be regaided as the
prircipal and most important ones on No. 1 Block, there are
numerous small rock holes in every possible direction, besides a laige
number of fine large and deep claypans, which hold water for long
time after rain. These latter are found between and immediately
north of the Bluff Bange and south of Mount Preeling and Mount
Boothby.
Block No. 2, 8,520 Square Miles.
Generally consists of an open, level, and well grassed mulga
scrub, with a few exceptions, about 110 square miles in the south-
western corner being sandy and covered with spinifex, and a few
patches of inferior grass. The south-eastern corner is traversed
by several large sandy creeks, and is splendidly grassed, saltbush,
cotton bush, and other herbs abounding. The remaining portion
comes under the opening description. Water is not very abundant
on this Block ; there are a few native wells shown on the accom-
panying plan, none of much importance, also a few small water-
holes in a creek shown in the north-eastern corner, and one very
fair soakage in the Mueller I vide plan), south-east from Bed Cliff.
This soakage is capable of watering at least 50 head of stock for
six months after rain. A good well might be obtained near this
soakage judging from surface indications. There are also numerous
large claypans in the eastern and south-eastern portion of this block.
Block No. 3, 2,000 Square Miles.
Differs entirely from the preceding two blocks. The north-
western corner to within a few miles of the Waite Biver, comprising
about 90 square miles, consists of low sandhills covered with low
mallee bushes, a few mulga, bean tree, poplar, grevillia, and spinifex.
The north-eastern corner, 580 square miles, consists of open mulga
scrub, splendidly and abundantly grassed ; the rest of the block,
1,330 square miles, consists of low granite and conglomerate ranges,
timbered with myall and mulga scrub, magnificently grassed and
traversed by numerous sandy creeks. In the southern portion there
are several extensive plains, thickly grassed with Mitchell grass, salt-
bush, and various other herbs. There are several large rain water-
holes in the Plenty Biver near its sources which would last for about
six months after rain, and also several sand soakages, the principal
one being four miles south-east of Mount Ida. This would water
about 50 head of stock for about six months ; with very little expense
an excellent dam could be made in this creek. At this soakage


sufficient water could by this means be stored to support a station •
farther down this creek about 10 miles south-west from Tent Hill at
the junction of two creeks, there is at present a small rain waterhole
capable of watering about 100 head of stock for about three months.
With very little expense, a large waterhole of the following dimen-
sions, 30 feet wide, 10 feet deep, 400 yards long, could be made here
by damming the branch creek. Another soakage in the Waite River
marked ‘‘water in sand ” is indicated by a large native well sunk in
the bed of the creek. It is about six feet deep, with a fair supply of
water ; this would be a good site for a well. Numerous large and
small claypans are met with throughout the whole of this block.
Block No. 4, 2,195 Square Miles.
The greater portion of this block (1,970 square miles) consists of a
level and well-grassed open mulga scrub ; the remaining portion of
220 square miles, situated in the south-west corner, consists of low
sandhills covered with low mallee bushes, bean tree, grevillia, and
spinifex. The north-eastern corner of this block is indicated by a
very high bluff, which will also serve as a landmark to find the water
which is in a large sandy creek about five miles west of the bluff.
This water (surface) is permanent beyond a doubt, and capable of
watering all the stock that can be brought to it. Several horses
which had been lost from Barrow’s Creek were found on this creek,
having been out here for nearly ten years. The exact course of this
creek is not at present known, I have, therefore, merely shown it
approximately (dotted) ; its general direction and termination as a
tributary of the W aifce River, as shown on the map, may be con-
sidered correct. Another small soakage in the Waite River, in the
south-west corner of the block, will water about 100 head of stock
for about six months after rain.
Block No. 5, 4,380 Square Miles.
To give an accurate description of this block it is necessary to fur-
ther subdivide it into four equal parts. The eastern half (north-east
and south-east parts), 2,190 square miles, is similar to No. 4 block,
being generally a level and open mulga scrub, splendidly grassed
for the most part, only a few small patches of spinifex are to be
found. The south-east part is traversed in its southern portion by
several small sandy creeks which have numerous small rain water-
holes in them that last for a few months after rain. The hills
included in this portion are part of the Forster Range (of Stuart)
and consist of granite and sandstone tablelands, not exceeding 1,000
feet in height. They are generally either barren or covered with
dense mulga and spinifex. The north- east part, through which the
O.T. line runs, contains one very good well at the Taylor Creek
crossing, which was sunk by Dr. Brown’s expedition. This well is
about 40 feet deep, and holds about 25 feet of water, which is very
brackish and scarcely drinkable, although horses, cattle, and sheep


relish it immensely, and after once becoming accustomed to it prefer
it to rain water. The supply is unlimited and permanent ; the well
is 5 feet by 4 feet on the inside ; it is fenced in and carefully tim-
bered on the inside down to the water. There are two more old
wells close to this one ; they have, however, been allowed to fall in,
and are now useless. The north-western part of block 5, 1,095
square miles, consists of an open mulga scrub and plains, and is
magnificently grassed. Saltbush, cottonbush, and various other
herbs grow in abundance. It contains several good waterholes, nota-
bly one marked “ Large Permanent Waterhole,” which is about 16
miles from Barrow’s Creek Telegraph Station. The size of this water-
hole varies considerably with each flood ; it’s present dimensions are
100 yards long, 80 feet wide, and 4 feet deep, W tter is always
Drocurable by digging in the sand near this hole. Seven miles from
here, on the road to the telegraph station, and near the junction of
Barrow’s Creek with the Taylor River, there are several large rain
waterholes, the largest being 200 yards long, 30 feet wide, and from
8 to 5 feet deep, capable of watering a few hundred head of stock
during four or five months. In the north-eastern corner, near Mount
Strelizk a freshwater lagoon is met with, about one mile long, and
half a mile wide. It is not apermanent water, but after being filled it
would last at least for nine months. A few rock waterholes and a
native well of no very great importance are also found in this block,
and are shown on the plan.
The remaining portion of No. 5 Block, viz., Part 4 (B.W
part), 1,095 miles in extent, includes Barrow’s Creek Telegraph
Station, which is situated at the south-western end of a high granite
range near a gap through which Barrow’s Creek takes its course.
It is about three miles north of the Forster Range. The station
consists of a strong stone building built in the form of a square,
having a square courtyard inside, also strong stone sheds, store,
and blacksmith’s shop. There is no permanent surface water, but
two wells have been sunk, and a plentiful and permanent supply of
good, though slightly brackish water has been obtained at about
six feet from the surface. The country surrounding the station is
splendidly grassed, saltbush and cotton bush being everywhere
abundant. A large number of cattle, horses, and sheep are kept at
the station. Leaving Barrow’s Creek station the road for some
miles passes through splendidly grassed open mulga scrub, until it
ascends the western end of the Forster Range by winding up a
steep spur. After having crossed the range the road turns off
to the Stirling Creek, striking the latter one mile east of the tele-
graph line. This is a favourite camping place for travellers, &c.
There are several very large rain water-holes in this creek, the
largest being about 500 yards long, 60 yards wide, and 10 feet
deep, and would last about a twelve months. The road follows the
Stirling Creek for some distance ; at about nine miles from the


water-holes it crosses the Stirling Creek at right-angles. The creek
is here confined between two sandhills, and is from a quarter to
three-quarters of a mile wide, having the appearance of a claypan ;
it crosses the telegraph line which is here to the westward of the
track and finally forms a junction with Hanson River, the two
producing a flooded flat several miles in extent, which is overgrown
with teatree, so dense in places as to make riding a very difficult
matter. I feel certain of the existence of some large and permanent
sheet of water in this neighbourhood ( i.e ., north-west corner of Part
4), having frequently observed pelicans and other large aquatic birds
hovering about this locality in dry seasons to the eastward of the
telegraph line. The Stirling Creek forms some very large swamps
and claypans, which hold an immense quantity of water when full.
In 1879 over 50 square miles of country was inundated to the east
of the telegraph line, the flood-marks showing a depth of over 30
feet of water in places. The sandhills around the swamps are
splendidly grassed, indeed the whole of the block is the
finest pastoral country imaginable, great varieties of grasses being
everywhere abundant, together with saltbush, cotton bush, and other
herbs. This block would compare most favourably with the best
runs in South Australia ; water can be obtained anywhere on the
Stirling flats, a few feet below the surface. The next water met
with is about eight miles to the eastward of Central Mount Stuart.
This water (springs), is permanent, and is found in small pools
in the bed of the creek ; by scooping a hole in the sand about six
inches deep, a plentiful supply of water could be obtained for all
purposes ; a water-hole about E.E.S. from Barrow’s Creek, T.S., is
also worth mentioning ; it is about 100 yards long, 20 yards wide,
and 4 feet deep, and lasts a considerable time. Water can how-
ever always be obtained here by digging in the sand.
Block No. 6, 3,650 Square Miles.
Is very similar to No. 2 Block, and consists of belts of mulga
scrub well grassed, the country in the vicinity of Central Mount
Stuart being very open and splendidly grassed. Central Mount
Stuart is situated in its south-eastern corner. Mount Leichardt is
about 48 miles west of Mount Stuart. Both these hills are very
high and conspicuous. A few small sandy creeks are met with in
the southern half of this Block. The northern half appears to be a
perfectly level mulga scrub, very dense in places. About three and
a-half miles south-east of Mount Stuart, and in the Hanson Creek
there are some permanent springs similar to those described in the
last Block ; these could be made equally available for stock by
scooping a hole in the sand from six inches to one foot in depth.
This is the only water of any consequence in this Block.
This concludes the report of country now belonging to me, and is a
true copy of the original in my possession.—A. M. Wooldridge.


Report on Block A, 1,050 Square Miles. '
That portion of country marked A on accompanying plan, 1,050
square miles in extent, consists principally of an open mulga scrub
splendidly grassed. In the southern part near Low Cliff and west
of it, as well as on the eastern side of the Waite River near Mendip
Hill, there are some fine large plains, thickly covered with Mitchell
grass, saltbush, and cottonbush. The hills included in this block
consist of low granite tablelands overgrown in places with mulga
and myall scrub, and are very fairly grassed. The whole block is
traversed throughout its entire length by the Waite River and several
smaller creeks. The Waite River is a large wide creek with a white
sandy bed and clay banks of medium height. In the northern part
near Mount Skinner there are numerous small rain waterholes in
several small sandy creeks, which last for several months after rain,
About three miles W.W.S. of Mount Ledan a large shallow rain
waterhole is found ; it is about 400 yards long, 25 yards wide, and
4 feet deep. It is situated amongst low pine clad hills and bare red
granite rocks ; this is a remarkable pretty spot, the country in its
immediate neighbourhood is splendidly grassed. About five miles
south-west of Mount Ledan a creek joins the Waite River from the
westward ; near this junction there is a very good soakage in the
sand, capable after being dug out, of watering about 60 head of
cattle for about six months. A little below the junction of the
Waite and Mueller, near two small hills, water can be obtained by
digging in the sand. Again, about five miles south-east from
Arnos’ Peak there is another very fine soakage in the Mueller
which, when dug out, would water about 50 head of stock for about
six months. ater can also be obtained by digging in a sandy
creek, the Langford, a few miles west of Mendip Hill. There are,
moreover, numerous large and small clay pans south-west and east of
Mendip Hill and north of Low Cliff.
In concluding this Report it is only necessary for me to mention
the great advantage of having a telegraph line through the centre of
your run, with a Permanent Telegraph Station nearly in the centre
supported by a strong staff of men for repairing the lines at any time
through heavy floods, and a further protection from blacks.
The benefit of being able to telegraph any day to your station is
immense, either in purchasing travelling stock, or forwarding fat
stock to market or ordering stores, &c.
The rainfall is also recorded in every days’ papers.
Teams cart stores to Barrow’s Creek Telegraph Station from Farina
so there is an established road for teams and travelling stock through
the run. Men travel up with their swags on their backs looking for
work as far as Barrow’s Creek Telegraph Station.


On no other block of country on the O.T.line has the country been
tested so well for water by sinking in wells.
In constructing the line camps had to be made on the spot, and
where no running water was obtainable (as it was scarcely possible
to camp always on a running stream) or too far to cart for a large
party, wells were sunk with good success. In seasons of drought should
the springs fail, unlimited supplies of water found at shallow depths
in wells that have been tested through dry seasons all through the
run is of incalculable value. A mail runs monthly to Alice Springs,
and letters to Barrow’s Creek are forwarded on by men looking after
the line.
By a reference to the plan the southern boundary is only 610 miles
from Farina Government Gums, the present terminus of the railway,
and Barrow’s Creek station is 740 miles from Farina.
The present Government have decided to extend the railway beyond
Farina, the present terminus of the Port Augusta and Government
Gums Railway.
It is a certainty that a “ Transcontinental Railway Bill ” will
be introduced shortly, and the day it passes both Houses of Par-
liament, the value of this immense area, secured on such liberal
terms —a 25 years lease, first 7 years at sixpence (6d.), and re-
maining 18 years at 2s. 6d. square mile rental—will be very con-
siderable. The railway will probably follow the telegraph line.
The forgoing Report on Run Claims about Barrow’s Creek, 20,450 square
miles, is by Charles Winnecke, (late Government Surveyor in the Survey
Department of South Australia).
Extract from the official diary of Mr. C. Winnecke’s Explorations, 1879, to
be placed before Parliament.
Monday, February 24. —Camp, Woodforde Creek. Barometer 27.90.
Thermometer 70 deg. Started 7. a.m. Camped at 18 miles. The country
from the Native Well, near Mt. Ewart, upwards and near the track on the
Overland Telegraph Line is the finest grazing country I have seen since
leaving the settled districts.
Tuesday, February 25. —Camp, Woodforde Creek. Barometer 28.06
Thermometer 69.25. deg. Started at 7 a.m. travelling as before along the
Woodforde and Hanson Creeks, 14 miles. Camped at the Teatree Well,
which is about 20 feet deep, through limestone rock, with a fine supply of
the purest water.
Saturday, March 15. —Rain all day. The rainfall this year at Barrow’s
Creek is something like 25 inches in two months. It’s impossible to go any-
where on horseback, I am therefore compelled to wait until thecountiy is
sufficiently hard again to enable me continue travelling.
OHAS. WINNECKE,
Leader Herbert River and North-Eastern Exploring Party.
20
Frearson and; Brother, Printers,: Kina William Street, Adelaide.








